SECRETS Revealed: OR, An OPEN ENTRANCE TO THE Shut-Palace of the KING:
Containing, The greatest TREASURE in CHEMISTRY, Never yet so plainly Discovered.

Composed By a most famous ENGLISHMAN, Styling himself ANONYMVS, or EYRAENEUS
PHILALETHA COSMOPOLITA: Who, by Inspiration and Reading, attained to the
PHILOSOPHERS STONE at his Age of Twenty three Years, Anno Domini, 1645.

Published for the Benefit of all Englishmen, by W. C. Esquire a true Lover of Art
and Nature.

London, Printed by W. Godbid for William Cooper in Little St. Bartholomews,
near Little-Britain, 1669.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Lucas, BARON of Shenfield in ESSEX.
My Honored Lord,
IT is not my Acquaintance with your Lordships Person, that makes me presume to
invoke your Lordships Patronage of this small, but worthy Treatise of great
Learning; for I never had the honor of ten words, with or from your Lordship,
though living formerly where your Lordship did frequent, and being a Neighbor
in our Youthful Years; but your Lordships own Worth and Learning, Sobriety and
Prudence, with other Accomplishments taken notice of in Public in your tender
Years, and some Eminent Discourses of deep Mysteries, your Lordship had with a
most Learned Frenchman (my worthy Friend) at your return from Oxford, in the
late Rebellious Times, related or intimated unto me to illustrate your
Lordships Perfections (being about the same time this Author attained to the
said Arts) makes me not doubt but by a sympathetick virtue, this English rare
Phoenix of Learning in his Youth, will rather draw your Affections, than need
any Intermediations for your Lordships Countenance; he being probably yet
living, though perchance unknown to your Lordship to be the same, by reason of
his absence and Travels, which he Writes of, and his desired obscurity. I
confess my Lord, I was persuaded to Dedicate it to some worthy Person of
Honor; but having had sufficient experience of my few Friends in my long
Troubles, I rather presumed herein upon the glory of your Honor and Virtues,
than any of my own Acquaintance. Now, my Lord, I must crave your pardon that so
obscure a person as my self, should offer so worthy a Present to your Honor,
but therefore I have used the best lawful Policy, though a little unmannerly,
to conceal my self, but only to remain,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Devoted, and Humble Servant, W.C.
Sept. 15. 1668.
THE PUBLISHERS EPISTLE TO THE ENGLISH READER.
Reader,
HAving enjoyed the benefit of this most excellent and rarely Learned Anonymon
in an English Manuscript, many years before the Publication in Latin by the
worthy and learned John Langius, probably written from the Authors Copy, or
very little corrupted, wherein this Author was pleased to reveal himself to be
born an Englishman, naming himself Eyreneus Philaletha Cosmopolita, and to have
accomplished this miraculous Treasure at his Age of Twenty three Years, 1645.
And considering also, with worthy Langius, the Authors good intention to
promote the welfare of all men, I could not neglect my duty longer to make his
own Countrymen happy thereby, many of whose Capacities reach not unto the Latin
Tongue, whose necessities and good intentions nevertheless may be fitted to
receive the said good things, and the misery of the Times requiring the same,
if it shall please God to give his Blessing in this our English shell of
Learning: I must testify with Langius, that I have hardly ever read any Author
more full and clear in all Operations of this Art: And (which is more to be
admired and honored) in regard he appears to be so candid and free from Envy
at those Years, being (as I may say) but a Child, but a true Child of Art as
well as of Nature; nay, I may be consident a true Child of God, who also after
Christ's Example (our great Master and Doctor) may be placed amongst the gravest
Learned Doctors: Artefius thought it a great Argument of his extreme old Age,
after a thousand years to become free from envy; but this Author has
accomplished the same, by Grace, in a few years; which demonstrates him to have
his gray hairs in his wisdom. I shall say little more of him, and indeed little
needs be said, but what you may find in effect by reading this Divine Author,
or is taken up and said already by that worthy Langius, whose Learned Epistle
and Dedication I have Translated, and her unto adjoined, that this Work might
be the more complete, wherein thou may, with more ease than Jason, purchase
the Golden Fleece, and find An Open Entrance to the Shut-Palace of the King,
with an Alchahestical Salt or Key, useful in Chemistry: But let me advise thee
of one thing; when thou come to the possession of the same, that thou glut
not thy self with the pleasures of this World, and forget God or thy Neighbor,
lest with Midas thou turn thy covetous Eyes into longer or larger Ears, and so
by enjoying, or rather misemploying, the present things, lose thy future
happiness of and in the Kingdom of Heaven: Which advice as it is the very
Command of God, so it comes from

Thy Well-wishing FRIEND, and true Lover of Art and Nature, and of the whole
Creation of God, W. C.
Dated Aug. 9. An. Do. 1668.
The Epistle Dedicatory of John Langius, Publisher of this Author in Latin.
To the most Prudent and most Excellent Man, the Lord GABRIEL VOGTIUS, Heir of
Elbersdorfe, etc. Privy Counselor of the most Serene and Powerful Elector of
Saxony, and Warden of his Coin and Metallic Affairs; as also Secretary of his
Exchequer: John Langius wishes much Happiness.
My Lord and singular Patron,
FOrasmuch as your Honor has been pleased to suffer the Candidats of Nature
to have some place with you, and lately have embraced me (though unworthy) with
singular humanity; I come to Offer this exact little Work of the true Art of
Chemistry to your Honor: I confess truly it is another Man's, but give me leave
herein to help my own weakness, being guilty to my self, that I could not be
able to afford any worthy matter, from my own store, fit for your accomplished
Mind; and they have need to borrow goods that are short at home; yet I hope you
will not despise it, seeing that many have offered to the gods those things
which are not their own, but are taken from the Sabean Harvest; especially
whilst this Excellent Book seems to be brought forth out of the favorable
Bosom of Nature, from a clear and good into ^^n; and therefore it could not be,
nor indeed ought to be, but most acceptable to you, whom Nature long since
entitled amongst her intimate Friends. Your House has hitherto been (like
Pernassus and Helicon) open to all the Lovers and Friends of the Muses and of
the Graces, and therefore let it be open to this of ours, which is not at all
ragged, as if it crept out of the Trophonian Den to beg an Alms, but truly has
a decent Habit, an open and clear Face and transplendent Gown, coming toward
you from the retired'st Closet of Chemistry to call upon your Honor, wherefore
admit it benignly; for if you entertain it rightly, I doubt not but (like a
grateful Guest) it will return you rare Gifts. I pray God you may live many
many years to your own comfort and yours, Natures and our public hopes.

Hamburgh, December, 9. in the Year (according to the vulgar account) 1666.
THE Preface of JOHN LANGIUS TO THE READER.
Benevolent Reader,
HAving not long since obtained this little Book, which I here Publish, from a
most excellent knowing Man of these Matters, it pleased me so much, that I
presently consulted to impart it for thy profit; and this drove me to it, that
this genuine Author seemed almost to be the only Possessor and Worker, in our
Age, of the Physical Tincture, and to have Composed his Work to that very end,
that he might be known to be an Adeptist when it should come forth, and that
the Wanderers in this Art might be reduced to the right path; and then withal
the candor and perspicuity of the Writing, as it were a continued Style of
Sendivogius, whose footsteps this Author does every where closely follow, yea
sometimes excel, but always indeed does excellently explain without making it
his aim at all: Wherefore I was confident that if I should divulge it, both the
aforesaid worthy intention of the Author would be satisfied, and a clear light
kindled in the dark night of Errors to very many, who until this very day
either by dolorous Labor, or presumptuous Learning, or continual incessant
Sighs (although alas! now and then their hopes do fail them) do hunt after the
great Elixir of the Philosophers. For although within these few years some
numbers have ambitiously endeavored to obtain the Title of True Philosophy, and
presumed under the vizard of a false name to instruct, or rather to distract
and make mad all the World with fantastic Books; nay have drawn some ignorant
Men, and those not obscure ones, upon the stage, not without the laughter of
the more discrect and learned; yet nevertheless the sharper witted, and such as
have conversed (as the Proverb goes) more familiarly with dead Philosophers,
presently found out their hooks and baits; so that shortly after those fruitful
promisers, who swelled with such great words, became forsaken of their Admirers
(like the Ass who was stripped of the Lions skin) and being left to themselves,
have always born their shot amongst false Coiners, and paid the utmost
farthing. But this Author, which we now dedicate to the common good, as he has
the style and third of the ingenious Philosophers, and observes it every where,
yea as he every way breaths the primordial and ancient Chemistry, and shows
himself abundantly by his own signs; so I hope it will come to pass, this Sun
being risen, that the false Stampers will at length quite be dispelled and
vanish like the fog and smoke. Truly who, or what kind of Person, was Author of
this sweet Must-like Work, I know no more than he who is most ignorant; nor
(since he himself would conceal his name) do I think fit to enquire so far to
get his displeasure; nevertheless it is clear enough he is beloved of God like
another Daniel, and is a Man of most hearty true desires, if he still be
living; and one who at that Age attained to the Medicinal, Chemical and
Physical Arcana's of the Philosophers, in which many others hardly attain the
least tittle, and that but very superficially: Certainly it will be a very hard
matter to find any one who like to him has gathered this Art out of Books at
so tender an Age; Thomas Norton professes he had the knowledge of the White
Tincture at Twenty eight years of Age; and Helmontius relates how Theophrastus
Paracelsus, at the same Age received the Gold-making Medicine; so Dionysius,
Zakarias, and perchance some few other Young Men, are reported to have attained
it: But these had it from other men's help and tutoring, which is not so much to
be wondered at, when as therein their capable wit is only to be commended: But
to pick out the Roses from the most thorny Bushes of Writings, and to make the
true Elixir of Philosophers by his own Industry, without any Tutor, and at
Twenty three years of Age; this perchance has been granted to none, or (as is
said) to most few hitherto. Who will gainsay but that in a particular manner
God has poured down this occult Science into such a wit through the open
windows of Heaven; when as I believe millions that have followed the same
study, and run that stage to their old Age, have sweat at the same for fifty,
fixty years, more or less, with all the toiling labors could be thought upon.
Therefore let us the more respect this highly enlightened Author, in regard
that he being (as 'twere) so largely overwhelmed by Almighty God with such
great and unusual Blessings, has not done like the Citharist Aspendius, who
used to sing and play privately to himself; But what he had learned without
envy, he would as benignly communicate without envy. How envy has prevailed
with many others in their setting forth these secret Arcana's, and how
therewith they have hedged their Writings (as with a Partition Wall) round
about, needs not here to be remembered, every Chemical Searcher can testify the
same. The Offspring of former Philosophers held it rather to be for their
commendation thus to delude their Posterity, and they triumphed under envy with
Chymerical Juglings, just as we read in the Eusebean Greek Writings of
Scaliger, That Democrates Abderites had obscurely written of Gold, Silver,
Stones and Porphyr; the like did also Mary an Haebrean wise woman; who were
taught by Ostanes how they should cover the Art with many witty Riddles, but
withal not to write without envy. But our Author, being taught in a better
School, has sequestered the Chemical Art from all vulgar errors; and the
Sophisms being thrown out, and the curious dreams of the Conceited hissed away,
has so heartily, clearly and perspicuously described his own Matters, that you
shall not find so many things more clearly set forth by any one, as Alethea (or
the truth her self) will justify: Yea, if those things which Mary Rant (an
English woman) by inward Revelation promised concerning the making of Gold
(that it would become vulgar or common in the year 1661.) come to pass within
an hundred years after, then I doubt not at all but it has taken some
beginning from this. He chooses to follow Sendivogius his footsteps, yet both
with a better order and far more exact distinctions; be it so though, that he
taught more obscurely concerning the true subject of Philosophers than
Sendivogius (I say more obscure to the sight of young Beginners, who may
perchance draw it more easily from Sendivogius) yet nevertheless he that
searches more curiously and without preconception of his opinion, shall
assuredly find a greater light from him than from Sendivogius; but in the rest
Sendivogius dares not place himself before him, nor any other, either of the
old or of the following Ages: Oh! how far are the Rivers Merrha and Siloam from
one another? How much disparity is between these and other Writings, which
hitherto endeavored to hinder the blindfolded World from her precipice and
ruin? Yet I would it had pleased this most worth Author, to have committed to
the public Press his noble and polisht writings himself (for I hear he has
also written a Dialogue concerning the watery Fire, or Liquor Alkahest) then I
could not doubt but we should have all more correct and perfect. Now, although
I have been most diligent and careful, yet (as it often falls out in such
matters or cases) because I was to use a Manuscript, not so very exact, I dare
not affirm that all things strictly agree with the words of the Author; for
oftentimes, where the sense was manifestly difficult, it was made plain by the
alteration or change of a small letter; nevertheless we have been studiously
wary, that wheresoever any firm sense might be gathered, there we would not
rashly alter it. We heartily wish, and humbly pray (if the Divine Author be yet
living) That either he himself would commit his Writings corrected and prepared
according to his mind to be printed: Or if he design to make use of our
service, That he will please to convey to our hands the true Manuscript (after
any manner he think fit) and we shall esteem, or repute it for a great Honor
to have our things well corrected for our love to the Public Good, having no
other aim at all.

Kind Reader, do thou interpret all this to the best construction, considering
that if these (like some Patrimonial Treasures, had travailed longer under the
communication of private Copies, perhaps in a little time either many more
Faults and Enormities (by blanks, or blind Letters, or wearing) had slipped in,
or else the true sense it self had by little and little been utterly spoiled;
which to how many Treatises of singular Note it has happened unto, is not
needful here to enlarge. I will say no more, for I do not here attempt to write
a Commentary: These things I have touched for my own sake only, least either
the Author himself might suspect I would also undertake the same against his
Book, which of old, the true Sun (so called) presumed against Sendivogius: or
else any others perchance might censure me (as the whole World is now full of
Busybodies.) However it be, in this I would do a kindness to the Lovers of
Chemistry, and satisfy the desires of many. If I shall see this has been
acceptable, perhaps more may follow: But if otherwise (yet I avoid to presage)
God bless the Benevolent Reader, and farewell.

Hamburgh, December 9. in the year 1660.
The Authors Preface.
I Being an Adept Anonymon, and Lover of Learning, and a Philosopher, I decreed
to write this little Treatise of Medicinal, Chemical and Physical Arcana's, in
the year of the Redemption of the World, 1645. but in the three and twentieth
year of my Age, that I might pay my duty to the Sons of Art, and might lend my
hand to bring them out of the labyrinth of Errors, wherein they are entangled,
and that it might appear to the Adeptists that I am a brother and equal to
them; and that those seduced by the deceits of Sophisters, might safely return,
see and embrace the true Light: I do also further presage, That not a few will
be enlightened by these my Labors; they are no Fables but real Experiments,
which I have seen, made, and do know, which an Adeptist will easily gather by
these Lines. Wherefore as I write these things for the good of my neighbor,
let it be enough, that I profess there is none that ever writ in this Art so
clearly; and that many a time in writing I said aside my pen, because I was
rather willing to have concealed the Truth under the Mask of Envy, ^ut God
compelled me to write, whom I could not resist, who alone knows the heart, to
whom only be Glory for ever. Hence I undoubtedly gather, many will become
Blessed in this last Age of the World with this Arcanum, by reason I have
written faithfully; nor have I willingly left any thing doubtful for a young
Beginner, which is not perfectly satisfied. Also I know many who, with me, do
enjoy this Arcanum, and am persuaded there are many more whose new familiarity
shortly (as I may say) I shall be daily acquainted with. Let the holy Will of
God do what it pleases; I confess my self unworthy by whom such things should
be effected; yet in these matters I adore the holy Will of God, to whom all
created things are bound to be subjected; for which cause only he did create
them, and being created, preserves them.

READER,
THe true Manuscript Copy, which John Langius in his Preface does so much
thirst after, is here Published for thy benefit; in which thou will find
considerable enlargements and explanations, wherein the Latin Translation is
deficient, as witnesses Chap. 15. etc.

SECRETS Revealed: OR, An OPEN ENTRANCE TO THE SHUTT PALACE of the KING.
CHAP. 1. Of the necessity of the Sophick for the Work of the Elixir.
WHosoever desires to enjoy the secret Golden-Fleece, let him know, That our
Gold-making POWDER (which we call our Stone) is only Gold digested unto the
highest degree of purity and subtle fixity, whereto it may be brought, by
Nature and a discreet Artist; which Gold thus essensificated, is called Our
Gold (and no more vulgar) and is the period of the perfection of Nature and
Art. I could cite all the Philosophers that write of this Thing, but I need no
witnesses; because my self being an Adeptist, do write more clearly than any
heretofore. Let any one believe me that will, and disprove it that can, carp he
that will; this is the reward it shall certainly receive, to be an high
Ignorance. I confess the subtle Wits do fancy many whimsies, but he that is
diligent shall find the truth in the simple way of Nature. Let Gold therefore
be the One True sole Principle of Gold-making; but our Gold is twofold which we
require to our work, viz. Mature and Fix, the yellow Latten, whose Heart or
Center is a pure Fire, and therefore it defends the body in the Fire, in which
it receives depuration; but nothing of it gives way to its tyranny, or suffers
by it. This does in our Work supply the place of the Male, therefore it is
joined to our white and more crude Gold as Feminine Sperme; into which it sends
forth its Sperme, and at length both do couple with an insoluble band; so it
becomes our Hermaphrodite, being mighty in both Sexes. Therefore corporal Gold
is dead before it be conjoined with his Bride, with whom the coagulating
{sulphur}, which in is outward, is turned inwards; so the altitude is hid, and
the profundity is manifested; so the Fix is, in time, made volatile, that it
may afterward possess (by way of Inheritance) a most noble State, in which it
may obtain an excellent powerful fixity. It is evident therefore that the whole
Secret consists in, of which, a Philosopher says, There is in whatever the
Wiseman seeks; concerning which Geber says, Praised be the Most High, who has
created our and has given it a nature overcoming all things. For verily if
that were not, the Alchymist's might boast as they will, but their Work of
Alchymy would be vain. It Is likewise evident it is not the vulgar but the
Sophick; because every vulgar is a Male that is corporeal, specificate and
dead: but ours is spiritual, feminine, living and vivifying. Attend therefore
to those things that I shall speak of, for as the Philosopher says, Our is the
Salt of the Wisemen, without which, whosoever operates, is like an Archer that
shoots without a Bow-string, and yet it is no where to be found upon the Earth;
but our is formed by us, not by creation, but by extracting him out of those
things in which he is; Nature cooperating in a wonderful manner, by a witty
Art.

CHAP. 2. Of the Principles composing the Sophical.
THe Intention of some Operators in this Art, is this, They purge diversely; for
by the adjoining of Salts they sublime it, some do vivifie it from various
Faeces, others only per se: and so by these repeated Operations they think to
make the of the Philosophers. They err because they do not operate in Nature,
for she amends things only in their own nature. Let them therefore know that
our Water is compounded of many things, but yet they are but one thing, made of
diverse created substances of one essence, that is to say, There is requisite in
our Water; first of all Fire; secondly, the Liquor of the Vegetable Saturnia;
thirdly, the bond of: The Fire is of a Mineral Sulphur, and yet is not properly
Mineral nor Metalline, but a middle betwixt a Mineral and a Metal, and neither
of them partaking of both, a Chaos or Spirit; because our Fiery Dragon (who
overcomes all things) is notwithstanding penetrated by the odor of the
Vegetable Saturnia; whose blood concretes or grows together with the juice of
Saturnia, into one wonderful body; yet it is not a body, because it is all
Volatile; nor a Spirit, because in the Fire it resembles a Molten Metal. It is
therefore in very deed a Chaos, which is related to all Metals as a Mother; for
out of it I know how to extract all things, even and without the transmuting
Elixir: the which thing whosoever does also see, may be able to testify it.
This Chaos is called, our Arsenick, our Air, our, our Magnet, our Chalybs or
Steel; but yet in diverse respects, because our Matter undergoes various states
before that the Kingly Diadem be brought or cast forth out of the Menstruum of
our Harlot. Therefore learn to know, who the Companions of Cadmus are, and what
that Serpent is which devoured them, what the hollow Oak is which Cadmus
fastened the Serpent through and through unto; Learn what Diana's Doves are,
which do vanquish the Lion by asswaging him: I say the Green Lion, which is in
very deed the Babylonian Dragon, killing all things with his Poison: Then at
length learn to know the Caducean Rod of Mercury, with which he works
Wonders, and what the Nymphs are, which he infects by Incantation, if thou
desire to enjoy thy wish.

CHAP. 3. Of the Chalybs of the Sophists.
THe Wife Magi have delivered many things of their Chalybs to Posterity, nor is
it a slight thing they have attributed thereto; and therefore the contention
amongst vulgar Alchymists is great, as touching what is to be understood by the
name of Chalybs. Several men have given several interpretations of this thing.
The Author of the New Light has writ thereof heartily, but obscurely. For my
part, that I may not (out of envy) conceal any thing from the Inquirers of this
Art, I will sincerely describe it. Our Chalybs is the true Key of our Work,
without which the Fire of the Lamp could not be, by any Art, kindled; it is the
Minera of Gold, a Spirit, very pure beyond others; it is an infernal Fire,
secret in its kind, most highly volatile; the Miracle of the World, a Systeme
of the superior virtues in the inferiors; and therefore the Omnipotent has
marked it with that notable Sign, whose Nativity is declared in the East. The
Wisemen saw it in the East and were amazed, presently knew that a most Serene
King was born into the World. Thou when thou beholdest his Star, follow him
even to his Cradle, there shall thou see a fair Infant by removing the
defilements, honor the Kingly Child, open the Treasury, offer the gift of
Gold, so at length (after death) he will give thee his Flesh and Blood, the
highest Medicine in the three Monarchies of the Earth.

CHAP. 4. Of the Magnet of the Sophists.
EVen as Steel is drawn to the Loadstone, and the Magnet does of its own accord
convert it self to the Chalybs, even so the Magnet of the Sophi draws their
Chalybs; therefore I have taught that the Chalybs is the Minera of Gold: In
like manner our Magnet is the true Minera of our Chalybs. Furthermore, I
declare that our Magnet has an occult Center abounding with Salt, which Salt,
is the Menstruum in the Sphere of the Moon, which knows how to calcine Sol,
this Center does convert it self to the Pole with an Archetick Appetite, in
which the virtue of the Chalybs is exalted into Degrees. In the Pole is the
Heart of, which is a true Fire (in which is the rest and quiet of his Lord)
sailing through this great Sea, that it may arrive to both the Indies, and
direct its course by the aspect of the North-Sar, which our Magnet will cause
to appear to thee. The Wiseman will rejoice, but the Fool will disesteem these
things, nor will he learn Wisdom, even though he behold the Central Pole turned
outward, marked with the notable Sign of the Omnipotent. They are so
stiffnecked that though they see even Signs and Miracles, yet will they not lay
aside their Sophistications, nor enter into the right Path.

CHAP. 5. The Chaos of the Sophi.
LEt the Son of the Philosophers hearken to the Sophi unanimously concluding,
that this Work is to be likened to the Creation of the Universe. Therefore, In
the Beginning God Created the Heaven and the Earth, and the Earth was void and
empty, and Darkness were upon the face of the Deep; and the Spirit of the Lord
was carried upon the face of the Waters, and God said, Let there be Light, and
there was Light. These words are sufficient for a Son of Art, for the Heaven
ought to be conjoined with the Earth upon the bed of Friendship and Love: so
shall he honorably Reign all his Life. The Earth is an heavy body, the Matrix
of Minerals, because it keeps them occultly in it self, although it brings to
light Trees and Animals. It is the Heaven wherein the great Lights together
with the Stars are rolled about, and it sends down its virtues through the
Air, unto inferior things; but in the Beginning all being confounded together,
made a Chaos. Behold, I have holily opened to them the truth; for our Chaos is
as 'twere a Mineral Earth in respect of its own coagulation; and yet
notwithstanding it is indeed volatile Air, whithin which the Heaven of the
Philosophers is, in its Center; which Center is truly Astral, shining upon the
Earth with its Beams, even to the very superficies. And what great one is this
that is so wise, as to gather from these things, that a new King is born more
powerful than all the rest, a Redeemer of his Brethren from original
Defilements? for 'twas expedient that he died to be exalted aloft, that he
might give his Flesh and Blood for the Life of the World. Good God! How
wonderful are these thy Works? It Is thy doing and it seems miraculous in our
eyes. Father I thank thee, that thou have hidden these things from the Wise,
and revealed them to Babes.

CHAP. 6. The Air of the Sophists.
THe wide Circuit or Firmament, called, in the Holy Writ, Air, is likewise
called our Chaos, and yet not without a great Secret; because as the
Firmamental Air, is the separator of the Waters, even so is our Air. Our Work
is therefore verily a System of the greater World; because as the Waters under
the Firmament are to be seen and do appear to us, who live upon the Earth, but
the superior Waters do fly our sight, because they are so far distant from us:
even so is it in our Microcosm, the Waters are the Minerals, without the Center
these appear; but those that are enclosed within, do shun our sight, and yet
really and truly are. These are those Waters, that the Author of the New Light
speaks of, viz. Which are, and do not appear, until the Artist pleases.
Therefore even as the Air distinguishes between the Waters, so does our Air
prohibit all manner of ingress of the extracentrical waters unto the waters
that are in the Center; for should they but enter in and be mixed, then would
they presently close together with an indissoluble union; therefore I say, that
the external vapors and burning {sulphur} does stiffly adhere to our Chaos,
whose tyranny it being not able to resist, the pure flies away from the Fire in
the form of a dry powder. If thou knew how to water this dry earth with a
water of its own kind, thou will loosen the pores of the earth, and this
outward Thief with the workers of Malice will be cast out of doors, and the
water will be purged (by the addition of a true Sulphur) from Leprous
Defilements, and from superfluous Hydropical Moisture, and thou shall have in
thy power the Fountain of Count Trevisan, whose waters are properly dedicated
to Diana the Virgin. This Thief is evil, armed with arsenical Malignitie, whom
the winged Youngster does abhor and fly from; and although the central water
be his Bride, yet the Youngster dares not utter his most ardent Love toward
her, because of the snares of the Thief, whose tricks are almost inavoidable.
In this, let Diana be propitious unto thee, who knows how to tame the wild
Beasts, whose two Doves shall temperate the malignity of the Air with their
feathers, then the Youth enters easily in, through the pores, presently shaking
the waters above, and stirrs up a rude and rubish Cloud; do thou bring in the
water over him even to the brightness of the Moon, and so the darkness which
was upon the face of the Abyss, will be discussed by the Spirit which moves it
self in the waters: thus by the Command of God Light shall appear, separate the
Light from the Darkness the seventh time, and then this Sophick Creating of thy
shall be complete, and the seventh day shall be to thee a Sabbath of Rest; from
which time, even to a Years Revolution, must you expect the Generation of the
Son of the supernatural Sun; who will come into the World at the end of the
Ages, that he may free his Brethren from al Defilements,

CHAP. 7. Of the first Operation of the Preparation of the Sophick Mercury, by
the Flying Eagles.
BRother, You are to know, that our exact knowledge of the Eagles of the
Philosophers, is conceived and judged to be the first degree of perfection; for
to know it, there is required a quick ingenuity. For do not believe that this
Science comes to any of us by chance or a casual imagination, as the common
ignorant people do stupidly believe; but we have sweated much and a long time,
we have passed many nights without sleep, we have undergone much labor and
sweat, that we might obtain the truth; and therefore, O studious Beginner! Know
of certainty, without labor and sweat thou will accomplish nothing (viz.) in
the first Work, although in the second, Nature alone performs the Work without
any imposition of hands, only using a moderate external Fire. Understand
therefore (Brother) the sayings of the Sophi, when they write, That their
Eagles are to be brought to devour the Lion; the which Eagles, how much the
sparinger the number is, so much the greater wrestling and a slow victory, but
the work is most excellently perfected in the seventh or ninth number. The
Sophical, namely, is the Bird of Hermes, which is sometimes called a Goose,
sometimes a Pheasant; one while this thing, another while that; but wherever
the Magi speak of their Eagles, they speak in the plural number, and they
assign their number from three to ten: yet they are not to be understood thus
as if they would have so many weights or parts of the water to one of the
earth, but you must interpret their sayings to be meant of the intrinsecal
weight, that is to say, you must take the water so oftentimes acuated or
sharpened, as they number Eagles; which acuation is made by sublimation, and
therefore every sublimation of the of Philosophers let be one Eagle, and the
seventh will so exalt the, that it will become a most convenient Bath for thy
King. Therefore that thou may have this knot well unfolded, attend
diligently. Let there be taken of our Fiery Dragon, which hides the Magical
Chalybs in his own belly, four parts, of our Magnet nine parts, mix them
together with a torrid Vulcan or great Fire, in the form of a Mineral water,
upon which there will swim a scum, which is to be cast away, remove the shell
and take the kernel, purge it the third time with Fire and Salt, which will
easily be done if Saturn shall have beheld himself in the Looking-glass of
Mars, thence is made the Chamaeleon or our Chaos in which all Arcana's lies hid
virtually, but not actually. This is the Hermaphroditical Infant, which even
from his very first Infancy has been infected by the biting of the Corascene
Mad Dog, whereby he is besotted and distracted by a perpetual Hydrophoby or
fear of the water; yea, though the water be nearer him than any natural thing,
yet he abhors it and flies it. O Fates! But yet there are in the Wood of Diana
two Doves which can assuage his frantic Madness, if applied by the Art of the
Nymph; then least he should again relapse into a Hydrophoby, drown him in the
waters, and let him perish therein; which waters the blackish Mad Dog being
impatient of, will ascend (suffocated) to almost the superficies of the waters,
then do thou banish him with a shower and stripes, and drive him far away, so
the darkness will disappear. The Moon shining in her Full, supply the Feathers,
and the Eagle will fly away, and leave the dead Doves of Diana; which except
they shall be dead at the first receiving, they cannot be profitable. Repeat
this seven times, then, at length, have thou obtained Rest; unless that thou
must make a bare Decoction, which is a most pleasing Rest: A Boys Play, and a
Woman's Work.

CHAP. 8. Of the labor and tediousness of the first Preparation.
SOme ignorant Chemists do Dream, That the whole Work from the beginning to the
end, is a mere Recreation, full of pleasantness; but the Labor they set aside,
without the bounds of this Art. But let them safely enjoy their own Opinion, in
a Work which they have imagined to be so easy; certainly they will reap but an
empty Harvest, from their idle Operation. For we know, that next the Divine
Benediction, and a good Root or Foundation to work on, Labor, Industry and
Diligence obtains the chiefest place; nor verily is it a Labor so easy, that
it may be called a Play or Refreshment of the Mind, that will give us the thing
we so earnestly desire: but rather as Hermes says, Neither the Life nor Labor
is to be spared; else that which the Wiseman fortold in his Parables, will not
be verified, viz, That the desire of the slothful will destroy him. Nor is it
any wonder, that so many men, dealing with Alchymy, are reduced to poverty; for
they shun Labor, and spare Cost: But we, who have known these things, and
wrought them, have certainly found, that no Labor is more tedious than our
first Preparation. Therefore Morienus does seriously exhort the King concerning
this thing, saying, Most of the Wisemen complained of the tediousness of this
Work; nor would I that you should understand these things figuratively, for as
much as I do not now consider of the things as they appear in the beginning of
the supernatural Work: but as we at first find them, to render the matter fit
for Work, as says the Poet, This is the Labor, and this is the Work; and
again, One Labor concerns the Golden Fleece, etc. Another is the great burden
to be sustained about the rude weight or matter, etc. Therefore that noble
Author of the Hermetick Secrets, names this first Labor Herculean. First,
there are in our Principles or first beginning, heterogeneous Superfluities,
which can never be reduced unto purity (for our Work) and therefore it is
expedient to purge them out thoroughly, which will be impossible to be done
without the Theory of our Secrets, in which we teach the true manner with which
the Kingly Diadem is to be separated, or thrust out of the Menstruum of the
Harlot -- Which manner being known, there is as yet required the greater
Labor; yea so great, that, as says the Philosopher, many have left the Art
lame as it were, because of the terrible Evils or Labor: yet I deny not but a
Woman may undergo the Labor of the Art, yet so, as that she proposes not
Plays amongst her Labors. But the Mercury once prepared, then is the rest
obtained, which is far more desirable than any Labor, as says the Philosopher.

CHAP. 9. Of the Virtue of our Mercury upon all the Metals.
OUr Mercury is that Serpent which devoured the Companions of Cadmus; nor is it
a wonder, because it had first devoured Cadmus himself, who was stronger than
all the rest: yet at length Cadmus shall pierce this Serpent through, after he
has coagulated him with the virtue of his own Sulphur. Therefore know, that
this our does bear rule over all Metalline Bodies, and dissolves them into
their nearest matter Mercurial, by separating their Sulphurs; and know, that
the Mercury of one, two, or three Eagles, commands, and: and it rules over
the from three Eagles to seven, then it rules over the even to ten Eagles.
Furthermore I make known unto you, that our Mercury is nearer to the first Ens
of Metals than any other Mercury. Therefore it radically enters the Metalline
Bodies, and manifests their hidden profundities.

CHAP. 10. Of the Sulphur which is in the Sophical Mercury.
THis above all things is a wonder that in our Mercury, there is not only an
actual, but also an active {sulphur}, and yet notwithstanding it retains all
the proportions and the form of Mercury; therefore it is necessary, that a form
be introduced therein, by our preparation, which form, is a Metalline Sulphur:
which Sulphur, is Fire that putrifies the Compositum, or disposed. This
sulphurous Fire, is the spiritual Seed which our Virgin (but yet nevertheless
she remains undefiled) has contracted; because an incorrupted Virginity can
admit a spiritual Love, according to the Author of the Hermetick Secrets, and
according to Experience it self. By reason of this Sulphur it is an
Hermaphrodite, because the same does apparently include at the same time, and
by the same degree of Digestion, as well an active as passive Principle; for if
it be joined with, it softens, melts, and dissolves him by a temperate heat,
suitable to the necessity of the Composition, and does (by the same fire)
coagulate himself, and gives in his coagulation, according to the pleasure of
the Operator. Hapily this will seem incredible unto thee, but it is true (viz.)
That being homogeneal, pure and clean, being by our Artifice impregnated, does
(by the application of a convenient heat only) coaguhimself (after the manner)
of Cream of Milk, there being (as it were) a subtle earth swimming upon the
waters: but being joined with, it is not only not coagulated, but the compound
shall daily be seen to be softer and softer, even till the Bodies being almost
dissolved, the Spirits shall begin to be coagulated in a most black color, and
a most stinking odor. It Is therefore manifest, That this spiritual Metalline
Sulphur, is the first that turns the wheel, and rolls the Axis into a compass
or circuit. This {sulphur} is in truth a volatile, not as yet sufficiently
digested, but pure enough; therefore it passes into by a bare digestion: but
if it be joined to already perfect, it is not then coagulated, but it dissolves
the corporal Gold, and remains with it (being dissolved) under one form,
although before the perfect union, death must necessarily precede, that so they
may be united after their death, not simply in a perfect unity, but in a
Millenary more than perfect perfection.

CHAP. 11. Of the Invention of the perfect Magistery.
THe Wise Men heretofore (as many of them as obtained this Art without the help
of Books) were led to the attainment thereof on this wise (by the permission of
God) For I cannot persuade my self it came to any of them by immediate
Revelation, unless Solomon had it so; which I am rather willing to leave to the
Judge, than determine thereof. And yet though he should have had it, what
hinders but he might have got it by search, whereas he requested only wisdom,
which God did bestow upon him in such manner that he therewith possessed all,
both Wealth and Peace? And therefore he unript, as it were, and searched out the
nature of the Plants and Herbs, from the Cedar of Lebanon even to the Hyssop on
the Wall; and what man that is well in his wits, will deny but that he likewise
knew the nature of the Minerals, the knowledge of which being altogether as
pleasant or prositable? But to the purpose, We say that it may very likely be
believed, That the first Adeptist that enjoyed this Magistery (amongst whom was
Hermes) who had no plenty of Books in those days) did not at first seek after a
more than perfect perfection; but only a simple exaltation of the imperfect
Metals to a regal condition: and when they perceived that all Metallic Bodies,
were of a Mercurial Original, and that was both as to its weight and
homogeneity most like unto Gold, which is the perfectest of Metals, they
therefore endeavored to digest it to the maturity of Gold, but they could not
effect it by any fire. Therefore they considered with themselves, that there
was requisite, besides the external heat, an internal one, if they will
accomplish their intentions. This heat therefore they sought after in most
things. First of all, they distilled out of the lesser Minerals most exceeding
hot waters, and with them they corroded the; but they could not by any Art
accomplish it this way, so as to cause the to change or alter his intrinsecal
proportions: for because all the corrosive waters were only external Agents,
after the manner of fire, though somewhat different. But these Menstruums (as
they called them) did not abide with the dissolved body, being by that same
reason confirmed, they rejected all Salts, one Salt only excepted which is the
first Ens of Salts, the which dissolves all Metals, and by the same work
coagulates: but this is not done but by a violent way, and therefore that kind
of Agent is again separated entire, both in weight and virtue, from the things
it is put to. Wherefore the Wisemen did at length know and consider that in the
watery crudities, and the earthly faeces, did hinder it from being digested;
which being fixed in the roots thereof, cannot be rooted out, but by turning
the whole compound in and out. They knew, I say, that if it could but put off
these things, it would presently become Fix; for it has in it self a fermental
Sulphur, of which, even the smallest grain would be sufficient to coagulate the
whole Mercurial Body, if only the Faeces and Crudities could be removed. This
thing therefore they attempted to bring to pass by various purging it, but in
vain; forasmuch as the foresaid Work requires both mortification and
regeneration, for which there is need of an Agent. Then at length they knew
that was destinated (in the bowels of the earth) to have been a Metal, to which
intent it retained a daily motion, as long as the fitness of the place, and
other externality well disposed, did remain; but these being by accident
corrupted, this immature Child or Offspring died of its own accord: so that it
is beheld as a certain thing deprived of motion and life. But now an immediate
regress from privation to habit or form is impossible, that is to say, there is
a passive {sulphur} in which ought to be active; so that it is needful to
introduce into it another life of the same nature in the introducing of which
it stirs up the hidden life of, so life receives life; then at length it is
fundamentally transformed or changed, and the defilements are voluntarily cast
away from the Center, as we have abundantly enough written in the preceding
Chapters. This Life is in the Metallic Sulphur alone, which the Wisemen sought
for in, and in such like substances, but in vain. Then they took the offspring
of Saturn in hand, and they found he was the Stylanx or tyer of Gold; and
whereas therefore it has the power of separating the Faeces from ripe Gold,
they thence became confident (by an argument drawn from the lower to the less)
that it would do so in: but they proved that this also had its own defilements,
and they remembered the old Proverb, Be thou clean that desire to cleanse
another; therefore they endeavoring to purge it, found it altogether
impossible, because it had no Metalline Sulphur in it, though it abounded with
the most purged Salt of Nature. When therefore they observed a little Sulphur
in, and that only passive, they found now in this Child of no actual {sulphur},
but only potential; and therefore it entered in friendship with a burning
Arsenical Sulphur, and foolish as it is, it cannot subsist in a coagulated form
without this Sulphur; and yet notwithstanding it is so stupid, that it had
rather dwell with the Enemy, by whom it is so exceeding straightly imprisoned,
and commit Fornication, than renounce him and appear under a Mercurial form.
Therefore they sought further for an active {sulphur}, and that most thoroughly,
and at length the said Magi sought it, and found it hidden in the house of
Aries. This {sulphur} is most greedily received by the son of; which Metallic
matter is most pure, most tender, and most near to the first Metallic Ens,
void of all actual Sulphur, but yet in power or capacity to receive a
{sulphur}. It does therefore draw this to it self like a Magnet, and swallows
it up in its own belly, and hides it; and the Omnipotent, that he might most
highly adorn this Work, has imprinted his Royal Seal thereon. Then forthwith
these Magi rejoiced when they beheld the {sulphur}, not only found, but also
prepared: Then they endeavored to purge therewith, but the success was not
answerable; because there was as yet an Arsenical Malignity commixt with this
{sulphur} thus swallowed up in the Child of: the which evil though now it was
but little, in respect of the abundance which it had in its own Mineral nature,
yet it withstood and hindered all entrance. Therefore they assaied to
contemperate this malignity of the Air by the Doves of Diana, and then the
event was answerable to their desires; then commixed they Life with Life, and
moistened the dry by the moist, and acuated the passive by the active, and
vivified the Dead by the Living: so the heaven became clouded over for a time,
which after large showers became clear again. Thus came out an
Hermaphroditical, him therefore they put in the fire, and they coagulated him
in time, yet not very long time; and in his coagulation they found most pure
and: Then returning to themselves they considered that this depurated, not as
yet coagulated, was not as yet a Metal, but volatile enough; and they saw that
in its distillation it left nothing remaining in the bottom, therefore they
termed it, their unripe, and their living, they also considered that, being
that out of which the true first Ens of Gold was (and being as yet volatile)
what should it be but the ground wherein being sown, would be increased in his
virtue; therefore they put in the same, and (to their admiration) the fire
became therein volatile, the hard soft, the coagulated dissolved, Nature her
self being amazed thereat. Therefore they Married these two together, and shut
them in a glass, and placed them at the fire, and governed the Work a long time
as Nature required; so the vivified became dead, and the dead living, the body
putrified, and rose a glorious Spirit: and the soul is at last resolved into a
Quintessence, the highest Medicine for Animals, Metals, and Vegetals.

CHAP. 12. Of the manner of making the perfect Magistery in general.
WE ought to give immortal thanks to God, because he has showed these Secrets
of Nature to us, which he has hidden from the eyes of most men. Those things
therefore which are freely given to us by that great Giver, we will lay open
freely and faithfully to other studious men. Know therefore, That the greatest
secret of our Operation, is no other thing than a cohobation of the Natures of
one thing above the other, until the most digested virtue be extracted out of
the digested (body) by the Crude one. But there is hereto requisite, first, an
exact preparation and fitness of the things that enter into the Work; secondly,
a good disposing of external things; thirdly, things being thus prepared, there
is required a good Regimen; fourthly, a foreknowledge of the appearances in
the Work is required, that your procedure therein be not blindfold; fifthly,
Patience, that the Work be not hastened, or head-longly governed. Of all which
we will speak in order, as much as one Brother to another.

CHAP. 13. Of the Use of a ripe {sulphur}, in the Work of the Elixir.
WE have spoken of the necessity of the, and have delivered many secrets of,
which (before me) were barren enough to the World; because almost all Chemical
Books do abound either with obscure Aenigmas, or sophistical Operations, or
with a heap of rough and uncouth words. I have not done so, resigning my will
in this thing to the Divine Pleasure, who (in this last period of the World)
seems to me to be about the opening of these Treasures: Therefore I do no more
fear that the Art will be disesteemed, far be it from me, this cannot be; for
true Wisdom will defend it self in external Honor. I could wish, That Gold and
Silver would at last be of as mean in esteem as Dirt, which has been hitherto
the great Idol adored by the whole World; then we who know these things should
not need so studiously to hide our selves: For we judge our selves to have
received (as it were) the Curse it self of Cain, for which we weep and sigh,
that is to say, We are driven, as 'twere, from the Face of the Lord, and from
the pleasant Society which we heretofore had with our Friends, without fear.
But now we are tossed up and down, and as it were beset with Furies; nor can we
suppose our selves safe, in any one place long. We oftentimes take up
Complaints and the Lamentations of Cain unto the Lord, Behold whosoever shall
find me, shall kill me. We Travel through many Nations, just like Vagabonds,
and dare not take upon us the Care of a Family, neither do we possess any
certain Habitation. And although we possess all things, yet can we use but a
few. What therefore are we happy in, excepting speculation only, wherein we
meet with great satisfaction of the Mind? Many do believe (that are strangers
to the Art) that if they should enjoy it, they would do such and such things;
so also even we did formerly believe, but being grown more wary, by the hazard
we have run, we have chosen a more secret Method. For whosoever has once
escaped the eminent perils of his Life, he will (believe me) become more wise
for the time to come. It Is a Proverb, Batchelors Wives and Maids Children are
well clothed or nourished. I have found the World placed in a most wicked
posture, so that there is scarce a Man found, whatsoever Face he bears of
Honesty, and howsoever he seems to heed public things, That does not propound
unto himself, some private, base, and unworthy end. Nor is any mortal Man able
to effect any thing alone, no not in the works of Mercy, except he would run
the hazard of his Head; which my self have of late experienced, in some strange
or foreign places, where I have administered the Medicine to some ready to dye,
distressed and afflicted with the miseries of the Body: and they having
recovered miraculously, there has presently been a rumor spread of the Elixir
of the Wisemen, insomuch that once I have been forced to fly by night, with
exceeding great troubles, having changed my garments, shaved my head, put on
other hair, and altered my name; else I had fallen into the hands of wicked
Men, that lay in wait for me (merely for suspicion only accompanied with the
most greedy thirst after Gold.) I could reckon up many such like things, which
will seem ridiculous to some; for they will say, Did I but know these and these
things, I would do otherwise than so: But yet let them know, that it is a
tedious thing for ingenious Men to have converse with blockish Men. And as for
those that are ingenious, they are subtle, crafty, quick-sighted; and some of
them have as many eyes as Argus; some are curious, some are Machiavilians, that
search into the life, manners, and actions of Men, most thoroughly, from whom to
hide our self is very difficult, especially if there is any familiar knowledge
(or converse.) If any one does think thus of himself, viz. That he would do so
and so (were he a Possessor of the Stone) I would willingly say unto him thus
(viz.) Thou art perchance a familiar acquaintance of an Adeptist, he would
presently consider with himself; and say, This is impossible, for it is great
chance but I should once see it; and by my familiar converse with him, it could
not be but that I should smell it out. Thou that imaginest these things of thy
self, Think thou that others do not abound with as much quick-sightedness as
thy self, who would be able to discern thee? For it is expedient to have
converse with some, else thou shall seem to be another quick Diogenes. But if
thou associate thy self with the Vulgar, this is unworthy; but if thou shall
contract familiarity with Wisemen, it behooves thee to be most highly wary,
least some of them discern thee, with the same facility as thou believe thy
self capable of finding out, as 'twere, another Adeptist (thou being ignorant
of the known Secret) If only thou were able to have a familiar consortship with
him, thou will not so readily discern That an opinion, being but a conceited
one, is without great inconvenience, even a slight conjecture shall be
sufficient to procure a lying in wait for thee; for the Iniquity of Men is so
great, that we have often known some Men to have been strangled with a Halter,
yet notwithstanding were strangers to the Art. 'Twas sufficient that some
desperate Men had heard a report of such an Art, the knowledge of which such
once bore the name to have. It would be too tedious to reckon up all things,
which we our selves have made trial of, we have seen and heard concerning this
thing. Moreover as concerning this present Age of the World, rather more than
in any former one, Who is it that pretends not to Alchymy? Insomuch, that thou
shall hardly dare to stir thy foot, except thou desire to be betrayed. If thou
do but do any thing secretly, this wariness of thine, will stir in some a
zeal of thoroughly searching thee out, even to the bottom. They Will tattle of
counterfeiting Money, and what not? But then if thou art a little open, and
some unwonted things done by thee, whether in Medicine or Alchymy, If thou
should have a great weight of Gold or Silver, and would sell it, any one
would admire readily, from whence so great a quantity of the finest Gold and
purest Silver should be brought; whereas such Gold is scarcely brought from any
place, save only Guiny or Barbary, and that in the fashion of most small sand:
but now thine being more noble than that, and in a massy form, will not want a
most notable rumor. For Buyers are not so stupid, although they should (like
Children) play with thee, and say, Our eyes are shut, come we will not see; but
if thou do come, they will even see, even but out of one corner of thy eye,
so much as is sufficient to bring upon thee the greatest Misery. For Silver is
by our Art produced so fine, that no such is brought from any place, That which
is brought out of Spain is the best, it does somewhat excel in goodness even
English sterling, and that in form of plain Money, which is transported by
Theft, the Laws of the Nations prohibiting it. If therefore thou shall sell a
quantity of pure Silver, thou have even already betrayed thy self: But if thou
adulteratest it (being not a Goldsmith) thou runnest the hazard of thy Head,
according to the Laws of England, Holland, and almost of all Nations, by which
it is provided, That every Deterioration or allaying of Gold and Silver (though
according to the Goldsmiths Balance) yet if it be not done by a professed and
licenced Metallourgist, it will be accounted a Capital Crime. We have known the
time that when we would have sold so much pure Silver, as was of six hundred
Pound value (in a foreign Country) being clothed like Merchants (for we durst
not adulterate it, because almost all Countries has its standing Balance of
the goodness of Silver and Gold, which the Goldsmiths do easily know in the
Mass; that should we pretend it was brought from hence or thence, they would
presently distinguish by their Probe or Trial, and apprehend the seller) they
presently said unto us that brought it, This Silver is made by Art. We demanded
the reason of their saying so, They replied only thus, The Silver that comes
out of England, Spain, etc. we are not now to learn how to know it, but this is
not any of these kinds: which when we heard, we privily withdrew, and loft both
the Silver and the price of it, never more demandable. Moreover if thou
should fain a great quantity of Gold brought from elsewhere, but especially
of Silver, this thing cannot be so private, but a rumor will be spread
thereof, the Ship-Master will say, Such a quantity of Silver was never brought
by me, nor can it come into the Ship, and every body be thereof ignorant; and
when others shall hear thereof, that were wont to buy it, they will laugh and say,
What? Is it a likely thing, that this Man can get such a Mass of Gold and
Silver, and put it into his Ship, there being such strickt Laws that forbid
it, and so strickt a charge to prevent it? Thus presently 'twill be blazed
abroad, not in one Region only, but in the bordering Countries. We being taught
by these dangers, have determined to lie hid, and will communicate the Art to
thee who dreamest of such things, that so we may see what public good thou will enterprise, when thou shall have obtained it. We therefore say, as
heretofore I taught that was necessary in the Work, and have delivered such
things concerning, which no former Age ever delivered; so also I now on the
other hand lay open the Sulphur, which will be desired, without which will
never receive a profitable congelation for the supernatural Work. Sulphur does
(in this Work) supply the place of the Male, and whosoever undertakes the
Transmutation Art without it, all his attempts will be in vain; for all the
Wisemen affirm, That there can be no Tincture made without its Latten, which
Latten is Gold, without any double speaking. Hence the noble Sendiuogius says,
The Fool (believe me) will not find our Stone, no not in Gold; but the Wiseman
will find it in the Dung, That is to say, In Gold (which is the of the Sophi)
the tincture of Goldness lies hid. This though it be a most digested body, yet
is it incrudated and made raw, in one only thing, viz. Our Mercury, and
receives from the multiplication of its own Seed, not so much in weight as in
virtue. And although very many of the Sophists do seem sophistically to deny
this thing, yet verily so it is as I have said, that is to say, They tell us
that common Gold is dead, but that theirs is alive; so in like manner a grain
of Wheat is dead, that is, the germinating activity therein lies suppressed, and
would eternally remain so, should it be kept in a dry ambient Air: but let it
be but cast into earth, and it presently receives a fermental life, it swells
up, is mollified and buddeth. Even so is the case with our Gold, it is dead,
that is, its vivifying virtue is sealed under abodily shell, as it is with the
Grain, although differently, according to the great difference betwixt a
Vegetable Grain and Metallic Gold. But even as a Grain remains perpetually
unchanged in a dry Air, is destroyed in the fire, and vivified in the water
only, even so Gold, that is uncorruptible in every Element, durable even
through every Age, is reducible in our water only, and is then living and ours.
Even as Wheat sown in the ground does change its name, and is called the
Husbandman's Seed-corn, either for Bread or other uses, as well as for Seed:
even so it is with Gold, as long as it is in the form of a Ring, a Vessel or
Money, it is the vulgar Gold, but as concerning its being cast into our water,
it is Philosophical; In the former respect it is called Dead, because it would
remain unchanged even to the Worlds end; in the latter respect it is said to be
living, because it is so potentially; which power is capable of being brought
into Art in a few days, but then Gold will be no longer Gold, but the Chaos of
the Sophi; therefore well may Philosophers say, That their philosophical Gold
differs from the vulgar Gold, Which difference consists in the Composition.
For even as that Man is said to be dead, which has already received the
sentence of Death; so is Gold said to be alive when it is mixed in such a
Composition, and put upon such a fire in which it will necessarily receive a
germinative life, in a short time: yea, 'twill demonstrate the actions of a
life beginning, and that within a few days. Therefore the same Sophi that say
their Gold is living, do bid thee (the Searcher of Art) to revive the dead, the
which if thou know to do, and to prepare the Agent, and rightly to mix the
Gold, it will soon become living; in which vivification thy living Menstruum
will dye. Therefore the Magi command thee to revive the dead, and to kill the
living; They do (at the first entrance call their water living, and say that
the death of one principle, with the death of another, has one and the same
period. Thence it is evident, That their Gold is to be taken dead and their
water living; and by compounding these together, the seed-Gold, will (by a
short decoction) vivifie or quicken, and the live will be killed, that is, the
spirit will be coagulated with the dissolved body, and both of them putrify
together, in the form of dirt or mud, until all the members of the Composition
are rent or dispersed into Atoms; Here therefore is the naturality of our
Magistery. The Mystery which we so much hide, is to prepare the, truly so
called, the which cannot be found upon the earth ready prepared to our hands;
and that for singular reasons known to the Adeptists. In the we neatly
amalgamate pure Gold, purged to the highest degree of purity, and filed or
beaten, and being shut in the glass we daily boil it; the Gold is dissolved by
the virtue of our Water, and returns to its nearest matter, in which the
included life of the Gold becomes free, and takes the life of the dissolving,
which (in respect of the Gold) is the same as good earth in respect of the
Grain of Wheat. In this therefore, the Gold being dissolved, does putrify, and
must be necessarily so by the necessity of Nature; therefore after the
putrefaction of death, there rises the new Body, of the same Essence with the
former Body, and of a more noble substance, (...) takes on it the degrees of
virtuality, proportionable to the difference between the four qualities of the
Elements. This is the reason of our Work, this is our whole Philosophy. We have
said therefore, That there is nothing in our Work secret but only, the
Magistery of which, is rightly to prepare it, and extract the hidden it
contains, and to Marry it in a just proportion with Gold, and to govern it with
the fire, as the requires, because Gold does not of it self fear the fire; and
as far forth as it is united with the, so far does it render it able to abide
the fire. Therefore this is the Labor and Work, to accommodate the regiment of
the heat, to the capacity of his abiding it; but he that has not rightly
prepared his, and should join Gold therewith, his Gold is yet the Gold of the
Vulgar, because it is joined with such a foolish Agent, in which it remains as
much unchanged, as if it had been kept in the Chest: nor will it lay off its
own bodily nature by any Regiment of the Fire whatsoever, where an Agent is not
alive within. Our is then a living and quickening soul, and therefore our Gold
is Spermatical; as Wheat sown is Seed-corn, when as the same Wheat would (in
the Barn) remain Bread-corn only, and dead; and though it were buried in a pot
under the earth (as the West-Indians are wont to hide their Fruit or Corn in
pits in the earth, fenced against the access of water) yet, unless it be met
withal by the moist vapor of the earth, it is dead, and abides without fruit,
and is plainly remote from Vegetation. I know there are many which will carp at
this Doctrine, and say, That he affirms it Gold of the Vulgar; and running is
the material Subject of the Stone: But we know the contrary. Go to therefore ye
Philosophers, examine your Purses, although you know such things, have ye the
Stone? Verily, as for my self, I do not possess it by theft, but by the gift of
my God. I have it, I have made it, and daily have it in my power, have often
formed it with my own hands, and I write the things I know: But I write not to
you. Therefore deal with your Rain-waters, May-waters, your Salts; tattle of
your Sperme, that it is more potent than the Devil himself, slander and revile
me. Believe ye that this your evil speaking will sadden me? I say that Gold
only and are our Materials, and I know what I write, and the searcher of all
hearts knows that I write the truth; nor is there any cause to accuse me of
envy, because I write with an unterrified Quill, in an unheard of style, to the
honor of God, to the profitable use of my Neighbors, and contempt of the
World and its Riches; because Helias the Artist is already born, and now
glorious things are declared of the City of God. I dare affirm that I do
possess more Riches than the whole known World is worth; but cannot make use
thereof, because of snares of Knaves. I disdain, I loath, and deservedly detest
this Idolizing of Gold and Silver, by the price whereof the pomp and vanities
of the World are celebrated. Ah filthy Evil! Ah vain Nothingness! Believe ye
that I conceal these things out of envy? No verily, for I protest to thee I
grieve from the very bottom of my Soul, that we are driven as it were like
Vagabonds from the Face of the Lord throughout the earth. But what need many
words, That thing that we have seen, taught and wrought, which we have, which
we possess and know, these do we declare, being moved with mere compassion
toward the studious, and with Indignation of Gold and Silver, and of precious
Stones; not as they are Creatures of God, far be it from us, for in that
respect we honor them, and think them worthy esteem: But the people of Israel
adores them as well as the World; therefore let it be ground to powder, like
the Brazen Serpent. I do hope and expect, that within a few years, Money will
be like dross; and that prop of the Antichristian Beast will be dashed in
pieces. The People are mad, the Nations rave, an unprofitable Wight is set in
the place of God. These things will accompany our so long expected and so
suddenly approaching Redemption, when the New-Jerusalem shall abound with Gold
in the streets, and the Gate thereof shall be made of entire Stones, and most
precious ones; and the Tree of Life, in the midst of Paradise, shall give
Leaves for the healing of the Nations. I know, I know these my Writings will be
to most Men like the purest Gold, and Gold and Silver will (through these my
writings) become as vile as dirt. Believe me ye Youngmen, believe me ye
Fathers, because the time is at the door; I do not write these things out of a
vain Conception, but I see them in the Spirit. When we Adeptists shall return
from the four Corners of the Earth, nor shall we fear any Snares that are laid
against our Lives, but we shall give thanks unto the Lord our God. My heart
murmureth things unheard of; my Spirit beats in my breast for the good of all
Israel. These things I send before into the world, like a Preacher, that I may
not be buried unprofitably in the World: Let my Book therefore be the
forerunner of Elias, which may prepare the Kingly way of the Lord. I would to
God that every ingenious Man, in the whole earth, understood this Science; then
no body would esteem hereof (Gold, Silver, and Gems being so exceedent
abundant) but so far forth only as it contained knowledge: Then at length
Virtue, naked as it is, would be had in great honor, merely for its own
amiable nature. I know many that possess the true knowledge thereof, all of
whom have vowed a most secret silence; but as for my self I am of another
judgment, because of the hope I have in my God; therefore I wrote this Book,
which none of my Adept Brethren (with whom I daily converse) knew of. For God
gave rest unto my soul, by a most firm faith; and I do undoubtedly believe,
that I shall (by this way) serve the Lord my Creditor, and the World my
Neighbor, and chiefly Israel, by this using I say of my Talent. And I know
that none can improve his Talent to so great Usury, for I foresee that (happily)
some hundreds will be illuminated by these my Writings; therefore I consulted
not with flesh and blood, I sought not after the consent of my Brethren in
writing hereof. God grant that it be to the glory of his Name, that I may
attain the end I expect; Then as many Adeptists that knew me, will rejoice that
I have published these things.

CHAP. 14. Of the requisite Circumstances in general, belonging to this Work.
WE have sequestered the Chemical Art from all the vulgar errors, and of the
vanquished Sophisms, and the curious Dreams of the Imaginarists; and have
taught, That the Art is to be made of and. We have showed that is Gold (without
all uncertainty and doubtfulness) not Metaphorically, but in a true
Philosophical sense to be understood; also our we have declared to be true
Argent Vive or Quicksilver, without any ambiguity of acceptance; The latter
we have told you must be made by Art, and be a key to the former. We have added
such clear and apparent reasons, that except you be blind at the Sun, you
cannot but perceive. We have protested, and do again profess, That we do not
declare these things from the faith we give to the Writings of other Men; the
things we faithfully declare, are what we have both seen and known. We have
made, and do possess the Stone, the great Elixir; nor verily will we envy thee
the knowledge thereof, but we wish that thou may learn them from these
Writings. We have likewise declared, That the Preparation of the true
Philosophical is difficult, the main knot lying in finding Diana's Doves, which
are folded in the everlasting Arms of, which no Eyes but a true Philosopher
ever saw. This one skill performs the Mastery of Theory, enobles a Philosopher,
and unfolds to the knower of it, all our Secrets. This is the Gourdian Knot,
which will be a knot for ever, to a ^yro in this Art, except the Finger of God
direct, yea so difficult, that there needs the peculiar grace of God, if any
one would attain the exact knowledge thereof. For my part, I have delivered
such things concerning the making thereof, as none before me ever did; more I
cannot do, unless I should give the (very) Receipt, which I have also done,
only I have not those things called by their proper names. It now remains that
we describe the use and practice, by which thou may easily discern the
goodness or defect of thy; that being known, thou may alter and mend it as
thou will. Having therefore animated and Gold, there remains an accidental
Purgation as well of the as the Gold, secondly Dispensation or Marriage,
thirdly Rection or Governance.

CHAP. 15. Of the accidental Purgation of Gold and Mercury.
PErfect Gold is found in the bowels of the earth, whereupon it is sometimes
found in little pieces, or in sands; if thou can have this sincere, it is
pure enough, but if not, then purge it with Antimony, or by the Cineritium or
Royal Cement, or by boiling with Aqua fortis, the Gold being first granulated.
Our Gold is made by Nature perfect to our hands, which I have found and used,
but hardly the Hundred thousandth Artist knows it, except he has exquisite
skill in the the Mineral Kingdom; but besides this it is in a substance obvious
to all Men, but then it is mixed with many superfluities; we do therefore make
it pass through many Trials and Mixtures till all the feculency be removed, and
the pure remain, which is then not without all Heterogeneitie; yet we melt it
not, for so the tender soul is lost, and becomes as dead as Gold vulgar, but
wash it in the water, in which all but our matter is consumed, then is our body
like a Crows bill; afterward melt it with a fire of fusing, and file it, then
it is Prepared: But needs an internal and an essential Purgation, which is an
addition of a true {sulphur}, orderly and by degrees, according to the number
of the Eagles, then is it radically purged. This {sulphur} is no other than our
Gold, which if you know to separate without violence, and then to exalt each a
part, and after to reconsume them, thou shall betwixt them have a conception,
which will give thee an Infant more noble than any sublunary thing whatsoever.
This Work Diana know to perform, if she be first infolded in the inviolable
arms of Venus. Pray the high God to reveal this Mystery to thee, which my
former Chapters have disclosed to a word; and where that Secret is couched,
there is not a word or stop superstuous or desectuous. But farther, It also
requires an accidental Purgation or Mundification to wash off the external
defilements that are cast out of the Center; but this is not so absolutely
necessary, but yet this Labor hastens the Work, and therefore is convenient.
Take therefore thy, which thou have prepared by a convenient number of Eagles,
and sublime it thrice from common Salt and the Scoria of Mars, grinding them
together with Vinegar and a little Sal Ammoniac until the disappear; then dry
it and distill it by a glass-Retort, by a fire gradually increased, even until
the whole ascend. Repeat this three times (or oftener) afterward boil the in
the Spirit of Vinegar an hour long, in a Cucurbit, or a glass with a broad
bottom and a narrow neck, sometimes strongly shaking it; then decant or pour
off the Vinegar, and wash off the sowrishness with Fountain Water, poured on
again and again; then dry up the, and thou will wonder at its brightness. Thou
may wash it with Urine, or Vinegar and Salt, and so spare the sublimation,
but then distill it at least four times without addition, after thou have
perfected all the Eagles or washings, washing the Chalybeate or Steel, Retort
every time with ashes and water, then boil it in distilled Vineagar for half a
day, stirring it strongly sometimes, and pour off the blackish Vineagar, and
pour on new; then wash it with warm water (thou may free the Spirit of the
Vineagar from blackness, by redistilling it, and 'twill be as virtuous as
before:) all this is for the removing the external uncleanness, which does not
adhere to the Center, and yet it is little more obstinate in the superficies
than you are aware of; which you shall thus perceive: Take this prepared with
his Eagles, viz. seven or nine, and amalgamate it with most purified Gold, let
the Amalgama be made in a most clear paper, and thou shall see that the
Amalgama will defile the paper with a duskish blackness, but yet this Faeces or
defilement thou may prevent by the foresaid distillation, boiling and
agitation, or stirring it; which Preparation does very much promote or hasten
the Work.

CHAP. 16. Of the Amalgamation of the and Gold, and of the due weight of both.
THese being rightly prepared, Take of purged and luminated Gold, or Gold
subtily filed, one part, of two parts, put it in an heated Marble Mortar; that
is to say, heated with boiling water (out of which being taken it dryes
presently, and holds the heat a long time) grind it with an Ivory Pestle, or
Glass, Stone or Iron (but this last is not so good) or Box; but the Stone or
Glass pestle is best (I am wont to use a white Coralline pestle) grind it I say
strongly, until it be made impalpable; grind it with as much diligence as
Painters are wont to grind their Colors, then see the consistence or
temperature of it; if it be pliable like butter, then it is not too hot nor yet
cold; but yet so that the Amalgama being declined (or bowed of one side) does
not permit the to run, like an hydropical intercutal water; the consistence
thereof is good, but if not, add as much of the water as is sufficient to make
it of this consistency. This is the Rule for Mixture, that it be most readily
pliable and most soft; and yet can be made up like round pellots, like as
Butter may (which though it yields to the easiest touch of the finger, yet may
be made up into balls by a Washing-woman.) Observe the alleged Example, as
being the most exact Example; because, as Butter, though it be turned of one
side, yet it does not pour out, or let go any thing from it self that is more
liquid than the whole Mass is. In like manner is our mixture, because of the
intrinsical nature of, Will this sign be given either in a double or in a
treble proportion of the to the Body, or also in the threefold of the Body to
to the fourfold of the Spirit, or in a double to treble: and according to the
nature of the, or difference, the Amalgama will be softer or harder; yet be
always mindful that it come together inpellots, and those pellots too being
laid by, do so concreate or hold together, that the does not appear more lively
in the bottom than in the top. For Note that if it be permitted to rest quiet,
the Amalgama hardens of its own accord. The consistency thereof, is to be
judged in the agitation or stirring it; and if then it be pliable like Butter,
and suffers it self to be made up into balls, and these pellots being put in
clean paper are of an equal liquidity, the proportion is good. This being done,
Take the Spirit of Vinegar and dissolve in it a third part of its own weight of
Sal Ammoniac, and put thereon and, formerly amalgamated, put it in a glass with
a long neck, and let it boil for a quarter of an hour, with a strong
Ebullition; then take the mixture out of the glass, separate the liquor, heat
the Mortar, and grind it strongly as above, and very diligently; then wash off
all the blackness with warm water, put it in again in the former liquor, and
boil it again in the same glass; then again grind it strongly, and wash it.
Repeat this Labor until thou can not get off any more color of blackness
from the Amalgama, by any Labor; then the Amalgama will be white, like the
purest Silver, and most polite, garnished with a wonderful brightness. Observe
even yet the teperature of it, and beware it be exquisitely right, according to
the Rules above-given; if it be not, make it so, and proceed as above. This is
a tedious Labor, yet shall thou see (by the signs appearing in the Work) thy
Labor recompensed; then boil it in a pure water, pouring it off and repeating
it, until all the saltness and Acrimony be vanished; then pour out the water
and dry the Amalgama, which will soon be done: But that thou may be more
secure (because too much water will destroy the Work, and break the vessel how
big soever it be) stir it or work it upon a clean paper, with the top of a
knife, from place to place, until it be dried exceeding well, then proceed as
I shall teach thee.

CHAP. 17. Of the Preparation, Form, Matter, and Closing the Vessel.
THou shall have an oval or round glass, so big as to hold at the most (in its
sphere or belly) an Ounce of distilled water, and not less than this if
possibly thou can, but get it as near the measure as possibly thou can; let
the glass have a neck of the height of one palm, or hand-breadth, or span; let
it be clear and thick, the thicker the better, so it be clear and clean, to
discover the actions which are within it; let it not at all be thicker in one
place than in another: The proportion of matter to this glass, let it be half
an Ounce of Gold, with an Ounce of, which is two to one, and if thou add three
to one of the, yet the whole Compound will be less than two Ounces, and this
proportion is exquisite: Moreover, unless the glass be strong it will not hold
in the fire; the winds which are in the vessel in the forming of our Embryo,
which will easily break a slight vessel. Let the glass be sealed at the top,
with so great caution, that there be not the least hole or chinck, else the
work would be destroyed. So you see that our Work as to our Principles, is
costlier than the price of three Florens, yea in the making of the water, the
price of what enters into a pound will hardly exceed a brace of Crowns. There
wants I confess some Instruments, but they are not deer; and if you had my
distilling Instrument, you may easily excuse the use of brittle glasses: yet
there are some Doctors who dreams, That the price of one Imperial or Crown will
suffice for the whole Work, to whom I have a ready answer to return, that is,
That I by that perceive, that they speak without any Easis of Experiment. For
there are in the Work other things that are precious and require charge. But
they will urge out of the Philosophers, That all which may be bought for a
great price, will be found a false Principle in our Work. To whom I may answer,
And what is our Work? Namely, to make the Stone. That indeed is our final
work, but our main Masterpiece is, To find a moisture or humidity, in which
the will melt, as Ice in warm water. This is our Work to find, for this many
seek, even to weariness; to attain this of, others for the of the: but all in
vain. For in this our Work, whatsoever is sold deer will prove deceitful.
Verily I say, That of the material Principle of our Water, as much may be
bought for the price of one Floren, as will prepare or vivifie two whole pounds
of our, it may become true Philosophical so much sought. Out of this we make a
Sol, which by that time it is perfect, is hardly so little chargeable to the
Artist, as if he had bought it at the price of the most fine; for it is indeed
as good in all other essays, and far more excellent in our Work. Moreover, we
need Glasses, Coals, Earthen-vessels, a Furnace, Ironvessels and Instruments,
which are not to be provided for nothing; away then with these Sophisters,
their vile prattling, impudent lies, by which they seduce many. Without our
perfect body, our offspring of Venus and Diana (which is pure Gold) there can
never be any tincture permanent. So then, it is, in respect of its nativity,
very vile on one hand, immature and volatile; on the other hand, perfect,
precious and fixed; which species of the Body and the Spirit is and, Gold and
Argent Vive.

CHAP. 18. Of the Philosophical Furnace or Athanor.
OF we have spoken, its Preparation, Proportion and Virtue; of {sulphur} also,
its necessity and use in our Work; which how they are to be Prepared, I have
showed; how to be mixed, I have taught: of the vessel also, in which they are
to be sealed, I have discovered much: which are all to be understood with a
grain of salt, else if you proceed too literally, you may happen to err
oftentimes; the which the unusual can do: For we have so mingled our
Philosophical subtleties with unusual candor, that unless you smell out many
Metaphors in our foregoing Chapters, your Harvest will hardly prove better than
loss of Time, Costs and Pains; as for Example: Where we, without any ambiguity,
told you that one of our Principles was, the other; one commonly vendible, the
other to be made by our Art: If you know not the latter, you know not the
subject of our Secrets, and may instead of it, work in Sol vulgar; yet mistake
me not, for our is in all examens good Gold, and therefore it is vendible, that
is, it may be (if reduced to a Metal) sold without any scruple: But our Gold is
not to be bought for money, though you would give a Crown or Kingdom for it,
for it is the gift of God, for our Gold is not to be had made to our hand (at
least not commonly.) But before it comes to be our, it stands in need of our
Art, yet thou may in and vulgar also seek our Sol and find it, if thou seek
aright. So then our Gold is the next matter to our Stone, and and vulgar are
near matters, but other Metals are the remote matter, and those things which
are not Metalline are most remote, that is alien from it. I my self have sought
it in and vulgar and found it, yet it is a far easier work out of our Matter to
make the Stone, than to abstract our true Matter out of any vulgar Metal; for
our Gold is a Chaos, whose soul is not put to flight by the fire; but Gold
vulgar is a body, whose soul is retired into a strong hold, that it may there
be defended from the violence of the fire; therefore says the Philosophers,
That the Fire of Vulcan is the artificial death of the Metals, and as many as
have suffered fusion have in it lost their Life. If thou can apply it
wittily, both to thy imperfect body, and to thy Fiery Dragon, thou need no
other Key to all our Secrets; for if thou will seek our in a middle substance,
between perfection and imperfection, thou may find it: Also loose the body
of common Sol, which is an Herculean Work, and it is called the first
Preparation, by which the Incantation is loosed, by which its body was bound
from performing the part of a Male. If thou go in our former way, thou
need a most benign fire from the beginning to the end; but if thou entrest
the latter way, thou must employ the help of Fiery Vulcan, such as we use in
multiplication, when corporal or vulgar is added to our Elixir for a Ferment.
This I fear will prove a Labyrinth to thee, except discretion help thee out of
it.

Yet in either, one progress or other, thou art in need of an equal and
continual heat, whether thou workest in vulgar, or in our only. Know also, That
thy in both Works, although it be one radically, yet it is far different in its
Preparation. Also thy Stone with our Gold shall be sooner perfected, by two or
three Months, than our first Matter shall be made to appear out of either or
vulgar; and the Elixir of the one will be at the first degree of perfection, of
a greater virtue by far than in the other at the third Rotation of the wheel.

Moreover, if thou work with our Sol, thou must make Cibation, Imbibition and
Fermentation, by which its force will be made in a manner infinite; but in the
other Work thou must first illuminate it, and nicerate it, as the great Rosary
teaches abundantly: Lastly, If thou work in our Gold, thou may calcine,
putrefie and purify, with a most benign fire of Nature within, helped from
without with a Bath, as if it were of Dung or Dew; but if thou work in vulgar,
thou must first sublime and boil this Compound till fit to be united with
Virgins Milk.

Yet be it as it will, thou can never do any thing without fire: It was not
then in vain, that the Truth-telling Hermes, next to the Father, and Mother,
reckons the fire as the third or governor of the whole. But this is to be
understood of the truly secret Furnace, which a vulgar eye never saw.

There is also another Furnace, which is called Our common Furnace, which is
either of Brick or Potters Loam, or of Iron or Copper plates well luted within;
this Furnace we call an Athanor, whose form, that best pleases me, is a Tower
with a Nest. Let the Tower be about two Foot high or more, and nine Inches
broad within the plates, or a common span; about two Inches broad below of each
side, and so about seven Inches high, or eight at the most; that where the fire
is, may be thicker of Clay than at top, but of a smooth ascent, somewhat
tapering; next to the bottom or foundation, let there be an ash-hole three or
four fingers high, or a little more, and a grate and stone fitted to it; a
little above the grate about an Inch high, let there be two holes which may
give vent into a Nest, which must be close joined at the side, the holes let
them be about an Inch diameter, and the Nest capable to receive three or four
Egg-glasses, and not too large; let the Nest and the Tower be very free from
cracks, and let the Nest have no scope downwards below the dish, but that the
fire may come immediately under the platter, and so forth at two, three, or
four holes, and let the Nest have a cover with a window in it, where a glass
about a Foot high may stand, or else the top of it let out at a hole above; and
being thus ordered, set your Furnace in a lightsome place, and the Coals are to
be put in at the top, first live ones and then others, and the top to be shut
from all Air with a cover, and sifted ashes in the joints of it. In such a
Furnace you may do the Work, from the beginning to the end.

But if you be curious, you may find other, and other ways of administering a
due Regimen of Fire. Let then, for a general Rule, such an Athanor be made, in
which, without motion of the glass, you may give what degree of heat you will,
from a feverish heat to a soft reverbering or dark red, and in its highest
degree, let it last at least ten hours or eight, without recruiting with Coals,
for less time is toylsom to the Workman; then have thou the first gate open.

Thou may, when thou have the Stone, make the forementioned Furnace
portable (as I my self have) for it is easily portable, and the Operations are
not so tedious, but very short, and so need no great Furnace; which would be
worse to carry about, and more trouble than the rising a little sooner than
ordinary, to recruit a small Furnace with Coals for about a Weeks time, or two
or three at the most, in the time of Multiplication.

CHAP. 19. Of the Progress of the Work in the first Forty Days.
HAving prepared our Sol and our, shut them in our Vessels and govern them with
our Fire, and within Forty Days thou shall see thy whole matter turned into a
shadow or Atoms, without any visible mover or motion, or without any heat
perceptible to the touch, save only that it is hot.

But if you be yet ignorant both of our Sun and of our, meddle not in this our
Work, for expense only will be thy lot, and no gain nor profit.

But if only thou want the full discovery of our Sun, having thoroughly attained
the skill of our, and know how to fit it to the perfect body, which is a
great Mystery.

Then take of vulgar well purified one part, and of our first illuminated three
parts, join them as was before taught, and set them to the Fire, giving a heat
in which it may boil and sweat; let it be circulated day and night without
ceasing, for the space of ninety days and nights, and thou shall see in that
space, that thy will have divided and reconjoyned all the elements of thy Gold;
boil it then other fifty days, and thou shall see in this Operation thy vulgar
turned into our, which is a Medicine of the first order: Thus does it become
our true {sulphur}, but it is not yet a teyning Tincture. Trust me, many
Philosophers have wrought this way, and attained the Truth, yet it is a most
tedious way, and it is for the Grandees of the Earth. Moreover when thou have
got this {sulphur}, do not think that thou have the Stone, but only its true
Matter; which in an imperfect thing thou may seek, and find it in a week,
with our easy, but rare way, which God has reserved for his poor contemned
and abject Saints: Of this thing I have now determined to write much, although
in the beginning of this Book, I decreed to bury this in silence; for here lies
the knot on which the grand Sophism of all the Adepti is built: Some write
concerning and vulgar, and they write true; and again others deny and vulgar,
and they also say true. I being now moved with Charity, will now reach forth my
hand, and therein I dare appeal to all the Adepti that ever wrote, and tax them
all with Envy, yea, and I my self that had resolved to tread in that same path
of Envy, but that God did enforce me beyond what I intended, to whom be
everlasting Praise. I say then that each way is true, for it is but one way in
the end, but not in the beginning; for our whole Secret is in our, and in our;
our is our way, and without it nothing is done; our also is not vulgar, yet in
vulgar is our, else how could Metals be homogeneal? If then thou know how to
illuminate our as it ought to be, thou may for want of our join with Gold
vulgar, but yet know that the acuation of the ought to be different for the
one, and for the other, and in a true Regimen of them, in an hundred and fifty
days, thou shall have our, for our naturally comes out of our: If then vulgar
be by our divided into its Elements, and afterward joined, all the mixture, by
the help of the fire, will become our, which then being joined with that, which
we prepared, and call our Virgins Milk, by reiterate decoction it will give all
the signs which the Philosophers have described, in such a fire as they have
written of in their Books.

But now if you shall in your Decoction of vulgar (though it be most pure) use
that same which is used in our (though both flow from one root in general) and
apply that Regimen of heat, which the Wisemen in their Books have applied to
our Stone, thou art without all doubt in an erroneous way, and that is the
great Labyrinth in which almost all young Practitioners are entangled, for
there is scarce one Philosopher who in his Writings does not touch both ways;
which is indeed but one way fundamentally, only one is more direct to the Mark
than the other: They then that do write of vulgar, as we sometimes in this
Treatise, so also Artephius, Flammel and Ripley, with many, others; We are not
otherwise to be understood, but that our Philosophical is to be made out of
vulgar and our, which then by reiterate Liquefaction, will give a {sulphur} and
Argent Vive, fixed and incombustible, and whose Tincture will abide all Trials;
also in this sense, our Stone is in every Metal or Mineral, forasmuch as vulgar
may be extracted out of them, and out of that our may be made, as being nearer
in it than any Metal. So then our Stone is in all Metals, but in our and nearer
than in any other; Therefore, says Flammel, some wrought it in, some in; but I
wrought it in Sol, and there I found it. Yet there is in the Metallic Kingdom
one thing of a miraculous Original, in which our Sol is nearer to be sought
than in Sol and vulgar, if it be sought in the hour of its Nativity; which
melts in our like Ice in warm water, and yet it has a resemblance with Gold:
This is not to be found in the manifestation of Sol vulgar, but by revealing
that which is hidden in our, the same thing may be found by Digestion in our
for the space of an hundred and fifty days. This is our Gold, sought the
farthest way about, which is not yet of so great a virtue as that which Nature
has made and left to our hands; yet turning the wheel thrice, each comes to
one end, yet with this difference, what thou find in the one in seven
months, thou must wait for in the latter the space of a year and a half, or it
may be two years. I am acquainted with both ways, and commend the first to all
ingenious men, but in my Descriptions I have most touched the hardest way, lest
I should draw on my head the Anathema of all Philosophers; know then, that this
is the only difficulty, in reading the books of those that are most candid,
that all, one as well as the other, do vary the Regimen, and when they write of
one Work they set down the Regimen of another, in which snare I was entangled
my self at first, and it was long before I could get free out of this Net.

Know then that the Fire in our Work is most agreeable to Nature, if thou
understand our Work aright; but if thou work in Sol vulgar, that properly is
not our Work, and yet it leads directly into our Work in its determined time;
but in it thou need a strong and long decoction, and a proportionable time;
then may thou go on the second Operation with our most benign Fire, with our
Tower and Athanor, which I chiefly commend.

If then the Work in Sol vulgar be sure to procure the Marriage of Diana, Venus
in the beginning of the Espousals of thy, then put them into the Nest, and in a
due heat of Fire thou shall see an emblem of the great Work, to wit, Black,
White, Citrine and Red; then reiterate this Work with, which we call our
Virgins Milk, and set it in a heat of Balneum Roris at the highest; let it be a
heat of ashes mixed with sand; then thou shall see not only the black but the
blackest black, and all blackness; so also both the white and the red complete,
and this with a gentle process; for in the fire and the wind God was not, but
in the still Voice he spoke unto Elias.

Therefore if thou know the art of it, extract our Sol out of our, then
shall thy Secrets spring all out of one Image, which, trust me, is more perfect
than any worldly perfection, according to the Philosopher; If, says he, thou
know how to make the Work out of alone, thou shall be Master of a most precious
Work. In this Work are no superfluities, but the whole (by the Living God) will
be turned into purity, because the action is only in one thing.

But if thou shall proceed in our Work with Sol vulgar, then the action and
passion is a twofold substance, and only the middle substance of both is taken,
and the Faeces rejected; if you do but meditate well on what I have told, in
few words, you have a key to open all the appearing Contradictions which are
amongst the Philosophers; therefore Ripley teaches to turn the wheel round
thrice, in his Chapter of Calcination, to which Relations his threefold
Doctrine of Proportions agrees, wherein he is very mystical, and those three
different proportions agree to three several Works; one Work is most secret and
purely natural, which is with our and our Sol, to which Work belong all the
signs described by the Philosophers. This Work is done neither by fire nor by
hands, but only by internal heat, and the external is only expelling cold and
overcoming its Symptoms.

The other Work is in Sol vulgar, purged with our; this operation is done with
a strong fire, and in a long time, in which both are decocted by the mediation
of Venus, so long until the pure substance of each be sublimed, which is the
true juice of Lunaria, this is to be taken, and the faeces are to be rejected;
this is not yet our Stone, but our true {sulphur}; which then is to be decocted
again with our, which is its own blood, by which decoction it becomes a Stone,
penetrative and teigning.

Thirdly and Lastly, There is a mixed Work, where vulgar is mixed with our in a
due proportion, and a Ferment of our {sulphur} is added as much as is
sufficient; then are fulfilled all the Miracles of the World, and the Elixir
becomes able to furnish the Possessor both with Riches and Health: Seek then
our {sulphur} with all thy might, which, believe me, thou shall find in our,

If Fates thee call. Otherwise choose Sol vulgar, and work on it with a due
proportion of heat, and out of it (in time) thou shall prepare our Sol and
Luna; but it is a way hedged with infinite briars, and we have made a Vow unto
God and Equity, that we would never, in naked words, declare each Regimen; for
I can assure you, upon my credit; that I have in other things discovered the
truth plainly. Take then that which I have described, and unite with Sol to
which it is most friendly, and in seven months, in our true Regimen of heat,
thou shall for certain see all which thou desire, or in nine months, or ten
at the most; but our in its full thou shall see in five months: And these are
the true periods of this {sulphur}, out of which, by reiterate decoction, thou
shall have our Stone and permanent Tinctures, through the grace of God, to whom
be all glory and honor for ever.

CHAP. 20. Of the appearing of Blackness in the Work of Sol and Luna.
IF thou shall work in Sol or to our {sulphur}, in them consider if you see
this matter like to paste, and to boil like unto water, or rather like to
melted pitch; for our Sol and have an emblematical Type in Sol vulgar, joined
with, and decocted in our: When thou have kindled thy Furnace, wait for the
space of 20 days and nights, in which time thou shall observe diverse colors,
and about the end of the fourth week, if the fire be continual, thou shall see
a most amiable greenness, which will be seen for about ten days, less or more,
then rejoice, for without doubt in a short time thou shall see it like unto a
coal in blackness, and all the members of thy Compound shall be turned into
Atoms, for the Operation is no other than a Resolution of the fixed in that
which is not fixed, that afterward both being joined together, may make one
matter, partly spiritual, and partly corporal: Therefore says the Philosopher,
Take Corascene Dog and Bitch of Armenia, join them together, and they shall
beget thee a Son of the color of the heaven; for these Natures, in a short
decoction, shall be turned into a broth, like unto the foam of the Sea, or like
a thick cloud, which shall be tinctured with a livid color; and once more I
may assure thee, that I have not hidden any thing save only the Regimen, and
this, if thou art wise, thou shall easily collect from my Lines: Supposing then
that thou will learn the Regimen.

Take the Stone which I have told you of before, and govern it as you know how,
and there shall follow these notable things; first, as soon as our Stone shall
feel the fire, it shall flow (its {sulphur} and its together) upon the fire
like to wax, and the {sulphur} shall be burned, and the color shall change day
by day; but the is incombustible, only it shall be affected with the colors of
the {sulphur} for a time, but it cannot be radically affected, therefore it
will wash Letton clean from all its filth; reiterate the heaven upon the earth,
so long and so often, until the earth receive a spiritual and heavenly nature:
O blessed Nature, which does that which is impossible for Man to do! Therefore
when in thy glass thou shall see thy Natures to be mingled like unto a
coagulated and burnt blood, know that then the Female is embraced by the Male:
Therefore after the first stirring up of the Matter, expect that in 17 days
thy two Natures shall be turned into a bloody or fatted Broth, which shall be
turned round together, like unto a thick Cloud, or the scum of the Sea, as is
before said; and the color of it will be exceeding obscure; then be sure that
the Kingly Child is Conceived, and from that time thou shall see vapors,
green, blew, black and yellow, in the Air or Fire, and at the sides of the
Vessel. These are those Winds, which in the forming of our Embryon are very
frequent, which are to be kept warily, lest they fly out, and the Work be
destroyed; beware also of the Odor, lest it happen to exhale at any chink; for
the virtue of the Stone would thereby get a most notable detriment; therefore
the Philosopher commands to keep the Vessel close sealed, and beware that you
do not break off abruptly from the Work; neither open nor move the Vessel, nor
yet intermit the Operation not an hour, but continue the Decoction till you see
the moisture begin to fail, which will be in about thirty days; then rejoice,
and rest assured that thou art in the right way. Attend the Work vigilantly,
for in about two weeks from the time, thou shall see the whole earth dry and
notably black, then is the death of thy Compound at hand, the Winds are ceased,
and all are rest and quietness. This is the fatal Eclipse of the Sun and of
the Moon, when no light shall shine upon the Earth, and the Sea shall vanish,
then is made our Chaos, out of which, at the command of God, shall proceed all
the Miracles of the World in their orders.

CHAP. 21. Of the Burning of the Flowers, and how to prevent it.
THe burning of the Flowers is an error of fatal consequence, yet soon
committed before the Natures which are tender and extracted from their
profundity, they are oftentimes burnt; this error is chiefly to be heeded
after the three weeks; for in the beginning there is so much moisture, that if
the Work be governed by a stronger fire than is convenient, it being brittle
will not bear the abundance of winds, but will suddenly fly in pieces, unless
the glass be too large, and then sure the vapors will be so out of measure
dispersed, that they will hardly return again to their body, at least not so
much as is necessary for the refreshment of the Stone. But so soon as the earth
shall begin to retain part of its water, then the vapors decreasing, the fire
may be strengthened without danger of the Vessel; but the Work will
nevertheless be destroyed, and will have a color of a wild Poppie, and the
whole Compound will at length become a dry and unprofitable powder, of a half
red color: Thou shall conclude from this sign, that thy fire has been too
strong, so strong, to wit, as to hinder true conjunction; for know, that our
Work does require a true change of Natures, which cannot be until an entire
union of both Principles be made; but they cannot be united but in the form of
water, for bodies may be confounded or blended together, but cannot be united,
nor yet can any body with a spirit be united per minima; but spirits with
spirits may well be united, therefore our Operations must become Homogeneal
Metallic Water; the way to which Solution is our foregoing true Calcination,
which therefore is not an exsiccation properly, but a kind grind of water, as
earth in Atoms; which when they become more subtle than the exigencies of the
earth requires, earth is then actually transmuted into, and does receive the
form of Ferment of water; but if the fire be too vehement, this spiritual
Nature being struck as with a fatal stroke, our active will become passive, of
spiritual corporal, even a red unprofitable precipitate, for in a due heat the
color will be as black as that of the Crow, which though it be dark yet it is
most desirable; yet there is also a blackness which will appear in the
beginning of the true Work, and that very remarkable, but this is ever
accompanied with a due proportion of moisture, and shows that heaven and
earth have been in conjunction, between which the fire of Nature is conceived;
by which redness all the concave of the glass will seem as it were gilt over
with Gold, but this color is not durable long, but in a short space will be
changed into a greenness, then in a very short time expect blackness; and if
thou will be patient, thou for certain shall see thy desire accomplished, at
least make slow, but sure progress. Let not thy heat be over strong, and yet
strong enough, and between Scilla and Charibdis sail like unto a skilful Pilot,
so shall thou attain the wealth of either India; sometimes thou shall see as it
were little Islands sloating, and shooting out as it were little sprigs and
buds, which will be changeable in colors, which soon will be melted and others
will arise in the stead of them; for the earth as it were inclining to a
Vegetation, is always sending forth some new thing or other; sometimes thy
fancy will be that thou see in thy glass Birds or Beasts, or creeping things,
and thou shall each day behold colors most beautiful to sight, which though
they are pleasant to the eye, are not of a long continuance; all is in the
keeping of a due heat without any intermission: So shall all these pleasant
colors in the space of fifty days end in a color most black, and a powder
discontinuous, which if thou see not, blame either thy or thy Regimen, or the
disposition of the Matter, unless thou either have moved or meddled with the
glass, which may either protract or finally destroy the Work.

CHAP. 22. The Regimen of Saturn, what it is, and whence it is denominated.
AS many of the Wise men as have wrote of this Masterpiece of Philosophy, have
all spoken of the Regimen of, which many (understanding wrong) have turned
aside unto diverse errors, and deceived themselves with their own opinion; some
being thus led with a great deal of confidence, although with very little
advantage: But know that our is more noble than any Gold, it is the Limus in
which the soul of our Gold is joined with its, that after they may produce Adam
and Eve his wife; therefore that which is the highest shall so humble it self
as to become the lowest, then expect that he will redeem all his Brethren by
his blood. The sepulcher in which our King is buried is named in our Work, and
its the Key of the Work of Transmutation; O happy is he that may behold this
slow Planet! Pray to God, my Brother, that he would vouchsafe to you his
blessing; for its not of him that wills, nor of him runs, but on the
Father of Lights alone, this Blessing depends.

CHAP. 23. Of the various Regimens of this Work.
BE certainly confident studious Son of Art, whoever thou art, that nothing is
hidden in this Work, save only the Regimen, of which, that of the Philosopher
may be verified, Whoever is Master of that Science, Princes and Grandees of the
Earth shall honor him. I assure you, upon the word of an honest Man, that if
this one Secret were but openly discovered, Fools themselves would deride the
Art; for that being known, nothing remains, but the Work of Women and the play
of Children, and that is Decoction: So that not without cause did the Wise men
hide this Secret with all their might. And rest assured that we have done the
same, whatever we have seemed to speak concerning the degree of heat; yet
because I did promise candor in this Treatise, something at the least is to be
done, that I may not deceive the ingenious of their hope and pains: Know then,
that our Regimen, from the beginning to the end, is only lineal, and that is to
decoct and to digest, and yet this one Regimen in it self comprehends many
others, which the envious have concealed, by giving them diverse names, and
describing as so many several Operations: We, to perform the candor we
promised, will make a far more perspicuous manifestation. So that, Reader,
whoever thou art (if ingenious) thou shall find cause to acknowledge our
candidness in this to be more than ordinary.

CHAP. 24. Of the first Regimen of the Work, which is of Mercury.
ANd in the first place we shall treat of the Regimen of, which is a secret
hitherto not discovered by any Philosophers; for they verily do begin their
Work at the second Regimen, and do give a young Practitioner no light in the
mastery of the capital signs of blackness; in this point, that good Marquess of
Treveso was silent, noble Bernard, who in his Parables says, That the King,
when he came to the Fountain, leaving all strangers behind him, enters the Bath
alone, clothed in golden Robes, which he puts off and gives to his first
Chamberlain, from whom he receives a black Velvet Suit. But he shows not how
long the intervail of time is, before he plucks of his golden Garment, and
therefore he passes over in silence the first and most intricate Regimen,
which is perhaps forty or fifty days ere it be fully complete; in which time
the poor Practitioner is left to uncertain Experiments; from the appearing of
blackness until the very end of the Work, the sights that do appear are
sufficient to refresh the Artist, but in this space to wander without a guide
or direction, for the space of fifty days, I confess is tedious: I say then,
That from the second kindling of the fire, even until blackness, all the
interval of time is the Regimen of our, even of our Sophical, which all that
time does work alone, his Companion being dead at first, and so remains a great
space; and this Secret before me no man ever yet discovered: Therefore when thy
Matters are joined, which are our and our, do not think, as some Alchymists
vainly imagine, that the r^^ing of the Sun will follow suddenly, no verily, we
waited a long and tedious while before a reconciliation was made betwixt the
water and the fire; and this the envious have in a short speech mystically
comprehended, when they in the first beginning of their Work, called their
Matter Rebis, that is, made of two substances, according to the Poet, Res Rebis
est bina conjuncta, sed est tamen una
Solvitur, ut prima sint aut Sol aut Spermata Luna.
Rebis are two things joined, yet is but one
Dissolved, that Sol or Lune be Sperm alone.


For know of an undoubted truth, that though our devour the, yet it does not so
as Chemical Phantasticks dream, for although the join with our, yet a year
after you shall separate each from the other in its own nature, unless you
decoct them together in a convenient degree of fire, otherwise they will not be
altered; he who will affirm the contrary, is no Philosopher: They who wander in
Errors Path, do dream that it is a matter of very light concernment to
dissolve the perfect bodies in our, in so much, that according to their
imaginations, Gold in this will be devoured in the twinkling of an eye; not
well understanding the place of Bernard Trevisan, in his Parable concerning his
Golden Book irrecoverably drowned in his Fountain. But how hard a Work it is to
dissolve Bodies, they can witness who have taken pains in this dissolution; I
my self, who have been often taught this Lesson by ocular testimony, can be a
witness, that it is a most ingenious thing to govern the fire, even after the
matter is prepared, such a fire as may dissolve the Bodies as they ought to be
dissolved, without burning their tinctures. Attend then to my Doctrine: Take the
Body which I have showed you, and put it into the water of our Sea, and decoct
it continually with a due heat of fire, that both Dews and Clouds may ascend,
and drops may descend, both night and day, without intermission; and know, that
in this Circulation the does arise in its former nature, and leaves the body
beneath its former nature, so long until after a long time the body begin to
retain part of its soul, so by degrees both begin to partake each of other, but
because the whole water does not ascend by sublimation, part of it remains
below in the bottom of the vessel, therefore is the body boiled in the water
that remains beneath, and by its means it is sifted, and the drops which are
continually running down do perforate the mass marvelously, and by continual
Circulation the water is made more subtle, and does sweetly extract the soul of
the Sun; so by the mediation of the soul the spirit is reconciled with the
body, and an union of both is made at the utmost within fifty days; and this
Operation is called the Regimen of, because the is circulated above, and in it
the body of the Sun is boiled beneath, and the body is in his work passive,
until the colors shall appear, which will be a little about the twentieth day
in a good and continual ebullition; which colors are afterward increased,
multiplied and varied, until all be at last completed in black of the blackest
most black, which the fiftieth day will give thee,

(If Fates thee call.)

CHAP. 25. Of the second Regimen of the Work, which is of Saturn.
HAving run through the Regimen of, which is to strip the King of his golden
Robes, to assault the Lion with diverse conflicts, to weary him, and at length
to kill him; the next Regimen that apears is that of, for it is the will of God
that the Work, when once it is begun, should be carried on even unto the end,
and the law of those Operations is, that the ending of one, is the entrance of
another; the period of one, the beginning of another: Nor does the Regimen of
sooner pass away, but his succesor comes in, who is the next higher in
succession; the Lion dying, the Crow is engendered: This Regimen lineal in
respect of the color, for there is but one only color, and that is the
blackest black, but neither fumes, nor winds, nor any symbol of Life, only the
Compound, will at some seasons appear dry, otherwhiles boiling like to melted
Pitch: O sad sight, the Image of eternal Death! But withal a most pleasant
Messenger to the Artist, for the blackness is not ordinary intense, so that it
shines again for blackness; and when thou see thy Matter swelling beneath,
like unto a Paste, rejoice, for know, that within this there is shut a
quickening spirit, which in its appointed time, will restore Life from the
Almighty and these Carkases. Be thou only careful of the fire, which thou must
be sure to govern with a sound judgment, and I swear unto thee upon the Faith
of an honest Man, that if thou urge thy Fire, so as to make ought to sublime,
in the days of this Regimen, thou will destroy the Work irrecoverably; be
content then, with good Trevisan, to be detained in prison forty days and
nights, and suffer the tender Nature to remain below in the bottom, which is
the Nest of their Conception; knowing for certain then, that when the period of
time is expired, which the Almighty has appointed, the spirit will arise
glorious, and glorify its body; it will ascend, I say, and be circulated
sweetly, and without violence, and from the Center it shall ascend unto the
Heavens, and again from the Heavens it shall descend to the Center, and it
shall receive the virtue of that which is above, and that which is beneath.

CHAP. 26. Of the Regimen of Jupiter.
AFter black, succeeds, who is of diverse colors; for after the putrefaction
and corruption which is made in the bottom of the vessel, through the command
of God thou shall again see change the colors, and a circulating sublimation.
This Regimen is not durable, for it continues not more than three weeks space;
in which time, all colors imaginable in the World will be to be seen, of
which, no certain account can possibly be rendered. In these days the showers
shall be multiplied continually, and at the last, after all these things most
beautiful to behold, there shall show it self a whiteness at the sides of the
vessel, like unto rays or hairs, then rejoice, for now thou art hapily run
through the Regimen of. The greatest caution in this Regimen is, lest when the
Chickens of the Crow have left their Nest, they return to it again; also, lest
you draw out the water too immoderately, so the earth beneath want it, and be
left dry and unprofitable in the bottom; lastly, lest thou waterest thy earth
so intemperately as to suffocate it, which error thou shall help by the good
Regimen of external Fire.

CHAP. 27. Of the Regimen of Luna.
AFter the finishing of Jupiter's Regimen, about the closing of the fourth
month, the sign of the Moon Crescent shall appear unto thee; and know, that
the whole Regimen of is employed about the washing of Letton, the washing
Spirit is very white in its nature, but the body which is to be washed is very
black, in the passage whereof to white, all the middle colors shall be seen;
after which, all will become white, not in a day, but gradually it shall arise
from white to the whitest of all; and know, that in this Operation, there shall
be a season in which all shall appear like to liquid Argent Vive, and this is
called, The sealing of the Mother in the belly of her own Infant which she
brought forth; and in this Regimen there shall also appear some beautiful
colors, but momentary and soon vanishing, and more of kin to white than unto
black, as the colors in the Regimen of contrariwise participated more of
blackness than whiteness; also know, that in three weeks the Regimen of will be
complete, but before its perfection the Compound shall change in a thousand
forms; for when the fumes begin to cease, before it be wholly congealed, it
will melt and grow hard again an hundred times in a day; sometimes it will
appear like to the eyes of a Fish, sometimes like to a pure silver Tree shining
with branches and leaves: In a word, about this season the hourly marvels that
shall appear, shall overwhelm the sight, and at the last thou shall have most
pure sparkling grains like unto Atoms of the Sun, more glorious than which
humane eyes never saw. Let us give immortal thanks to our God, who has brought
the Work to this perfection, for it is the true perfect Tincture to the White,
yet only of the first order, and therefore but of small virtue, in comparison
of that admirable force which it will attain by reiterate Preparation.

CHAP. 28. Of the Regimen of Venus.
ABove all things this is most wonderful, that our Stone being now wholly
perfect, and able to give a perfect Tincture, should of his own accord again
abase himself, and become again volatile without any laying on of hands: But if
you take the white stone out of the vessel, the same being put again into a new
vessel, after it is once cold, can never be brought into a new Operation; a
demonstrative reason of which, neither we nor any of the ancient Philosophers
are able to render, only it is done by the will of God; at least here be very
wary of your fire, for this is the Law of the Stone when it is perfect, that it
must be fusible: Therefore if you give too great a heat, the Matter will be
vitrified, and melting will adhere to the sides of the vessel; nor can thou
then go on any farther with the Work. And this is the vitrifying of the Matter
so often warned of by the Philosophers, which often happens to them which are
unwary both before and after the White Work is, even ended, to wit, after the
middle of the Regimen of, until the seventh or tenth day of the Rule of:
Therefore let thy fire be increased but a very little, so that the Compound may
not vitrifie, that is, to be melted passively like to glass; but with a
bounteous fire, it may of its own accord melt, and swell, and by the command of
God it shall be endued with a spirit, that shall fly aloft, and the stone to
fly with it: It shall thus give thee new colors, the green at first, which is
of, which shall last a long time less or more for the space of twenty days;
expect after this Cerule and Livid, and about the end of the Rule of pale and
obscure purple, be heedful in this Work that thou do not provoke the spirit too
urgently, for being now more corporal than formerly, if it do fly to the top
of the vessel, it will hardly return of its own accord; which caution is also
to be observed in the Rule of. When once thou see the spirits to thicken,
then handle them sweetly and without violence, lest if thou make them to
ascend to the top, that which is in the bottom be either burnt or vitrified, to
the destruction of the Work; when then thou see greenness, know that in it is
the virtue Germinative contained. Beware then that this greenness turn not into
a filthy blackness with immoderate heat, but govern thy fire prudently; so
after forty days thou shall see this Regimen at an end.

CHAP. 29. Of the Regimen of Mars.
AFter the Rule of is ended, whose color was chiefly Vert or Green, and a
little Red of an obscure Purple, and sometimes Livid; in which time the
Philosophical Tree did flourish with Boughs and with discolored Leaves and
Branches, next succeeds the Reign of, which shows a little Yellow, mixed with
Luteous Brownness; these are the chief colors, but transitory ones of the
Rainbow and Peacocks-tail, it shows most gloriously, this is a dry state of
the Compound, in which the Compound will appear at times in strange Figures;
the Hyacinth and high Orange color in these days will be seen frequently. Now
the Mother being sealed in her Infants Belly swells and is purified, but
because of the present great purity of the Compound, no putridness can have
place in this Regimen, but some obscure colors play their part as the chief
Actors in this Stone, and some middle colors do pass and come, pleasant to be
hold: Now know, that this is the last Tillage of our Virgin Earth, that in it
the Fruit of the Sun might be set and maturated; therefore continue a good
heat, and thou shall see for certain about thirty days off this Regimen a
Citrine color shall appear, which shall in two weeks offer its first appearing
Tincture, all with a true Citrine color.

CHAP. 30. Of the Regimen of Sol.
NOw art thou drawing near to the end of thy Work, and have almost made an end
of this business; now all appears like unto pure Gold and the Virgins Milk,
with which thou imbibest this Matter, is now very Citrine: Now to God, the
Giver of all Good, you must render immortal Thanks, who has brought this Work
on so far; and beg earnestly of him, that thy Counsel may hereafter be so
governed, that thou may not endeavor to hasten thy Work now it is so near
perfection, so as to lose all; Consider that thou have waited now about seven
months, and it would be a mad thing to annihilate all in one hour; therefore
be thou very wary, yea, so much the more by how much thou art nearer to
perfection. But if you do proceed warily in this Regimen, thou shall meet with
these notable things, first, thou shall observe a certain Citrine sweat to
stand upon the Body, and after that Citrine vapors, then shall thy Body below
be tinctured of a Violet color, with an obscure Purple intermixed; after the
fourteen or fifteen days expectation in this Regimen of the, thou shall see
the greatest part of thy Matter humid, and although it be very ponderous, yet
it will ascend in the Belly of the Wind; at length, about the twenty sixth day
of this Regimen, it will begin to dry, and then it will liquefie and recongeal,
and will grow liquid again an hundred times in a day, until at the last it
begin to turn into grains, and sometimes it will will seem as if it were all
discontinuous in grain, and then again it will grow into one Mass again, and
thus will it put on innumerable forms in one day; and this will continue for
the space of about two weeks; at the last, by the will of God, a light shall be
sent upon thy Matter, which thou can not imagine; then expect a sudden end,
within three days thou shall see, for thy Matter shall convert it self into
grains, and as fine as the Atoms of the, and the color will be the highest
Red imaginable, which for its transcendent redness will show blackish, like
unto the soundest blood when it is congealed, although thou may not believe
that any such thing can be an exact parallel of our Elixir, for it is a
mavelous Creature, not having its compare in the whole Universe, nor any
thing exactly like it.

CHAP. 31. The Fermentation of the Stone.
REmember now that thou have got our {sulphur} red and incombustible, which can
by no fire be promoted further of it self, and be very wary, which I should
have told you in the former Chapter had I not forgot it, that in the Regimen of
the Citrine Sun, before this supernatural be born, which is adorned with a true
Tirian color; lest, I say, thou then vitrifie thy Matter with too great fire,
for so it would be after insoluble, and by consequence cannot be coagulated
into these glorious Atoms, Red of the Reddest. Be wary then that thou destroy
not so great a Treasure, and yet do not think that thy Labor here has an end,
but proceed further, that out of this {sulphur}, by reiterate solution and
coagulation, thou may have our Elixir: Take then of most fine Gold three
parts, and of this {sulphur} one part, thou may take four parts of and a
fifth part of our {sulphur}, but the aforesaid proportion is better; melt the
in a clean Crucible, and when it is melted put thy {sulphur} into it, but very
warily, lest you lose it by the smoke of the coals, let them flow together,
then put them forth into an Ingot, and thou shall have a Mass, which may be
pulverised, of a most glorious Red color, but hardly transparent; then take of
this Mass exactly pulverised one part, of thy Sophical two parts, mix them
well, put them in a glass, which seal, and govern it as before two months, in
which time thou shall see all the foresaid Regimens pass in their order. This
is true Fermentation, which thou may, if thou will, reiterate.

CHAP. 32. The Imbibition of the Stone.
I Know that many Authors do take Fermentation in this Work for the internal
invisible Agent, which they call Ferment, by whose virtue the fugitive and
subtle Spirit, without laying on of hands, are of their own accord thickened;
and our forementioned way of Fermentation they call Cibation with Bread and
Milk, so Ripley; but I (not using to cite other Authors, nor yet to swear to
their words in a thing which I my self know as well as they) have followed my
own judgment in my Writings. There is then another Operation, by which our
Stone is increased in weight more than virtue: Take of thy {sulphur}, white or
red, and to three parts of the {sulphur} add a fourth part of the water, and
after a little blackness, in six or seven days decoction, thy water newly
added shall be increased or thickened, like unto thy {sulphur}; then add
another fourth part, not in respect of the whole Compound, which is now
increased a fourth part by the first Imbibition; but in reference to thy first
{sulphur} as thou tookest it at first, which being dried add another fourth
part, and let it be congealed with a convenient fire, then put to it two parts
of the water in reference to the three parts of the {sulphur} which thou
tookest at first, before the first Imbibition, and in this proportion, imbibe
and congeal three other times, at last add five parts of water in the seventh
Imbibition, still remembering to reckon the water in reference to the {sulphur}
as it was taken at first; seal thy Vessel, and in a fire like to the former
make thy Compound pass through all the foresaid Regimens, which will be done in
one month, and then thou have the true Stone of the third order; of which one
part will fall on a thousand, and teyn perfectly.

CHAP. 33. The Multiplication of the Stone.
TO this is required no labor, save only that thou take the Stone, being
perfect, and join it with three parts, or at the most with four parts of of our
first Work, and govern it with a due fire, in a Vessel well closed, so shall
all the Regimens pass with infinite pleasure, and thou shall have the whole
increased a thousand fold beyond what it was before the Multiplication of it;
and if thou shall reiterate this Work again, in three days thou shall run
through all the Regimens, and thy Medicine shall be exalted to another
millinary virtue of Tincture; and if thou yet shall reiterate the Work, it will
be perfected in a natural day, and all the Regimens and Colors shall pass,
which will be done afterward with another reiteration in one hour, nor shall
thou at last be able to find the extent of the virtue of thy Stone, it shall be
so great that it shall pass thy Ingenuity to reckon it, if that thou proceed in
the Work of reiterate Multiplication: Now remember to render immortal Thanks to
God, for thou now have the whole Treasure of Nature in thy possession.

CHAP. 34. Of the manner of Projection.
TAke of thy Stone perfected as is said, white or red, according to the
equality of the Medicine, take of either or four parts, melt them in a clean
Crucible, then put in of thy Stone, white or red, as the Metal that is melted
is in quality, and being well mixed together in fusion, pour them into an
Ingot, and thou shall have a Mass which is brittle; take of this Mass one part,
and well washed ten parts, heat the till it begin to crack, then throw upon it
this Mixture, which in the twinkling of an eye will pierce it; increase thy
fire till it be melted, and all will be a Medicine of inferior virtue; take
then of this, and cast one part upon any Metal, purged and melted, to wit, as
much as it can teyn, and thou shall have most pure or, purer than which Nature
cannot give. But it is better to make Projection gradually, until Projection
cease; for so it will extend farther; for when so little is proiected on so
much, unless Projection be made on, there is a notable loss of the Medicine, by
reason of the Scorias which do adhere to impure Metals; by how much then the
Metals are better purged before Projection, by so much more will the Matter
succeed.

CHAP. 35. Of the many Uses of this Medicine.
HE who has once, by the Blessing of God, perfectly attained this Art, I know
not what in the World he can wish, but that he may be free from all snares of
wicked men, so as to serve God without distraction. But it would be a vain
thing, by outward pomp to seek for vulgar applause, such trifles are not
esteemed by those who have this Art, nay rather they despise them: He therefore
whom God has blessed with this Talent, has this field of Content, which far
exceeds popular admiration; first, if he should live a thousand Years, and
every day provide for a thousand men, he could not want, for he may increase
his Stone at his pleasure, both in weight and virtue, so that, if a man would,
one man that is an Adeptist, might transmute into perfect Gold and Silver all
the imperfect Metals that are in the whole World; secondly, he may by this Art
make precious Stones and Gems, such as cannot be paralelled in Nature, for
goodness and greatness.

Thirdly and Lastly, he has a Medicine Universal, both for prolonging Life,
and Curing of all Diseases, so that one true Adeptist can easily Cure all the
sick People in the World, I mean his Medicine is sufficient.

Now to the King Eternal, Immortal and sole Almighty, be everlasting Praise,
for these his unspeakable Gifts, and unvaluable Treasures.

Whosoever enjoys this Talent, let him be sure to employ it to the glory of
God, and the good of his Neighbors, lest he be found ungrateful to God his
Creditor, who has blessed him with so great a Talent, and so be in the last
day found guilty of misproving of it, and so condemned.

This Work was begun in the Year, 1645. and ended by me, who have made and do
profess these Secrets, yet desire not applause, but to be helpful to a sincere
Searcher of this Secret Art; to whom I subscribe my self a Friend and Brother,

Aeyrenaeus Philaletha, Natu Auglus, Habitatione Cosmopolita.

The Contents.
CHAP. 1. OF the necessity of the Sophick Mercury for the Work of the Elixir.
page 1. CHAP. 2. Of the Principles Composing the Mercury Sophical. page 4.
CHAP. 3. Of the Chalybs of the Sophists. p. 6. CHAP. 4. Of the Magnet of the
Sophists. pa. 8. CHAP. 5. The Chaos of the Sophi. page 9. CHAP. 6. The Air of
the Sophi. page 11. CHAP. 7. Of the first Operation, of the Preparation of the
Sophical by the Flying Eagles. page 14. CHAP. 8. Of the labor and tediousness
of the first Preparation. page 17. CHAP. 9. Of the virtue of our Mercury upon
all the Metals. page 20. CHAP. 10. Of the Sulphur which is in the Sophical
Mercury. page 21. CHAP. 11. Of the Invention of the perfect Magistery. page 23.
CHAP. 12. Of the manner of the perfect Magistery in general. page 36. CHAP. 13.
Of the Use of the ripe {sulphur} in the Work of the Elixir. page 32. CHAP. 14.
Of the requisite Circumstances in general belonging to this Work. p. 51. CHAP.
15 Of the accidental Purgation of Gold. page 53. CHAP. 16. Of the Amalgamation
of the Mercury and Gold, and of the due weight of both. page 57. CHAP. 17. Of
the Preparation, Form, Matter and Closing of the Vessel. page 61. CHAP. 18. Of
the Philosophical Furnace or Athanor. page 64. CHAP. 19. Of the Progress of the
Work in the first Forty Days. page 71. CHAP. 20. Of the appearing of Blackness
in the Work of and page 80. CHAP. 21. Of the burning of the Flowers and how to
prevent it. page 84. CHAP. 22. The Regimen of Saturn, what it is, and whence it
is denominated. page 88. CHAP. 23. Of the various Regimens of this Work. page
89. CHAP. 24. Of the first Regimen of the Work, which is of Mercury. page 90.
CHAP. 25. Of the second Regimen of the Work which is of Saturn. page 95. CHAP.
26. Of the Regimen of Jupiter. page 98. CHAP. 27 Of the Regimen of Luna. page
100. CHAP. 28. Of the Regimen of Venus. page 102. CHAP. 29. Of the Regimen of
Mars. page 105. CHAP. 30. Of the Regimen of Sol. page 107. CHAP. 31. The
Fermentation of the Stone. page 110. CHAP. 32. The Imbibition of the Stone.
page 112. CHAP. 33. The Multiplication of the Stone. page 114. CHAP. 34. Of the
manner of Projection. p. 116. CHAP. 35. Of the many Uses of this Medicine. page
118.
The Characters Explained.
Sol. Mercury. {sulphur} Sulphur. Venus. Saturn. Jupiter. Mars. Luna.
FINIS.

