A Smart Scourge for a Silly, SAUCY FOOL. BEING An Answer to a LETTER, at the
End of a Pamphlet of Lionell Lockyer, (quondam and lately) Botcher, now (
tandem aliquando, nuper quidem) dressed up with the Title of Licensed PHYSICIAN.

New Vamp't with a Coat of Arms, The three BORES HEADS.

Whether Bought, Begged, or Stolen, it concerns not the AUTHOR.

By G. S. M. D. and Philosopher by the Fire.

In way of Epistolical Discourse to the unknown Writer of that Letter.
SIR:
MEeting with a new Impression of the Advertisement, concerning Lockyers
Bauble, (Titled by the name of Pillula Radiis Solis extracta) in praise of
which he has stitcht up the names of as many Diseases, all curable by that
trifle, (or else the Knave and Fool lies) as ever he made use of patches for
the Botching up a Beggars Coat, (to which sort of people, as my undeniable
Information assures me, he was at the best of his former Condition, a
denominated Tailor.) I find a Letter of yours (like the close of syrup after a
Fart,) concluding that Tractate, ushered in with the Licensed Physicians
Encomium, that you are a Person of Quality; which although it might have been
verifyed, (had you been indeed but the common Hangman,) yet my Charity binds me
to an higher esteem of you; that you are the true Father of the whole Scribble
in praise of that silly Cheat, which he (who has been accustomed to Father
other men's Brats, as well as to endeavor to impose some of his upon them) lets
pass under his own name, both in City and Country.

Knowing therefore Sir, beforehand, that you are a man of Quality, as such a
Person I shall address my self unto you, and endeavor (being assured what
Predicament you stand in, so far as the Pen of a Botcher can ascertain me) to
find out, if I can, your especial Qualities. And truly, Sir, professing my self
a Scholar, (which honor the worst of mine Enemies dare not deny me.) I take
notice first of your false Latin, (a very bad Quality) for which, should I
take you to task as a rigid Paedagogue, and make you untruss for the first
fault, your Breech would be bloody, and too sore to sit on, if for all the
lapses committed in that very short Epistle, you had (as you deserve) a several
lash.

Next your Tautology, fie for shame! A Person of Quality, and yet in so short
an Epistle, (that I am confident you would at your Execution conceive a longer
Ex tempore Prayer) four times to torture a Dyssyllable (in which an Emphasis
lies) and could find no Synonymous word, nor Periphrasis for Adage. Certainly
Sir, when you shall have confidence sufficient to pluck your Woodcocks head out
of the Thicket, and (with shame enough) own your name, I shall send you a Sylva
Synonymorum, that you may not so often Re-seeth your poor Coleworts in your next
Epistle.

Thirdly, I find you a pitiful, creeping, dirty, thing, in Addressing your self
to him by the Title of Honored Doctor; Who but a man of your Quali^y would
honor him in Print, that is not honorable? But Sir, I find in his book the
Pills commended for the POX in Capitals, on which score perhaps, he has let
you have as many as would serve turn, at half price; and so he may be honored
of you, that is not Worshipful to any in the world besides.

Fourthly, (And truly Sir, I have now traced you as far as the Oyster Wenches
at Billingsgate) I find you an uncivil, lying, railing fellow; yet though I
call you Fellow, do not think that I account you my Fellow, though Mounsieur Le
Quack have ranked you in the Predicament of Quale, yet I shall not reckon you
for Aliquid (...), you may serve to make an Epilogue to such a silly
Saltambanco's act, but if at any time you please to Address your self to me, do
it in earnest, for I scorn to be made familiar with any of your Quality in
jest. For your personal reflections on me, let it suffice that I dare you to
divulge your unworthy, yet wisely Concealed name; or let your Patron (as I take
him) but own your Lines, and I shall teach you or him, what it is falsely to
reproach, and asperse a man's person with Calumnies, because he discovers (as
both Duty and Charity oblige him) your Juggles, Sophistications, and Forgeries.
But let my Book speak for it self. It Is not your barking (had you as many heads
as Cerberus) can blemish my Reputation, nor will your slanders so cunningly
cast (as not to make you answerable for your unmannerly Abuses to the Law) at
all enervate the undeniable force of my Demonstrations made concerning the
danger of Lockyers Pills, which accusation it were fit you should have
answered, and wiped off the imputations, with much (both) truth and justice
laid on them: If I have had Misfortunes, and by them troubles, though they have
grieved me, yet do they not shame me; and I do, and shall challenge any Stygian
Cur of the blackest mouth, to discant upon my life and manners, but let him do
it with truth, or let him own his name; and avow what he speaks or writes, and
I shall effectually convince him of his Falsehood and Folly. It Is enough to me
that where I am known your Abuses will signify so little, that it would be
hard for me to prove (with truth and candor) my self damnified to the value of
one farthing, by either the Quondam Botcher himself, or you his Zany by himself
alone (in which I dare swear he is singular) Dubbed, and declared a Person of
Quality, unless it be of Rank Quality. Had you been a Voucher for him within
this four years to have sold a Horse on his own score you might have been
hanged for your pains; and yet to have given him but twelve pence a head for
all the Cattle he fed, might have made you hang your self for want of a Dinner:
But the world is well amended. O blessed Absaloms Pillar! The man of Judgment
wonders, and reports it of himself as a strange thing, that within this year or
little more, he has mended not only in his activity ( Tailors and Botchers are
nimble to the Last) but also in his flesh, being waxed in his waste he does not
know how; I Will do him the favor (in requital of his Postscript) to tell him:
Since this new fangled Juggle has blessed his Purse with Crowns (of which he
boasts largely enough) he has eat more good Meat, and drunk more good Drink,
then in half his life before; and since his change of Linen, he has
questionless shook off, and cast aside some scores, if not hundreds, of his
ancient hangers on and retainers; and can his wisdom be so at a Nonplus to find
out a reason of his growing fat and thriving? Certainly it is a sign of a weak
judgment; Howbeit he is blessed with a happy invention, and that followed with
a strange fortune; But oh the misery of answering Letters, after so great
charge in paying for writing, and Printing so many books of reiteratedly
altered Copies. What a plague this is that so profound a Chemist and Licensed
Physician, should have the ill luck to learn no more writing, then to be able
to scratch or score up in Chalk, and after to Copy out in Letters; a Dog could
not read, the particulars of a Botchers Bill, and to cast up the sum total in
something like to Figures: Take notice therefore you that deal with him, that
he can find some better employment to busy himself in, then answering Letters;
Therefore that no occasion of troubling him may be pretended for the future,
take notice what his Pill will do; By it all Diseases in general, the compiling
of a Catalogue whereof in particular, with some other appurtenances to make up
his Scribble or Pamphlet, cost him thirty seven pound in earnest, Printing and
all accounted together, (or else the Knave told a strapping Lie to an
acquaintance and friend of mine in jest) will be cured he knows not, nor is it
any great matter how; nor dare any Malady, Sickness, Disease, or Grief, by what
name soever, or title distinguished, stand in the body and look his Pill in the
face, but must ( Presto Jack) be gone and vanish, with this one and only
Proviso, That if God have a mind, intention, or determination to kill a man,
there this Bauble must fail ('it is well he was so modest) otherwise, Have among
you blind hapers at all adventures, let Death muster up his whole Army of
Diseases, and appear in the Field his forces shall be all routed and himself
taken Prisoner; and he compelled (though unwillingly) to an honourabled truee.
Therefore Gentlemen consider your interest, Nobles, Gentry, Yeomen, Mariners,
Soldiers, come, here is Jack in a Box for you; Health at the rate of
Red-Herrings, twelve a Groat, do not neglect your time, this profound Artist is
Old, this opportunity will not last always now is the season, he is making his
last quantity, which like the Widows Oil, will never decay while he lives; but
when he is gone, O sad, lamentable consideration! down goes this secret with
Dust and Ashes into perpetual oblivion; then, then, it will be too late to cry,
(had I wist) O brave Lionell! Well Quack'^ Lockyer! Thou on my life shall have
the Whetstone, and a Golden handle and Chain to hang it at thy Girdle to boot*
what need I say more? What shall I write? My book of Examination and Censure of
this juggling toy is so full and clear, I need add nothing to it, nor was this
necessary, had it not been to answer a Fool according to his folly, lest he
add this to his folly, to grow wise in his own conceit. To prevent which, that
I may at Conclusion address my self to you, the Epistler to Lockyers Pamphlet,
I take leave till your folly farther provoke me, and subscribe my self,

So Cordial a well-wisher to public good, as to discover any Cheat, Juggles,
Forgeries, and Sophistications, as may prejudice it, under what glorious and
specious pretense whatsoever. G. S. A Philosopher by the Fire in spite of Momus
or Zoilus.

A Supplemental Corollary to the Moderate, Discreet, and judicious Reader.
THou may wonder Courteous and candid friend, to find me engaged in so sorry
and sordid a combat, A Philosopher by the Fire, with a Botcher in Southwark;
the Monomachy to speak truth, makes me blush at the thought of it: It is I
confess ( ^mpar congressus) yet it is as true, that had there appeared no other
then this illiterate Botcher himself, I should have been silent; But he
obtrudes upon the world a Letter in a third persons name, and gives his word
for him, that he is a Person of Quality. His Quality, his Language, false
Latins, impertinencies, and notorious falsehoods speak sufficiently, he barks
securely because invisibly, Vox est, praeterea nihil, nihil dixi? imo Calumniae
effrontes, and audacissimae, atque decumana mendacia: To convince him of which,
it is necessary that he either own his unworthy name, or let Quack Fustian
himself own and avow his lines, so as to justify the truth of them; and I
shall quickly catch hold of the Woodcocks bill, and perhaps force him to a
Recantation in a pitiful tune. This Person of Quality, although I doubt nothing
but that he is the Penman of the whole Scribble (such a silly Crutch, how
feeble soever it is, Lockyer cannot be without) yet because strangers who shall
read that Postscript and Letter (which were levelled and darted at me, with as
much security in falsehood as was possible) may judge the Epistler to be a man
of better Quality, then he either is, or deserves to be thought; for Lockyer by
mediation of his wonder-doing toy, has gotten into the acquaintance of several
persons of real honor and worth; and I might add, fallen deservedly into the
most just Contempt of many of them: Therefore it was that I unwillingly entered
the lists of Contest, to wipe off the dirt which may seem to stick on me on
that score, to such as have little or no acquaintance with me, or knowledge of
me; and shall refer thee for thy information and satisfaction as to the ground
of this quaarel to my book, Entitled, A Brief Examination and Censure, etc.
Namely of Lockyers Pill, Hughs Powder, etc. Sold by Mr. Livewell Chapman in
Exchange Alley, and Mr. Joseph Leigh in Basing-Hall-street, in which at the
importunity of at the least forty and more persons of ingenuity, I gave an
account of its virtue, value, and danger, having been for a long time by
Letters solicited even to weariness, to give my opinion concerning them, which
I did, with that unanswerable Demonstration of truth, appealing to Fact and
Occular proof for Confirmation of my Sentence; that I am sure, it is out of the
reach of him, or his Epistling thing of Quality, to Answer me, or Vindicate
that most justly Censured and condemned Venom; I was alarmed with threat of an
Answer of ten Sheets of Paper, which after above a fortnights expectation, in
vain I found at last dwindled to a pitiful sorry Epistle, remarkable for
nothing but false and scandalous aspersions of my Person; false Latin,
incongruity of sense and impertinencies; but not a word in Vindication of the
safety and Excellency of the Pills; a Work not to be done, till he can get
Confidence enough, and manage it with Impudence, to deny matter of fact; and
say the Powder is not to be reduced to Antimonial Regulus, which experience
will convince in as little time as a man may eat a soft Egg: On which
Demonstration publicly to be made, I will take him up, if he dare, for as much
money as he pleases, from five to five hundred pounds, which shall be
deposited on each side, and let the trial determine, whether the Philosopher by
the Fire be mistaken; or Lionell Lockyer, have imposed on, abused, and wronged
the too credulous Nation, to his great gain, and their, at best, great hazard;
yea, in many scores of instances that I can produce inexcusable, undeniable,
and I am sure unjustifiable detriment; fatal Tragedies having been the effects
of those Pills, on the score of their Churlish Venom; but especially by his
indiscreet commending them in several Cases (especially Fits of the Mother,
indifferently and indefinitely) in which many of his own quondam profession,
that is Botchers, and some Cobblers, poor Nurses, and Midwives are so well
skilled, that they would receive the advice of a Vomit with trembling and
horror, especially so Churlish a Vomit as Antimonial, and its vitrifyed Crocus
is equal to, if not worse then any of that kind in Venom, and Vomitive
virulency, working with violence to Convulsions often times and Swoonings;
sometimes to dying outright, a bad Remedy for Uterine fits, which can stop the
breath and choke without any such provocation. But I repute it beneath me to
enlarge upon so pitiful a subject being born and bred Generously, Educated from
my Youth in Learning; and as for my Chemical Studies, this is the one and
Twentieth year therein, during which time few have Exceeded me in pains, and
unwearied Industry: Of my public profession of the Art of Medicine, this is
the Seventeenth year, as an Encouragement in which art in particular, as of
Learning in General, I have had as much Academical honor, as by the Conferring
of degrees, Students and Practitioners in Physic are capable of: This I write
not that I take delight to hear or relate it, God is my Judge, but to let the
world know I am not so Contemptible as Lockyers pitiful Epistling thing would
represent me; And particularly I am in good deed ashamed of this Contest with
him, who spent his Youth, and found his Old age before he attained greater
honor then that of a Botcher, from whose Stall he leapt into the row of
Physicians Licensed, and so with the Gravity of an Owl promising the Brains of
a Woodcock, he salutes his customers in his book in his Effigies or
Pourtraicture, promising a Pill that will do as much ( in re medica) as Nature
will afford and allow off; It being the best preparation, and highest graduated
and advanced; made of the best Minerals and Metals, the best of all earthly
subjects for yielding Medicines; Take this on his Experience and Word, and yet
he has a Medicine in preparation (of which he gives a hint) that will out-cure
the other two Bars length and a half, in comparison of which the former will
appear but a trifle, and so upon my Reputation they are both, if you dare take
my word.

How he grew to be a Chemist, and by whom, and when initiated, I can acquaint
the world; Molton of Hogg-lane, being his first and best Tutor; of whom he
learned his chief skill; which how far it reaches, and how he has made it his
continual study since he first learned any thing, to impose upon the world, by
disguising common and trivial Preparations; and how fatal I have still been to
him, in discovering his abuses, formerly convincingly demonstrating his Fucu^
and Deceit, in tinging Mercurius vitae (a common and very churlish Medicine)
with Cocheneel, and boasting of it, as if it had been a profound Mystery; and
now laying open this far more silly, yet infinitely more beneficial and
profitable, Sophisticate Juggle; How he as good as threw away his money upon
his Master in Hogglane, because he wrote not down his processes and trials, as
a Contemporary scholar of old Moltons with him (still living) did, and can
testify for a need: How he wrought upon the Philosophers Stone, till he became
sine re, and spe, and from thence took a trip, and stood up close halled for
the bay of Medicine, in which he has cast out his sheet Anchor of a License,
which yet (as all Licenses granted from the Bishops do) send him packing eight
Miles off from London before it gives him Liberty to practice, which is a
secret perhaps by him not understood; and had not I told him, it is likely he
never would have understood it: If I should discourse largely, as I might, on
all these Heads, I might perhaps make the Reader merry, but tire mine own', I
am sure vex Lockyers patience; Therefore I shall conclude this Discourse here,
nor reassume the handling of it while I live willingly, unless provoked by his
Rude, Uncivil Reproaches for future, under the borrowed disguise of some other
Person of Quality; till which time I remain

A hearty Friend to all Sons of Art; and Servant to any that are Impartial,
George Starkey.
Bartholomew Lane, second Door below the Excise Office, Dec. 9. 1664.
FINIS.

