SALVATION BY JESUS CHRIST ALONE, (As it is expressly laid down in the
SCRIPTURES)

Agreeable to the Rules of Reason, And to the Laws of Justice.

The Whole intermixed with several Practical Reflections, directing and
persuading to a Christian Life.

To which is added, A Short Inquiry into the State of Those Men in a Future
Life, who never heard of Jesus Christ the Savior in This Life.

By THO. STAYNOE, Minister of the United Parishes of Christ-Church and St.
Leonard Foster-lane, London.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took at the Middle Temple Gate in Fleet Street, and
sold by John Jones at the Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCC.

To the Right Reverend FATHER in GOD, NICOLAS LORD BISHOP OF CHESTER.
MY LORD,
IT was my early and great Happiness, that I was then a Member of
Trinity-College, when You were an Eminent Guide to the Studies of the Youth
there. For, though You were not my appointed Tutor; yet it so fell out, that for
Two Years together (a Thing perhaps scarce known in the College, but at that
Time) the great and daily Burden of the Philosophy-Lecture was laid upon You:
And (for which I do to this Day bless the Divine Providence) those Two Years
fell in with that Time, in which my Standing in the House obliged me to attend
those Lectures. And, whatever other Influence they had on me; This I can with
Truth avow, That from that Time I always carried in my Breast an Honor and
Respect for Your Person.

This I therefore tell Your Lordship, because (I believe) You could not have
known it without my Information. For, the beneficial Influence of very useful
Men diffuses it self farther, than their own Observation reaches: And some Few
choose that it should do so. And I am not so much a Stranger to Your Lordship,
as not to know, that You have a chief Place among those Few. But then withal, I
beg leave to add, That though it be a Noble Temper in Your Lordship to overlook
Your Good Deeds to others; yet that will not excuse those others, if they
should do so too: For, Ingratitude is not the less, but the more Criminal,
where there is no Expectation of Requital. For which Reason, I have rather
adventured to trespass upon Your Lordships Goodness, than to forfeit all Title
to Goodness my self, by offering to You some of those Fruits, which do very
much owe themselves to Your early Watering and Cultivation.

But though these Your early Benefits were (I believe) unknown to Your Self; yet
I am sure, that some later ones are not: Though withal I know, that You would
have them be so to others. You cannot but remember, (I am sure, I cannot) how
affectionately You did desire my advantageous Settlement in this City, and how
zealously You did prosecute such Your Desire both with Your Interest and
Assiduity, till You made it appear, that You did more than barely desire it.
And I own it to the World, that my First Preferment in London I obtained by
Your Means.

And these Your Kindnesses You still pursued with a condescending Friendship,
by which I was blessed with the Freedom and Benefit of Your Conversation, that
is, with an Advantageous Assistance in my Studies, and with an Advantageous
Example of a sincere Piety. The Faults therefore of what I here offer to Your
Lordship and the World, I do with Shame take to my self: For, they might have
been prevented, had I carefully followed my Copy.

But there seems to be a Fatality in Humane Frailty; and therefore Imitations
always fall short of their Originals. But still I reverence what I cannot
transcribe; and so will every Christian, who knows Your Lordship, and loves our
Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. For, a good Part of the Nation can bear You
witness, that You have with an hearty Affection, and with an unwearied
Diligence, employed Your self in that Work (of which he is the Master Builder)
that is, of building up Christians in their most Holy Faith, and of edifying
them to Salvation. May His Grace make Your Success equal to Your Labors; and
may Your Example provoke other His Messengers to an Imitation of Your
Practices. His exalting You to such a Station, where Your Example is more
visible, and its Influence more powerful, adds Faith to such my Wishes; and
Your great Candor and Integrity (which are Insinuating and Victorious Virtues)
do increase such my Faith. For, I do confess, I have my self felt Your
Influence; and because we are apt to judge other Men by our selves, I can the
more easily believe, that others may do so too. God grant, that they may do so
without my Defects; of which so many Instances as the following Discourse may
offer to the Severity of Your Judgment, so many fresh Occasions it will also
afford for the Exercise of Your Candor: For, what the First may condemn, the
Last may pardon; and though You do not allow my Performance, yet You may accept
my Endeavors. However, I desire You to believe, that what I here offer to Your
Lordship is designed as a Public Testimony of that great Reverence I have for
Your Person, Piety, and Learning; and of those Acknowledgments which are due
for Your great and past Favors to,

MY LORD, Your Lordships sincere and humble Servant, THO. STAYNOE.

TO THE READERS.
BEfore I enter upon the Discourse it self, I have something to offer to Two
sorts of Readers. First, To those who deny the Doctrine proposed: Secondly, To
those who own it.

They of the First sort, to whom I shall address my self, are either the Sober
and the Serious, or else the Vicious and Profane.

Now the First of these, when they depreciate our Savior's Person, and deny
his Purchase, do undertake to do so from Grounds of Natural Reason. For, though
they pretend to acknowledge Revelation in the Case, yet that is but a Pretense;
because it is notorious, that they will not allow such Revelation to speak its
own Sense, where it does not speak theirs. For, they do so far make their
Natural Reason the Measure of Divine Truth, as to believe no such Truth any
farther than it falls in with such their Reason: And so the Revelation comes to
be believed, not because it is acknowledged to be Divine, but only because it
conforms to such their Measure. And therefore, where their Measure falls short,
there the Revelation, though it do expressly dissent from them, shall yet, by one
Artifice or other, be brought down to comply with it.

And to make what I say appear true, I shall here offer Two Instances of such
their Practice, and that too in Two Things which do very much concern our
future Discourse, which are, Death, and a Resurrection.

And first, though we know by our Natural Reason, that Sin deserves Punishment;
yet we know only by Revelation, that Death is a Punishment of Sin. And
therefore the Heathen, who in this Case had no Revelation to instruct them, had
no other Notion of Death, but that it was necessary and natural. And Socinus
and his Followers have expressly told us, (and that too in spite of Revelation)
That their Notion of it is just the same. They tell us indeed moreover, That
though Death be natural, yet had Man continued Innocent, God would have
overruled Nature, and so have secured him from Death. That is, the Holy and
Wise God had by the ordinary and regular Frame of Things exposed his Innocent
Creature to the greatest Natural Mischief: But then, that such a Disposition of
Things might not cast a Blemish upon his Justice, he prevented the Effect of it
by his Omnipotence: In plain English, he had ordered Things so, that had not
his Omnipotence interposed, the Consequence of such Order had been Injustice. A
very honorable Account of God's Justice and Wisdom in his Creation; which is
so far from mending the Matter, that it makes it worse. But what better is to
be expected, when Man shall by his Natural Reason presume to control the
Revelations of God?

Their Reason then having faultred in giving an Account of the Punishment of
Sin; it may upon that score the more easily do so, in giving us an Account of
the Pardon of it. For, besides that a Resurrection, which is a Release from
Death, the Punishment of Sin, is only made known by Revelation; and therefore
they, who say, that Death is Natural, must (if they will agree with themselves)
disagree from the Scriptures, and say, That a Resurrection is a Release from a
Mischief, which is Natural; but not that it is so from a Punishment, which is
Moral: But, I say, besides this; when they come by their Reason to tell us, how
a Release from Death comes to be granted; they will not, with the Scriptures,
allow such Release to be granted in Consideration of our Savior's Merits; but
will by all Means ascribe it to God's more Mercy. Now though it be allowed, that
the Pardon of Sin comes from God's Mercy; and that such his Mercy, as it
relates to us, is Free, because we can in no wise deserve it; yet, for all
that, such Mercy is not in it self, what they would have it to be, the Effect
of God's Free Will alone.

For, God's Mercy, as his Word, (which can best inform us in the Case) and as
true and sound Reason, agreeing with such his Word, will tell us, is of Two
sorts.

1. His Mercy is in the Scriptures taken for his Bounty; and from this it is
that all his Creatures derive all they are, and all they have: And this his
Mercy consists in giving. But then,

2. His Mercy is taken for the Pardon of sinful Man; and this his Mercy
consists in forgiving.

So much Difference then, as there is between Giving and Forgiving; so much
Difference there is between the First Mercy, and the Second.

Now, by the First Mercy God may (it is confessed give freely, and in what
Measure he pleases: For, he may do what he will with his own, and that
according to the unbounded Liberty of his own good Pleasure; which is therefore
evident, because he may place a Creature in what Station, and bestow upon it
what Endowments and what Happiness he pleases, so far as a Creature, as such,
is capable of either. And in this Sense all Creatures have been Partakers of
his Mercy.

But that cannot be truly said of that his Mercy, which consists in Forgiving.
For, all those Creatures cannot be forgiven, who have not sinned; and all those
shall not, that have.

Though therefore the First sort of Mercy be not bounded or limited by God's
Justice; yet the Last is: And therefore a Resurrection, being a Forgiveness,
must be so limited and bounded too. For, Vindictive Justice is not (as it is
but too commonly taken to be, and as will appear more fully in the Discourse it
self) only a Negative Justice; that is, it is not barely not unjust to punish a
Criminal: But it is and must be a Positive Justice; that is, it is unjust not
to punish him: Or otherwise, he, who has a just Power of punishing a Criminal,
may, upon no other Motive, but his own Will and Pleasure, not do it.

To tell us therefore, That God by a Resurrection grants a Release from Death,
the Punishment of Sin, only upon the Account of his mere Mercy, and that Jesus
Christ came into the World only to bring the joyful Tidings, and to ratify the
Truth of such his Message by his Death and Resurrection; but that he had
nothing to do in the Purchase of such Release; as it does confound God's Bounty
with his Pardoning Mercy, (and so is a Deviation from Right Reason) so it goes
counter to the express Declarations of the Scriptures, and so is a
Contradiction to Revelation.

Now the Design of what we have hitherto offered, is, to engage the Men, to
whom our present Address is directed, to consider,

1. Whether it be not more rational, to acquiesce in the plain Discoveries,
which are made to us by Revelation, concerning the Punishment and Pardon of
Sin, than to frame such (as they call them, rational) Surmises of their own
concerning either, which do very much differ from, and in some Cases contradict
such plain Discoveries?

2. I would desire them likewise seriously to consider, Whether what they call
Reason, can possibly have such a large Prospect, and comprehensive Knowledge,
as to be a competent Judge of the Congruity of all such Things, which may
possibly be discovered by Divine Revelation? For, if it have, then it must be
no longer called Reason, but Omniscience: And if it have not, then it will be
an intolerable Presumption to undertake to control express and acknowledged
Revelation by it.

3. I would desire them to consider, in the Third place, Whether they have by
their Reason examined the Justice of the Divine Proceedings in the Pardon of
Sin (as it is expressly laid down in the Divine Revelations) as far as Reason
will go? For, Reason is a Thing capable both of Information and Improvement:
And That may not seem rational to a less careful View, which yet may do so to a
more strict and critical Examination. And therefore such Plausibilities shall
sometimes pass for Truths with what at present is thought Reason, which, when
thoroughly sifted, shall be found to be gross Falsities.

4. Lastly, I would desire them to consider, That God in his Revelations
concerning Man's Salvation, has not only acquainted us, that he will save
Mankind; but has also told us, upon what Considerations he will do so. For, if
they be once satisfied, that he has revealed the Last, as well as the First,
(and by believing the plain and express Revelation, they may be so satisfied)
then they may as reasonably expect to be saved without their own Repentance, as
they may without their Savior's Merits; that is, they may be satisfied, that
they cannot be saved without both.

And when they have well weighed and considered these Things, it may be hoped,
that being already supposed sober and serious, they will also be found so
modest, as to permit God to save them in his own Way.

The next sort of Readers, who, as is supposed, may deny the Doctrine
delivered, are the Vicious and Profane. For, they who professedly renounce
Christianity in their Practice, are easily brought over to renounce it in their
Belief: Because it is hard to conceive, that they will allow Salvation to be
his Purchase, and at his Disposal, who has avowedly declared, that such as
themselves shall not be made Partakers of it. And therefore, where profligate
Wickedness and Debauchery does abound, it is the less to be wondered, though it be
the more to be lamented, that Infidelity does so too. Irreligious Practices do
naturally produce Irreligious Opinions: And a plausible Cavil against any
material Truth in Religion, is by too many thought a sufficient Vindication of
a profligate Life.

Now it is notorious at first View, that such Men as these do therefore refuse
to believe the Truths of Revealed, because they have first broke through the
Obligations of Natural Religion; and that having forsaken their God, they do
therefore reject his Christ. Whether they have not been assisted and encouraged
so to do, by the Zeal and Abilities of those, whom we have treated as the Sober
and the Serious, it concerns them to consider; as it does also, Whether their
Attempts to depreciate Revealed Religion, has not proved a great Occasion of
those Immoralities, which have overrun the Nation, and which equally
contradict both Revealed and Natural Religion too. For, it will be found true,
that as Immorality does incline Men to contemn God's Revelations, so a Contempt
of such Revelations does (and that too in its own Nature) lead Men into
Immorality: For, both are indeed a Contempt of God's Word. And I must leave it
a Doubt, which of the Two mocks God most, whether he, who pretends to believe a
God, but yet will not obey his Word; or he, who pretends to believe Revelation,
but yet will not allow such Revelation to acquaint him with any Thing, but what
his Reason can comprehend. The first puts a Slight upon his Authority; the
last, upon his Omniscience; but both, upon his Honor: And then we may be sure,
that both are pernicious to the Welfare of Men's Souls.

And indeed, for these Reasons chiefly I have engaged my self in the present
Argument. For, it is a very melancholy Contemplation to consider, how many Men
in the present Age, who yet call themselves Christians, do professedly renounce
that very Faith, into which they were baptized, and that too by their Savior's
express Institution, exhibited to us in Revelation. And he must shut his Eyes,
who does not take notice, that the Manners of the Age are no better than its
Faith. And in such a Case, I cannot but think it Treachery in a Minister of
Jesus Christ, not to interpose in one way^or other. For, not to do it at all,
is in effect to betray his Master, to betray his Trust, and to betray the Souls
of Men.

The other sort of Readers, whom I would bespeak, and that only in a Word or
two, are Those, who though they agree with me in the main and principal
Conclusions, may yet perhaps differ from me in some subordinate Propositions,
which I lay down in my Way to such Conclusions. Now, to such Readers I have
this small Request, That they would not think, because I hold the same Articles
of Faith with them, that therefore I stand bound to take them by the same
Philosophical Handle. I believe the Scripture, because I take it to be the Word
of God; I believe an Article of Faith, because it is in the Scripture: But when
I come to accommodate such Article to Right Reason, I do no more think my self
tied up to other Men's Measures, than I think, that they are to be tied up to
mine. We may go different Ways, and yet meet in the same Truth: And, which is
more, perhaps the Divine Wisdom may make use of such our Differences to take in
more Souls, whose Conceptions of Things do so differ, as ours do. And though I
can say nothing for my Skill, yet I can say thus much for my Sincerity, that I
have in all Cases whatsoever followed That, which at present I take to be Truth.

One Thing more I have to add, and that is, That it has been objected, (and may
be again) That my Zeal in the Cause appears too late; and that it would have
been more seasonable, had it showed it self, when Things of this Nature, and
(at least) relating to this Subject, were lately and hotly debated from the
Press: And, That the Business, I undertake, has already been, and that several
Times, discussed by Learned Men and Great Names.

But all this, and more, must not weigh with one, who is persuaded, that,
notwithstanding all past Endeavors, Infidelity and Immorality do still go on,
and gain Ground; and that we ought in Honesty still to apply Remedies, as we
find the Contagion spread; and that according to the various Constitutions of
the Patients, a less promising sort of Physic may sometimes work a Cure, where
a more likely, and that too from a more celebrated Hand, has fallen short.
Something more might be said, and that Something true: But I think what is said
in short, enough in the Case.

To conclude then; I would desire every Reader, to lay aside all Prejudice, by
whatsoever Means contracted; Whether from an Opinion of other Men's great Worth,
or a Conceit of their own; Whether from a Security, that they are already in
the Right, or a Shame to retreat, though they find themselves in the Wrong;
Whether from Vice, or Carelessness, or from any other Cause whatsoever. And I do
solemnly profess, that what I desire them to do in the Reading, that I have all
along endeavored to do in the Writing of the following Discourse. For, I have,
as far as my slender Talent goes, had my Eye all along directed to Truth, to
the Honor of my Great Lord and Master, and to the Good of Souls. And may his
Grace, which is alone able to do it, make it effectual for those Great and Holy
Purposes: That so Men may be persuaded, not to be so foolishly wicked, as to
entertain cheap Thoughts of, and much less to revile and blaspheme Him, in
whose Hand is lodged all Power in Heaven and Earth, who shall be their Judge,
and who alone must be their Savior. And it is this Last Proposition which the
following Discourse attempts to make good.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE Scriptures do most expressly assert, That Mankind are redeemed by
the Blood of Jesus Christ. It is not agreeable to the Divine Wisdom, or to the
Method of his Proceedings in the like Cases, to employ greater Means to bring
his Purposes to pass, where less may be sufficient. Punishment is the necessary
Wages of Sin. An Objection to this Position answered. Page 13 CHAP. II. The
Gospel holds forth no such thing, as an Absolute or Unconditional Pardon; no,
nor yet an Arbitrary Pardon. Page 32 CHAP. III. A Gospel-Salvation contains in
it, 1. Pardon of Sin. 2. The Gift of Eternal Happiness. To these, Two other
Things required: 1. An Expiation of Sin. 2. A Restitution to Holiness.
Negatively, the several Ways how such Expiation cannot be made; from whence an
Inference of the Doctrine asserted, with some Practical Inferences. Page 36
CHAP. IV. That Person to whom the Expiation of Sin is by the Scriptures
ascribed, is by the same Scriptures set forth to us, 1. As God; 2. As Man; 3.
As God and Man united in one Person, or God Incarnate. No Man a competent Judge
of all possible Unions. The Incarnation agreeable to the Sentiments of Mankind,
and variously foretold, prefigured, and suggested in the Scriptures. Some
Practical Inferences, somewhat enlarged. Page 57 CHAP. V. The Son of God, by
his Incarnation, accommodated his Condition for the making good the Expiation
of Man's Sin. Page 96 CHAP. VI. The Divinity of the Son of God necessary for
the Expiation of Man's Sin, as well as his Humanity. Some Doctrinal Inferences.
A general Proof, That as our Savior did actually die, so, that he might justly
die for the Expiation of Sin. Page 113 CHAP. VII. Answers to Three Objections.
1. The Punishment was in Justice only due to us, not to him. This Objection
retorted upon the Socinians. 2. That his Death was but a Temporal Punishment;
but the Expiation pretended to be made, was of an Eternal Punishment. 3. The
Absurdity, that God should suffer for the Satisfaction of his own Justice. Page
134 CHAP. VIII. Bare Pardon of Sin not sufficient for a Gospel-Salvation: Some
Reasons offered for it. They, who are entitled to the Reward of the Law, must
be entitled to the Obedience paid to the Law. Such Obedience must be perfect.
Some Practical Reflections. Page 160 CHAP. IX. Whose that Perfect Obedience is,
in Consideration of which, Eternal Happiness is given to Man. That it is our
Savior's. Some Objections answered; and the Doctrine of the Imputation
asserted, 1. Against those, who acknowledge the Expiation; 2. Against those,
who deny it. This Doctrine agreeable to the Scriptures. Page 179 CHAP. X. Some
Objections answered, and some Practical Inferences made. Page 216 CHAP. XI. The
First and General Proposition asserted from all that has been said: That the
whole Doctrine of a Gospel-Salvation, as laid down in the Scriptures, is
agreeable to the allowed Practices of Mankind in their Legal or Judicial
Proceedings; and is worded in the Scriptures accordingly. Page 233 CHAP. XII.
That besides the Savior's Righteousness imputed, God will after their
Resurrection endow Believers with a perfect, inherent, and eternal Holiness.
How the Savior did fit and prepare Men for such an Holiness. Page 254 CHAP.
XIII. By what Means Men shall be put into the Actual Possession of Eternal
Life. Page 277 CHAP. XIV. Wherein the Happiness of Eternal Life does consist.
Several Reflections, and Considerations on what has been said, tending to
promote an Holy Life. Page 297
ERRATA.
Page Line For Read 50 2 their Sons them Son 118 10 naturally actually

SALVATION BY JESUS CHRIST ALONE.
The INTRODUCTION.
I. SAlvation implies in the very Notion of it, either the Prevention of some
Mischief, to which we are obnoxious; or a Deliverance from some Mischief, which
we actually suffer. Now because it is our professed Design and Business at
present to discourse of the Salvation of Mankind by our Savior; therefore, in
order to our so doing, it will be proper first to consider, what Mischief it is
from which they are saved. For the true Knowledge of the Occasion and Nature of
the Mischief, will very much assist us in our Enquiries into the Nature and
Justice of such Salvation.

We must know therefore, That when God, who made Man, and all Things beside,
had placed Man in this lower World; as he did provide for his Well-being by his
Bounty, so he did provide for his greater Happiness by his Law. For by the
first he only put all Creatures here in subjection to Man; but by the last, he
acquainted Man with his own Subjection to Himself. For it is an undoubted
Truth, That it is a greater Happiness, to be a true Subject to God, than it is
to be Tenant of the whole Earth, and a deputed Lord over all the Creatures in
it.

Now, in order to some few Remarks, which we shall make upon God's first Law
given to Man, and which will open a Way to our main Design; it will be
convenient, that we lay down the Law as it was given forth. Thus therefore it
stands: Of the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, thou shall not eat of
it: For in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die; or, as it
is in the Original, dying thou shall die: The Reduplication in that Language
being equivalent to an Asseveration in ours. It has been a Doubt among Learned
Men, whether this first Law be a Moral, or only a Positive Law. Now for the
Resolution of such Doubt, it may not be improper to consider apart, First, What
is expressly contained in the Law; and, Secondly, What is implied under such
Expression.

And first, If we only consider the express Words of the Law, which forbid the
eating of the Fruit of the Tree specified; the Law in such Case is therefore
Positive, not Moral, because before the Prohibition there was no more
Immorality in eating of that Tree, than of any other.

But then, secondly, If we farther consider, that though the Law, as to the
particular Thing prohibited, was purely Arbitrary, and therefore so far forth
only Positive; yet that the Prohibition did imply in it a Moral Duty, grounded
upon very equitable Considerations; we may conclude, that under this express
and Positive Law, there is implied and couched a Moral Law. For,

First, God gave Man not only his Being, but also all Things for the necessary
and convenient Support of such Being: and from thence we may by our Natural
Reason inform our selves, that his so doing was a very equitable Consideration,
why Man should be bound up in Gratitude (and that is as much, as being bound up
in Morality) to acknowledge the Kindness and Bounty of his Great Benefactor.

Secondly, Man being bound in Gratitude to acknowledge the Kindness and Bounty;
we may truly add, that he was farther bound to acknowledge such Kindness and
Bounty in such Way, as such his Benefactor should appoint.

Thirdly, God having made the Earth, and all Things in it; he might grant as
many, or as few of the Things so made, to Man, as he himself pleased: And
therefore might except any one, or more of them, out of such Grant.

Fourthly, God having an undoubted Power of Reserving to himself what he
pleased out of those Things, which he had made; he might in Justice and Equity
require, that Man should give one Testimony of his Gratitude, by abstaining
from what he should please so to reserve.

Fifthly, God by singling out the Forbidden Tree from all the rest, and by so
doing, reserving it to himself, had made that a standing Mark and Signal of his
own rightful and supreme Dominion over the Whole; as also, for the same Reason,
of Man's Tenure and Subjection.

Sixthly, As we may suppose the Forbidden Tree to have stood in the midst of
the Garden, from the Ninth Verse of the Second Chapter of Genesis; so a Tree so
placed was by its very Situation a very fit and proper Thing to be made use of
for such a purpose; because being (in some measure at least) equidistant from
the Boundaries of the general Grant, it must for that Reason be most likely to
present it self to Adam's View, to whatever Part of the Garden he moved; and by
so doing must constantly, or at least frequently put him in mind of the Nature
of his Tenure, viz. that he held it of him, who had settled him in the
Possession and Use of all the rest. So that, as the Law is Positive, if we only
look upon the express Words of it; so it is Moral, if we consider what is
implied in it. And therefore, as the immediate and direct Transgression of the
Law was the eating the forbidden Fruit; so the couched Immorality of such
Transgression was an Usurpation upon God's Prerogative in this lower World, and
an Encroachment upon the reserved Rights and Demeans of the Supreme Lord. The
Transgression of the express Law then was a Sin against God's Command: But the
Transgression of the implied Law was a Sin against his Natural and Supreme
Right. The first was a Sin, because it did what God had expressly forbid: The
last was implicitly forbid, because it was a Sin; and therefore was a Sin, though
God did not expressly forbid it. The first was therefore only unlawful, because
forbidden: The last was unlawful in it self.

To sum up all in a few Words: Though the Designation of the particular Thing,
viz. the Tree in the midst of the Garden, was Arbitrary, and therefore
Positive; yet the Designation of Something was, as Just and Wise, so (I may
add) Moral and Necessary too; at least so far as it is so, that God's Supreme
Right ought to be asserted and owned. For, so far forth the Prohibition given
to Man, of eating of the Fruit of any Tree marked out, or of meddling with any
Thing else, is grounded upon the Antecedent and Eternal Rules of Reason and
Justice, that is, of Morality.

And therefore, though the express Prohibition of the Law be only Positive; yet
the Reason of the Prohibition is at least so far Moral, as it is so, That Man,
by some Means or other, should acknowledge God to be his Supreme Lord, and that
he receives from him whatsoever he enjoys; and that if God do expressly appoint
the Way and Means of his so doing, he ought to do it by the Way and Means so
appointed.

And I therefore say (expressly) because so far as the Words of the Law under
our present Consideration do go, it is notorious, that what is expressly
prohibited by it, is only Arbitrary and Positive: But that the Morality of the
Prohibition is not expressed, but (at the most) but couched and implied.

By what has been spoken, we may learn,

1. That the Sin expressly prohibited by the Law may therefore truly be esteemed
a lesser Sin, because it is only a Sin against a Positive Law. For, such a Sin
is a Sin only against God's Authority: Whereas a Sin that contains a Natural
Immorality in it (if I may so speak) is a Sin both against God's Authority, and
against his Purity and Holiness too.

2. That the express Penalty of the Law is only a Punishment threatened against
the Transgression of the express Prohibition of the Law. For it does not look
like Justice, to assign an express Punishment in the Law, for the Transgression
of any Thing, which is not expressly contained in the Law.

3. Such Punishment so threatened against the Transgression of the express Law,
is express, absolute, and peremtory. Adam then did therefore fatally suffer the
Penalty of the Law, because he sinned against an express Prohibition, which was
ratified by an absolute, peremptory, and express Threat. For God may therefore
be thought to be obliged by his Truth to punish Adam's Transgression according
to the express Threat of the Law, because he had passed his more solemn Word,
that he would do so. And as he was obliged by his Truth to punish it as the Law
had threatened; so he was obliged to punish it, because it was a Sin: For so,
undoubtedly, is the Transgression of any of God's Laws.

From hence it may be concluded, that we all die a temporal Death for Adam's
Sin. For, as we were in the Loins of him in the day of his Transgression; so
God has not by any other Law assigned an Universal Mortality as the Punishment
of Sin. And so speaks the Scripture; In Adam all died.

4. As the Moral Law couched in the Positive Law is not express, so neither is
there any express Punishment threatened to the Transgression of such couched
Law. For while Man was in a State of Innocence, as there was no need that God
should prescribe him any express Law to guide him in such Things, which were in
their own Nature good; because the dictates of his own reason were of
themselves sufficient for such his guidance (for Moral Goodness is nothing
else, but the Dictates of right Reason employed about the Actions of Rational
Creatures): So, for the same Reason, there was no occasion to threaten him in
that Case with any express Penalty; because the threatening of an express
Penalty antecedent to the Commission of the Crime, can only be proper there,
where there is an express Law commanding a Duty: Whereas Man had never by his
Reason known, that it had been a Sin to eat of any Fruit, which kindly offered
it self to his View, and natural Inclinations, if such Fruit had not been
forbidden by some express Law. And therefore, for the same Reason, that it was
necessary, that such Law should be express; it was necessary, that the Penalty
of such Law should be express too.

5. As the Sin against the Moral Duty, which is only implied in the Law (were
that Duty supposed to be express Law) is greater than the Sin against the
express, but Positive Law; so (were there a Punishment to be expressly assigned
to such Sin) it must in Justice be greater than the Punishment assigned to the
less Sin, that is, to the Transgression of the Positive Law. The Punishment
therefore assigned by the express Law to the Transgression of it, being only
Death, and that too (as appears from the Nineteenth Verse of the Third Chapter
of Genesis) a temporal Death; our Reason, and that natural Sense we have of the
Proportions of Justice, will assure us, that the Law, which forbids a greater
Sin, than this Law does, must in Reason and Equity assign an heavier Punishment
to such greater Sin.

6. Such heavier Punishment must suppose a Resurrection. For, a greater
Punishment than Death cannot therefore be inflicted upon a dead Man, without a
Resurrection; because no Punishment at all can be so inflicted upon him. For
where there is no Sensation, there can be no Punishment; and a dead Man can
have no Sensation, unless we could suppose him to be alive, and dead at the
same time. This Head may meet with Objections; but I shall wave them, and any
Answer to them, at present; and that too so much the rather, because it is
notorious, that the Scriptures do lay the greater Punishment, that is, the
Punishment greater than Death, not only beyond the Resurrection, but also
beyond the last Judgment itself.

7. Lastly: In such Places of Scripture, where the greater Punishment is
threatened, it is not (as the Punishment of the Transgression of the Positive
Law was) absolute and peremptory, but only conditional. And therefore if we
except, first, the Sin against the Holy Ghost, (whatever that be; for it does
not concern us to enquire at present); and, secondly, The Refusing the
Conditions of Salvation offered in a Savior, that grand and comprehensive Sin,
which either neglects or renounces the only Means appointed for Man's Salvation
from all his other Sins; I say, if we except these Two Cases (if yet they be
Two) not only the future Punishment threatened against the Breach of this or
that Law, but of any, or all, may (as far as the Gospel-discoveries go) be
remitted.

Which may teach us to think, that the Punishment threatened in the Law given to
Adam, was not a Punishment after a Resurrection, but a Punishment without a
Resurrection. And that, not only because at that Time, when the Law was given
to him, there was not only no Resurrection promised; but no Savior neither, by
whom alone a Resurrection was to be brought to pass. To which we may add, That
the Death threatened to Adam by the Law given to him, was (as we have seen) upon
his Transgression of such Law, absolute and peremptory; and that the Execution
of such Threat is (as the Scripture and our Experience tells us) absolute and
universal. Whereas the Threat of an eternal Death, as we are well assured, is,
upon the Breach of God's Laws, only conditional. Now it looks hard to our
Reason, that when only Death is threatened in the Law, and that Death at the
very most but indefinite, to say, that the Death so threatened does imply a
double Death, that is, both a Temporal and Eternal Death. And it looks harder
yet, to say, that the Threat and Execution of one of the Deaths is absolute and
universal; but that the Threat and Execution of the other is only partial and
conditional. For our Reason tells us, that neither any Threat nor Execution of
Death can be both Absolute and Conditional; both Universal and Particular too.

From the Whole we take notice, That tho God was obliged both by his Truth and
Justice to execute the Threatening against the Transgression of the first Law;
because that Law being given to Man in his Innocence, (that is, before he stood
in need of a Savior, and therefore before God had promised one) the Threat of
Punishment upon the Breach of the Law was (as we have seen) absolute and
peremptory: Yet because the Revelation of a future and everlasting Punishment
in the New Covenant, is rather made by way of Information, than by way of
peremptory Threat, and absolute Denunciation; therefore God is obliged to the
Execution of such Penalty only by his Justice, but not at all by his Veracity.

If then there be a Means provided to satisfy such his Justice, without the
rigorous Execution of such declared, and (without such Means) certain Penalty;
it will well enough follow, That such Penalty may be remitted, without any
Prejudice either to his Justice, or to his Truth. And therefore, in what is to
follow, we trust to make it good, That our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST may
and will justly save us from the Punishment peremptorily threatened to Adam, (
viz. the Loss of Life executed upon him and all Mankind) by releasing us from
it after we have suffered it; and from a future and eternal Punishment
(expressly revealed in the New Testament to Christians, and probably also after
the Fall of Adam, and the Promise of the Seed of the Woman, believed by the
Patriarchs, and by God's Church among the Jews) by preventing it.

CHAP. I.
The Scriptures do most expressly assert, That Mankind are redeemed by the Blood
of JESUS CHRIST. It is not agreeable to the Divine Wisdom, or to the Method of
his Proceedings in the like Cases, to employ greater Means to bring his
Purposes to pass, where less may be sufficient. Punishment is the necessary
Wages of Sin. An Objection to this Position answered.

AND as we have grounded what we have said in the Introduction upon the
Revelations of God, which have acquainted us how Sin, and the Punishment of it,
Death, entered into the World: So, in what is to follow concerning the
Redemption of Mankind both from Sin and Punishment, we shall take our Rise from
Revelation likewise: Not only because we had known nothing of the Matter, but
by Revelation; but also because, in the present Case, Revelation is undoubtedly
the best Guide of our Reason. For, Reason must of necessity be guided best by
that, without the Guidance of which, Reason it self is confessedly blind. And
we are very sure, that it becomes all those, who acknowledge the Scriptures to
be the Revelations of God; I say, it becomes them, in modesty and deference to
the Author, and in prudence for their own more certain Conduct, rather to
endeavor to bring their Reason to comply with the Revelation, than to bring
the Revelation to comply with their Reason. And therefore that we our selves
may practice what we cannot but judge to be best in the Practice of others, we
shall lay the Groundwork of all that is to follow, upon the Words of St.
Peter, in the Fourth of the Acts and the Twelfth Verse; Neither is there
Salvation in any other: For there is no other Name under Heaven given among
Men, whereby we must be saved. In which Words the Apostle, and he too at that
time filled with the Holy Ghost (as appears by the Eighth Verse) does expressly
tell us (for the Words do import so much) That Men must be saved by JESUS
CHRIST of Nazareth, (consult the Tenth Verse) and by no other.

For it is evident, that by Name in the Text is meant Jesus Christ himself;
because what he calls [Name] in one Part of the Verse, is opposed to [any
other] in the other Part of the Verse: As in the Tenth Verse he tells us, that
the impotent Man was made whole by the [Name] of Jesus Christ, in the
beginning; and that he was made whole by [Him], that is, by Jesus Christ, in
the latter end of the Verse.

Those who professedly and avowedly make it their Business to evacuate the
Purchase of Our Savior's Merits and Blood, do to that purpose start, if not an
impertinent, yet a very saucy Question; which is, Whether or no God could not
have saved sinful Man by some other Means, than by the Death of his Son? And by
that means would alter that very Question, (which they alone have made a
Question) viz. Whether Jesus Christ died for the Sins of Men? I say, they would
alter it into another Question, neither fit to be disputed, nor possible to be
determined by short-sighted Men; viz. What God can do, and what God cannot do?
Whereas it is sufficient for us to take Things as we find them; and if we find,
that Things in the present Case are so ordered by God, and that he tells us,
that they are so, as that sinful Man shall not obtain Redemption but only by
the Merits and Death of Jesus Christ their Savior: I say, if God tells us, and
that too by repeated Declarations, that Things in the present Case are so
ordered; we ought to acquiesce in such his Declarations, and not employ our
Vanity or Curiosity (for it can in no sober Sense be called our Reason) in
enquiring Whether, much less in determining that they might or might not have
been better ordered. But of this more hereafter.

At present therefore, and in the first place, we shall take the Matter of Fact
to be just as the Scriptures have in most plain and express Words told us it
is; That Jesus Christ died for our Sins; that he died to save Sinners, etc. And
then, by comparing this Matter of Fact with other the Methods of the Divine
Proceedings in the like Cases, see if it will not afford us a very plausible
Argument of the Truth laid down, That there is not Salvation in any other.

Now if we carry our Observation through any other the Transactions of the
Divine Love and Mercy, that do design to entitle Men to the same Salvation, we
shall find, that God does never make use of extraordinary Means, where the
ordinary are sufficient. And therefore, when the Lord himself appeared to Saul
in his Journey to Damascus, we find, that the Design and Effect of that Vision
was to refer him to Ananias for Instructions in his Duty. And so when the Angel
appeared to Cornelius, the Business of his Message was only to direct him to
Peter, that so Peter might by the ordinary Means of Grace direct him into the
Way of Salvation. And when Men have Moses and the Prophets, it will therefore
concern them in Duty and Interest to hear them, because in such Case God will
not convince them by raising one from the Dead. In short, as it is not the
Method of the Divine Proceedings, so neither is it of Wisdom it self, to let
the Measure of the Means exceed in their Proportion to the designed End. And in
any Case whatsoever, where less Cost or Labor is sufficient, there common
Prudence will by no means allow, and much less approve our Drudgery or
Profuseness. Now to bring what we have said to our present purpose:

Since our Savior, for the Establishment of the Gospel Covenant, did actually
take upon him Our Flesh, and in that Flesh suffer; it will afford us no slight
Argument, that That Covenant could not have been established upon more easy
Conditions; because our common Reason does assure us, that all Excess of
Performance in the Case would have been Superfluity: And our Religion and
Modesty does forbid us to fasten any such Imputation upon the Divine Counsels
and Actions. And here we may well put Abraham's Question, Shall not the Judge
of all the Earth do right? And when by the purpose of his Mercy he determined
to rescue fallen Man from Sin and Misery, shall he reject the Son of his Bosom,
and expose him to all sorts of Misery in this World, and to Violence and
Barbarity in his Departure out of it; when the Ransom might have been made at a
cheaper Rate? Certainly the Love of God is not so narrow and stinted, but that
he both could and would have extended it to his lost Creatures, and yet at the
same time not have removed it from his only and beloved Son, if Justice and
Wisdom had allowed him so to do. But then, because he himself tells us, that he
did otherwise; and because we know, that what he tells us, must be true; as
well as, that what he does, is just and holy; therefore the Conclusion, that
fairly offers it self, is, That nothing less than the Incarnation, and Death of
the Son of God could in Wisdom and Justice have brought about the designed
Redemption. To which we shall in short add, That it is one of the certain
Characters of the True God, that he brings his Purposes to pass by the best,
wisest, and most proper Means.

And now having thus opened our Way to our main Design, by these few Reflections
on the Matter of Fact, as it is laid down most expressly in the Scriptures: We
shall in what follows go on to consider the Merits of the Cause; and that we
shall do, by examining, Whether or no Mankind had not brought themselves into
so forlorn a Condition by their Sin, that there does not appear in Justice any
probable, or indeed any possible Way for their Salvation, but only by the
Incarnation and Death of the Son of God.

And that there did not, will (I presume) appear, when we have considered and
confirmed the following Propositions; whereof the

First is, That Misery and Death, or, in one word, that Vengeance is, as the
Just, so also the Necessary Wages of Sin.

And here, before we begin, to prevent, as much as possible, all Objections
that may be started against what we shall deliver, we must desire the Reader to
take notice, that we do at present only make it our Business to measure the
Equity of the Punishment of Sin by the exact and rigorous Laws of Justice: That
is, we do (as we must, if we will do right) conceive Things in that State, in
which they had stood, had the Son of God never been designed for the Savior of
the World. For, because our Business at present is to enquire, what would have
become of sinful Man, if the Son of God had not interposed for his Rescue;
therefore we stand obliged at present to take other Measures in accounting for
the Proceedings of the Divine Justice, than what our Experience acquaints us
with in this World. For while we live here, we come within the Compass, and so
enjoy the Benefit of that Relaxation of the Law, which was the Purchase of our
Savior's Merits; and therefore we cannot truly pass a Judgment upon the exact
Proceedings of the Divine Justice, from the Contemplations of those Proceedings
of Justice which we see in this World, and which, upon that account, come
within the compass of that Relaxation. To know therefore, whether the
Incarnation, Life, and Death of our Savior were necessary for Man's
Redemption, we must enquire, what had become of sinful Man, if the Son of God
had not become his Savior. And if upon that Enquiry it shall appear, that
Vengeance without any Remedy had been his Portion; then it will also appear (at
least) a probable Conclusion (for we shall adventure no farther, because we are
utter Strangers to the unsearchable Depths of the Divine Wisdom) That Mankind
had brought themselves into so forlorn a Condition by their Sin, that there
does not appear to us any possible or just Way for their Redemption, but only
by the Incarnation, Life, and Death of their Revealed Savior, the Son of God.

This Caution then being laid down, and well observed, the First Proposition,
viz. That Punishment or Vengeance is the Just and Necessary Wages of Sin, will
appear more easy and rational.

And for asserting the Truth of it, we lay it down in the

1. First place, That God is in his own Nature Holy. This does necessarily fall
in with our very Notion of a God; because it is a Contradiction to our very
Conceptions of a Deity, to suppose any Wickedness or Turpitude in him.

2. We lay it down, secondly, That God loves himself. This will easily be
allowed, for more Reasons than one; both because the Notion is Natural and
Universal, that all Living Things do so; as also because God cannot but be
supposed to be the most Noble and Adequate, as well as Natural Object (if I may
so speak) of his own Love. Nay, some Men have streined this Point so far, as to
tell us, that the great and infinite Complacency that God takes in himself, and
in his own Perfections, would never have allowed him to condescend to his Work
of Creation, and by that Means to have allowed any of his Love and Good Will to
low, mean, and inferior Creatures (as the best of Creatures are, if compared
to him) if the Son, who is the Word of God, had not interposed upon that
Occasion; and so they make him a Mediator of Creation, as well as of
Redemption. But laying that aside at present, as being nothing to our purpose;
it may suffice for our Design, that whatever Love God bears to his Creatures,
it cannot be supposed, but that he not only loves, but that he does also
chiefly, and in the first place, love himself.

These Two Things then being laid down, That God loves himself; and, That he is
in his Nature Holy; the Inference that we shall make, before we proceed any
farther, must be, That he cannot otherwise choose but hate and abhor whatsoever
is contrary to such his Nature: And, because all Sin and Wickedness is so; that
therefore he cannot choose but hate and abhor all Sin and Wickedness. And hence
it is, that the Scripture acquaints us, that the carnal mind is enmity with
God; that is, all Sin and Wickedness is so. For we may as rationally conceive,
that a Man, who entertains and makes much of Sin, does love God; as we may,
that God, who in his Nature is Holy, can love Sin, which is directly contrary
to such his Holiness. This Inference then, from the Two former Propositions,
being thus in short laid down, and made good; we go on, and add in the

3. Third place, That the Life and Happiness of all God's Creatures is only the
Effect of the Divine Good Will and Pleasure. For undoubtedly, it was he that
made us, and not we our-selves. And taking it for granted at present, that he
did so; I would in the next place enquire, Whether we did deserve such our
Beings, or not? If it be answered, That we did not; then we have what we
desire, and that is, that the great and first Blessing, that ever God bestowed
upon us, was by him freely bestowed, without any possible Merit in us; and
therefore, that it was the free Effect of his Good Will and Pleasure. But if
any Man shall be so silly, as to think, that he could deserve his Being of God;
then to make good such his Conceit, it will be expected (and that too, for
ever; for the Expectation will never be answered) that he should make it out,
that Nothing may have Something of Merit in it; and, that what as yet is not,
may have wherewithal to lay an Obligation upon Omnipotence.

And as our Being was the free Effect of the Divine Good Will and Pleasure; so
also are all those Blessings which do attend it. For with our Beings he did
also bestow upon us all those Faculties, which should entertain any other Thing
whatsoever. And as he made our Faculties, so did he all Things else, which can
possibly gratify those Faculties. And that there is any Harmony or Agreement
between those Faculties, and their Objects, is undoubtedly owing to him, who
was the original Contriver and Author of both. And therefore in the

4. Fourth place, I would offer it to Consideration, That it is only the
Exercise of God's Good Will toward us, that does indeed and truth make way for
the Exercise of his Justice upon us; Because we could never have undergone the
Severity of the last, if we had never been made Partakers of the Bounty of the
first: And therefore, when God does punish us for our Sins by his Justice, that
Punishment does nothing else, but only strip us of something, which we had
before received from his Mercy. And this, upon a serious Consideration, will
appear to be true, whether the Punishment inflicted do deprive us of our Ease,
Peace, Safety, or even of Life itself. For, what have we, that we did not
receive; since in him we live, and move, and have our Being?

5. Fifthly, I would offer it to Consideration, Whether when God takes any
Thing from us, which, upon the account of his Good Will and Pleasure, he had
bestowed upon us; I say, Whether in such a Case the true and just Reason, why
he does so, is not, because we by our Sins have turned such his Good Will
toward us, into his Displeasure against us? For, if what he bestowed was the
Effect of his Goodwill; and if (as God made us holy and upright at first) he
cannot but continue the same Good Will toward us, so long as we continue as he
made us: Then we may be assured, that so long as he continues such his
Good Will toward us, so long he will continue the Effects of such his
Good Will too. And if we were not assured of this, then it might be all one as
to us, whether God were well-pleased with us, and loved us, or not. For, if the
Loss of such good Things, which are the Essects of God's Good Will to us, may
(while we continue holy and innocent) be once made consistent with such his
Good Will; then farewell to all Distinction as to the Justice of Rewards and
Punishments: For, in such a Case it may be the same thing, whether we please
God, or displease him; because we may lose the Effects of his Favor, that is
(according to the Tenor of the last Head) we may be punished as well for our
Innocence, as for our Wickedness; or, at the very best, we may be punished for
Nothing. No! no! As God's Displeasure is contrary to his Good Will and Favor;
so the Essects and Consequences of that Displeasure must be contrary to the
Effects and Consequences of such his Good Will and Favor too. This is the
Voice of Nature, and this the Voice of Justice; and therefore also this is the
Voice of Truth. And then, as we showed before, that all the good Things, that
we do or can enjoy, did proceed purely and merely from God's Good Will; so I do
now add, that our Sins do naturally turn that Good Will into Displeasure; and
then the Good Will ceasing, all those Emanations, that flowed from it, must in
course cease also. And then, because where they cease, there the Sinner's
Punishment does begin; therefore we may now from the Whole begin to perceive,
that the Punishment of Sin is not so arbitrarious a thing, as it is usually
taken to be; but that it does, when traced to the beginning, depend upon the
same Necessity, by which God loves himself. For, if we sum up all our Discourse
upon this Head from the beginning, we shall understand, That God loves himself;
That he is in his own Nature Holy; That therefore he hates whatsoever is
contrary to such his Nature; That all Sin therefore is so, because it is
contrary to his Holiness; That the Effects of his Hatred must be contrary to
those of his Love; or, at the very best, That the Emanations of his Love must
then be stopped, when that Love is turned into Hatred and Displeasure; That
when his Creatures lose those Emanations, then their Misery begins; That all
those Creatures must needs lose them, that lose that Love, from whence alone
they do proceed; and, That they lose that Love by their Sins; because (as we
said before) Sin, and Sin alone, does turn it into Hatred and Displeasure. So
that (if we may be allowd so to speak in Morality) there is an essential
Relation between Sin and Punishment; and the Necessity of Punishment (when
narrowly scanned) is founded upon the eternal and immutable Laws of Truth,
Holiness, and Justice.

But before we leave this Head, I would (if that be possible) make all a little
plainer by an Instance: And that Instance shall be in that Punishment, which
the first Sin brought upon the whole Race of Mankind. And I do the rather take
my Instance there, because the Law was given and broken, and so the Penalty
both threatened and incurred, when there was no Savior to remit the rigorous
but just Execution of such Penalty.

Now we are assured by the Reason of the Thing itself; (as we have already
discoursed) But if that will not do, we are assured by God's Word, by his
Promise, by his Oath, that he neither wills, nor delights in the death of a
Sinner. And when he swears so to us, it would be both proper and modest in us
to believe, that there is something in Sin, which does oblige God in Justice
(and that is the same thing with God, as to be obliged by Necessity) to punish
it with Death. And to this purpose we may take notice, that it is derogatory to
God's Honor, for us to resolve any Punishment, which we suffer, into God's
Will only, and not into his Justice. Because (as we shall presently perceive)
when God wills the Death of a Sinner, he therefore only wills it, because
Justice does require it, and that (in the Nature of the Thing) antecedently to
such his Will. For, if the Death of a Man should be therefore just, only
because God wills it, though the Man do not deserve it; then it may be all one as
to the Event, and that justly too, whether a Man were perfectly innocent, or
the most profligate Miscreant upon the Face of the Earth. For, according to
that Doctrine, which we now oppose, God might in such a Case justly will the
Death of the Innocent, and save the Criminal alive. For, if the ultimate
Resolution of the Justice of our Death be only into the Will of God, then
nothing can hinder, but that God may justly slay a perfect Innocent. And so
when God told Adam, that in the day of his Transgression he should surely die;
the Meaning of his Threat must have been, that he might have died, whether he
had transgressed or not. But because we cannot without Blasphemy tax God's Law
of such notorious Prevarication; therefore we must determine, that the ultimate
Resolution of Adam's Punishment in such Case, must be into the Desert of such
Punishment by the Breach of the Law, and that God's willing his Death was a
just Consequent of such his Desert. In short; God wills such things only, which
he can will justly; and he, who will rationally, and truly account for the
Proceedings of God, in that and such like Cases, must have a care to do it so,
as to maintain the Harmony of all his Attributes. He must not magnify his
Power, no nor his Mercy so, as to impeach his Truth, Wisdom, and Justice: For
he, who confounds the Events of Innocence and Guilt, will be found (when his
Opinion comes narrowly to be scanned) to make God either a Favourer of Sin, or
an Enemy of Righteousness. The Sum of all is, That when God tells us, that
Death is the Wages of Sin, he does not therefore pass it into a Law, because it
pleases him so to do; but because it is just in itself, that he should do so:
And that if it had not been just in itself, he had not upon that single
Account willed it at all. So that upon the whole, it does remain a fixed and
settled Truth, That Death is the Wages of Sin by the eternal and immutable Laws
of Justice and that it cannot be otherwise, so long as God loves himself, and
so hates whatsoever is contrary to himself and to his Nature, as all Sin most
undoubtedly is. And therefore when any Man sins against God, as by so doing, he
does of necessity forfeit God's Favor; so also by consequence, he does by
necessity forfeit his own Life, which has nothing else to depend upon, but that
Favor alone.

And as a Temporal Death upon Sin is necessary, because both threatened and
incurred before the Promise of a Savior; so after the Savior has laid down
his Mediatorial Office, an Eternal Death will be found to be so too. I word it
so, lest my Caution before this Head should by this time be forgot. Now, if it
be not an Eternal Law of Justice, that Punishment is the necessary Reward of
Sin; then it may be all one, as to the Event, (and that justly and finally too)
whether a Man depart this Life the best or the worst Man in the whole World.
For, if there be not some Law of Justice, that shall at the last Day
distinguish the Event of their contrary Courses, then nothing can: And if that
Justice be not necessary (let the Means, by which it is not so, be what they
will) the Difference between their Condition can be but casual, (or at the very
best, but arbitrary) and so we must leave them both to a grand Perhaps; which
will be in effect to destroy all Religion and Justice.

There is one thing against this Discourse, of weight and moment; which though I
shall professedly answer in another Place, yet shall not go unmentioned here:
And that is, That if the Punishment of Sin be absolutely just and necessary,
then how came it to pass, that God did in his Counsel design, and in his Wisdom
appoint a Savior, in order to the Pa^don of Sin? For, in Order of Nature the
Design of Pardon must be antecedent to the Design of sending a Savior: And
therefore if the Punishment of Sin be, as it is la^ down, both just and
necessary, God's Design of Pardon going counter to this Law, should seem to be
unjust. For how could he just^ design to pardon That, which in Justice an^
Necessity he stood obliged to punish?

Now to this several Things may be answered. As,

1. First, That God did never design (...) pardon Sin, but only in and through
a Sav^our. And how far such his Design, under such a Restriction and
Limitation, is ju^^ is very much the Business of that part of the Discourse,
which in its Place is to follow, an^ therefore must not be forestalled here.

2. That notwithstanding a Savior, ye^ God did never pardon any sinful
Creature All the Sinners, that we know, are the fal^ Angels and Men. What the
Scriptures acquaint us with concerning the first, we know well enough: And
among such Things, (...) know also, that it gives us an Account (...) the
Punishment of their Sin. And as for Men; those of them that shall be saved a^
last, in consideration of their Savior's Merits, do yet in this World suffer
Losses an^ Crosses, and Pains, and Diseases, and Death. All which are undoubted
Punishments of Sin^ And for the rest, who shall by a final Impenitence reject
the Benefit of the Savior's Purchase (besides the Calamities which they suffer
in common with the Good in this World) the Scriptures do acquaint us
sufficiently with their Doom in the next. So that if it may be an Argument,
that Punishment is the necessary Reward of Sin, because all Sinners have, do,
and shall suffer Punishment; then God's designing of a Savior for Mankind, in
order to their Pardon, does not take off the Force of such Argument; because,
notwithstanding such his Design, and such Savior, no Sinner whatsoever did, or
ever will go unpunished.

3. But then, thirdly, It is a Mistake, that the Salvation of Man from
Punishment was the immediate and direct Design in God's Counsel of sending a
Savior. For, as we shall see hereafter, [See Chap. 12.] the Business of our
Savior's Coming was to bring back Mankind to his Father's Kingdom, who had
been drawn into a Revolt from his Dominion and Jurisdiction, by the
Solicitations of the Devil, and had thereby put a Slight upon the Authority of
the King of all the World, and so, in some sense, lesned the Extent of his
Kingdom. Now those whom our Savior shall so bring back to their Allegiance, by
restoring them to their lost Holiness, shall indeed be saved: But then their
Salvation is a Consequence of their Return to Holiness; and so was not properly
the Design of God's sending a Savior, but the Consequence of the Success of
such Design.

CHAP. II.
The Gospel holds forth no such thing, as an Absolute or Unconditional Pardon;
no, nor yet an Arbitrary Pardon.

THe next and Second Proposition offered to be made good, in order to our main
Design, is this; That the Gospel holds out no such thing to us, as an absolute
Forgiveness of Sin. Which Proposition I therefore lay down here, not only
because it is introductive to some Things, which are to follow; but also to
obviate the Conceit of those Men, who think they do sufficiently wipe away the
Merits of our Savior in reference to the Pardon of our Sins, by telling us,
that God may without any more ado pardon such our Sins by his Free Grace.

1. But, in the first place, we cannot but take notice, that what God may do,
and what he has declared he will do, are Two very different and distinct
Things. Though therefore it be supposed, that God may grant us an absolute
Pardon; yet if in those very Revelations, in which he has discovered to us his
Intention of pardoning us, he does expressly tell us, that he will not do so; it
will be proper and modest in us, to acquiesce in what he so tells us, rather
than to raise in our Imaginations conceited Possibilities, which do directly
contradict such his Declarations.

2. But, secondly, He who brought us the Gospel Dispensation, in order to the
Pardon of our Sins, does in that Dispensation require our Repentance in order
to such our Pardon. Now if Repentance be a Condition of the Pardon, then for
that Reason alone the Pardon cannot be Absolute; because an Absolute Pardon is
an Inconditional Pardon, and it is impossible, that the same Pardon should be a
Conditional, and an Inconditional Pardon too.

3. An Absolute Pardon of Sin fights directly against all that we have said
under our last Head, concerning the Necessary Justice of Punishment: And
therefore, till all that be wiped away, we may upon those Grounds deny, that
there is any such sort of Pardon. For, it looks a little too harsh, and that
too to Natural Reason, to tell us, that God will be reconciled to the Enemy of
his Nature, and that upon the account of mere Mercy and Compassion; and that,
in order to his being so, he will throw away all Considerations of his Justice,
which in this Case we may adventure to call his Natural Displeasure.

4. If we should suppose or allow such a thing as an Absolute Forgiveness; then
we must also allow, that it may be the same thing, whether a man has been the
best, or the worst Man in the whole World. For an Absolute Forgiveness, in the
Reason and Nature of it, may as well be extended to the one, as to the other.
For, let what Reason soever be assigned, why it may not; and that very Reason
(be it what it will) will prove the Forgiveness not to be absolute. For, that
Forgiveness cannot be so, that is limited or restrained by any Reason
whatsoever.

5. An Absolute Pardon does throw a Slur upon God's Wisdom, no less than it
does so upon his Justice. For, the Law being his, against which we have
transgressed, and he having in that very Law threatened Vengeance upon such as
shall transgress it; if after the Transgression he should grant an absolute
Pardon to such Transgression, he would by such a Pardon as much void and annul
the Law, as he had by his Threatening established and confirmed it: And so it
might come to the same pass, as to the final Event, whether he had made any Law
or no. For, what is the Difference, not to make a Law, and not to execute it?
And therefore St. Paul, pointblank to our purpose tells us, in the Third to the
Romans, the Fifth and Sixth Verses, That if God should not execute Vengeance,
he would not only be unrighteous, but that also he could not judge the World.
And we may add, that he would not only be unrighteous, but (considering the
Contrariety that would be between his Practice and his Law) he would be unwise
also. And therefore,

6. Lastly, The last Judgment, and that Description that we meet with of it in
Gods Word, do fully assure us, that he has no such Designs in his Counsels, as
to throw away his Laws to gratify his Enemies with Impunity.

From all which Reasons, and (as we do believe) from each of them in
particular, it seems satisfactorily evident, that a Gospel-Pardon of Sin is no
absolute Pardon: And that therefore, when God does in the Gospel promise Pardon
of Sin, there must be some previous Conditions, that must be observed in order
to such a Pardon. And what Share our Savior has in the Performance and
Accomplishment of such Conditions, we shall learn hereafter.

In the mean time, before we dismiss this Chapter, we must not dissemble, that
it may be surmised, and therefore also, that it may be objected, That though
there should be no alsolute Gospel-Pardon, that yet there may be an arbitrary
Gospel-Pardon; and that there are some Expressions in the New Testament, that
lean that way, and may at least incline us to believe, that there is such a
Thing. But because we are sure, that no Pardon can come from God, but what is
just; and because we know that Arbitrary Justice is only one Branch of
Arbitrary Power, and therefore is in reality no Justice at all (for it is only
a resolute Determination of the Will, without any Reason for such
Determination) therefore we are sure, that it cannot belong to God. For all his
Actions are limited and bounded by his Holiness, that is, by the Eternal Rules
of Reason and Justice: And he only therefore wills what he pleases, because he
neither does not can please to will any thing, but what is Just.

CHAP. III.
A Gospel-Salvation contains in it, 1. Pardon of Sin. 2. The Gift of Eternal
Happiness. To these, Two other Things required: 1. An Expiation of Sin. 2. A
Restitution to Holiness. Negatively, the several Ways how such Expiation cannot
be made; from whence an Inference of the Doctrine asserted, with some Practical
Inferences.

HAving in the First Chapter made it good, that Misery and Death, that is, in
one Word, that Vengeance is, as the just, so also the necessary Wages of Sin:
And, in the Second, That the Gospel it self holds out no such thing to us as
either an Absolute or Arbitrary Forgiveness of Sin: Our next Proposition must
be, That because the Gospel in this very Case is the Revelation of God's Will,
and because the Will and Counsel of God in that Gospel revealed is the Pardon
and Salvation of Man; that therefore Man's Sin is to be pardoned, though not by
an absolute or arbitrary Forgiveness.

And then, because it must for that Reason be pardoned some way or other; it
will be our next Business to enquire, what that Way is. For, by such Enquiry it
may perhaps appear to be a Gospel Truth, and that too agreeable to Reason, That
there is not Salvation in any other, but in Jesus Christ alone; and, that there
is no other Name under Heaven given among Men, whereby we must be saved.

And here, because the Gospel promises no absolute Pardon of Sin; as we do from
thence in the first place conclude, that the Pardon must be conditional; so we
must in the next place enquire, what that Condition, or what those Conditions
are, upon which this Pardon is to be obtained.

Now, if in order to our more rational and satisfactory Resolution of this
Enquiry, we do first look into the Gospel, there to inform our selves, what a
Gospel-Salvation means; we may from thence learn, that it does contain in it
Two Things: Whereof the first is, Pardon of Sin; and the second is, the Gift of
Eternal Happiness. And in order to the obtaining of these Two Things (as we
shall see more fully in the farther Prosecution of this Matter) Two other
Things are in the Gospel required: 1. An Expiation of Sin; and, 2. A
Restitution to our lost Holiness. For, as we may conclude from our second
Proposition, That (though the Gospel does allow a Pardon, yet because it does not
allow an absolute Pardon of Sin, that) therefore something will be required in
order to such a Pardon: So we may conclude from our first Proposition, That
(because Punishment for Sin is necessary) therefore some Punishment (be that
what it will at present) must be suffered for our Sin.

And then, if in the Progress of our Discourse it shall appear, that in
Consideration of any such Punishment so suffered, the Gospel-Pardon of our Sins
does afterward ensue; then such Pardon may be so far ascribed to such
Punishment, as that our Guilt, and the Vengeance due to such our Guilt, may be
truly esteemed to be expiated by it.

Now, in order to find out what Punishment it is, that can make such an
Expiation, we shall first enquire, what Punishment cannot do it. And because
Repentance does not so wholly consist in Action, but that it must have
something of Suffering mixed with it; therefore in pursuit of our Design, let
our first Negative Proposition be this:

1. That our Repentance for our Sins can never make out an Expiation of our
Sins. For, though Repentance for our Sins be a Gospel-Condition required of us,
without which we shall never be made Partakers of the Benefit of the
Gospel-Expiation; yet, notwithstanding that, we neither do, nor can by our
Repentance make out that Expiation for Sin, which is by the Gospel necessary
for our Salvation. For, besides that there is no Man's Repentance so exact and
complete, as to free him from all Sin, while he lives; and so after all he must
remain a Sinner as long as he lives: I say, besides that, His very manner of
going out of the World, and that is by Death, is a demonstrative Proof, that
his Repentance has not made an Expiation for his Sins; because we may most
certainly conclude, that his Sins are not then expiated, and so neither
pardoned, when God himself lays on the Penalty threatened in his Law with his
own Hand. For when God gave his Law to Mankind in their universal Father and
Representative Adam, we know, that he ratified such Law by the Penalty of
Death; and we know also, that every Man (let him be as pemtent as can be
supposed) does still suffer that Penalty. And we may from thence also know,
that for that Reason no Man's Repentance can so far expiate his Sin, as to free
him from the Punishment threatened to it by the Law. And then from the whole we
may conclude, That if any Man be saved because he is a true Penitent, he must
be saved by some other Expiation, than by such his Repentance; forasmuch as his
Repentance can at the most but qualify him to be made a Partaker of such
Expiation.

2. As Man's Repentance for his Sin (which we may call his voluntary Punishment
for Sin) cannot; so neither can his professed Punishment (which we may call his
legal Punishment for Sin) expiate his Sin, and so obtain for him a
Gospel-forgiveness; and that for this Reason, because there is such a Thing in
the Gospel, as an eternal Punishment, allotted to Sin. And as under the last
Head we found, that Reason did fall in with the Gospel, and that they both
spoke the same thing; so also we shall find it here. For, it is certain, that
the Punishment of sinful Man can therefore never expiate his Sin, because it
can never purchase a just Release from Punishment; and it is certain, that it
cannot do that, if it may be justly continued to Eternity. And that it may be
so, we may learn from hence, because the Law of Grace being God's Law, as well
as the Law of Works, must for that Reason be just: And we are assured by this
Law, as much as Words can assure us, that the Punishment which it denounces
against those, who do not ful^^l the Conditions of it, is Eternal. And that it
shall so prove, besides the express Words of the Law, we have this farther
Reason; which is, that the suffering the Punishment threatened by the Law to
those, who neglect to perform the Conditions of the Law, can neither in Sense
or Reason pass for the Performance of such Conditions so neglected; and that
the Neglect of this Law shall (and that in Reason and Justice) be repaid with
an additional Vengeance for the refusal of the Mercy offered in it, (which
designs to free us from the Punishment of all our other Sins) as well as with
that Punishment, which is due to such Sins. For, it is Reason and Justice, that
a more heinous Sin should be punished with a more grievous Judgment; and it is
Truth and Reason, that a Sinner does then become a more heinous Criminal, when
to his Desert of Punishment, he adds a Neglect or Contempt of the easy
Conditions of Pardon. And since by the Tenor of the Covenant of Grace, such
Sinner is to suffer his Punishment after his Resurrection from the Dead, that
is, not only after the Time limited for the Possibility of his Pardon is
expired, but also after Death it self shall be destroyed; as we may from thence
conclude the certainty, so may we also the eternal Duration of his Punishment.
For, as a Punishment due after the Day of Grace is past, will not be remitted;
so such Punishment, when Death is no more, cannot be determined. By which we
may understand, that as Death is, without a Savior, the just and necessary
Wages of Sin, (as we made it good in our first Chapter) so also, that when such
Death is sure (by a Resurrection purchased by a Savior) to be taken away, in
order to an happy and everlasting Life, (and that too upon the easy, or, at
worst, the very feasible Conditions of the Gospel;) yet if Men will neglect
such Salvation, so placed within their reach, and so leave the eternal Life
(purchased for them in order to their Happiness) exposed to the Vengeance,
which is the just and necessary Reward of all their other Sins, and of such
their Neglect; they must impute it to their own Folly, if such Vengeance, in
stead of Happiness, be the continued Companion of their eternal Life. For, in
the Case so put, the Restoration from Death to Life comes from the Mercy of
God; the making that Life eternal, comes from the Mercy of God; the Designing
to make that eternal Life happy, comes from the Mercy of God; The granting
Means to Men (and those no very hard ones neither) of obtaining that Happiness,
comes from the Mercy of God. But foolish Man defeats the Counsel of God, by an
obstinate and unrelenting Perseverance in Sin; and does in this Case, as he
does in most others, turn the Blessing of God into a Curse upon himself; that
is, he makes that Life, which was designed for his eternal Happiness, an
Occasion of the eternity of his Misery.

One thing more may be added to what has been said upon this Head, and then we
shall apply it to our present Design; and that is, That at that time, when the
Punishment we now speak of shall come to be inflicted, our Savior (as the
Scriptures tell us) will have laid down his Mediatorial Office, and so Men must
stand the Award of their own Deserts; and then, if such their Deserts be Evil,
we may be instructed from what was said in the First Chapter, that the Justice,
which will overtake them, will be Justice without Mercy; and that pure and
unmixed Vengeance will be their Portion, even such Vengeance which will only
revenge upon them the Breach of the Covenants of their God, but will never so
much as pretend to make up such Breach.

To our present purpose then: If the Punishment of Men for their own Sins
shall, without the Interposition of a Savior, be eternal; and if this appear
to be so by the Testimony of that very Gospel, (in which, however, there is a
Possibility of Salvation held forth) and if Reason do vouch for the Truth of
what the Gospel in this Case teaches; and lastly, if an Eternity of Punishment
be absolutely inconsistent with an Expiation of Sin by such Punishment (for the
last supposes the Sin to be cancelled, and the first supposes it to be
continued): Then we may conclude, that the Punishment of Man for his Sin can no
more exp^ate his Sin under this Head, than his Repentance (as we there made it
good) could do so under the last. An^ then, because there is no other possible
Way for Mankind to expiate their Sin, but by their Repentance, or by their
Punishment, w^ do conclude, that there is no possible Way for them to make any
Expiation of it at all.

3. As Man cannot expiate his Sin by any Punishment of his own; neither by his
Repentance, nor by his Death, whether Tempor^ or Eternal: So neither can he
expiate his Si^ by the Death of any other Creature. This (...) therefore add,
because we may be apt to surmise, that what has been done already, may be done
again. And we can hardly be ignorant, that the Lives of other Creatures have
been offered to God, and that too by his own Appointment, for the Expiation of
the Sin^ of Men. And (which is yet something more) they have not only been
offered by Man, but they have been also accepted by God, as a^ effectual
Expiation. And that they have bee^ so, the History of the Jewish Religion,
recorded in the Bible it self, may easily convince us.

But, notwithstanding all this; yet he who shall look nearer into the Matter,
and examine it more nicely, will be satisfied, 1. That all those Sacrifices
(though instituted by God himself) were only Types and Shadows of that great
Propitiatory Sacrifice, that was to expiate the Sins of the whole World. And
therefore, though they may serve to inform us, that such a Sacrifice ought to be
in order to the Expiation of Sins, and (because they did prefigure such a
Sacrifice) they might over and above foretell, that such a Sacrifice should be;
yet because they themselves were but Types and Shadows, it is notorious, for
that very Reason, that they were not the Reality and Substance; and that
therefore the Expiation did not belong to them. Take what we say in the
Apostle's Words, and so it may be more satisfactory, in the Tenth to the
Hebrews, and the beginning: For the Law having a Shadow of good Things to come,
and not the very Image of the Things, can never with these Sacrifices, which
they offered Year by Tear continually, make the Comers thereunto perfect: And
after some other things to the same purpose, he concludes in the Fourth Verse,
that it is impossible that the Blood of Bulls and Goats should take away Sins.
And therefore, though it be freely granted, that a Remission of Sin did usually
follow upon the offering of those Legal and Ritual Sacrifices; yet from what
has been said, it must be granted also, that such Remission did not proceed
from the Consideration of any real Expiation, that was made by those
Sacrifices; but only from that Expiation, of which they were the Types, viz.
from the Expiation made by the Lamb of God, which was slain from the Foundation
of the World; that is, the Merit of whose Death does extend it self from the
Fall of Adam to the Consummation of a Things.

2. But, secondly, The Lives of the Creatures offered to God, as an expiatory
Sacr^fice for Sin, can never make the Expiati^ designed, because all those
Lives are his as tecedent to such Offering. To attempt ther^ fore to expiate
our Sins by them, is no bette^ than to offer to God what is his own already or
(for our Sins are in the Gospel calle^ Debts) it is to pay our Debts to God
wi^^ his own Money; which, rightly considere^ is so far from bringing us out of
debt, that really increases our Debt, by the folly, if no also by the mockery
of the Attempt. This (...) God's own Argument to his People the Jew^ in the
Fiftieth Psalm: I will take no Bullock o^ of thine House, nor He-goat out of
thy Folds for every Beast of the Forest is mine, and (...) are the Cattle upon
a thousand Hills; wit^ more to the same purpose, relating to the Insufficiency
of their Legal Sacrifices for the Expiation of Sins.

3. The Lives of the Creatures offered t^ God for the Expiation of the Sins of
Men can never make such Expiation; because the are of far less Value, and that
too not only in the Nature of the Thing, but also in the Estimation of those
that offer them, than the Lives of those for whom they are offered Now it can
never answer to the Rules of Justice, to pay our Creditor only an hundre^
Pence, when we owe him an hundred Pounds. And he who shall think, that he can
so discharge his Debt, may by the same Measures come in time to reckon, that he
may discharge it for nothing.

I have spoken something the larger to these Things (though perhaps it may seem
needless) partly because they have been a Part of God's own Instituted Worship;
partly because they are a Part of the Religious Worship of many Nations at this
Day; but chiefly, because they have a Relation to that great Sacrifice, which
is the main Design of all our Discourse. And this our Design will still be
farthered, if we consider in the

4. Fourth place, That as neither Man for himself, nor the Creatures, that are
inferior to him, can make any Expiation for his Sins; so neither can the
Creatures above him. Now the most exalted Creatures that Revelation has
acquainted us with (and we know nothing in this Case, but what we have from
Revelation) are the Angels and Archangels: And we may be therefore satisfied,
that those glorious Beings can never make an Expiation for the Sin of Man;
because it appears by the Revelations of God, that they can never make an
Expiation for their own Sins. And therefore, as we are told in such
Revelations, that some of them have sinned; so we are in the same told, that
those that have so done, are reserved in everlasting Chains, to the Judgment of
the great Day. Now, our Natural Reason tells us, that no Creature can be so in
love with Misery (and surely everlasting Chains, and a fearful expectation of
Judgment, do imply Misery; for, the Devils believe and tremble:) But, I say,
our Natural Reason tells us, that no Creature can be so in love with Misery, as
not to free it self from it, were it in its power so to do. And therefore the
same Natural Reason does tell us, that the true Reason why the fallen Angels do
not do so, is because they cannot do so. And if they cannot expiate their own
Sins, we may be pretty well satisfied, that they cannot expiate Sin at all: And
we may be the rather so satisfied, because we are as sure, that they would in
the Case employ their best Endeavors for themselves, as we are sure, that they
love themselves best.

Besides, we know, that in the Case of Mankind, Death is threatened, as the
Penalty for the Breach of the Law: And we may be pretty well satisfied, that
without Death no Expiation can be made: For, without Blood there is no
Remission. But, on the other side, we have some Reason to believe, that Angels
are not liable to Death, at least, not to such a Death, to which Man is
obnoxious; and therefore, for this Reason, as well as the former, we may pretty
rationally conclude, That the Angels are in no Capacity to expiate the Sins of
Mankind, and that therefore they cannot do it.

One thing more I would add to this Head, before I leave it; and that is this:
That though the Angels are very glorious and exalted Creatures, and, by the
Account we have of them in the Scriptures, are placed in a much higher Scale in
the Creation than Man, and so are far above him; yet still, because they are
Creatures, they are therefore at as great a distance from God, as Man himself
is: For, their Distance from him is infinite; and there are, we know, no
Degrees in Infinity. Now, because the Expiation of Sin is to be made to God,
and to God alone; and because there is an infinite Distance between God and
Angels, as well as there is between God and Man: I say, for these Reasons, we
can no more think the Interposition of an Angel effectual for making an
Atonement and Expiation for Sin, than we can think the Interposition of a Man
to be so. And if we should suppose a sort of Creatures a thousand, nay, ten
thousand or more times as much above Angels, as Angels are above Men; yet
because, after such a Supposition, even this sort of Creatures are as much
below God, as Man is; and because the Expiation of Sin, if attempted by such
Creatures, is to be made to God; therefore we cannot think, that the Dignity of
their Station can contribute any thing at all toward the making their
attempted Expiation effectual. And we know, and that too by unquestionable
Proof, that the Dignity of the fallen Angels (and among them, one of them Son of
the Morning, whatever that signifies; but we may be satisfied, that it
signifies something excellent) but, I say, we know, that the Dignity of the
fallen Angels did not so far avail them, but that God provided and accepted an
Expiation for fallen Man; whereas he left them in the Hands of Justice, to attend
the Events of their own Deserts. So that, for ought we can discover, either by
Revelation or Reason, the Dignity of no Creature whatsoever does qualify him
to make an Expiation for those Sins which he shall commit against the Creator.
For, in this Case, the Distance between the Party offended, and the Party
offending, being infinite, there cannot possibly be any Mediation or Expiation,
that can extend it self to both the Extremes. And therefore, we shall at last,
from what has been said upon this Head, conclude, That no Creature, though never
so much above Man, can ever make an Expiation to God for the Sins of Man.

5. Fifthly, and lastly: As no sinful Creature can ever by its Punishment
expiate its own Sins, or the Sins of any other Creature; so no innocent
Creature can do the last, that is, no innocent Creature can ever expiate the
Sins of any sinful Creature. For, in such a Case, it must, in order to its
undergoing the Punishment justly, first take upon it the Sin willingly; and so,
by putting it self into the Place of the Sinner, must first be supposed to be
such a Sinner it self, before it can undergo the Punishment due to its Sin. But
then, when any Creature is supposed to lie under the Burden of such Sin, it is
at the same time supposed to be in the same Condition with the Original Sinner
himself: For, when the Punishment comes to be transferred from the last to the
first, it is therefore so transferred, because the Law allows the Act of the
Surety, by which he has owned and accepted the Sin to be his own: And then the
Law in such a Case makes no difference between the Surety and the Principal.
And if the Law makes no difference, then, as to the Business of Punishment, we
may be therefore sure, that there is none, because both are Creatures, and both
are Sinners. If therefore (as we showed before) the Principal could not by his
Punishment (had he undergone it himself) have expiated his Guilt; then, for the
self-same Reasons, the Surety will also be unable to expiate the self-same
Guilt. So that the Conclusion of this Head will be, that as no sinful Creature
is able to unload its self of its Sin by its Punishment; so no Creature (be it
never so innocent) will be able to do it, by being punished for its
Fellow Creature. And therefore, as we do not know, that any of the Blessed
Angels, who retained their Innocence, did ever interpose for the Redemption of
those that fell, so we do most assuredly know, that though they did interpose,
the Event did not answer; because we know, that the Condition of those that
fell, does continue desperate: Nay, there do not want probable Reasons to
persuade, that the fallen Angels themselves do not interpose for their own
Redemption in any kind, no not so much as by Prayer: Which, if it be true; as
it is a good Argument of their Despair, so it is a probable Argument, that they
have no Mediator, in whose Name they may put up such their Prayers, and for
whose sake they may with any probability hope, that they will be accepted. And
yet all this while we have no Reason to doubt, but that That noble Charity,
which must needs accompany a perfect and unspotted Innocence (such as that of
the Holy Angels is) would be inclined to engage it self one way or other for
the Redemption of their fallen Brethren, did not their Prudence check and
control such a possible Inclination. And then, if such their Prudence do not
consist in One of these Two Things, that is, that they either think or know,
that such their Interposition would be either saucy or vain; we can hardly
upon any other ground excuse their Neglect of such their Interposition.

In One Word; The Scriptures have acquainted us, that some of the Angels have
sinned, and that their Condition thereupon is become desperate: But the
Scriptures have not acquainted us, that they have any Mediator to intercede
with God in their behalf, or to make Expiation for their Sin. And, as we may be
satisfied, that were an Expiation made, their Sin must in Justice be remitted;
so may we, that if any of the good Angels had taken upon himself to make such
Expiation, he must, in order to his so doing, have taken upon himself the Sin;
and so he must have brought himself into the very same Condition with those
that fell; and that therefore he would have been just as unable as they, to
free himself from such Condition. No! no! We do, or may know well enough, that
Sin has Weight enough in it to crush both Men and Angels. Experience has
acquainted us with the first; and Revelation has assured us of both. And then
the Conclusion is easy; That he who in such a Case could relieve either, must
for that Reason be more powerful than both. And when we come to make it out,
that he who did so, was so, we shall then begin more plainly to perceive, that
there is not Salvation in any other; though most of what we have hitherto
offered, has directly tended to the same Design.

But before we proceed any farther, we shall make some few Remarks upon what
has been already laid down, that may have an Induence upon our Practice.

1. And first, From what has been offered, we may take notice of the great
Malignity of Sin. For People would hardly sin so freely, if they thought Sin so
deadly. And yet a little Reflection will tell us, that Sin has slain all
Mankind from the time of Adam to the time of the Expiration of the last Man
that died. We may think the Plague, the Sword, the Famine, great Destroyers:
They are indeed the Beesoms of Destruction, and, where they come, make great
Devastations among Mankind; but when we have taken a View of the Desolations
caused by them, and by all other Miseries and Mischiefs besides, we must know,
that as Sin has been the Parent of them all, so has it been also of all those
Calamities and Destructions, that all of them have produced: And because it has
so, therefore we take notice in the

2. Second place, That God's Justice is no such trifling Thing, as is but too
generally thought. For, there is no Sinner, who ever escaped being a Sufferer.
For, if all the Miseries which we suffer in this World (and those are neither
few, nor light) do come from our Sins, as most certainly they do; then we may
be easily satisfied, that even those Sinners, whom yet God does treat with the
greatest Kindness of all others, do yet never go without the Marks of his
Displeasure. And if he does correct his Children with Rods (and we may be sure,
that he never does that, but he does it with Justice too) then, for the same
Reason, we may believe, that he will chastise his Enemies with Scorpions. And
upon this Account we should take care to hear the Rod, and who has appointed
it; and should make such good use of the Miseries which we suffer in this
World, as to let them put us in mind to flee from the Wrath to come. For, if we
will not hearken to God's Voice, when he chides us, we shall at last, when he
comes to smite us, sink under the weight of his Hand; and if we neglect his
Displeasure, we shall fall under his Fury and Indignation.

3. If God in the greatest and highest Instance of his Mercy, with which he has
acquainted us in his Gospel, has not allowed us an Absolute Pardon; but has
even in that his Covenant of Grace required Conditions of us, in order to our
being made Partakers of that Pardon, which is the Purchase of our Savior; then
it does highly concern us, that we take care to perform the Conditions on our
Part, that so we be not excluded from the Benefits of such Purchase. For, though
it be most certain, that we shall not be saved by our Repentance alone; yet it
is as certain, that we shall not be saved without it. No! He who has purchased
our Ransom, has in such his Purchase provided for God's Honor, as well as for
our Safety; and, notwithstanding his Purchase, has taught us, that we shall
forfeit the last, if we take no care of the first. Let us therefore look upon
our selves, as we are in our selves, that is, as forlorn, miserable Wretches:
Let us acknowledge our selves such to God: Let us quit our Sins, which have
made us such: And (as we have by such our Sins hitherto rebelled against him)
let us for the future resolve to comply with his Will, that is, to the
uttermost of our Power, to obey his Laws: Let us be heartily sorry, that we
have been so foolish, as ever to have done otherwise. And when we have done all
this, then let us joyfully accept, and thankfully acknowledge the Designs of
his Pity toward us, and the Provisions that he has made for our Safety in a
Savior. For, this is the Way to bring that Salvation, which he has pr^^^ded
for Mankind, I say, to bring it home to our selves, and to make it our own. And
I may add, that this is the only way for us to do so: For, as there is not
Salvation in any other, but in Jesus Christ alone; so there is not any possible
Way for us to make our selves Partakers of this Salvation, but by Repentance.

4. Lastly, Because we have seen, that the Condition of the fallen Angels is
forlorn and desperate, for want of a Savior to expiate their Sins; therefore
this Consideration should enhance and magnify our Praise to God, that whereas
he has in his Severity passed by those glorious and exalted Creatures, and so
has left them to the Stroke of pure and unrelenting Justice; yet he has not
dealt so with us Men, weak and sinful Dust and Ashes. Lord, what is Man, that
thou art thus mindful of him? or the Son of Man, that thou so regardest him?
Therefore, Blessing, and Praise, and Honor, and Glory, be to him that sits
on the Throne, and to the Lamb for evermore.

CHAP. IV.
That Person to whom alone the Expiation of Sin is by the Scriptures ascribed,
is by the same Scriptures set forth to us, 1. As God; 2. As Man; 3. As God and
Man united in one Person, or God Incarnate. No Man a competent Judge of all
possible Unions. The Incarnation agreeable to the Sentiments of Mankind, and
variously foretold, prefigured, and suggested in the Scriptures. Some Practical
Inferences, somewhat enlarged.

HAving seen in the foregoing Chapter, that an Expiation for our Sin could
neither be made by our selves, nor by any other Creature; and that therefore
he, who could make good such an Expiation, must be more than a mere Creature:
It will be our next Business to search the Scriptures, in which (as we shall
see more fully hereafter) the Expiation of Sin is set forth; and there to see,
what Character they give of him, who made such Expiation: For, by that Means
only, we are likely to come to any true Knowledge and Information in this great
Affair.

1. Now in such Scriptures we find, first, that That Person to whom this
Expiation is there ascribed, is called God, the Son of God, the Word, the Only
Begotten of the Father; That he is there said to be with his Father before the
World began; That he laid the Foundations of the Earth, and that the Heaven are
the Work of his Hand; That he create^ all Things that are in Heaven, and that
are i^ Earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or
Principalities, o^ Powers; That all Things were created (...) him, and for him;
That he is before al^ Things, and that by him all Things consist That to him is
given all Power in Heaven and Earth; with much more to the same Import and
Purpose; which we need not repe^ at present, because if we believe so much (and
we all, at least, pretend to believe it for the Word of God) we may from thence
satisfy our selves, that he who has such a Character from God, must be the
True an^ Everlasting God: For so is the Maker o^ Heaven and Earth; and so is
he, who ha^ all Power in Heaven and Earth: For, such (...) Description does
imply in it Omniscience, an^ Omnipotence, and such other Attributes, b^ which
we do (though in other Words) describ^ the True God, both to our selves, and to
al^ others. But we shall pursue this no farther here, because it is not our
professed Business at present: For we have only mentioned it, and confirmed it
with some few Texts of Scripture, without quoting the Places, in order to our
full and clear Explication of that Expiation which was made by our Savior. And
when we come to do that, we shall then more plainly perceive, that the Deity of
our Savior, and the Expiation made by him, do mutually prove and establish
each other.

2. The Scriptures do acquaint us, That that very Person to whom they do
ascribe the Expiation of Sin, was a true and real Man. For they give us an
Account of his Conception, Nativity, Life, and Death: They acquaint us with his
Conversation, and Manner of Life; with his Natural Actions and Passions; and
each of them such, which are undoubted Arguments of an Humane Nature and
Condition: Such are his Discourses, his Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, Grieving,
and the like: By which Account of his Person, we may be as well satisfied of
his Humanity under this Head, as we may be of his Deity under the last. And I
may add, that (if we do with Simplicity and Sincerity receive the Account of
his Person and Character, that the Scriptures give us both in the one Case and
in the other) that we may be as well satisfied of his Deity under the last
Head, as of his Humanity under this. But neither shall I at present pursue this
Thing any further, because I must go on toward That, which is the present
Design of it, and that is, the Expiation of Sin Therefore,

3. Thirdly, The Scriptures do acquaint u^ that That very Person, to whom they
d^ ascribe the Expiation of Sin, was God an^ Man in Conjunction, or, in other
Words, the he was God Incarnate. To this purpose the tell us in one place, That
the Word was ma^^ Flesh, and that he dwelt amongst us, or (as (...) is in the
Original) he tabernacled among us which was typified by the Feast of
Tabern^cles under the Jewish Law, and by God's abode and residence in the
Tabernacle of the Sanctuary in the Jewish Commonwealth (as h^ been fully made
out by Learned Men). We are told in another Place, that God was manifested in
the Flesh; and in a third, that in him that is, in Jesus Christ, dwells all the
Fullness (...) the Godhead bodily; with several other Place^ of the same import,
and to the same purpose and design. Now because this Proposition does
comprehend the two former, (for i^ our Savior be God Incarnate, there can be
no doubt, but that he is God and Man) and because our true understanding of the
Doctrine of the Expiation, does mightily depend upon the Doctrine of the
Incarnation; and because, lastly, this Doctrine of the Incarnation is not only
vigorously opposed by many among us, but also slighted, and even ridiculed by
not a few; therefore we must a while make a Stand here, and examine, whether
the Incarnation (which we affirm to be revealed by the Scriptures) will not
stand the Test, and admit the Approbation of Reason; or whether (as is
pretended) it be so absurd, as to be easily confuted by Reason, or to be
treated with Contempt and Derision.

And, in the first place, we cannot but take notice, that as Contempt and
Derision is very seldom a Sign of Wisdom; so it is so far from being so, when
it is employed about any thing which does appear to be the Revelation of God,
that, in such a Case, we may certainly pronounce it to be Folly. For, let it
(for once) be supposed, that some Men (and yet those some have been very far
the greater Number of Christians through all Ages, since the New Testament was
recorded for the Word of God.) But, I say, let it for once be supposed, that
some Men have been mistaken in the Meaning of God's Revelations in the present
Case: Yet because the obvious and literal Sense of such his Revelations does
speak the same thing that they do; that is, because that Book, which is on all
Sides agreed to be the Word of God, does in plain and express Words tell us,
that God was manifested in the Flesh, that the Word was made Flesh, and the
like; it must needs be insolent and soolish, to treat the literal and plain
Meaning of such Propositions with Scorn and Derision: Because, in such a Case,
should the Meaning be, what at first view it appears to be, it will (...) but
an ill Excuse for such a Treatment, to a^ ledge, that Men thought otherwise;
and pe^ haps it may be nothing better, but rath^ worse, to allege, that they
knew otherwi^^ No! where Things revealed, by what we o^ selves confess to be
the Word of God, (...) plain, and categorical; but more especial where such
Things have from the same Wo^ of God a great deal of collateral Confir^tion (as
the Incarnation has) in such Cas^ if we doubt of the plain and literal Meanin^
our best and most prudent way will be, to (...) our Doubting be attended with
Modesty a^ Sobriety, and to let our Inquiry after anoth^ Sense be sincere and
diligent: And not upon the Confidence of our own Presumption, (...) upon the
presumed Strength of our Nature Reason, to reject That, which upon such (...)
Inquiry may prove a Truth. For, if we w^ admit nothing for Truth, that is
proposed (...) us, as such, by Revelation, but what we ca^ without such
Revelation, discover to be so (...) our Natural Reason; all Revelation may,
(...) to us, be superseded: and so the Old Tes^ment, indicted by the Spirit of
God for the Institution of the Jewish Religion, and t^^ New Testament, indicted
by the same Spirit f^^ the Institution of the Christian, might have very well
been spared, and Natural Religic^ which was in the World before either, mig^
well enough have supplied the Place of Bo^ Now this Consideration we have
therefore offered in the first place, to check the Confidence of those, who
lean so much to their own Understandings, that they will never allow Revelation
to guide their Reason; but, on the contrary, do so manage it by their uncouth
Expositions, as to permit it to speak no Truth, but what their Natural Reason
might have acquainted them with, without it.

But to proceed: To such Men, who therefore reject the Belief, because they
deny the Possibility of the Incarnation, I would put this short Question, which
is, Whether or no they are acquainted with the Nature of all possible Unions?
For, it is most certain, that the Reach of no Man's Understanding is so large,
as to enable him where to fix the utmost Bounds of all such Unions, nor yet to
account for the Manner how several of those Unions, with which yet it is
acquainted, are made. And Instances might be given (and those too not a few) to
make out what we have said. But though Humane Understanding is not acquainted
with all possible Unions; nor can account for many, with which yet it is
acquainted; yet that will be no good Argument, that therefore there are no such
Unions. Alas! our most refined and improved Reason falls short in its Knowledge
of the greatest part of those Things, which yet are as surely known, as it is
sure, that there is such a Thing as Omniscience, and such a Being as a God. And
when we are once satisfied, that any Union, be it what it will, is revealed to
us by Omniscience; as we may by the same Means be satisfied in Reason, that
there really is such an Union; so we may be satisfied in Modesty, that the
Knowledge and Discovery of such Union did exceed the Grasp of our Natural
Understanding. Though therefore, in what follows, I do neither pretend to prove
or to explain the Incarnation by Reason; yet if any Thing shall be offered, by
which the Expressions which the New Testament gives us of it, shall appear to
be plain and literal, and that their Meaning is, what it seems to be; it will
be a sufficient Ground for our Belief of the Thing; because those with whom we
have to do in the present Argument, do not pretend to doubt the Truth, but only
the Meaning of such Expressions.

1. In order then to the helping forward our Faith in the Union of God and Man
in the Incarnation of our Savior; I would offer it to Consideration, That the
Scriptures do instruct us, that there is a very intimate Union between Christ
and his Church. And though Humane and unassisted Reason, taking its Measures from
other Instances of the like Appearances, may be apt to conclude, that the Union
of our Savior with his Church is but a Political Union, such as is between a
King and his Subjects, or the Head and Members of an ordinary Corporation; yet
a Christian's Reason, once truly enlightened, and so guided by Divine
Revelation, will thereupon conclude it to be something nobler and better: And
because it is informed, that he took part of the same Flesh and Blood with his
Members, and because he their Head does influence such his Members by his
Spirit, in order to their Spiritual Life; that therefore there is between them,
in some sense, a vital Union.

From whence we may, to our present purpose, conclude, That one Person may be
vitally united to another, and that too at the greatest apparent Distances; and
that they may by that means become one, though our Senses, and our Natural, but
unassisted Reason, do give us in quite contrary Informations. When the King of
Syria sent a great Host, and enclosed Elisha in Dothan, in order to his
Destruction, the Man of God, to encourage his desponding Servant, desired of
the Lord to open his Eyes: and when that was done, he saw the Mountain full of
Horses, and Chariots of Fire round about his Master. Now though one might well
think (and Natural Reason would be apt to incline one more than barely to think
so) that Fire is a Thing very discoverable to our Sight; (for perhaps nothing
discovers it self to our Sight but Fire) yet we see, that sometimes Revelation
is required even for such a Discovery. But then, such a Revelation, when once
made, does easily work a Conviction. And truly I cannot persuade my self, but
that the Revelation of our Savior's Union with his Church would do so too,
would Christians but consider it with an honest and sincere Mind, and with a
free and impartial Reason. For, though I am satisfied, that bare Reason could not
have discovered it; yet I cannot so well satisfy my self, that a diligent Use
of our Reason will then let us dissent from it, when once Revelation has
acquainted us with it.

2. But, secondly, I would have it considered, in order to the Assisting our
Belief of the Union of God with Man in the Incarnation of our Savior, whether
or no the Apprehension of the possible Union of God with Man be not (at least
in some degree) natural. For, that the Heathen in many Countries, and in
several Ages, had such a Notion, (and that too very ordinary and common) might
be made out from innumerable Instances out of their several Histories. But it
will be the less needful to produce any from thence, because we are furnished
with one out of the Acts of the Apostles: For there, in the Fourteenth Chapter,
where we have an Account, that Paul and Barnabas cured the impotent Man who had
been a Creeple from his Mothers Womb, we are likewise told, that the People
lift up their Voices, and said, that the Gods are come down to us in the
likeness of Men. And that we may not think, that such Apprehensions proceeded
only from an Idolatrous Notion of the Deity, we may furnish our selves with
Instances in abundance from the Old Testament, that the Worshippers of the true
God had constantly the same Apprehensions: For, though God sometimes appeared to
the Jews in Fire, as to Moses in the Bush; and sometimes in a Cloud, as in the
Tabernacle; and sometimes in both together, as in the Wilderness, and in Mount
Sinai: Yet his more constant and repeated Appearances to particular Persons,
were in the Likeness of Man. So he appeared to Abraham, to Isaac, to Jacob, to
Joshua, to Manoah, and to several others. And though it be freely confessed, that
some of those Appearances were in reality but the Appearances of Angels; yet it
must be granted also, that such Angels were so united to those Bodies, in which
they appeared, that they did in them exercise several Actions both of an Humane
and Animal Life. By which we may be instructed, that an Angel may be so united
to Man, that our Knowledge of that may help to lead us one Step farther toward
our Belief, that Man may be united to God. It must be granted also, that though
in several of the Instances laid down, the Union was only between a Man and an
Angel; yet (which is close to our present purpose) they who saw the Appearance,
did almost constantly take it for the Appearance of God. So it seems to be in
the Case of Joshua, in the Fifth Chapter of that Book: So it was in the Case of
Manoah and his Wife, in the Thirteenth Chapter of Judges, where the Man tells
his Wife, We shall certainly die, because we have seen God: And so undoubtedly
it was in the Case of Abraham, when he entertained the Three Men, in the
Eighteenth Chapter of Genesis; for Abraham in his Behavior and Discourse
treats one of them as the Lord God himself; and more particularly, in the
Twenty fifth Verse, calls him, the Judge of all the Earth.

To our purpose then; If it be certain, that Angels have appeared to Men in
Humane Shape; If it be certain, that under such Appearances they have done
several Actions of the Humane Life, such as Talking, Walking, Eating, Drinking,
and the like; if it be probable, that God himself has so appeared, and under
such Appearances has also done the same Things; And, lastly, if it be certain,
that most of those People, to whom such Appearances have been made, have
constantly taken such Appearances for the Appearances of God in the Likeness of
Man: I say, if these Things be so, as it is probable, by what has been said in
short, that so they are; then, as we may rationally look upon such Things as
Presigurations of the Incarnation; so may we also be so far from thinking the
Incarnation an Absurdity, or an Impossibility, that we may be satisfied, that
great, good, and wise Men have believed and thought otherwise, and that too
upon such their own Experience; to which they, who deny an Incarnation, neither
do nor must pretend, unless they will by such their Pretenses contradict
themselves. Now, if Abraham, who had such an intimate Converse with God, and so
was a much better Judge in the Case, than we can pretend to be, did not only
acknowledge the Possibility, but the Reality of an Incarnation too, it may so
much the less become us to deny it; and that too the rather, because we may
easily satisfy our selves, that he did so believe. And therefore I do not
question, but that there is more in that Saying of our Savior, than is usually
taken to be, [Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my Day, and he saw it, and
was glad.]

3. I would take notice, in the third Place, That where the Scriptures do
professedly give us the Account of Man's Creation, they do frequently inculcate
it upon us, that God made Man after his own Image and Likeness; I say,
frequently, because I find it so delivered Six times in the Beginning of
Genesis, and in Two Places, that is, both in the Twenty sixth and Twenty
seventh Verses of the First Chapter, with an Ingemination: And an Ingemination
does by the very way of Expression summon us to a more deliberate attention to,
and observation of what is spoken. Now though we do not, with the
Anthropomorphites, from such repeated Expressions conclude, that God has the
Shape and Figure, or the Image and Likeness of a Man; yet for all that, it will
be impossible to conceive any Sense in the Words, if God may not be so like to
Man, as Man is like to God: For the Likeness with reference to both must be the
same (be that Likeness at present what it will) or else there can be no
Likeness at all. And to say, that the Likeness consists in Holiness, is too
frigid an Interpretation of such an inculcated and reiterated Expression, and
does not very well agree with several Texts, where such Likeness is mentioned;
nor indeed does it seem to come up to the Import of the Expression. And I am
therefore persuaded, that the Patriarchs apprehended, that there was something
more in it, for the Reasons offered under the last Head. For, though Moses, who
wrote the History of the Creation, lived after them; yet it is not only
possible, but also highly probable, that their Notion of the Thing might be
derived down by Tradition from them to him: And we may be the rather satisfied,
that so it was, because after the Flood, God does give it as a Reason to Noah,
why that Man's blood shall be shed by Man, who sheds Man's Blood, because God
made Man in his own Image. Now, (considering the Longevity of Men in those
Days) as a Tradition from Adam to Noah, so a Tradition from Noah to Moses, is a
very conceivable Thing, especially in such a Case, in which several of the
intermediate Descendants might reasonably conceive, that they had had, at
least, something like Experience in the Case, by conversing with God in the
Likeness of Man.

To come up a little closer to that Point, at which we all this while do aim:
As the Derivation of all Mankind from one sole Head and Fountain, which was the
first Adam, was a Type, that all the Elect should by Regeneration derive from
one sole Fountain, which was the second Adam; and as the Promise, that the Seed
of the Woman should break the Serpent's Head, contained in it a Prophetic
Account of the Manner of the Savior's Nativity: So the Expression of Man's
being made after God's Image and Likeness, does to me seem to be a Proleptick
Declaration of the Incarnation, and, when compared with several Places in the
New Testament, may very fairly, at this time of day, be thought to be no very
dark Prophecy, that God should be made in the Likeness of Man. For, if it were
in the Counsel and Foreknowledge of God, that God should become Man, and be
really united to an Humane Body; then the Expression, that Man was made in the
Image and Likeness of God, will, upon that account, not only be warrantable,
but proper. For, when God made Adam, he made him (if I may so speak) by the
Samplar in his own Mind: And I may the rather be allowed so to speak, because
in the very Making of him God does seem to set himself a Pattern, when he says,
Let us make Man in our Image, after our Likeness. And therefore before Man was
made at all, and before our Savior was made Man, the Expression of Making Man
after our Likeness, and in our Image, may be thought only to give an honorary
Precedence to our Savior's Incarnation, though the Creation of Man was to have
a temporary Precedence to the same Incarnation. And then the Import of the
Expression, [Let us make Man in our Image, after our Likeness] will amount to
thus much; Let us make Man in that Image, and according to that Likeness, in
which we our self in the Fullness of Time will converse among Men. And
therefore, as Man in his Creation is said to be made in the Likeness of God; so
God in his Incarnation is said to be made in the Likeness of Man: So we read of
God's sending his Son in the Likeness of sinful Flesh, in the Third Verse of
the Eighth Chapter to the Romans; and so again, in the Second to the
Philippians, the Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth Verses, the Apostle tells
us, that Christ Jesus being in the Form of God, thought it no Robbery to be
Equal with God, and was made in the Likeness of Man; that is, in the same
Apostle's Words, 1 Timothy 3. and the last Verse, God was manifested in the Flesh.
And he who shall consider what Interpretation the Apostle, in the Second to the
Hebrews and the Sixth Verse, puts upon the Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth Verses of
the Eighth Psalm, and what Relation those Verses have to the Twenty sixth and
Twenty eighth Verses of the First Chapter of Genesis, may be easily satisfied,
that the Creation of Adam did prefigure our Savior's Incarnation. And
therefore it is remarkable to our purpose, what we meet with in the Twenty
seventh Verse of the First Chapter of Genesis, that it is there twice said,
that God created Man in his own Image; but when the Text goes on to speak both
of the Man and the Woman, it is barely said, that God created them. Agreeable
to which, we may add what St. Paul says, in the First to the Corinthians, the
Eleventh Chapter and Seventh Verse, where he tells us, That the Man is both the
Image and Glory of God; but then speaking of the Woman, he only says, that she
is the Glory of the Man.

Now from the whole we argue, That God, in whose Image and Likeness Man was
created, was made in the Likeness and Fashion of such created Man; that is,
that God, who at first created Man, was afterward made in the same Likeness
himself; which, in other Words, is the same as, He became Man himself. Now
there neither is, nor can be any doubt, but that That God, who became Man, was
the Word of God also. Now then, if God made Man, and if the Word of God made
Man; and if God was made Man, and if the Word was made Flesh, that is, Man:
Then we must first control, not only the Account of the Creation given in the
Scriptures, but the Account of the Incarnation too; that is, we must in effect
contradict the Old Testament and the New, before we can deny the Union of God
with Man, that is before we can deny the Incarnation.

We might to all this add those several Passages in the Old Testament which
ascribe to God the Parts of an Humane Body, such as Eyes, Ears, Nostrils, etc.
or Humane Postures, Actions, Passions, and the like: Which (though they are
usually taken to be nothing more but condescending Expressions, suited to our
feeble Capacities) yet, from what has been said, may be conceived to carry in
them a farther, and more mysterious Meaning, that is, to have a Regard to the
Incarnation ^ And that too so much the rather, because (as Learned Men have
observed) it is probable, that since the Fall God has had no other Intercourse
with Mankind, but by the Interposition of the Mediator. And then, if such
Expressions are to be applied to the Mediator, (though they do not expressly
foretell indeed) yet they may be thought to insinuate a future Incarnation.

To sum up all then in a few Words: As it is a Presumption to measure all
Possibilities by the Standard of our own Reason; so is it, to measure all
possible Unions by the same Line: For there are actually several real Unions,
which must be confessed to be so, which yet we should never have known, if we
had not been made acquainted with them by Revelation. And where Divine
Revelation (and that too acknowledged by us for such) does in as plain Words as
can possibly be made use of, discover to us the Personal Union of God and Man;
and when it does moreover, by several Gradations, gently lead us (if our
Wilfulness or Conceitedness do not make us hang back) I say, when the
Revelations of God do gently lead us into such a Belief, how dare our
short-sighted Reason contradict the Truth of the Discovery, or limit the
Efficacy of Omnipotence? Do not we know, that in him we live, and move, and
have our being? and that if he were not present with us, we could neither
think, nor reason, nor perform any the ordinary Actions or Offices of Life? And
do we think his Power so restrained, that he cannot, when the Purposes of his
insinite Mercy and Goodness invite him to it, I say, do we think, that he
cannot more intimately unite himself to any of us, than he has done in the more
familiar and ordinary Ways? We believe, that he will do so in another World;
and it must be something very far out of our reach, which neither Eye has
seen, nor Ear heard, nor can enter into the Heart of Man to conceive. And yet
we need not at all question, but that God can make a more intimate Union
between himself and Man, than what will be required to our designed Happiness:
And therefore, when he tells us, that he has done so, it would be very proper
for us to resign our shallow Reason, and to take his Word.

One Remark I would leave here, before (...) leave off this Head; and that is,
That tho in the Instances produced it has appeared, that Angels often, and that
(at least probably) God sometimes has appeared to Men in Humane Bodies; and
that they have in such Bodies exercised several Functions of an Humane Life and
Nature; and that therefore they were so united to such Bodies, that, to the
Apprehensions of the Beholders, they were judged to be an Union of God and Man;
yet we do not all this while either assert, or pretend to maintain, that those
Unions were such, or so intimate, as that which was exhibited to us in the
Incarnation of our Savior. For, we have not offered the several Instances of
Divine Appearances to explain the Manner how the Union is made, but only to
facilitate the Credibility of it. For, if we are once satisfied of the last, it
is no great matter, though we are ignorant of the first. For, a reasonable Belief
of the Possibility of the Thing, will wipe away all Arguments that shall
pretend to maintain its Absurdity; and the Possibility of it, when backed with
several express and literal Revelations of its Certainty, will be abundantly
sufficient to make our Belief of it certain. Those who pretend to go farther,
and are not contented till they offer to others a nice Explication, how this,
and other such like Mysteries are brought to pass, do only place themselves in
the Dark, and ever after that stumble and founder at every Step they take. It
is better in such Cases to be modest and wise; and truly we shall therefore
approve our selves wise, if we keep our selves modest. Alas! we know not how
any one Effect in Nature is produced, though such Things lie exposed to our
narrowest Search and Disquisition. And if we are Strangers to the Methods of
God's Working in these ordinary and obvious Things, with which we daily
converse, why should we pretend to trace him in his deeper and more mysterious
Counsels; in such Things, which he has covered with a thicker Veil; Things,
that are hid from Principalities and Powers, and such as the Angels themselves
desire to look into? In such Cases then it is well enough with us, if we have
sufficient Ground for our Faith, though we can discover nothing to gratify our
Curiosity. And our Faith in such Truths must then be stronger, and more firm,
when we have not only the express and plain Word of God, that so Things are;
but when w^ have also the concurrent Satisfaction of ou^ own Reason, that so
they may be. And i^ any thing that has been said, may but only so far help our
Faith in the Article of the Incarnation, then I hope that we shall no longe^
question it, much less contradict and gain^ say it, and least of all despise
and ridicule it.

But though I would willingly hope, that wha^ has already been offered may help
to persuad^ the Possibility, and therefore also the Cred^ bility of the
Incarnation; yet I do not at a^ question, but that a great many other Thing
will fall in to confirm and ratify such a Po^sibility. For, when we shall come
to mak^ out the Expiation made by our Savior, w^ shall then perceive such an
Harmony an^ Congruity between that Expiation and the Incarnation, that we shall
be satisfied, that a^ those Revelations, which mention the one, d^ at the same
time confirm the other; and tha^ the Truth of each is therefore the more
certain and firm, because the Support is mutual. Which they seem to be aware
of, who endeavor to invalidate the Doctrine of the Incarnation; because for
that purpose they neverr boggle in their Attempts to evacuate an^ make null the
Doctrine of a Gospel-Redemption; and break through a multitude of expres^
Texts, not to say the Tenor of the whole Gospel, to make good such their
Attempt. But we must leave the farther Prosecution of these Things to another
Place, because when they are laid together, their Evidence and Reasonableness
will appear more plain and satisfactory.

In the mean time, I would offer some Practical Considerations from what has
been already laid down; that so the Doctrine delivered may as well promote our
Piety, as increase our Faith.

Now the Doctrine of our Savior's Incarnation in order to our Redemption, does
contain in it

1. First, Matter of Praise and Thanksgiving; and,

2. Directions how to pay such Praise and Thanksgiving, as we ought.

In our Prosecution of the First of which Things, I would desire all Christians
seriously to consider, that they ought the more heartily and devoutly to praise
God our Savior, that he was pleased to take upon him our Flesh, in order to
our Redemption, because our Condition, by reason of our Sins, was so desperate
and forlorn, that neither our own Repentance, nor our own Punishment, no nor
the Punishment or Interposition of the Angels, could ever have redeemed us from
that Curse, which we, by such our Sins, had brought upon our selves. For, as
for our selves, it is most certain, that we are less able to return to our
Innocence, after we have sinned, than we were to retain our Innocence before we
had lost it. For, every Sin (as our sad Experience may easily inform us)
weakens our Ability to resist Sin; and it is far more easy to preserve our
Innocence, than to restore it: And then, when our Ability is made weaker, and
our Business is become greater, we may easily judge, that such our Business is
very likely to go undone. For which Reason, as well as for several others,
formerly mentioned, we may be sure, that when we had once brought our selves
into a sinful, and, for that Reason, into a miserable Condition; we had, by the
same Means, put it out of our Power to redeem our selves from such Sin, and
from such Misery. And it is as certain, that no Man ever was or will be^ able
so to do, as it is certain, that all Men are Mortal: For, Death is the Wages of
Sin. And as the Experiment has passed the Test, that Mankind cannot save it
self from its Sin; so it has as good as done so, that neither can the Angels
save it: For if they could, then they would in Nature first have done such a
Kindness for themselves. But the Condition of the fallen Angels discovered to us
by Revelation, assures us, that there is no Possibility for them to do such a
Kindness for themselves; and then Reason will tell us, that neither can they do
it for Man. Herein then was the Love of our Savior manifested, and mightily
inhanced, that he was pleased to step in for our Rescue, when we can discover
no other Way for our Escape. And, if there be not Salvation in any other, then
we may be sure, that our greatest Praise and Acknowledgments are due to him,
who alone could bring us Salvation, and who alone has brought it; and so has
not refused us that Mercy, which he alone was qualified to bestow.

2. We ought to magnify and praise our Savior, not only because he was
pleased to undertake our Redemption, when he alone could make good such an
Undertaking; but that also, to make such his Undertaking good, he was pleased
to take upon him our Nature, and to come down to us in that Nature. The
Condescension of the Mercy ought to magnify his Praise in our Mouths, and in
our Hearts too; and with Astonishment, and an humble Adoration, we may well cry
out with the Psalmist, Lord, what is Man, that thou art thus mindful of him? or
the Son of Man, that thou so regardest him? We know well enough, that God does
every day stoop to the Relief of our Necessities: His Eye goes through the
World, and all Things are under his Inspection and Care; and he, who feeds
the young Ravens, that call upon him, and clothes the very Grass of the Field
with Ornament and Beauty, does also provide for the Support and Welfare of him,
who is made after his own Image. But then this is the Care of his ordinary
Providence: And because the Providence is ordinary, therefore also it is too
generally neglected by us, an^ the Familiarity of it does bring it into
Contempt. But when he engages himself to fre^ us from a greater Mischief than
Famine (...) Nakedness, that is, from our Sins, then, a^ the Mercy is greater,
so also is the Method, b^ which he brings it to us, more wonderful an^
astonishing. For, in this last Case, he doe^ not only stoop to our Wants, but
to our Condition also: And he, who would not execu^^ his Judgments upon Sodom,
till he came dow^ to see, whether the Cry of their Sins were s^ or no, would
neither bestow his greatest Blessing without a personal Visit. He brough^ the
Salvation, which he designed to bestow and then appeared in the greatest
Humility when he was about to display the Glory o^ his most endearing
Attribute. For, his Con^descension, then to take upon him the Form of a
Servant, when he designed to become a Savior; nay, therefore to do the First,
be^ cause he designed to be the Last, was Mercy mixed with Sweetness; and when
he put on^ our Condition, in order to the conveying such his Mercy to us, we
stand bound in Gratitude to acknowledge the Condescension, as well as the
Mercy. We receive the Favors of great Personages (especially if they do them
to us in Person, and not by Proxy) with Deference and Respect: And though it may
perhaps be but a Smile, or a gracious Nod; yet because even such little Things
bring along with them the Tokens of a condescending Kindness, they are
therefore entertained with a joyful Welcome, as well as with an humble
Acknowledgment. If therefore we would but behave our selves in proportion to
our condescending God, as we do to our condescending Fellow Creatures, we ought
in reason to receive his Visit to us, that brings Salvation with it, not only
with humble Acknowledgments, but with humble Adorations too. And when we find,
that he does not disdain to take care in his own Person (if I may so speak) of
our Happiness and Salvation, we should be officiously ambitious of setting
forth his Honor and Praise, for such his Condescension, and for such his Care.

3. We ought to praise our God, not only that he condescended to be united to
our Nature, and so to take upon him our Condition, in order to our Redemption;
but his Praise ought still to be so much the more magnified, that he stooped to
Sinners, as well as Creatures; and that the grand Design of his Condescension,
was the Saving of his Enemies. We stand at an infinite Distance from him, as we
are his Creatures; but we stand in an infinite Opposition to him, as we are
Sinners. In the First Case we are capable of his Bounty; but in the Last, we
forfeit his Mercy; and had he obliged us to stand the Award of our own Deserts,
Vengeance had been, as our miserable, so our just Portion. Now our Natural
Sense tells us, that a Favor to an Enemy is at least a double Favor: It
requites Good for Evil, and does a Man a Benefit, even against his own
Endeavors. Now he, who has so much Bowels of Mercy, as to relieve his Enemy;
as he has a very noble Temper, so he deserves a very noble Character. But still
this Character must run higher, if he shall rescue his Enemy from that Mischief
which he had pulled upon himself by his Enmity toward his Deliverer. And this
is the Case of sinful Man with Relation to his Savior: For our Sins had not
only deserved, but had also provoked the Plagues of Justice; they were Acts of
Hostility against God, and carried in them Malice, as well as Ingratitude. And
in such a Case, Reason and Justice will teach us to expect, that abused
Omnipotence should vindicate it self with Severity of Vengeance. But the
Condescension and Mercy of our Savior has taught us otherwise, and may easily
convince us, that the Hostilities of impotent Creatures do not always
extinguish the Love of him that made them; that he pities the Peevishness, and
even Wilfulness of his Children; and that he so considers their Weaknesses and
Imperfections, that, in commiseration to their feeble Condition, he lets his
Pity take place of his Severity, and is so far from dealing with them according
to their Deserts, that he interposes for their Rescue; for their Rescue from
the Folly, and from the Vengeance of Sin; and even stoops to the Lowness of
their Condition as Creatures, that he may save them from the Misery of their
Condition as Sinners. And because in doing so, he does many ways make the
Wonder of his Love and Condescension appear still greater and greater;
therefore it will be our Duty more and more to magnify him for such his
Condescension, and for such his Love.

4. We ought to praise God our Savior, as that for our Redemption he was
pleased to condescend to our Condition, by being clothed with our Flesh; so
also, in that by being so clothed, he passed the fallen Angels, and took not
their Nature upon him. It is a Remark made by the Author to the Hebrews, that
he took not on him the Nature of Angels, but he took on him the Seed of
Abraham. I know well enough, that it is objected, That the Original imports,
that he took not hold of the Angels, but he took hold of the Seed of Abraham;
and it is confessed, that the Greek will admit and approve such an
Interpretation; and (which is more) the Interpretation is close and proper so
far as concerns the Language; but then it is not full, so far as concerns the
Context: For when we are told before, that he took part of the Flesh and Blood
whereof his Children were made; and when we are told immediately after the
Words, that in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his Brethren,
that he might be a merciful High Priest; we may easily allow, that he took on
him the Nature of such his Children, and of such his Brethren. But that by the
by, to assert and make good the Propriety and Validity of our English
Translation, against the Adversaries of the Incarnation. But more directly to
our purpose: Since the Son of God, the Savior of Mankind, was pleased to
interpose for the Redemption of fallen Man, but did not do so for the Redemption
of fallen Angels; it must be confessed, that the lost and forlorn Condition of
the one, when compared to the restored Condition of the other, must needs
afford a weighty Argument of Praise and Thanksgiving to Man, when he finds his
own Safety and Welfare preferred by the Savior, to that of Angels, and has not
only a Possibility, but also the comfortable Hopes and (if it be not his own
Fault) an Assurance of that Salvation, of which they must for ever despair.
Now, Natural Reason might perhaps incline us to think, that the Rescue of the
fallen Angels by a Savior might therefore have been a more honorable Purchase,
because the Angels are a more noble Creature; and the Dignity of such a
Creature might seem to countenance the preference of such a Purchase. But in
these Things our Reason is short-sighted, and we may easily judge amiss,
because we judge in the Dark. Thus much, however, to our present purpose, we
are sure of, and that is, that it is a greater Condescension to stoop to the
Relief of an inferior Creature; and that where there is such a Condescension,
there that Creature is obliged to the greater Gratitude. And this is
confessedly our Case; and therefore such Gratitude is undoubtedly our Duty. Let
us therefore with Heart and Voice rejoice in this miraculous Salvation of our
God; the Salvation which old Simeon saw, and embraced before his Death; the
Salvation, which St. John, the Beloved Disciple, tells us, was from the
beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our Eyes, which we have
looked upon, and our Hands have handled of the Word of Life: That is, in a few
Words; The Word of Life, the Son of God, the Savior of the World, by his
Incarnation made manifest to our Senses, and by the same Incarnation qualified
to be our Sacrifice, our High Priest, our Redeemer. To him therefore be Glory
and Praise in all Churches of the Saints. Amen.

But that we may learn to praise him aright, both for the Greatness and
Condescension of his Mercy too; let us take these few, and following Rules, to
guide us in our Practice of such Praises. For a verbal Thanksgiving is too poor
an Offering for so superlative a Blessing; and to praise God, who searches the
Heart, with our Lips, when we do not do it with our Hearts, is in deed and
truth to mock him. That we may not therefore increase our Sins, when we pretend
to perform our Duty, we may do well to guide our Gratitude in the Case by these
following Directions. And,

1. Did our God condescend to take upon him our Flesh, that he might by his
Instructions, by his Example, by his Life, and by his Death, purchase to
himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works, and so from a sinful and
degenerous Condition, exalt us to a State of Holiness, and by consequence of
Happiness? Then we ought to meet our God in such his gracious Design; and by
lifting our Hearts toward Heaven, and so by setting them upon Heavenly Things,
to endeavor to be holy, as he is holy. It is a noble Ambition, and complies
with the Counsel and Design of his Incarnation: For it will engage our Souls in
higher Flights of Duty, and render us fit Inhabitants of that Place, where
Holiness is both the greatest Happiness, and the greatest Ornament. For, though
some of God's Attributes are so peculiar to himself, that they are utterly
incommunicable to any of his Creatures; such are his Omnipotence, his
Omniscience, and the like; yet there are others, which he has not only proposed
to our Imitation, but which also he has commanded us to imitate; and such are
his Love, his Mercy, his Justice, in one Word, his Holiness. And therefore he
does require us to be holy, because he is holy. And it would be no hard matter
to make it out, that his Holiness is his prime and leading Attribute, such as
guides and conducts all the rest: And therefore though he be Omnipotent, yet for
all that, he cannot do any thing that is unjust, because he is holy. Does God
then allow, nay require us to imitate him in his prime and leading Attribute,
and by stooping to our Nature, provoke us to exalt that Nature so far, as to
make our selves like to him in those Things, for which his Praise is chiefly
celebrated? Then let us for once gratify our Ambition the right way; and though
we are but Men, yet let us in this attempt to make our selves like to God, as
he in his Incarnation was pleased to make himself like to us. The Attempt is
great and generous, and worthy the Endeavors of our best Endowments, and most
noble Faculties: For, if we cheerfully cast off our Sins, and, by a constant
and sincere Practice of Holiness, do make it our Business to be like our
Savior, holy and undefiled, as he our High Priest was, we shall in some sense
lift our selves above the Earth, even while we inhabit in it; and though we
cannot get up to Heaven, yet we shall, by that means, bring Heaven down into
our Souls, and so shall in some measure anticipate our consummate Happiness.
And since the grand Design of our Savior's Humiliation in his Incarnation, was
to engage us to this holy Ambition; let us have a care, that we do not defeat
such his Design, and our own greatest Hopes.

2. Did our Savior, by taking our Flesh and Blood, and so uniting it to
himself, consecrate our Nature to the great and noble Purposes of Holiness and
Mercy? And did he also, by so doing, so intimately unite us to himself, that we
are Flesh of his Flesh, Bone of his Bone, and Members of his Body? Then this
should teach us, to have a more sacred and especial Care, by no means to
pollute That, which he has so consecrated. And therefore what St. Paul says in
the Case of Fornication, [Shall I take the Members of Christ, and make them the
Members of an Harlot? God forbid,] that we may say in all other like Cases;
Shall we take the Members of Christ, and make them the Members of a Drunkard,
of an unclean, of an intemperate Person, or indeed of any other Sinner
whatsoever? God forbid. For, we should be ashamed to abuse our Bodies, which by
his Incarnation are so nearly allied to his Body, that they are the same Flesh
and Blood with it: I say, we should be ashamed to abuse them by such Practices,
which we must needs know, his Soul abhors: And this our Shame should therefore
be attended with the greater Confusion, because whereas he took upon him our
Flesh, that in that Flesh he might work out our Salvation; we, when we employ
it in any Sin, do indeed employ it to its own utter Ruin and Damnation. Let us
therefore have a care, that we be sober, chaste, temperate; because otherwise we
bring a Scandal upon our greatest Friend and Benefactor: For, by abusing our
own Bodies, when we our selves are Members of his Body, we do by the Slander of
such our Doings abuse his Body also.

And here I take my self to be obliged to leave a Mark upon one Practice too
too general among Christians; and that is, That when they do professedly
pretend to commemorate the Infinite Mercy of their Savior's Incarnation, they
are so far from doing it in a way agreeable to his Honor, that, instead of
that, they do too commonly do it by Excesses, Surfeitings, and Drunkenness: And
so when they pretend to offer to God, for their Savior's Incarnation, the
Praises of Men, by their Manner of doing it, do render themselves more vile
than Beasts. Which Practice, as it is in it self profligately vile and wicked;
so it has brought such a Scandal upon the Duty by such its Wickedness, that not
a few (and those too devout and zealous Christians, though their Zeal and
Devotion does indeed want Wisdom) have leaped over into the other Extreme, and
have utterly disallowed any Commemoration of the Infinite Blessing at all. So
easily do foolish Men run into Extremes on both Sides, and leave the Golden
Mean to be practiced only by a few, that is, by the truly Wise.

3. Did our Savior humble himself to our Nature and Condition, in order to the
working out of our Salvation? Then this should teach us to be like him in this
very respect, and not to disdain to stoop to our Inferiors, when by such our
Condescension we may any ways advantage their Welfare and real Interest. And
for our doing so, we have in him the most noble Example, that ever yet the
World was made acquainted with: For, in this Case we imitate the Condescension
of our Lord and Master: Nay, when our Compassion stoops lowest, it only stoops
to our Fellow Creatures, those who are made of the same Lump of Clay with our
selves, and those who (as Things may fall out) may be as helpful and useful to
us again. So that when we condescend to relieve them, we do, by so doing, teach
them to relieve us, if ever the same, or the like Miseries with theirs, should
become our own. And we are as sure, that Things may so fall out, as we are
sure, that we are Men. Now because our God did condescend to our Nature for the
Relief of our Misery, when the Condescension and the Kindness was only His, and
when the Benefit was only Ours; shall not we the rather practice such a
charitable Condescension, when by such our Practice we do commiserate at least
our Own possible Condition? Shall the Son of God, by taking upon himself our
Nature, make our Condition His, in order to his more sensible Compassion of
such our Condition, and shall not we condescend for the Relief of those of our
own Kind; which, after one Remove, is for the Relief of our selves? For, if we
be too proud in the Case to stoop to our Inferiors; yet methinks we should not
be too proud to imitate our God: And if the Infirmities of the one will not
engage us to Condescension in order to Compassion; yet one would in reason be
apt to think, that the Example of the other might do such a thing. We ought
therefore, in order to our Exaltation, to learn from him, that to do any good
to our calamitous Brother, is not to debase our selves: For our Charity is not
the less, but rather the more noble, for being extended to a thatched Cottage;
and a personal Visit to the meanest Man, where it is likely to prove beneficial
to him, will always wear this Character. That it is a glorious Imitation of the
Lord of Glory, who did not disdain a personal Visit to the meanest of his
Creatures, whom he had endowed with Capacities of receiving that his
inestimable Blessing, without which they must have been for ever miserable.

4. Did our Savior not only come to us clothed in our Flesh, but did he also
put on the Form of a Servant, in order to the Purchase of our Redemption? Then
this his Example should instruct us to do our very best Works with Meekness and
Humility. We are very apt to think our ordinary Performances (if in any degree
Pious) to be extraordinary good; and not a few of us put such a Value upon our
good Deeds, that we spoil that little Goodness that is in them, by our
over-valuing them; and our spiritual Pride, like the Fly in the Box of
Ointment, robs them of their good Smell and Savor: But it must be confessed,
that in so doing we do not imitate our Lord and Master, who was meek and lowly,
and by his Self-denial ascribed such his Good Works, which could not be hid,
entirely to God's Glory. Why! what Graces we have, do confessedly come from
God, the Author and Giver of every good thing; and therefore to ascribe the
Goodness of any thing we have, or of any thing we do, to our selves, is
Usurpation and Robbery. For, we may as well ascribe to our selves our Natural,
as we may our Spiritual Life: Both the one and the other derive from an higher
Spring, and from a nobler Fountain. And he who has taught us by his Word to
account our selves, when we have done all we can, but unprofitable Servants,
has taught us by his Example to do more. For, He did exactly fulfill the Law,
and his Obedience was perfect; and yet, for all that, his Humility was great.
And then, in Reason, because our Performances are less, our Humility ought to
be greater. For, as Modesty should make us humble, when we do well; so our
Defect in so doing, should make us more so. And therefore our Savior's
Example, which showed forth the greatest Humility in the Archievement of the
greatest and noblest Performances, should oblige us, poor, impotent, defective
Creatures, to a greater (were that possible) Humility.

5. Lastly, Did our Savior come down in our Flesh to save Sinners, both from
the Slavery and Filth of Sin, and from the Wages of Sin too? Then this should
engage our Endeavors to rescue Sinners from the Error of their Ways, and to
do as he did, that is, to bring them to God by the Ways of Holiness. This is a
noble Lesson, and has our Savior's Love and Good Will, as well as his
Holiness, for its Pattern. For, a Man may be good and holy himself; and yet
Self-interest (I mean an allowable Self-interest) may be at the bottom of it:
He may fear God's Vengeance, should he be wicked; and so his Goodness may have
an Eye to his Security. But he, who endeavors to reclaim another Sinner from
the Error of his Ways, mixes Charity with his Piety, by making another
Welfare his Aim, and by making more People happy besides himself. Indeed, the
Grand Business of our Savior's coming into the World, was to redeem us from
the Slavery and Dominion of Sin, (for, if we be not redeemed from our Sins, it
is utterly impossible that we should be redeemed from the Vengeance of them:)
And therefore he, who endeavors the Conversion of Sinners, imitates his
Savior in That, that was his chiefest and noblest Design. He endeavors to
bring Rebel-Subjects under the Dominion of their first and rightful Lord: He
endeavors to defeat the Designs of the Devil for their utter Destruction: He
endeavors, as far as his little Sphere reaches, to restore the Creation to
that Order and Harmony that God gave it, when he first made it. And in all
this, he does that which is his greatest Glory; for he copies out the gracious
and merciful Work of the Lord of Glory.

CHAP. V.
The Son of God, by his Incarnation, accommodated his Condition for the making
good the Expiation of Man's Sin.

IN order to our Vindication of the Counsel of God for the Salvation of sinful
Man, so far forth as he has been pleased to make manifest such his Counsel by
the Revelations of his Word; we have made it out, that we had brought our
selves into so forlorn a Condition by our Sins, that, so far as Reason guided
by Revelation can discover, there was no possible Way left for our Redemption,
but only by the Incarnation of the Son of God. And in pursuit of such our
Design, we have in our last Chapter made it good, That the Son of God was very
God and very Man; God and Man united in one Person, or God Incarnate. That this
is a Truth professedly and expressly declared in the Scriptures, and that too in
such Words, that it is impossible to express any thing whatsoever more plainly
or more fully. That what the Spirit so declares in the Scriptures, is in no
wise disagreeable to our Natural Reason; and that upon both Accounts in
Conjunction, it is to be admitted into our Christian Belief. For, undoubtedly,
whatever God speaks, that is not disagreeable to our Reason, ought by us so to
be admitted.

Now because, in order to a Gospel-Salvation, a Gospel-Forgiveness is required;
and because, in order to a Gospel-Forgiveness, an Expiation is required; and
because we have already made it good, That no mere Creature can by any Means
whatsoever make out such an Expiation: Therefore we shall, in what is now to
follow, make it our Business to show, That the Incarnation of the Son of God is
(as by the Scriptures, so also) by Natural Reason, the most congruous Means,
and the best accommodated, for the making good of such an Expiation. For, we
may be very sure, that the All-wise God always makes use of the most proper
Means to bring about the Designs of his Counsels: And we may be sure also, that
where he himself tells us, that he makes use of any Means for the bringing any
such his Designs to pass, that what in such a Case he tells us, is Truth. If
therefore he tells us, that he employed the Incarnation of his Son for the
Expiation of Sin, or that his Son was Incarnate in order to such Expiation; we
may, for that Reason alone, (if yet there were no other) be rationally
satisfied, that such his Son's Incarnation was a proper Means of bringing to
pass such an Expiation. For, the Methods of God's Proceedings in any Case
whatsoever, are therefore Wise, because they are his: And if at any time we
cannot discover the Wisdom of such Methods, it would be both modest and wise in
us to impute the Want of such Discovery, not to the Impossibility of the Thing,
but to the Short-sightedness of our own feeble and impotent Capacities. Now all
this I therefore speak, not that I think that the Wisdom and Congruity of the
Incarnation, in order to the Expiation of Sin, cannot be rationally accounted
for, (for, I hope, we shall by and by find it otherwise) but only to check the
Confidence of some, who make great Pretenses to Reason, (even such Pretenses,
that they do laboriously and industriously endeavor to bring down the most
express Revelations of God to the Standard of such their Reason) but seem to
take no care to bring their Reason to an Accommodation with such Revelations.

But to return to our Design, which is to make it out, That the Incarnation of
the Son of God is a Means wisely, as well as mercifully ordained for making
good the Expiation of Sin: Let us first hear what the Spirit says, who in the
Fourth to the Ephesians, the Fourth and Fifth Verses, tells us, That when the
Fullness of Time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under
the Law, (that is, his Son was Incarnate, and was under the Law, and therefore
made so, as to be obliged to be obedient to it) to redeem them that were under
the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons. And when we are told in
one place, That the Son of God was manifested for this very purpose, that he
might destroy the Works of the Devil; and in another, That he was manifest to
take away Sin: And when to answer to, and explain the Meaning of these Places,
we are assured from other Places, that at least one Way of his taking away Sins
was by the Sacrifice of himself, as in the Twenty sixth Verse of the Ninth to
the Hebrews; and that he appeared for that very purpose, in the same Place: And
when we add to all this, what we find in the Fifth Verse of the following
Chapter, that God had prepared him a Body; and in the Tenth Verse, that we are
sanctified (that is, our Sins are put away) through the offering of the Body of
Jesus Christ once for all, who (as St. Peter speaks) his own self bare our Sins
in his own Body on a Tree: I say, when the Spirit of God does all along in the
Scriptures expressly and categorically tell us, That our Savior suffered in his
Body, shed his Blood, lost his Humane Life for our Sins, for the Remission of
Sin, for the Redemption of Sinners; when it does in several Places compare his
Death to the Expiatory Sacrifices under the Law; when it calls him the Lamb of
God, (alluding to the Paschal Lamb) that takes away the Sins of the World;
when it tells us, that he is the Propitiation for our Sins, and the like; It
does by these, and such like Expressions (as much as Words can do it) acquaint
us at the same time, that he suffered in his Body, and died to atone for and to
expiate our Sins. And therefore all the uncouth and forced Interpretations of
these and such like Texts (which yet are a multitude) that attempt to evacuate
their plain Meaning, may as soon persuade an honest and sincere Man, that the
Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament are a Book full of Collusion and
Prevarication, as they may, that Jesus Christ our Savior did not die to
expiate the Sins of Mankind. And were I not assured of God's Providence, I
should be apt to fear, that the Devil might in time so bring Things about, that
if he could upon Pretenses of Reason wipe away that Part of the Bible that
concerns our Savior's Incarnation, and the Relation which that has to Man's
Redemption, that he might at last raise his Hopes of blotting out the whole
Christian Religion. For, to tell us, that our Savior is only such a Man, as
other Men are, but only conceived in a different, and therefore more wonderful
manner; to tell us, that he died patiently, though wrongfully, only that he might
give us an Example of an exact Patience, and of an entire Submission to God's
Providence; to tell us, that he was slain a Sacrifice only to confirm the
Covenant of Grace, but that there was no such Design in his Death, as to suffer
for, or to expiate our Sins; as it is a notorious Contradiction to, and not an
Exposition of the Scriptures; so, for that very Reason, it will appear to have
a direct Tendency toward the overthrowing the Grand Design of the whole Book
of God: All which, to them who shall scan the Scriptures exactly, is directed
to, and does center in the Savior, and that Redemption which he purchased for
Mankind by his Death and Merits.

Having therefore thus in short taken notice of what the Scripture tells us,
concerning the Expiation of Sin by the Susserings of our Savior; and having
already made it out,

1. That no Creature can by any means expiate the Sin of Mankind; and,

2. That our Savior is God Incarnate, or God and Man united in One Person, we
do, in pursuit of our main Design, lay it down in the

3. Third place, That the Way and Method of Man's Salvation (as it is expressly
and frequently laid down in the Scriptures, which is by the Sufferings and
Death of the Son of God manifested in the Flesh) is agreeable to right Reason,
and exactly congruous to the Measures of Truth, and to the Rules of Justice.
And, in order to our making this plain and clear, we take notice,

1. That that Law, about the Transgression of which, and the Release from the
Penalty of such Transgression, the Gospel-Forgiveness is only concerned, was
given to Man. For, the Scriptures give us no Account of the Forgiveness of the
Breach of any other Law, but only of that Law, which God had prescribed to
Mankind. And therefore, though in the Scriptures we have several broad Hints of
the Fall of the Angels; and though our Reason tells us, that that which put them
under the Displeasure of God, must needs be Sin in the general; yet we are
therefore ignorant what their Sin was, because we are ignorant what that Law
was, against which they sinned.

2. We take notice, That as that Law, about which alone the Gospel-Forgiveness
is concerned, was the Law given by God to Man; so the Gospel takes no other or
farther notice of the Transgression of that Law, than as that Law is broke by
Man. From whence we infer in the

3. Third place, That that Punishment, which the Law threatens against those
who transgress it, can only in Justice belong to those, to whom the Law was
given and directed. For, they can never transgress a Law, who have no Law
assigned them; and they can never be justly punished, for the Transgression of
the Law, who can never transgress the Law. The Law therefore, about which alone
a Gospel-Forgiveness is concerned, being the Law given to Man, and transgressed
by Man; Man alone can justly suffer the Penalty of such Transgression. From
whence we infer in the

4. Fourth place, That if any Penalty can ever justly expiate that Guilt, which
is contracted by the Breach of the Law; that Penalty, that must make such
Expiation, must be a Penalty laid upon Man. And therefore our Common Sense of
Justice will not allow us to think, that either Angels, which are ranked above
Mankind; nor Beasts, which are ranked below them, can by any Sufferings
whatsoever expiate or atone for the Breach of such Law, which being given by
God to Man, does so far forth concern Man alone. And though we have before made
it out, that neither Angels on the one Hand, nor brute Beasts on the other, can
expiate the Sin of Mankind, as both the one and the other are Creatures; yet
what we now say, is, that they cannot do it as they are different Creatures.
For, it seems necessary, and that too in the Nature of the Thing it self, that
Creatures so different should be under different Laws; and that therefore
neither their Obedience to, nor their Transgression of those several Laws,
under which they are, should have any such Concern or Relation to one another,
as that one sort of Creature should in any Case undergo the Penalty of the
Transgressions of the other sort of Creature. And therefore, for the same
Reason that we should look upon it as absurd and unjust, that a Man should
suffer for the Sin of an Angel; I say, for the same Reason, we should think it
no less absurd and unjust, that an Angel should suffer for the Sin of a Man.
The Thing might be made out in more Words: But it needs not.

Now these few Remarks being left by the way, to give Perspicuity and Strength
to those Things which are to follow; the Wisdom, Justice, Reasonableness, and
Congruity of the Redemption of Mankind by the Sufferings and Death of our
Savior (as that Redemption is expressly laid down in the Scriptures) will
appear from these following Considerations.

1. And first, Our Savior, who by his Death and Sufferings undertook the
Purchase of Man's Redemption, was as really and verily a Man himself, as were
those, whom he undertook to redeem. This is evident, because he is all along in
the New Testament called Man, the Son of Man, and the like, (as we have made it
out already.) And this so far accommodates the Scripture-Account of the
Purchase of Man's Salvation, to the Law, that,

1. As the Law threatened the Punishment to Man alone, and to no other Creature;
so in the Purchase of the Redemption, Man alone suffered such Punishment, and
no Creature besides.

2. And secondly, As it accommodates the Scripture-Account of the Purchase of
Man's Redemption, to the Law; because our Savior, who suffered in order to
such Purchase, was a Man: So it accommodates the Scripture-Account of the
Purchase of Man's Redemption, to the Rules of Justice; because our Savior, who
suffered in order to such Purchase, was an Innocent Man. It may perhaps at
first sight look strange, when I say, that the Purchase of Redemption by the
Death of an Innocent Man, is accommodated to the Rules of Justice: But the
Wonder will then vanish, when I shall come to make it out, that though an
Innocent Man cannot without his own Consent be justly punished; yet that with
such his Consent, he may be so punished. But because That belongs to another
Place, therefore in this I pass it by. For, that that I design at present, is
only to show, that it is not agreeable to the Laws of Justice, that a Criminal
against the Law should expiate another Man's Sin, by suffering the Penalty of
the Law: Because the Penalty, which he suffers, being the just Demerit and
Wages of his own Sin, he cannot, by undergoing the Punishment of his own Sin,
add any such Desert to such his Punishment, as to make it meritorious of
Impunity to any other Sinner. As therefore under the last Head we learnt, that
he who by his Punishment expiates the Sin of another Man, must in Reason and
Congruity be a Man himself; so under this Head we may learn, that he must be an
Innocent Man likewise. And so the Sufferings and Death of our Savior for the
Redemption of Mankind, will afford us a further Congruity to the Rules of
Reason and Justice, in that that Savior is exhibited to us in the Gospel, not
only to be a Man, but also to be an Innocent Man.

3. The Wisdom, Justice, and Reasonableness of the Redemption of Mankind, by
the Sufferings and Death of our Savior, as that Savior was a Man, will yet
farther and more notoriously appear, if we consider the first Rise and
Formation of Mankind according to that Account which the Scriptures give us of
it: For, there we are told in general, that God did of one Blood make all
Nations of Men, for to dwell on the Face of the whole Earth, in the Seventeenth
Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. And then, if we look back to the original
Creation of Mankind, and there enquire more particularly how this was done; we
shall from thence be informed, that God first made Adam out of the Earth, and
that after that he made Eve out of Adam, (both of them extraordinary and
miraculous Productions) and that then, through all succeeding Generations, he
formed all the rest of Mankind out of both, or such succeeding Pairs which
proceeded from both, (to an understanding Man as miraculous, though a more
ordinary Production than that of the first Man and Woman.) So that all Mankind
are by the Scripture-Account of the Thing a continued Propagation of the Blood
of Adam, branched out through the several Disseminations of all succeeding Men
and Women, from his Days to this present Time. Now our Savior, as he was Man,
took part of this Flesh and Blood, (so the Scripture) and by doing so, became a
Part of that Common Blood, out of which all the particular Men in the World
are, and always have been made, as well as he. he stands therefore in as near a
Relation to all Mankind, as can possibly be made by the same Flesh and Blood;
and that Relation may well be granted to be very near, because it is that very
Relation, which the several Parts of a Thing (by continued derivation the same)
have to one another. And so far the Relation of our Savior to the rest of
Mankind is in all Circumstances exactly the same with that Relation, which
every other Man has to every other. But yet there is something peculiar to our
Savior in his becoming Man, which does not belong to any other Man whomsoever:
And that is, that as the first Woman was formed only out of the Man, so our
Savior was formed only out of the Woman. And accordingly, the first Promise of
Redemption, that God gave to Adam after he had sinned, was Prophetically
worded, when he told him, that the Seed of the Woman should break the Serpent's
Head. And therefore, as Adam is in the Scriptures called the first Man, because
he was formed out of the Earth; so our Savior is called the second Man in the
same Scriptures, because he was formed out of the Woman; that is, he was the
first Man after his Kind, as Adam was in his. To our present Purpose and Design
then: As we cannot but take notice, that God's Counsel and merciful Purpose for
the Redemption of Mankind was very early, (for that Counsel must needs be so,
that was in a manner Cotemporary to Man's first Sin, as the immediate Discovery
of that Counsel to Man upon the Commission of that Sin does make it appear) so
some Glimpses of that Counsel do (to me) seem to show forth themselves in the
Scripture-Account of Man's Creation. For, when God tells us in his Word, that
he has so ordered the Creation, Propagation, and Dissemination of Mankind, that
though their Numbers are to us Innumerable, yet we do for all that know, that
they all came from one single Fountain, that is, from one single Man; and so,
that they are all but so many Rivulets from that Fountain: And when, moreover,
we are assured, that our Savior is One of those Rivulets; (For, though our
Savior was only to be made of the Woman, yet because the Woman was made out of
the Man, therefore our Savior did by the Woman derive from the same one single
Person with the rest of Mankind) I say, when we consider all this, methinks it
is no hard matter to conceive, that God himself does in his Word lay the
Groundwork of Man's Redemption by a Savior (if I may be allowed so to word my
self) in that near and intimate Relation, which our Savior, by becoming Man,
has to all Mankind besides; and that the Intimacy of such Relation consists in
this, that the Savior and all Mankind do derive from one single and common
Fountain. And hence we are told in one Place, that as by Man came Death, (there
is the Sin of Adam, and the Wages of such Sin) by Man came also the
Resurrection of the Dead, (there is the Redemption of our Savior, and his
Purchase.) And more expressly still to our present Purpose, speaks the same
Apostle in the same Chapter, (the Fifteenth of the First to the Corinthians)
For as in Adam all died, so in Christ shall all be made alive: And to the same
purpose again, in the Fifth to the Romans and the Eighteenth Verse, Therefore
as by the Offense of one, Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation; even so
by the Righteousness of one, the Free-gift came upon all Men unto Justification
of Life. In all which Texts, and several others that might be named, it is
notorious, that the Redemption of Mankind is so ascribed to the second Adam,
the Man Christ Jesus, as the Sin and Death of Mankind is ascribed to the first
Man Adam. And I do not at all question, but that those Hints, which the
Scriptures do frequently offer to us, of our Savior's taking the Humane Nature
in order to our Redemption, of his taking Part of the same Flesh and Blood with
us, of his being our Brother, and the like; I say, I do not at all question,
but that, when seriously considered, they may mightily assist and facilitate
both our Conceptions and Belief of the Wisdom, Justice, Reasonableness, and
Congruity of our Savior's Incarnation, Death, Resurrection; in one Word, of
that Redemption, which he, by being made one with Mankind, by taking their
Nature upon himself, has purchased form them: And may mightily conduce to the
Removing of those Difficulties which the Enemies of the Cross of Christ have
thrown as so many Stumbling Blocks in the Way of plain and honest Christians.

4. The Wisdom, Justice, Reasonableness, and Congruity of our Savior's
Incarnation, in order to his Purchase of Man's Redemption, does yet farther
appear, in that by becoming Man, he put himself into a Capacity of suffering
Death, that is, of suffering that Punishment, which the Law had denounced
against those that should transgress it. For, it is a gross Mistake, and does
indeed bring a Scandal upon God's Veracity, to affirm, That he threatens
greater Vengeance in any Law, before the Transgression of it, than he will
execute after the Transgression, that so he may the more effectually prevent
such Transgression. For, God never yet threatened any peremptory and
unconditional Punishment in any Law, which he has not, or, when the Time comes,
he will not as certainly execute. In the Day thou eatest thereof, thou shall
surely die, says God. The Threatening, we see, is peremptory; and the Execution,
we find, is so too; and therefore all Sinners die. And I cannot in the least
doubt, but that, for the same Reason, an eternal Punishment will be the certain
Vengeance upon a final Impenitence. But that is not so direct to my present
purpose, and therefore here I pass it by. But, to confirm what I am now upon, I
say, that God does not pardon the Death threatened in his Law against Sin, no
not in Consideration of the Death of our Savior; and therefore,
notwithstanding his Death, and that too in our stead, we see, that all Men, and
even those who hope for Salvation by such his Death, do yet die. What therefore
our Savior in this Case has puchased for us, is not a Freedom, but a Release
from Death: And therefore that Redemption from Death, which is the Purchase of
his Blood, is to be accomplished (after we have been dead) by a Resurrection. A
Resurrection then is to make good the Purchase of his Death; and therefore his
Death purchased for us not a Freedom, but a Release from our Death by such
Resurrection. Now, as his Death was necessary for such a Purchase; so his
Incarnation was necessary in order to such his Death: And he was therefore made
of the same Blood with all Mankind, that by shedding that Blood for Mankind, he
might after his own Resurrection restore the Lives of all Men, which had been
forfeited by Adam's Transgression. So that as his Death was the meritorious
Expiation of Sin; and as a Resurrection is the Fruit and Effect of such his
Expiation: So his Incarnation was a necessary Forerunner of such his Death; and
therefore before he could possibly die for Man, and so purchase a Redemption of
Man from Death, it was agreeable to the Laws of Wisdom, Justice, and Reason,
that he should become Man himself.

But then, how his Death came to be of so valuable a Price, as to make so
glorious a Purchase, we must leave to farther Enquiry. For, by that it will
appear, that as it was necessary, that he should die the Death of a Man; so it
was necessary, that such his Humanity should be united to the Divinity: And by
both it will appear, that God was manifested in the Flesh to destroy the Works
of the Devil; and that therefore, when the Scriptures tell us so much, they
tell us no more than what is agreeable to Wisdom, Justice, and Reason.

CHAP. VI.
The Divinity of the Son of God necessary for the Expitation of Man's Sin, as
well as his Humanity. Some Doctrinal Inferences. A general Proof, That as our
Savior did actually die, so, that he might justly die for the Expiation of
Sin.

HAving therefore seen, that our Lord Jesus Christ was qualified by his
Incarnation to make an Expiation for Sin by the Sacrifice of himself; and that
such his Qualification is agreeable to the Laws of Justice, and to the Rules of
Reason, and Wisdom: Our next Enquiry must be, How such his Sacrifice came to be
of such a Value, as to be justly sufficient to make good such an Expiation.
For, because the Death of an Innocent Man (if he be no more than a mere Man) is
but the Death of a Creature; and because no Creature can by its Punishment in
another Creature's stead, expiate the Sin of that other Creature; (for if it
could, then a Creature might by its own Punishment expiate its own Sin, both
which we have already showed to be impossible;) Therefore it was necessary,
that as our Savior, in order to his undertaking the Expiation of Sin, should
be a real Man, a Creature; so, that he should be more than a Creature, in order
to the accomplishing of such his Undertaking. For, though by becoming Man, he did
accommodate his Condition to his Design of undertaking an Expiation (as we have
just now seen) yet, for all that, his Humanity had sunk under, but but had not
taken away the Burden, had it not been supported by his Divinity. For, that
that crushes both Angels and Men, (and that too, while they cope against it
only with their own Strength) beyond the possibility of a Recovery, must, for
the same Reason, have crushed him also, (when once he had put himself in Man's
stead, and by consequence into Man's Condition) had he not been endowed with a
Power superior to both, to enable him to subdue and conquer it. And what
Power, but that of God, can we think sufficient to conquer Sin and Death; and
that too, when they had got to such an height, as to have infected and
overrun the whole Race of Mankind? Can we think, that when the Contagion and
Mischief had spread it self so wide, that even the best of Men (and those whose
Graces are chiefly celebrated by the Spirit of God himself) could not preserve
themselves from the overflowing Inundation; I say, can we think, that in such a
Case any one single Man (were he no more than a Man) could have saved himself
from the universal Mischief, by the Strength of his own Resolution or Virtue?
And if in Reason we must think, that he could not; then how can we in Reason
think, that his Strength should be sufficient to rescue and save all the Rest?
No! Such Salvation belongs only to the Arm of God; and He, who can save from
Sin, Death, and Hell, and can over and above extend such Salvation over all the
Earth, and that too through all the successive Generations of Mankind, that
ever did, or ever shall live upon the Earth, must be God, and God alone. The
Extensive Merit therefore of the Death and Sufferings of the Man Christ Jesus,
derives it self from the Infinite Dignity of Jesus the Son of God. For, had not
this Jesus been the Son of God, as well as the Son of Man, he had never been
the Savior of Man, And if there be not Salvation in any other, (as in effect
the whole Book of God does tell us) it may seem inconceivable, how this Seed of
the Woman should extend this Salvation, and so break the Serpent's Head, from
the Days of Adam to the Consummation of all Things, unless all Things were in
his Disposal, that is, unless he were God. No! He who considers the Thing
seriously and wisely, may be satisfied not only by the Scriptures, but by his
own Reason also, that there is the same Mercy, and the same Power required to
redeem sinful Man, that was required to make Man; and that He only, who did the
first, can do the last. And therefore, as we are taught by God, that all Things
were made by his Word; so are we also, that this Word was made Flesh, and that
by being so made, he became to us, after we were dead in Trespasses and Sins,
the Word of Life. From all which, and a great deal more that might be offered,
both from Reason, and from Revelation, (some of which Things we have already
spoken to, and some of which we shall have occasion to speak to hereafter) we
may be not only informed, but assured, That the great Merit of our Savior's
Expiation made for Sin by his Death and Passion, did arise from hence, that his
Divinity was personally united to that Body, which underwent such Death; or,
that nothing less than the Death of the Son of God could expiate that Death,
which the Law had denounced against the Sin of Man. But because these Thing
will appear in a more full and clear Light, in the farther Prosecution of our
Design; therefore we here leave them for a while, and proceed.

For, it having appeared, as to Matter of Fact, and that too by most express
Declarations of Scripture, that our Savior was made an Expiatory Sacrifice for
Sin; and it having also appeared, that he did by his Incarnation accommodate
his Condition to the making good of such Expiation, and that too in a Way very
agreeable to our Natural Sense and Reason: The next Thing to be spoken to, is,
the Matter of Right, or whether or no he could make such Expiation in Justice?
But before we proceed to speak to That, it will be proper that we make some
Inferences of weight and moment, from what has been already spoken. And,

1. By what has been said, it appears plainly, That though our Savior made good
the Purchase of our Redemption by his Death and Resurrection; yet that such his
Purchase shall not be fully made over to us, till our own Resurrection. That he
made good the Purchase, his Resurrection is a Demonstration: For, because the
Wages of Sin is Death, and because he died for our Sins, and not for his own,
and because after such his Death he rose again, and because such his
Resurrection was a Discharge from the Penalty of those Sins, for which he died;
I say, from all these Things it is evident, that he accomplished his designed
Purchase, that is, he made good his Expiation by his Death and Resurrection.
But then, on the other side, because it is most certain, that we are not
redeemed from the Curse or Penalty of the Law, till we are redeemed from Death;
and because we are not redeemed from Death, till we rise from the Dead, that
is, till our own Resurrection; therefore it is as evident, that till such our
Resurrection we are not put into the Possession of such his Purchase. And
therefore (strictly speaking) no Man (be he who he will) is ^actually justified
in this Life. For, because every Man that lives shall certainly die, and
because Death is the Penalty threatened to Sin by the Law; it therefore grates
too hard upon our common Sense, to tell us, that any Man is then justified,
when he is not only liable to the Vengeance of the Law, but when he is also
sure in a little time to undergo such Vengeance. If therefore any Man be,
according to a Gospel-estimate of Righteousness, a righteous or good Man, we
may upon that Account say, (and we shall say true) that he is in a justifiable
Condition; but we cannot truly say, that he is a justified Person.
Justification then in the Execution belongs to a future Life, and not to this.
And when we shall come to discourse on the second Thing contained in a
Gospel-Salvation, which is a Restitution to Holiness, and the Consequent of it,
the Gift of Eternal Life, we shall then be more fully satisfied, that
Justification cannot belong to any Man in this World, because no Man in this
World is restored to that Holiness, which was lost by the Transgression of the
Law; and because no Man shall be completely and actually justified, till he be
so restored.

2. Because the Expiation of our Sin by our Savior, and by consequence the
Pardon of Sin by God, is not Absolute, but Conditional; and because some of
those Conditions, upon which such Pardon does depend, are to be performed by
us, such are our Repentance, Conversion, and the like; and because, lastly, our
Condition in this World is such, that there will of necessity be required Time
for our Performance of such Conditions: Therefore we do conclude, that as our
Savior has purchased for us such Conditions, in order to our Redemption; so
has he also purchased for us a longer Term, in which we may perform such
Conditions. For, it is evident, that the Denunciation of the Law upon the
Transgression of it, is, [In the Day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely
die.] And in strict Justice and Reason, the Punishment is then to be inflicted,
when it becomes due; and it then becomes due, so soon as the Law is broken:
For, were it not due then, it would never become due at all. Now because we
find, and that too by Experience, that notwithstanding not only Adam's Sin, but
our own Sins too, we do not presently die; but that God waits our Return, that
he may be gracious to us; and because we know, that such his Patience and
Forbearance is therefore extended to us, that we may by our Repentance qualify
our selves to be made Partakers of that Expiation, which is made by our
Savior, (for, there is not Salvation in any other) therefore we do at last
conclude, that the Grant of a Space for Repentance is the Purchase of our
Savior. For, it would have been the same thing for our Savior to have made no
Purchase for us at all, if such his Purchase had been clogged with such
Conditions on our Part, which it was utterly impossible for us to perform: And
it had been utterly impossible for us to make out our Repentance, and
Amendment, if we had not been allowed a competent Time to make them out in.

And what we have said concerning God's allowing of a competent Time in which
Sinners may perform the Conditions of the Covenant purchased by the Savior,
that we say also concerning the Means which are necessary for such their
Performance: Such are his Word, the Succors and Assistance of his Spirit, his
Sacraments, and whatever else does usually come under the Title of Means of
Grace. For, it is not conceivable, that our Savior should purchase for us the
End, and yet leave us without the Means, which are necessary for the bringing
about such End. But yet because the Means to enable us to perform the
Conditions required of us in order to our Salvation, are not, nor indeed can
possibly be that very Salvation, for which they are designed or employed as
means; and because, while we live in this World we are required, and it is
necessary in it self, that we always have, and also employ such Means to the
purpose of our Justification; and lastly, because it is so far from being
necessary, that it is neither proper, no nor wise, to employ any Means for any
End already attained; therefore what we observed under our last Head, will
still remain true; and that is, That no Man is actually justified in this Life.

3. From what has been said, we take notice, That though Afflictions in this Life
are undoubtedly the Executions of Justice; yet (which is owing to our Savior's
Purchase) there are always couched in such Afflictions Designs of Mercy. For
though, as they look backward, they have an Eye to our Sins; yet, as they look
forward, they have an Eye to our Amendment, or, at least, to our Restraint.
For, had we died for our Sins, according to the Law, we had been both
immediately punished for our Sins past, and had by the same Means been
prevented from ever sinning for the time to come. (For, a Death without a
Resurrection, had proved a sure and everlasting Prevention.) But (as we have
seen) our Life being continued in consideration of our Savior's Purchase (though
Afflictions are laid upon us during the Reprieve) and though such Afflictions do
confessedly come from the Hand of Justice; yet they are never laid on without a
Design and Mixture of Mercy: And therefore, as they are the Punishments of Sins
past, so they are designed as Means of Grace for the time to come: And by the
wise Counsel of our merciful and gracious God are employed (chiefly indeed for
our future Reformation) but at least for our future Restraint; and so are one,
and a great Branch too, of what we call Restraining Grace.

As therefore we took notice under our last Head, that the Reprieve of Man from
the immediate Execution of the Sentence of the Law, was the Purchase of our
Savior, and that so Man's Life came to be continued, notwithstanding his
Transgression; so under this Head we may observe, that though Sin, during such
Continuance of Life, cannot be restrained by Death; yet the Just, Merciful, and
All-wise God has not, even in such Circumstances, left it without all
Restraint; but has by Afflictions fitted such a Curb for it, which
(notwithstanding the Savior's Purchase) is an irrefragable Proof of his
Justice: But though it be so, does in no wise encroach upon such Purchase, but
rather promotes the Design of it. For, a Life continued in order to the
Performance of those Conditions, by the Performance of which Man, in and
through his Savior, may obtain Salvation; A Life, I say, continued to such a
Purpose, is more likely to answer to such Purpose, if its Attempts after sinful
Commissions be restrained, than it could be, were such Attempts left free and
at large. For which Reason, such Restraint, though it be caused by Afflictions,
does rather fall in with, than control the Design of our Savior's Purchase.
And though it be confessed, that such Restraint is not so efficacious for the
Prevention of future Sins, as Death without any Reprieve had been, (for, in the
last Case the Prevention had been necessary, whereas in the first it is at the
most but possible) yet it must be confessed also, that it is most wisely suited
to the Circumstances of those, about whom it is employed; and that for this
Reason, Because all Restraint being designed either to keep or to make them
Good, it is necessary, in order to either, that it be left to their own Choice,
whether they will improve it to either, or both Designs, or no: For, there can
be no Goodness at all, without such Freedom. By all which we may at last
understand, that though Afflictions, as well as Death, are the Wages of Sin; and
though God does not let the reprieved Life of a Sinner pass on without the Tokens
of his Displeasure, that is, in the present Case, without Afflictions; yet that
it is owing to our Savior, that all such Afflictions are employed as Means of
Preventing Grace: Whereas otherwise, the Prevention of Sin by a Death without a
Reprieve, that is, a Death without a Savior, and so without a Resurrection,
had been no Means of Grace at all, but only pure and mere Punishment.

4. Lastly, From what has been said, I take notice, that our Savior, by his
Expiation of Sin, did not purchase for us an Absolute Freedom from Death, so
that by virtue of such his Expiation we should not die at all; but only a
Release from Death, so that after our Death we should be raised to Life again.
This I spoke to before; and the thing is as certain, as it is certain, that all
Men do die; and therefore I shall speak no farther to it at present: Only one
Quaere I would make upon it, and that is this; Whether, because the Law
required Death as the Punishment of Sin, and because our Savior, for the
Purchase of our Redemption, and for the fulfilling of the Law, was necessitated
in his own Person to undergo Death; I say, Whether upon this Account God, by a
Mixture of Mercy and Severity, might allow his Expiation to extend no farther
than only to release us from Death after we had suffered it, but not to prevent
us from suffering it at all? But, as I said before, I leave this as a Quaere,
because the Scripture speaks nothing to it, and so the Resolution of it lies in
the dark. Only I thought it not amiss to mention it, because it may help to
instruct us in the very great Malignity of Sin: As most undoubtedly that must
be very pernicious to God's Creatures, which is downright Enmity to him, who
made them, and which is not wholly expiated by our Savior himself.

However, the Wisdom and Harmony of God's Truth, Justice, and Mercy do seem to
me, from what has been said, to shine forth very conspicuously in his Counsel
for the Redemption of Mankind.

For, though God executes that Death upon Man fatally, which, upon his
Transgression of the Law, he threatened peremptorily; and so, notwithstanding
the Death of our Savior makes good the Truth of his Threat by the Execution of
the Penalty: Yet for all that, he does not so execute such Penalty, but that he
first allows Man a Reprieve for a time, to make himself a fit Subject for his
Savior's Purchase; and, secondly, he grants him a Release from Death by a
Resurrection, to capacitate him to be put into the actual Possession of such
Purchase.

Again, though the Life of Man, continued in Consideration of his Savior's
Merits, be ever and anon overcast with Afflictions; and though such Afflictions
are a Punishment for his Sins, and so a Proof of God's Justice: Yet still those
very Afflictions are, in Consideration of his Savior, turned into Means of
Grace, and so are a merciful Discipline to secure him from those Mischiefs,
which otherwise might retard or defeat his Pursuit after the purchased Pardon
and Inheritance.

These Remarks being left by the way, we proceed to the next thing proposed,
and that is, Whether our Savior, as he did in Fact, so also might in Justice
and Right, die for the Sins of Mankind? For, because the Scriptures do lay down
the Matter of Fact not only in express Terms, but also in great variety of
Expressions; and because those who deny the Doctrine of the Expiation, do in
this Case, as they do in most others, oppose Reason to Revelation: Therefore,
as by what has been said already, we have made it out, that our Savior did die
for our Sins; so, in what is to follow, we shall endeavor to make it out also,
that he might so die. For, if the Matter of Fact be found to be the Declaration
of God, we may be sure, that it will have the Approbation of Justice: For,
Justice and Truth can never clash nor interfere. But however, before we begin,
I cannot but take notice in the

1. First place, That the Redemption of Mankind by our Savior, is one of those
Things of God, which no Man knows, but the Spirit of God; and that, upon that
Account, it is not so proper a Subject for the Deliberations of Humane, that
is, of shortsighted Reason. And my Warrant for so judging I therefore take to
be good, because it was a Thing (as the Scriptures themselves tell us) that was
hid from Principalities and Powers, from Ages and Generations, till it was made
known by God to his Church, that is, to those who were chiefly, and, as to
their own Persons, only concerned in it. And therefore we are very sure, that
no Man, by the Sagacity of his own Reason, could ever have made any Discoveries
of it.

2. I cannot but be satisfied, in the second place, that any Man of an ordinary
or of an extraordinary Understanding, who is willing in honesty and sincerity
of Heart to receive the Scriptures as the Revelations of God; I say, I cannot
but persuade my self, that such a Man (and that too by the bare Conduct of his
Common Sense) would readily acknowledge and accept it for a Truth in those
Scriptures revealed, that our Savior suffered and died to expiate the Sins of
Mankind: For, the Texts that assert it, are so often repeated, and, when
compared, do so mutually not only confirm each others Truth, but also explain
each others Meaning; and the Management of the whole Thing is so exactly
accounted for, and that through all the Stages and Periods of it, till our
Savior comes to offer his Sacrifice to God in the Heavens, the Place of his
more peculiar Residence and Abode (as the High Priest did typically in the like
Case do in the Holy of Holies, the more peculiar Discovery of God's Residence
among the Jews under the Law:) I say, all these Things are so categorically
asserted and explained, and so critically accounted for in the Revelations of
God, that I cannot as yet persuade my self, that Common Sense, and Common
Sincerity will not oblige those to receive and believe them, who are willing to
receive those Books, in which they are so laid down, for the Word of God.

3. Neither can I persuade my self, that Reason, if it be not spun too fine,
(and what is so, may easily break) but, I say, I cannot persuade my self, that
Reason, upon a sober Examination of the Matter, (as it is laid down in the
Scriptures) can in any wise call in question the Justice of it. For, as it is
there laid down, there are only three Persons more especially concerned in it,
and those are, God, our Savior, and Man. Let us therefore take the Sum of the
Business in these Three Propositions, and then see, if our honest and natural
Reason can discover any Injustice in it.

And, First, God does forgive our Sins in Consideration of our Savior's
Sufferings.

Secondly, Our Savior did suffer in our stead, in order to the obtaining of
such Forgiveness.

Thirdly, We do obtain such Forgiveness in Consideration of such his Suffering.

Now if we set our plain and honest Reason on work to examine, whether there be
any Injustice in this whole Transaction; that will readily tell us, that if
there be any such Thing as Injustice in it, that Injustice must be attributed
to some of the Persons concerned in it. For, in this Case, it is not sufficient
to say, that the Transaction, either in the Whole, or in any Part of it, is
unjust, unless we do particularly assign that Person engaged in it, to whom
that Injustice does belong. For, all Injustice in Matters of Fact must be
ascribed to some Person or other: And no Injustice, in any Matter of Fact
whatsoever, can be truly ascribed to any Person whomsoever, if that Person be
supposed to have nothing to do in that Matter of Fact. Now, in the Case, as it
is put, there are (as we observed just now) no other Persons concerned, but
God, our Savior, and our selves. If therefore the Thing prove to be, as by the
Revelations of God it will be found to prove, that we Sinners are reconciled to
God by the Sufferings, Death, and Merit of our Savior, and so are pardoned for
our Sins; then it will follow, that if there be any Injustice in the Case, that
Injustice must be either ascribed to God, to our Savior, or to our selves.

Now there cannot possibly be any Injustice in us, because we are purely
passive in the Case: For, so far forth as we are forgiven, (and that is as far
as we are concerned) most certainly we are so. And we may be very sure, that
Reason will never tell any Man, that he is therefore a Criminal, because he
receives a great Blessing from God; and least of all will it tell him, that it
is a Sin in him to receive from God the Pardon of his Sins.

And I dare not so far question the Modesty of any Christian, as to suppose,
that they will fix any Injustice in the present Case, either upon God, or upon
our Savior: And therefore because no Injustice can be charged upon any of the
Persons concerned in the whole Affair; therefore, if we be but once satisfied,
that God himself has told us in his Word, that the Affair was so managed, (as
most certainly so he has told us) then the Conclusion at last must be, that
there was no Injustice in it at all. I say, I am satisfied, that this would be
the way of Reasoning to a sober and modest Christian; and that this would be
good and satisfactory, if Men would with Modesty and Humility bring their
Rational Sentiments to comply with the Scriptures, and not industriously
struggle to force the Scriptures to comply with their own prejudicate Opinions
or Surmises. For, in a Thing of that Depth and Counsel, as is the Redemption of
Mankind, I am sure it is much more safe, as well as more modest, to comply with
the Declarations of God, whose Counsel and Work it is, (and that too
especially, where, as we have seen, a sober and modest Reason falls in with,
and approves such his Declarations) than by a more refined way of Reasoning,
and a more tedious and intricate Deduction of Consequences, (where any little
Flaw or Mistake may spoil the whole Concatenation, and at long run determine in
Deceit and Fallacy) downright to control and contradict such Declarations.
For, God is our best and most sure Guide in all things: And then, when he
professedly undertakes to be so, and that too in such Things, that our Natural
Reason knows nothing of, without such his Guidance; it would be the best Use
that we can possibly make of such our Reason, in all such Cases to follow his
Conduct. For, in this very Case, God has himself told us, that he has
confounded the Wisdom of the Wise. For, Christ crucified was to the Jews a
Stumblingblock, and to the Greeks Foolishness. And it has before our Days been
thought very good Reason, that he therefore could not save others, because he
could not save himself. Though I cannot persuade my self to doubt, but that That,
and all other Methods of Reasoning, that attempt to make out the Injustice of
his Suffering in our stead, or any other ways to evacuate the Merit and
Purchase of his Blood, will in the conclusion prove frivolous and empty; and
that they will be found light, even in the Balance of Reason it self.

But to carry this Business a little farther: As we have made it out, that
sober and sound Reason will warrant the Justice of Man's Redemption, if it was
so managed, as we have laid it down; so, that it was so managed, we may be as
much assured by the Word of God, as we may of any other Thing contained in that
Word. And hence we are told, that God made our Savior to become Sin for us,
who knew no Sin, 2 Cor. 5. ult. That he reconciled us to himself by Jesus
Christ, in the Eighteenth Verse of the same Chapter: He tells us also, that he
was reconciling the World to himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them,
in the Verse immediately following. And that we may be assured, that God does
all this in Consideration of our Savior's Death and Passion, we are told in
one Place, that he died for our Sins; in another, that the Blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses us from all Sin; in a third, that being justified by his
Blood, we shall be saved from Wrath through him. All which, with a great deal
more to the same import, that might be alleged, amounts to thus much; That our
Savior took upon himself our Sins, and in our stead died for them; and that
thereupon God pardoned such our Sins, and was reconciled to us. Now, because
God himself tells us such a thing, and that too in as plain and express Words,
as any thing can possibly be told in, we may be very sure, that what is so
told, is plain and open Truth: And because at the same time he tells us, that
what was so done, was done by himself; we may moreover be sure, that what was
so done, was just and right. However, thus far we are certain, that if in the
present Case we will be contented to be determined by the Word of God, that
then there neither are, nor can be any Laws of Justice, that can hinder our
Savior's Suffering in our stead, in order to our obtaining the Pardon of our
Sins by such his Suffering.

The Answer then to what shall be alleged against such Justice, we shall defer
to the next Chapter. Only before we break off here, we cannot but take notice,
that the Doctrine of our Savior's Expiation, as it has in part already, and
will more fully hereafter appear to have more Truth in it, than what is
alleged against it; so also it will appear to have more Comfort. For, if there
be no other Name, whereby we must be saved; it must needs be very imprudent at
least to refuse to admit our own Salvation in and by him: And it is a Doubt at
least, whether they, who deny his Expiation, the Purchase of his Blood, and the
Forgiveness of Sins in Consideration of his Death, do not so refuse it. And it
is at least another Doubt, whether those, who refuse it upon such
Considerations, do not refuse it altogether. The Scriptures do at least seem to
tell us so: And they will give but an ill Account of their Prudence, who will
so far hazard their Salvation, as to gratify their Obstinacy in an Opinion,
that does so palpably control God's express Declarations.

CHAP. VII.
Answers to Three Objections. 1. The Punishment was in Justice only due to us,
not to him. This Objection retorted upon the Socinians. 2. That his Death was
but a Temporal Punishment; but the Expiation pretended to be made, was of an
Eternal Punishment. 3. The Absurdity, that God should suffer for the
Satisfaction of his own Justice.

BUT notwithstanding the Multitudes of such Declarations in his Word, which do
avowedly and professedly acquaint us with this great Truth; yet for all that,
it has met with many Adversaries: Who, as they have endeavored by odd and very
uncouth Interpretations to expound away the plain and categorical Assertions of
such Declarations; so have they also to back such their Expositions with
Arguments taken from Natural Reason. Now it may be reasonably expected, that
those Reasons should be very good, and well-grounded, which pretend to make
good such an Interpretation of God's Word, which at first View is a downright
Contradiction to such Word. And because all those Interpretations, which
attempt to annul the Expiatory Sacrifice of our Savior, are such; therefore,
before we proceed any farther, we cannot but take notice, that it looks
presumptuous at least to pretend to measure, and much more is it so, to
control the Justice of the Divine Counsels and Actions, laid down expressly and
frequently in his acknowledged Word, by so uncertain a Standard as Humane
Reason; because it is impossible, that such Reason should comprehend all
Possibilities; especially such, which are confessedly brought to pass by the
more signal and extraordinary Power of an Omnipotent Arm. But however, because
such Attempts have been made, we will consider some, and the chief too, of
those Allegations which have been offered in opposition to those plain and
express Discoveries, that God in his Word has made to Man, of the Method of his
own Proceedings in the Forgiveness of their Sins.

1. And first, It is pleaded against the Justice of our Savior's Suffering in
order to the obtaining of our Pardon, That such Sufferings cannot therefore be
just, because in Justice and Equity they are due to us, and not to him. For,
since the Justice of the Punishment must arise from the Demerit of the
Delinquent, the Punishment can in Justice be only laid on there, where the
Demerit is lodged. And therefore, if our Savior was not the Sinner, (as most
certainly he was not) neither ought he in Justice to be the Sufferer. And to
confirm this Way of Arguing, we have the Voice of God himself assuring us, that
the Father shall not suffer for the Iniquity of the Son, nor the Son for the
Iniquity of the Father, (that is, one Soul shall not suffer for the Sins of
another) but the Soul that sins, that shall die, in the Eighteenth of
Ezekiel. And, which is yet a great deal more, God does there appeal to the
Sense of Mankind for the Equity and Justice of such his Proceedings. Now then,
if every Sinner ought in Justice to bear his own Burden, how can it possibly be
just, that the Punishment of our Sins should be laid upon another, who was in
no wise guilty of those Sins? And then, lastly, if the Vengeance due to our
Sins could not in Justice be laid upon another; then neither can it be true,
that God does therefore remit such Vengeance to us, because our Savior has
suffered in our stead. And by consequence, the Forgiveness of our Sins cannot
either in Reason or Justice depend upon our Savior's Sufferings. And if it
does not, then it must be a Mistake at least to affirm, that God's Forgiveness
of our Sins is just and equal; and yet at the same time to maintain, that he
does forgive them in Consideration of our Savior's Sufferings. The Objection
(you see) looks plausible at the first sight; but yet, when it comes to be
strictly examined, will (as will appear by and by) signify just nothing. For,

1. There is no doubt made by any of Mankind, that we know of, but that in some
Cases one may become a Surety for another; and that if the Principal fails in
the Performance of his just Obligations, the Surety (so far as he stands bound
for him) is obliged in Justice to answer and make good such Obligations. This
among Mankind is taken as a Thing granted in all those Pecuniary Obligations,
which do relate to Commerce or Traffic: And therefore it is generally allowed,
that he who is bound for the Payment of another Man's Debt, upon default of
Payment in the original Debtor, does become Debtor himself, and, as such, is
bound in Justice to make good the Debt to the Creditor.

Nay, we may go farther yet, and by doing so, may advance one Step nearer to
our main Design. For, as all Mankind are agreed, that the Surety stands bound
in Justice to pay the Debt, upon the Non-payment of the Principal Debtor, where
such Debt is contracted by Commerce or Traffic; so also they have the same
Sense of the Surety's Obligations, where the Debt is contracted by the
Principal Debtor's Crime or Delinquency. Now it is agreed on all Hands (for
Common Sense tells all Men so) that a Debt contracted by a Crime is a
Punishment, though it be but a pecuniary Punishment. And then, if a Surety, upon
the Failure in the Principal, be bound in Justice to pay such a Debt; it will
be so far from being a Doubt, whether a Surety in such a Case may justly
undergo the Punishment of the Criminal; that in deed and truth he is bound, and
that too in Justice and Honesty, to undergo it. From whence we conclude, in the
first place, that it is so far from being absolutely true, that one Person
cannot justly suffer the Punishment due to the Crimes of another; that, on the
contrary, it may so happen, that he may be bound, and that too in Conscience,
to take upon himself such Punishment.

2. To which we add, in the second place, That in such a Case, where one Person
undergoes the Punishment due to the Crimes of another, the Punishment so
inflicted can so much the less be taxed of Injustice, if the Person, who
undergoes it, do undertake it freely and willingly. And therefore, though it be
true in Thesi, that is, in the general, that it is Injustice to punish an
Innocent Man for the Fault of a Criminal; yet in Hypothesi, or in a particular
Matter of Fact, it may not be unjust so to do. And the Reason is, because any
Punishment (be it what it will) can only be unjust with relation to that Person
who undergoes such Punishment. For, if he does justly undergo it, then, let the
Punishment be what it will, yet still it will be just. Now, where a Person does
willingly, freely, and o^ his own accord submit to a Punishment; there the
Punishment, though he did not by his Crimes deserve it, cannot therefore be
thought unjust, because it would be an odd and unheard of kind of Injustice to
any Person, to injure him by sulfilling his own Desires, and by gratifying his
Choice. If then we apply this to our Savior's Sufferings, which he underwent
in our stead, we may be informed by him himself, that he laid down his Life,
and, that no Man took it from him; that is, he laid it down willingly. And
because he did so, therefore though God laid upon him, and accepted from him the
Vengeance due to our Sins, in order to our Acquittance; yet he did him no
Injury by so doing, because he was willing, as our Surety and Proxy, to undergo
and suffer such Vengeance. Indeed it is not to dissembled, that because the Sin
was Ours, and not His, that God therefore might, and that justly too, have
refused the Punishment to be his, and not ours. But then, withal, we must take
notice, that though God might have done so; yet that there was no Law of Justice,
that either did or could oblige him so to do. And therefore, to clear that, or
any other Doubt that may arise from what has been spoken upon this Head, we add,

3. In the third place, That where that Person, who willingly suffers for
another's Crime, has an undoubted Right and Title in all those Things, and an
uncontrollable Power to dispose of all those Things, which are either damnified
or lost by such his Sufferings: In such a Case, as there is no Injury done to
his Person, by reason of his willingness to suffer; so neither is there any
Violence offered to any Law of Justice, by reason of such his undoubted Right,
and absolute Power. Now at once to clear this Matter, and to bring it up to the
Point we aim at, we must take notice, that our Savior tells us himself, in the
Tenth of St. John and the Eighteenth Verse, I have power to lay down my Life,
and I have power to take it again. And Reason tells us the same Thing: For,
because he made the Worlds, and because all things were created by him and for
him, and because for these Reasons alone he is the Almighty God; therefore
there can be no question, but that he may justly challenge to himself that
Power, which the Supreme God claims, as his most undoubted Prerogative, I kill,
and I make alive. To which we may likewise add, that he is to be Judge both of
Quick and Dead (as even that Creed, which goes by the Name of the Apostles, and
even our Adversaries too, in the present Case, do allow.) Now it cannot in the
least seem reasonable, that he should have the Power of Damning and Saving, who
has not the Power of Life and Death: For, it must needs sound harsh to our
Reason, to grant him the greater Power, and in the mean time to deny him the
less. Taking it therefore for granted, that he had an absolute and
uncontrollable Power to dispose of his Life as it seemed best to his own
Wisdom; if he was pleased so to dispose of such his Life, as to lay it down in
our stead, and for our sakes, there could not possibly lie any Obligation of
Justice upon God, to bind him up from accepting the Offer of such his
Sacrifice; because such a Power does in it self suppose, that there neither is,
nor can be any Injury, that should forbid such an Offering. And we know well
enough, that any thing may be lawfully done, against the doing of which there
is no just Law. And therefore the Case of our Savior, in the present Instance,
does so far forth differ from all the Cases of all other imaginary Innocents in
the World. For, though another Man be supposed to be Innocent, yet he has no such
Power over his own Life, as to dispose of it as he himself shall please: And if
he should by any Means destroy it without his own Demerit, it would be in him
Self-murder, and that too, though he should offer it for a Criminal. But if he
should so order his Life, as to deserve Death; then that very Crime, that
forfeits his Life, would spoil his Innocence too. And therefore should a
Magistrate, who is invested with the lawful Power of the Sword, accept the Life
of an Innocent in lieu of the forfeited Life of a Criminal, he would therefore
become a Criminal himself; because in such a Commutation he allows the Innocent
Man to become a Criminal, by usurping upon the Prerogative of God himself.
Which may serve to show the Fraud and Deceit of that way of Arguing, which will
not therefore allow it to be just, that our Savior should offer his Life, as a
Sacrifice for Sinners, because it cannot be justly allowed, that other Innocent
Persons should do so: Whereas the Life, which our Savior offered in the
present Case, was entirely his own, and absolutely at his own disposal; which
yet cannot be truly affirmed of the Life of any other Innocent Person in the
World (if yet we should suppose such a Person) from the Days of the Creation,
to the Consummation of all Things. As therefore we learned by the last Head,
that God might have refused to accept our Savior's Death in our stead; because
the Life offered was not the same that was forfeited, but another: So, by what
has been spoken under that Head, and this, we may now perceive, that there is
no Reason in Law or Justice, why he might not accept it. For, if our Savior
might have become Surety for the Discharge of that Debt, which by the Tenor of
the Law we owed to Justice, by our Transgression of the Law; and if, upon our
Inability to pay such Debt, so as to obtain our Acquittance, he was willing,
and fully empowered to lay down his Life, in order to our Release and
Discharge; and if God might in Justice accept the Offering of such his Life for
so gracious and merciful a Purpose: Then the whole Objection against the
Justice of his Suffering in our stead, and for our sake, vanishes, and comes to
nothing.

These Things I have pursued thus far, to put the whole Matter in a true Light,
and to lay it down just as it is: Though I do frankly confess, that I do not
think the Objection against our Savior's Sufferings, taken from the Injustice
of such Sufferings, to be of any force at all, no not upon those very
Principles, upon which they go, who make it. For, they themselves allow our
Savior to be Innocent, and by consequence (though they make Death a Natural
Thing, which, by the way, is but an Heathen-Notion of it; for it does not in
the least agree with what the Scriptures teach us about it:) But, I say, they
themselves allow our Savior to be innocent; and therefore they must allow,
that he did not deserve that Death, which he suffered. But then they tell us,
that God did therefore permit him to undergo such a cruel and hard Treatment,
that he might be an Example of Patience, Submission, and Resignation, to all
Men, in any Circumstances, under which they should be brought by God's
Providence; and that he was slain a Sacrifice to ratify and establish the
New Covenant, that God then made with Man in order to the Pardon of Sin. By
which it is notorious, that they endeavor to vindicate God's Justice from
those Ends and Designs of his Providence or Mercy, for which God delivered up
his Son to a cruel and bloody Death, though he did not deserve such Death.

1. Now we are very well assured, in the first place, that our Savior was
delivered up to be crucified and slain, by the determinate Counsel and
Foreknowledge of God. For so St. Peter expressly tells us, in the Second of the
Acts and the Twenty third Verse. And again, we are told in the Fourth of the
Acts the Twenty seventh and Twenty eighth Verses, that Herod, and Pontius
Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the People of Israel, were gathered together, to
do to him, whatsoever God's Hand and Counsel determined before to be done. We
know also, that his Crucifixion was prophesied in the Old Testament, and that
in sundry Places; and that he himself does both foretell it in the New
Testament, and does there also tell us, that it was plentifully foretold in the
Old. And we know, lastly, that what was foretold some thousand Years before it
was brought to pass, and then was so actually brought to pass, as it was
foretold, must be foretold by God: The Certainty of the Event, in such a Case,
being a Demonstration, that Omniscience gave forth the Prediction.

2. We are assured, in the second place, that our Savior being perfectly
Innocent, as having never transgressed the Law, could not possibly deserve the
Death of the most heinous Malefactors, a Death attended with Agony and Torment,
though he did suffer such a Death.

3. It is agreed, in the third place, between us and our Adversaries, That
because our Savior did willingly submit to the Counsel and Determination of
God, in suffering such a Death; that thereby God's Justice is sufficiently
assoiled and vindicated (to which we spoke more largely just now) and that by
such his Submission he gave an Example to Mankind, under any Affliction, of an
entire Resignation to the Counsel and Will of God, in all Cases whatsoever.

4. But then, in the last place, it may be reasonably demanded, how it comes to
pass, that these self-same Sufferings, this self-same Death of our Savior, do
then become unjust, when they are affirmed to have been undergone by him for
the Expiation of Man's Sin? They were just, because he underwent them
willingly; and they were honorable, because they were exemplary; and we are
sure they were merciful and charitable, if they were expiatory: And then, shall
what is just in it self, and honorable, because it is designed for an Example,
or for any other End; I say, shall such a Thing therefore become unjust,
because it is over and above designed for a Charity and a Mercy? The same Thing
(we know) may be directed to more Ends and Purposes than one; and those several
Ends and Purposes may all be good and warrantable; and where they are so, there
(if the Thing be good and just in it self) we may in Reason rest satisfied,
that one of those good Endswill no more vitiate and corrupt it, than any other
End will. If therefore the Death of our Savior were just without being
designed for an Expiation; it will remain just still, though it be designed for
a^ Expiation. For, Mercy and Compassion (which are undoubtedly included in such
Expiation) are most undoubtedly just and good Things, when they are designed
and brought to pass by just and lawful Means. And therefore, when the
Adversaries of the Expiation do tell us, that the Death of our Savior was just
and lawful, they do with the same Mouth-full of Breath contradict their own
Objection against the Justice of the Expiation; and do as good as tell us, that
the Expiation is just and lawful too. When therefore Secinus, and his
Followers, do in very tragical Expressions (and some of those Expresnons so
indecent and irreverent, to say no worse, as not fit to be mentioned) exclaim
against the Injustice of the Expiation; it is notorious, that they quit their
Reason, and fly to Harangue; that is, they hope in this Case to prevail by
their Rhetoric, rather than by their Arguments. For, I can hardly persuade my
self to believe them so short-sighted, as not to perceive, that any Argument
against the Justice of the Expiation does not contradict such their own
Positions, which maintain the Justice of our Savior's Death and Passion.

One Thing more I would remark, and then I shall proceed; and that is, That
because the Objection under this Head is only laid against the Justice, but not
at all against the Value, Merit, or extensive Influence of our Savior's Death;
therefore I have precisely stuck to the Matter of the present Objection,
without mixing other Things with it relating to the Expiation; that is, I have
here only asserted the Justice of our Savior's Death, in order to the
Expiation of the Sins of Mankind.

2. The second Objection against our Savior's Expiation of our Sins by his
Death, stands thus: and that is, That though it should be granted, that he had
Power over his own Life, that he was willing to lay down that Life, and that
God was willing to accept it; yet all this will amount but to part of Payment:
For, first, the Death that we deserved by our Sins was Eternal; but that which
he suffered in our stead, was but Transient and Temporal. It is confessed, that
as the Socinians do deny the Expiation, so do they also an Etern^ty of
Punishment: But yet that does not at all take off from the ^orce of the
Objection; because if they, who maintain the Doctrine of the Expiation, do also
assert an Eternity of Punishment, it is sufficient for their Confutation to
show, that their several Doctrines do contradict, and so overthrow each other.
The Objection then being so far laid right, it goes on further, thus: The Sins
of Mankind are the Sins of Many, of Thousands, of Millions, of Myriads, nay, of
Multitudes of Myriads; but the Death of our Savior was only the Death of One:
So that if either we consider the Extent of our Guilt, or the Malignity of it,
it will by no means seem reasonable, and therefore neither just, that the
single Death of our Savior should be looked upon as a proportionats Expiation
of it. Nor indeed would it, according to those who make the Objection; who
(though the Apostle tells us in one Place, that in him dwells all the Fullness of
the Godhead bodily; and in another Place, that being in the Form of God, he
thought it no Robbery to be equal with God) will yet, in spite of these, and a
Multitude of other express Declarations to the contrary, still allow our
Savior to be no more than a mere Man. Now it is freely confessed, that if the
Case were so, then his single Death would be no valuable Compensation for the
Death of all the Sinners in the World; and much less would it be so for the
eternal Death of such Sinners. But since the Scriptures have over and over told
us, that his Death was such a Compensation; and since such a Compensation
cannot not exceed the Dignity of that Character, which the same Scriptures have
given us of him, though their Way of Reasoning says otherwise; I dare leave it to
any sober Christian to judge, whether it does not more concern them to answer
what the Scriptures do object to them, than it does us, in the present Case, to
answer what they do object to us. For, if the Fullness of the Godhead dwelt in
our Savior bodily, and so was united to and with that Body; then it will be no
inconceivable Strain to imagine, that the Infinite Dignity of the Person
suffering must needs add an immense Value to such his Sufferings, and by so
doing must make them more than adequate to the Guilt of all Mankind. And though
this of it self may be sufficient to stop the Mouth of the present Objection;
yet if we do but recollect some few Things, that have been spoken to, and made
good already, we may still be farther satisfied, that the Objection against the
Value of his Sufferings, in order to the Expiation of the Sins of Men, will be
of no force at all. If we do consider therefore, that because our Savior took
on him the Nature of Man, and not of Angels, that he did therefore die for Men
and not for Angels: If we consider, that the fallen Angels are left without any
hope of Escape from the Vengeance of the final Judgment, which Man is not: If
we consider, that the Vengeance which the fallen Angels shall then suffer, will
never work out their Redemption, or Forgiveness; and that for that very Reason,
because that Vengeance shall be eternal: If we consider, that neither would
eternal Vengeance work out the Salvation of any Man, for the same Reason: And
lastly, If we consider, that notwithstanding the utter Impossibility of Man's
satisfying the Divine Justice by his own Punishment: yet we are assured by the
Voice of God, that some Men shall obtain Redemption by their Savior's Blood,
even Reminion of Sins: I say, if we con^^der all these Things, our Natural
Reason will help us to conclude, that the Death of our Savior, tho it were but
the Death of One, and though it were but a temporal Death neither, yet will do
that, which all the Eternal Deaths in the World could not do; that is, it will
reconcile Sinners to God, and from him obtain their Pardon; and that upon that
single Account, it is of more Value in his Signt, than the Death of Angels and
Men; and that therefore he, who suffered that Death, was infinitely greater
than both. By which we may also understand, that if there be any Absurdity in
the thing, that one Person, by his single and temporal Death, should satisfy
the Divine Justice for the Sins and Demerits of so many; they, who make the
Objection, do make the Absurdity too; because, in their Opinion concerning the
Person suffering, they do degrade him below that Infinite Station and Dignity,
in which the Scriptures do assure us, that he stands exalted.

3. The last Objection against our Savior's Expiation of Sin, and that which
does indeed rather attempt to prove the Impossibility, than the Injustice of
the Thing, is this; That if our Savior be God himself, and if this very
Savior did die to reconcile Sinners to God; then it will follow, That God
suffered to reconcile Sinners to himself: Which, at at the very first sight,
looks absurd.

1. And so it may indeed, to Humane Reason, which in many other Things, but
more especially in the Things of God, is very often guided by dark and blind
Measures. But still the Apostle twice tells us, in the Second to the
Corinthians, chap. 5. ver. 18, 19. That God was reconciling us, and reconciling
the World to himself, and that he did this by Jesus Christ, whom yet the same
Apostle in another Place calls, God over all, blessed for ever. Now, in the
Contrivance and Enterprise of this Reconciliation, he was the first and
principal Agent; and so indeed the very Beginning of the Reconciliation came
from the offended Person: Nay, it was he, who contrived the whole Method of
Reconciliation; (for, it was hid from Ages and Generations, from Principalities
and Powers, till God made it known to his Church.) And that we may not think,
that there is any Absurdity in this his doing, he does in this very Case, as
far as our Circumstances will allow, command us to follow his Example. For, in
the Eighteenth of St. Matthew and the Fifteenth Verse, he requires, that if our
Brother offend us, we (that is, we the Offended) should go and tell him his
Fault. So that, though the Injury be done, not by us, but to us; yet we must make
the first Step toward a Reconciliation. Now, a Man of a worldly Reason would
in this Case be apt to cry out, What! must I begin to give my self
Satisfaction? Is this Sense or Justice? Did not he do the Injury? And is not
the whole Reparation to come from him? But, God's Thoughts are not as Man's
Thoughts, nor his Ways as Man's Ways. And therefore, though your Enemy began the
Injury; yet, if he commands, you must begin the Reconciliation. And if God do
not only begin the Reconciliation in the Case before us, but also suffer
himself, that he may complete it; all the Inconvenience that will follow from
it, will be, that God can do more than Man: For, he can do any thing, that is
not unjust; and any thing, that is not impossible. And, as we have already made
it out, that it is not unjust; so we shall go on farther, to make it out, that
it is not impossible.

2. For, secondly, our Savior being (as we have already made it out) a Middle
Person between God and Man, a Mediator in his Person, as well as in his Office;
as he was not so Man, but that he was God; so he was not so God, but that he
was Man. And then, if we add, that as Man he suffered for the Sins of Man, so
much may be allowed now, because so much has been proved already. And indeed,
strictly and closely speaking, it was Man, not God, who suffered in the Person
of our Savior. For God, we are sure, is utterly, and in his own Nature,
incapable of any such Thing, as that is, which we call Suffering. So far forth
therefore as the Objection furmises, that we take God to have suffered; so far
the Objection is mistaken and laid wrong. But yet,

3. Because God and Man were personally united in our Savior, and so made up
but one Christ; therefore our Reason will tell us, that the Sufferings of such
a Man must receive an immense Value from his Personal Union with God. Take the
Thing in an Instance, and it will be much more plain, and satisfactory. A Man
strikes a Prince. No one will say, that he strikes his Dignity, (for the thing
is impossible) but only his Body. But yet to think, that the Injury and
Malignity of the Stroke shall not be rated, as well by his Dignity, as by his
Body, would be an Imagination, that an ordinary Reason would condemn of
Weakness. And therefore, though the Bodies of all Men are made of the same Flesh
and Blood, and so the wounding of a Prince is no greater a natural Hurt to him,
than the wounding of a Peasant is to him, (supposing their Wounds to be equal
or alike) yet we know, that the Difference of their Conditions shall make such
a vast Difference in the Value of the Mischiefs done by the several Wounds;
that, in the first Case, the Fault of such Mischief shall be esteemed Capital;
when perhaps in the last it shall hardly be thought Penal. The Sufferings
therefore of the Man Christ Jesus might be sufficient for the Expiation of the
Sins of Mankind, not because his Deity suffered with his Humanity; but because
he being IMMANUEL, his Deity gave an Infinite Value to the Sufferings of his
Humanity, by being Intimately, because Personally, united to it. And therefore,
as my Reason suggests to me the Certainty of the Union of his Deity with his
Humanity, from the Expiation made by the Value of the Sufferings of his
Humanity; so from the Union of his Deity with his Humanity, it rather suggests
to me, that he is One Person of the Deity, than that his Deity suffered for the
accomplishing of such his Expiation. And I cannot but think, that the Arguments
already offered will in a good measure warrant such a Suggestion: And
therefore, to what has been already said, I add in the

4. Fourth place, That though the Expiation of the Sin of Man was one Design both
of our Savior's Incarnation and Sufferings; yet that it was not the whole
Design of such his Sufferings, and of such his Incarnation. For, he came to
destroy the Works of the Devil; the Kingdom, which the Devil had set up in this
lower World; to recover sinful Man from that Revolt that he had made from God,
and so to restore him to his Duty and Allegiance to his Sovereign Lord and King
(as will appear more fully hereafter.) And to this purpose, as it was
necessary, that he should purchase to himself a peculiar People zealous of good
Works; so it was necessary, that he should free such People from that State of
Sin, in which they were in Bondage, and by doing both, establish a Kingdom of
Holiness and Righteousness, in lieu of a Kingdom of Sin and Darkness. His grand
Design then was the enlarging of his Father's Kingdom, by restoring to it what
the Devil had torn off from him. And then, if for the accomplishing of such his
Design, the Expiation of Man's Sin; and if for the Expiation of Man's Sin his
own Death was necessary; it will be no great strain to conceive, that the Man
Christ Jesus, united to the second Person in the Trinity, should do and suffer
what he did, for the fulfilling the Will of God, by restoring and so enlarging
his Kingdom, by subdu^ng his Arch-enemy, and by taking his usurped Dominion out
of his Hand, and asserting it to himself. For, all this our Savior did, when
by those Methods, with which the eternal Wisdom has acquainted us in his Word,
he builds up a Kingdom of Righteousness out of one of Rebellion and Wickedness:
Which Kingdom, when his Work is fully accomplished, he will (which was his main
and grand Design) resign up to God, the natural and rightful Lord of all
Kingdom and Dominion: See 1 Cor. chap. 15. ver. 24. Though therefore our
Apprehensions may be startled, when we undertake to conceive, that the Son of
God, the Alpha and Omega, the Word of God, by whom he made the Worlds, should
suffer to reconcile Man (who had made himself his Enemy by Sin) to himself, in
order to Man's Pardon: Yet when we consider, that by the same Undertaking, he
re-settled his Father's Kingdom, asserted his Honor and Dignity, displayed his
Mercy, and in Conjunction with that maintained his Justice; and that by doing
all this, he exhibited God to the World, not only a faithful Creator, but also
a gracious and loving Redeemer: I say, when all these Things are considered,
our Wonder and our Incredulity may not only abate, but cease; and we may be
rationally satisfied, that it was as well worth our Savior's Sufferings, to
bring all these Things to pass, (tho his Enemy Man had his Interest in it) as
it was for him to make Man at first.

Now, what we have said, is a sufficient Answer to the Objection, upon
supposition, that any or every Sin is of so malignant a Nature, that the just
Punishment of it shall be Eternal. But though there be such a Thing, as Eternal
Punishment, most expressly asserted by the Scriptures, (and therefore we do by
no means question the Truth of it) whatever the Socinians may pretend to the
contrary; yet perhaps it is not so certain, that the Scriptures do allot any
such Punishment to any other Sin besides Unbelief, or (which amounts to much
the same Thing, though in other Words) a final Impenitence. For, it is most
certain, that all other Sins, if they be truly and heartily repented for,
shall, in Consideration of our Savior's Merits, be forgiven; and it is as
certain, that no Man shall undergo an eternal Punishment for those Sins, which
shall be forgiven. If therefore we do assert, what is most true, that our
Savior did not die to save Unbelievers, or Impenitent Sinners; and that they
are the only Sinners, to whom eternal Punishments are assigned; in such a Case,
the Objection, that his temporal Punishment could not take away an eternal
Punishment, would be of no force; because, in such Case, eternal Punishment was
not designed to be taken away. For, every Unbeliever, and Impenitent Person,
shall suffer it, notwithstanding our Savior's Death: And there do not want
very good Probabilities (and those too in no wise disagreeing to
Scripture-Revelations) that the Sins of those, whose Sins shall not be pardoned
after the Resurrection, shall have just so much Punishment, as they do in
Justice deserve, (be that more or less) but that such their Punishment shall
not therefore be eternal, because such their Sins did deserve such eternal
Punishment; but because they refused and rejected those easy Means, which God
had provided in a Savior, by a due Use of which they might have escaped all
Punishment whatsoever. Now, because it is absurd to imagine, that our Savior
under^ent Death to save those who should slight or reject that Salvation, which
he purchased by his Death; and because none but such, who do so, shall, by the
Tenor of the Gospel, suffer eternal Punishment; therefore it is no Objection
against the Merit of our Savior's Death, to say, that his temporal Death
cannot expiate an eternal Punishment, because he did not suffer Death for any
such Purpose; and he did not do so, because he did not suffer Death for those,
who alone shall suffer eternal Punishment; that is, he did not suffer Death for
those, who shall refuse and reject the only Means of Salvation, which he
purchased for Mankind by his Death.

Much more might be offered upon this Occasion; but this being sufficient in
this Place, I shall therefore here add no more.

In the mean while, I do not question, but that the Value of our Savior's
Sufferings s^fficient to expiate the Guilt of any Sins, for whose Expiation
such Sufferings were designed; though such Guilt should be supposed or allowed to
deserve eternal Punishment of it self.

And from the Whole, that has been spoken on this Subject, we do at last
conclude, That a Release from the Vengeance due to Sin by the Law, and
purchased for Man by his Savior the Lord Jesus Christ, who for Man's sake made
his Soul a Sacrifice for Sin, is a just and legal Pardon, and agreeable to the
Measures of Right Reason, and to the Laws of Justice.

For, because the Pardon of Sin does imply in it a Desert of Punishment in the
Party forgiven; and because the laying the Punishment which he deserves, upon
another, is in effect a Remission of that Punishment to him; and because,
lastly, a Remission of Punishment to the Party, which deserves such Punishment,
may be truly accounted a Pardon of his Sin; (For, Pardon of Sin to any Party
whomsoever, is neither more nor less, than the Releasing or Freeing him from
the Punishment due to his Sin:) Therefore, if, by what has been spoken, it has
appeared, that the Punishment due to our Sins was, without any Injustice,
translated upon another, and that upon such Translation it cannot justly be
exa^^ed of us; then it will follow, that so far forth as our Sin was pardoned,
so far forth the Pardon was just.

And therefore, so far as we have hitherto gone, we may truly and rationally
conclude, That that Method, in which the Gospel discovers our Salvation to be
brought to pass, does exactly square to the Rules of Right Reason and Justice.
For, so we have seen, that it does in the first thing, which a
Gospel-Forgiveness does imply and contain in it; and that is the Pardon of Sin.

CHAP. VIII.
Bare Pardon of Sin not sufficient for a Gospel-Salvation: Some Reasons offered
for it. They, who are entitled to the Reward of the Law, must be entitled to
the Obedience paid to the Law. Such Obedience must be perfect. Some Practical
Reflections.

Though we have hitherto asserted the Sufficiency of our Savior's Sacrifice, for
the Expiation and Pardon of Sin; yet it must be confessed, that bare Pardon of
Sin, upon any Considerations whatsoever, (be those Considerations never so
valuable) yet can never in Reason or Justice make out a Gospel-Salvation. And
therefore, we laid it down at the Beginning, that as, in order to a
Gospel-Salvation, there was first required an Expiation, and, in consideration
of such Expiation, a Pardon of Sin; so there is also required a Restitution to
Holiness, and the Gift of Eternal Happiness. For, because God's Law (as every
good Law besides) does consist of Two Parts; First, the Directive, or what it
requires to be obeyed; and, Secondly, the Vindictive, or what upon Disobedience
it requires to be suffered: And because Sin is the Disobedience to, or
Transgression of the Law: Therefore, so far as we have discoursed of the
Justice of the Pardon of Sin, so far we have only discoursed of that Justice
which concerns the Vindictive Part of the Law. But by doing that, we have not
at all discoursed of that Justice, which concerns the Directive Part of the
Law. And if, upon our neglect to follow such Directions, God does, for any
Reasons whatsoever, forgive us the Penalty, which we incur by such our Neglect,
and nothing more; it must be confessed, that by such a way of Proceeding, all
Care of the Directive, which is indeed the principal Part of the Law, is thrown
away. For, because all Men are Sinners, that is, because none do obey the Law;
though God upon valuable Considerations do remit the Punishment to some, or all
of those Sinners; yet still it is certain, that the Duty enjoined by the Law
remains undone by all. And I therefore say, it is certain, because it will
notoriously appear by what follows, that the Pardon of Sin, that is, the Pardon
of the Transgressionof the Law, (though such Pardon be granted by God, and
obtained by us, in Consideration of our Savior's Suffering in our stead) can
never pass for the Performance of the Directions of the Law; that is, can never
pass for that Righteousness, which consists in an Obedience to such Directions;
and therefore (as we shall see more fully hereafter) can never be sufficient
for our obtaining a Gospel-Salvation, which includes in it an eternal Holiness,
and an eternal Happiness, as well as the Pardon of Sin.

Now, that the Pardon of our Transgression of the Law, can neither in Reason
nor Justice pass for our Performance of the Directions of the Law, will appear
notorious from these following Considerations.

1. Because Forgiveness does imply in the very Notion of it a Desert of
Punishment; and a Desert of Punishment does imply in it the Transgression of
the Directions of the Law. For, no Man can be truly forgiven, who does not
justly deserve to be punished; and no Man can justly deserve to be punished,
who does not transgress the Directions of the Law. Now, for the same Reason,
and upon the same Account, to esteem a Man Innocent, and yet a Criminal, must
needs be absurd, because it is a Contradiction. And then, because in
Contradictions only one Part can be true; therefore, so sure as we are, that
he, who is truly forgiven, must be a Sinner, so sure we are also, that he
neither is, nor can be truly supposed to be Innocent. And therefore, when God
forgives, as it is supposed in Reason and Common Sense, that he does forgive
Sins, and is so expressed in general in the Scriptures; so it is supposed in
the same Reason, and the same Common Sense, that he does forgive those Sins to
Sinners. And therefore we cannot be supposed to have obeyed the Directions of
the Law, upon the Account, that God does forgive us the Punishment threatened in
the Law.

2. Nor can we be so, secondly, Because should we undergo the Punishment which
the Law threatens; yet we could not by so doing ever fulfill the Directions of
the Law. For, it is notorious in it self, that the suffering what the Law
threatens, is not the doing what the Law commands. Now, it is certain, that the
Forgiveness of that Punishment, which we have deserved, can give us no better a
Title to Obedience, than our suffering such Punishment could have done, had
that Punishment not been forgiven. And it looks absurd at first view, that
Guilt should consist in the neglect of Obedience, and that Punishment should be
the Desert, and therefore in Justice the Effect of our Guilt; and yet that
Obedience should be the Effect of our Punishment: That is, that Guilt, after
one Remove, should be the proper, and in a manner natural, because just Cause
of Duty. But, we may be therefore sure, that it is no such matter, because we
are told by God himself, that there is a Punishment after this Life, which
shall be Eternal; which yet would be impossible, if the suffering of Punishment
were equivalent to a perfect Obedience to the Directions of the Law: Which,
because for the Reason alleged, and for more, that might be alleged; it
cannot be, therefore neither can the Forgiveness of such Punishment be so. For,
it is evident, that the Forgiveness of our Punishment can do no more toward
the making us obedient, than the Punishment it self could do, should we undergo
it. And therefore the Pardon of our Sins for the Sake of our Savior's having
suffered in our stead, does not of it self suppose us to have fulfilled the
Directions of the Law.

3. The Forgiveness of our Sins does imply nothing more in it, than our Freedom
from that Vengeance, which the Law has threatened, and which we have deserved by
our Transgression of the Directions of it; and so does only free us from the
vindictive Part of the Law: But does not, for that Reason, entitle us to those
Rewards, which the Law promises to those who obey its Directions. Now, it is a
very different Thing to be barely freed from the Vengeance of the Law, and to
be entitled to the Promises of the Law; because the Case may really so be put,
as that a Man may obtain a Release in the First Case, and yet never be entitled
to, or possess the Promise in the Last. And in all Cases (let them be what they
will) yet still we are certain, that the First can only in Reason, nay, in
Nature, belong to those, who have transgressed the Law; and that the Last can
only in strictness of Law belong to those, who have obeyed the Law: And
therefore, that the First can be only Matter of Favor; whereas the Last may be
Matter of Right. Now, if there be any Difference in the Two Cases, then, let
that Difference be lodged where it will, yet we are from thence assured, that
the Cases are not the same; and therefore, neither can the Forgiveness of our
Sins upon the Account of our Savior's suffering the Vengeance of the Law in
our stead, be any Argument, that we have fulfilled the Directions of the Law.

And therefore, though it be affirmed by several Learned Men, that we are
sufficiently entitled to Eternal Happiness by the bare Pardon of our Sins, in
Consideration of our Savior's Sufferings; and that for this Reason, because
when we are treated by God with Impunity, we are at the same time treated as
Innocents; and that he, who is treated as an Innocent by God himself, (who
cannot be mistaken in the Case) must therefore needs be so.

Yet these Men, as they do not sufficiently distinguish between an Innocent and
a Saint; so neither do they between Impunity and a Reward. For, though our
Savior's Sufferings are meritorious of a Reward to himself, (and so the
Scriptures tell us;) yet they are only expiatory to us; and that too in the
Nature of the Thing. For, the utmost Design, the natural Tendency, and the only
Business of an Expiation, is to obtain an Impunity for such, who have deserved,
and therefore must in Justice, without such an Expiation, suffer Punishment.
But neither Scripture, Reason, or Justice will tell us, that a Purchase of
Impunity from the Vengeance due to the Transgressors of the Law, can be a
Purchase of that Reward, that is only due to Obedience to the Law. In one Word,
Reward and Punishment derive not only from different, but from contrary
Principles: And Impunity has, and that too in the Nature of the Thing, a
Respect or Relation only to Punishment, but none at all to Reward: And for that
Reason, the meritorious Cause of Impunity can have no Concern with Reward
neither. Since then the Death of our Savior is the meritorious Cause of Pardon
to those, who have transgressed the Law; it is absurd in Nature and Reason to
make it also the meritorious Cause of that Reward, which, as it supposes no
need of Pardon, so does by the Law only belong to those, who have obeyed the
Law. So that an Expiation does at the most but make a Man Innocent, but does
nothing to make him a Saint: For it only cancels his Neglect of Duty, but does
not do that Duty for him, which he has neglected.

By all which it appears,

1. That Reward does in Propriety and Justice only belong to Obedience to the
Law.

2. That Punishment does in Propriety and Justice only belong to the
Transgression of the Law.

3. That Expiation has no Relation to the Reward of Obedience; but that it only
concerns that Punishment, which without such Expiation is in Justice due to
Disobedience.

Now because God has taught us, not only that our Sins shall be forgiven in and
through our Savior; but that also, in and through the same Savior, we shall
obtain a glorious Reward: And because (as has appeared in general) Reward does
in Reason and Justice as properly belong to Duty and Obedience, as Forgiveness
does to Expiation: Therefore our next Enquiry must be, upon what Obedience such
Reward is grounded. For, we are very sure, that, because the Distribution of
such Reward is lodged in God's Hand, therefore the Reward will be bestowed
justly; and because we are sure of that, therefore we are farther assured, that
it will be conferred upon Duty and Obedience. And indeed, having in what went
before seen what Provision God has made for the fulfilling the Vindictive Part
of the Law, in order to the Possibility and Justice of Man's Salvation; and
being satisfied, that that Provision, which he has made for that purpose, will
not also fulfill the Directive Part of the Law; it must be our next Business to
enquire, what Provision he has made for the fulfilling of such Directive Part.
For,

1. In the first place, We may therefore be certain, that it shall be fulfilled
one way or other; because the Law being God's, is in it self Holy, Just, and
Good. And we know, (and that too by the Light of Nature) that it cannot be an
indifferent Thing to the Everwise, and most Holy Lawgiver, whether a Law,
which is so, be obeyed, or not. For, that would be in effect to cast off all
Regard to Duty, Holiness, and Righteousness. Nay, (which is yet more) because
every just Law must for that Reason, even because it is just, design the
Obedience of them, for whom it is made; I say, because it must principally and
in the first place design their Obedience, and not their Punishment, (and
therefore not their Forgiveness neither) it would be in effect to contradict
his own Design, in giving forth his Law. For, the Design of his Law being the
Holiness of his Creatures, resulting from their Conformity to the Directions of
such Law; if he should so pardon their Neglect of such Conformity, (that is,
the Neglect of their Obedience) as to make no Provision for such Obedience; it
is evident, that by so doing he would have no more Regard to the Directive Part
of his own Law, than they have had; and so the Manner of Forgiving the
Transgression of the Law would unravel the main and principal Design of making
the Law. But, we know very well, that such a Way of Proceeding is neither
agreeable to Wisdom, nor to Holiness; and therefore much less to Infinite
Holiness and Wisdom. And therefore, if the Ever-Holy and Wise God gave up his
beloved and only begotten Son to Death for the accomplishing the vindictive
Part of the Law; and if for the same purpose he punishes all Mankind, not only
with many Miseries in this World, but also with Death in their going out of it:
I say, if he does all this, (which yet he himself tells us is his strange Work)
that so the vindictive Part of the Law may not fall to the Ground; shall we
think, that he will do less, or indeed shall we think, that he will not rather
do more, to make good the main and grand, and, I may add, the more natural
Design of his Law, which is the Holiness of his Creatures? No! we are sure,
that no Word of God shall return empty; and that therefore his more solemn and
express Declarations (and such are his Laws) shall be sure to have their
Accomplishment, and shall be fulfilled in their due time, notwithstanding the
counter-Endeavours of Hell and Wickedness. For, it shall not be in the Power of
any Enemy to defeat the Counsels, or evacuate the main Design of that Law,
which proceeds from Eternal and Essential Holiness, and which moreover is
backed with Omnipotence. We may therefore very well be satisfied, that God has
made Provision for the Performance and fulfilling of the Directions of the Law,
as well as of the Vengeance of the Law.

2. And we may be satisfied, in the second place, that such his Provision does
and must extend it self to Man, to whom the Law was given. For, it would be
unreasonable to imagine the Design of any Law to be fulfilled, when such Law is
not obeyed by any of those, for whom it was proclaimed, and to whom it was
given. And therefore, because the Law was given to Man, and requires Obedience
from Man, we cannot say, that the Design of the Law is fulfilled, unless Men do
obey it.

3. We may be satisfied, in the third place, that no Man in this World (except
our Savior alone) has obeyed the Directions of the Law, from the Days of
Adam's Transgression, to this very Day. And we may be satisfied moreover, from
so long an Experience of the Thing, and from Reason grounded upon such
Experience; but, if both will not do, we may be satisfied from Scripture, that
no Man ever will or shall pay a perfect Obedience to such Directions. Nay, it
is notorious, that no Man does so, because we know, that every Man in this
World is under the Curse of the Law; and we know, that every Man is so, because
we are assured, that every Man in his going out of the World shall undergo such
Curse, that is, that every Man shall die. Now, Death being the Penalty expressly
assigned by the Law to the Transgression of the Law; we may be sure, that
those, who are not only liable to such Penalty, but who shall also certainly
undergo it, are Transgressors of the Law. And then, because that is the Case of
all Men in this World, we may from hence also conclude, that all Men in this
World are Transgressors of the Directive Part of the Law.

4. We may be satisfied, in the fourth place, (both because it is the Object of
each good Christian's Faith and Hope in particular, and because it is an
express Revelation of the Will of God in general) that some Men shall be saved;
that is, shall obtain an Eternal Happiness in another World; though we know most
assuredly, that all Men do transgress the Law in this World. Now, because it is
impossible in Justice, and absurd in Reason, that Vengeance and Salvation
should both be the Recompense of the Transgression of the Law; and because,
though all Men are Transgressors, and some of those Transgressors shall be
pursued with Vengeance, yet others, upon the Account of their sincere, though
imperfect Obedience, shall be rewarded with Salvation: Therefore we do infer in
the

5. Fifth place, That those who shall be so rewarded, shall, in order to such
their Reward, be then entitled to a perfect Obedience, when such Reward shall
come to be bestowed: That this is a Truth laid down in the Covenant of Grace,
the Covenant by which alone Men shall obtain Salvation: That Reason and Justice
do fall in with such Covenant, in asserting and maintaining the same Truth; and
that therefore it is every way firm and good. For, it sounds harsh to our
natural Sense of Justice, that without a perfect Obedience a Man should obtain
that Reward, which in Justice and Reason can only be allotted to such
Obedience. For, an Obedience that falls short of Perfection, is in truth and
reality (whatever it is called) a Transgression: And so is so far from
deserving a Reward, that it does indeed stand in need of a Pardon. For, the
Defect of such Obedience is Sin; and Sin mixed with any thing, corrupts the
whole, and makes it unclean and impure; and we know, that nothing that is so
can enter into the Kingdom of God. And therefore, in order to his Salvation,
St. Paul renounces his own Righteousness, which is of the Law, in the Third to
the Philippians, and the Ninth Verse. Alas! the very best of us in this World
have our Failings and Imperfections; and not only sinful Weaknesses, but sinful
Wilfulnesses also: Nay, our very Righteousnesses are but filthy Rags: And then
we may be satisfied, that we shall never in those Rags be admitted to the
Marriage-Supper of the Lamb. When the Prodigal Son returned to his Father, the
Father not only provided the Feast, but the Robe and the Ring too, to qualify
his Son to be a fit Guest for such a Feast.

Now from these Propositions, so laid down and confirmed, it may seem no very
remote Consequence, that that Righteousness, to which those, who shall be
saved, shall be entitled, in order to such their Salvation, shall be the
Righteousness of that Person, whom the New Testament sets forth to be the
Savior of Mankind. For, their Salvation must in Justice and Reason depend upon
their Obedience to the Law; otherwise such Salvation can in no Sense be truly
reckoned a Reward. And if that Obedience, to which such Reward is by the Law
assigned, were entirely their own, then that Person, whom yet the Scriptures
call their Savior, could in no Sense be truly so called, because in such Case
their Salvation would be their own legal Purchase, as being the Reward of their
own Obedience. And lastly, to suppose the Savior to be therefore their
Savior, because he bestows upon them Salvation, in Consideration of an
Imperfect Obedience, that is, an Obedience which is so far from deserving
Salvation, that it does indeed stand in need of a Pardon, is to suppose him to
bestow the Reward there, where the Law does not lay it; that is, upon
Supposition that such Law is Just, it is to suppose him to be Unjust. From all
which, the Conclusion at last must be, That since their Savior must save them
for their exact Obedience to the Law, (if he save them justly) and since we are
sure, that he does save them justly, though they have paid no such Obedience;
that therefore the Method in which he saves them, is by entitling them to a
perfect Obedience. Now, how that is done, will be our Business to make out; as
also, that the Manner of his doing it is just and righteous, and therefore
reasonable. By which it will appear, that our present Way of Reasoning does not
want its Weight, though perhaps it may at present seem too light to demand an
Assent. But before we proceed to that, we shall offer a few Practical
Reflections upon what has been already laid down.

1. And first, From what has been said, we may easily perceive, that God is not
so fond of our Persons, or of our future and everlasting Happiness, as to
provide for such our Happiness, by his own Neglect of his own Law. For, Heaven
and Earth shall pass away; but one Tittle of his Law shall not do so. Though
therefore we can easily allow our selves to break his Law, and make light of
his Commands; yet we may therefore be sure, that he will not do so, because his
Commands and his Laws are Holy. For, it is a foolish and vain Imagination to
think, that essential Justice and Holiness, that is, in other Words, that God
will put Slights upon himself, to gratify those with Impunity, and much less
with Glory and Immortality, who put Slights upon Holiness, by sinning against
his Laws. The truth of it is, because we are fond of our selves, and very
desirous of our own Happiness, we are (ay! and the very best of us too) too apt
to think that God is so too; and in this Case we are foolishly inclined to
think him to be altogether such an one as our selves: And this makes us to
entertain soft and easy Thoughts of his Mercy; and in the mean time to have no
due Regard to his Justice. But, if we would but consider, that both his Mercy
and his Justice are guided by his Holiness; and that as he will not punish us
without our Demerit, so neither will he reward us unless we become righteous: I
say, if we would but seriously consider this, it might be an effectual Means to
engage us to look better to our Ways; lest whilst we think we are on our
Journey toward Happiness, we be found by Mistake to tread in the broad Road,
that leads to Destruction.

2. From what has been said, we may learn where to seek and to find what we do
all naturally desire, and that is Happiness. I say, we may learn, that it is
only to be sought wisely, and to be found certainly in the Ways of Holiness.
For, though our Sins may be expiated by the Death of our Savior; yet when we
have made our selves Sinners, we are not sure that we shall be made Partakers
of such Expiation, and so we are not sure of the Pardon of such our Sins; and
we are sure, that without returning to the Paths of Holiness, we shall not be
made Partakers of such Expiation, and that therefore we shall only enjoy the
Benefit of it, when we are found in such Paths. The most certain Means
therefore of making our selves happy, will be by keeping our selves holy: For,
so long as we do so, we keep our selves within the reach of the
Gospel-Promises; and though our Holiness be not in this World perfect, yet (as we
shall see shortly) God will provide a way to make that and our Happiness
perfect in another World.

3. By what has been said, we may learn, how it comes to pass, that we have no
sincere and entire Happiness in this World; and that is, because we have not
here any sincere and entire Holiness. For, were we freed from all Sin, we
should be also freed from all Misery. For, we mistake, if we do not think, that
Crosses, Losles, Pains, Sickness, and Death, are all of them the Effects of our
Sins: And we may be sure, that they therefore are so, because we are sure, that
when our Sins are done away, all these Miseries shall be taken away too. No!
Sin is mixed with our Life; That spots, stains, and corrupts it; and so
Affliction and Misery come to be mixed with it too. And therefore, were Sin
once banished out of this lower World, and true Righteousness planted in its
Place; were God's Will done in Earth, as it is done in Heaven; his Kingdom
would presently come, and the Glories and Beatitudes of Heaven would certainly
flow in upon all those, who have arrived to a perfect, that is, to an Heavenly
Holiness. Since therefore we may be so easily satisfied, that it is Sin, and
Sin alone, that impairs our Happiness, and that too (that Happiness which most
of us love so well) our Happiness in this World; one would think, that this
Consideration single, and by its self, should engage us to hate Sin, as much as
we love such our Happiness; and therefore also to endeavor to increase our
Happiness, by destroying our Sins.

4. If our Good Works are so full of Flaws and Imperfections, that, in order to
our Salvation, it will be necessary, that we be entitled to a Perfect
Obedience; then this may instruct us, not to trust in them alone for our
Salvation. For, though it be true, that we cannot be saved without them; yet it
is as true, that we cannot be saved by them alone; because an Imperfect Cause
can never produce a Perfect Effect. Such Salvation then, as the Gospel has
taught us to hope and expect, God in our Savior only can bestow; but we can
never by our Good Works deserve. And therefore, even he, who has wrought out
such Salvation for us, has taught us (when we have done the best we can) still
to confess our selves unprofitable Servants.

5. Lastly, If no Man's Obedience be perfect in this World, then it will but
ill become us to boast of our Perfection here: Which in this latter Age has
been the known Practice of several proud Seducers, and Enthusiasts; who have
therefore despised all other Christians, but those of their own Cast or Sect,
as carnal and profane Creatures. A Pride hateful to God and Man, and such,
which has constantly betrayed it self to come from that proud Spirit, (which is
the great Deceiver) by the detected Falsities, Forgeries, and Villainies of its
most celebrated Pretenders. Let us therefore have a care, that we be sober, and
humble: Let us not be high-minded, but fear: And seeing there remains a Rest
for the People of God, let us labor to enter into that Rest, lest any of us
fall short, by reason, not only of our Unbelief, but of our Confidence also.

CHAP. IX.
Whose that Perfect Obedience is, in Consideration of which, Eternal Happiness
is given to Man. That it is our Savior's. Some Objections answered; and the
Doctrine of the Imputation asserted, 1. Against those, who acknowledge the
Expiation; 2. Against those, who deny it. This Doctrine agreeable to the
Scriptures.

HAving laid it down in the former Chapter, that those who shall be rewarded
with Eternal Happiness, shall be entitled to a Perfect Obedience, in order to
such their Reward: Our next Business is to enquire, Whose that Perfect
Obedience is, to which they shall be so entitled; and whether they can obtain
such Title according to the Rules of Reason, and the Laws of Justice.

1. And to satisfy this Enquiry, we lay it down, first, That as the Obedience
of our Savior to the Law, while he was in the Flesh, (and so under the Law)
does alone in Justice deserve that Eternal Happiness, which is promised in the
Gospel; so the Imputation of such his Righteousness to Believers, is the only
true and just Reason, why they shall be made Partakers of such Eternal
Happiness. When the Apostle tells us, in the Fourth to the Galatians, the
Fourth and Fifth Verses, That God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made
under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law; he seems to insinuate at
least, that our Savior's being under the Law, was in such Savior a requisite
Condition in order to his working out of Man's Salvation. Now, had our Savior
been such a Man as other Men are, the Reward (it is confessed) had only
concerned his own Obedience: But, because by taking upon him the Nature of Man,
he obliged himself to obey that Law, which God had given to Man; and because he
took upon himself the Nature of Man, when he might have refused so to do; and
lastly, because he took it upon himself for Man's sake alone, and not for his
own; therefore for Man's sake alone, and not for his own, he put himself under
an Obligation of obeying the Law. From all which, the least that can be
inferred is, that Man was to reap some considerable Benefit and Advantage from
such his Obedience.

It is usually alleged in this Place, That had he not obeyed the Law himself,
he could not have been qualified to make an Expiation by his Death for the
Transgression of others: And we may take notice, that they who offer this
Allegation, do in effect tell us, that his persect Obedience to the Law, was
nothing more, in order to Man's Salvation, than a previous Condition to sit and
capacitate him to make such Expiation.

2. And therefore we offer it to Consideration, in the second place, That the
Reward promised in a Savior to those, who do confessedly pay but an imperfect
Obedience to the Law, is greater than that Reward which was promised to Adam's
perfect Obedience, without a Savior. It is true, there is not in the Law given
to Adam any express Promise at all: But then it is as true, that there is an
implied Promise. For, when the Law does threaten his Transgression with Death,
it does as good as promise Life to his Obedience. And indeed, there was no
Occasion, much less any Necessity, that the Promise of the Reward (which was
Life) should be express; because the Law being given to Man in his Innocence,
(that is, while he was in actual Possession of the Reward) he was by the Tenor
of the Law secure of such Possession, if he did not forfeit it by his
Transgression.

Now we therefore say, that the Reward promised in a Savior to those, who do
confessedly pay but an imperfect Obedience to the Law, is greater than that
Reward which was promised to Adam's perfect Innocence; because we are assured
by the Gospel, that Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor can it enter into the
Heart of Man to conceive, the Reward which God has prepared for those, who in a
Savior shall be saved. But we are sure, that no such Things can be truly said
of the Reward promised to Man in his Innocence: For, he knew his Reward
experimentally, and therefore it could not be to him Inconceivable.

Put we the Question then, How comes the Reward promised in the New Covenant,
so far to differ from, and to exceed the Reward promised in the Old? For, no
doubt, there is therefore a good Reason for such Difference, because all God's
Words and Actions proceed (if I may be allowed so to speak) from Essential
Reason: And it is as certain, that they all proceed from Justice. Now, neither
Justice nor Reason do tell us, that an Immense and Inconceivable Reward can be
assigned to a broken and imperfect Obedience; and, in the mean while, a less
Reward be assigned to a perfect Obedience. Since therefore a less Reward was
proposed to Adam's Obedience, (had such his Obedience been perfect) than what
in a Savior is proposed to a Christians imperfect Obedience; it is notorious,
that such different Rewards can neither in Justice nor Reason be assigned to
the different Obediences, as such; but that the Reward to the Christian must
derive from his Savior's Merits, as the Reward of Adam must have derived from
his own. If therefore it be demanded, upon what Grounds the Christian's Reward
does derive from his Savior; the only Answer that can be given, is, That it
must derive either from his Savior's Sufferings in his stead, or from his
Savior's Obedience in his stead. And then, because we have already made it
out, that it cannot either in Justice or Reason, or indeed in Common Sense,
derive from his Savior's Sufferings (which do and can, and that too in Nature,
only relate to his Punishment, but not at all to his Reward) therefore we do at
last conclude, that that immense Reward which the Gospel assigns to the
believing Christian, it does assign to him only in Consideration of his
Savior's Obedience.

Before we go any farther, we may from what has been said, observe, That the
immense Value of our Savior's Person and Dignity does show forth it self, as
well in the immense Value of his Obedience, as in the immense Value of his
Death and Sufferings. For, as it is evident, that the Reward of his Obedience
is inconceivably greater than the Reward of Adam's had been, (had Adam been
obedient) so, for the same Reason, it is infinitely greater than the Obedience
of any other Man, were that other only such a Man as Adam was. The Dignity
therefore of the second Adam is inconceivably greater, than the Dignity of the
first.

Now, as by what has been said, it has appeared, that the Obedience of our
Savior is the only Obedience, that is or can be entitled to a Gospel-Reward;
so, in what is to follow, we must make it our Business to show, first, that
Christian Believers may in Reason and Justice be entitled to such his
Obedience, (which is to be made good by Reason;) and, in the next place, that
they shall actually be so, (which is to be made good by Scripture.) And then,
if upon the whole Matter it shall appear, that they may be so entitled, and
that in order to their Salvation, it is necessary that they be so; then the
Conclusion will be, That the Doctrine of the Imputation is therefore true,
because the Salvation of Believers is certain. But then I would have it
remarked, that I only say, that this Conclusion will follow, if our Reasons
prove good. For, because the Salvation of Believers is generally agreed to be
express Revelation; but the Imputation in order to such Salvation, is not;
therefore, as our Reasons, and those Interpretations of the Scriptures which we
bring to back them, may be found defective; so, when once they appear so to be,
I do profess in this Case, as in all others, that I shall willingly part with
them; because to me, express, and on all Sides acknowledged Revelations, do
weigh a great deal more, than all Reasonings, and elaborate Deductions, or
Interpretations whatsoever.

Now, to make it out, That our Savior's Obedience may be justly and reasonably
imputed, or assigned over to Believers, in order to their obtaining the Reward
of such Obedience, I would take notice in the

1. First place, That it is a Thing in a manner generally agreed among Mankind,
that one Man's Duty (in many Cases at least) may be done by another, and yet
the Reward of such Duty shall be thought, and that too justly, to belong, not
so much to him who did the Duty, as to him for whom it was done. The Thing is
notorious in all Proxies, Deputations, and Substitutions whatsoever: And every
Proctor, Attorney, Solicitor, Factor, Journey-man, Apprentice, and Servant, is
a Witness and Proof of it. For, all such Persons do, as such, act, not for
themselves, but for others; and the Benefits and Advantages which arise from
such their Actions, do accrue to others; and, which is more, and more to our
purpose, are by the Common Sense of Mankind thought to do so justly. And though
it be confessed, that in most, if not all the Cases mentioned, some Benefit
does come to him, who actually does the Duty; yet it is known also, that such
Benefit becomes his Due, only by a collateral Contract; but that it is neither
the full, nor the direct Reward of the Duty done by him. For, the whole Right
of such Reward is universally thought to belong to his Principal. And I do
hardly believe, that any Man, though never so just and righteous, does then think
that he wrongs his Journey-man, when he pays him his Wages agreed between them,
though by so doing he does not allow him all that Profit, which he himself reaps
by his Work. But if any Man, the better to maintain his Argument, shall resolve
with himself to go against the ordinary Sense of Mankind in the Case, and shall
pertinaciously affirm, that such Dealing is unjust (as I am satisfied, that in
some special Cases some Men are so resolved) I shall not at present (because I
need not) contend the Point with them; but shall add in the

2. Second place, that which serves as well for our present Design, but what is
more free from all Exception; and that is, That if any Friend, purely of his
Good Will, without any Expectation of Recompense or Reward, nay, with a fixed
Resolution not to receive any; I say, if such a Friend shall undertake and
discharge the Duty of another; whether his so doing may not so far be imputed
to such other, as to entitle him to that Reward, which belongs to such Duty. To
say, [It cannot] would go a great way toward the making of all Friendship
useless, and would have a great tendency toward the rendering of all Peoples
Lives forlorn and comfortless; and, when thoroughly examined, would be found to
contain so much Uncharitableness in it, that (were there nothing else in the
Case) yet such an Opinion, purely upon the account of its Malignity, and
ill-natured Influence upon Humane Affairs, may very well be thought not to
contain that Justice in it, to which it pretends. And therefore, because a
mutual and friendly Assistance of each other, in the Discharge of the several
Duties that lie upon us; and sometimes in the undertaking and performing each
others Duties entirely, is very beneficial to Mankind in general; and because
Justice is so too; therefore we shall rather conclude, that it is agreeable to
Justice, than that it contradicts it, that one Man may, not only receive, but
also have a Right to the Reward of that Duty, which yet is done for him by
another. To which we shall add,

3. In the third place, That when one Man is disabled from doing his Duty, and
another, in Compassion to his Disability, does it for him; there it will be so
far from being unjust, that the disabled Person should receive the Reward of
the Duty so done, that it would be uncharitable (and all Uncharitableness is at
least a Degree of Injustice) to debar him of such Reward.

Now before we proceed any further, we do, in order to our main Design, from
the Propositions already laid down and confirmed, conclude in the first place,
That our Savior being made of a Woman, made under the Law, that is, being
Incarnate, and made Man, in order to qualify himself, among other Things, to
fulfill the Directions of the Law given to Man, might justly (if he so designed
and pleased) do that Duty for other Men, which the Law laid upon them as their
Duty; and by doing such Duty in their stead, might entitle them to that Reward,
which the Law had promised to those, who should obey it. For, the Reward, by
the Tenor of the Law, becoming his Right, upon the Account of his Obedience,
there can (I think) no doubt be made, but that he may, and that justly too,
Assign over such his Right to whom he pleases; and that he may so much the
rather do so, because those, to whom he makes such Assignment, were utterly
disabled, and that too without their own Personal Fault, to do such Duty
themselves. And there can be the less doubt, that he might so do, because, had
it not been for Man's Disability, and for Man's sake, there had been no
Occasion, and much less any Necessity, that he should have been Incarnate, and
so have been made Man himself; that is, (so far as we are concerned at present)
there had been neither Occasion nor Necessity that he should have brought
himself under any Obligation of obeying the Law given to Man.

Now, if we add, to what has been spoken, that our Savior will only assign
over the Reward of his Obedience to those, who though they neither did nor could
obey the Law, yet however were willing, and did testify the Sincerity of their
Willingness by their hearty Endeavors to have obeyed it; and who moreover were
heartily grieved and troubled, that they could not make good their Endeavors,
(which yet is really the Case between our Savior, and all those, who shall be
rewarded for his Righteousness:) I say, if we add this Consideration to all the
former, it may perhaps help to give us a more rational Satisfaction in the
Case, and may convince us, that his Assignment of the Reward of his own
Obedience, to such People, is an Act of Justice, as well as Pity; because God,
by putting his Creatures into Being, has (and with all Reverence I desire to
speak it) instated them in a Right to such Things, without which they must
needs be miserable, and which (though they heartily endeavor it) yet they cannot
by their own utmost Powers supply themselves with.

From the Whole, we may rest satisfied, that the making over of that Happiness,
which was the Reward of our Savior's Obedience, to other Men, is no such
absurd or unjust Thing, as it is but too generally taken to be. And I am pretty
well assured, that some even of those Men, who have stiffly opposed it in the
Case of Man's Salvation by our Savior, yet both have and will allow it in
other Cases, that run parallel with it; and that therefore, in order to their
taxing such a Way of Proceeding of Injustice, they do even contradict
themselves.

It may perhaps be objected, That our Savior, by assigning the Reward of his
Obedience to any others, does by so doing dispossess himself of such Reward;
because, by making it over to them, he does in effect make it away from himself.

Which seeming Difficulty (for so I shall only call it in this Place) may be
easily removed, if we do reflect back upon what has been said in this Chapter,
concerning the Inconceivable Value of the Purchase made by our Savior's
Obedience, and the Inconceivable Dignity of his Person: And, when we have made
such Reflection, shall go on farther to compare it with what has been spoken
to, and made good, concerning the extensive Merit of his Expiation, in the
beginning of the Sixth, and upon the Second Objection of the Seventh Chapters.
For, by comparing what has been said in those two Places, with the Case now
before us, and by applying the one to the other, it will be no hard matter so
to resolve this seeming Difficulty, as that it shall not any longer appear to
be any such Thing.

But to return: As it has appeared, that Men may obtain the Reward promised by
the Law, in virtue of their Savior's Obedience to the Law, whereas yet they
have not obeyed the Law themselves; so, if the Reward due to their Savior's
Obedience, can therefore only be justly transferred upon them, because their
Savior did obey the Law in their stead: Then the next Conclusion will be,

2. That his Obedience to the Law must, in order to their receiving such
Reward, be accounted as theirs; that is, in other Words, his Obedience to the
Law must be first imputed to them as theirs, before they can have a just Title
to that Happiness, which is only the legal and just Reward of his Obedience.
For, if one Man performs that, which it was another Man's Duty to do, but yet
does not do it, or, which is more, professes that he does not do it for that
other; in such Case, that other can never in Justice either claim or receive
the Reward belonging to such Performance; because that Performance can never be
made his, till it be made over by him, who was the Author of it. And, on the
other side, it is no easy Matter to conceive, how one Man should make over the
Reward due by Law to his own Obedience, to another; if such his Obedience, to
which alone such Reward is by the Law inseparably annexed, be not some way or
other made over also; And if such Obedience, in such a Case, must some way or
other be made over; the least that can be supposed, will be, that it must be
made over by Imputation. For, the Merit of the Reward consisting in the
Goodness or Holiness (which you will) of the Obedience; and the just Gift of
the Reward (according to the Law) depending upon the Merit of that Reward; it
is obvious to infer, that the Reward can only there be justly given, where the
Merit is lodged; and that the Merit is only lodged there, where the Holiness or
Goodness of the Obedience is lodged: For, the Promise of the Reward is only
made to the Obedience. If therefore Eternal Happiness (the Reward of Obedience
to the Law) may be justly transferred to any Man, in Consideration of his
Savior's Obedience; it will follow, that the Merit of such Reward must (at
least Imputatively) be transferred also: And if the Merit of the Reward be
transferred, then that, in which that Merit does alone consist (and that is the
Obedience) must be transferred likewise.

And, upon the whole Matter, we do conclude, that that Part of the
Gospel-Salvation, which consists in Eternal Happiness, (which is the Reward of
the Savior's Obedience alone, in rigor of Law) may by that Savior be justly
assigned over to Man, which was the First Thing which we undertook to make
good: And, secondly, That to make good the Justice of such Assignment, that
Obedience, to which alone such Reward does in Law belong, must (at least
imputatively) be assigned over also.

It may be objected here, That I talk of the Law, when I should talk of the
Gospel. For, though it be true, that the Reward promised by the Law to Obedience
does only belong, and therefore can in Justice be only bestowed upon a perfect
Obedience; yet it is not true, that the Reward promised by the Gospel is so
clogged or limited, but that by the Tenor of such Gospel it may belong to an
Obedience that is not perfect, provided such Obedience be attended with
Sincerity, and followed with Repentance.

Now, in answer to this Objection, it is freely granted,

1. That the Promise of the Reward in the Gospel Covenant is, as it is said to
be; that is, it stands engaged to Sincerity and Repentance; and that therefore
those Believers that are sincere in their Obedience, and penitent for their
Failings, (though neither their Obedience, nor their Repentance be absolutely
perfect) yet shall inherit such Promise.

2. But then, in the second place, it must be also acknowledged, that God has
made and established that Promise of the New Covenant in our Savior, and in
our Savior alone. Now, the Business of our present Enquiry is not, what is the
Promise of the Gospel, (for in that we are agreed;) but upon what just and
rational Consideration such Promise is founded. And since it is agreed in
general, that it is founded in our Savior; all the Debate at present is,
Whether the Promise of the Gospel-Reward be founded in that Savior's
Obedience, or in his Death; or, in other Words, Whether the Promise of the
Reward be not so grounded upon our Savior's Obedience, as the Promise of
Pardon is upon his Expiatory Sacrifice. And if those Reasons which we have
already, or shall hereafter offer, do prove, that in Justice and Reason it is
so; then the Objection vanishes.

I may add, That the Objection only speaks to the Matter of Fact, that there is
a Promise made in the Gospel to an Imperfect Obedience, which no one, so far as
I know, denies;) But it does not speak, as to the Matter of Right and Justice,
how such a Promise can be justly and reasonably made, without any Violence
offered to the Law of Works, which is God's Law, as well as the Gospel is so:
And we may be sure, that God's Laws do not either contradict each other, or
control any the Laws or Rules of true Justice or Reason.

That then, which is the only Thing which is at present maintained, is, That
the Promise of the Reward in the Gospel to an Imperfect Obedience had never
been made to Man at all, because it could not have been made justly, if the Law
of Works given to Man had never been fulfilled by Man; and that the
Gospel-Promise was granted in Consideration that our Savior fulfilled that
Law. And to this, the Objection, so called, is really no Objection at all.

It is confessed indeed, that the Eternal Life promised to Believers in the
Gospel, will be attended with an Happiness inconceivably greater, than the
Eternal Life promised in the Law to Adam; and it may be thereupon surmised,
that the Reward promised in the Gospel has no Eye to the Obedience required in
the Law; and (if it has not) that then the Eternal Happiness of Believers
cannot be the Purchase of our Savior's Obedience to the Law.

To which I shall say no more at present, than this; viz. That it is agreed,
that our Savior by his Death took away Death, the Curse of the Law, and made
good such his Achievement by a Resurrection. Now, the Life after the
Resurrection is a Life in a Spiritual Body, not in a Natural, (I speak the
Apostle's Words:) And our Natural Reason tells us, that a Life in a Spiritual
Body, is a more refined and exalted Life, than a Life in a Natural Body; and
that in multitudes of Circumstances it must needs differ from it; perhaps in so
many, that it may be as inconceivable to us now, as the future Happiness of the
Saints. And yet this refined and exalted Life is no good Argument, that it was
not purchased by our Savior's Death; nor, that such his Death had no Eye to
the Law of Works in such Purchase.

And so say we: Though the Happiness of the Blessed be greater, vastly greater,
than what was by the Law of Works promised to Adam upon his Obedience; yet that
can never make it out, that such Happiness is not the Purchase of our Savior's
Obedience, or that such his Obedience was not an Obedience to the Law of Works.
It may indeed convince us of the super-eminent Dignity of his Person, and of
the inconceivable Value of that Reward, which by being purchased by him,
derives such its Value from such his Dignity, as we observed before; and which
is directly to our present purpose, it may furthermore convince us, that the
Reward of Believers is the Reward of their Savior's Obedience made over to
them; but not a Reward that does or can belong to their own (at the very best)
Imperfect Righteousness.

I know very well, that this Doctrine is denied by many Divines, and other
Learned Men; and those too, not only such, who do utterly deny, that God
bestows Salvation upon Men in consideration of their Savior's Merit and
Purchase; but even by the generality of those, who yet do ascribe the Salvation
of Man to such Purchase and Merits. What Reasons they offer for such their
Denial, we shall speak to hereafter: But, in the mean time, we shall go on to
make good the Imputation, against each Party that denies it; and after that,
shall show, that the Reasons of such their Denial have not that weight which
they seem to have.

1. And first, we shall speak to them, who do not barely acknowledge, but even
contend, that the Salvation of Man is obtained in Consideration of the Merits,
that is, in Consideration of the Death of our Savior.

And the Men of whom we now speak, do maintain, That in order to Man's
Redemption, our Savior died for Man's Sin; and that, by such his Death, he
puchased for Man a Freedom from that Vengeance, which is the just Wages of such
Sin. Now, what they so maintain, we believe to be true, and are ready to join
Hands with them to make it good, against all the Adversaries of the Cross of
Christ. So far therefore we are agreed. But then, it may be demanded, How our
Savior can possibly suffer for Man's Sin, if the Sin of Man be not imputed to
him? For, in order to his suffering for Man's Sin, he must take upon him such
Sin; and the taking upon him Man's Sin, is the having Man's Sin accounted as
his own; that is, in effect, and in other Words, the having Man's Sin imputed
to him. And then, on the other Side, how can Man have any Pretense of Benefit
from his Savior's Sufferings, if the Merit of such Sufferings be not imputed
to Man? For, without such Imputation, the Merit (be it what it will) can only
belong to the Savior himself.

It is evident therefore, by what has been said in short, but might be made out
in more Words) that they who assert the Expiation of Sin by our Savior's
suffering in Man's stead, do therefore entitle Man to the Benefit of such
Expiation, because Man's Sin was imputed to his Savior, and the Merit of his
Savior's Sufferings, at least, imputed to Man.

Things therefore standing thus in the Case of the Expiation, it may be
reasonably and further demanded, Why our Savior's Righteousness or Obedience
may not as warrantably be imputed to Man, as Man's Sin may be imputed to his
Savior? or, Why the Eternal Happiness, which is assigned as the Reward of
Obedience by the Law, may not be bestowed upon Man in Consideration, that the
Merit of his Savior's Obedience is imputed to Man; as well as a Release from
Punishment may be granted to Man in Consideration that the Merits of his
Savior's Punishment are imputed to Man? For, there is the very self-same
Reason, why the Obedience of our Savior should be imputed to Man, in order to
Man's Salvation, that there is, that the Sin of Man should be imputed to our
Savior, in order to such Savior's Condemnation: And there is the self-same
Reason, why the Merit of our Savior's Obedience should be imputed to Man, in
order to Man's obtaining Eternal Life; as there is, that the Merits of our
Savior's Sufferings should be imputed to Man, in order to Man's Release from
Death. That is, Imputation is as reasonable and as justifiable in one Case, as
in the other; for they both stand upon one and the same Foot; and for that
Reason, he who throws down one, throws down both. And therefore, whoever
rejects the Doctrine of the Imputation of our Savior's Righteousness to Man,
does, by so doing, reject the Imputation of Man's Sin to our Savior, and all
the Consequences of it: Or, in other Words, he who rejects the Doctrine of the
Imputation, does, by so doing, reject the Doctrine of the Expiation likewise.

2. Those Men who do so far maintain Man's Salvation to depend upon the Merits
of our Savior's Death alone, as to deny Imputed Righteousness to have any
thing to do in the Purchase of Salvation, do not seem to me sufficiently to
consider, that there are Two Things contained in the Death of our Savior; 1.
The Death it self; and, 2. His Obedience to the Will of his Father, in
submitting himself to such a Death. Now, because Death is, properly speaking,
what he underwent for the Expiation of Man's Sin, (for the Vindictive Part of
the Law does expressly assign Death as the Punishment of Sin) hence it is (as I
conceive) that most of those who have discoursed of Man's Redemption for the
Sake and Merit of our Savior's Death, have placed the Merit of the Purchase
only in such Death; and in the mean time have wholly laid aside all
Consideration of the Merit of that Obedience, which attended it. But because
the Scriptures in the Case speak otherwise, and because we must needs be best
instructed out of them, in any thing which concerns our Savior; therefore,
laying aside at present all Schemes of Humane Reasoning or Contrivance, we
shall entirely apply our selves to them for such Instruction. Take we notice
therefore, that they inform us, that our Savior was delivered to death by the
determinate Counsel and Foreknowledge of God: So St. Peter tells us, in the
Second of Acts, and Twenty third Verse; and so we are told in other Places.
From which we infer, that the Sufferings and Death of our Savior was an Act of
Obedience to the Will and Counsel of God. All which St. Paul gives us in a few
Words, but those very full to our present Purpose, when he tells us, in the
Second to the Philippians, the Eighth Verse, that Jesus Christ being found in
fashion as a Man, humbled himself, and became obedient unto Death, even the
Death of the Cross. Since therefore our Savior's Death was, at least, one
Branch of his Obedience to the Will of his Father; that is, since his Obedience
in the Scripture-Account was showed in his Death, as well as in his Life; and
therefore Both, when in Conjunction, were one and the selfsame thing: I would
desire to know, upon what Ground, or by what Warrant, it can be imagined, and
much less defended, that Man is saved for the sake of his Death, but that he is
not saved for the sake of his Obedience. And I would so much the rather insist
upon this Inquiry, because though it should be granted, that our Savior's Death
was meritorious of Man's Everlasting Happiness, (and that is the present Case)
then, if we must make an Opposition between his Death and his Obedience, (and
to ascribe Man's Happiness to his Death, but not to his Obedience, does make
such an Opposition;) but, I say, if there must be an Opposition made between
them, it seems much more agreeable to Reason, nay indeed to common Sense, to
ascribe such Merit to the Obedience of his Death, than to his Death. For, it is
the Voice of Natural Justice, that Duty and Obedience may deserve a Reward; but
it is a Strain beyond Conceit, that Punishment should do so too: For, if that
were allowed, then the suffering of Punishment for the Breach of the Law, might
be justly meritorious of a Reward, as well as Obedience to the Command of the
Law; and so at long run it would come to the same Event to break the Law, as to
keep it. But, because that cannot be allowed, therefore, if People will have an
Opposition in the Case, where the Scripture has made none, we should rather
ascribe Man's Eternal Happiness to the Obedience of our Savior's Death, than
to the Death it self. And then, if our Eternal Happiness may be ascribed to the
Merit of our Savior's Obedience in one Case, why may it not be so in more?
For, for the same Reason that a Believer may be interessed in the Obedience of
his Death, he may be interessed in the Obedience of his Life too. Since then,
in the present Case, it is allowed, that a Believer has his Interest by
Imputation in the first Case; it will follow, that he may, and (considering
what has already been said) that he must have it so in the last. That is, in a
few Words, That the Obedience of our Savior both in his Life, and in his
Death, must purchase for Man that Happiness, which by the Tenor of Justice is
the proper and appropriated Reward of Obedience.

It being evident then, that for the same Reason, for which the Merits of our
Savior's Death may belong to Believers, the Merits of his Obedience may do so
too; and that both the one and the other do therefore belong to them, because
they are imputed to them: Our next Business must be with those Men, who deny
all Imputation whatsoever, and therefore neither allow the Merits of his Life
or Death to have any thing to do in the Purchase of Man's Salvation.

And because we have already and largely discoursed of the Purchase made by his
Death: Our only Business at present will be to enquire concerning the Purchase
made by his Obedience. And because the Men, we have now to do with, do deny all
Imputation of what our Savior did or suffered whatsoever; therefore we shall
lay down, and attempt the Proof of this following Proposition: That that
Righteousness, by which Believers shall be judged, and in consideration of
which they shall obtain Salvation at the Resurrection, and the Great Day, shall
be the Obedience of their Savior, while he lived in the Flesh, imputed to such
Believers.

1. In order to this, we take notice; in the first place, That the Scriptures
do tell us, That all Men shall be judged according to their Works, that is,
according to their Obedience, or Disobedience in this Life.

2. We lay it down, in the second place, That all those who shall be adjudged
to enjoy an Eternal Happiness, must, in order to that blessed Sentence, be
first entitled to a perfect Righteousness. This, we reckon, is proved before.

3. We take notice, in the third place, That no Man, though never so righteous,
yet ever did, does, or shall arrive at a perfect Righteousness in this Life.

The Question then, that remains to be resolved, is, How any Man shall come to
be entitled to a perfect Righteousness, that so he may be entitled to Eternal
Happiness? And because no Man can warrantably say, how he shall not be, unless
he do assign some Way how he shall be so entitled; therefore they who in this
Case deny all Imputation whatsoever, do tell us, that a perfect Holiness shall
be bestowed by God upon Believers by Infusion; that is, (for so they must mean)
God shall by his Mercy and Free Grace bestow such a Stock of Holiness upon
Believers, as shall cleanse and fill all their Capacities, and so make them
perfectly holy, and by consequence capable of Eternal Happiness.

1. Now though it be freely, granted, that God will in the next World bestow such
an holy, God-like, and eternally-durable Frame of Spirit, upon all those who
shall be saved, (as we shall discourse more fully hereafter) yet it is not in
Consideration of such Holiness, that Believers do obtain that Eternal
Happiness, which is the promised Reward of the Gospel. For, by what is to
follow, it will, we presume, appear, that Salvation obtained in Consideration
of our Savior's Obedience imputed, is, First, Better accommodated to the Rules
of Reason, and the Laws of Justice, than Salvation obtained in Consideration of
an Holiness infused after a Resurrection: And, Secondly, That as it is better
accommodated to the Rules of Reason, and to the Laws of Justice; so, that it is
so also to that Account which the Scripture gives us of this Matter.

1. For, the Obedience by which Believers are to be judged at the last Day, is
that Obedience which was required of them in this World: And accordingly as Men
have behaved themself here, so they shall receive the Reward of such their
Behavior there. So St. Paul, in the Second to the Corinthians, chap. 5. ver.
10. We shall all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the Things done in his Body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad. By which we may understand, that the Distributions to be made
by Justice upon a Resurrection have an Eye to the Lives of Men before their
Death: And from thence we may infer, that they are not to be guided by an
infused Holiness, which does (even by those who plead for it) not take place,
till after the Resurrection. (For, it is agreed on all Hands, that no Man's
Holiness is perfect in this Life.) Now, it does not look altogether so
rational, nor so agreeable to the Measures of Justice, or the Revelations of
Scripture, that a Man should be judged according to what he has done in the
Body before his Death; and yet, that he shall by the last Judicial Sentence be
everlastingly rewarded for an Holiness infused by God after his Resurrection.
And therefore, if we will adhere to Reason, Justice, and Revelation, we must
conclude, that Believers do not after this Life obtain an everlasting Happiness
in consideration of such an infused Holiness.

2. And, secondly, we may do well to take notice, that the Obedience of our
Savior to the Law, was the Obedience which was required of Man, and which was
also paid by Man in this Life; and that because such his Obedience was perfect,
therefore the Reward assigned by the Law to Obedience, was in strictness of Law
and Justice due to such his Obedience. If therefore his Obedience, while he was
in the Flesh, may by any Means be so made over to Believers, as to be justly
accounted theirs; then there can be no doubt, but that their Right to the
Reward appointed to such Obedience will be just and good too. And that it may
be justly accounted theirs, we have, as we believe, made it good already. But
an Holiness infused by God after a Resurrection, can in no Sense, nor in any
Congruity be accounted, and much less can it be, an Obedience paid by Man
(while in the Body) to the Law; and therefore it cannot in any Sense, or in any
Congruity, be such an Holiness, to which the Reward, allotted only to
Obedience, can belong. And therefore, neither can Eternal Happiness be bestowed
upon Believers, in consideration of such an infused Holiness. In one Word,
Infused Holiness in order to Man's Salvation, does in no wise agree to that
Account which the Scriptures give us of the Last Judgment; and though it pretends
to magnify God's Mercy, yet it takes no care in the mean while to assert and
vindicate his Justice; but makes the whole Process of that great Assize to be
arbitrary and illegal, whilst it opens a Way to Man's Happiness, by an
Holiness, which has nothing to do with the Cause, upon which alone his Trial
depends. For, a Reward conferred in another World, upon an Holiness infused in
another World, does in no wise look back to, or pass a Judgment upon the Life
that was led in this World. But because we know assuredly, and that by many
express Testimonies of Scripture, that that will be the Work of the Last Day;
therefore, for that Reason alone, if yet there were no other, we cannot ascribe
a future Happiness, the happy, just, and final Sentence of that Day, to such an
infused Holiness. No! the Holiness, for which we are to be rewarded in a future
Life, must be an Obedience practiced in this Life. The Duty is laid upon Man by
the Law here; and the Reward stands engaged to the Performance of such Duty.
And if the Righteousness of Man at the Resurrection be not an Obedience paid to
the Law then, when the Law required such Obedience; the Reward promised by the
Law can in no wise belong to such Righteousness. And therefore, to fancy a
Reward for an Holiness, in which the Law is not at all concerned, (as it is not
in an infused Holiness) is to have no regard to the Law at all. For, Happiness
bestowed in consideration of an infused Holiness, may as well be granted
without the Law, as with it; nay, indeed much better: Because, had there been
no Law at all, then such a Management had not affronted the Law: Whereas the
Law having been once settled, to bestow the Reward promised by the Law upon an
Holiness, which has no Eye to the Law, (as an infused Holiness has not) is to
slight and overlook the Law; for it allows the Law to have nothing to do in the
Allotment of such a Reward.

It may be plausibly objected in this Place, That while I vindicate the Cause
which I undertake, against one Adversary, I give it up to another: Because,
while I assert, That every Man shall at the last Day be judged according to his
Behavior in this World, I do in effect refer the Reward, that shall then be
adjudged to Believers, to such their Behavior; that is, in the present Case,
to their Obedience in this World: And that, because I do so, I therefore pull
down with one Hand that which before I had set up with another, viz. the
Imputation of their Savior's Righteousness, in order to their Salvation.

1. But this Objection is grounded upon a Mistake; which Mistake is, that the
Objection supposes an Opposition between the imperfect Obedience of Believers,
and the Imputation of their Savior's Righteousness; from which supposed
Opposition, it infers, That if Salvation be bestowed upon them in consideration
of the one, that it cannot for that Reason be bestowed in consideration of the
other. And indeed, such a Supposition being granted, the Inference would be
good.

2. But then, secondly, we do assert and maintain, That there is no such
Opposition between the Imputation, and the imperfect Obedience of Believers, as
that Salvation must be disjunctively bestowed in consideration of the one, in
opposition to, and exclusive of the other. For, though we allow a Believer's
imperfect Obedience to be a subordinate; yet we do not allow it to be the
meritorious Cause of Man's Salvation; that is, though he shall have the Benefit
of the Imputation, in consideration of his sincere, but imperfect Obedience;
yet he shall only obtain his Salvation in consideration of such Imputation.
For, Justice only bestows the Reward there, where it is deserved; and to bestow
it elsewhere, may be called Mercy, or may be called Favor; but cannot, either
in propriety of Speech or Truth, be called Justice. Since therefore it is our
present Business, to maintain that Method, in which God bestows not only Pardon
of Sin, but over and above an eternal Happiness, to be just; and since, in
order to its being so, it must conform to his Law, which is so; or else the Law
cannot be fulfilled; and since, lastly, the Law does not assign its Reward to
an imperfect Obedience; (For, it requires a perfect, not an imperfect
Obedience; and its Reward can and does only belong to what it requires, not to
what it does not require.) Since, I say, the Case stands thus; it is obvious to
observe, First, That because the Reward is only bestowed upon the Savior's,
that is, upon a perfect Obedience, to which alone by the Law it does belong;
that therefore the Execution of the Law, in the Distribution of its Reward, is
just: And, Secondly, That because (as we have already proved) such his perfect
Obedience is justly imputed to Believers, in consideration of their sincere,
though imperfect Obedience; that therefore, as by his Obedience alone they are
entitled to the Reward, so, according to the Tenor of the Gospel, by their own
Obedience they are entitled to His. When therefore Believers come to be judged
in another World, according to what they have done in this, the Enquiry shall
not be, Whether by their Life led in this World, they have deserved an eternal
Happiness in that? (for that needs no Enquiry, because it is most certain in it
self, and confessed on all Sides, that they have not:) But their Trial shall
be, Whether their Obedience in this Life, though imperfect, (and therefore in it
self undeserving of eternal Happiness) be such, as may so far entitle them to
their Savior's Purchase, as that his Obedience may be imputed to them, in
order to their obtaining such Purchase.

I have therefore pursued this Thing the farther, because the Socinians do, as
much as in them lies, vilify the Imputation of our Savior's Righteousness;
for by that Means they gain great Advantages, to run down the Doctrine of the
Expiation. And yet too many of our own People do here close with them; and do
not, to me, seem to discern the mischievous Consequences that will fall upon
the whole Doctrine of Redemption, if once our Savior's Obedience be excluded
from being the meritorious Cause of Man's Salvation. For, as to my self, I am
at present very well satisfied, that if the Law had never been fulfilled by
Obedience, the Breach of it had never been expiated by any Punishment inflicted
for such Breach whatsoever. For, God's Design in promulging his Law was, that
it should be obeyed. For, most certain it is, that it cannot be indifferent to
him, whether we obey what the Law commands, or suffer what it threatens. No!
his Design is, that we should be holy, and safe: Such a Design flows from his
Nature, and is an Effect of his essential Bounty and Goodness, and therefore
came from him freely, without the Invitation or Solicitation of any Thing
besides his own Propension or Inclination. But Judgment, that is, Punishment
for the Breach of his Law, is his strange Work, that is, it does not come from
him, as his Goodness and Bounty does, freely and spontaneously; but is extorted
from him by the Interposition and Provocation of Sin. To accomplish therefore
the principal and more natural Design of his Law, it is necessary, that his Law
should be obeyed; for there is no other way of fulfilling of it. And therefore
He who told us, that not one Jot or Tittle of it should fail; told us likewise,
that he came to fulfill it: Fulfill it, not only as the Antitype of it, but
likewise as a Subject to it. The Law then was fulfilled by our Savior's
Obedience; and by his Obedience alone: For all the rest of Mankind broke it.
And had he not fulfilled it by obeying it, the Vengeance of it had always
continued: For, it must have continued, so long as it was justly due; and it
must be justly due, so long as the Law remains broken, and not obeyed. We owe
our Reward therefore to our Savior's Obedience, as we do our Redemption to his
Death. Nay, which is more, and more direct to our Text, because the Law must of
necessity be obeyed, and because He alone did obey it; therefore, for that
Reason, as well as for several others, there is not Salvation in any other. I
would desire them, whom it chiefly concerns, seriously to consider it.

And now having seen what Reason says to the Doctrine of our Savior's Imputed
Righteousness; the next Thing to be enquired, because the next Thing proposed,
will be to see, what the Scriptures say to it. In order to which, take we
notice in the

1. First place, That our Savior, at his Incarnation, did take upon him the
same Flesh and Blood with us Men. For, because he, the Man Christ Jesus, and
we, do both of us derive from one and the same single and common Stock, Adam;
and because we are several Propagations and Branches from that one Stock;
therefore we may be truly reckoned, because in reality so we are, the several
and distinct Parcels of that common Flesh and Blood, out of which all Mankind
are made. But though the Son of God became Man, in order to be the Savior of
Man; and though he was made of the same Blood with all Men, in order to his
becoming Man; yet because we know, that the distinct Parcels of this common
Flesh and Blood have, and that justly too, very different and sometimes
contrary Allotments of Justice; therefore we take notice,

2. In the second place, That all those, who, according to his Gospel, are
sincere and penitent, are secure of having the Communications of his Spirit.
And then, though that Flesh and Blood, of which they with him are made Partakers,
be common to all Mankind besides; yet by such Communications it is so far
particularized, (if I may so speak) as that in the estimation of the Gospel,
those who enjoy such Communications do become a Part of himself. And hence it
is, that such People are in the Scripture said to be Members of his Body, of
his Flesh, and of his Bones; and that he is so often, in the same Scriptures,
called their Head. And we may know, that he himself does so account them,
because he reckons those Kindnesses, which are done to his distressed People,
as done unto himself. These Things then being so, how does the Scripture teach
us to reason upon them in relation to our present Business? Why, as Sin was the
Transgression of Adam entailed upon all his Posterity, because the Covenant was
made with him, and with all his Seed; for, all Mankind (as the Apostle in the
Epistle to the Hebrews speaks in the like Case) were in the Loins of Adam in
the Day of his Transgression: So Believers, in consideration of their Savior,
being regenerated by the Spirit, and so becoming the Children of God; the
Righteousness of such their Savior does so belong to them, who are his Seed,
[See Isaiah 53. ver. 10.] as Adam's Sin did to his. And therefore, in him they
are the Sons of God, and the Heirs of the Covenant of Grace. And to this very
purpose, and in this very manner too, (if I be not very much mistaken) the
Apostle argues, in the Fifth to the Romans and the Nineteenth Verse: For, as by
one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners; so by the Obedience of one shall
many be made Righteous. And we may safely pronounce it, that the Parallel of
the Apostle would be no Parallel at all, if the Obedience of Christ did not so
affect Men in reference to their Righteousness, as the Disobedience of Adam did
to their Corruption. And therefore, the same Apostle tells us, in the First to
the Corinthians, chap. 1. ver. 30. That Christ is made to us Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption. And the same Apostle still,
after he had renounced his own Righteousness, as well knowing, that it would
not avail him for the Purchase of that Happiness which the Gospel promised,
does confide only in that Righteousness, which is through Faith in Christ, in
the Third to the Philippians, ver. 9. And in another Place, we are said to be
made the Righteousness of God in him; and, in the Prophet Jeremiah, he is twice
called the Lord our Righteousness. Other Places might be produced, which, though
they have been interpreted to a different Sense; yet, by that Light which has
been already offered, it does appear, that they do more than barely countenance
what we now maintain, viz. That our Savior's Obedience shall be made ours; and
how it shall be made so. For, what we have said concerning that Intimate
Relation between him and his People, will be a sufficient Warrant for the
Imputation of his Righteousness to them.

CHAP. X.
Some Objections answered, and some Practical Inferences made.

NOW besides those Objections, which lay directly in our Way; and which we were
therefore constrained to speak to, in order to clear and open our Passage in
the Profecution of the present Argument; there are some others, which lie
against our whole Discourse, and which, because we have promised so to do, we
must now speak to apart, and by themselves.

1. And first, it is objected against the Imputation of our Savior's
Righteousness, That such his Righteousness, which is meant in the present Case,
is his Obedience to the Law, and that his Obedience to the Law does consist in
the Conformity of his Actions to the Law. His Obedience therefore being lodged
in his Actions, unless his Actions can be made ours, it is impossible, that his
Obedience should be so. For, so long as the Actions of one Man are not the
Actions of any other Man; so long it must and will be true, that the Obedience,
which is only paid by such Actions, and which is therefore undoubtedly lodged
in such Actions, cannot be that others neither. This is the Substance of the
Objection, which might be put in more Words; but because I think the full Force
of it is sufficiently expressed in what we have spoken, therefore it needs not.

1. Now, in order to clear this matter, we observe, first, That the Right which
one Person has in a Thing, may be made over, or transferred to another Person,
by the delivery of such Thing to him; provided, that he who delivers it, do
some way or other signify, that it is his Mind, by such his Delivery, to
transfer such his Right: Where we must take notice of Two Things; First, That
bare Delivery of the Thing, without such Signification, does not alter the
Right in such Thing: For, in such Case, the Thing being only transferred
naturally, but not legally, the Right in it is not transferred with it. Take
the Thing in an Instance. A Man puts a Purse of Money into another Man's Hand,
who stands by him, to hold it. In this Case, the Purse and Money is actually
and naturally transferred from one Man to another; but though it be naturally
transferred, yet it is not (for all that) legally transferred: For, the
Alteration of the Possession, does not in the Case alter the Right; and so, tho
the Money be removed from one Man to another, yet the Propriety in the Money is
not. On the other Side, one Man by Deed of Gift, or some other legal and
sufficient Conveyance, makes over his Right in the Purse of Money to another,
but still keeps the Money in his own Possession: In such a Case, though the Money
be not naturally, or locally, (call it which you please) transferred or made
over to that other, yet it is legally so. For, though the Possession remain in
the Donor; yet the Right is transferred to, and therefore is in the Donee. The
second Thing to be observed in this Case, is, that that Thing, whose Right is
transferred by Delivery, must be something which is capable (as our Law speaks)
of Manual Occupation. For, though the Right to some Things may be transferred by
Delivery; yet the Right to others cannot be so transferred.

2. Secondly, therefore, The Right in a Thing may be transferred from one
Person to another by Deed, or any proper and legal Instrument of Conveyance
there, where the Nature of the Thing is such, that the Thing it self cannot be
transferred by Delivery. And such a Thing (for Instance) is a Privilege: For,
we may bestow upon another a Privilege, which of Right belongs to our selves,
and, by so doing, may give him a Right in such Privilege; though we cannot so put
him in the possession of it, as we can do of a Ring, or a Garment. Such a Thing
then may be legally and rightfully transferred to another, though (because it is
not capable of Manual Occupation) it cannot be transferred locally or naturally.

3. Thirdly, Where a Thing not capable of Manual Occupation does so inseparably
by Law belong to one, that it cannot but do so, without Breach of the Law; yet
even such a Thing shall by Act of Law be so imputed to another, that that other
shall receive the Benefits, or suffer the Mischiefs, which legally flow from
such Thing, as if the Thing it self, which was the Cause of such Benefits or
Mischiefs, had been his own. And such are the Actions of some Persons, when
they stand in some sorts of Relations to other Persons. And, to come up a
little closer to our present Design; it is a known Practice in our own Law, the
Law of England, that in some, if not many Cases, the Actions of the Wife shall
be so reckoned the Actions of the Husband; and, in some Cases, the Actions of
the Husband shall be so reckoned the Actions of the Wise, that they shall, and
that too by Law, receive the Advantages, and suffer the Disadvantages, of each
others Actions. And I do the rather instance in this Case, (though several others
might be offered) because we know, that the Scriptures do expressly tell us,
that the Savior is so the Head of his Body, the Church, as the Husband is the
Head of the Wife.

These Things being laid down, in order to make plain what is now to follow,

1. It is to be observed, in the first place, That the whole Transaction of
Man's Salvation is managed by way of Covenant; that is, it is managed in a
judicial or legal, not in a natural way. This is as notorious, as it is, that
the Transaction is carried on by mutual Obligations of the respective Parties
engaged, by Promises, by Rewards, by Punishments, and the like. It appears
likewise by the Sacraments, which are legal, not natural Conveyances of those
Graces or Blessings, of which they are the Pledges. For, Water in Baptism does
not naturally wash away Sin; nor are the Bread and Wine natural Seals or
Ratification of the Covenant in the Sacrament: They only give us a Title to the
Benefits of it, as the Delivery of a Deed, a Turf, or a Wand, do to an Estate:
That is, they are only legal Ways of Conveyance, and therefore do loudly
proclaim a Covenant.

2. The Transaction of Man's Salvation being managed by way of Covenant, (that
is, in a legal or judicial, not in a natural way) though it be granted, that the
Obedience of one Man cannot naturally be made over to another; yet it will not
from thence follow, that it may not therefore be made over judicially, or in a
legal way. Nay! by what has been said already, it is notorious, that it may be
so made over. And therefore, besides the Instance already offered between an
Husband and Wife, (which will in the Scripture-Account as well belong to our
Savior and Believers) it is in some Cases the agreed Sense of Mankind, that he
who does not hinder the bad Action of another, when it is in his Power, (at
least, when it is his Business, and so ought to be his Care so to do) by not
hindering it, does in Law make such bad Action his own: That is, the Action in
Law shall be so imputed to him, as if he himself had done it; and he shall
accordingly be obnoxious to the just and legal Consequences of it. And then, if
the ill Action of one Man may (in a judicial way) be justly imputed to another,
and so be rated as that others; then there can be no good Reason, why the good
Actions of one Man may not be justly so rated and imputed likewise.

All therefore that the Objection offers, is, That one Man's Action (be that
Action Obedience, or what it will) cannot naturally become or be made the
Action of any other Man: But that it may not legally or judicially become so to
all Intents and Purposes of Law, whether of Rewards or Punishments, as it does
not affirm it, so, should it do so, it may, for the Reasons offered, be truly
denied, because in deed and truth it is false.

But we shall have occasion to speak more to this Matter hereafter; and
therefore shall not pursue it any further here. Only one Remark I would leave
upon it, and that is this: That it is too frequent a Practice, when Men
discourse upon Points of Christian Doctrine, to treat of such Points rather as
Natural Philosophers, than as Lawyers, or Divines: That is, that I may speak my
Meaning as plain as I can, they fall upon the Nature of the Things, of which
they discourse; and so argue from their Natural Properties, Qualities, and
Powers; and from thence draw such Conclusions, which (though they call them
Theological) yet have nothing to do with Divinity, or indeed with the Christian
Religion. Whereas they should treat of those Things, which are concerned in
Religion, in a legal and judicial way: They should examine, what Relation and
Regard they have to that Holy Covenant; how far they agree with, or differ from
the Design and Purport of it; and, by consequence, what Share they have, or
what Influence they may or may not have, for the hindering or promoting, or
accomplishing its Designs. The Case under our present Consideration will make
my Meaning still plainer: For, they who tell us, that our Savior's Obedience
cannot be made over to Man, because it consists in Action, and because one
Man's Action cannot, in the Nature of the Thing, be made over to another; do
only discourse of his Obedience in a natural Sense, that is, as
Natural-Philosophers; but do not discourse of it in a moral or judicial Sense,
that is, as Divines, or Lawyers: And because they do not, therefore they start
from the Business of Religion; and so instead of discoursing of the Christian
Covenant, they give us a Lecture concerning the Nature and Properties of Animal
Motions and Powers: And, in the mean time, overlook that that is, or, at least,
should be their Business, which is, the legal or judicial Consideration of such
Obedience; as, what Relation it has to the Law; what Influence it has by Law
upon the Person whose Obedience it is, or upon others; how far the Merit and
Desert of it may go, and the like. And, to come close to the Business we have
been all this while upon, Because Imputation is an Act of Law, and not of
Nature, to undertake to overthrow the Possibility of it by the Laws and Rules
of natural Motions or Actions, is much the same thing, as to attempt to open a
difficult Place of Scripture with a Knife, or a Saw: The Things are of
different Natures; and there is no Congruity in the Application of the one, for
the Resolution of the other. And I am very well satisfied, that the Church of
Christ had never been troubled with the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, if the
Romish Priests had never heard of nor read either Aristotle, or his
Commentators, concerning Substance and Accident. It was the jumbling of his
Natural Philosophy, and Religion together, that produced the Monster. Nay,
which is yet something more; had they been trained up in any other sort of
Natural Philosophy, they had been very well satisfied and contented without
that new and uncouth Article of their Christian Faith. Other Instances might be
produced to show, that gross Fooleries and Corruptions have crept into Religion
at this Door. Whereas a due Consideration, that the Christian Religion is a
Covenant, and the treating of it as such, would acquaint us much better with
the Nature, and engage us more effectually to the Duties of it. But this useful
Remark being left in this place, we proceed.

2. The second Objection therefore against the Imputation of our Savior's
Obedience to Believers, in order to their obtaining the promised Reward of the
Covenant, stands thus: That supposing, that our Savior did provide for the
Directive Part of the Law by his Obedience; and that he did also fulfill the
Vindictive Part by his Death: In such Case, there does therefore seem to be a
Superfluity in his Provision; because, should his Obedience alone be imputed to
us, we should by that Means be entitled to a perfect Righteousness; and then
there had been no need of his Death to expiate our Sins, because then we should
have had no Sins to be expiated. And that which may add some Strength to what
is thus alleged, is this: That our Savior paying that Obedience to the Law,
while he was in the Flesh; the Obedience so paid was paid before his Death; and
therefore, in the Course of Things, it should seem, that it might be imputed
before his Death, and, in the Course of Justice, without it. For, when by such
Imputation we were once entitled to his Righteousness, the Plea of his Death,
in order to qualify us for Happiness, must needs be useless and superfluous.

Now, though it may seem indeed, that Things might have gone so, if we only have
a Regard to the Order of Time; yet if we look to the Order of Reason and
Justice, we shall easily perceive, that they could not. For, we cannot by any
Estimation of Justice whatsoever be reckoned Righteous, so long as our Guilt
lies upon us; and, when once by our Sins we have made our selves guilty, such
Guilt must needs lie upon us, till it be one way or other expiated. Now,
because we have already and fully made it out, that it neither is, nor can be
expiated any other way, than by the Death of our Savior; therefore the Death
of such Savior must, in the Order of Justice, first expiate such our Guilt,
before we can possibly be entitled to a perfect Righteousness. For, who can put
a clean thing into an unclean? It is neither agreeable to the Methods of Wisdom
or Justice, so to do: And therefore we may be sure, that it cannot be the
Practice of the most Wise and Just God. No! we know well enough, because we are
told so by the Spirit of God, that our Savior first died for our Sins, and
after that rose again for our Justification. And we know moreover, that when
God had once given forth his Law, though, had an exact Obedience been paid to it,
the Vengeance of it, which was only Conditionally threatened, had never been
executed, (for, the Justice and Execution of such Vengeance does entirely
depend upon our Transgression;) yet after we had transgressed the Law, the
Execution of such Vengeance was as necessary, as was the Happiness promised, if
we had not transgressed it. For, Vengeance does, by the Tenor of the Law, stand
in the same Relation to Sin, as Happiness does to Obedience. The first becomes
our Due, in case we neglect our Duty; the last, in case we perform it. And the
Distribution both of the one and the other, must as necessarily follow, upon
our Performance or Nonperformance of those Conditions to which each of them do
stand respectively engaged, as it is necessary for God to love Holiness, and
hate Wickedness. One Part of the Law therefore is in Justice to be provided
for, as well as the other. And then, if neither the Punishment of Man could
fulfill the Law, on the one Hand; nor the imperfect Obedience of Man, on the
other; and if our Savior undertook for Man's sake to supply Man's Defects;
then there was the same Necessity in Justice, that he should fulfill the
Vindictive Part of it, by his Death; that there was, that he should fulfill the
Directive Part of it, by his Obedience. And therefore, as neither his
Obedience, not his Death, had been necessary, (no, nor his Incarnation neither,
upon which such his Death, and such his Obedience do depend:) But, I say, as
neither his Obedience nor his Death had been necessary, if Man had obeyed the
Law himself; so, upon Man's Transgression of the Law, they both became
necessary: Because, as we have already seen, Man's Punishment is in Justice as
necessary upon his Breach of the Law, as his Obedience was upon God's
Promulgation of the Law. And therefore, when our Savior undertook to save
sinful Man, that is, Man who had transgressed the Directions of the Law, and
Man who lay exposed to the Vengeance of the Law; it was necessary, in order to
his doing so justly, that he should have a Regard to one Part of the Law, as
well as to the other; that is, that he should fulfill the Vindictive by his
Death, and the Directive by his Obedience. And had he not done both, one Part
of the Law (at least) had been neglected, and so the Redemption had not been
just. By which we may by this time understand, that there is no Superfluity in
his providing for Man's Salvation, both by the Obedience of his Life, and by
the Sufferings of his Death. For, that cannot in Reason be accounted
Superfluous in the doing of any Thing whatsoever, without which such Thing
cannot be done justly.

Now, as in our Answer to the former Objection, we made good not only the
Possibility, but the Legality too of the Imputation of our Savior's
Righteousness; so, in our Answer to this, we have showed the conjunct Necessity
both of the Imputation, and of his Death, in order to Man's Salvation. By all
which, we may at last come to understand, that God in his Counsel for Man's
Salvation, as he consulted his Mercy, so did not lay aside the Care of his
Justice. For, the whole Transaction, as we have largely seen, was in him,
Justice; as it was to us, Mercy: Justice, as it fulfilled the whole Law; Mercy,
as it redeemed us from the Curse, and invested us in the Promise of the Law. A
strange Mixture! and (had it not been discovered to us by Revelation) by our
Natural Reason not to be fathomed: But, as it is revealed, agreeable, as we
have seen, to such Reason so assisted.

1. By which we may, in the first place, understand, That though Christ crucified
be to the Jews a Stumbling Block, and to the Greeks foolishness; yet to us he
is (and that notoriously) the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God. For, his
Wisdom and his Power can, we see, bring Things to pass beyond the reach of
Angels and Devils, and therefore much more beyond the reach of short-sighted
Man: And yet by his Light he can, because he has, instructed us, that such
Things are not only the Effects of an Almighty Power, but of an Almighty
Wisdom, of an Almighty Justice, and of an Almighty Mercy too. For, in the
Business of Man's Salvation, as in all Things else, he does so display his
Attributes, as that they never clash nor interfere. His Mercy does not fight
against his Justice, nor his Justice against his Mercy; and neither fights
against his Wisdom. By the Revelation therefore of the Christian Religion God
has admitted us to a nearer View of his Dealings with the Children of Men, and
has, at least, communicated so much of his Counsel to us, as may assist us (if
we be not wanting to our selves) to provide for our own everlasting Happiness
and Security; and to vindicate and assert his Justice and Mercy. Let us
therefore thankfully receive the Mercy, as it is graciously offered; and not
pretend to regulate his Revelations by our feeble Reason; but guide our Reason
by his Revelations. For, we know, that he can do more than we can; and
therefore also we may know, that he can guide us better, than we can guide our
selves. And because he has vouchsafed in Mercy so to do, it will but very ill
sort with that Deference we owe him, to do, as too many nowadays do, that is,
to return from Revealed to Natural Religion, and so to walk in Paths, not only
of our own choosing; but, many times, of our own making too. For, since the
Day Star from on High has visited us, it is our Duty, as to guide our Lives,
so to guide our Faith by that Light which it affords us.

2. Since we can only be saved in Consideration of our Obedience to the Law,
and since none of us have paid such Obedience; and so, if we stand the Award of
our own Deserts, we must needs fall short of Salvation: I say, since Things are
so, we ought with Heart and Voice to praise our Savior, who by an Infinite
Condescension both obliged himself to obey the Law, and so intimately united us
to himself, as to entitle us to his Obedience, by which we may be saved. For,
as there is no other way of obtaining Salvation, but by Obedience; so there is
no other Name given but his, whereby we must be saved; and therefore we may
safely conclude, that that Obedience, by which we must be saved, is his. His
Love to Righteousness then made his Obedience perfect; and his Love to us made
his Obedience ours; and Both (if we be not wanting to our selves) will make our
Condition happy and secure. And then surely our Security and Happiness, as they
do very well deserve, so they do require a Thanksgiving. For, we therefore
stand bound to be grateful to, and to love the Author of our Happiness, because
we find, that we cannot but love our selves.

3. As we cannot be saved without our Savior's Righteousness; so, as we desire
our own Safety, we should heartily endeavor to qualify our selves to be made
Partakers of such his Righteousness. And we may be sure, that our Desire, at
least, after Righteousness, and our Good Will to entertain it, are necessary
even for our obtaining the Imputation of it; because it cannot in any Sense be
ours, if we be not willing that it should be so. We must be therefore disabled
to receive it, if we be unwilling to entertain it. So much Righteousness God
requires of us, in order to our being entitled to a perfect Righteousness. I
know, that some Divines do speak of Irresistible Grace, and that some few do
defend it: That is, in a few Words, they make God, by the arbitrary
Determinations of his own Pleasure, to bestow Grace upon some Men, whether they
will or no, and even against their Inclinations. And, to make good what they so
maintain, they instance in the Conversion of St. Paul, and such like Cases. But
though St. Paul, and some others, have been converted by Miracle; yet we know
well enough, that Miracles wrought for the self-same purpose, have not always
been attended with Success; and that the Miracles even of our Savior himself,
and those too wrought before their Eyes, did fail of their designed Effect, and
that, in a manner, upon the whole Nation of the Jews. And we know not the
Hearts of Men, nor the inward, but real Preparations of Soul, that may duly
qualify them to admit God's Grace. But we do know, that St. Paul thought
verily, that he ought to do as he did: And then, though he was defective in his
Knowledge, yet because he acted according to such Knowledge, he was therefore
honest and sincere in his Practice. And then, if God in pity to his Ignorance,
and in approbation of his Sincerity, did reward that Sincerity with an
extraordinary Direction for the guidance of his Practice; we may from thence be
taught, that his Grace was suited to St. Paul's Will. For, he willed that after
the Miracle, which he willed before it; that is, he willed that, which he took
to be good. And indeed, we may as well think any other Creature to be capable
of Righteousness, as we may think Man to be so without his own Will and
Consent. Let us therefore take care, that we will and endeavor to obey God's
Law, that is, to be righteous; if we design, that God our Savior should make
us so: For, we cannot be like him, unless we are willing to be so. He therefore
who would appear at the Wedding Supper of the Lamb, must take care to wash and
cleanse himself from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, in order to his
putting on the Wedding Garment. For, as they only shall be pronounced Blessed,
who shall be found Righteous; so they only shall be found so, who do sincerely
desire and endeavor to be so.

CHAP. XI.
The First and General Proposition asserted from all that has been said: That
the whole Doctrine of a Gospel-Salvation, as laid down in the Scriptures, is
agreeable to the allowed Practices of Mankind in their Legal or Judicial
Proceedings; and is worded in the Scriptures accordingly.

AND now having gone so far, before we proceed any farther, we shall bring all
that we have hitherto spoken, to our Design at the Beginning; and by so doing,
shall endeavor to make it out, That there is not Salvation in any other, but
in Jesus Christ alone; and, That there is no other Name under Heaven given
among Men, whereby we must be saved.

1. And to do this, we shall first show, That no other, but our Savior alone,
could so suffer for Sin, as to obtain a Release from the Penalty, which the Law
had threatened against it: Or, which is much one and the same Thing, That no
one, but our Savior alone, could make an Expiation for the Sin of Man.

2. And, secondly, That no one, but our Savior alone, could, by an exact
Obedience to the Law, purchase that Reward, the Gift of Eternal Life, which the
Law had promised to such Obedience.

1. Now, in order to our making good our first Proposition, we must examine,
what Qualifications are absolutely necessary, in order to fit any one to make
such Purchase; and then enquire farther, Whether such Qualifications either do
or can belong to any other, besides our Savior alone.

1. Now the first and leading Qualification in him, who shall be fitted for the
Purchase of a Release from the Penalty of the Law, which they have incurred,
who transgress the Law, is, that he, who makes such a Purchase, must be one of
the same Kind with them to whom the Law was given; that is, in the present
Case, must be a Man. For, the Law was given to Man, was broke by Man; and
therefore also the Breach of it, in the Congruity of Things, and by the Laws of
Common Sense and Justice, is to be punished in Man. Now, though our Savior was
not the only Person in the World, who had this Qualification, (for every Man
besides is as real a Man, as he was) yet he was the only Man among all Mankind,
who by this Qualification was fitted for the effectual enterprising and bring
to pass those other Things, which are absolutely necessary for the Purchase of
the Release spoken of.

2. For, secondly, The next Qualification of him, who is fitted for the
Purchase of a Release from the Penalty of the Law, is, that he must be an
Innocent Man. He was to be a Lamb, without Spot or Blemish, and to answer to
the Paschal Lamb, which in this, as in several other Things, was a Type of that
Lamb of God, which should take away the Sins of the World. For he, who is
qualified to suffer for others, in order to release those others from the
Penalty of Sin, must not therefore be a Sinner himself; because, if he be so,
then he must by the Laws of Justice, and even according to the Tenor of that
Law, which assigns such Penalty, suffer the Penalty for his own Sin: And he,
who suffers the Penalty of the Law for his own Sin, cannot therefore suffer the
Penalty of the Law for the Sin of others; at least, in the present Case he
cannot; because the Penalty of the Law, upon the Transgression of it, being the
loss of Life, his own Penalty exhausts the whole Stock or Possibility of his so
suffering: For, he who has but one Life, (and no Man has more) can pay that
Life but once: And therefore, if he lays it down for his own Sin, he must for
that Reason have nothing remaining to lay down for the Sin of others.

3. He who is duly qualified to purchase for Mankind a Release from the
Penalty of their Sins, must be a Man whose Life is of more value than the Lives
of all the rest. And the Reason for it is plain and obvious, because we know,
that the Lives of all the rest can make no such Purchase: And the Lives of all
the rest cannot therefore make any such Purchase, because the Death of no
single Man can make such a Purchase for himself. For, what no single Man's
Death can do for himself, that the Death of all Men cannot do for all: For,
there is just the same Proportion between all Men, and the Death of all; that
there is between one Man, and the Death of one. Besides, supposing a Man to be
a Transgressor of the Law; it looks very absurd to affirm, that the Death of
such a Man, which is the Punishment of his Transgression, can be the Purchase
of his Release from such Punishment: For then, the self-same Thing (and that is
his Death) will bear a quite contrary Character; for, it will be both the Wages
of his Sin, and the Purchase of his Ransom; that is, it will be the Vengeance
of the Law, and the meritorious Cause of his Freedom from the same Vengeance.
Every Sinner therefore against the Law, must be a Sufferer under the Vengeance
of the Law; and that Law, which adjudges those who transgress it, to Death,
does not, by so doing, design to return them to Life: For, if it did, then, by
inflicting its Sentence, it must design to revoke that Sentence, and, by making
the Punishment a Release from the Punishment, must look like Trifling, and not
like Justice.

The Loss of no Sinner's Life then is of Value sufficient to put a Period to
the Execution of that Sentence, which the Law pronounces against those who do
transgress it: And every Man's Death, in the Course of the Law, had been
eternal, were there nothing else to remove it, but his own Strength, that is,
in the present Case, but his own Death. For, if the Death of a dead Man can do
nothing for him, we are sure, that no other of his Powers or Merits can: For,
in the Case before us, he can have no other Merits of his own to restore him to
Life, but the Merits of his Death; and the Merits of his Death, as we have
seen, are none at all. And to expect any Relief from a dead Man's Powers, is to
expect Relief from no Powers at all; for Death crushes all the Powers of all
Men whom it seizes.

Now this being the Condition of all Men who die, because they are Sinners, we
may from hence safely conclude, That if any Man, who is not a Sinner, shall
undertake by his own Death to make good the Ransom of all the rest from Death,
and after that, shall make good his Undertaking; I say, if any Man shall do
this; we may be sure, that his Death, or his Life, (which you will) is
therefore of more Value than the Life or Death of all the rest, because he does
by it make that Purchase, which all the rest could not do by theirs. For, in
the present Case, the Value of the Thing may be truly and justly estimated by
the Possibility of the Purchase it can make; because the Possibility of the
Purchase depends upon the Allowance of the Great and Just God. And then when
God is willing to release Man from Death, in Consideration of the Death of his
Innocent Savior; and when he is not so, in Consideration of sinful Man's own
Death; and when he does professedly declare such his Will in many Places of his
Word, and by the repeated Attestations of Matter of Fact, whereby several
People have been raised from the Dead, in the Name, and by the professed Power
of the Savior: I say, when we find all these Things to be so, (as we do, or at
least easily may find them so to be) we may from the Whole conclude, That the
Death of our Savior is of more Value, than the Death of all Mankind; because
it can do that, which the Death of all the rest cannot do, and that too by the
Allowance of God himself.

Now, from these Propositions, so laid down, we may therefore conclude, That
there is not Salvation in any other, but only in our Savior, set forth in the
Gospel.

1. Because it was absolutely necessary in Justice, that the Law being broken
by Man, the Punishment threatened by the Law should be inflicted upon Man. For,
the Threatening of the Law has the same Eye, and the same necessary Relation to
the Transgression of the Law, that the Reward has to the Obedience of the Law;
and either, the same necessary Relation to each, that it has to God's Holiness
and Justice. And therefore, so necessary as it is, that God should be holy and
just; and so necessary as it is, that he should in his Laws be serious and
true; so necessary also it is that the Vengeance threatened by his Law should
there take place, where the Duty commanded by the Law is not observed. Now
because no Man, except our Savior, could so undergo the Vengeance of the Law,
as without such Savior's Help to be ever freed from such Vengeance; therefore
we do from hence conclude, in the first place, That there is not Salvation in
any other, but in our Savior alone, as Salvation is taken for our Redemption
from the Vengeance and Penalty of the Law.

2. Because no Man is qualified to suffer the Penalty of the Law so, as by such
his Suffering to redeem others, that are Sinners against the Law, from their
suffering for their Sin, unless he be Innocent himself; and because no Man,
except our Savior, was ever Innocent, that is, no Man, except him alone, did
ever fulfill the Law; therefore no Sinner can be saved, as Salvation is taken
for a Release from the Vengeance of the Law, but only by the Death of our
Savior, that is, by the Death of him, who was the only Innocent Person of all
Mankind.

3. Since the Death of all Mankind (because it is the Punishment threatened by
the Law against the Transgressors of it) is not of Value sufficient to expiate
the Sin of Mankind, whether we consider their Punishment and their Guilt in the
Gross or Lump, or whether we consider it in Parcels and Particulars; and since
Death is the necessary Punishment of the Law; and since, lastly, if there be
any Redemption purchased from such Penalty, it must, for the Reasons alleged,
be made by a Death of more Value than all the Deaths of all Men: I say, from
these Reasons in conjunction, we do conclude, That such a Death is necessary
for Man's Redemption from the Curse of the Law. And then, whose Death that
Death was, the Scriptures do sufficiently acquaint us; for, they expressly and
frequently tell us, that it was the Death of him, whom they set forth to us as
our Savior.

And from the Whole, we do infer, in the first place, that no other, but our
Savior alone, could so suffer for Sin, as to obtain a Release from the Penalty
which the Law had threatened against it; and that therefore there is no
Salvation in any other; and, that there is no other Name given under Heaven
among Men, whereby we must be saved, as Salvation is taken for our Redemption
from that Vengeance, which the Law threatens and executes upon the
Transgressors of it.

2. The second Proposition therefore laid down at the Beginning, comes next in
order to be made good; and that is, That no one, but our Savior alone, could,
by an exact Obedience to the Law, purchase that Reward, Eternal Life, which the
Law has promised to such Obedience. And to make this good in a few Words, we
take notice, in the first place, That as the Law, by the same Tenor of Justice,
does engage the promised Reward to the Obedience, as it does the threatened
Vengeance to the Transgression of the Law; so we may from thence infer, under
this Head, That every Man, who will be Partaker of such Reward, must pay such
Obedience; as we did under the last, That every Man, who was guilty of such
Transgression, must suffer such Vengeance. He therefore who does not obey the
Law, does lose his Reward, as certainly, as he who transgresses it does pull
upon himself his own Punishment. Now because, among all the Race of Mankind, no
one, except our Savior, has obeyed the Law; therefore every Man besides him,
when left to the Purchase of his own Obedience, has forfeited his Reward. No
Man therefore does, upon his own Account, deserve such Reward. And then,
because we know, that Justice does deal with Men according to their Deserts;
therefore, the Reward being Eternal Life, or Happiness, every Man, when left to
himself, has lost such Happiness. That Part therefore of a Gospel-Salvation,
which consists in Eternal Life, is not to be expected by any Man, but by the
Savior alone.

Now, that our Savior obtained it for himself, is not questioned. And that it
was the Gift of God to others, in Consideration of his Obedience to that Law,
to which others, as well as himself, stood obliged, we have already, and at
large made good. If therefore all other Men's obtaining Eternal Life, does not
proceed from their own Obedience, but from their Savior's; then we may now
begin to perceive, that there is not Salvation in any other, but in our Savior
alone; and that too as Salvation is taken in the Gospel for the Gift of Eternal
Life.

The Socinians, we know, who deny the Salvation of Man to be our Savior's
Purchase, do attempt to elude the Force and Evinence of that Text, which is the
Subject of our present Discourse, and of several other express Places of
Scripture, which assert the same Thing with it, by starting the Question,
Whether or no God might not, by some other Means, have saved Mankind, had it
pleased him so to do? And by that Means have (as we observed at the Beginning)
endeavored to alter the Controversy from Matter of Fact to Matter of
Possibility; and to engage others in that saucy Dispute of what God can do, and
of what God cannot do. Whereas it is sufficient for us to know, what God has
done; and abundantly sufficient, when he himself does furnish us with such
Knowledge by his own express Word. And if what that Word tells us in the Case,
be agreeable to our rational Sentiments, to that Light which he has afforded us
to judge Things by; if moreover it be agreeable to the Common Sense, that all
Men have of Justice, (and Justice and Reason in this Case are the same;) if
that our Light, which confirms to us the Reasonableness and Justice of his
Proceedings in the present Case, does by the same Measures guide all
Governments, not only Christian, but others; and if it be more than a shrewd
Sign, that because Mankind do, and that too in their Laws and Judicial
Proceedings, treat one another, for the most part, as God in the present Case
does treat Mankind, that they are guided so to do by that Light, which he
himself has afforded them: I say, if all these Things are so; then it may,
besides all that has hitherto been offered, make out the Conclusion, at least,
very plausible; That his Dealings with Mankind in and through a Savior, as we
have out of the Scriptures laid it down, are just and reasonable. Let us try
the Matter in a sew Instances, which will direct our Meditations to a great
many more, and see whether the Business be so, or no.

The Merits of our Savior's Death, we say, and so do the Scriptures, are made
over to us. We may add, but we need not, that they are so made over by his last
Will and Testament. And, if we do add it, the Scriptures will bear us out in it.

The Merits of his Obedience also are, as we with the Scriptures say, made over
to us.

By the first, we obtain Redemption from the Curse of the Law.

By the last, an Inheritance with the Saints in Light.

Now, what says the Light of Nature, when it discovers it self in the Practices
of Mankind in the like Cases?

1. Why, in the first place, The Father has served and obliged his Prince by a
due Regard to his Laws, and to himself, and by a Defense of both from the
disobedient Attempts, and rebellious or hostile Outrages of all others. In such
Defense he has been a great Sufferer; has lost his Estate, his Limb, perhaps
his Life. The Son of this very Man, guided more by his own vicious
Inclinations, than by his Father's Example, dips his Hand in Treason, and
thereby forfeits his Life to the Law, and to his Prince. Suppose we now, that
the Prince grants this Son his Life, in Consideration of the Father's Services
and Merits, and so cancels the Demerits of the Son, by putting the Deserts of
the Father in the Scale against them; which, especially if the Father died in
the Prince's Cause, is the ascribing or imputing (which you will) the good
Deserts of one Man to another, who is utterly destitute of such Deserts. Now,
such a Case as this being supposed; will any Man accuse the Prince of
Injustice, for the Grant of such a Pardon? Was not the Injury done to himself?
And may he not remit such an Injury, by esteeming the great Services of the
Father, and the Benefits that he himself received, and the Mischiefs which the
Father sustained by such his Services, a sufficient Counterpoise to the Injury
of the Son? And may he not be satisfied, that the near Relation and dear
Affection of the Father to the Son, may make the Son's Pardon a Gratification
and Requital to him for all his own Services and Sufferings? Surely these
Things may be allowed among Men: And I do not at all question, but that these,
or such like Things, have been practiced in all Governments, and yet that their
Justice has not been taxed for such their Practice. And yet I do assert and
maintain, That the Pardon of Man's Sin in Consideration of his Savior's
Sufferings, does much more critically and nicely come up to the Rules of an
exact Justice, than the Pardon of the Rebel in the present Instance does; and I
am well enough satisfied, that what has been already offered, will abundantly
make good such an Assertion. But saucy Man will not allow what his God says or
does to be true and just; though at the same time he will allow and approve the
same, or the like Practices, in his Fellow Creature.

2. But to proceed: Secondly, The Father, by his Labor and Toil of his Body,
or by that of his Brains, purchases to himself an Estate. His Son enjoys his
Share in it while the Father lives, and the whole of it after his Death. How
comes the Father's Purchase to derive to the Son? You will answer, By the Law.
But the Question returns; By what Act does the Law make the Father's Purchase
to become the Son's? Why, it may be replied, that as the Son descended from the
Father, so it is but fit that his Estate should do so too. Well! be it so, or
any thing else; (for more may be said in the Case.) But still in the Case, the
Father's Right being extinct by his Death, moves, that is, is transferred upon
another: So that he comes rightfully to possess the Estate, who yet did not
purchase it, nor earn it, nor perhaps do any one Act for the obtaining the
Possession of it. Not only the Estate then, but the Right and Title to the
Estate, which is undoubtedly lodged in the Purchase, and must be made good by
it, is transferred from one Man to another, and that too not by or for any
Action of Desert in the Man who enters; but by an Act of Law, call it
Imputation, Translation, or what you please. And, which is more, such a
Translation both of Estate and Title is accounted just by all Mankind,
generally speaking. For, it is not material in the Case, that some arbitrary
and despotical Governments do in some few Instances vary from it; because not
only the rest of Mankind, but even they themselves, do, by their contrary
Practice in other and more Cases, condemn their own Practice in this.

Now to our Purpose: Shall the transferring not only of one Man's Estate to
another, but even of the Right and Title in that Estate, be thought just
between Men among themselves, and that too by that Light of Reason, which is
confessedly given them by God? And shall it at the same time be unlawful and
unjust for God so to make over his Purchase, his Right and Title to any Thing,
(as he thinks fit) to Mankind, as one Man may do to another? Certainly he has
as good a Right, and as full Power of disposing of what is his own, as any Man,
or any Law of Man whatsoever. And therefore, when he tells us, that he does so
in the Case under our present Consideration, it would become us in Modesty, in
Reason, and (because the Case does very much import our Welfare) in Interest
likewise, to believe his Word, and to approve his Doings: And that too more
especially, because in those very Writings, in which the Conveyance is
contained, he seems all along to word such his Conveyance in Law-Terms; thereby
giving us (at least) an Hint, that in the Transaction of Man's Salvation by our
Savior, he did in a great measure condescend to those Methods and Ways of
Judicial Proceedings, that Men, by that Light of Reason which they received
from him, had instituted among themselves. And therefore, when we had forsaken
his Family, by revolting from that Duty, which we owed him, as his Natural
Children; as he calls himself our Father in Christ Jesus, so he calls us his
Adopted Sons, upon his restoring us to such his Family; and in order to the
Renovation of our lost Title, he does esteem us to be Regenerate, that so by
becoming again the Children of God, we may inherit the Kingdom of him our
Father. So he calls us the Heirs of Salvation, and makes us a Title to the
Purchase of our Savior, by calling us his Brethren. He reckons us as
Joint-Heirs with him, and discourses in several Places of our Inheritance. Now,
when we are assured, by Multitudes of other Places of Scripture, that all these
Appellations and Titles are given to us, not only in Terms in the like Cases
made use of, at that Time, by the most celebrated Laws, but also in
Consideration of our Savior's Purchase; I say, when we find Things so, and
that too in the Book of God, wrote professedly on this Subject; does it become
us to think, that the Holy Ghost, the Indicter of these Things, did only word
himself at random? Or ought we not rather to think, that in so doing he had a
Regard to those Legal Ways of Conveyances, which were established by Man's
Reason and Sense of Justice in those Laws, which were then most current in the
World? We cannot, I am sure, we cannot rationally think so. For, why are we
told, that we are bought with a Price? Why are we told, that our Savior
purchased us with his Blood? Why are we told, that we are redeemed, not with
corruptible Things, as Silver and Gold; but with the precious Blood of Christ;
but that our Redemption and Salvation did, as to the Justice and Equity of it,
answer to those Legal Ways of transferring of Rights from Man to Man? For, our
Redemption was purchased by our Savior, (so it is expressly worded) and by him
therefore conveyed and made over to us, because otherwise it could in no Sense
be called our Redemption. Indeed, a Purchase does, in the very import of the
Word, imply the Acquisition of a Thing in a Legal way; and by so doing, does,
in the Nature of the Thing, imply also a Legal Power of making over such Thing
to another. For, he can only legally sell, or otherwise give or convey, who has
a Legal Right in the Thing sold, given, or conveyed. And he can only legally
purchase, who pays a Legal Price. When therefore the Holy Ghost in the
Scriptures does so word the Manner of God's bestowing and our receiving
Salvation in and by our Savior, as to do it in such Terms, which were at that
time Terms of the most celebrated Law (next to his own) that ever yet was, or
perhaps ever will be in the World; and when he does so frequently, and almost
constantly; it would become us to believe and think, that he designed, and that
too even by his manner of expressing the Thing, to insinuate to us, that the
Salvation he all along speaks of, was bestowed in a way of Conveyance at that
time familiar among Mankind; in such a way, as was established both by their
own Laws, and by their own Practice; in such a way, that their best Reason,
granted to them by himself, had set on foot: And that, upon this Account, his
way of doing it so, as is by him expressed, (and that too all along in that
very Book, where he affords us the Discoveries of it) is just, equitable, and
legal. I do but run over these Things, and in a manner glance at them; because
I rather design to give an Hint to others more able so to do, than to pursue
them my self. For, if a Man wellstudied in the Civil Law (a Law that will weigh
with Mankind so long as good and sound Reason has a free Passage in the World:)
But, I say, would such a Man so thoroughly acquaint himself with the
New Covenant, the Covenant of Grace in Jesus Christ, as to be able exactly to
compare it with that Law, which is the Business of his Profession; I do not at
all question, but that such a Comparison, judiciously managed, would go a great
way in removing those Doubts which have been started by People of all Parties,
concerning Man's Redemption. And because several Learned Men, I know, are very
well versed in both those Laws; I do the rather hope, that God will put it into
the Heart of some of them, to bless the World with such a Christian and
beneficial Piece of Learning. But this by the by. In the mean time, from what
has been said in short, we may learn thus much; That the Salvation of Man is
the Purchase of the Son of God; that the Benefit (at least) of such Purchase is
by the Purchaser made over to Man; that in Consideration of that Intimate Union
that is between him and Man, by his taking upon him the same Flesh and Blood
with Man, and by affording to Man the Communications of his Spirit, a Way is
opened, as for the more congruous and equitable Way of such Conveyanee, on the
one Side; so, on the other Side, for the more congruous and equitable Way of
Man's entering upon the Possession of such Purchase; and that when the whole
Thing is strictly sifted and examined, it will be found to be agreeable to the
just and equitable Rules of Law, as well as to the express and plain
Revelations of the Gospel. But I desist: Only I would offer an Inference or
two, that may relate to our Practice, before I do so.

1. And first, If God spared not his own Son, when he had put himself into the
Place of Sinners; we may from thence conclude, that neither will he spare us,
when we our selves are Sinners, and that too by our own default. For, besides
that he was, and was so proclaimed by God himself, his only Son, in whom he was
well pleased; I say, besides that; the Generosity, Charity, and Candor of such
an Undertaking as our Savior's was, (by which he showed more Tenderness to
others, than to himself) may be thought to be a very considerable Motive even
to Justice it self, so far as is possible, to remit to him a great deal of that
Rigor, and Severity, which Sin does deserve. And then, if notwithstanding such
his Undertaking, yet he was fain to pay the uttermost Farthing, that is, to
die; how can we hope to escape, if we the Original, and therefore also the
Principal Sinners, come under the Severity of so exact a Justice? We may be
sure, that the Portion of Vengeance allotted to us in such a Case, will not be
less severe. For, if God so treated his Beloved, because interposing Son; how
do we think he will treat avowed and professed Rebels? Or, as our Savior
himself speaks in the like Case, If these things are done in the green Tree,
what shall be done in the dry?

2. And as this Consideration may serve us for Caution; so the next, that is,
the second, may serve us for Consolation: And I shall give it in the Words of
the Apostle, in the Eighth to the Romans, ver. 32. He, that spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely
give us all Things? For, his delivering up his Son for our sakes to become Man,
to lead an hard and uncomfortable Life, and to die a miserable and scandalous
Death, that both by his Life and Death he might work out our Salvation, is such
an exalted Evidence of God's Love to us, that Imagination it self can hardly
conceive, that any thing can extinguish it, but our Ingratitude for it. And our
Natural Reason and Common Sense may easily instruct us, that he, whosoever he
be, that is ready and willing (and that too even to Performance) to do us the
greatest Kindness, will not for that very Reason refuse us in a less. It
concerns us therefore, as we would not reject the Kindness already offered, and
as we would not exclude our selves from all future Love and Kindness, to make
good our Gratitude, by receiving our Savior, and that Salvation which he
brings along with him, with a due Acknowledgment and Respect; and to make good
such our Respect, and such our Acknowledgment, by receiving him upon any, but
more especially upon his own Terms. Let us therefore cast away our Sins, that
we may receive him: Let us, by loving each other, practice our selves to love
and receive him: Let us receive him, by receiving the Pledges of his Love,
exhibited to us in the Sacrament of his most Blessed Body and Blood: And let us
not think, that Christ crucified will profit us any thing, if we do not so
receive him, as he requires, and therefore also so receive him as we ought.
For, he does in effect refuse the Gift, who refuses the Instrument of
Conveyance by which such Gift is to be signed and made over to him. And it is
irrational and imprudent, to expect the Love of him, the Pledges of whose Love
we do reject. Let us cast off therefore every evil Work, every Sin, that does
beset us, and gird up the Loins of our Mind, (as the Scripture speaks) and do
the Work of Christians in all Cases whatsoever; that so at last we may receive
the blessed Wages of such Work, through Jesus Christ our Lord, and only Savior.

CHAP. XII.
That besides the Savior's Righteousness imputed, God will after their
Resurrection endow Believers with a perfect, inherent, and eternal Holiness.
How the Savior did fit and prepare Men for such an Holiness.

BY what has been hitherto discoursed, we have seen,

1. That God in a Savior has made Provision for the Expiation of Man's Sin, in
order to save him from the Vengeance of the Law, the just Wages of such Sin.

2. We have seen, that he has not barely provided for Man's Escape from the
Vengeance of the Law, by the Merits of his Savior's Death; but that he has
also provided for his positive and future Happiness, by the Merit of his
Savior's Obedience.

3. But yet, in what is now to follow, we shall find, that his Mercy has not
stopped here; because, in the third place, he will, in and through our Savior,
endow Man with a perfect and inherent Holiness: By which I mean, such an holy,
Angelical, and withal durable Frame of Spirit, that shall for ever secure him
from all possible Sin, and shall for ever engage him in a vigorous and cheerful
Discharge of all holy Duties; and in so doing, shall both accompany and secure
his Happiness to all Eternity. For, though it be confessed, that Believers do by
the Communications and Assistances of the Spirit arrive to a Degree of such an
Holiness in this Life; yet it must be confessed also, that it is but an
imperfect Degree: For, it is not vigorous, nor uniform, nor constant; but
irresolute and weak; and therefore has its frequent Intermissions and Failings.
But, as we shall see more fully in what is to follow, the Holiness of the
Saints in Glory is, like their Happiness, firm, lasting, and immutable; and
therefore will be found to be a Gift of God in Christ, that does vastly, if not
infinitely, exceed the most refined Holiness of the very best Man in this Vale
of Sin and Misery. It shall be the Business then of our present Undertaking, to
make it good, that besides that Title, which Believers in another World shall
have to their Savior's Righteousness, in order to their future Happiness, that
they themselves shall be endowed with a perfect, inherent, and indefectible
Holiness, in order to the secure Eternity of such their Happiness.

Now, to put this Matter into a clear Light, that so we may be the more
rationally satisfied in all that is to follow; we lay it down, First, That God
by his Almighty Power having made the World, and all particular Beings in it,
has by virtue of such his Creation an undoubted Right and Title to the Dominion
over all Things so by him created: And that therefore all his Creatures ought
to be in Subjection to him, and to act according to the Determinations of his
Will. And it is hardly to be doubted, but that all those Creatures, which by
the Boundaries of their Creation are devoid of Understanding and Free Will, do
constantly act (according to those Impresses and Powers that God in their
Formation has stamped upon them) in a regular Subordination to such his Will.
And the Scriptures do give us, not only frequent Hints, but also express
Declarations, that so they do.

Now, as God created those lower Creatures, so did he the higher, and those
which are endowed with more noble Faculties. And because, among such Creatures,
upon whom he has bestowed an Understanding, to enable them to know his Will,
and with a Will to enable them to choose Obedience to such his Will, we are not
acquainted with any other, but Angels, and Men; and because our Design is only
concerned about them, and chiefly about the latter; therefore, directly to our
present Purpose, we take notice,

That some of the Angels, first; and, by their Instigation, the first Man; and
(because all Men ever since do derive from him in a Lineal Propagation)
therefore also all Mankind, by transgressing God's Will made known to them in
his Laws, have revolted from their Allegiance to him, and have, by so doing, in
effect renounced and disclaimed that their Subjection to his Dominion, which
was (if I may so speak) his natural and essential Right. For, Wickedness is a
professed and avowed Renunciation of that Subjection which Rational Creatures
owe to their Holy and Rightful Lord and King, even the God that made them. And,
for that Reason, it is an Encroachment upon his Anthority; for it does lessen
and contract the Extent of his Kingdom. For, because a Scepter of Righteousness
is the Scepter of his Kingdom; and because all those Laws, by which its
Administration is executed, are in themselves Holy, Just, and Good; it is, upon
that Account, very obvious to conceive, that Wickedness, so far as it goes,
does defeat such Administration, and overturn such Laws; and by so doing, does
diminish the Authority, and encroach upon the Jurisdiction and Dominion of the
Rightful and Supreme Lord.

Now, from what has been thus spoken in short, we may easily understand, that
the fallen Angels having first revolted themselves, and by their Sin withdrawn
their Allegiance and Subjection to their most Holy and Supreme Lord, did (what
other Rebels after their Example, and perhaps by their Instigation, have done
to weak and short-sighted People) by false Colors, and taking Delusions,
invite Mankind into the same Revolt and Rebellion with themselves; and, by so
doing, draw away a Part of God's Kingdom and Dominion; and, in opposition to
his Holiness, that is, in opposition to God himself, set up a Kingdom of their
own, a Kingdom of Darkness and Wickedness; in plain English, a Kingdom made up
of such Creatures, who by their Sin and Wickedness did rebel against and revolt
from their Holy and Rightful Lord and King. All this, being Matter of Fact, is
expressly discovered to us by the Revelations of God: And the History of Man's
Fall, recorded in his Word, with the Account that we there meet with of the
Devils Kingdom, of his Servants and Subjects, of his Slaves and Captives, of
his Wars against the Holy Angels, the faithful Subjects of the True and
Everliving King, do afford us a very lively Description of the Thing. And
because no Christian, who is but tolerably acquainted with the Revelations of
God in his Holy Word, can possibly be a Stranger to it; therefore we have
thought it less necessary to quote the several Texts, which by being put
regularly together, will give us an exact and Historical Account of it. And
indeed, we have so much the less need to do so, because we shall be farther and
more fully satisfied in it by those Things which are to follow. Well then!
Things standing in this State, God was pleased to send his Son, his Beloved
Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, made Man, to be a Savior, a
Redeemer, a Light to Mankind; that is, he sent him in Man's Nature, to guide
and direct, to save and redeem Man from that Condition, into which he was
brought by his Sin and Rebellion. What that Savior did in order to the
obtaining of such Salvation, we have seen already; and what is to be done in
order to the everlasting Continuance of such Salvation, is to be enquired now.

As therefore it was one Part of God's Counsel in sending his Son to Mankind,
to expiate their Sins; so it was another, and indeed the main and grand Design
of such his Message, to rescue them from their Slavery to Sin, and from their
Subjection to Satan; and so to bring them back to his own Kingdom, and to
resettle them under the Jurisdiction of his own most holy Dominion. For, it is
a very great Mistake (which, I am apt to believe, has proceeded chiefly from
our oversondness of our selves) to think, that God's chief Design in sending
our Savior, was to free us from the Vengeance due to our Sins; thereby vainly
imagining, that God has a greater Concern for our Impunity, than he has for our
Holiness; and that he had rather we should be safe, than that we should be
good. Whereas our Reason will tell us, that God must needs love Holiness, as he
loves himself, because he himself is (if I may so speak) Essential Holiness:
And then the same Reason will tell us, that he must needs love himself better
than he loves our Safety; and that more especially, when we our selves, by
slighting and neglecting of Holiness, had betrayed such our Safety. As
therefore Man did, by his Compliance with the Devil, that is, by his Sin,
expose himself to the Prosecutions of God's Vengeance; and as he did, by the
same Means, so far forth revolt from his Dominion, and withdraw himself from
his Jurisdiction, as to become the Subject of Satan, and Slave of Sin, (by
which Means God was ousted of his Natural and Original Right to Man's
Obedience, and his Subjects so far forth drawn of from their Allegiance to him,
as to slight his Authority, by slighting his Laws, and to fight against him, by
opposing his Holiness;) so, when the Hostilities were come to this pass, that
Man did fight against God by his Sins, and that God did fight against Man by
his Justice; though God, in order to a Reconcilation, sent his Son into the
World, and by him a Proclamation of Pardon to all who should return to their
Duty; yet our Reason, nay, our Common Sense will tell us, that the Restoration
of God's just Right and Dominion by Man's Return to Holiness and Duty, is in it
self a Point of greater moment, than Man's Pardon. And therefore, by the Tenor
of that very Covenant, in which the Articles of Reconciliation are contained,
it is stipulated, that Man shall first be obliged to repent and return, before
God shall be obliged to forgive. And we know, that our Savior himself, in that
Prayer which he taught his Disciples, and in them all Christians, does put that
Petition, [Thy Kingdom come,] before that, by which we pray, that God would
forgive our Trespasses. Why, all the Nations of the Earth are before him, but
as the Drop of the Bucket, or the small Dust of the Balance: And then, can we
think, that his Honor and Natural Right is not to be consulted before Man's
Safety? It cannot be; and because it cannot, therefore we do conclude, that
though God did design the Pardon of Man's Sin by a Savior; yet for all that, the
grand and principal Design of sending him, who was to be that Savior, was the
bringing Man from a State of Sin to a State of Holiness, the purchasing to
himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works; or, as it is in the Fifth to
the Ephesians, ver. 27. a glorious Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle, or any
such Thing; and thereby restoring to God so much of that Part of his Dominion,
which, by the Temptation of the Devil, and by Man's Revolt, had been broke off
from his Kingdom, and which was willing, upon the Gospel-Conditions, the
Proclamation of Pardon, to be restored again to it.

Now, from what has been spoken, I would infer, That it is a great Mistake, to
make the Sending of our Savior in its first, principal, and grand Design, to
be the Pardon of Sin. For, as Obedience to the Law is the first and principal
Design of the Law; and as Punishment is but a secondary Design of the Law, and
is only grounded upon the Defeat of its grand and principal Design: So Pardon
of Sin, in the very Nature of the Thing it self, depending only upon the Desert
of Punishment, can therefore rise no higher than its Fountain, and therefore
can at the most be but a secondary Cause of our Savior's Coming.

And therefore, should we suppose God to pardon Sin, though in and through our
Savior, without any Regard had to the fulfilling of the Directive, that is, of
the grand and principal Part of the Law; we should, by that means, suppose him
to break the Directive Part of the Law, in order to his contradicting the
Vindictive Part; that is, we should suppose him to break both Parts of the Law,
in order to such a Pardon. For, Veracity is one Branch of Holiness; and when
God tells Man in his Law, that upon his Transgression he should surely die, as
we may perceive by the manner of the Delivery, that the Denunciation is serious
and solemn, not only because it is backed with an Asseveration, but because
also it is incorporated into the Law; so, to tell us, that God may by a Pardon
(that has no Regard to the Directive Part of the Law) revoke such his solemn
Threat and Asseveration, is in effect to say, that he may start from his
Veracity; and that is the same as to say, he may start from his Holiness; or,
in other Words, that he may himself break the first and principal Part of the
Law, by remitting the Penalty of the last and less principal. For, Holiness is
so refined a Thing, and so all of a Piece, (if I may so speak) that he who
transgresses its Rules in any one Case, does, by so doing, forfeit his Title to
the whole, and therefore is truly called Unholy.

And therefore, I cannot but wonder, that Men, after almost Six thousand Years
Experience in the Case, in which, because all Men have been Sinners, therefore
all Men have died; I say, I cannot but wonder, that, after so long an
Experience to the contrary, any Man should now think, that Men may be freed
from the Curse of the Law, before they have fulfilled the Directions of it.
For, methinks, by that Experience alone we may be instructed, that Men should
never be blessed with Impunity, till they first return to their Duty; and that
they must first be obedient to the Law, before they shall be freed from the
Vengeance of it.

But because some Things under this Head may bear a Dispute; and because some
others may seem hard to be understood; therefore, to be more plain and open,
and to offer something which is so, and which will as well conduce to my main
Purpose and Design, I lay it down,

1. First, That as it is asserted in the Gospel, and is generally agreed among
all Christians, That an Eternal Life and Happiness is contained in that
Salvation which the Gospel promises; so is it, That whosoever shall be made
Partakers of such Happiness and such Life, must be so perfectly Holy, as to be
eternally free from all Sin. For, as without Holiness no Man shall see the
Lord; so, the Blessed in Glory are by all allowed, as to be eternally without
Misery, so to be eternally without Sin. And we do not question, but that it may
be made out, and that too by Force of Reason, without the Assistance of
Revelation, that complete Happiness (and an Happiness that is not eternal, is
not complete) and that too in the Nature of the Thing, is inconsistent with
Sin, which does certainly and constantly bring Misery along with it,
wheresoever it is permitted to come. And the Reason why I say, I do not
question it, is, because what has Been done already, may be done again: And we
know very well, that the Thing has been done already, and that too beyond all
possible Contradiction. But because it is an allowed Thing, That where the Seat
of eternal Happiness is, there nothing can either enter or remain but pure and
unspotted Holiness; therefore we shall spend no Time in the Proof of it; but
shall take it for granted, and so proceed to our

2. Second Proposition, which is, That the Holiness of those, who shall inherit
eternal Life and Happiness, does not come from themselves, nor is either the
Archievement or Fruit of their own Powers. This we may be sure of, because a
clean Thing cannot come out of an unclean; and all Men here are unclean,
because all Men are Sinners. And since Man in his Innocence did not keep
himself Holy, it is unreasonable to expect, that after the Fall, when Men's
Abilities are lessened, that any Man should make himself so. And we are
moreover assured, that no Man does make himself so, because all Men do die: And
we are further assured, that no Man can carry any more of his own Holiness with
him into another World, than what he was Owner of in this: And lastly, we are
infallibly assured, that no Man can secure to himself an Holiness to Eternity,
which he has not. From which Things run over in short, we may be satisfied,
that that Holiness, which shall for ever attend those of Mankind, who shall be
made Partakers of eternal Happiness, is not their own. The Thing might be made
out in more Words; but it needs not: And therefore,

3. Since that Holiness, with which Men shall be endowed in Heaven, is not
their own; it must therefore be bestowed upon them by some other: To which we
may add, That that other can be no other, but God. For, it may be very well
presumed, that the very best of Creatures have no Holiness to spare, upon a
Supposition, that one Creature could make over any of his own Holiness to
another. For, upon such Supposition, whatever they should contribute toward
the perfecting of another Creatures Holiness, would be so much pared off from
their own; and so a Defect of their own Holiness would be the Consequence of
that other's Perfection; and an Abatement, at least, if not the Loss of their
own Happiness, a Consequence of such Defect. But then it is a vain Thing to
conceive, that one Creature can make over its own inherent Holiness to another;
and it is as vain a Thing to think, that it can bestow on that other an
Holiness, which it has not to bestow; and it is certain, that it has no
Holiness, but its own. But neither shall I pursue this any farther, because I
shall at one View offer a short Prospect of all that has been already laid
down, in order to make it good, That our Savior has made Provision, that
Believers shall be endowed with an indefectible Holiness in a future and happy
Life.

Take we notice therefore, That as a Gospel-Salvation does imply in it, not
only the Pardon of Sin, but the Reward of Righteousness too; so the Reward of
Righteousness (as the Gospel, and as he, who is both the Author of that Gospel,
and of that Reward, does set it forth) is to be eternal and everlasting. Now,
though it should be granted, that Heaven and Happiness is in it self the just
Reward of Duty and Obedience; yet it cannot be so freely granted, that an
Eternity of Happiness is so; unless that Duty, or Obedience, to which that
Happiness is assigned, be eternal also. And the Reason why such a Thing cannot
be granted, is grounded upon Matter of Fact, and that Matter of Fact authorized
by God's own Judicial Proceedings. For, we may safely affirm, that the fallen
Angels were once Holy; and we may affirm it so much the more safely, because
being in their Nature Creatures capable of so noble a qualification, there can
no doubt be made, but that they came forth such out of the Hands of their most
Holy Creator. Though therefore, while they remained Holy, that is, while they did
their Duty, we do not question their Happiness; yet we do maintain, that that
Happiness then ceased, when their Holiness did so: And from thence we do
conclude, that their Happiness was therefore not eternal, because their
Holiness was not so. Now because such their Holiness, which was not eternal,
was their Original, or their Natural, or their Personal Holiness, (for you may
call it which you please) therefore we do farther conclude, that there is no
Security, that any Creatures Personal or Natural Holiness shall be eternal.

If therefore we shall bring our present Business to this Case, and by
comparing one with the other, take leave to judge of what may be, by having
seen what has been; we may take notice, that if our Savior did nothing more
for Man's Salvation, but only expunge the Guilt of his Sins, and so restore him
again to his Original Innocence; all this would warrant no more, than that Man
should by this Means have been restored to that Innocence, or Holiness, of
which Adam stood possessed before his Transgression. But that this Holiness
should be lasting and eternal, we have not all this while any the least Ground
of Warrant, no nor of Conjecture: Nav, we may rather conclude, that it would
not be so; because we know, to our Cost, that Adam's was not so. For, I would
ask, Whether this Innocence, or Holiness, be sufficient to make Man happy? If
it be both answered, and granted, That it is; then I would further demand,
Whether it will secure that Happiness to Eternity? If it will, then it must be
something more than a Restoration of Man to a State of an Adamical Holiness;
for we are sure, that that first Holiness could do no such thing: If it will
not, then it will not answer to a Gospel-Salvation, because such a Salvation
does imply in it everlasting Happiness, and everlasting Happiness must (as we
have seen) be attended with everlasting Holiness. In one Word therefore, if, as
Man's Happiness does depend upon his Holiness, so his everlasting Happiness
must depend upon his everlasting Holiness; then we may well reckon, that that
Holiness of Man, which shall accompany eternal Salvation, must be an
indefectible Holiness, that shall never fail, and therefore whose Reward shall
never cease.

And by this time, we hope, that the Truth of what we have laid down, and of
what we designed to make good, may begin to appear; which is,

1. That the Chief Design of our Savior's coming into the World, was to bring
sinful Man to a State of perfect Holiness; for, by that Man's chief Happiness,
and (which is yet a great deal more) God's original Dominion and Jurisdiction
over Man, is provided for.

2. That an everlasting Holiness is required to an everlasting Happiness.

3. That such an Holiness is none of Man's own, and that therefore,

4. It must come from some other; and that that other must be God.

Having therefore seen, by what has been said, that an everlasting Holiness is
necessary, in order to Man's everlasting Salvation, and that such Holiness must
come from God: Let us proceed, and by that Light, which his Revelations have
afforded us in this Case, enquire, what Provision God has made for the
furnishing Man with such an Holiness, in order to such his Salvation. And,

1. We are instructed by such Revelations, That God sent his Son, our Savior,
into the World, clothed with the same Flesh with sinful Man, to instruct and
direct him in the Ways of Holiness, by his Doctrine, and by his Example: That
upon this Account he is called the Light of the World; for he made our Duty
plain and intelligible, took off that Veil from Men's Understandings, by which
they were induced to believe, that Holiness did consist in outward Washings, in
Ceremonies and Formalities, and such other or Modes or Gestures, which
contained nothing of true Holiness in them, because they did not form our
Spirits to God's Likeness, nor make us holy, as he is holy. And because he
found Men laden with Sin, he did advise them to unburden themselves by
Repentance, that so they might the more expeditely set about the Attainment of
that Holiness, which he recommended to their Practice. And hence it was, that
his Forerunner, John the Baptist, first, and he himself, and his Apostles,
afterward, did all begin their great Work with an Exhortation therefore to
Repent, because the Kingdom of Heaven was at hand. In a Word, in order to
terrify Men from their wicked Courses, and to invite them into the Paths of
true Piety and Godliness, he did by his Threats acquaint them with a more
express, grievous, and future Punishment; and by his Promises, with a more
express, happy, and future Reward, than either Natural Reason or Revelation had
as yet discovered. These, with some other, were the Methods which our Savior,
when in the Flesh, took to persuade Men to add their own Endeavors to his, for
their obtaining Salvation. And because these Things were designed for such a
Purpose by him, and because they have in themselves a natural tendency to bring
such Design to pass; and because, lastly, the Salvation of Man does in the
whole Economy of it proceed from the Grace of God; therefore these Things,
when summed up together under one Denomination, are called Means of Grace.
These therefore, and the like Means of Grace, and them too backed and confirmed
by Miracles, our Savior made use of, to engage Men to practice and attain that
Holiness, by which alone they could in Justice be fitted for Salvation.

2. But then, secondly, we are instructed, both by God's Word, and by our own
Experience, That all these Means made use of by our Savior, did never yet
produce that Holiness in any Man, which is to fit him for his designed
Salvation. For, what from Weaknesses and Irresolutions from within, and what
from Temptations from without; what from the Temptations of the Devil, and what
from his own wicked, habitual, and overruling Practices, every Man falls short
of the Grace of God; and his very best Practices being corrupted with
Carelessness, or Inadvertency, or Wilfulness, (and all of them Evil) do not
beget in him that Holiness, to which alone eternal Salvation can in Justice
belong. It may be then demanded, How any Man comes to be saved? To which I
answer in the next, that is, the

3. Third place, That though the Means of Grace do not beget that Holiness in any
Man in this Life, in Consideration of which he can in Justice obtain eternal
Salvation; yet we are assured, that the Means of Grace tendered in the Gospel,
and made use of by Man, may, and often have this Effect, as to engage Men
heartily to desire and wish for such an Holiness. This is what our Savior
calls hungring and thirsting after Righteousness: An hearty and sincere Desire
to be what we ought to be; and (to make good the Sincerity of such our Desire)
an hearty and sincere Endeavor to be what we desire to be. For, no Man does or
can heartily and sincerely desire any Thing, who does not also heartily
endeavor to obtain it. Now, an hearty Desire, and an hearty Endeavor after
Holiness, does (if I may so speak) open and enlarge the Soul to admit and
receive such Holiness, whenever God shall be pleased to bestow it. And because
every good and perfect Gift comes from above, from the Father of Light, we may
be therefore sure, that Holiness, the best and most perfect Gift, whereof we
are capable, does so too. And we are moreover sure in Reason, that God will
more freely bestow his best Gift there, where it is most heartily desired, and
therefore also most kindly received: And we are the more sure, that he will do
so in the present Case, because the Will of Man must in this Case concur with
the Grace of God; or else it is impossible, that the Holiness to be bestowed
should ever become his own. For, no Man can in Reason or Nature be holy against
his own Will. He then, who by the Means of Grace has advanced so far as to
hunger and thirst after Righteousness, shall be sure to be filled. We have his
Promise for it, who is able to make it good; and we have his Promise for it,
whose Promise cannot fail. And then we cannot but be sensible, that he who is
filled with Righteousness, cannot want that Holiness which accompanies
Salvation. And truly, when I consider, how these lower good Things, the
Blessings of Nature, which are confessedly the Bounties of the God of Nature,
do freely flow in upon all his Creatures, where their natural Appetites or
Wants do desire or require them, and (where their Powers and Faculties are
such) in pursuit of such their Desires, they endeavor to obtain them; it
mightily inclines me to think, that his Blessing of Holiness will also there
flow in, where the moral Appetites of his Rational Creatures do sincerely
desire it; and where they are so sensible of their Want of it, as to endeavor
after it.

4. We proceed, and add, in the fourth place, That we are instructed, both by
God's Word, and by our own Experience, that though a perfect Holiness may be
heartily desired, and sincerely endeavored after; yet, that it is never
attained by any Man in this Life; and therefore so neither is a perfect
Happiness. The Evidence for the first is, because all Men in this World are
Sinners; and the Evidence for the last is, because all Men in this World are
Mortal. Now, as Sin is an infallible Confutation of a perfect Holiness; so
Mortality is an infallible Confutation of a perfect Happiness. We are therefore
at last arrived thus far, that no Man shall arrive at a perfect Holiness, till
he is translated to another World: And because it is difficult, if not
impossible, to conceive, how any Man should arrive at a perfect Holiness in the
Grave; therefore we may go one Step farther, and add, that no Man shall attain
to such an Holiness, till the Resurrection: And we may very fairly and
rationally conjecture, (I may say, infer) That then the Faithful shall: For, we
know, that by the Resurrection we shall be released from the Curse of the Law
on the one Hand, and shall enter upon the Reward of Obedience and Holiness on
the other.

5. And then, lastly, Because that Happiness, which our Savior has purchased
for Believers, is an eternal Happiness; and because (as we have seen) it is
impossible, that there should be any such Thing as an eternal Happiness,
without an eternal Holiness; and because to pretend to bestow an everlasting
Happiness upon Man, and not an everlasting Holiness, without which such an
Happiness is impossible, is to mock Man, and not to save him; and because,
lastly, we cannot without Blasphemy and Absurdity tax the Counsels and Purposes
of our Savior, in the Business of Man's Salvation, of such gross
Prevarication: therefore we do at last conclude, That God in our Savior will
endow Believers, at or upon their Resurrection, with an Inherent, Immutable,
and Eternal Holiness.

Now we have observed before, That the Punishment threatened by the Gospel
against those, who shall refuse their Salvation by the Neglect of the
Conditions of the Gospel, is greater than what was threatened against the Breach
of the Law of Works, the Law given to Adam.

And that the Reward proposed by the Gospel to those, who shall admit the
Conditions of it, is greater than what was by the Law proposed to Adam upon his
Obedience.

And we have observed in this Chapter, That that Inherent and Indefectible
Holiness, which is a Part of such Reward, is greater and nobler than Adam's
Holiness before the Fall; because it is more lasting than that of him, or
indeed of the fallen Angels.

Now it is certain, that the Degrees of the Punishments are by Justice
proportioned to the Degrees of the several Sinners own Deserts. And it is
certain, that the Rewards of eternal Life, and of an Indefectible Holiness, do
in Justice exceed the Deserts of all that are saved, (for they have been all
Sinners.) And then, what Grounds these Considerations may afford for the
magnifying of God's Grace, and the Merits and Dignity of our Savior's Purchase
and Person, may be a Matter worthy our Meditations. But I shall not pursue it
here, because though there be an Occasion for me to enlarge what has been said
already; yet I am unwilling to repeat.

CHAP. XIII.
By what Means Men shall be put into the Actual Possession of Eternal Life.

HAving thus far discoursed, First, Concerning the Pardon of Sin; and,
Secondly, Concerning the Gift of an Happy and Eternal Life, (the Two Things in
which a Gospel Salvation does consist:) And having made it good, That Believers
do obtain both the one and the other only in Consideration of our Savior's
Merits; and that their so doing is agreeable to Reason and Justice: Two Things
do still remain to be examined.

1. By what Way or Means they shall be put into the Possession of such Eternal
Life? And,

2. Wherein the Happiness of such Life does consist?

1. And in order to the Resolution of the first Thing, we lay it down, as a
certain Truth, in the first place, That Man, in order to his entering upon the
Possession of Eternal Life, must first rise from the Dead. For, all Men die,
because all Men are Sinners: And because it is absurd so much as to imagine,
that Man can enter upon the Possession of Eternal Life, while he remains under
the Power of Death; therefore, without any more ado, we shall take it for
granted, that Man must be freed from that Death, which is brought upon him by
his Sin, before he can obtain that Eternal Life, which is purchased for him by
his Savior.

2. We lay it down, in the second place, as a certain Truth, That because our
Savior underwent Death himself for the Expiation of Man's Sin; and because our
Savior could not in Nature or Possibility be qualified to bestow upon Man the
Purchase of such his Death, till he himself should rise from the Dead: That
therefore, in order to Man's entering upon the Possession of an Eternal Life, it
was necessary, that our Savior himself, as well as Man, should first rise from
the Dead.

3. We lay it down, in the Third place, That if the Merits of our Savior's
Death were of Value sufficient to make good the Expiation of Man's Sin; that
then, in Reason and Justice, he ought to rise again from the Dead. For,
because, in the Case so put, he could have no Concern with Justice, but what
was his own; and because he himself had paid an exact Obedience to the Law; and
because Life is the Reward of such Obedience, as Death is the Wages of
Disobedience; Therefore, if we do allow him to have unloaded himself of the Sin
of Man, which he had taken upon himself, by his Death; we must, and do, by so
doing, reinstate him in his own Right; that is, we must allow, that he had a
Right to be, and therefore in Justice ought to be restored to Life again. And
therefore it is not at all to be questioned, but that our Savior had never
died at all, if he had never taken upon himself the Sins of other Men. But of
this more by and by. In the mean while, these Things being laid down, we
proceed, and,

1. Observe in the first place, That our Savior's Resurrection is almost
constantly by the Scriptures of the New Testament ascribed to God the Father:
And Multitudes of Texts might be quoted for it; as, the Second of the Acts,
ver. 24, and 30. The Fifth Chapter of the same, ver. 26, and 30. The Tenth,
ver. 40. The Seventeenth, ver. 31. The Tenth to the Romans, ver. 9. The First
to the Corinthians, chap. 6. ver. 14, etc. We know well enough, that they, who
make it their Business to degrade our Savior below his most exalted Dignity
and Station, do make use of these Texts for such their Purpose: But we know
withal, that there are other Texts, though indeed not so many; and some of them,
when compared with their Context, not so Categorical; which yet ascribe his
Resurrection to himself. Such is that in the Second Chapter of St. John, v. 19.
Destroy this Temple, and in three Days I will raise it up. And so again, in the
Tenth of St. John, v. 18. No Man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my
self: I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. Now, as
we made it out just now, that after the Expiation finished he had a Right to
rise from the Dead; so we do not at all question, but that he had a Power to
raise himself too. But though it should be allowed, (as we do not at all
question, and that too from several Things already laid down, and made good,
but that it may be proved:) But, I say, though it should be allowed, that he had
both a Right and a Power to raise himself from the Dead; yet notwithstanding
that, it was not altogether so congruous or agreeable to the equitable
Proceedings of Justice, that he should exercise such his Power, or put himself
into the possession of such his Right, in the present Case. For, because he had
submitted to offer his Life an Expiatory Sacrifice to the Divine Justice, for
the Sin of Man; he had by such his Submission so far resigned such his Right
and Power into the Hand of God, as that, both by the Laws of Reason and
Justice, as well as by the Rules of Decency and Congruity, God was now become
the sole Judge of the Validity of such his Sacrifice, for the Accomplishment of
the designed Expiation. And if God was the sole Judge of the Validity of his
Sacrifice; he had by the same Means the rightful (and I may add, the sole)
Power of declaring such Validity: And because the Resurrection of our Savior
from the Dead, was in effect such a Declaration; therefore we may now be
satisfied, why the Holy Ghost does so very frequently, and in a manner
constantly, ascribe the Resurrection of our Savior in the Scriptures, to God
alone. To which we may add, That the High Priest under the Law (who in this
very Case was a Type of our Savior) was obliged once a Year to enter into the
Holy of Holies, but (as the Author to the Hebrews words it) not without Blood,
which he offered for himself, and for the Errors of the People. In which Case,
it must be confessed, that the offering of the Blood to God was in order to his
acceptance; and that God's acceptance of the Blood, that is, of the Life of the
Sacrifice, was the Ratification of that Expiation, that was made by such
Sacrifice. And in deed and truth, our Savior in the Business now before us,
being both the Priest and the Sacrifice to God for the Sins of Man; and his
Resurrection being the first Testimony or Declaration of the Acceptance of such
his Sacrifice: We cannot in any Congruity suppose, that such Testimony or
Declaration should be ascribed to any other, but to God alone. And therefore,
as all those Texts, which ascribe our Savior's Resurrection to God, do in this
Case speak strictly and properly; so we may now, by what has been said,
perceive, that they are no Prejudice to his Divinity; because he having obliged
himself to offer that Body, to which his Deity was united, a Sacrifice for Sin;
he had by the same Act obliged himself to expect from God the Approbation and
Allowance of such his Sacrifice; and therefore also to receive from him his
Resurrection, which was an effectual Declaration of such Allowance: And
therefore,

2. I do offer it to Consideration, That the Resurrection of our Savior from
the Dead, was an undoubted Argument, that he had finished and completed that
Expiation, which he had undertaken to make by his Death for the Sins of Men.
For, as we are assured by the Scriptures, that he was crucified, dead, and
buried; and so, that he died the Death of a Criminal: So we are assured by the
same Scriptures, that he did not die for his own Crimes. For, it is utterly
impossible, and that too in the Nature of the Thing, that he should die for his
own Sins, who yet did no Sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth; that is,
who had no Sins of his own to die for. Now, because we are taught by the
Scriptures, and (as we have already made it out) because our Reason, guided by
them, does fall in with them, and so both do tell us, that the Wages of Sin is
Death; that is, that there is a Natural Justice in the Case, that Death should
be inflicted as the Punishment of Sin: And because we are assured by the same
Natural Reason, that it must needs be unjust to inflict the same Punishment
upon an Innocent Person, which is the just Punishment of a Criminal: I say, for
this Reason, we may be satisfied, that our Savior, though he was in himself a
Lamb without Spot, yet did die for some Sins or others, (be those Sins whose
they will at present:) And therefore because the Spirit of God has by his
express Word told us, that he died for our Sins; we may, upon his Testimony,
rest satisfied, that so he did. Thus far therefore we have advanced toward our
present Purpose and Argument; That Death was what the Law threatened for our
Sins, and that we being Sinners, and so having incurred the Vengeance
threatened, our Savior (who, as we have showed, had an absolute and
uncontrollable Power to dispose of his own Life, as he himself pleased) did put
himself in our stead, became a Sacrifice for us, and so in his own Person
suffered that Death, which we by our Sins had deserved. But then, to the making
good of our present Proposition, we add, That as he suffered Death for the
Expiation of our Sins; so if he had not finished and completed such Expiation,
he had not rose again. For, so long as the Guilt remained, so long the
Punishment was, and that too in Justice, to be continued. For, in such Case,
there had been the same Reason for the Continuation of the Punishment, that
there was for its first Infliction. And therefore, as it was first inflicted
for a Guilt, so it must have been continued for the Continuation of such Guilt.
From which we do infer, That if he was justly acquitted from the Continuation
of the Punishment, then he was also acquitted from the Guilt; and if he was
justly acquitted from the Guilt, that then he had by his Punishment made a
sufficient Expiation for it. And that he was acquitted from the Punishment due
to the Guilt, and that he was justly acquitted too, the Resurrection singly and
by it self will make out an undoubted and uncontrollable Argument. For, our
natural and common Sense does assure us, that a Resurrection to Life is an
Acquittance and Discharge from Death: And Reason will tell us, that because a
Discharge from Death can only come from God, and because God cannot but be
just; therefore that Acquittance and Discharge, that is made by a Resurrection,
must needs be just too. And therefore, from the Whole we may infer, That the
Resurrection of our Savior from that Death, which he suffered as the
Punishment of our Sins, was a demonstrative Argument and Proof, that by his
Death he had paid a sufficient Ransom, and had made a sufficient Expiation for
such Sins. So that, strictly speaking, in his Death consisted the Punishment of
our Sins; in the Infinite Value of his Death consisted the Expiation of our
Sins; and in the Resurrection appears the full Proof and Evidence of such his
Expiation.

Before we part with this Head, it may not be improper to take notice, that
because his Death was of infinite Value, that therefore there was a sufficient
Ransom paid for our Sins by that Death, so soon as it was suffered. For, it
must be confessed, that the Ransom was then made, when the Debt was paid. And
because that is Truth and Justice, we do from thence infer, That our Savior
might, and that justly too, have resumed his Life so soon as he had laid it
down. And so he might (for any thing that Justice can offer to the contrary)
have descended alive from the Cross, after he had once died upon it: Nor needed
his Resurrection, in point of Justice, to have been deferred to the third Day,
but might (had God so pleased) have been caused on the first. But though it might
justly have been done so; yet we do not find, that it was actually so done; for
the Scriptures tell us, that he did not rise till the third Day. From whence we
observe, That as he died to save Man from Sin; so he did for some time continue
in a State of Death, to satisfy and assure us, that he did so die. And so as
his Death had a regard to God's Justice; so his Continuance so long under the
Power of Death had a regard to our Faith. The first was the Purchase of our
Salvation: The last was our Assurance of, and therefore also our Comfort in
such a Purchase. By which we may understand, that his Love was expressed to us
even in the Grave; and though (as the Psalmist speaks) no Man remembers God in
the Pit; yet we may hence learn, that even in the Pit our God both can, and has
remembered us.

We may also under this Head take notice, That as our Savior had never died at
all (as we observed before) because he himself was perfectly Innocent, if he
had not by his own Choice put himself in the stead, and so exposed himself to
the Punishment of the Guilty; so we may be confident, that he, whose Innocence
was so singular and illustrious, as not to be in the least tarnished, whilst he
inhabited in mortal Flesh and Blood, must, now that Flesh and Blood is
spiritualized, (see the First to the Corinthians, chap. 15. ver. 44.) be rather
the more free (if that were possible) from all possibility of Stain or Guilt.
And we may be secure, that if his glorified Body shall ever live free from Sin,
it shall for that single Reason, if yet there were no other, live free from
Death too. So true is that of the Apostle, in the Sixth to the Romans, ver. 9.
that Christ being raised from the Dead, dies no more, Death has no more
Dominion over him: and that in the Revelations, I am he, that was dead, and am
alive, and live for evermore. So that the Victory which our Savior obtained
over Death, by his Resurrection, cannot so well be looked upon as a single
Conquest, since it is to extend it self to all Successions of Ages and Time;
and is to last, when Time shall be no more; that is, for ever and ever.

3. As our Savior, by his Resurrection, did so far subdue Death, as to obtain
to himself a future and secure Immortality; so also he did, by the same
Resurrection, so far subdue Death, as to secure a future and glorious
Resurrection to all those, who are so far planted into the likeness of his
Death, as to be dead to Sin, and alive to God. For, if we live to him, while we
live here; we may, from his Resurrection, have a comfortable Assurance, that
notwithstanding we die for a time, as he did; yet we shall be raised again, and
live with him for evermore. To this purpose, we must recollect, that when he
died, he did not die for his own Sins, but for ours. And then, if in his Death
he laid down his Life in our stead; we may be easily satisfied, that it was in
our stead that he took it up again at his Resurrection. For, if our Guilt had
not been cancelled, and so our Debt discharged, by his Death; then his Death
(as we observed under the last Head) had been continued still. And as then we
did conclude, that he had therefore satisfied the Debt, because he was released
from the Penalty; so now we do conclude, that because the Debt so discharged
was ours, and not his own; therefore the Benefit of the Release must redound to
us, as well as to him. For, it must needs be unjust in the Creditor to detain
us in Prison for that Debt, which our Surety has paid. And because we know,
that the Creditor in the present Case is God himself; and because we know also,
that such a Creditor can do no Injustice; therefore we know, that as when our
Savior laid down his Life, he laid it down in our stead; so also, that when he
took it up again, he took up with it the Lives of all those, who by the
Conditions of the New Covenant shall have an Interest in such his Death. And
therefore, as our Christianity does acquaint us, that they who live to Christ,
do live by the Spirit; so St. Paul, to our present purpose, does tell us, in
the Eighth to the Romans, ver. 11. that if the Spirit of him that raised up
Jesus from the dead, do dwell in you; he that raised up Christ from the dead,
shall also quicken your mortal Bodies, by his Spirit, that dwells in you. In
a Word, Christ is our Head, and we are his Members; and because he, and we, do
make up one Body; and because, as Members of such his Body, we are quickened by
his Spirit; therefore we may confirm our own Resurrection by his. And
therefore, as he is called the Firstborn from the Dead, in the First to the
Colossians, ver. 18. so we are called the Children of the Resurrection, in the
Twentieth of St. Luke, ver. 36. So that a good Man, from the Certainty of his
Savior's Resurrection from Death to Glory and Immortality, may safely conclude
his own; may lie down in his Grave as securely, as in his Bed; and when the
Morning of the Great Day shall down forth, may be more secure of rising again,
and putting on his Body; than he can be, that he shall rise on the
Morrow-morning, and put on his Clothes: For, for the first he has the Security
of Truth and Omnipotence; but for the last he has only the Promises of his own
Presumption, or (at the very best) but of his Hope.

4. As the Faithful shall, in Consideration of our Savior's Death and
Resurrection, obtain their own Resurrection from Death to Life; so the Life,
which by such their Resurrection they shall obtain, shall be Life Eternal. This
is express Scripture; and a Christian may therefore be satisfied in, and
assured of its Truth. For, our Savior himself tells us as much, when giving an
Account of the Last Judgment, he closes such Account, in the Last Verse of the
Twenty fifth Chapter of St. Matthew, with these Words; [And these shall go into
everlasting Punishment:] and then follows that, which is directly to our
present Purpose, [ But the Righteous into Life Eternal.]

And Reason tells us, that so it must needs be; because where the Cause of all
Death whatsoever is taken away, there the Possibility of Death must be taken
away too; unless we should imagine, that Death should be brought upon a
Rational Creature, subject to Law, without any meritorious Cause of Death at
all. But (as we have often laid it down, and proved it already) that cannot be
supposed in the present Case; because the Death, we now speak of, is supposed
to come from God's Justice; and the Justice of God cannot either truly, or
rationally be supposed to inflict Death there, where there is no Desert of it.
Now, we therefore know, that the meritorious Cause of Death is Sin, because we
know, that the Wages of Sin is Death. If therefore, as we have already seen,
the Sin of the Faithful be taken away by the Expiation, and if upon their
Resurrection they obtain an indefectible Holiness; the Inference will be, That
the Cause of Death, Sin, will upon the first Account be cancelled, and blotted
out; and that, upon the last Account, it cannot be renewed or restored; and
that therefore, upon both Accounts in conjunction, Death, the Wages of Sin, can
never more return. And then, when a Life restored is secured from all possible
return of Death, we may be sure, that such Life so restored must be Eternal.
And agreeable to what we now say, St. Paul tells us, in the Third to the
Philippians, the last Verse, that our Savior, whom we look for from Heaven,
shall change our vile Body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
Body, according to the mighty working, whereby he is able even to subdue all
Things unto himself. Now we know, that when our Savior appeared to St. Paul,
that is, to that very Apostle who tells us these Things, he does expressly
affirm to King Agrippa, in the Twenty sixth of the Acts, that the Light of the
Appearance was above the Brightness of the Sun, (and yet the Context will tell
us, that the Appearance was made about Midday.) And perhaps our Savior's
Transfiguration on the Mount was a Proleptick Discovery of that Glory, with
which his Body was to be clothed upon his Ascent into Heaven, the Mount of
God. But be that as it will; yet to our Purpose: If the Bodies of the Saints
shall be fashioned like unto his glorious Body, then it will be no improbable
Conclusion, That they shall with that Glory put on an Immortal Frame and
Constitution. And this Conclusion will then advance from Probable to Certain,
when we know, that the same Apostle does acquaint us, not only, that our Body,
which is sown in dishonor, shall be raised in glory; but, over and above, that
this Corruptible must put on Incorruption, and that this Mortal must put on
Immortality. Much more might be offered on this Subject; but, from what has
been glanced at, we may now perceive, that our Body, in imitation of our
Savior's Body, shall after its Resurrection be endued with a glorious Frame,
and an immortal Constitution; that it shall be done by his Power, as it shall
in Consideration of his Merit; that the Power that shall do it, is able to
subdue all Things to it self, that is, is Omnipotent. And then, where we have
the Promise of Truth, and the Power of Omnipotence, to secure to us an Eternal
Life; there we can have no Reason to doubt the Eternity of such Life.

The Second Thing should now in Order follow, which is to show, wherein the
Happiness of such Eternal Life does consist. But before we speak to that, I
shall lay down two or three Practical Considerations; which, as they look back
to what has been spoken already, so will be no improper Introduction to those
Things which are to follow.

1. And first, We should be sensible of, and grateful for that blessed
Provision, that our Lord and Savior has made for our Everlasting Happiness and
Security. And this we should so much the rather be, because, by what has been
said, we may now understand, that such Provision does fully answer to our
highest natural Desires and Inclinations. For, our Anxiety for our own Welfare
will tell us, that among all the several Appetites, by which we pursue after
our own Happiness, our Desire of Life does hold the first and chief Place with
us. And the Reason is plain, because the Loss of Life must needs be followed by
the Loss of all other Enjoyments whatsoever, that can in any wise conduce to
our Happiness. And, as we are told by our Common Sense, that our grand and
topping Appetite is that of Life; so we are told by the same Common Sense, that
Immortality is a sure Fence for that Life. If therefore God has graciously made
Provision for the Gratification of this our most exalted Appetite, by securing
to us a future Immortality; and if, over and above, he has engaged to secure
that very Immortality from the Loads and Encumbrances of all those Miseries,
which do constantly attend our Mortal Life in this World: I say, if God has
done so great Things for us, we ought to look upon our selves to be obliged in
Gratitude to endeavor a Return (as far as our slender Abilities go) in some
measure proportionate to the Almighty Bounty. For, if ever our Thanks be due to
any one whomsoever; then most certainly they must be so to him, who is willing,
and able, and has promised to gratify the utmost Pitch, and the most exalted
Desires of our own Self-love.

2. Has God provided an Immortal and Secure Life for us in another World? Then
that should engage us not to set up for Happiness in this. For, though it be
granted, that the Good Things of this Life are present, and at hand; but that
those of a better Life are lodged at a distance; and so we are engaged in our
Pursuit after the first by our Senses, but we can only pursue the last by our
Faith or Hope: Yet, because our Experience, upon innumerable Repetitions, has
constantly convinced us, that our Senses have always deceived us, (for, our
highest and most exalted Enjoyments here do always determine in Emptiness and
Dissatisfaction:) I say, for this single Reason, (if yet there were no other)
we should for the future rather seek for the Happiness we desire there, where
our Faith tells us, it may be had; than to repeat our Disappointments, by
pursuing it there, where our Experience has convinced us, that it cannot. Alas!
a very little consideration may satisfy us, that in our Attempts after
Happiness by the Pursuit of the Good Things of this Life, we always blunder;
and that too, whether we do, or do not obtain those Good Things, which we so
pursue. For, if we do not, then we lose our desired Happiness by our
Disappointment: But if we do, then either they must leave us, by reason of
their slipperiness and uncertainty; or we must leave them, by reason of our
Mortality. And then, be it one, or be it the other, the Case is much one and the
same; for, in both Cases, the expected Happiness vanishes. And because by this
we may perceive, that we cannot be made happy by any Thing in this Life;
therefore,

3. Let us be exhorted to seek our Happiness in a future Life; that is, (as has
appeared) to seek it there, where it may be had. For, if Happiness be to be had
any where, undoubtedly it is to be had in the Favor and Presence of God; who,
as he is the undoubted Author of all Things, so for that Reason alone he is the
undoubted Author of all that Happiness, which we can possibly reap from the
Enjoyment of any Good whatsoever. Now, because the same Revelations, which have
discovered to us a Future and Immortal Life, have also acquainted us, that that
Life is lodged in the kind and favorable Presence of God, that is, in Heaven;
and because we know, that no unholy or impure Thing shall come into the
Presence of him, who is of purer Eyes, than to behold Iniquity: Therefore, to
the present Exhortation, let me add this Direction, and that is, That we pursue
our future Glory and Immortality (or Eternal Life hereafter) by an holy Life
here. For, the true and solid Reason, why there is no Misery nor Death in
Heaven, is because there is no Sin nor Wickedness there. For, Death and Misery
are so far forth the inseparable Companions of Sin and Wickedness, that, as
wherever we find the last, there we are sure to find the first; so, where the
first are not, there we may be sure, that the last are shut out. And therefore,
because Mortality and Misery have no Place in Heaven, we may, for that Reason,
stand confirmed, that Sin and Impiety have no Place there neither. If therefore
we do in good earnest design to be lodged in those Regions of Happiness, we
must first be sure to cast off our Sins, and to leave them behind us. For, so
sure as Death is the Wages of Sin, so sure it is, that Immortality and
Happiness shall not be the Portion of the Impenitent. And so long as God is in
his own Nature Holy, and that is, so long as he is God, so long he must be
displeased with all those, who are pleased with, and make much of Sin, the
grand Enemy of such his Nature, because the grand Enemy of such his Holiness.

CHAP. XIV.
Wherein the Happiness of Eternal Life does consist. Several Reflections, and
Considerations on what has been said, tending to promote an Holy Life.

HAving in the last Chapter showed, by what Means we are put into the
Possession of an Happy and Eternal Life, the Purchase of our Savior's Merits:
We must in this, according to our Promise, inquire wherein the Happiness of
such Life does consist.

And, in answer to this Inquiry, we lay it down, in short; That the Consummate
Happiness of the Saints in Eternal Life, does consist in that Joy, Pleasure,
and full Satisfaction, which results from their Loving the Lord their God with
all their Heart, with all their Soul, with all their Strength, and with all
their Mind; and from their Enjoyment of God (the Party beloved) and his Love. I
have chose to express the Love of the glorified Saints to God, in the Words of
Scripture, because they seem to me to contain in them such an Intense Love,
under so large and comprehensive an Expression, that, had I delivered it in
other Words, I should more than have doubted, that I should have fallen short
of the Thing. And I do believe, that such Caution will then appear to be no
scrupulous Nicety, when we shall come seriously to weigh and consider those
Things that follow.

1. And first, we take notice, what every one may easily be satisfied of by
their own Experience, That we love our selves best, that is, before and beyond
all other Persons, and all Things whatsoever. And there neither is, nor can be
any doubt, but that such our Inclination is planted in us at our first
Formation, by the Hand of God himself. And therefore neither does God ever
require of us to slight or cast it away, but by such Motives, that will more
than recompense all the Evil, that we do, or can suffer, by our so doing. And
therefore he, who in the Cause of God and Goodness shall so far undervalue his
own Welfare, as to part with that Welfare (be it what it will) for the sake of
such Cause, may be sure of a Compensation from God's Hand, that shall repair
his Damages with advantage, and that too, though what he so parts with be Life it
self. And therefore it was a fixed and undoubted Persuasion in the Primitive
Christians, that whosoever suffered Martyrdom for his Savior's, and Religions
sake, was certainly thereupon crowned with Glory; and with them, to be a
Martyr, and to be crowned, were equivalent Expressions; for, they meant the
same Thing, whether they made use of the one or of the other. So confident were
they of the Truth of their Savior's Promise, in the Nineteenth of St. Matthew,
ver. 29. Every one that has forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or
Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands, for my Names sake, shall
receive an hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting Life: and of that in the
Tenth Chapter of the same Evangelist, ver. 39. He that loses his Life for my
sake, shall find it. By which we may understand, that God does so far allow our
Self-love, the Work of his own Hand, that where, for his sake, we are willing
to lay it aside in lesser Matters, there he has, in requital for our so doing,
obliged himself to provide for the gratification of it in greater Matters.

Now, though it be confessed, that there is a Thing too frequently, and too
kindly entertained among Mankind, which wears the Name of Self-love; and which
is not only commonly accounted, but which also really is in it self Criminal:
Yet, if we narrowly look into such Crime, we shall find, that it is not
therefore a Crime, because it is Self-love, but because it excludes our Love of
others. It is indeed kind to it self, (as all Self-love, and that too in the
Nature of the Thing, must needs be) but then it is kind to very few or none
besides. And therefore the Viciousness of it consists, not so much in doing
what it does, as in not doing what it ought to do: That is, the Self-love, so
far as it is only Self-love, is innocent: But it then becomes a Sin, when it
advances to Uncharitableness. For, every Man is allowed (perhaps in a degree
required) to love himself; but no Man is allowed, no not upon the Pretense of
such his Love, to hate another. Nay, he may love himself best; but by so doing,
he must not shut out all others from any Share in his Love; nor (where his
Circumstances and Condition, measured by the Standard of Common Humanity, or
Christian Charity, will allow him so to do) must he shut out others from the
Proofs and Evidences, that he allows them such a Share. So that as we are
satisfied by our own Sense of the Thing, (and that is as great a Satisfaction,
as we are capable of in any Case whatsoever) that we love our selves best; so,
by what has been said, it may now appear, that we do not transgress any Duty of
Morality or Religion by our so doing.

2. Our next Proposition must be, That as we love our selves best, so our Love
of any Person or Thing besides is directed by and to our Self-love. For, we
therefore love any Thing, because it does, or at least because we think it may
conduce to our own Welfare and Happiness. For, all Love has in it a Mixture of
Desire; and then, as the Love of our selves is accompanied with a Desire of our
own Welfare; so, because we love our selves best, all our other Desires must,
for that Reason, be in a subordination to that. And therefore, though our Love to
other Men may engage us to do very great and considerable Kindnesses to such
Men; yet, for all that, we should not do so, did we not, by so doing, gratify
our selves. For, though it is confessed, that because our Kindnesses to them
proceeded from our Love to them, that therefore we design to please and
gratify them by our Kindnesses; yet it is full as true, that if their Pleasure
and Gratification were not pleasant and grateful to our selves, we should leave
those Kindnesses undone, by which we designed such their Pleasure and
Gratification. And as it is thus notorious, that our Love to other Persons is
finally resolved into the Love of our selves; so it is as, if not more
notorious, that our Love of Things is so. For, Things have no Sense of our
Kindness to them; and therefore our Kindness to them, were it for their sakes,
would be irrational and absurd; for there could no Account be given of it in
Reason, or Nature. But because we our selves are capable of receiving a Benefit
from Things, by our having a Sense of such Benefit; and because we are capable
of apprehending such our Benefit, before we do obtain them, as well as when we
do possess and enjoy them; therefore we may from thence be satisfied, that our
Love, and therefore also our Desire of them, does spring from such our
Apprehension of our own Benefit; and we may be sure, that the Desire of such
our own Benefit does come from our Self-love. So that now we may be as well
convinced, that our Love to other Persons, or to Things, does proceed from our
Self-love, under this Head; as under the last we might, that we love our selves
best.

3. Let our Third Proposition then be this: That we find in our selves, and
that too by our own Sense (I may say, Feeling) of the Thing, such a Want of
that, that will satisfy the Desires of our Self-love, that we are constrained
by such our Self-love, (that is, we are constrained by Nature; for Self-love,
as we have seen, is natural;) I say, we are constrained by Nature to seek for a
Supply for such our Want from abroad; that is, we are constrained to seek for
it out of our selves. This might be abundantly proved from the great Variety of
these our Wants, which can only be relieved by a Foreign Supply; and those too,
Wants, not only of our Bodies, but of our Minds; without our obtaining of
which, we do account our selves in a degree miserable; at least, not so happy,
as to gratify our Self-love. But the Thing being Natural, and our Conviction
of its Truth being so too, it needs not. And therefore I would have it here
remarked, that my chief Aim in laying down this Proposition, is to adjust the
Coherence, and by consequence the Proof of my main Design, which is to show,
wherein our Grand and Eternal Happiness does consist.

But yet (because it may in some measure conduce to such our Design) we shall,
before we quit this Proposition, leave this Remark upon it: That it is not
unlikely, if it be not certain, that God in our very Formation has so ordered
our natural Frame and Constitution, that as the Desires of our Self-love cannot
be answered nor supplied by our Self-sufficiency; so, that such our Desires
should carry our Thoughts abroad to seek such Supply elsewhere. Which is (if I
may so speak) the first Step, to which we are obliged by Nature, in order to
our seeking after God. And in the next place, That God has made all Things in
this World, within the compass of our possible Purchase, so inadequate to the
Desires of our Self-love, that when we do actually obtain such Things, our
highest and most exalted Enjoyment of them does still fall short and does never
fill or satisfy such our Desires. Which is the Second Natural Step to bring us
to God.

4. This Remark then being left by the way; let our Fourth Proposition be this:
That the more we know, or believe, that other Persons or Things will answer to,
and satisfy the Desires of our Self-love; the greater Value we put upon them;
and the greater Value we put upon them, the more we love them. The Truth of
which Proposition is as certain, as it is certain, that we desire to gratify
our Self-love: And it is as certain, that we desire to gratify our Self-love,
as it is certain, that we have such a Thing in us as Self-love. For, because
our Self-love consists in a Desire of our own Gratification; and because a
Desire of our own Gratification contains in it a Love of those Persons or
Things, from which we expect to receive such Gratification: I say, for these
Reasons, to suppose, that we shall not love such Things or Persons in
proportion to that Gratification, which we expect to receive from them, is to
suppose us to contradict those very Desires, which yet at the same time we do
professedly entertain. We shall therefore take our present Proposition for good
and true, and that is, That we must needs love all Persons and Things according
as we think or know, that they will answer to, or gratify the Desires of our
Self-love.

5. The natural and immediate Effect of our Love of any Person or Thing, is a
Desire of possessing or enjoying the Person or Thing so loved. For, our Desire
of any Person or Thing includes in it our present Want of such Thing or Person.
Now, if such our Want were not at home, that is, in our selves, we need not
seek abroad, or out of our selves, for a Supply of it. And because the Want,
which in the present Case we feel in our selves, is fixed and immovable, and so
cannot stir abroad; therefore that, that must supply such Want, must be brought
home to it. Our Supply then must be caused by the Union of that Thing or Person
to our selves, which is to supply such Want. And when that Thing or Person is
united to our selves, then, and not before, we may be said to possess or enjoy
such Thing or Person.

I do believe, that the Truth of this Proposition may be doubted; because we
may be satisfied with the Assurance of our Friend's Kindness, though we do not
enjoy his Company. And something very like it may be said of the Satisfaction
that we take in several Things, though at a distance from us. But when it is
considered, that though we do not enjoy the Company of our absent Friend, yet for
all that, we do at that very time enjoy his Friendship; and that though his
Person be absent from us, yet that the Assurance of his Friendship is present
with us, and lodged in our Breasts; we may then begin to be satisfied, that so
far forth as our Desires are gratified, or our Want supplied, so far forth
that, which does so gratify or supply them, is present with us, which is an
assured Satisfaction of our Friend's Love and Kindness to us. But then we must
take notice, that if our Desires do extend themselves farther; as suppose, if
our Love of him engages us to desire the Presence of his Person, as earnestly
as the Assurance of his Friendship; then, in such a Case, as our Desires and
our Want are more than barely the Desire and Want of his Friendship and
Kindness; so such our greater Desire and Want cannot be supplied, but by the
Presence and Enjoyment of his Person and Company. And therefore, strictly
speaking, our Desire of his Company proceeds from our Love of his Person; but
our Desire of his Friendship proceeds from our Love of such Friendship, which
is a Thing, and not a Person. But then it must be granted, that no Man can love
another, but that, according to the Degree of such his Love, he must desire his
Company too; and that the want of his Company would be attended with an
Affliction proportionate to the Degrees of his Love; if the Absence of his
Person were not in some measure compensated by the Assurance of his Friendship,
which is present. And what is thus true of Persons, is so also of Things. For,
we therefore desire any Thing, because we love it, and because we want it: And
then the only way to supply such Want, and to gratify such our Love, is, by
bringing such Thing home into our own Possession, that is, within the reach of
our Enjoyment. For, an hungry Man may as soon fill his Belly with the Meat that
remains in the Market, while he tarries at home, as any Man's Love of any Thing
or Person can be gratified, while that Person or Thing is out of the reach of
his Possession or Enjoyment. For, as it is absurd to imagine, that any Man can
love any Person or Thing, without any Desire to possess or enjoy them; so it is
equally absurd to think, that he can possess or enjoy them, while they are at a
distance from him.

These Five Propositions I have laid down, as previous and introductory to the
making out the Truth, which we now pursue; and that is, That the Happiness of
our Eternal Life will consist in that Pleasure and Satisfaction which we shall
take in our Love and Enjoyment of God, and in his Love of us. For, it is
obvious, because natural, for us to conceive, that all possible Happiness (be
that Happiness what it will) must come from something that is grateful to our
Inclinations, that is, from something which we love; and therefore also from
something, which (if we want it) we do also desire: That what we so want and
desire, cannot make us happy, till we possess and enjoy it; because till then
our Desires are not fulfilled: That our Make and Frame is such, that we feel in
our selves that we do want That, that must make us happy; and that therefore,
if we will obtain it, we must seek for it abroad, and out of our selves: And
lastly, That our Self-love does, and that too necessarily, engage us to seek
after such Thing: I say, these are natural and easy Truths, and (as we shall
perceive presently) such, as will lead us into the Discovery of what at present
we do only enquire after, viz. The Nature of our Eternal Happiness; or, Wherein
our Eternal Happiness shall consist.

And that we may from Enquiry advance to Discovery, I would offer it to
Consideration, in the first place.

1. That when our Souls and Bodies shall be refined, by the Resurrection and
Glorification of the last, and by the complete Holiness of the first; that then
we shall have such a true Sense of the great and supereminent Value of
Holiness, that we shall upon that Account love that above and beyond all Things
besides. For then we shall perceive and know, that God therefore makes us holy,
that so he may make us happy: That our Happiness begins, when our Holiness
does; and that it is then perfected, when our Holiness is so: That Holiness is
the Perfection of God's Nature, and of our own: That where Holiness is in its
most exalted Excellence and Perfection, it is the same Thing with Wisdom and
Truth, with Omniscience and Omnipotence; and that it is the true and only
Fountain of all real and rational Happiness. And then, that which is the
Fountain of all Happiness, and by consequence of our own Happiness, must, when
once it appears so to us, be the Object of our greatest Love, as sure as it is,
that we do love our selves best.

2. Where we find such Holiness (which we shall be better acquainted with by
our Glorification and complete Sanctification) in its greatest and most exalted
Perfection and Excellence; there our Love of such Holiness must in Nature and
Reason, (and our Reason will then be exactly refined and discerning;) I say,
that where we find Holiness in its greatest and most exalted Perfection and
Excellence, there our greatest and most intense Love of Holiness will be
lodged. For, when we come to love Holiness for its own Excellence and
Perfection; then we shall be sure to love that Holiness most, which has the
greatest and most exalted Excellence and Perfection.

3. This our greatest and most intense Love of the greatest and most perfect
Holiness, will (as we may rationally conceive) be still augmented and
increased, when we apprehend it as lodged in an Intelligent Being. For, our
Love (and that too in Nature) to such a Being, is (caeteris paribus) greater
than our Love of Things; because such a Being is (if I may so speak) more
congenerous and cognate to us, than Things are; and we find the Harmony and
Sympathy to be in Nature always greater there, where there is the nearest
Cognation. The further Use which we make of this Proposition, besides that
already laid down, is to unite our Love of God and our Love of Holiness
together, and so to exhibit them under one View; as indeed in God they are but
one and the same Thing. And therefore, in what follows, we must alter our
Phrase; and what hitherto we have called our Love of Holiness, must hereafter
be styled our Love of God.

4. Our Love of our most Holy God will still receive a considerable Addition of
Increase, when we shall come to know, that his Holiness is not only most
perfect and exalted; but that it is also accompanied with all other
Excellencies and Perfections, and that too in the highest and most perfect
Degree. For, though God be One with his Holiness, and all other his Attributes;
yet it may be doubted at least, whether the Capacities even of glorified
Creatures shall ever be so enlarged, as to apprehend his Beauties and
Excellencies any otherwise, than by distinct and separate Conceptions: Nay, it
may be more than doubted, whether those their Conceptions shall be adequate to
those his (to them) several Beauties and Excellencies, which shall be the
Objects of such their Conceptions. For, it is hard to conceive, that the
glorified Capacities of Creatures shall be made Infinite by their
Glorification; and unless they be so, we are sure, that the most Seraphick
Conceptions must needs fall short of the Dignity of their Object. And we know,
that it is sufficient for any Creature to have its Creature-capacities (when
most enlarged and refined) filled and satiated by Happiness. For, no Creature
is capable of, and no Creature can desire more, than a full and complete
Happiness: And that Happiness is most certainly full and complete, which is as
much as he can contain.

5. The Increase of our Love to our most Holy God will still grow greater by
our Assurance, that he loves us again. For, it is a Truth in Nature, That, as
Love slighted or refused does by that Means grow cold, and so in time
languishes and expires; so, if it be kindly received, and answered by Love
again, it therefore grows the warmer, because then its Hopes begin to turn into
Happiness. And, as Love for Love between Mankind carries in it Gratitude and
Requital; so the Love of God for the Love of Man carries in it Recompense and
Reward: And in both Cases it increases the Happiness and Delight. And then
certainly it must be Infinite Happiness to be blessed with the Love of him, who
is Infinitely Happy in himself, and the undoubted Author and Fountain of all
possible Happiness to all others. For, all Love wishes well to the Party
beloved at least; and where its Power answers to its Wishes, does well too. And
then, when once we are in possession of God's Love, we are therefore secure of
our own Happiness, because we are secure, that all possible Happiness is within
the Reach of his Power. And indeed, to suppose the glorified Saints love of
God, and by consequence their Holiness to be perfect, and to suppose their
Happiness not to be so, would be in effect to suppose the Creature, in its Love
to God, to outdo God in his Love to the Creature. No! Perfect Holiness,
wherever it is, is a Ray of his leading and most beloved Attribute: And we
can in Reason no more conceive, that God will not love such an Holiness, than
we can conceive, that he does not love himself. And then we may be sure, that
the Happiness of the Creature will in the final Issue (and of that only we
speak at present) bear a Proportion to its Holiness.

6. The Increase of our Love to God will still grow greater and greater, when
we come to find, as most certainly we shall so find it, that his Love of us
will engage him to unite us more intimately to himself. The Union of the
glorified Saints with God, is, it must be confessed, a great Mystery; for so
that must needs be, which neither Eye has seen, nor Ear heard, nor can it
enter into Man's Heart to conceive; and which therefore he can much less
express with his Tongue. But yet that such a Thing there will be, we may be
satisfied by those Discoveries, that Revelation has afforded us of it in the
general. For, it is most certain, by such Discoveries, that we shall at least
so enjoy God, as we do our Friend; we shall appear in his Presence; in that
Presence, where there is fullness of Joy; and at his Right Hand, where there are
Pleasures for evermore. It is true indeed, that the Nature and infinite Variety
of all sorts of Unions (and, among the rest, undoubtedly of those, which God
has reserved for future Accomplishments, and for future Discovery) are laid out
of the Reach of all mortal Understandings. And therefore we shall rest our
selves satisfied with what is certain; or, at least, with what, by the help of
Revelation, we may easily believe to be so: That the Union of the Blessed with
God in Heaven will be such, as shall be sufficient for the mutual
Communications of each others Love; of the Love of the Creature in Duties and
Praises offered up to God; of the Love of God in the Effusions of such Joy and
Delight, such agreeable Transports and Ecstasies, as shall fill the utmost
Capacities of his Chosen ones; and shall therefore exceed their Hopes and
Wishes, because their first Knowledge of such their Happiness can only come
from their Experience of it; and that Experience alone will fully answer to,
and gratify their Self-love.

7. Lastly, The Love of the glorified Saints to God will be still further
augmented, and indeed receive its full Complement and Perfection, by their
Assurance, that all that Happiness, of which they stand possessed at present,
shall be eternal. For, a Fear of a Failure for the future, may dash the Relish
of the highest Enjoyment for the present; and our Satisfaction in the
Possession of any Good Thing (be it what it will) must needs be abated, if it
be accompanied with a Doubt of its Continuance. But Happiness with Security
must needs be complete and perfect. Nay, it must be so much the more complete
and perfect; because tho the Continuance of Happiness be future, yet the
Assurance of such Continuance is present; and by such Assurance we do in some
Degree compendiously, and at the same time, enjoy both our present and our
future Happiness. Now the Blessed in Glory may therefore be secure of the
Eternity of their Happiness, because God's Love stands immutably engaged to
their Holiness, forasmuch as such their Holiness is indefectible and eternal.
For, where that is eternal, his Love most certainly is so too.

To conclude, in a few Words: Our Love of our selves makes us desire to be
happy: But it must be our Love of something else, that must make us so. For, if
the Love of our selves could of it self make us happy, then it could not for
that Reason engage us to desire to be so. And nothing can conduce to our
Happiness, much less can any thing complete it, but what is entertained by our
Love.

When therefore we fix our Love upon that, which will answer the Desires of our
Self-love; we may then be sure, that we love that, which may make us happy; and
when we come to possess and enjoy that, which we so love, we may be sure, that
we shall be happy; and if our Enjoyment of it be securely eternal, we may then
be farther assured, that we shall be always so. And that our perfect Love of
God, and our Enjoyment of his Love and Favor, will bring all these things to
pass, we hope our foregoing Discourse has made good.

1. Now if the Happiness of our future State in Glory shall come from our Love
of God, and his Love of us; then this should teach us to have a care, that we
do not make our selves unfit for the Happiness of Heaven, by our
Uncharitableness whilst we live here upon Earth. For, the Love of God will
hardly be perfected in that Man, who does not love his Neighbor. For, He who
loves not his Brother, whom he has seen; how shall he love God, whom he has
not seen? And he, who does not love God here, how shall his Love to him be
perfected hereafter? For, that that is not, can never be made perfect. And, he
whose Love to God shall never be made perfect, how shall he be ever made happy?
For, there can be no Happine^s, no not in Heaven it self, without our perfect
Love of God. It is remarkable, that our Savior, when he taught his Disciples
to pray, (though he taught them to pray for several Things) yet annexes a
Condition to that Petition alone, by which they were to b^g Forgiveness of
their Sins; and afterward gives them a Reason for his so doing; because if
they forgive not Men their Trespasses, neither will their Father, who is in
Heaven, forgive them their Trespasses. By which we may understand, that as we
shall not be admitted into Heaven, unless we be made like to God; and as we
shall not be admitted into Heaven, unless God does forgive us our Sins; so
neither shall we be admitted into Heaven, unless we be in this like to God,
that we do forgive their Sins to others. In one Word, the malicious,
ill-natured, and uncharitable Man is one of the worst Companions in the World:
For, he is very apt to do it always; and for the most part actually does make
all People uneasy, where he comes; and from thence we may be satisfied, that
he is very unlikely to come in for a Share of that Happiness, which consists in
Love. And for that Reason, we may be satisfied also, that till he lays aside
his Uncharitableness, it will be impossible, that he should be made Partaker of
the Happiness of the Blessed.

2. If our eternal Happiness must come from our ardent and eternal Love of God
and Holiness; then we should have a care, that we do not place our Religion,
and by consequence our Hopes of eternal Happiness, in such Things, which have
no real Holiness in them. For, it is a very great Mistake, (which yet perhaps
runs through all Sorts of Christians) to think, that such Things, that are not
good and holy, will for ever make them happy. For, too many People do place not
only their Religion, but their Zeal for it too, in such little, and in
themselves insignificant Observances and Practices, which may be done, or may
be let alone; and yet all the while they themselves be never the more either
religious or holy. For, what Holiness (for Instance) can the Confession of the
Sinner, or the Absolution of the Priest, confer upon that Man, who has no other
Design in his Confession, but that he may go on to sin upon a new Score, and so
continue his Sin with a better Relish, and with the less Reluctance? Or, What
Holiness can the strict Observance of the Sabbath beget in that Man, who
therefore only obliges himself to a greater Severity upon that Day, that he may
by that Means compound with his Conscience for his fraudulent Dealings, or his
profligate and vicious Life, all the rest of the Week? Or, How can any Man be
the more holy, because he lists himself under this or that Party or Sect; when
all the while he takes no care to do what God commands, or to avoid what God
forbids? No! no! Holiness is a real Thing, though it be not the Object of our
Senses: And this Thing only lodges in that Heart, which by an humble Obedience
conforms it self to God's Will, and which, by harkening to his Voice, is
conformed to his Likeness. And if any Man thinks to become Holy by any other
Means, he does but deceive his own Soul, and by a fond and foolish Imagination
exclude himself from that Happiness, which shall only be bestowed upon those,
who shall be made like to him, who is most happy; that is, who shall be holy,
as he is holy. All they then who would make themselves happy, must take care,
that they make themselves holy. They must, I say, do so; and they must be
pleased, that they have so done. For, he only loves God, who delights in
Holiness; and he only shall be happy, who loves God.

3. Since it has appeared, that our most consummate Happiness does come from
our perfect Love of Holiness; and since perfect and unmixed Happiness is most
certainly our Aim: we do from thence conclude, That Holiness ought in Prudence
to be our Practice. For, as it is a Short-sightedness, and (at least) a Degree
of Folly, not to seek our Happiness there, where it may be found; so not to
seek it there, where we are truly, because rationally informed, that it may be
found, is Madness. For, that Man may well be taxed of Frenzy, who will not
take that Way to Happiness, to which he is directed by such Advice, which is
inculcated by the joint Suggestions of Revelation and Reason, that is, by the
ordinary and extraordinary Light, that God holds out to direct him in such Way.

Now, to set home this Exhortation, by convincing Men, that the true and
rational Way to their Happiness is by Holiness, (besides all that has hitherto
been offered) I would propose to their serious Consideration these Things
following.

1. That that Religion, which has been confirmed by Prophecies from the
Foundation of the World, before it was revealed; and which, when, and after it
was revealed, was confirmed by Multitudes of other Miracles, and by the
Resurrection of him from the Dead, who did reveal it; must as certainly have
God for its Author, as it is certain, that such Miracles and such Predictions
could only come from God.

2. The Christian Religion, and no other Religion, either truly or falsely so
called, is the Religion which has this Character, and therefore has God for its
Author.

3. That Religion, which has God for its Author, must needs be a true Religion.

4. That Religion, which has God for its Author, must needs be an holy Religion.

5. Since it is one of the greatest Businesses of Religion to instruct Men how
to serve God; the true Religion must, even because it is true, instruct Men how
to serve God truly.

6. He who truly serves God, who is most holy, must do so by living holily.

7. He who lives holily, pleases God: For, he complies with the Instructions of
that Religion, of which God is the Author.

8. He who pleases God, by complying with the Instructions of that Religion, of
which God is the Author, shall not fall short of the End, that God intended in
his Institution of Religion.

Now it is most certain, that God instituted Religion for the Sake and Benefit
of Man; and it as certain, that God wills the Happiness of Man: And therefore
it is rational to infer, That God instituted Religion to direct Man in the true
Way to Happiness; and that Way (we have seen) is Holiness.

1. From all which I would infer, First, that which is to my present Design,
That the only Way for us to obtain Happiness, is by our Practice of Holiness:
And, what is not indeed so direct to my purpose, but yet of good use,

2. That the best and surest Way of guiding our Enquiries after the True
Religion, will be to keep our Eye, all the while we are so employed, stedfaitly
fixed upon Holiness. For, we can much better tell what is good and honest, than
we can tell what is true. Our Knowledge of the first therefore may prove a very
good Guide to us in our Search after the last. To which I would add,

3. That to talk of Truth and Certainty, and much more of Infallibility in
Religion, when the Determinations and Resolutions of such Certainty or
Infallibility are mischievous or pernicious to the real Happiness of Mankind,
or any other ways wicked, is Nonsense and Banter; and is in deed and truth an
Imposition upon Men's Understandings, in order to damnifie the honest and real
Interests, and true Happiness of Mankind. But to return to our Design.

That Men may be the more heartily engaged to believe what has been said, and
to practice what they shall so believe; I shall still go on to press the
present Exhortation more home, by advising them to try the Experiment, whether
the Doctrine now delivered (which is, That our Happiness must come from our
Practice and Love of Holiness) be true or no. The Proposal is fair and
reasonable; and there is no Man who has not one way or other made a great many
Experiments in the Case: For, our constant Desire of Happiness will always be
putting us upon such Experiments. And I dare be bold to say, before we proceed
any farther, that if any Man's Trial has succeeded, his Success does fall in
with my Proposal, and back the present Exhortation.

Now, because our Happiness cannot (as we have seen) so much as be supposed to
be lodged abroad; but if it be our Happiness, it must, for that Reason, be
lodged within us, at home, and in our own possession; therefore, to engage Men
to entertain our present Exhortation the more heartily, and by confequence to
make the Trial of the proposed Experiment the more willingly; I would desire
them, by a serious Reflection, to consider, whether all Wickedness does not
constantly bring Misery along with it into that Breast, where it self is
entertained. For, if we suppose a Man to be wicked, we must at the same time,
for the most part, (for, there is but one excepted Case) suppose, that he knows
that he is so. And when that is once supposed, such a Supposition will acquaint
us with these following Truths: That he will have one Thought employed upon
God's Law, which commands his Duty; and another Thought upon his own Actions,
which transgress that Law; and a third Thought, which shall, by comparing the
one with the other, discover the Disagreement, nay the Contrariety, that is
between the Law, and such his Actions. Now, here are already Thoughts
disagreeing and fighting with each other, and by that Means a Civil War raised
in his Breast; the Effects of which, in all Cases, are sure to be not only
mischievous, but calamitous. Let us then see a little farther, and let us
suppose (what will yet be more than supposed, for it will be certain:) But, I
say, let us suppose, that when by one Thought the Man has discovered the
Contrariety between his own Actions, and the Directive Part of the Law, that
thereupon he bestows another Thought upon the Vindictive Part of the Law, (and
such a Chain of Thoughts is very natural) and that by another Thought he
applies such Vindictive Part of the Law, that is, the Threat of the Law, to his
own Actions, and, by consequence, to his own dear Self. And when this is once
done, then we may begin to be satissied, that Multitudes of other Thoughts will
presently rise in his Breast, and those too filled with Doubt, and Fear, and
Shame, and Grief, and all those other troublesome, vexatious, and tormenting
Passions, which are the natural Effects that follow upon the Contemplation of
our own Guilt. Now, when all these boisterous and vexatious Thoughts do oppose
themselves against, and make violent Assaults upon a Man's natural Desire of
Ease, Content, and Happiness, what a Storm and Tempest must they, by so doing,
raise in that Soul, where they all meet, and where they all rage and contend?
The poor Man, in this Case, will (in the Words of the Prophet) be like the
troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose Waters cast up Mire and Dirt: That is,
Filth and Wickedness is the Cause of his Disquiet; and Tumult, Confusion, and
Agony are the Effects of such Filth and Wickedness: For, there is no Peace to
the Wicked, says God; and we may be sure, that what God says, is true: For,
when our own Thoughts do tell us, that the Miseries which they bring upon us,
they do therefore so bring, because we have offended and displeased our God;
they do, by so doing, add one great Misery to all our other Miseries. For, in
all other Afflictions we have still a Place of Refuge left; and, like a City
besieged, though all our Communications with the Comforts of this World be
hindered and intercepted, yet our Intercourse with Heaven is still left free and
open, and in God we have a sure Retreat. But when our Misery springs from our
own Wickedness, we do at the same time lose our Happiness, and our Hopes of
Relief too; because our Misery comes from his Hand, who has all Relief and all
Happiness in his own disposal.

I have described these Things in a plain, familiar, and natural Way, because I
would have People convinced of their Truth, without the Trouble or Expense of a
Trial. (For, though I would have them try, whether Goodness will not make them
happy; yet I would not have them try, whether Wickedness will not make them
miserable.) For, the Experiment in this Case will be too dear and costly. And
that must needs be so, which destroys our Peace, by robbing us of the Peace of
God. And if Men are but in some moderate Degree satisfied of the Truth of these
Things, it may be hoped, (and God grant that our Hope do not deceive us) that
they will by that means be engaged to try, whether Holiness will make them
happy, or no. For, now they have a fair and farther Probability of Success to
invite them to such a Trial; because Holiness and Wickedness being contrary the
one to the other, our Reason will teach us more than barely to conjecture, that
they must produce contrary Essects. For, if (as we have seen) Misery,
Confusion, and Agony are sure to be the Effects of Wickedness; it may the more
reasonably be expected, that the Effects of Holiness should be Joy and
Happiness; and therefore it may be the more reasonably expected also, that Men
should be persuaded to pursue their Happiness by the Practice of Holiness.

And it may be farther expected yet, that Men should be so persuaded, because
(which yet may seem strange) there is hardly any wicked Man, though he be ranked
among those whom the World do commonly account Profligate) but who yet has so
much Knowledge of the Comforts of Holiness, as might (would he but use his
natural Reason in the Case) engage him to attempt the Increase of such his
Comforts, by becoming holy. For, though he be guilty of many, perhaps of most
Sins; yet he cannot be guilty of all. For, Sin is not only an Absurdity in it
self, and a downright Contradiction to all sober Reason; but it is in many
Cases a Contradiction also to it self. For, one Sin shall stand in such
opposition to another, that it shall in a manner be impossible for both of them
to be Retainers to the same Man. For, it is as impossible to conceive, that a
professed and profligate Debauchee (while he is what he is) should be an
Hypocrite, as it is, that he should proclaim and conceal his Wickedness at one
and the self-same time. And yet, even such a Debauchee, thus abandoned to all
sorts of Vices, as far as Possibility and his own profligate Inclinations will
permit, shall value himself for his Forbearance of that Vice, from which yet he
does not therefore forbear, because it is a Vice, but because (should he admit
it to his Practice) it would thwart and control his other many and beloved
Vices. And we cannot but sometimes observe, that some Men, who heartily hug
Covetousness, and all those Vices which drudge under its Direction, such as are
Extortion, Oppression, Fraud, Lying, Perjury, and all manner of
Uncharitableness, shall yet raise a Comfort to themselves, because they are
sober, and free from Drunkenness. These Things, as strange as they are, yet are
too often found to be true. And the present Use that we make of them, is this:
That very wicked Men, and even such, whose Vices are very numerous and very
black, shall yet, for all that, perceive such a Beauty and Excellency only in
abstaining from other Vices, which are not their own. that they shall gather
Comfort to themselves from such their Abstinence; and that therefore even such
Men are not utterly void of all Sense, that the Practice of Virtue is a
pleasant and comfortable Thing; and that, by consequence, there is an Happiness
which does attend and follow it. And then, if it be so true, that Holiness or
Virtue (for Virtue and Practical Holiness are one and the same Thing;) But, I
say, if it be so true, that Holiness has Happiness for its Companion and
Follower; that the most wicked Men are sensible of it, and that all other Men
do confess it; then it is hoped, that the present Exhortation will be admitted,
and that is, That all Men would try to make themselves happy, by making
themselves holy. And it will be a very hard Case, if Men will not put
themselves to the trouble of trying that Experiment, which their own Sense of
the Thing, and the Sense of all other Men besides, will tell them must needs
succeed; and which, when it does succeed, must needs make them happy.

And thus far the present Exhortation is more professedly directed to those,
who are in a manner utter Strangers to the Ways of God, and so have need of a
Guide to enter them into the right Way.

To all others, I have but One or Two Things to say, and so shall conclude the
whole Matter.

1. And first, Because I do suppose them not to be wholly Strangers to
Holiness, therefore I would advise them to look back to their own Experience in
the Case: And though perhaps that Experience may not be much; yet, such as it is,
I am very confident, that their own Reflections will tell them, that whenever
they did any Duty heartily and sincerely, they did not go without all Comsort,
that they had so done: That when they have done as they ought, their Condition
has been as they desired: That when their Actions have been guided by their
Conscience, and their Conscience has been guided by God's Law, they have
thereupon been blessed with calm and comfortable Reflections: That a diligent
and constant Discharge of their Duty has therefore kept their Souls at peace
with themselves, because they have then been satisfied, that God has been at
peace with their Souls. Now, such Comforts and smaller Happinesses as these,
because they have always accompanied and been proportionate to their fainter
Love of Holiness, have given in sufficient Evidence, that their Happiness shall
then be perfect and complete, when their Holiness shall be so: And by having so
done, may enforce our present Exhortation, which is, That by growing in Grace,
and by improving in the Love of God and Goodness, they should fit themselves
for an eternal Happiness. For, by what has been said, they may now begin to be
satisfied, that when their Savior requires of them to love the Lord their God
with all their Hearts, with all their Souls, with all their Strength, and with
all their Minds, he does in effect require of them to love their own Souls;
since it is by this time notorious, that what in this Case is their Duty, will
prove not only their true Way to Happiness, but that it will also put them into
the actual Possession of such Happiness.

2. I would add, in the second place, That if we do not sincerely love
Holiness, and by consequence desire it, we shall never attain to the Perfection
of it: And if we fall short of a perfect Holiness, we shall by consequence fall
short of Eternal Happiness. For, our Savior will not bestow a perfect Holiness
there, where it is not desired; and it cannot be desired there, where it is not
loved. We must therefore fit our selves to be made perfectly holy, as well as
he is willing to make us so. For, as we have seen already, that those only who
hunger and thirst after Righteousness, shall be satisfied; so we shall here
add, That those only who are so satisfied, shall be blessed.

A SHORT INQUIRY, Whether it does not appear from The Scriptures, THAT THE
GOSPEL OF OUR Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST Shall be made known to those Men
After their Resurrection, to whom it had never been made known Before their
Death?

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Took, at the Middle Temple Gate in Fleet Street.
1700.

THE PREFACE.
IT may be perceived, by the very Title, that I would be thought (however I
have all along worded my self) to propose the following Essay (for so I would
choose to call it) only Problematically. For which Reason I have separated it
from the foregoing Discourse, and have cast it here by it self.

If it be found true, it cannot for that Reason be condemned of Novelty,
because it is wholly grounded upon the Scripture, and goes no farther, than
those Consequences, which That affords, will warrant.

And if it be found true, it may perhaps be found useful also for the Resolving
of more Difficulties in Religion, than what it expressly pretends to.

But I was unwilling to adventure too far; and therefore desire the Reader to
take it in good Part, such as it, at present, offers it self to him.

T. S.

A SHORT INQUIRY, etc.
IT has been our professed Business, in the foregoing Discourse, to make it
out, That there is no other Name under Heaven, but that of Jesus Christ, given
to Men, whereby they must be saved. Which, because it is a Truth only made
known by Revelation; and because it is attended with some Difficulties, which
our Natural Reason cannot easily surmount; has therefore (of late especially)
been slighted (to say no worse) by some Men, who call themselves Christians;
but who, for all that, will allow nothing to be necessary to Salvation, but the
Belief of a God, and that Natural Religion, which is consequent to such Belief;
and therefore who are desirous at least to lay aside all Revelation whatsoever.

Now, though others, who have looked farther into the Matter, cannot persuade
themselves to renounce God's Revelations concerning a Savior, made to Man in
the Old and New Testaments, which do indeed carry sufficient Evidence in
themselves of their Divine Authority; the main Drift and Design of the First
being to foretell and prefigure the Coming of our Lord Jesus the Messiah, with
other Things relating to his Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection, etc. And the
main Drift and Design of the Last being to exhibit to us the Accomplishment of
what had been so foretold and prefigured:) For, the Testimony of Jesus is the
Spirit of Prophecy; and the Spirit of Prophecy is the Spirit of God: Yet even
some of these Men do so treat the acknowledged Revelations, as to employ their
Reason rather to expound away those Difficulties, than to resolve them; by that
means rejecting the most express Meaning of a great Part of the New Testament,
and so cutting those Knots, which they perhaps therefore only cannot, because
they will not try to untie.

Now though we have attempted to resolve several such Difficulties, (and some of
them in such a way, which, we hope, may persuade thinking Men, that, provided
they hold fast the Foundation, they are not always obliged to tread in beaten
Paths:) Yet one grand Difficulty still remains; and that is, That if Men are to
obtain Salvation by Jesus Christ alone, and if such a Doctrine can only be
known by Revelation; then it may seem strange (at least) that the Revelation is
not made known to all Men. And it may seem the more strange, that it is not so,
because in those very Revelations, which we have of it, we find expressly, that
the Salvation designed in Christ Jesus was intended for all Men: And it is
natural to think, that that which is designed for the Benefit of all, should be
exhibited to all; and that especially, when such Design is the Counsel of
Wisdom and Omnipotence. Besides, if the Revelation of a Savior was necessary
for any; then, either immediately or mediately, it must be necessary for All;
because if any of those Men, to whom it is not made, may be saved without it;
then, so might those, to whom it was made; and so the Revelation (as to its
necessity to Salvation) might have been wholly spared. For which Reason, we
cannot think it sufficient to say, that the Savior knows all Men, and so can
save them; though all Men do not know the Savior, and so cannot believe on him.
And therefore the Scriptures of the New Testament do expressly assign our
Salvation, on our Part, to our Belief; and they do as expressly make our Savior
the Saving Object of such our Belief. And therefore, though the Author of The
Reasonableness of Christianity has showed himself no great Friend to Articles
of Christian Faith, and therefore does at least pretend to wipe away the
Necessity of all other Articles in our Creed but this, That Jesus of Nazareth
is the Messiah; yet he does not adventure so far, as to exclude the Necessity
of that Article. My Business is not with that Author at present; and therefore
having taken notice, that he does so far agree with me, I shall proceed: Only I
would by the bye remark, That though that be the first and leading Article of
Christianity, (for without the Belief of Jesus Christ there can no more be any
such thing as Christianity, than without the Belief of a God there can be such
a Thing as Religion;) yet for all that, it will be true, that as a Religion
grounded upon the Belief of the true God, may however be a false Religion; so a
Christianity grounded upon the Belief of the true Christ, may however be a
false Christianity. For, as notwithstanding a Belief, or, which may be
something more, the Knowledge of the True God, Men may fall into Idolatry; [See
Romans chap. 1. ver. 21, 22, 23.] So, notwithstanding the Belief not only of the
true Christ, but of his Resurrection also, Men may have no other Expectations
from him, but Wealth, Power, and Grandeur in this World; [See Acts chapter 1. ver.
6.] And yet I do hardly think, that a Faith either in the one Case or in the
other, will by that Author be thought a Saving Faith: And if it be not, then it
will appear a good Conclusion, That in the last Case, that is, in the Case of
Christianity, something more is necessary to be believed in order to our
Salvation, than barely, that Jesus is the Christ.

But, as I said before, this by the bye. That which is directly to our present
Purpose, is, That if it be true, that none shall be saved, who do not believe
in Jesus Christ the Savior; then how shall we account for the future Condition
of those, who in this Life never heard of Jesus Christ? For, though we may out of
the Scriptures be taught, That he who believes, shall be saved; and, that he
who believes not, shall be damned: Yet still we cannot but know, that that
Disbelief to which Damnation is allotted, must be as contrary to that Belief to
which Salvation is allotted, as Damnation and Salvation are to each other. Now
because that Belief, to which Salvation is allotted, is an Act of the Will,
(whatever the Schools teach of Faith being lodged only in the Understanding;)
therefore we do conclude, That that Disbelief, to which Damnation is allotted,
must be an Act of the Will too. And indeed, since Damnation is confessedly the
Reward of Unbelief; and since this Reward is to come from the Hand of such
Justice, which cannot err; we may from thence be assured, that the Unbelief, to
which it is allotted, must be Criminal; and we are moreover assured, that
nothing can be so, in which the Will is not at all concerned. Now, because it
is most certain, that those who in this World never heard of Jesus Christ, do
not therefore not believe in him, because they will not, but only because they
cannot: I say, for that Reason it will be unjust to asign that Damnation to
their Unbelief, that is, by them unavoidable; which is by the Scriptures
assigned only to that Unbelief: which is therefore Criminal, because it is
Voluntary. Though therefore Damnation be by the Scriptures pronounced against
that Unbelief, which refuses the Savior made known and offered to Men; yet we
cannot from thence conclude, that it shall be the Portion of that Unbelief,
which is only a Consequence of an unavoidable Ignorance of the same Savior.

And as we cannot from the Scriptures conclude, that they who never heard of
the Savior, shall be damned for their Unbelief: So neither can we from them
conclude, that they shall be saved, notwithstanding their Unbelief. For, if a
Faith in Jesus Christ be, according to the Scriptures, necessary to Salvation;
it will from thence follow, that they who want that Faith, must go without that
Salvation, to which it is necessary.

Now, it may be presumed, that far the greater Part of Mankind, if not in all,
yet in most Ages, and that therefore much the greater Part of Mankind in
general, never had the Savior made known to them; which, if it be true, (as we
have no reason to doubt the truth of it) then it will follow,

That though God has provided a Savior for all Men; yet by making a Faith in
that Savior a necessary Condition for Man's obraining the provided Salvation,
he has thereby excluded the greater Part of Mankind from such Salvation;
because by having determined the Times before appointed, and the Bounds of
their Habitation, he has by his Providence so placed them in the World, that it
is to them impossible to come to so much Knowledge of the Savior, as is
necessary to their Belief in him.

And if this Conclusion be true, it will afford us another, which is, That
notwithstanding God has in a Savior made sufficient Provision for the
Salvation of all Men; yet the greater Part of Men shall fall short of such
Salvation, and that too without their own Default.

Now, it is freely confessed, that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Savior, laid the
Design of extending that Salvation, which he purchased, as wide, as was the
Merit of his Purchase; that is, his Purchase was sufficient for the Salvation
of all Men; and he gave such Directions and Injunctions for the Propagating to
all Men so much Knowledge of such his Purchase, as might be sufficient to bring
them to that Faith, which might entitle them to the Benefit of it. And
therefore we find, that he commanded his Apostles to go into all the World, and
to preach the Gospel to every Creature; and that he gave them Abilities to obey
such his Command, by bestowing on them, and many of those who should be
instructed by them, the Gift of Tongues, and the Power of working Miracles. By
which Means there was Provision made for the Faith of all, as well as for the
Salvation of all; for the Means, as well as for the End. But yet because,

1. The Propagating the Means of Faith, that is, because the Propagating the
Gospel to all Mankind, was left in the Hand of Man, and, for that Reason, was
not likely to be performed according to the Will and Command of God; insomuch
that he, who is both the Author and Finisher of our Faith, does before his
departure out of this World make it a Question, Whether, upon his Return, he
should find Faith in it; Shall the son of man, when he comes, find faith upon
the earth? And because,

2. As it was likely, that those Men, who had the Means of Faith and Salvation
themselves, would not; so it has been found by Experience, that they have not,
at least they have not so industriously propagated such Means, as that they
should reach to all others: And because,

3. Though any Man may defeat the Counsel of God for his own Salvation, and (if
he do so) his Damnation will not only be just, but necessary; yet it is not
agreeable to the Equity of the Divine Justice, that it should be in the Power
of any Man to defeat the Counsel of God for the Salvation of any other Man:

I say, from these Things laid together, it may seem no improbable Conclusion,
That God will by some way or other make known his Counsel (to all Men) for
their Salvation, as he has already done so to some: And that he will also make
them acquainted with the Conditions, that he requires of them, in order to
their being made Partakers of such Salvation, that is, he will make them
acquainted with Jesus Christ their Savior, and with his Doctrine and Laws.

And then, to come up close to that Design, at which we have all along aimed;
Since we know by Experience, that God has not by any Means made all Men
acquainted with these Things in this Life, that therefore he will do it in a
future Life.

And it seems to me, that he has given us sufficient Grounds to believe, that
he will do so, in those very Revelations, which he has already afforded us to
guide us in the Way of Salvat on. For, though the generality of Christians, and,
by their Way of wording themselves, whether in their Popular Discourses or in
their Writings, one would be inclined to think, that the generality of Divines
too do conceive, that the Resurrection of all Men will be caused at one and the
same time; perhaps invited to such a Persuasion, because, as the Scriptures do
tell us, that a Resurrection is in order to a General Judgment, so they do
assign but one Day to that Judgment, called therefore the Day of Judgment: Yet
we may do well to consider, That short and general Expressions are very seldom
complete and full Narratives: And if, in this very Case, the Scriptures, where
they descend to a more particular Account of the Matter, do give us in a
different Information, and so do assure us, that the Resurrection of all Men
shall not be at one and the same time; but that there is a distinct Period of
Time set out for the Resurrection of some Men, from that which is appointed for
the Resurrection of others; then we hope, it will not be thought an
Extravagance, if we shall assert, That there will be more Resurrections than
one; or, which perhaps speaks our Meaning plainer, That several Sorts of Men,
according to the Tariety of their Behavior, and other their Circumstances in
this World, shall be raised, not only in different Conditions, but also at
differeut Times, in the next World: And those Times too (as will appear from
what will be spoken hereafter) at Distances considerably remote from each other.

Now, the Scriptures, in the Twentieth Chapter of the Revelations, do acquaint
us with a threefold Resurrection.

1. The First is, of those Men, who were Martyrs for Jesus, and for the Word of
God, etc. ver. 4. By which I understand all the Faithful in Christ; though I do
not in this Place contend the Truth of such Exposition, because I shall have
occasion to speak to it hereafter.

2. The Second Resurrection is in ver. 5. where we are told, that the rest of
the Dead lived not again, till the thousand Years were finished.

Now, those who are said to be first raised, in the Fourth Verse, are there
also said to reign with Christ a thousand Years. Therefore when we are told, in
the Fifth Verse, that the rest of the Dead lived not again, till the thousand
Tears were finished, it is implied, that then they did live again. So that a
thousand Years do intervene between the first and second Resurrection. And though
it follows in the latter end of the Fifth Verse, [This is the first
Resurrection;] yet it is evident, that that cannot be meant of the Resurrection
in the Fifth Verse, because we had been before made acquainted with a
Resurrection which was a thousand Years before it.

I therefore take the whole Sentence in the former part of the Fifth Verse,
[But the rest of the Dead lived not, till the thousand Years were finished,] to
be Pro^eptical, and to come in in a Parenthesis: For, indeed their proper Place
is between the Sixth and Seventh Verses.

Let us therefore see how the Sense will go, if we remove them from the Place
where they stand at present, and place them between the Sixth and Seventh
Verses.

Ver. 4. And they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand Years.

Ver. 5. This is the first Resurrection.

Ver. 6. Blessed and holy is he, that has part in the first Resurrection: On
such the secord Death has no power; but they shall be Priests of God and of
Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand Years.

Now, if in this Place we bring in those Words in the Fifth Verse, [But the
rest, etc.] the Sense will go thus;

Ver. 5. But the rest of the Dead lived not again, until the thousand Years
were finished.

Ver. 7. And when the thousand Years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of
his Prison, and shall go out to deceive the Nations, etc.

By which it is plain, that if the Sentence at the beginning of the Fifth Verse
be removed and placed between the Sixth and Seventh-Verses, then the Sense, and
the Discourse concerning both the First and Second Resurrection, will be entire
and continued, and also will be plain, easy, and natural.

Now, from the Words thus restored to their natural and true Order, we do to
our present purpose take notice,

1. That they, who have behaved themselves as faithful Christians in this Life,
shall be raised first in the next Life, 1 Cor. chap. 15. ver. 23.

2. That they shall reign with Christ a thousand Years before any of the rest
of Mankind shall be raised.

3. That they shall reign with Christ here upon Earth, because, 1. The Dead in
Christ shall rise first, shall with the Faithful that are alive, and remain at
the Lord's coming, be caught up in the Clouds to meet the Lord in the Air: From
whence we do with Mr. Mead infer, That the Lord is at that time coming down to
the Earth; for otherwise, how should they meet him? Consult the First to the
Thessalonians, chap. 4. toward the latter end. 2. Because the Saints of the
First Resurrection shall, after the thousand Years, be besieged in the beloved
City, Rev. 20. ver. 9. But such City comes down from Heaven to Earth, Rev. 21.
ver. 2. And it is evident in the First Text, that the City besieged was upon
the Earth. Consult the Second of Peter, chapter 3. ver. 13.


4. That they shall never die more, because they shall ever be with the Lord, 1
These. chapter 4. ver. 17.

5. That they shall with him judge the Angels, 1 Cor. chap. 6. ver. 3. and
probably also, wicked Men: See the Second Verse of the same Chapter. Compare
also the Thrones in the Fourth, with the great White Throne in the Eleventh
Verse of the Twentieth Chapter of Revelations. By all which it is at least
suggested, that the Saints of the first Resurrection shall then be with the
Lord Jesus, when he shall judge both wicked Angels and Men.

6. That as our Savior, after his own Resurrection, continued upon Earth Forty
Days, and then ascended into Heaven; so his People shall, upon their
Resurrection, continue with him upon Earth a thousand Years; and afterward
shall go from hence with him, and be with him, where he is: For, they shall
ever be with the Lord; but, the Earth shall fly away before his Face, Rev. 20.
ver. 11.

7. That though the Righteous shall be Witnesses of, because present (at least)
at the Judgment passed upon the Reprobate; yet that the Reprobate shall not be
present at that Sentence, by which the Righteous shall have their Reward
assigned them: For, they shall not be raised, till after such Sentence be
passed and over; Rev. 20. compare the Fourth Verse with the Eleventh and
following Verses.

8. Neither shall the Devil be present at the blessed Sentence, and therefore
shall not then be permitted to accuse the Righteous; because he is bound, and
cast into the bottomless Pit, before the Thrones are set, in the Fourth Verse,
and is not loosed, till the thousand Years are expired.

One Thing more we must remark upon this First Resurrection, and that is, that
it shall not be brought to pass till the Last Day; by which I understand, the
last Day of the Economy of this World, or the Day of our Savior's first
Coming to Judgment. Consult St. John, chap. 6. ver. 39, 40. At which Day, as
the Faithful, whether dead, (and then raised) or remaining, (or not yet dead)
shall be caught up to meet the Lord in the Air, 1 Thessalonians. 4. ver. 16. so, in
that Day, the Earth, and the Works that are therein, shall be burnt up, 2 Pet.
chap. 3. ver. 7, 10, 12. compared. From whence we conclude, That as the
Faithful shall be caught up to meet the Lord in the Air; so the Wicked and
Unbelievers, that remain in the Earth, shall be destroyed by that general
Conflagration.

From whence we have a plausible Argument for that, which we have called the
Second Resurrection; which is the Resurrection of some Men (whoever they be at
present) after the Resurrection of the Righteous: Because after the
Resurrection of the Faithful, and the Destruction of all the rest by Fire, as
aforesaid; and not only so, but also a thousand Years after that, Satan is let
loose to deceive the Nations. Now, after the general Conflagration, there could
be no Nations to be deceived, if there were no Resurrection. They therefore,
whom he is to deceive, are those who were raised in the Fifth Verse, as was
before said: For, he cannot deceive those of the First Resurrection, for many
obvious Reasons.

But farther to assert this Second Resurrection, and to clear such Doubts as
may arise concerning it, we shall enquire into these following Particulars.

1. Who those Men are, that shall be raised by it?

2. Why the Devil is let loose to deceive them?

3. Why they are called the Nations?

4. Who is Gog and Magog? For, as we shall see by and by, Gog and Magog must
come under this Second Resurrection.

1. And for an Answer to the first Question, viz. Who those are, who shall be
raised by the second Resurrection? We must take notice, that the Scriptures do
tell us, what it has been our Business in the foregoing Discourse to prove,

1. That there is not Salvation in any other, but in Jesus Christ alone.

2. The same Scriptures do tell us, That those Men, who shall be saved by Jesus
Christ, must believe in him; that is, they must receive him for their Savior,
and admit the Conditions of that Covenant, which he established in order to
their Salvation.

3. The same Scriptures, and our natural Reason do tell us, That Men cannot
believe in him, of whom they have not heard.

4. And we are assured by Experience, not only, that many Men, but that many
Nations of Men, and that too through most, if not all Ages of the World, have
not heard of Jesus Christ.

5. And yet we know by the Scriptures, that Jesus Christ came to save all Men;
that he died for all; that God wills not, that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance, and be saved: with much more to the same purpose.

6. And we are assured, That where God wills the Salvation of all Men, and
where he has provided Means sufficient for the Salvation of all Men; that there
he will not, (we may perhaps say, cannot) in Truth, Equity, and Justice, so
order Things by his Providence, that many, nay, the most part of those Men (for
whom, as well as for the rest, he provided, and therefore designed Salvation)
should be put in such Circumstances, and that without their own Fault, as that
it should be utterly impossible for them to come to the Knowledge of their
Savior and his Gospel, and, by consequence, to a Possibility of obtaining
Salvation.

Now from these Propositions, so laid down, we do infer,

1. That at some time or other, Jesus Christ shall be made known to all Men,
before they shall by him be called to Judgment, to give an Account, whether
they have received and believed in him, or not.

2. That all those Men, to whom Jesus Christ and his Gospel was never made
known before their Death, shall yet be made acquainted with them after their
Resurrection.

And in order to our more full Satisfaction in these Conclusions, we take
notice farther,

1. That all, upon whom a final Judgment shall pass, that is, all Men, are by
the Scriptures ranged into Two Sorts; Those who shall be saved, and those who
shall be damned.

2. That those, with whose Resurrection we are made acquainted, from the Fifth
to the Ninth Verse of the Twentieth of Revelations inclusive, were raised after
the Resurrection in the Fourth Verse is over; and were raised and gone before
the Resurrection in the Eleventh, Twelfth, and following Verses does commence,
which are expressly Resurrections of Remuneration; whereas those of this second
Resurrection, are not, during the Time that their Resurrection lasts, called to
any final Judgment, for any Thing that they had done in this Life; but are all
that while treated much after the same manner, as Men in this Life are.

And this will yet farther appear, if we consider, that Satan was let loose to
tempt them. For,

1. They that are raised to Happiness and Glory (and so are all they, who have
in this Life heard of, and believed in the Savior) shall not after their
Resurrection be tempted by him. They have fought the good Fight, they have kept
the Faith, they have finished their Course; and from thenceforth are to obtain
the Crown of Glory laid up for them.

2. And all those, who have in this Life been made acquainted with the Savior,
and have rejected him, have by that Means put away Salvation from themselves,
and therefore shall at their Resurrection be raised to Condemnation; and so
there will be no Occasion for the Devil to tempt them.

3. To which we may add, That when we are told, that Satan is let loose to
tempt the Nations, it is implied, that he will tempt them from something that
is good, to something that is evil; for, we know to what End his Temptations do
drive, and that he is that roaring Lion, who goes about, seeking whom he may
devour; that is, that the Business and Design of his Temptations is the
Destruction of Souls: And, for that Reason, we may also know, that the main
Design of his Temptation, or Deceit, in the Text, must be to seduce the People
there mentioned from believing in, and receiving the Savior; and, by
consequence, from obtaining Salvation.

From all which we do conclude, That to qualify these People for the farther
Mercies of the Savior, over and beyond the Resurrection, (which I shall in
this Place adventure to call his general and unconditional Purchase) we may
suppose,

1. That the Savior shall be then tendered to them: For, not having heard of
him in this Life, they had no Possibility, either of receiving or rejecting him
here, as the rest of Mankind had.

2. That after they are, upon their Resurrection, made acquainted with the
Savior, they shall be put upon the same Probation, whether they will receive
him upon the Conditions of the Gospel; as those were, who had heard of him, and
the Gospel-Conditions, in this Life.

3. That if, upon such their Probation, they do receive him; they shall then be
in the same happy Condition, in which they now are, who did receive him in this
Life, and who do therefore enjoy the Happiness of the first Resurrection. For,
we may reasonably judge, that if upon their Resurrection they did receive him,
that then they should die no more, as they who were alive at his first Coming
(which Coming does still continue) did not die, but were caught up to him. And
perhaps for this Reason the Text does only account for the Death of those of
this Second Resurrection, who opposed the Savior, and besieged the beloved
City. And if we suppose such a Process in this Affair, (as indeed the
Circumstances seem to allow us more than barely to suppose it) it will upon
such Supposition be found exactly to answer and agree with the Proceedings at
the first Coming of our Savior to raise the Righteous. For, as then they, who
believed in him, and were alive in the Earth, did not die at all, but were
caught up to meet the Lord in the Air; so here, those, who upon their
Resurrection received and believed in the Savior then made known to them,
shall not die, but shall be taken to the Lord, and so shall escape that Fire
from Heaven, which will destroy all the rest, who besiege the beloved City:
Just as the Righteous at the beginning of this our Savior's Coming were caught
up to meet the Lord in the Air, and so escaped the general Conflagration, which
ensued.

1. Now, from all that has been said, the Answer to the first Question will be,
That they, who shall be raised by that, which we have called the Second
Resurrection, are all those, who never had had the Offer of a Savior made to
them in this Life.

2. From which we may gain an easy Answer to the second Question, which is,
Why the Devil is let loose to deceive them?

The Reason of which is, Because they are to undergo the same Probation, upon
the Offer of the Savior to them, which those underwent, who in this Life had
the same Offer. For, it is just and equitable, that they should undergo the
same Trial with those of the first Resurrection, for this Reason; Because all
Mankind having by Sin become voluntary Subjects to Satan; it is neither
agreeable to the Divine Justice, nor indeed to the Rules of Reason in general,
to rescue any of them from such Subjection, without their own voluntary
Consent. For, in order to their Return to their Original Subjection to God, it
is necessary, that they become good and holy: And in order to their becoming
so, it is necessary (and that too in the Nature of the Thing) that they be
willing to become so. As therefore the Devil first brought them off from their
Subjection to God, to that of himself, by persuading them to consent (that is,
to be willing) to the Revolt; so God brings them back again, only by persuading
them to be willing to return. For, if on one side or the other, either God or
the Devil should force or compel them to their respective Subjection, they
could by such Force neither be made good nor bad; that is, they could not
become Subjects to either; because there can be no moral Goodness or Badness
without the Consent of his Will, who is good or bad. Since therefore God
(having made Man a Free Agent, and so, capable of Moral Goodness) did not force
them to continue good, when the Devil first tempted them to be bad; and so did
not hinder the Devil from tempting them to be bad at first; neither will he,
for the same Reason, hinder the Devil from tempting them to continue so, no,
not when he himself does offer to them a Savior. So that the Offer of a
Savior by God, and his Invitations and Persuasions of Men to receive such
Savior, on the one Hand; and the Devil's Dissuasions and Temptations of them
from receiving such Savior on the other Hand, being in some measure a
Counterpoise to each other; the Receiving or Refusing of the Savior becomes
the Act and Deed of him, to whom he is tendered; and so, in Right and Justice,
the consequential Benefits of such Receiving, and the consequential Mischiefs
of such Refusal, shall become his just Portion.

Though therefore the Devil shall not be suffered to tempt those of the First
Resurrection any more, because they had already baffled and overcome his
Temptations in this Life; and so, notwithstanding such his Temptations, had
received the Savior on the Gospel-Conditions: Yet because the Case of those of
the Second Resurrection is, upon such their Resurrection, and the Offer, of the
Savior then to them, just the same, as was the Case of the First in this Life;
therefore Satan shall be let loose to tempt them after their Resurrection, as
he was to tempt the others in this Life.

God therefore, by raising them from the Dead, did in a Savior do that for
them, which it was utterly impossible for them to do for themselves; but still
leaves them to do for themselves what they can do; though (as we may suppose) not
without such Assistance as may be sufficient (if they be not wanting to
themselves) to enable them to conquer the Devil's Temptations.

3. The Third Question is, Why the Devil is said to be let loose to deceive the
(Nations?)

In order to the Resolution of which, we must take notice, that upon the Second
Resurrection, there was now Two Sorts of People upon the Face of the Earth;
whereof the first are the Inhabitants of the New Jerusalem, the beloved City.
Now, as under Moses's Law, the Israelites, who were the People of God, (whose
chief City was Jerusalem, the Place where God had settled his more Solemn
Worship, and his more Especial Abode;) I say, as the Israelites are opposed to
the Gentiles, that is, to the rest of the World, in the Scriptures; so, in
allusion to that, (for, the Church of the Jews was a Type of the Church of
Christ;) the Faithful in Christ are in several Places of the New Testament
called the Israel of God. So in the Sixth to the Galatians, ver. 16. the
Apostle prays for Peace and Mercy upon some Christians there mentioned, and
upon the whole Israel of God. And when he tells us, in the Eleventh to the
Romans, ver. 26. That all Israel shall be saved, it is evident, by the Context,
that he means, all, whether Jews or Gentiles, who shall believe in the Savior.
And therefore Christ calls Nathanael, in the First Chapter of St. John, an
Israelite indeed, (that is, a true good Man) in whom there is no guile. Those
then of the First Resurrection, in the Twentieth of Revelations, are there to
be esteemed the Israel of God, or the People of Israel. But those of the second
Resurrection are therefore called the Nations, because, upon their
Resurrection, they shall stand in several Circumstances to those of the First
Resurrection, as the Gentiles did to the Jews before, and at the first
Promulgation of the Gospel. For, Salvation was of the Jews; and St. Paul tells
them, (and so our Savior appointed) in the Thirteenth of the Acts, ver. 46. It
was necessary, that the Word of God should have first been spoken to you; but
seeing you put it from you, etc. lo! we turn to the Gentiles. But still the
first Converts to Christianity were Israelites, and the Gentiles were added to
the Church afterward. Now, we must take notice, that the People, who are in
the Eighth Verse of the Twentieth of Revelations called the Nations, who (as
appears by the Context) are those of the Second Resurrection, are styled in the
Original (...), which in the New Testament is translated sometimes the
Gentiles, and sometimes the Nations: The Nations, in the Verse quoted in the
Revelations; the Gentiles, in the Thirteenth of Acts, quoted before. Now, from
these Things, so premised, we take notice,

1. That the People of this second Resurrection are notoriously, in the
Twentieth of Revelations, distinguished from those of the first, much after the
same manner, as the Gentiles in this World were from the Jews: The one being
called the Nations or Gentiles; the other, the Saints, or the Holy People, the
Inhabitants of the New Jerusalem, or the beloved City. So that, as the Jews
were first called in this World, and after them the Gentiles; who, before such
their Call, had no Prophecies, nor any Promises, concerning the Messiah, the
Christ; and so were utter Strangers to any Knowledge of him, and, by
consequence, incapable of any Faith in him: So the Israel of God are first
raised in the next World, do enjoy the Promises in the Messiah, and do inhabit
what the Apostle calls Jerusalem, which is above. And after them, those who had
been utter Strangers and Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, the Gentiles,
are raised, have the Savior the Messiah made known to them, and so are put
into a Capacity of entering into his Rest, as the Israel of God had done before
them.

2. That those Nations or Gentiles were capable of being seduced by Satan; nay,
that Multitudes of them were so. By which we may understand, (as we have
observed before) that they were seduced from something that was good: Nay, it
is evident from the Context, that they were seduced to resist and oppose the
Savior, because they were seduced to besiege that City, where the Savior was
King.

3. Since they were seduced from something that was Good; and since it is
expressed, that by such their Seduction they were engaged to oppose the
Savior; it is (at least) implied, that they were seduced from following him,
(as his People of the first Resurrection had done, and now did) and from
putting themselves under his Government.

4. Because their Multitudes are reckoned very great, ver. 8. and 9. we may the
rather conjecture, that they were the People, who in this Life had never heard
of the Savior, whose Numbers must needs be exceeding great. And yet,

5. It is not to be thought, that, though many of them were seduced, yet that all
of them were so. Nay, it is more rational to think, that it will be much the
same with them then, as it was with those who had heard of the Savior in this
World, where many are called, but few are chosen.

4. Now this great Multitude of the Second Resurrection, who shall be seduced
from receiving the Savior, (though tendered to them) and who upon such their
Seduction shall oppose him and his People, I take to be Gog and Magog: For, the
Description of them here, does well enough agree with that Description which we
have of Gog and Magog in the Thirty eighth Chapter of Ezekiel. Let us try, by
comparing them a little together.

Rev. chap. 20. Ver. 8. The Nations that are in the four Quarters of the Earth,
Gog and Magog. Ezekiel. chap. 38. Ver. 2. Gog in the Land of Magog, reckoned up
there. Ver. 5. Persia, Ethiopia, Libya. Ver. 6. Gomer and the house of
Togarmah. Now Persia was on the East of Jerusalem; Ethiopia and Libya on the
South; Gomer on the West: For Gomer was a Son of Japhet, [See Genesis 10.] and the
Western Parts were inhabited by the Posterity of Japhet. And Togarmah, though a
Son of Gomer, and by consequence of the Posterity of Japhet, yet in the very
Text is called Togarmah of the North Quarters, perhaps a Colony planted toward
that Quarter. So that Gog and Magog are in both Texts said to come up against
Jerusalem from the four Quarters of the Earth; and therefore so far they agree.

V. 8. The number of whom is as the Sand of the Sea. V. 9. And they went up on
the breadth of the Earth. V. 9. They come like a Storm, and are like a Cloud
over the Land, and many People with them. With other such like Descriptions,
whereby it appears, that thy agree in their Numbers.

Rev. chap. 20. V. 9. They compassed the Camp of the Saints about, and the
beloved City. Ezekiel. chap. 38. V. 18. At the same time, when Gog shall come
against the Land of Israel. V. 16. Thou shall come against my People Israel; it
shall be in the latter days. Gog and Magog came up against the beloved City in
the latter Days, as is evident in the Context.

V. 9. Fire came down from God out of Heaven, and devoured them. V. 22. I will
rain upon him, and upon his Bands, and upon the many People that are with him,
an overflowing Rain, and great Hailstones, Fire, and Brimstone. By all which we
may understand in general, that the Nations, which on all Sides came against
and destroyed the Nation and People of the Jews, seem to be called by the
Spirit, in Ezekiel, Gog and Magog: For, the Universality of the Description
seems to imply all Nations that contributed to their Destruction.

And though the Prophecy might directly and immediately regard only the State of
the Jewish Nation then, when they were led Captive to Babylon; yet it may, for
all that, have a farther Prospect to their utter Extirpation, when their whole
Nation was rooted up, after our Savior's Crucifixion.

And then, as God punished the Amorites, the Moabites, those of Mount Seir, the
Edomites, the Philistines, the Tyrians, the Sidonians, the Egyptians, the
Assyrians, for their Cruelties to the Jews, [See Ezekiel. chap. 25, 26, 27, 28,
29, 30, 31, 32.] and afterward the Romans for theirs: All which Nations, and
perhaps some others, (the Romans excepted) are summed up under the Name of Gog
and Magog, in the Thirty eighth and Thirty ninth Chapters: So the Destruction
of those, who were seduced under the Second Resurrection, may be there
described Allegorically, by the Destruction of Gog and Magog: That is, the
Destruction of those, who shall then reject the Savior, and oppose his People,
after he is tendered to them upon the second Resurrection, may (because of the
Parity of the Case) be accounted for in such Terms, in which the Enemies of the
Jewish Church (the Type of the Christian Church) are recorded to have been
destroyed by the Prophecies of the Old Testament.

Gog and Magog then in the Twentieth of Revelations, are those People of the
Second Resurrection, who having been seduced by Satan to refuse and oppose the
Savior, and them who, dying in him, rose first; are, for such their Refusal
and Opposition, destroyed by the Vengeance of Heaven.

So much for the Second Resurrection.

But before we quite leave it, I must remark, That the Reasons why there are
not in the Scriptures any more express Revelations of a future Probation of
those, upon their Resurrection, who knew nothing of a Savior in this World,
seem to be these Two.

1. Because their Resurrection, and Probation upon such Resurrection, neither
does, nor can concern those, who have the Scriptures: For, by those Scriptures
they may come to the Knowledge of the Savior in this Life, which is as much as
concerns them. And,

2. Had this Resurrection and Probation been put into the Scriptures, yet those
who had not those Scriptures in this Life, could, for that Reason, have known
nothing of the Matter in this Life; and so, as to them, as well as to the
others, it had been put into the Scriptures in vain.

But yet, when the Account which the Scriptures give us of God's Dealing with
Mankind, draws toward a Conclusion; that is, when it comes to that Period,
where their Case ends, who have in this Life had the Revelation of a Savior,
and where their Case begins, who shall have such Revelation after their
Resurrection: I say, when the Scriptures do come to that Point, they do by the
Account that they then give us of the thousand Years, of the City of the
Saints, of Gog and Magog, etc. compared with some other Texts, give us some
duskie Glimpses of such an Economy and Proceeding.

3. The Third and Last Resurrection is accounted for in the Eleventh and
following Verses, to the end of the Chapter: In which we have an Account of the
Last Judgment, by the Description of the great White Throne, and him that sat
upon it, etc. And this Resurrection I take to be only the Resurrection of Gog
and Magog, and of all others, who had refused the Savior in this Life, as Gog
and Magog did after their Resurrection.

1. For, first, The Faithful (in this Life) were raised, in the Fourth Verse,
and died no more. All then that were raised at the first Resurrection, I take
to be one Part of those, who were written in the Book of Life. For, though the
Description of those raised in the Fourth Verse, may not seem, and is not
thought by some to extend to all the Faithful in this Life, but only to
Martyrs: Yet, because several other Texts do assure us, that the Dead in Christ
shall rise first; therefore, by the warrant of those Texts, in conjunction with
the Fourth Verse, I do extend the first Resurrection to all who believed in
this World. Besides, They who did not receive the Mark of the Beast, nor of his
Image, in the Fourth Verse, and they that did; I say, this Division does
include all Believers and Unbelievers in this World: And it is notorious, that
so it does through the whole Account that this Book of the Revelations gives us
of the Beast and his Followers, and of those who refused the Mark of the Beast.

2. And we have already surmised, That some of those who are raised by the
Second Resurrection, shall believe and be saved, and that too before the great
White Throne is set. And indeed it is not to be thought, that the Savior
should be made known to them, unless some of them were to have received, and
believed in him. And therefore I do entirely exclude both these Sorts of
Believers; that is, in other Words, I do exclude all, who shall be saved, out
of this Third and last Resurrection.

And he who shall well weigh and consider the Account that is given of the
Great Judgment mentioned in the Eleventh and following Verses, will (I believe)
be satisfied, that it is only the Judgment passed upon Unbelievers. For, as the
Books, that were opened, are mentioned as distinct from the Book of Life; so it
is expressly said, that they were judged out of the Books. If therefore the Book
of Life did contain in it all that were saved, as most notoriously so it did;
for, besides the Import of the Phrase, the Text tells us, that whosoever was
not found written in the Book of Life, was cast into the Lake of Fire, ver. 15.
Then those who were judged out of the Books, distinct from the Book of Life,
can only be the Unbelievers and the Reprobate. The third and last Resurrection
therefore does only belong to such. From which I would remark, That God is slow
in the Execution, as of other his Judgments; so more notoriously in this his
last and heavy Judgment; because we find, that he has assigned the very last
Place to this, among all his Dealings with the Children of Men.

FINIS.

