A DISCOVERY OF THE EDUCATION OF THE Scholars of Cambridge; BY Their
Abominations and wicked Practices acted upon, and against, the Despised People,
in scorn Called QUAKERS.

Brought forth by the young Ministers at several times in the said Town:
whereby all Men may see the unchristian Breeding, and the horrible Fruits of
the University-Men; And how that the Spirit of the Whore and false Prophet, and
the remainder of the Dreggs of Popery boyles up in them, in Persecution, and
Madness, and Ignorance; And this is Written for all sober People to Read and
Consider.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the Sign of the
Black spread-Eagle, at the West end of Paul's, 1659.

To You that be the Heads of the NATION.
HEre is a Declaration of the Sufferings of the People of God in Cambridge, by
the Savage Scholars, and Others now called young Ministers; whose practice
follows Oxford their Example: which two Places are called the Well-Heads, two
Eyes, two Mothers, two seed-Plots of good Nursery; the Fountains of Piety, and
Nurses of Virtue: Now see whether they do not show that they are puddles and
unsavory, and their People are bred up in filth, and to filthyness as their
Actions and Fruits declares it to all People, and for conscience sake toward
God they cannot feed them, whose Fruits thus shows forth themselves; That are a
disgrace to their Heads called Vice-Chancellors, Doctors, and Proctors; and a
Dishonor to Virtue, and to Breeding, and to Modesty, and to Government, and to
the Heads of this Nation that feeds them; That these Fruits should appear
openly like Sodom and Gomorrah; Idleness, Wickedness, and Filthynesse; these
things will stink among the Heathen, and be loathsome among them; nor is not of
a good Report, but a shame to all that have the name of a Minister, and are not
worthy to have the name, and a dishonor and a shame to all their Tutors and
Proctors in Oxford and Cambridge, (as see Oxford Sufferings Printed, at Those
Symonds at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,) and are a shame to all their
Parents that sends them thither, and it is enough to make all sober People to
be afraid to send their Children there, for fear there they should be spoiled;
and they are a dishonor to Christianity, and all them that professes Faith in
God, and owns Jesus Christ, the holy Example, to be their Rule to walk by.

Anne Cock Widow, aged about threescore years, being moved of the Lord to go
to Sidney College Chapel in the time of their Worship, and they being singing
David's Conditions, did say unto them, in the Word of the Lord. That their
Praises and Services were not acceptable to the Lord, but they were an
abomination to Him; and she had no sooner spoke these Words, but she was hauled
out by one John Hudson a Glover, (...) he did kick her all the way out of the
College, and did justle her against the College Gates, and as she was passing
homeward to her outward dwelling Place, one of the aforesaid Hudson's Daughters
was at a Pump right against her Fathers house, and threw warer upon her into
her neck; and passing a little further, one Edmond Sa^ter a Tailor, did throw a
piss-pot of Urine upon her, and several other abuses which the poor old Woman
has suffered, which would be too tedious to relate; Likewise, another poor old
Woman being moved to go to the Steeple House, before that she could get into
it, to declare her message, she was stopped by the rude multitude both of
Scholars and Others; and hauled away, they thrown against the ground, and
kicked and stoned along the Streets, and threw dirt upon her, and abused her
shamefully; and several other times she has been persecuted either coming into
the Town, or coming home, her House being almost at the Towns-end: Likewise two
Maids passing out of the Town with a Friend, they were mocked at, and scoffed
at, and abused; and at length passing over a Bridge (they were both thrown into
the Water by the Scholars, and one of them was almost stifled in the Water,
and the Scholars mocked them, and said they had Baptized them) they threw them
off of a high stone Bridge into a deep and dangerous place, and it was a mercy
they were not drowned.

And John Peace passing out of the Town in the Winter Season, when the Snow was
great, the unruly Boys seeing him coming, they hasted to make great Snowballs;
and when he passed by, they threw at him with all the Force they could; and one
snow-ball hit him on the Eye, so as he thought it had dropped out into his hand,
so that his Eye was very sore for a Week: and at another time standing in the
Marketplace in Obedience to the Lord, he was mocked, and scoffed, and abused,
and kicked by the Scholars, and they thrust pinns into his Legs; and likewise
there was one rude Fellow did come upon his Back, and thrust him with all the
force he could from one end of the Market Hill to the other, several times,
insomuch as he could hardly keep himself from falling.

And Luce Field going to the Steeple House with another friend, she with the
other Woman had their Head-cloaths pulled off their Heads by the Scholars, and
their Clothes rent and torn, and abused them very shamefully, and threw dirt
and dirted their Faces and Eyes, that they could not see. And when our Friends
have been moved to speak to the Scholars, they threatened to kick them; This we
have suffered, besides all other abuses we have suffered from time to time,
going to Meetings, and about our Occasions; sometimes being stoned, and dirt
flung upon us, and our Clothes torn and rent-in-pieces, and spit in our Faces
as we pass along the Streets; all which is, and has been done by the Scholars
and young Ministers (so called,) at the Nursery of young Ministers, as they are
called: And when these comes from their Nursery, they sell their Ware at a dear
rate; and after all these things had been done unto us, by the Nursery of young
Ministers, and we had patiently borne all these things of the Scholars, at the
length it was so ordered for the truths sake, that we suffer for, That we hired
a House for a public Meeting place, and then as truth began more and more to
be published openly, the rage of the Heathen began to be great: And first of
all the Scholars envy appeared against the House, and some wished that it were
pulled down, others that it were burnt down to the ground; and in the night
time the Scholars threw stones and dirt against the VVindowes, and broke the
VVindowes very much; and they shot Bullets into the Chambers at us, and slung
great stones; but the Man that we hired the House of, carried them to the
Master of the College, and showed them to him, and told him, how that if those
things were suffered, That he durst not lie in the rooms, and said, he lay in
danger of his Life, or words to that purpose; and then he making them give him
satisfaction for breaking the VVindowes, they were a little quiet as to that
thing: then the Priests and Professors began to be in a great rage, and would
have given any thing to have prevented our Meetings so publicly; and some (as
the Man informed us, which we hired the House of) offered sums of money to have
prevented our Meetings, and the Priests would have given the Man that Let us
the House so much a year as we gave for it, to have prevented us of the House;
and one (who is called Mr. Huffe, one of Jesus College so called,) as we are
informed, offered 10 l. for his own particular, That the House might be taken
from us again: And one who is called Major Jordan, which was a Master of Arts,
as they call them, That have taken the Degree whereby they may go forth to
deceive the People, (he now lives as a private man in the Town) he said, if
God's Plague was in the House, (meaning the Meeting Place,) it could not be
more offensive to the Colleges then the Quakers Meetings were: and moreover
encouraged the rude Scholars, and the young Ministers (so called) to rudeness;
and he said further, That the Man that let us the House, had better have set
fire to it, and have burnt it down, then to have let us have it.

And further as any Friends came out of the Country to hear the Truth declared,
they were stopped, and had before Alderman Br^an, as looking upon him to be the
Man to act most against the Truth, he being a great favorite of the rude
Priests, having much trading by and from them; but as he did commit any to
Custody, the then Mayor did set them Free, (being a moderate man, and
considering their envy and wickedness): And Priest Hill of Magdalen College,
(so called) on a first day coming from his morning worship, (being a Proctor so
called) he met with one or two of our Friends, and he caused them to go with
him to the Constable, and wished him to have them before a Justice, but he was
unwilling, in regard he knew that the Mayor had released some before, of our
Friends: he came forth with the Constable, and what order he had, we knew not;
but the then Mayor sent for them, and charged the Constable to release them,
which did exceedingly inrage the Scholars, and the rude multitude, insomuch
that they came into the Meeting House, and stormed like so many bedlams or mad
People, because they could not have their wills, nor any ways break our
Meetings, so that many hundreds of the Scholars came resolved to do what they
could, in the malice of their hearts against us: and one rude fellow, a Painter
(who has preached for the Scholars; when they have not a Sermon ready, they
get him,) came in, and was set on by the Scholars to sing a Psalm, and so he
did, and a great many sang with him, and some laughed and hollowed, and made a
noise, mocking and scoffing; but did sing but three or sour lines, and then the
Scholars broke out into a laughter: and so as in former Ages the Drunkards
made songs of David, and he was had in derision daily by such unclean Birds as
these are. But they not prevailing this way over us, with all their mockings
and scoffings, and tauntings at us; The Scholars then fell to acting with
their hatts and hands all they could imagine, and having a Mayor come to bear
Rule in the Town, who they thought would let them alone in whatsoever they did,
they took encouragement, and fell on to do their Masters Works with boldness,
and for several first-dayes were so brutish, that it is even a shame to relate:
but, that all may see what Fruits are brought forth in this Fountain; and see
what bitter-water streams forth into this Nation from this Place, I shall give
a little taste of the Scholars Fruits which they bring forth.

And first, As we were fitting peaceably, and waiting upon the Lord to hear his
Truth declared unto us, they came and put up our Hats, and looked us in the
Faces, talking unto us, sometimes hollowing, hissing, and making sport: and
when it has been desired of them to be sober, they said, They did not come
there to be sober; sometimes calling for Bear and Tobacco, and telling us, We
(...) out the Spirit. Now if these things are not all to be condemned, judge
you yourselves; and whether it is not a shame that these should have the name
of Nursers of Piety, and Plants for Ministers.

And when they had done what they could to provoke us unto words, by pulling
some of our Hats off, and taking us by the hand, and some by the nose, and yet
could not prevent our Meeting, or break it up; they threw several things at us,
as Apple Cores and Parings, and Tobacco-pipes; besides mockings and scoffings:
and one Paris an ancient man was hauled about, and tumbled down, and trod upon,
by the Scholars in the Meeting: and several times they cracked nuts, and slung
handfulls of shells at Friends saces, and said, They would by these Actions
make the Spirit speak; And the Scholars pulled the Women's Head clothes ost in
the Meetings, and daubed their hands over their Face, and pissed in the Entry
among the People, and daubed the look of the Door and key with Dung, that we
could not tell how to touch it.

After one of their Doctors in Cambridge had assaulted Thomas Nicholson, the
late Mayor in the Street; the next day at the Steeple-House several Scholars
there appeared in Contempt against the Mayor, and one of the Scholars hung a
piece of his shirt-tayl or linen, or some such thing, upon the Gown of the
Mayor's Officer, in contempt and derision to the Mayor, because the Doctor had
not the Wall of the Mayor as he would, when he in contempt assaulted the Mayor.
And when Friends have been moved to speak to the Scholars, they have threatened
to kick them; And is this called an Eye of the Nation and the Nursery? And is
this great pudder in the Nation for Maintenance for this Nursery, to maintain
these Scholars in these Actions? And are these the Men that must teach the
Nations? And is this Your breeding of Them? Surely, modesty would shame at
these things if it were amongst You, Who have been warned often: But your
Actions must come to Public View, that the Nations may not be deceived by
you; Who are worse then the Pharisees, whose outsides are not fair.

And at one meeting, when the Scholars saw that all their unseemly and
irreverent Scossing and Mocking at what was declared would not break up the
Meeting; then they threw Tobacco-pipes, and when that would not do what they
intended to have done, nor did not move us, but we patiently suffering for the
Truth's sake, then the Scholars were resolved to pull down him that spoke, and
cried aloud, Down with him, Down with him, several times together, and did
attempt to do the thing, but were prevented by the power of the Lord; and they
would run through our Meeting Place like so many wild Horses, throwing all down
before them, and did hollow, stamp, hiss, and shout, on purpose that none
should hear what was declared, and thinking thereby to silence William Allen
(who then spoke) but could not; and they seeing all this would not do any thing
as to fulfill their wicked desires, then they let down the windows, and shut up
the doors, so that at one end of the House, next the street, we had not any
light: and then the Scholars laughed, and scoffed, and said, Our Light was
Darkness, and they had shut us up in Darkness, and words to that purpose; and
then the Scholars clapped the windows up and down, as if they would have broke
them off the Hindges, and when we opened the doors they shut them again, and
when they threw Friends down they would tread on them: And these things they
acted in the time of their Worship.

And seeing they could not, with all these wicked Actions, break up the
Meeting, then they appeared more and more filthy and brutish, and the Scholars
began to stamp with their Heels against the boards, and made a noise as if
several Drums had been beating up, and labored what they could to prevent him
[William Allen] from speaking: Then they went out into the next Yard, and took
old wet Mapps, and old Dish-cloaths, and dragged them through the dirty
Kennels, and came and threw them at our Friend that was speaking, and at us
also, and therewith mired and dirted Friends. And there was a great strong
wooden Chair which a Friend sat in, to bear the rude Scholars and People off
from William Allen that spoke; and because the Scholars could not make him
rise up that sat in the Chair, to give them way to fulfill their Wills, the
Scholars pulled the Chair all to pieces, and made it in two horns, and poked
William Allen in the face with it, and shouted and hollowed as if they had done
a great matter, and threw some of the Chair at him, and at Friends; But this
would not satisfy their mischievous desires, but they did abuse the Friend that
sat in the Chair, and pulled his Coat all to pieces off from his back. And
the Mayor being coming from the Steeple-house, the Friend went and told him
what the Scholars had done unto him, and showed him his Coat which was so
rent; but there was John Lowrey one of the last Parliament, he, instead of
doing Justice and punishing the Offenders, said That he might have stayed at
home, after he had asked him, Wherefore he came? And the man said, To hear the
Word of God I came 9 or 10 (...), out of the Isle of Ely.

And further, at the same meeting, the Scholars threw dirt, and clay, and
stones, and other things, as Bones, and rotten Apples, and what they could
gather up in the street, and flung at William Allen, and friends; and cut his
lipp that the Blood gushed forth, and battered his head in two or three places,
besides what blows he had on the body: and the Scholars tore Alderman
Blackley's Son's Coat off his shoulders; and one rude Scholar took John Peace
by the hand, and took two fingers in one hand, and two in the other hand, and
pulled them, as if he would have broke them each from the other, which put him
to great pain, and the Scholar threatened him, that when he met him in the
street he would baste him: And the rude Scholars called Alderman Blakely Old
Rogue, and scoffed at him, and abused him very much. And John Peace hearing the
Mayor was coming by, he went forth of the meeting, and spoke to the Mayor and
some others with him, desiring him in the fear of the Lord to execute Justice
upon the Transgressors; and one of the rude Scholars, standing by the Mayor,
which had threatened him, and pulled him by the fingers, as above mentioned, he
told the Mayor of him, and the Mayor turning and looking upon the Scholar, did
say something to him, but the Scholar denied what he had said and done; and
then John Peace told the Scholar he was a Liar, whereat the Mayor was offended
at him, for reproving him of his wickedness; So that Night he was moved to
write to the Mayor, and carry some of the Dirt, and Stones, and showed him
them, and told him, if he did not execute Justice against such Offenders, the
stones should be a witness against him, and so laid them at his Door, and left
him to read those lines; and soon after, the Mayor sent for John Peace, when
his Passion was over, and began to reason with him, and said, It was not civil
for him to tell the Scholar, He lied; I told him I spoke Truth in so saying;
He said, I was not to speak Truth at all times: And this was sad that a
Magistrate should teach such a Saying; and at that time the Mayor gave him a
Warrant to the Constables, but they did nothing to prevent the rude Scholars;
for the next day, many of the rude Scholars came to the Meeting, and were
resolved to pull William Allen down, and to break up our Meeting, which they
had often atempted; and truly it is to be feared that Murder was in their
hearts.

For some of the People of the World, have come to some of our houses, who have
seen the Carriage of these rude Scholars, in our Meetings toward us, to know
whether some of us were not murdered.

And they have spoken great swelling words forth, but the Lord kept them from
acting any such thing, if they did intend it; but at the Meeting, they were so
wild and brutish, and shameless and nasty (we mean the Scholars), That they
did hawk and spit such nasty filth upon William Allen, and Friends faces, and
hair, and loathes, that his hair was like unto froth, and that it was a shame
to see it: and William Allen said his face was stiff with the filth which was
spat upon his face by the Scholars, and as we parted from the Meeting, one
Luce Field was thrown down into the kennel by the Scholars, and her Heart trod
in the dirt: And several times passing from the Meeting several Friends have
had mire and dirt thrown upon them by the Scholars, and there has been almost
a whole street full of them hollowing and tearing of Us, and the Keeper of the
Library in Cambridge has boasted of these and such like Actions of the
Scholars.

And the rude Scholars have eften taken up Women's Coats in the Streets, as
they pass along, and in the Meeting; fleshly, filthy, lustful Beasts; and
would lay hold on Women in the Streets, and lugg them, and pull them, and kiss
them in the Meeting, and in the Street: and if they turned their Heads from one
Company, other Scholars would come on the other side and kiss them: and these
Scholars have made ancient Women to stand in the sink, until they had torn
the Coats off their Backs. Now are not these a stink in your Nostrills, and
are these your Ministers you send out into the Nation? Is Cambridge become as
Sodom? there was so many hundreds of them, that the Women can hardly pass the
Streets, but are abused by them; here you may see Cambridge Fruits, and the
Fruits of the Priests which are come from Oxford and Cambridge; as let Cheshire
and Lancashire witness, and the whole Nation, What filthy work they make with
poor People, prisoning them for their hellies, even such they do no work for.

And one Friend was put in the stocks by William Pikering Mayor, and set many
hours, and the Scholars were very rude, and did much abuse him; and some of
them got bread, and spread tallow and dirt upon the Bread, and put it to the
Friends mouth, and said, They would make him eat it.

And the Scholars have taken up Excrements, and thrown it into the meeting to
Friends. Now if We should serve Your Mase-Houses so, Your old Popish Colleges,
what a rage would You have been in? And it may be taken notice of, that several
of the Fellows and Proctor of Sidney College have stood by, and seen the
Scholars act some of this wickedness and brutishness; and yet did nor reprove
them, but rather encouraged them.

And when Alderman Nicholson went into the College, and told the Proctor of
the Actions of the Scholars, and spoke to him to keep them quiet; he told him
in plain words, he could not, nor would not: Now these things cannot be
otherwise expected from these Proctors, Vice-Chancellors, and Tutors, and
Scholars; Who have their Bowls, their Games, and their Tennis-Courts in their
Colleges, and Fidles and Music, and Musick-Arts, and Cards, Dice,
Shovel-Boards; and fencing, more liker Tinkers, and Pedlars, and Colliers, then
Houses for Professors of the Gospel: Are these Places to make Ministers for
Christ? Are these good Examples? more liker Taverns for Drunkards; Nay, there
are hardly the Actions as (they have Acted before mentioned) done in the
Taverns and Ale houses in the Nation, in their Houses, as are Acted in your
Houses amongst you: Oh this grieves the Righteous! and makes the Just sick,
That the Nation should be loaded with such filth, such a House of filth.

And further, the said Smith, Priest, before mentioned, caused the place in the
Mass House, where the Holy Water, as they call it, used to be put in, to be
opened, and a Cross to be put a top of the Steeplehouse.

And at another Meeting, as George Whitehead was a declaring the Truth to the
People, the Scholars came and were very rude, and crowded much upon him, and
cried our, let us smother him; and if the Mayor had not appeared presently in
the Meeting, it is likely they would have mischiefed him; besides, the said G.
W. has suffered several times by the rude Scholars, and the Scholars took
Alderman Blacklyes Hatt off his head, and threw it away among the rude
multitude, and he stood bare-headed until they threw it to him again, and John
Peace aforesaid, had his Coat rent, at their public Commencement, for giving
some Papers to the Vice Chancellor; and he was hurried to and fro, and some
cried, hang him, some stone him, some knock him on the head.

And I homas Nicholson being a sober man, Who was the former Mayor,
understanding some thing of their filthy behavior at our Meetings, and being
sensible of their cruelty and wickedness, was Resolved the next day to come in
Person, and so he did, and brought half adozen Constables with him, and so
prevented their mischeivous Ends and Intentions: and the said Alderman
Nicholson very boldly and valiantly stood upon a form to the view of all the
People some hours, and heard the Truth, which was of good service to the Lord,
to stop the violent.

And several times the Constables have been fain to stand to keep our Meetings.

Therefore let these things be sufficient which are past, and repent, and amend
your lives, lest your wickedness swell to a mountain, and your filthiness and
ungodliness running out of so many fountains, may gather together to be a Sea:
And is not this the Cage of unclean Birds spoken of in the Revelations? Are
these the Ministers you lay your hands on? to send them out in the Nations to
deceive People for dishonest gain, and to haul People before Courts because
they will not put into their mouths, and cast them into Prison that they do no
work for; Therefore every one, High and Low, ye have time now, prize it, and
consider in your selves whether these things be not an ill savor both with God
and Man; Therefore do so no more, lest a worse thing come upon you.

We whose Names are here Underwritten, have been Eyewitnesses of these filthy
and abominable Practices.

Edward Sammon Robert Letchworth George Clark Thomas Edmondson Mary Godfrey
James Blackely Ald. Matthew Blarkely Nicholas Frost John Peace Joseph Coarse
John Clark Alexander Parish.


Here follows the Copy of a Letter, with some Addition to it, which John
Peace gave to the Mayor John Ewin. From the Lord God of life and Power, am I
moved this to declare unto thee.
WHereas the Lord by his Providence has called thee to be chief Magistrate, or
Governor of this Town: This the Lord God requires of thee; Thou having the
Sword in thy hand, Know this from the Lord, that it is not put into thy hand in
vain; For it is not given into thy hand thereby to rule for thy self, or any
ways to set up thy self, but thou art to rule in the fear of the Lord (for
God), without having respect to any Man's Person for any advantage whatsoever.
And thou art to defend and protect his People from all manner of Violence,
Wrongs, and Injuries, offered unto them, which many of the dear Servants of the
Lord have suffered, and do daily suffer, for bearing their Testimony against
their ungodly practices; But know thou this, That they are as dear to him as
the Apple of his Eye, and what is done to one of the least of his little Ones,
he takes as done unto himself. Therefore in His fear, I exhort thee to stir up
that noble Principle of God in thee, even that which reproves thee in secret,
and stands a living Witness for God against the least appearance of Evil in thy
own particular; and that being minded in thy own particular, the same will lead
thee forth to act for God in the general, and it will cause thee to lay thy
Sword upon Evildoers, thereby to cut down all manner of Sin and Wickedness,
and that thou may be a terror to all the wicked and ungodly in this Town, and
to punish all that do Evil, and not a praise to them; that so Righteousness may
be the Fruit of thy Government, that so thou may have the Praise of all them
that do well, and that thou may be an Instrument in the hand of the Lord, for
the staying of the heavy Judgments which will undoubtedly come upon all that do
act wickedly and maliciously in this Town against the Servants of the Lord: And
know thou this from the Lord, That if thou wink at Iniquity, and call the proud
Happy, and set up and strengthen the hands of Evildoers, and turn thy Sword
backward like a blind man, then the Lord will requite thee, who damms not up
the ungodly unrighteous floods of Iniquity from running down the streets; for
the Scholars and young Ministers should be such Plants as should damm up the
Ungodly and stop the way of the wicked. This is the Fruit of the Plants of
Renown which comes from the Nursery of Christ; so let your Gates be a praise
and not profane, let your Gates be righteous and not ungodly, so cleanse this
Nursery of ungodly men, unfruitful Plants, fruitful Plants of Unrighteousness,
but unfruitful toward God, which are the Workers of Darkness, with whom no
Fellowship is to be had, but to be reproved: And if thou countenance those that
act wickedly, in abusing the Servants of the living God, thou shall not escape
the Judgments of the Lord, but thou with them that do wickedly shall receive a
Reward according to your Works.

Therefore, once more from the Lord, in Bowels of Love to thy Soul, and in pure
Subjection to thy Authority (so far as thou rulest for God) do I desire, that
thou would discharge thy Conscience in executing Justice and true Judgment
upon all Ungodliness, that there may be a good savor in your streets. And so
in obedience to the motions of God, I have cleared my Conscience.

This is from a Lover of Righteousness, and a Hater of every evil way, and all
the Ungodliness of Men, Known by the name of John Peace.

FINIS.

