A TESTIMONY Unto the TRUTH, AND A Warning unto the World IN GENERAL, But more
particularly to the Inhabitants of Enoder parish in Cornwall.

By one whom God has called out to bear witness of the Truth, as it is in
Jesus, called by the Name of RICHARD SAMBLE.

Printed in the Year, 1676.

TO THE READER
READER,
THou art desired to be considerate when thou read this following Book, and
to be very ponderous in thy Mind, as touching the things therein contained,
that thy Understanding may be opened by the invisible God, who gives unto us
Life, Breath and Being; and also, that thou would lay to Heart this very
Thing, How that Almighty God has risen in many Ages of the World, in his
Judgments and Fury, to stain the Glory of all Flesh, and to set up
Righteousness in the Earth, and has caused his Truth to spring and flourish
amongst his People, under every Dispensation, until they departed from the
Lord, and served other Gods, and followed their own Inventions, and then
Darkness came over them, and so their Hearts were hardened from his Fear, Prove.
1.29, 30. And this thou art also to consider, That Sin has been the very Cause
of Man's Destruction from Generation to Generation, and therefore if thou dye
in thy Sins, thou art like to have no part amongst the Living in the Kingdom of
Christ; but the same will be thy Portion that has been the portion of the
Wicked in all Ages, which is perpetual Sorrow, Distress and Anguish for
evermore. And this consider also, That whatever thou do profess, or what Show
of Religion soever thou may make, whilst thy sins remain, I am to tell thee,
and that in the Name of Christ Jesus, Thou art not accepted of God, but all thy
Prayers are an Abomination to the Lord, Ezekiel. 8.17, 18. Isa. 1.15. because thou
art in the Transgression in that which the pure God of Glory hates, and upon
which he will pour out his Fury and Indignation for evermore; and if thou art
one that lives in Pleasure, and thy daily Satisfaction is in following these
Evil Devices, that are very common amongst men in this Generation, to wit,
Drunkenness, Swearing, Lying, or other Profane Practices, and that which is
called Pastime, or sporting thy self amongst such as count it Pleasure to Riot
in the day time, Jam. 5.5, 6. know this, that all these things will be a
Hindrance to thy eternal Welfare; for such as do such things, cannot inherit
the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. And also thou art to consider, That
there has been a Night of gross Darkness over the Hearts of the Children of
men, since the Apostles days; and that Saving Grace, which was common in that
Generation, people have lost in the Night, and are become dry and barren, as a
Desert or Wilderness, as relating to Matters of Spiritual Concerns, wherein
consists the Stability of their Souls Peace with God. And this also I am to
tell thee, That God, who is unchangeable, and immortal, has revealed his
blessed Truth again, and the Gospel of his blessed Kingdom is now preached to
the Nations; and if ever thou come to God's Kingdom, thou must come to know
him that is the Everlasting Teacher (to wit) Christ Jesus, and him to know in
thy own Particular, who is the Man of God's Right Hand, a quickening Spirit the
Lord from Heaven, 1 Cor. 15.45. and so thou will come out of thy lost
Condition, wherein thou art in the Fall, in the first Man Adam, into the Life
of Holiness and Righteousness, into the Restoration by Christ Jesus, the second
Adam, the Heavenly Man. And this know also, That thou can not come to him by
any other way, but as thou come into Self denial, and believe in thy Heart
the Record that God has given of his Son, which is the true Light, that shines
within thee, and lets thee see thy Sins. And farther, That as sin has been the
very Cause of Man's Separation from the Lord; yet when thou shall return again,
and come to know a Godly Sorrow in the Secret of thy Heart, and when thou shall
feel in thy self a Tenderness, and a Broken-heartedness before the invisible
God, who sees in secret, Mat. 6.6. he will grant thee Repentance unto Life; and
he will return unto thee in his Everlasting Mercies, and blot out thy sins out
of his Remembrance. And this also I am to tell thee, in the Fear of God, and in
his Name, That as the Lord has appeared in days past, and in Generations that
are gone, in his Indignation, and has smitten many Nations and Peoples in his
Wrath, sometimes overturning the World by Water, and sometimes destroying
Cities and Peoples by Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, Luke 17.29. Genesis 19.24,
25. and again by Plagues and Pestilence, and at certain Seasons the Lord God
(because of the Abominations of the Children of Men) has visited them in his
Wrath and hot Displeasure, and greatly afflicted them; and the End of the Lord
has been, that such as remain upon the Earth might fear before him, and dread
his great Name, who is Mighty, and none can escape him: And people in these
last days and times have greatly grieved the Lord, and therefore except they
Repent, his Fury will he pour forth upon them, until that which is in his Heart
be accomplished, and they shall not escape his heavy Hand.

And so Reader, whoever thou art, that reads these following Lines, the Desire
of my Soul is, that thou may be impartial concerning me, and conclude in thy
Mind, that its written in tender Love to thy Soul, and so thou will see my
honest Intent, who am a Lover of Truth and Righteousness, desiring thy Eternal
Welfare when this Time and Day of thine is at an End. I rest

Thy Friend and Well-Wisher, RICHARD SAMBLE.

A TESTIMONY UNTO THE TRUTH, etc.
IN the deep Consideration of the States and Conditions of the Sons and
Daughters of men in the Fall, and seeing how the World lies in the Extremity of
Wickedness, being overcome by the Old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, who
has tied and bound them with his Chains of Sin (who is the Author of all Sin)
I am drawn in Spirit to warn them to Repentance, and to declare to the World
the Way that the Lord God of Heaven and Earth has ordained, which is Christ
Jesus, who is Everlasting, and was with the Father before the World began, John
17.5. who is the Way, the Truth and the Life, John 14.6. by whom my Soul has
been redeemed, and who raised me up out of Sin; and therefore, having obtained
Mercy through the Love of God in Christ Jesus, whom he has sent a Light into
the World, and I having known in measure the Judgments of the Lord, and the
Terrors of the Almighty because of my Transgressions, therefore cannot but
persuade men to turn from Ungodliness, even all people that lie in Wickedness,
knowing assuredly, that all People shall be called to an Account before the
Tribunal Seat of Christ, there to give an Account for the Deeds done in the
Body, 2 Cor. 5.10. and such as have done well, shall receive a Crown of Life
and Peace with God forever; and they that have done Evil, shall go into
Everlasting Punishment, Mat. 25.46. And therefore, as you have been
Transgressors against God, and Strangers to the Life of Holiness, it is upon my
Spirit from the Lord God to warn you speedily, to turn every one from the Evil
of your Ways, that out of Darkness you all may come, and out of Ignorance and
Blindness, unto Christ Jesus, the true Way, that you may have Life, who said, I
am come that you may have Life, and that you may have it more abundantly, John
10.10. And therefore turn unto him in your Hearts, whose Spiritual Appearance
is inwardly, whom God has sent a Light into the World, John 1.9. Now that all
may come unto him, and believe in your Hearts the Lord Jesus, and be saved; for
people have been in a great Mistake concerning the Faith that saves and
overcomes the World; for the true Faith is the Gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. arising
from the Word of Faith nigh in the Heart, Romans 10.8. which Faith Christ is the
Author of, and the Finisher also, Heb. 12.2. and without this Faith you cannot
please God, Hebr. 11.6. And so all People. read your States and Condition in
the Light of Christ within you, which shows unto you what you are, and declares
unto you your Thoughts, this is the Record which God has given of his Son in
the Earth, which is Eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son, John 5.11. this
reproves you in secret for sin; this is the Holy Spirit of Promise that was to
come, whom the Prophets prophesied of in the days of old, whom God has given
for a Leader and a Commander of the People, Isa. 55.4. the Gentiles Light and
Israel's Glory, Luke 2.32. and unto him you must turn, who stands at the Door
of your Hearts and knocks, Revel. 3.20. who is come to destroy Sin in the
Flesh; whose living Power was felt in the Hearts of many Thousands in days
past, after his Resurrection, in the days of the Apostles, when he returned to
his Glory that he had with the Father before the World was; who descended first
into the lowest parts of the Earth, and ascended up far above all Heavens (
Ephesians. 4.9, 10.) that he might fill all things, whose Glory fills Heaven and
Earth; neither is there any Creature that is not manifest in his Sight, but all
things are naked and open to the Eye of him with whom we have to do, Hebr.
4.13. who dyed for our Sins, and rose again for our Redemption and
Justification, Romans 4.25. who appeared first to Mary Magdalen, and made her a
Preacher of his Resurrection, Mat. 28.10. Mark 16.9. and then to his Disciples,
before he ascended into Heavenly Glory: And when he ascended up on high, he led
Captivity captive, und gave Gifts unto Men, Ephesians. 4.8. And though he appeared
to his Disciples as they sat at Meat, yet he bad them wait for the Gift of the
Spirit, when he asecended unto the Father, Luke 4.49. And so they were made
Witnesses of his Resurrection, that he rose out of the Grave, and not only so,
but that he was in Heavenly Glory, who came again, as he had foretold his
Disciples, who said, Ye have heard how I said, I go away, and come again unto
you, etc. John 14.28. And as the Apostle said, he was offered up once for all,
and to every one that looks for him, will he appear the second time without Sin
unto Salvation; and by his spiritual Appearance were many Thousands gathered,
and many were made able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but
of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. And this Spirit of Grace taught them to deny all
Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live soberly and righteously in this
present World, Tit. 2.12. And this Grace of God that brings Salvation, has
appeared unto all men, Tit. 2.11. even to Jew and Gentile; the Grace of God,
the pure Spirit of Christ, the Light of the Gentiles, unto which Light the
Apostles were sent to turn the Heathen, that had no wr^tten Law in those Days;
and from the Power of Satan unto God, Acts 28.8. Thus the Lord stretched forth
his Everlasting Arm of Strength and Power in those Days, that People might be
gathered unto him, and raised up by Christ Jesus, out of Death and spiritual
Bondage; and those Preachers of the Glorious Gospel of God's Kingdom, travailed
cheerfully in the Lord's Work, and preached freely, as they had received
freely, Mat. 10.8. declaring both to Jew and Gentile that God has raised his
Son from the dead. Acts 2.24, 25. and that the Day of Joy and Glad tidings was
come, wherein Deliverance from the wicked one was to be known, and Redemption
from dead Works to serve the living God, Heb. 9.14. who waited for the Son from
Heaven (mark that) you that are Preachers in this Nation. The Apostles did not
come to People with Enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, but directed them to the
Light that was revealed from Heaven (to wit) the Son of God the Light of the
World, These. 1.10. 1 Cor. 2.4. John 1.9. and if you turn not People to the Son
of God the Light of the World, to wait for him inwardly, then ye are blinded
and are in Darkness and preach another Gospel then Christ jesus, whom the
Apostles did preach, Gal. 1.8. for Christ Jesussaid, Seek not the Kingdom in
Observations; for behold, the Kingdom of Heaven is within you, Luke 17.21. And
Paul to the Romans says, That which may be known of God, is manifested in
them; for God has showed it unto them, Romans 1.19. And the true Gospel is the
Power of God, wherein the Righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to Faith,
Romans 1.16, 17. and the Light of this Glorious Gospel shines within, and if this
glorious Gospel be hid, it is to them that are lost, in whom the God of this
World has blinded the Minds of them that believe not, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. And you
that have not this Gospel take heed how you preach, lest you be found false
Witnesses, runnning before the true Guide Christ Jesus, and professing God and
Christ, and yet dead in Sin, all such Preachers and Hearers that are not come
to the Gospel within, to the Word of Eternal Life in their Hearts, 1 John 5.12.
are out of the Truth, in the Fall, and so abiding in Death; for he that has
not the Son (who is the Truth) has not Life; for this living Word within, was
the Foundation of the Holy Prophets and Apostles, by which they were made
alive; and this did divide between the good and bad, which Word is quick and
powerful, and searches the Heart, and tries the Reins, Heb. 4.12. Rev. 2.23.
And it is the same to this Day as ever it was, yea, it lives and abides for
ever, 1 Pet. 1.23. And the Primitive C^ristians who were true Believers, their
Faith did arise from this living Word, which came down from Heaven; And Woe be
to such as turn away from him that speaks from Heaven, Heb. 12.25. which is
sent forth from God (to destroy the Works of the Devil) 1 John 3.8. Christ
Jesus the Seed Immortal and Incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1.23. that bruiseth the Head
of the Serpent, and by this Seed they were redeemed (in the Days of the
Apostles) and brought forth and born of it, not of corruptible Seed, but of
incorruptible; and this Seed must be witnessed within, as in the Days of Old,
to raise up Mankind out of the Fall inwardly, and to quicken to God by his
Spirit that dwells in you, said the Apostle, Romans 8.11. And this is the true
Shepherd that laid down his Life for the Sheep, John 10.11. that gathers his
Sheep from the Barren Mountains, where they have been scattered in the cloudy
dark Day, Ezekiel. 34.12. and brings out of the Wilderness and Solitary Ways, into
a sure Dwelling, and a quiet Resting Place, Isa. 32.18. And this true Bishop of
the Soul was known savingly in the primitive times, by all those that did
return unto him, as the Apostle said, Ye were as Sheep going astray, but are
now returned to the Shepherd and Bishop of your Souls, 1 Pet. 2.25. And so by
the Operation of his Spirit inwardly, People came to the Knowledge of God and
Christ Jesus, whom God sent forth to save the World; and this is Life Eternal,
as our Lord said in the Days of his Flesh, to know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, John 17 3. And there is not another Way to
Salvation, but as People come to know Christ revealed in them, as the Apostle
said, Examine your selves, prove you own selves, what, know you not how that
Christ Jesus is in you except you be Reprobates? 2 Cor. 13 5. but in those Days
this pure Way of Life was hid from the wise and prudent, and revealed to Babes
and Sucklings (mark) such as were born again, regenerated and walked in the Way
of Regeneration, those only knew the Mysteries of God's Kingdom; for it was
revealed unto them by the Spirit, Romans 2.10. But the wise Men who were outside
Professors (yet Rebellious and Stiff necked, and a Gainsaying People) unto whom
God stretched forth his Hand all the Day long, but they would not obey him, nor
hearken to his Voice, Romans 10.21. Acts 7.51. These knew not Christ in the
Mystery, but crucified him, though they were I rofessors and had a Zeal for the
Traditions of their Forefathers, yet I say the Workings of God's Spirit was a
strange Thing unto them, for said the Apostle, We preach Christ in a Mystery,
which none of the Princes of this World knew; for if they had known him, they
would not have crucified the Lord of Life 1 Cor. 2.7, 8. And those holy
Apostles and Servants of Christ, who preached by the Spirit, even by the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.12. they were hated, and persecuted, and set
at naught, and esteemed as a Foolish and Ignorant People, as the offscouring
of all things, 1 Cor. 4.13. And said the Apostle, God has made foolish the
Wisdom of this World. When the World by Wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by
the Foolishness of Preaching to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 20.21. So those
that were Enemies to God, and to the Appearance of his Son; they cast him (that
is the true Heir) out of the Vin yard, and slew him, that the Inheritance might
be theirs, Mat. 21.38, 39. So read this ye professing Christians, who are in
the Rebellion against Christ's Appearance, who is now appeared in Spirit in
these last Days, Glory to the Name of the Lord forever. And is not this it that
you rebel against, even his Appearance in your Hearts, that breaks your Peace
in the Transgression, and brings forth your Deeds which you have wickedly
wrought in secret, to your Remembrance? And do you not love Darkness rather
then Light because your Deeds are evil, John 3.19. And are you not in the same
Transgression with those Jews who hated his Appearance in the Flesh? and are
turned from Jesus Christ in your Hearts, and consulting together against him
(who is the Light and Life of Men) how you may betray and overcome this true
Principle of Eternal Life in your selves and others, that you may set up your
selves, and live in your Pride and Lostiness, and all manner of Wickedness; and
so in much Wantonness you pass and spend away your precious time, in Rioting
and Drunkenness, in Chambering and Wantonness which is forbidden, and will be
eternally punished, James 5.5, 6. And so you live above the Cross of Christ
Jesus, the Power of God in your own Hearts, which Cross said the Apostle,
Crucisies the World unto me, and me unto the World: And so you are found
Enemies to God, resisting the holy Ghost, as they that cast him out in Days
past, and would not believe that it was he: And said Christ Jesus, If ye
believe not that I am he, you shall dye in your Sins, John 8.24. Acts 7.51. Ye
shall seek me, but shall not find me; and whither I go, thither ye cannot come.
So all People, believe that it is he that reproves you in secret, and obey him
in your Hearts, lest you dye in your Sins, etc. for it is surely the same true
Witness that in old time testified of the World, that the Works thereof are
Evil, John 7.7. which is a sure Witness, that does not alter, but is
Unchangeable, with whom there is no Variableness, James 1.17. but if you rebel
against him, who is the great Power of God, Christ Jesus, WOE will be unto you
for evermore.

Therefore I warn you in God's holy Fear, and in the Authority of his Spirit,
That you rebel no longer against God; for if ye continue in the Rebellion
against him, Time will not bring End to your Misery, but you will go into
Everlasting Punishment, and so take heed to your ways, lest ye be found with
Judas, betraying his Master; for Judas was a Professor of Christ, and yet
apostatized: So ye professing Christians, take heed lest ye be found in the
Treachery, dealing deceitfully against the Light of Christ Jesus in your
Hearts, professing him with your Mouths, and denying him in your Hearts, who
is the Spirit of Truth, that reproves the World of Sin, Righteousness and of
Judgment, Joh. 16.8. And therefore examine your selves, and try whether ye be
in the true Faith; for there is but One Lord, One Faith and One Baptism, Ephesians.
4.5. which is the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, the pure Spirit of Life, which
baptizeth into one Body, 1 Cor. 12.13. (And so all other Faiths and Baptisms
will come to an End) and this brings into true Love and Unity one with another:
And this true Faith works by Love, Gal. 5.6. But in this dark Night of
Apostasy, the World, that has retained a Form of Godliness in the outside
Profession of Christ has been setting up Faiths and Forms of Worship, from the
true Faith, and true Worship of God, which is in the Spirit, John 4.23. and out
of the Power and Life (in the dark) out of the Light, wherein the Fellowship of
the Saints stood in the days of old, 1 John 1.7. And this Faith, that is of
man's making and setting forth works not by Love, neither brings people into
Unity and a holy Fellowship one with another; but people are brought under by
Constraint, and by outward Force; and such as are in their Way zealous for
their Worship, run into Persecution, and so the Ground is not good, the Heart
is not changed, but the old Man of Sin remains; and this is far from the true
Faith, that works by Love: and many times people, whose Hearts God has
touched, are compelled to go to such Worships against that which has in some
measure given them to see the Insufficiency of those Worships and Faiths that
stand not in God's Power.

And so people, you that are in any measure made tender in your Consciences,
and are breathing inwardly for Deliverance (that you may witness Redemption to
your Souls) and know not the true Way, and are many times afflicted inwardly,
and accept not Faith to believe in yout Hearts on the Lord Jesus, Wait you in
the Sense of that which begets the Breathings, and pens your Hearts for the
Desire to spring forth, that desires after the Lord, and that will let you see
the Way more and more, yea, the invisible Way of God, Christ Jesus, who is the
Way, the Truth and the Life, John 14.6. and then you will have Faith to believe
that God will bring you forth out of the False Ways of this World, into Peace
with himself, and into Covenant with him, and so your Hearts will be changed,
and you will come to witness inwardly the Law of the Spirit of Life written in
your Hearts, and so then you will have no need to wander abroad, to seek Christ
Jesus in the dark ways of this World; but you will all know the Way of his
Appearance in your selves, and so you will be his People, and he will be your
God, Hebr. 8.10. And this is the same Truth that was in the days of the
Apostles, Christ, the true Foundation, that upheld all the true Christians in
the former days, who were the true Church, in Covenant with God, joined unto
the Lord, and so were Heirs of God's Kingdom, yea, joint Heirs with Christ,
Romans 8.17. Ephesians. 2.20. and this was a true Church, that was in God, and in
Christ Jesus, 1 These. 1.1. not an outside Profession only, but an inward
Possession, a people that were risen with Christ, seeking the things that are
above, where Christ sits at the Right Hand of God, Colloss. 3.1. So they had
Heavenly Riches and Treasure, laid up in Heaven, that fails not: And this
true Church was the House of God, not an Outward House, builded with men's
Hands, but a Spiritual House, a People made alive to God, by Christ Jesus, and
so they were the Workmanship of God, Ephesians. 2.10. 1 Pet. 2.5. But since the
Apostasy came in, and people having gone a whoring from the Lord, they have not
known this Mystery; but have been building High Places, and calling them
Churches, and God's House, contrary to the Scriptures; and so People have lost
the true Sense and saving Knowledge of Christ Jesus, though they have the
Letter of the ^criptures, which tells us plainly, that the Bodies of the true
Christians are God's Temples and his House, 1 Cor. 6.15, 19. And his Church is
of his building, and of his raising up, who is the sure Workman, even Jesus
Christ, that makes alive, and brings up Mankind unto God, out of the Fall; and
of this Church he was and is the Head, who is worthy of more Honor then the
House, which is his Church, the Ground and Pillar of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. So
Christ Jesus was in his House, in his Church, over which he ruled and was the
Head; and he is in his Church to this day, and is the true Head, the true Guide
and Leader of his People, that are quickened by him, and brought forth to Praise
him, with one ^ongue and one Morth even as one Body And so all people, come to
know Christ in you, as they that we read of in the Scriptures, Coll 26.27. for
this is a Time wherein he is to be sound, if you seek to him berimes, and not
slight the Day of your Visitation; for the Visitation of the Almighty is come,
and he has caused the Day pring from on Pigh to visit us, Luke 1.78, 79. in
which the Lord will bring to pass that which has been of old in his
Determination (viz) to set up Righteousness in the Earth; and this Day shall
never have an End; it the lasting Dispensation, that shall never more be
veiled, Prove. 14.6. and blessed are all that come to the Knowledge of it; and
in the first Breakings forth of it in the days of the Apostles, many Thousands
were gathered to God; and that which was the Cause of its being veiled from
man's Understanding was, because of the Unfaithfulness of such as did profess
the Truth, whose Candlestick at last was removed out of its place, Rev. 2.5.
and Darkness came over them, who retained a Form of Godliness, and lost the
Power thereof, and these were the first that rebelled against the Spirit of
Christ in the days of the Apostles, Acts 7.51. and so the Devil got the
Possession of their Hearts, and sat in the Temple of God, showing himself that
he is God, 2 Thessalonians 2.4. Therefore, oh ye professing Christians! search your
selves, let not the Devil rule in your Hearts, for all Unrighteousness is
begotten in the Heart by the Devil, who is the Author of all Sin in the Heart,
before it be committed; but turn to the Light of Christ within, that convinces
your Consciences, and shows you the Begettings of that false spirit, and so you
will know Deliverance from the subtle Serpent, the Enemy of all Mankind: for it
is high time to look about you, and consider whose Servants you are, and to
whom you yield your selves Servants to obey, and whose Work you are doing,
whether ye are obeying Christ Jesus in the Spirit of Truth, that leads out of
the World's Ways, Fashions and Customs, into all Truth ( John 14, 16, 17, 20,)
and Righteousness, that ye may know ye are his Sheep; for, My Sheep, says he,
hear my Voice, (John 10.11, 14.) and I lead them out, and they follow me, and
ill give unto them Eternal Life, John 10.28. Or whether you are obeying the
Devil, which is the Spirit of Error, which leads your Minds into the Wickedness
which is in the World, out from God and Christ Jesus the true Light, into
Darkness and Death, and so you are under the Bondage of Corruption, polluted
with all manner of Uncleanness, and so in the Way to Everlasting Destruction,
and as the Ground that brings forth Briars and Thorns, which is nigh unto
Cursing, whose End is to be burned; for his Servants you are to whom you yield
your selves to obey, whether of Sin unto Death, or of Obedience unto
Righteousness, Romans 6.16. for its not sufficient to say with your Mouths and
your Lips, We believe in God and Christ Jesus, while ye abide in the
Transgression, and your Hearts far from him; and that he dyed without the Gates
of Jerusalem, and ye still live in the Nature of the Wicked One; this is the
same as they in old time, who retained a Form of Godliness, and denied the
Power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.5. who were False Apostles, Deceitful Workers,
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, and its no Marvel, said
the Apostle, for Satan himself is transformed into an Argel of Light, and it is
no great thing if his Ministers also be transformed as the Ministers of
Righteousness, whose End shall be according to their Works, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14,
15. And this was the great Deceit that entered into the Church, and began in
the Days of the Apostles, when that false Spirit of Antichrist seduced those
that were called Christians, I say such as were deceitful Professors of Christ
Jesus in that Day, who turned aside after filthy Lucre into Balaam's Way, and
so loved this present World, 2 Pet. 2.15. and these denied the Immediate
working of the Spirit of Christ, and so became Enemies to God, and unto the
Cross of Christ, whose God is their Belly, whose Glory is their Shame, who mind
earthly things, said the Apostle, Phil. 3.19. and said Jude, Beloved you have
heard before of the Apostles of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, how that
there should Mockers come in the last time, walking after their own ungodly
Lusts, these be they said he, who separate themselves, Jude 18, 19. sensual not
having the Spirit; and these were they that denied the only Lord God, and our
Lord jesus Christ savingly, under the Dispensation of the Gospel, who rebelled
against the Spirit and Power of God in their Hearts; and these were corrupted
and deceitful treacherous, Heady, Highminded, Lovers of Pleasure more then
Lovers of God 2 Timothy 3.3, 4. And thus the Devil (by his Insinnuations) brought
in the Apostasy, and led People into the Rebellion against the Light and Spirit
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and so People have been bewildred, and greatly
desolated since the Days of the Holy Apostles, Rev. 12.6. and VVanderers from
Hill to Mountain, even from one dry Profession to another, in the Darkness of
Transgression, and so Ignorance has abounded in the Kingdoms of men, and the
general Doctrine has Been denying the work of the Spirit of Christ within, and
the Light not to be the Way, and so People are b^inded from time to time, and
following the Spirit and Power of Darkness, who leads from God and Christ Jesus
who is Light and Life (to the Souls that obey him) into Death and Sorrow, under
the We and Indignation of Almighty God. Now consider ye that are denying the
Working of the Spirit of God within you, and say, Revelation is ceast. Oh that
you would diligently weigh this thing in the just Balance in your own Hearts!
Is not this the denying of Christ? for God looks to the Heart, 1 Samuel 16.17.
and not to the outward Appearance; and all that deny the Spirit of Christ
within, they have broken Covenant with God, and are in Danger of Eternal Death,
and so go a whoring after other Gods, and other Lovers, as the old apostate
Jews, who turned aside into by Paths, and crooked Ways from the Way of Life,
whose Services, Sacrifices and offerings, New moons and Sabbaths were all an
Abomination to the Lord, Isa. 1.13. And so you that deny the work of the Spirit
in your Hearts, your Service, Worships and Ordinances are not acceptable to the
Lord, because Sin remains, the Sting of Death yet untaken away, you remaining
in the Guilt dead in Trespasses and Sins, and so the Spirit of the Wicked One
keeps the House, and has the Possession in the Heart, who has no right to
reign in the Hearts of the Children of Men, therefore as the wicked Spirit has
reigned, which has led you into Darkness, and possessed you with a Persuasion
that Revelation is ceast, now examine and try your selves that he may be cast
out, and your Hearts cleansed, and your Souls redeemed, that Christ may reign
whose right it is, and so you will come to know the VVorking of God's Holy
Spirit, the true Power, Christ Jesus, who is come to destroy Sin in the Flesh,
Romans 8.3. to the 11th. and as you yield your selves unto him inwardly, so the
Change of the Mind you will come to witness, and your Affections, Desires and
Inclinations will be redeemed out of the Earthly corruptible things, and
Vanities of the World, into a Heavenly-mindedness; and so you will have
Treasure in Heaven with the Lord, being delivered from the Power of Death and
Darkness, which rules in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience, and so you
will be true VVitnesses for God that he has raised up his Son from the dead,
who is become a quickening Spirit, who works in the Hearts of all that obey him,
and these are the true Christians this Day, who are redeemed by Christ Jesus to
God, out of the Fall, out of the Death, that came by Sin, into the Life, that
came by Christ Jesus who sinned not, and so you will know in your selves the
Truth and the Way which is Holy, and no Defilement at all in it, which is the
Light and Life of Men, Christ Jesus, John 1.4. for assuredly the Day, is dawned
wherein God has opened the Way of Truth, which is not another, but the same
as in old time, which is the Way of Holiness, Isa. 2.3. and 35.8. And though
this seems to be a strange thing to preach Christ Jesus in Spirit (this Day)
who is the Light of the World, as God has sent him forth to enlighten every
man that comes into the World, John 1.4, 9. yet we know to our Souls Comfort
and Satisfaction, that he is come, whose Power and Dominion shall sway and bear
Rule in the Hearts of the Sons and Daughters of Men, until he has utterly
wasted that wicked Nature in Man that rebels against him, and will not that he
should reign, Luke 19.27. And though People have rebelled against him in this
Night of Darkness, and the Clouds thereof have shaddowed, veiled and darkened
the Understandings of the Sons of Men, yet that shall not make void the Ancient
Promise of God, who said, that the Knowledge of his Glory should fill the
Earth, as the Waters cover the Sea, Isa. 11.9. Hab. 2.14. neither shall it
frustrate the Intention of the Lord, whole Determination has been and is, to
make an End of Sin, and bring in Everlasting Righteousness, Dan. 9.24. though
the Enemy of the Souls of Men has brought in a great and deep Mystery of
iniquity under a Pretense of Religion in these latter Ages and Generations of
the World, yet it is not that which must stand in the Earth, being polluted and
defiled, neither are such polluted Worshippers (who are bound with the Chain of
Sin) accepted of God, who are placed in the Habitations of Cruelty: And so the
wicked One has been possessing the Minds, and Hearts of those who wander from
God in their Imaginations, that Revelation is ceased; but though this Doctrine
be preached, as though God would work no more in the Children of Men, I say it
is not consistent with Truth, but is of the false Part in man that wanders from
God, and therefore shall not hinder the Lord from breaking forth in this his
Day, to redeem a People to himself for his own Glory, neither does it hinder,
or stop the Blessings of God unto his People, and redeemed ones, who wait to be
sustained by him with the Bread of Life, but the Lord is at work in this his
blessed Day, wherein he has sent forth a Savior, even jesus who is revealed
from Heaven; and your preaching against the Work of the Spirit of Christ
within, will not be sufficient in the great Day of Account, to stop (but rather
to hasten) the Eternal Judgment from being executed upon you, who are in the
Deceivableness of Unrigteousness with them that perish, 2 These. 2.10. Oh that
you would lay to Heart these things, and repent and live, while your Day
lasts, that you may come forth from all your Abominations, and believe the
true Witness in your Consciences that records your Deeds, for which if ye
repent not, you will suffer in time to come, and such as deny the Work of the
Spirit within, are one with them that went out from the Apostles Fellowship,
that stood in a regenerated State, 1 John 1.7. who walked in the Light, and had
Fellowship with God, 1 John 1.3. And since the first turning from God, out of
the Heavenly Light, how has the Devil deceitfully wrought in the Kingdoms of
this World? but blessed for ever be the Name of our God, the true Light is
come, that lets us see through the gross Darkness of this Night of Apostasy,
wherein the Stars that have fallen from Heaven have been wandering in the Night
of Darkness, having lost their Habitations, for whom the Blackness of Darkness
is reserved forever, Jude 13. And therefore you that have lost the Truth, and
are yet in the Death, that came by Adams Transgression, you that have gotten
the Name Christian, and lost the Power and Life of Christianity, unto you this
opens in my Heart to write; if ever you be saved, you must come to that which
was in the Beginning before the Apostasy entered, and before they denied the
work of the Spirit, even to the Word that God has given of his only Son, which
is the living Witness in you, testifying against your Evil Deeds; and so your
Eyes will be opened to see the Death that has reigned over Mankind since the
Working of the Spirit of Christ has been denied; and also you will see the
Work that God has begun, and is doing in this his Day, who has showed forth
his Strength in the Redemption of a little Remnant, who are true Worshipers,
who worship the Father in the Spirit and in the Truth, John 4.23, 24. but if
you hold to the Traditions of your Fathers, who deny Revelation, and so have
set up your Resolutions, not expecting the Spirit to be revealed in you, then I
say, you cannot be saved; for without the Spirit man is dead to God, and
Righteousness, and Holiness; and so without Holiness no man shall see the Lord,
Heb. 12.14. and this is the Gross Darkness that is over many this Day, who are
settled upon their Lees, as Moab of old, not being emptied from Vessel to
Vessel, Jer. 48.11. not knowing the Lord's Power in them to change their
Hearts, and such have set themselves against the Spirit of Truth within, and
cry out to People that Revelation is ceast, in such a Day as this wherein the
Iniquity of many is even come to the full, and wherein God has afforded to
Mankind a Day of Visitation that they may be saved. So in a general Sense, the
Wise and Learned amongst men in the Apostasy, in their several Professions, are
resting in something besides the Spirit, and so esteem the Profession without
the Spirit, that first in the days of old the true Christi^ns received and
obeyed, by which they were brought to profess Christ Jesus; and so their
Profession and Worship was not only in a Form, but in the Power and Spirit of
God, until the Deceiver entered, and then they retained the Form, and lost the
Power, 2 Timothy 3 5. and now through the Disobedience of Mankind, and rebelling
against the Power, they have undertook to gainsay and resist the Holy Ghost,
even the Holy Spirit which i^ the true Leader to God's Kingdom, as did their
Forefathers, Acts 7.51, 52. Oh that you would return to God! Ye professing
People while you have a Day; for now is a time wherein you may find the Lord,
if you seek him early; for he has said, They that seek him early shall find
him, Isa. 55.6, 7. And now all such as deny the Revelation of Jesus Christ,
they are seen to be in the Deceit, and in the old corruptible Way, as in the
Days of old, in the broad Way that leads to Destruction, Mat. 7.13. where no
true Peace is, but men out of God's Counsel, running not being sent of God, and
so profit not the People at all, Jer. 23.32. And now as one whom God has
raised up to proclaim his ancient Truth against all the Deceit that has
entered into the World in the Night of Darkness, for the Sakes of such as have
Desires after the Lord, this is written; for there are many, I do believe, that
are amongst you, whose Hearts the invisible God has touched by his word which
is Eternal, and from the Beginning, that is nigh in your Hearts, Deuteronomy. 30.11,
12, 13, 14. and Romans 10.6, 7, 8. at certain Seasons, being quick and powerful,
sharper then a two-edged Sword, Heb. 4.12. which does open the Secrets of your
Hearts, and declares unto you your Thoughts, so that you need not go far away
to seck a Savior, but wait for him from Heaven to be revealed within you, as
the Apostle directed, 1 These. 1.10. and then you will find him, who is the true
Beloved; for if ever you come to the true Enjoyment of him, you must wait for
him in his own Way, who is Heavenly, and comes from his Holy Habitation: and
you must turn from the blind Watchmen, who are in the Night, who have loft the
Way of his Appearance, and are turned against him, even fighting against his
Appearance with their filthy Weapons, pleading for sin, for which Cause the
Earth mourns, and the Inhabitants thereof (who are redeemed) take up a
Lamentation in the Consideration of these things. And all you that are thus
touched inwardly, and tendered in any measure, in the Bowed-dowaness of your
Souls, seeking the Lord that you may be saved, oh! go not forth after your
Imaginations to seek him in the Desert, nor after such as say, Lo here, or Le
there, Go ye not after them, nor follow them, Mat. 24.23. but wait, having your
Minds retired in the Manifestation of his heavenly Light within you, and then
ye will come to a true and certain Knowledge of him; and so you will see how
the Wise have Erred, and how they are gone back into the old By-Pathes that
they were in that could not speak a Word in Season to the Soul that is weary,
but shut the Kingdom of Heaven against men, and hindered such as were entering,
Mat. 23.13. therefore WOE was cried against them, which WOE stands over the Heads
of all that are in the Rebellion against the Spirit of God to this day: And is
it not even so? Do not our Wise Men and Professors shut the Kingdom against
men? Do not they preach against the Entrance into Life Eternal, saying,
Revelation is ceased; and this sad Doctrine has filled the Land with
Uncertainties, and many Thousands are like to perish and dye in their Sins
through Unbelief, John 8.21, 24. Now all you that are out of the Light of Life,
in the World of Death and Darkness, and are persuaded, though you dye in your
(Sins and) Uncleanness yet you shall be saved, not being freed by Christ Jesus
from the Act of Sin here in this Life: Troly this is a false Faith and Hope,
that will come to an End; for Sin ever was and is the Cause of man's Separation
from God, Isa. 51.1, 2. and God sent his Son to destroy Sin in the Flesh, and
to be a Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, 1 John 2.2. And though
People have forsaken the Lord God of Power and Life, yet he has again visited
with his Ancient Mercies, the Sons of men, to the End they might not perish,
and his Ancient Arm is revealed, that gathers to himself; and though the Night
has been long and tedious, wherein the Enemy of the Soul has possessed the
Place and Seat in the Temple, 2 These. 2.4. yet now the Lord calls for
Repentance, and for all to come unto him out of their Sins, and from under
Satan's Power; and whosoever comes unto him, he will in no ways cast out, John
6.37. but in this Day, who refuses to hearken to his Heavenly Voice, and come
not unto him, they will unavoidably perish for evermore, and their Blood shall
be upon their own Heads; for there is no way to God's Kingdom, but as
Redemption is witnessed by Christ Jesus out of the lost State, and so being
restored to God by Christ Jesus, you come into the Way of Life, where Peace
with God is known; and this has been the Happiness of People in all Ages and
Generations, as they have come up into Obedience, out of the Transgression, and
so have had Fellowship together in the Light of Righteousness, and so Truth and
Righteousness was their Way, and Christ the Rock was their Foundation, which
Foundation God has laid, 1 Cor. 3.11. and so they found Favor with the Lord,
and ended their Days in Peace; but on the other Hand, this has been the sad
unhappy State of Mankind, when they turned from God and Righteousness, and
Holiness into Disobedience, and so became wicked workers, filthy and corrupted
with Sin and Uncleanness, and so the Devil through Deceit has undone many to
their Utter Ruin, and their Eternal Sorrow, and sometimes persuading the
Creature one Way, and sometimes another, sometimes in profession of Religion
without the Life of Holiness, which is an Abomination to the Lord; for unto the
Wicked God says, What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou
should take my Covenant in thy Mouth? Psalm. 50.16. And so let all repent and
turn to the Lord, that you may be saved; for the Truth is revealed that has a
long time been hid with the Lord even the same unchangeable immortal Seed,
CHRIST, that bruiseth the Serpent's Head; and though many are so vailled with
Darkness, as to deny his working Inwardly; and limit the holy one, yet he is
come contrary to their Expectations and therefore they receive him not: So the
Way of God is not to be known in man's Way, nor yet in man's Time, nor in man's
Will, but as man obeyes God and is subject to him, so he comes to know his Way.
And so all People consider these things whilst you have time, and be warned to
come out of Ignorance, and become sensible that you may understand; for God
never forsakes any People without a just Cause, therefore lay it to Heart, and
ponder this in your secret Meditations, and as your wise men tell you
Revelation is ceast, let them tell you, when? where? to whom? and for what
cause? did God ever cast off any People, when they were obedient to him? Nay,
he never forsakes People till they forsake him, therefore the Cause is in man,
and God is clear: So the Lord in his Mercy in these latter Days has opened his
Truth, and has brought us into the Way of Life, wherein we see how the
Apostasy came in, and in all Ages, and under every Dispensation, the Cause was
in men, because they rebelled, and turned from God; but now there are many so
bewildred in their Minds, having lost the good old Way, are persuaded the Cause
is in God, and that he will not work by his Spirit now, as he did in Days past,
and so being deceived do not truly endeavor to come out of Sin all their Life
time, but imagine that God will accept of them in their Sins, and yet are
persuaded that they shall inherit Heaven, when this Life shall be at an End,
Ephesians. 5.5. whereas the Apostle said, The Heaven and the Earth that now is, are
kept in store reserved unto Fire against this Day of Judgment and Perdition of
UNGODLY MEN, 2 Pet. 3.7. so you may read your Portion here, if you turn not to
God that you may be cleanled, where all your false Joys and Pleasures will
come to an End, Amos 8.10. and everlasting Sorrow will overtake you. And
farther, as you deny the Working of the Spirit, and rebel against it, you are
one with the old Backsliders, even from the Beginning; for that was the chief
Cause that God brought Destruction upon the old World, because they rebelled
against his holy Spirit; for, after they departed from the Lord, yet his good
Spirit did strive with them, till at length the Lord was grieved, and said, My
Spirit shall not always strive with Man, etc. Genesis 6.3. so the Day of their
Visitation passed away, and they were overthrown with the Flood, Genesis 7.23. so
you may read and apply this to your selves; for you dare not say, but the Lord
by his Spirit has and does strive with you (as in the days of Noah) who is
reproving you in your hearts for your Profaneness and Idolatry; therefore,
while you have Time put into your Hands, Repent, and obey the Good Spirit of
the Lord God, lest God cease striving with you, and so you be overthrown by his
Almighty Power, who is a terrible God against all Unrighteousness: but all the
holy People of God, before the Flood, were guided by his holy Spirit, which was
a true Guide, and a sure Leader from the Beginning; and the Spirit of Truth was
the Guide of all the chosen People of God after the Flood, even Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, and that sustained them in all their Travails, and was with them, as
you may read at large in Genesis 12, and 48. And this was the Foundation of all
the Holy Men in all Ages and Generations. And when Israel at any time rebelled
against the Spirit of God, which he gave them to instruct them, (read Neh. 9.
throughout) then the Lord turned against them, and afflicted them, and caused
them to be carried away out of their own Land. Therefore the Spirit was and is
the true Guide, and the true Fountain of Life, of Living Refreshment and
Heavenly Virtue, which gives true Wisdom and a heavenly Mind, which when people
forsook, and rebelled against it, then Ignorance abounded: And so you that
rebel against God, who is a Spirit, are you not one with Israel in the
Apostasy, notwithstanding your Profession, against whom the Prophet testified,
saying, My People have committed two horrible Evils; the one, they have
forsaken the Lord, the Fountain of Living Waters; and have hewn out to
themselves broken Cisterns, that will hold no Water, Jer. 2.13. And is not this
your State and Condition this day? Are you not digging Wells of your own, and
hewing out to your selves Cisterns, and when all is done, it retains nothing
pure, nothing holy, nothing clean, no living Water, nothing from Heaven, but
all is corruptible, all filthy, all sinful? Oh that your Eyes were opened to
see these things! how ye are erred from the Life and Power, from the Living
Fountain, with the old backsliding Jews and dark bewildered Christians, who in
old time lost the Light of the Sun of Righteousness: but these things have
happened through gross Mistakes; as for instance, The general Belief has been
and is amongst the outside Professors of Jesus Christ, confessing only and
believing, that Christ dyed without the Gates of Jerusalem, though it is true;
and so in a general sense saying, We believe in God and in Christ Jesus, and so
come no farther to any inward Belief and Knowledge of him, as did the true
Christians, Romans 8. from Verse. 1. to 17. now here lies the Mistake, and here
many comfort themselves, because they confess to his Appearance in the World
sixteen hundred Years since, but this a man or woman may do and yet they may
perish; for to profess Christ and live in the Lust of Uncleanness, is but to
augment their Sorrow. because there is a living Witness in them which they
rebel against, and pierce, and so cause his Wounds to bleed afresh, and put him
to an open Shame, Heb. 6.6. Rev. 11.8. And notwithstanding they may use Meats
and Drinks, and have respect to Days and Times, Months and Years, yet all will
pass away, and perish with the using, and the ground of the Separation from God
may remain, and so you may eat and drink Damnation to your selves at unawares;
for he that eats and drinks unworthily, is guilty of the Body and Blood of the
Lord, 1 Cor. 11.27. therefore be warned whilst you have time, and consider
these things whilst your Day lasts, that you may come to God (out of Sin and
Death) by Christ Jesus, who is come to destroy Sin in the Flesh (mark that, in
the Flesh) this is a nearer Knowledge of him, then to confess him only as he
dyed without the Gates of Jerusalem, who is glorified with the Glory he had
with the Father before the World was, and fills Heaven and Earth; neither is
there any Creature that is not manifest in his Sight, but all things are naked
and open to the Eye of him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13. Therefore take
beed to your Way, and mind that pure Eye, even the heavenly Light within you,
which is a sure Word of Prophecy, to which ye do well if ye take heed, as unto
a Light shining in a dark Place, till the Day dawn and the Day Star arise in
your Hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19. And this is the true saving Faith, and saving
Knowledge. to believe in your Hearts the Lord Jesus, Acts 16.30, 31. Romans 10.8.
And whatsoever Way or Worship there is, or may be this Day, or whatsoever
Profession or Confession, otherwise then that which the ancient Apostles
declared of, who were Eyewitnesses of his Majesty, is contrany to Truth, and
will not make the comers thereunto Perfect, who preached from a certain Divine,
yet Intelligible Principle revealed within them, which was the Seed Immortal,
Incorruptible, promised of God to destroy Sin and bruise the Head of the
Serpent, and this Seed or Spirit of Life you must all come to know within you,
to destroy Sin in Flesh in your Mortal Bodies, and to quicken you from dead
Works to serve the Living God, Romans 8.11. And this is the plain Truth unto you
from the Spirit of the Lord, witnessed by the Scriptures, as John well said,
when the spirit of Antichrist began to work, and some were seduced by the
Wicked One, said he, Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits,
whether they are of God; every spirit that confesses that Christ is come in
the Flesh, is of God [mark] every spirit that confesses Christ come in the
Flesh, Romans 8.3.
who came to save his People from their Sin, and to destroy the Works of the
Devil, 1 John 4.2. for the Devil had wrought in the Flesh of Mankind the Works
of Darkness, Corruption, Uncleanness, and all manner of Filthiness, in which he
rules and Reigns over the Children of Disobedience, in that State and Nature
which he has begotten them into, and such were those sometimes that the
Scripture mentions, who were by Nature Children of Wrath, even as others, but
God, who is rich in Mercy, and abundant in Loving Kindness, caused his Love to
break forth in Christ Jesus, the Brightness of his Glory ( Hebr. 1.1, 2, 3) and
visited those that were dead in Sins and Trespasses, and quickened them by the
Spirit of his Son; and so they were made Witnesses of the Life of Jesus, who
begat them again, and Redeemed them from the Bonds of Death by his Blood. So
here is the Way of Life, and Path of Eternal Rest, Christ Jesus, the Power of
God, which destroys the Devil and his Works, 1 John 3.8. Hebr. 2.14. and this
is the true Spirit this day, we know it to our Souls Satisfaction, that confess
Christ come in the Flesh; and this was the Advice of the Apostle John to such
as did retain Christ, the Power and Wisdom of God, which taught them all
things, and instructed them in the things of God, and in the weighty Matters
pertaining to Eternal Life; Little Children (says he) I write these things
concerning those that seduce you; but the Anointing that you have received of
him, abides in you; and you have no need that any man teach you, 1 John 2.27.
and this was at that time when the Devil went about to deceive the Churches;
for said Peter, Your Adversary the Devil goes about like a Roaring Lion,
seeking whom be may devour. And again, says John, It is the Last Time, in
which you have heard, that Antichrist should come; for even now there are many
Antichrists, 1 John 2.18. and Every spirit that confesses not that Christ is
come in the Flesh, is not of God, but is a Deceiver; and this is that spirit of
Antichrist which ye have heard of should come, and even now is already come
into the World. 1 John 4.3. And this has been and is to this day the loss of
many, in that they profess Christ Jesus only outwardly come, and not try the
spirits, that they may know Christ also inwardly, by his Spirit, Power and
Wisdom, crucifying the fleshly Desires, Affections and Lusts, that he alone may
reign and rule: And this is the true Guide, Leader and Teacher of all the
Children of the Lord in every Age and Generation, who is given for a Leader,
even Christ Jesus, the Light of the World, Isa. 55.4. and such as are not
taught of him, they are not the Children of the Lord, but Children of him that
has stolen their Hearts from God, and leads them into Forgetfulness concerning
the weighty things, wherein consists their eternal Peace; and so multitudes are
deceived, and are Wanderers in the Darkness of the palpable Night, wherein the
Thief has robbed, stolen and deprived Thousands of their. Right; for Man was
not created for Destruction, but to inherit Life Eternal; and our God creates
none to be destroyed, but that all should be saved, and come to the Knowledge
of his Truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. And therefore, if any perish, its because they yield
themselves to the Wicked One to work Unrighteousness, which is the Cause of
Man's Misery: And I certainly know, That no Man or Woman can have Peace with
God, but as they come to witness in themselves Reconciliation by Christ Jesus,
which can never be until they obey him; for this I find by good Experience,
That Tribulation and Anguish is upon every Soul of man that does Evil, to the
Jew first, and also to the Gentile, Romans 2.9. both Professors and Profane, and
notwithstanding the Height of Profession, where Christ Jesus is not become the
Head, or where that which is contrary to his blessed will is not yet put under
his Feet in every particular, there is Condemnation and Terror within, and
secret Fears and Doubtfulness, which many Times causes Torment, 1 John 4 18.
And so in the Bowels of tender Love to all the Sons and Daughters of Men, is my
Heart opened to declare the Truth, as it is in Jesus, who is the true
Foundation and Rock of Ages, 1 Cor. 10.4. And for lack of the true and saving
Knowledge of him, many have wandered in great Fear, and many to this Day wander
from the Knowledge of him, and some whole Hearts (by the Nearness of God unto
them) are tendered in Secret, and mourn in Secret, and are broken in Heart, in
the Consideration of their Conditions, whose Sins are laid before them by the
Lord, Psalm. 50 8. and know no Way to escape the Indignaion of Almighty God, but
lie down in Fear and rise up in Sorrow, those are they whose secret Cry is to
the unknown God, whom yet they are not come to know; but here is a Travail
inwardly to enjoy the Redeemer, and here the invisible, immortal God has
reached forth his spiritual Power, and some have come to a Desire after the
Lord, from a real Sense of an inward Breathing after him, and yet have come
short of the thing they desired in the Day of the Tenderness of their Hearts;
for the Desire begotten inwardly, it must inwardly be satisfied, and all
outward things, as Ordinances and outward Observations cannot satisfy the
Soul, and herein many in this Day have come to a loss, and have stumbled at the
Foundation that God has laid, 1 Pet. 2.6, 7, 8. and so have overrun
themselves, and the tender Breathings of their Souls come to be stopped, and so
comes up Hardness of Heart again, though the Pretense be never so fair, and
here many stand in their Imaginations, fighting against the Appearance of God,
and so many that might have been serviceable for God's Cause in their Day and
time, and Witnesses (in the Life of Jesus) against the Works of Darkness, are
now become Enemies to the Lord that first begot them into Tenderness, in Days
that are gone and past; and this is the very Way, in which many Thousands in
this Nation have lost themselves, but a Remnant there are that have obeyed the
Heavenly Voice of the Beloved, that first touched their Hearts, and opened
their Understandings, whose Souls have continually mourned after him Day and
Night, when Sorrow overtook us, and Lamentation was heard within our Dwellings,
till we were sensible of the Way that leads to God's Kingdom, and then it was
the true Desire of our Souls to obey him, and follow him in the Way of his
Judgment, Prove. 8.20, 21. Isa. 1.27. and 4.4. and now he is become our Leader,
who is the true Satisfier of the Soul, even Jesus Christ (unto whom every one
must give an Account) who is the first and the last, Rev. 21.6. and 22.13. the
Beginning of the Creation of God, who has all Power in Heaven and in Earth,
Mat. 28.18. and is near to all, who is that Grace of God, that brings
Salvation unto mankind, Tit. 2.11, 13. and these that obey him and hear him,
who is the Beloved of the Father, according to his Commandment Mat. 17.5. they
are the true Church, the true Body, Christ Jesus being Head, ruling by his
blessed Power and Spirit in every Member, and this Spirit and Power redeems the
Church, and raises it up from the Grave, and such come to know the Resurrection
of the Body, and the Passage from Death to Life, who obey Christ and know his
Power in their Hearts to quicken and make alive; and so t^is mortal puts on
Immortality, and this corruptible puts on Incorruption, and so Death is
swallowed up in Victory, Isa^ah 25.8. And this is a holy Church redeemed to
God, whole Light is God's Glory, Rev. 21.23. Isa. 60.19. and those that are
come to this Spirit and Power that overcomes the Devil, are true Witnesses for
the Lord, in this Age and Day, who are redeemed from Death and Darkness, into
Life and Light; and this is the Lamb's Wife which is espoused unto him,
betrothed in Loving Kindness, and confesses him, and is not ashamed of his
Name before Men, Mat. 10.32. and such as have the Spirit they are the Children
of God, but if any man have not the spirit of Christ he is none of is, Romans
8.9. and these that are obedient to the Spirit of Christ within them, they are
a Living People, and are spiritually minded, waiting for the Promise of God to
be sealed up in Covenant with the Lord, Ephesians. 2.22. And so they come to be a
Habitation for God through the Spirit, that first cleanses and prepares the
Heart for God, and so it comes to be sanctified through the Spirit by believing
in the Truth, 2 These. 2.13. And all other People that are gathered outwardly,
without the Spirit, and Life and Power of God, that destroys the Devil and
his Works, are dead to God, and are yet in the Grave of Transgression, and are
in danger of falling into the deep pit of Misery, where their Worm dies not,
neither is their Fire quenched, Isa. 66.24. and such are Hypocrites deceiving
themselves and others, and painted with an outside, having the Sheeps clothing,
but Inwardly are ravening Wolves: And such as have not the Spirit for their
Guide, run when God sends them not, and prophecy when the Lord speaks not to
them, Jer. 29.8, 9. as they in old Time that rebelled against the Spirit, and
cast the Word of God behind their Backs, Isa. 5.24. and such are blind
Watchmen, who are in the dark Profession, over whom the Sun is gone down, Mic.
3.6. and Darkness is to them who have not a Vision, Michah 3.5, 6, 7. but deny
any such Thing as Vision and Revelation, and so are Night-Workers, not knowing
whether their Work will stand in God's Day, or not; and such were the blind
Watchmen in the Days of old, when God did arise, and by his Word and Power in
the Hearts of a People, moved the Inner man, and raised Desires after himself,
but the Watchmen of the Night (said the Church they found me and wounded me,
Cant. 5.7. and here is the Time of trying the false Prophets; then says the
travailing Soul, I am troubled inwardly, and cannot be satisfied with all, my
outside Profession, nothing will satisfy me till I come to enjoy the Beloved
of my Soul, who is heavenly, and was sent to save me from my Sins; Watchman
can thou tell me where I may find him? But says the blind Watchman,
Revelation is ceast, no inward immediate Working of the Spirit now. And here
many have been (and are) wounded to this Day; and this is a certain Testimony
whereby you may know the true Prophet from the false; for the true Prophet
comes in the Name of the Lord, standing in God's Counsel, turning People to
God, saying, Turn from Transgression, and obey Christ Jesus the true Light,
that you may be made free, and says the true Messenger, wait for the Son from
Heaven, 1 These. 1.9, 10. And so many have obeyed this Glorious Gospel, the
Light whereof shines inwardly, and the Beloved is found that we sought for
amongst the blind Watchmen, where we found him not; but it was but a little
while, I was gone from the Night Watchmen, and I found him whom my Soul loves,
Cant. 3.4. This also consider, the false Prophet he comes with a Lie, preaching
no Freedom from Sin, no Revelation, the Light within not the Way, not directing
to the Heavenly Witness, which is able to save Eternally from Death and Misery,
but daubs up with untempered Mortar: Ezekiel. 13.10, 11. and sows Pillows under
the Arm holes of People crying, Peace, Peace, when there is none, healing the
wound deceitfully, Jer. 6.14. And so are Pastors that destroy and scatter the
Sheep of God's Pasture, Jer. 23.1. but God will require his Flock at their
Hands, Ezekiel. 34.10. and We will be unto them forever, who are found in the Way
of the old rebellious amongst the Jews, and professed Christians, who transgress
against the God of Jacob, whose Portion was with the Unbelievers and Hypocrites
where is Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth. And in the Rise of the false Church,
who went a whoring from Jesus Christ, it was signified by the Spirit concerning
her Punishment, I will cast her into a Bed of Torment, and they that commit
Adultery with her, into great Tribulation, Rev. 2.22. And so all People
consider these Things, and come to the Revelation of the Son of God, which
gives Life and Dominion over Hell and Death, Isa. 25.8. 1 Cor. 15.54, 55, 56
which is the Good Old Way, the Path of the Righteous, and Obedient Children of
the Light of Jesus Christ; and so all will know the Lord and be saved; for
without this, Man is beneath the Beast of the Field; for when he was made Ruler
over the Creation, he knew Dominion, and Power, and Wisdom from on high, and
was in the Image of God over the Creation of Beasts, Fowls, Fishes and the
Earth, Genesis 1.26. but when he transgrest against God, he lost his Righteous
Life, and Innocent Dominion, and fell under the Creation; and so the Ox knows
his Owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib, but Israel knows not his God, Isa.
1.3. Jer. 8.7. now until this lost Estate be restored to man again, and the
Cause removed, which is Sin, Man remains in the Loss, without God in the World,
and there is no Way to come to that State again, but by Christ Jesus, who is
the Door the true Entrance, who says, No Man knows the Son, but the Father,
neither knows any Man the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will
reveal him, Mat. 11.27. and this is the standing Rule, which is unchangeable,
and is from Everlasting to Eve lasting, though it is vilified and lightly
esteemed of amongst many, yet unto us he is the chiefest of Ten Thousands,
Cant. 5.10. who has redeemed us unto God out of our Sins, and washed us from
our Filthiness in his own Blood, to him be Glory forevermore, Rev. 1.5. And
this is the sure Rock, upon which God is building his Spiritual House his
Church, against which the Gates of Hell shall not prevail, Mat. 16.18. And all
that think of an Inheritance in Heaven, though they dye in their Sins, are in a
great Mistake; for no unclean thing shall enter, Ephesians. 5.3, 4 5, 6. And if any
think of being cleansed after this Life, and so made fit hereafter, this also
will fail and come to an End; for after Death there is no Redemption, mortify
therefore your members whilst you are upon the Earth Col. 3.5. for consider
the Rich Man who dyed, and lift up his Eyes in Hell, Luke 16.23. and cried for
Help from poor Lazarus, ver. 24. but all was in vain, there was no Remedy, nor
Redemption for him who had spent his Days in Pleasure, and Van^ty upon the
Earth, not so much as a little Water to cool his Tongue, when he was tormented
in the Flame: And also you may read concerning his five Brethren, that he had
left behind in his Father's House, who were in the same Danger to be tormented
with him, and therefore desired they might be warned by poor Lazarus, lest,
said he, they also come to this Place of Torment, Luke 16.28. So all you that
are lofty and wanton upon the Earth, consider your latter End, who spend your
precions Time to the Flesh, in the Lust of Uncleanness, and nourish your
Hearts, as in a Day of Slaughter, James 5.5. O remember the Day wherein the
Holy Pure God will plead with you for all your Abominations, and for your
Secret Sins, that you have committed against the God of Heaven, and how you
make merry over the VVitness, that brings Condemnation upon you because of your
Sins, and even torments the Worker of Iniquity in secret, this is the Faithful
and True VVitness, even Jesus the True Messenger, who brings G^adtidings to the
imprisoned Soul, that is like to perish in Iniquity, and this is he that was
crucified in the Flesh, but quickened again in the Spirit, by which Spirit he
preached to the Spirits in prison 1 Pet. 3.18, 19. And it may be thus men may
rebel against him, and not turn at his Reproofs, but spiritually may crucify
him to themselves, as some did in Days past, Heb. 6.6. Rev. 11.8. but it would
have been much better that they had never had a Being; for when God shall call
them to an Account for the Deeds done in the Body, then shall they cry to the
Mountains, fall upon us, and to the Hills, cover or hide us from the Face of
him that sits upon the Throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb, Rev. 6.15, 16,
17. for the Hour of his Judgment is come; and who shall be able to stand?
Therefore return unto him betimes before it be too late, that you may be
reconciled to the Father, and so the Lord will return unto you; in his Love,
and in his Tender Mercy will he visit you, as you yield unto him in your
Hearts; for such as obey him this Day, do certainly enjoy his Peace, and in his
Name is their Safety, which is his Power, by which their Souls are kept from
the spiritual Enemy, and therefore, O Land of my Nativity! hear the Word of the
Lord God of Heaven, which Word is near unto all the Inhabitants thereof, from
one End unto another, that the Land may be cleansed, and enjoy her Sabbaths,
lest Afflictions and great ^orrow come in like a flood upon the inhabitants,
from the Great God, whose Righteous Soul is grieved because of the Abominations
that are within thy Borders, who by his searching, living Power that is
Eternal, over all (Death and Hell) is searching from one End to the other to
bring Mankind into his Light and Life, to worship him in his Spirit and Truth,
who is the blessed Creator of all, the Beginning and the End, to whom be Glory
forever, Amen.

THE Righteous God, whose Power is great, and who is wonderful in Counsel, and
excellent in working, Isaiah 28.29. has in these last Days appeared invisibly
in the inward Parts of Mankind, to place his Name and his pure Fear in the
Hearts of his People, according to his ancient Promise, Heb. 10.16. Jer. 31.33.
and to write his Law in the Hearts of his Children, who are truly turned unto
him; and amongst the many Witnesses, the Lord who is rich in his Love unto
Mankind, not willing that any should perish, he visited me, who was a Wanderer
in Desolation from Year to Year, seeking the Way of the Redeemed of the Lord,
and a Cry in secret was begotten in my Heart after God, who in his own time did
hear, and Answer my Earnest Desire; and I well remember the Days of my tender
Years, when I was very young, there was an Innocent Breathing within me after
the Thing that is Good, and I saw Sin in its Conception, but knew not that
which gave me the Knowledge of it; and Swearing I saw to be a great Evil in
them that were addicted thereunto, and unto the Nineth and Tenth Year of my
Age, I was in a good Measure restrained from Evil, according to the Knowledge I
then had, but afterward when Years did increase, I well remember my great
Loss; for evil Desires did spring up within me, and by the subtle one I was
betrayed, and led into diverse Pleasures, and Vanities of this Wicked World, and
into many Evils which did displease the Lord, and so the Tender Desires which
were after Righteousness were slain, and then great Darkness and Sorrow did
overtake me, and so into a spiritual Captivity from the Light that did shine
within me in my tender Years, and so for many Years walked in the Crooked
Bypaths of Darkness and Ignorance, in Disobedience, without the Knowledge of
the true God, in which time I was a Servant to the Wicked One, and so are all
that obey him, be they high or low, rich or poor; and after some Years I began
to consider my Condition, and something within me bringing to Remembrance what
I had done, and laying before me the Danger that attends the wicked, and in
this time a Travail was begotten within me to seek the Lord, and repent of my
Sins, and from Day to Day under the Indignation of the Lord which was revealed
against me because of Sin; and here was a Travail through much Fear and
Doubtfulness what would become of my Soul if God should cut off my Life, and
indeed I could read Adam's Condition, when he was afraid of the Lord and hid
himself, because he was naked; and in the first Adam I then was, and so lost in
the Fall, and as God behold me in that woeful State, Heb. 2.15.
subject to Bondage for Fear of Death, at last he opened unto my Soul the way
of Life, howbeit Sorrow overtook me, and much Boweddownness did compass me
about, and then the Enemy of my Soul wo^^d have taken away my Life, but the
secret invisible Arm of God's Power did uphold me, though I knew it not; so I
say, God is the Savior of all men, especially of them that believe 1 Timothy
1.10. And as Tenderness was begotten in my Heart, so my Sins became a Burden
too heavy for me to bear And this Testimony I give in the Name of the Lord,
that whosoever feels the Weight of their Sins, it is by the working of God's
Heavenly Power, begetting Tenderness in their Hearts though they know it not:
And so none can come to God but by this Way, as our Lord said, None can come
unto me, except the Father that has sent me draw him, John 6.44. And so my
Heart was bowed before the Lord, and an Inward Desire begotten, that none could
satisfy but him alone: And I saw the Ways of Man in his corrupt Nature, were
not those which lead to God's Kingdom, and from Professor to Profane, all were
gone astray, then my Cry was the more earnest to the unknown God, and none
amongst my Worldly Relations, and Neighbors could tell me the Way of my Soul's
Beloved, till at last the Power of the Lord opened my Understanding, and as I
retired my mind inwardly in the Heavenly Light, I was made more and more
sensible of the Operation of his blessed Spirit, which gave me Dominion over
one Sin, and here was the Beginning of the Work of God in my Soul, and then I
had a little Hope, of overcoming, and a little Faith to believe I should be
saved. So this is the Seed of God's Kingdom, which is immortal, compared to a
little Leaven ^^d in three Measures of Meal, until the whole be leavened, which
Seed is the Foundation which God has laid, 1 Cor. 3.11. for Man and Woman to
build upon. And when all my Hope was lost of getting out of that fallen State,
and when I could not believe that I should be saved, if I died in Sin, so that
this Cry was within me, My Bones are dried, my Hope is lost, I am cut off for
my Part, Ezekiel. 37.11. then did the Lord remember me, and manifested a Savior
in an acceptable Time, and as my Mind was inclined toward the invisible Power
that opened my Understanding. Ephesians. 5.13, 14. so the Sins of Youth I overcame,
and this is the Light of the Glory of God, that shined in my dark Heart, before
I knew what it was; and so it is certain the Light shines in Darkness, but the
Darkness comprehends it not, John 1.5. and then I came to know God's
Salvation near me, according to his Promise, Isa 51.5. and so I saw the Days I
had spent in Vanity, and began to redeem the Time, Ephesians. 5.15, 16. and also
how youthful Lusts and Pleasures came over me in the Beginning, and how I was
betrayed from my Innocent State, in the Days of my Childhood; so now I know
this is the Spirit of Promise, that brings all Things to my Remembrance, Joh.
14.26. and so my Soul by the Spirit of Jesus Christ was redeemed from dead
Works, and out of the dark Ways of sin and Ignorance, into the Light of
Righteousness, to serve the living and true God; and this I affirm is the
Spirit of Truth, that first convinces the Conscience of sin, and then as it is
obeyed, it lead^ out of sin, and roots out the Worker of Iniquity, and sets up
Righteousness and Holiness in the Heart, and this is the true Teacher, that
comes to do the works that none other can do, and such as declare that which he
has done for their Souls, they are the true Messengers, as it is written, How
beautiful upon the Mountains are the Feet of them that bring Glad-tidings, and
publish Peace, bringing Glad-ridings of good Things, Romans 10.15. and such as
are come unto this true Teacher (and abide with him) are happy forever; and as
my Soul lamented in Days past for a Savior, and languished for lack of
Spiritual Comfort, now I am satisfied fully, in that I feel a VVitness in my
self, 1 John 5.10. which bears witness that my Soul is redeemed; and this was
before me for some Years, to give a Testimony of these Things which God has
done for me, in restoring me to my Habitation, Everlasting Praises be given to
his Name forevermore. And as Man that is lost in the first Adam, as he obeys
the Heavenly and Spiritual Adam, Christ Jesus, who never fell, so he comes to
God again, and is restored into Life and a holy Liberty, with the Sons of God.
And now my Soul is made a VVitness for Jesus Christ, that God ha^h raised him
from the Dead, who has quickened me that was dead in Sins and Trespasses, 1
Cor 15.45. And this is the Mystery of Godliness, hid from the wise and prudent,
and revealed unto Babes and Sucklings, Mat. 11.25. Luke 10.21. And this
Everlasting Power that is now revealed, is that which will overcome, even unto
the End, Rev. 3.21. and his Government is everlasting, and shall root out and
destroy the Government of the Wicked One; for he shall reign whose Right it a,
Rev. 11.15. And now all you that have Desires after the Lord, and are not come
to the Knowledge of him, consider these Things, and singly read these Line,
that the saving Knowledge of God you may come unto, and then the Burden of Sin,
an the heavy Weight will be taken away from your Souls, and then Life and
Immortal Glory will be your Portion forever; for great, yea, unspeakable is
God's Love to his People, who are saved by him, and Infinite are his Mercies to
he Souls of his Children; and though there be many miserable Comforters that
say, Revelation is ceast, so much as to say, The Way of God's Heavenly Mercies
to the Souls of Men; is shu^ up, but blessed be the Lord, there are many
Witnesses this Day, unto whose mourning Souls God has opened the Way of his
Tender Mercies, and they are come to the Faithful and True VVitness, even Jesus
the Mediator, and he opens and none can shut, and shuts and none can open:
And my Soul is made willing to invite all to come; for the Spirit says come,
and the Bride says come, and let him that is a thirst come and drink of the
Water of Life freely, Rev. 22.17. that all may be saved from the Wrath to
come, which will be heavy upon those of this Generation, who slight the Day of
their Visitation; and therefore you that are come to seel your Sins to be your
Burden, look not out for a Savior, but wait for the Appearance of Christ
within, and you will find him to your great Satisfaction, and Everlasting
Comfort, and in your Age and Generation you will come to be VVitnesses for God,
and his Presence you will come to know, in which is Life, and at his Right Hand
are Pleasures for evermore. And this is the Joy of my Soul, now God has made
me sensible of his Way, even to do his Will; and I know that such as do not
his Will will be found on the left Hand amongst the Hypocrites, and such as
are without God, unto whom it will be said, depart ye cursed into Everlasting
Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 7.23. Mat. 24.41. And then I
well remember, when this Way of Life, first I came to know, and when I was
separated from my former Acquaintances, and could not go with them into the
same kind of Riot as before, they then turned against me, and I became a By
wo^d unto my Neighbors, and as the Apostle said, They think it strange because
you go not with them to the same kind of Riot, speaking evil of you, 1 pet.
4.4. and so our Lord foretold of the^e things, who said, They shall cast you
out of their Company, and your Names shall be cast out, as evil, for the
Kingdom of God Sake; and when men shall persecute you, and speak all manner of
Evil fasly for my Name Sake, rejoice in that Day; for great is your Reward,
list up your Heads, and be glad; for your Redemption draws night, Luke 21.28.
And this was that which did uphold me in that Day, even my Redeemer drawing
nigh. And, now I have written concerning my Coming forth out of my Sins, and
from the Ways and Worships of the World, who are not in the Spirit and in the
Truth, and therefore will come to an End, and the true Worship which is in the
Spirit, and in the Truth, will be established; for God who is strong in
Judgment, will raise up his own Tabernacle, Amos 9.11. Acts 15.16. and the Time
is come wherein the Lord will work, and woe unto such as endeavor to hinder his
Work, which is a righteous Work, and will stand, when the Pleasure of Sin
shall end with Everlasting Punishment; for it is Righteousness. that will
remain when God shall judge the World, and search out every secret Work that
has been wrought in Darkness, yea, when Inquisition shall be made for the
Thoughts of the Ungodly.

And so all that read understand, and turn unto the Lord; for he is certainly
risen in great Power, yea he has taken unto him his great Power, and is come
to reign, 1 Cor. 15.25. for he has seen the great Backslidings of the Sons of
Men and the Darkness that has veiled the Creation, and the Death that has
reigned over Mankind; and he is come to take away the Vail that the Enemy of
Mankind has spread over the Nations, and to destroy the Face of the Covering
cast over all People, that Death may be swallowed up in Victory, 1 Cor. 15.54,
55 And the Holy, Pure God, whole Dominion is an Ancient Dominion, and his
Heavenly Glorious Kingdom is from Everlasting to Everlasting, before the Devil
and Death's Kingdom, Rule and Government was, he has beheld the Sad Estate of
the Sons of Men and has sent forth a Savior, who is mighty, the same that in
Days past was mighty in word and Deed, before God and all the People, Luke
24.19. and the same Savior, even Jesus, which is Christ the Lord, has
redeemed and saved a People from their Sins, Mat. 1.21. who is able to bring
forth all the distressed amongst the People, whose inward Cry is to the unknown
God, as mine was, who has delivered my Soul from Death, who is my Shepherd,
Bishop and Teacher, in whom dwells all Fullness, who laid down his Life for
his Sheep, whose precious Blood has redeemed us, whom my Soul has Cause to
extol and praise Night and Day, who is my Strength and Defense against all the
Assaults of my Soul's Enemy, to whom says my Soul, be Glory Everlasting, and
Praises for ever rendered, who is over all Blessed forever, Amen.

After this Work was begun in my Soul and my Understanding opened to see the
sad and woeful State of Mankind, being fallen into the State of the first Adam,
in the Separation from God, and Christ Jesus, my Heart was filled with Sorrow,
and a Zeal for the Name of the Lord God did livingly spring in my Heart, and a
Necessity was laid upon me to warn my Neighbors to turn unto the Lord; and the
Lord showed me the sad and woeful State of many whose Iniquities are even come
to the full, and I warned them in the Name of the Lord in their public
Assembli^s to turn from the Evil of their ways, and now it lives in my Heart
afresh, to warn them by writing also, in the Holy Fear and Awe of the God of
Heaven and Earth, in the deep Consideration of their sad Estate.

And now my Neighbors, this is unto you in Bowels of tender Love, whose, o^l
desires your Everlasting Good, that you may consider your Ways, and turn unto
the Lord; for he is merciful, slow to anger, and of great Kindness, that
Inwardly you may be sensible of the Power of Jesus Christ whose Heavenly Light
shows you your Sins; for great are your Abominations which grieves the Lord
God, and the abounding thereof from Day to Day. How does Drunkenness abound
amongst you, and Pride, and Vain Glory, and Swearing, and Lying from Day to Day
abound, within the Borders of the Place of my Nativity? for whose Sakes my
Heart has often been bowed down before the Lord, that the Days of Sin and
Iniquity may come to an End. Now Friends and Neighbors, there is no Way for
you to escape the Indigration of the Lord, but by Repentance, and therefore
repent speedily, and forsake your Sins in this Day wherein the Lord has
visited you with his Day Spring from on high, and that is the true Light that
shows unto you your Thoughts, and reproves you in Secret for Lying, Swearing
and Drunkenness, and all manner of Uncleanness; and that is the Day Spring from
on high, revealed from God to lead out of Sin, and to save from Transgression,
and this is the Grace of God which the Apostle spoke of which has appeared
unto all men, which is the true Teacher, and Leader out of Sin, Tit. 2.11. into
Holiness; and this will search your Hearts, as you wait for it; for how have you
been saying from Time to Time? At what Time soever a Sinner does repent him
from the Bottom of his Heart; God will blot out all his Transgressions out of
his Remembrance, and do not many take Liberty to sin because of this, but as
the Promise of Forgiveness upon Repentance, Ezekiel. 18.21, 22. commends the Mercy
of God, that none might despair, yet the Lord will surely plead with all, that
are presumptuous and Continuers in Sin, read (your Portion) Ezekiel. 18.20.
therefore all both old and young, remember Repentance from the Bottom of the
Heart; for that you must all come to witness, if you be made clean, so that God
may receive you. And indeed that is a Thing of great Concernment; but that is
the Thing most wanting amongst men; for there are Professions enough, but I see
but few that are come to the Cleansing of the inside, or inward Washing, but as
the Pharisees, who made clean the outside of the Cup or Platter, but the inside
was unclean, Luke 11.39 So there are many outside Professors of God and Christ,
that ^r^ confessing their Sins, and Repentance, as they say, from the Bottom of
the Heart, but the Cause remains, the Bottom is still corrupt, and therefore
that you may come to the Bottom that is the Desire of my Soul, and the End of
writing unto you; for you can never come to the Bottom, till you come to the
Spirit of Truth, the Heavenly Light that lets you see the Bottom of your
Hearts, and searches out the most hidden Things; for the Heart of Man is
deceitful, and none can search it but the Lord, Jer. 17.10. and the Lord knows
it, and tries the Heart, and searches the innermost Parts.

And this is the Substance that is come, that searches the Heart and declares
unto man his Thoughts, Ames 4.13. and as you obey him who is near you, even the
Spirit of Truth, ^o you will come to witness the Work you are a talking of, a
Death to Sin, and a New Birth unto Righteousness; for Christ Jesus is manifest
to take away Sin, renew Man and Woman again to God: And such as come to witness
Repentance from the Bottom of the Heart, are the only People of God, who are
come to the Foundation and Rock which is laid in the Bottom of the Heart that
is cleansed; for such as are cleansed to build upon. So this is the Truth, and
is no Lie, and is a sure Teacher, which is in Heaven, and not only so, but in
the Earth also, by his Spirit and Power redeeming, and bringing up out of
Captivity his Heritage, that mourned unto him, Jer. 12.11. being in Desolation,
and all false Coverings that serve for a Cloak for your Sins, as a bare
Confession, and yet remain the same as before, will be too narrow to hide you
from the Wrath of God, which is like to break forth upon you, except you
repent. And therefore my Countrymen and Neighbors, I cannot but deal plainly
with you to declare in Plainness the Thing that is upon me from the Lord; for I
truly desire your Everlasting Good. And now you that are young, and think you
have much Time to sp^nd, take heed to your selves, and remember the Lord before
whom you must appear, that it may be well with you; for the Lord visited me
amongst you in the Days of my Youth, not that I was better then others, but
God who is rich in Mercy, heard the inward Cry of my Soul, and granted me
Repentance unto Life, Romans 10.12. and that which I was saved by that declare I
unto you, to be the only and alone Savior, and there is not another, that can
save from Sin but Jesus Christ, John 4.29, 42. neither is there any Way to come
to God but by him, John. 14.6 and there is no way to come to him but as you
turn to his Light in your Consciences, that lights every man that comes into
the World, John 1.9. So all repent and live; for Woe will overtake all the
wicked, and great Distress will come upon them from the Lord; for the Day is
dawned wherein he has begun his Work, which he will carry on by his mighty
Power; and it is in vain for any to gainsay the Lord; and all false Professions
the Lord will bring down, and set up his Ancient standing Rule over all, yea,
the Standard of his Power, over the Devil, and all God's Enemies; for the Year
of his Redeemed is come, and the Day of Vengeance is in his Heart, Isa. 63.4.
who has suffered, and has been slain from the Foundation of the World, Rev.
13.8. by the Wicked amongst Men, and in many Ages and Generations he appeared
spiritually, and by his mighty Power began to reform the Nations, but People
dealt deceitfully with him, and cast his Word behind their back, Neh. 9.26. and
in this dark Night of Apostasy he has greatly suffered with his Heritage,
which has been in the Wildernss, and in the Streets of that great City, which
spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt where the Witnesses have prophesied in
Sack cloth and Ashes, Rev. 11.3. but now the appointed Time is come, wherein
the Lord has prevailed over him that has darkened, and desolated the People,
and has taken to him his great Power and is conquering, Psalm. 146.10. and in
this his Day, he will cut his Work short in Righteousness; for a short Work
will the Lord make in the Earth, Romans 9.28. and all Foundations of every
Profession are clearly seen in the Light of the Lamb. and all whose Vine, is
the Vine of Sodom, and Grapes, Grapes of Gomorrah, will be shaken as a Fig Tree
that casts her untimely Figs when she is shaken with a mighty Wind, Rev.
6.13. yea the Harvest of the Earth will be reaped, and cast into the Wine press
of the Wrath of God, Rev. 14.19. And he that People sin against, whose Way you
err and stray from, and whom you pierce by Reason of your wicked Works; I say,
The Lamb that was slain, who lives, and was dead, who has all Power given
unto him in Heaven and in Earth, Rev. 1.18. he treads the Wine press of the
Wrath and Fierceness of the Almighty God, whom all Rebellious Christians have
forsaken, therefore will he bring Judgment into Victory, that Righteousness may
run down as a mighty Stream; and happy, and blessed will all such be that
return unto him in their Hearts, who is come near to execute true. Justice and
Judgment in the Earth, who is the Covenant of the People, the Gentiles Light,
and Israel's Glory. I say, such will see his Goodness, and they only will be
received into the Father's Kingdom being freed from the great Punishment due
because of Sin. And so my Country men, Repentance unto Life, yea, a Forsaking
of your Sins, that will cause the Lord to turn from his Fierce Anger that ^s
like to break forth like Fire against you, and nothing else will make up the
Breach, and therefore, O my Native Place, I cannot but lament thee, because I
see the great Abominations that are committed within thee, and not in thee
only, but in the Places adjacent, but chiefly I am concerned for you who are my
Acquaintances, that if by any means I might provoke you to fear the Lord, and
consider your latter End; for in the Way you are in which is sinful, you will
never find peace with the Lord; for the End is Sorrow, and the Reward is Death,
Romans 6.23. but if you forsake the Evil, and love Righteousness, you will come
into Life, and live forever with the Lord; and that is the Travail I^f^el
within me concerning you, that you may walk in the Light, and come to a Holy
Righteous Conversation, that you may have Fellowship with us. 1 John 1.3. and
have Right to call God your Father, that you may be begotten of him, and so
love one another with a true Love in Righteousness, and so come to know the
Spirit of adoption, which is the Spirit of his Son, who breaks down the middle
Wall, Ephesians. 2.14. and blots out the Handwriting of Ordinances that is
contrary to us, and takes it out of the Way, nailling it to his Cross, Col.
2.14. and so you will come into Covenant with God, in the Light of Jesus, which
Light leads to God's Kingdom, and conducts out of all the barren Wildernesses,
and Desolations of the first Adam, into a sure Way, and Place of Defense in the
second Adam, where is Safety, and a Place of Rest, as he said, Come unto me all
ye that are weary and heavy laden: and you shall find Rest to your Souls, Mat.
11.26. and so you will know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you free, John
8.32. and you will come to the general Assembly, and Church of the first born
written in Heaven, Heb. 12.32. and to have Right to the precious Promises of
God, and to the Tree of Life; but while you continue in Rebellion against God,
you have no Part nor Lot, or Inheritance amongst the Living; for Sin is the
Hindrance of the Promises and Blessings of God unto the Soul, whatever you may
promise your selves, and think to inherit if you dye in Sin, nay; for man comes
short of all spiritual Blessings, notwithstanding all his Wisdom, Parts and
Abilities; for God has placed Cherubims, and a Flaming-Sword, which turns
every Way to keep the Way of the Tree of Life, Genesis 3.24. and here man is
defeated, notwithstanding all his fair outward Show or Pretense of Religion;
for without Obedience to Christ, he is undone and lost, though he may retain
the Name Christian, and as some in Days past, who had a Name to live, and were
dead, Rev. 3.1. and stood as though they were Rich, and had need of nothing,
but knew not that they were Poor, Blind, Wretched, Naked and Miserable, and so
were without the City, New Jerusalem, without a Part or Inheritance in the
Kingdom of God; though they had a Name, yet were dead to God, in the Profession
only without the Life, and so were threatened, as said the Spirit, I will kill
her Children with Death, and all the Churches shall know that I am the Lord,
that searches the Heart, and tries the Reins, and give to every one according
as his Work shall be, Rev. 2.23. and 3.17. And so dear People, come into the
Light of Christ that is within you, before your Glass be run, that you may find
a Place of Repentance, lest the Days come over you when Repentance shall be
hid from your Eyes, Hosea 13.14. and so with Esau seek the Blessing when it is
too late, and a Place of Repentance with Tears, and could not find it,
therefore while it is called to day, if you will hear his Voice, harden not
your Hearts, Heb. 3.7, 8. but draw near unto the Lord, and he will draw nigh
unto you, and gather you unto himself, and you shall no more wander without the
Knowledge of him, but the gathering Arm of God's Power will keep you from the
Enemy of your Immortal Souls, who is a Thief, and a Liar from the Beginning,
and a Murderer, who abode not in the Truth, John 8.44. and so you will be with
the Redeemed of the Lord, whose Hearts are in Covenant with him, who are come
to the Blood of Sprinkling, that speaks better Things then that of Abel, Heb.
12.24. and so you will know a sure Teacher, even Jesus Christ, who is a Priest
forever, after the Order of Melchizedek, whose Ministration is Life, who has
the Words of Eternal Life, John 6.48. And this Teacher cannot be removed into a
Corner, Isa. 30.20. who is the tender gathering Shepherd, and careful
over-seeing Bishop, 1 Pet. 2.25. which leads by the Springs of Living Water,
and guides to the Fountain of Life, Rev. 7.17. and here you will find Power and
Wisdom, Strength and all things needful; for God has laid Help on one that is
mighty, which is the mighty Redeemer and Reconciler of Man to God; and this is
that secret Joy that springs up in my Soul from day to day, feeling the holy
Power of the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of the World, who has
delivered my Soul, and now he does minister Joy and Comfort to my inner Man, in
the Sense whereof my Soul says, Come all ye scattered ones, who are yet
wandering as Sheep having no Shephe^d, come to the Fold of Rest; Oh! let your
Hearts be bowed down and tendered before the Lord, who is risen in this the Day
of his Power, and has made a little Remnant willing to follow him, whose Eye
is render, and sees, every secret thing, and beholds the Breathings of the
Souls of the Children of Men, who have Desires after him; and all you that
mourn in secret, cleave unto him who has touched your hearts, and go not forth,
but be retired in your Minds, and he will make way for you through all, and so
Fear not them that can kill the Body, but fear him that has Power to cast both
Body and Soul into Hell (Luke 12.5.) and so such as will obtain Life, let them
take up the Cross, and despise the Shame (Hebr. 12.2.) and turn your Backs upon
all the World's Pleasures and Delights, and follow Christ in the Regeneration,
and be of Moses 's Mind, who esteemed it greater Riches to suffer Persecution
with the People of God, then to enjoy the Pleasure of Sin for a season, Hebr.
11.24, 25. for the Woe reaches forever to Man and Woman in the Transgression,
if they Repent not; and that State is attended with the Wrath of God, and the
Lord's Displeasure, which is a sufficient Discouragement.

And so read these Lines in Coolness of spirit, and in a ponderous weighty
sense of your present Conditions, and then you will receive Benefit thereby,
and the End will be answered for which this is written; so being clear in my
Conscience, in that I have done as I was drawn in Spirit by the Lord God of
Heaven and Earth, to declare unto the World in general and to some more
particularly, that which was opened to my Understanding, to warn People
concerned herein to turn unto the Lord, I shall leave the Issue of all unto him
who knows all Hearts, and return into my Rest in that Measure of Grace given
me of God, where with my Brethren and Sisters, who are redeemed out of the Sins
of the World, I shall give Glory to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the
Lamb for evermore, Rev. 5.13. which was, and is, and is to come, who is our
God, our King and Lawgiver, before whom all must appear, who is God over all
blessed forever, Amen.

Richard Samble.

POSTSCRIPT.
GOD, who is Everlasting in his Being, and Mighty over all in his Power,
rewarding such as obey him with Life eternal, Joy, Peace and everlasting
Comfort; and also rewarding the Wicked with Punishment and Sorrow for evermore.
When first he created Man and Woman, he created them in his own Image, in
Righteousness and true Holiness; but soon after the Creation, the Devil
prevailed over them, and corrupted their Hearts, and so they lost the pure
Presence of the Lord; and then, as the World came to be peopled, so did
Wickedness abound in the Earth, although the Lord did strive with them by his
Spirit, that they might return and live, but they continued in the Rebellion
against the Lord, and then the Lord said, My Spirit shall not always strive
with man etc. Genesis 6.3. -- and so God brought the Flood upon them, and their
Blood was upon their own Heads: And after the Flood, though great was the
Deliverance of Noah and his Family, in that great Deluge wherein many Thousands
were overthrown, yet one of the Sons of Noah became a Wicked Man, and the Curse
came over him, Genesis 9.25. and as the World became peopled again, so did
Wickedness increase, and people grew up in Ignorance, without the Knowledge of
the true God, in Rebellion against the Lord; and then God appeared unto
Abraham, and commanded him to forsake his Father's House, and his Kindred, Genesis
12.1. and Abraham believed and obeyed God, and was faithful in all things
before him, with whom the Lord made a Covenant, and the Promise of Life was
unto his Seed, wherein all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed; and the
Promise of God unto Abraham was, That his Seed should inherit the Land wherein
he was a Stranger; so God blessed Abraham, and multiplied his Seed as the Stars
of Heaven; and they increased unto a multitude in the Land of Egypt, and the
Egyptians entreated them evilly, and afflicted them Fo^^ Hundred Years, Genesis
15.13. and afterward God remembered his Covenant made with Abraham, and raised
up a Prophet, to wit, Moses, who was faithful in all God's House, and by mighty
Signs and Yokens of his Judgments upon Egypt, God brought them forth by a
mighty Hand and an out stretched Arm, and preserved them by the Way from the
Expectation of their Enemies, and kept them in the Red Sea from being overtaken
with the Egyptians; and God did this for them, to the end they might be unto
him a Chosen People, to set forth his Praises to the Ends of the Earth: But
soon after this great Deliverance, when they came into the Wilderness, the
Devil by his Subtilty turned their Hearts from the Lord, and so Iniquity was
found within their Camp, and Murmurings amongst the People, and so God was
displeased, and cut down their chosen men who lusted by the way, and raised up
another Generation amongst them, and they entered the Land, and God gave them
his Law and his Statutes, that they might be a People known to the Lord, in
obeying him forever; but soon after they came into that Inheritance, the Devil
wrought again to turn their Hearts from the Lord, and they followed the Ways
of the Heathen whom God cast out before them, and then the Lord was grieved
with them, and gave them into the Hands of their Enemies, who ruled over them,
until they should remember the Lord, against whom they had sinned; and when
they remembered the Lord, he sent Deliverance unto them, which brought them
again to their Land: And so all may read who have Understanding, what the Cause
is this day, why people do not enjoy the Blessings of God unto their Souls, its
certainly because they are in the Transgression: But God will remember such,
though they may be in spiritual Captivity, that desire after him, and forsake
their Sins, which is the Cause of their Souls Captivity; for when the Heart
shall return unto the Lord, he will take away the Vails, and give an
Understanding of the thing that is Heavenly: So Israel dealt treachtrously with
the Lord from time to time; but the Lord often times, when they cried unto him,
raised up faithful Messengers, which declared unto them the Way of the Lord;
and David, whom God chose, with whom he confirmed his Premise before made unto
Abraham, and said, David shall not want a Man to sit upon his Throne forever;
but this People, to (...) Israel, were Corrupters, and followed their own
Inventions, and rebelled against the Spirit of God, and slew the Prophets of
the Lord, which he sent unto them: And so the Time came when God according to
his Promise, sent his Son, the Seed, wherein the Blessing consists, in which
all the Nations of the Earth shall be blessed, which is to gather into one all
things in Christ, whether in Heaven or in Earth, Ephesians. 1.10. But the Jews,
though they were the Seed of Abraham outwardly, yet did not know this spiritual
Seed, Christ, but rose against him, and put him to Death, h^ ^beit God raised
him from the Dead by his Glorious Power, and received him again into his
ancient Glory, that he had with him before the World began; but God turned his
Hand against these professing Persecutors, and the Time came over them that
Distress and Sorrow compassed them in, and Affliction and Tribulations from day
to day attended them, because of that bloody Action, in Consenting to the Death
of Jesus; and so God's Fury was poured forth upon them from time to time, until
they were disinherited and driven out of their Possession, which if they had
received him, and believed that it was he, Eternal Life and Glory would have
been their Reward for evermore: And about this time, God, who is rich in Grace,
after Christ Jesus, the Son of his Love, was raised up from the Dead, began to
appear in him, and to work by him inwardly in many, and raised up many to bear
witness of God, that he had raised up his Son from the Dead, whom he furnished
with the Gift of Life, Power and Wisdom, to declare unto the Sons of Men, That
Jesus was the Christ; and this was the Gospel which before was preached unto
Abraham, unto whose Seed the Promise was forever, which Seed is Christ; and
many Thousands by this glorious Gospel were gathered to God, and a glorious Way
they were brought into, and also into the enjoyment of the sure Mercies of
David, Isa. 55.3. never to be forsaken, nor yet to want a Man to execute
Judgment (in their Behalf) in Truth and Righteousness: But here comes the
Misery again, the Devil, who was ever an Enemy to God's Heritage under every
Dispensation, he begins to work again, and to seduce the Minds of such as
profess Christ Jesus, and then Wickedness again began to spring, and as
Wickedness abounded, so people were darkened in their Understanding; and as the
Wicked One prevailed, so people were corrupted; and this was the beginning of
falling away again from God, after the Appearance of Jesus Christ: And now, as
the Jews and all Apostates in days past have rebelled against God, so have
these called Christians rebelled against Christ, and so Darkness and Ignorance
came over those called Christians also, and the Devil has ruled, and has had
Dominion, and then God, who first appeared to them in his Son Christ Jesus,
when they thus rebelled and grieved him, he with drew his Presence from them,
and so they have been a wandering People from Generation to Generation; but God,
who is Everlasting, though Man has changed in his Mind, yet God is the same,
and changes not; and that Blessed Truth and Everlasting Gospel, which is not
another, in these last days has God revealed again, and its now professed,
enjoyed and preached by the despised People called Quakers, whom God has
gathered by the Right Hand of his Righteousness, to bear forth a Testimony for
his Name, in this Generation, whom God will support, uphold and strengthen
against all Oppositions, that his ancient Truth may be proclaimed to the Ends
of the Earth, that so such as are afar off may be brought nigh to God, and the
Devil shall be defeated, whose Power of darkness has reigned, and Christ Jesus
shall reign, whose Right it is, and he shall bring us into the Possession of
the spiritual Canaan, that Land of Eternal Rest which remains for the People of
God; and he will chain the Devil that has deceived the Nations, and cast him
into the Bottomless Pit, and his holy People shall possess and inherit forever
the blessed Kingdom; and the Wicked and Abominable, and Murderers and
Adulterers, and all Liars, shall have their Part in the Lake that burns with
Fire and Brimstone, which is the second Death, Rev, 21.8.

R. S.

THE END.

