THE DIVINE OBLIGATION OF HUMANE ORDINANCES. Delivered in a SERMON Upon the
26th of February, Before the JUDGE, At St. Mary's in Bury St. Edmonds, BY
WILLIAM STARKEY, D.D. Rector of Pulham in NORFOLK.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by JOHN FIELD, Printer to the University: And are to be
sold by Henry Dickinson Bookseller in the Regent Walk in Cambridge. 1668.

To the Honorable Sir WILLIAM MORTON, One of His Majesty's Justices of the
Kings Bench, Health and Happiness.
SIR,
NO importunity of Friends could persuade me, no calumny of my worst Enemies
could provoke me, niether could the juncture of time when this Sermon was
preached, induce me (only the assurance of your Lordships Patronage has
prevailed with me) to expose to public view these weak Meditations; without
which, this Scroll, as worthless, must have undergone the Authors doom, and
must have been condemned to perpetual forgetfulness.

And certainly (my good Lord) there is great necessity of your defense, who
have been so valiant for the Truth, and feared no opposition. For that Spirit
of Loyalty and Obedience that runs through this whole Discourse, which sure was
the sole reason that moved you to like it when preached before you, will for
this reason alone make it dis-relishing amidst an unreasonable Generation;
which setting up a pretended Conscience above, yea against a certain Law, is
yet desperately hurried headlong into a lawless liberty and licentiousness, and
into all manner of disobedience.

If therefore there be any thing in this Treatise that may conduce to correct
these miscarriages, I think I need not protest my Integrity in delivering them:
Malice it self will acquit me, and my worst Enemies cannot entertain a
suspicion of my Hypocrisy in this; when no former Preferments have pre-ingaged
me, no future Hopes can have biased me, no other Worldly Respects can have
inclined me: but that is done in all probability, is done in simplicity, out of
an unfeigned love to Order and Peace.

To which if I may contribute any thing, I have my design; and the Reader that
has any benefit will with me thank God for your Lordship, and pray heartily
for the continuance of your Welfare; who has been always ready to act and
suffer for the preservation of the Religion, the Laws and Obedience of the
Nation. This your care has brought these things that follow to the light: And
the assurance of your Lordships perseverance, constrains the Author, that he
can no longer forbear to vow himself

Yours in all Services with all readiness to his utmost, WILL. STARKEY.

The Divine Obligation of Humane Ordinances, etc.
1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake.


AS it was with St. Paul's new-converted Gentiles, even so was it with St.
Peter's dispersed Hebrews, to whom he chiefly directs this Epistle. Either the
Gnostics, or some other carnal Gospellers, that made it their business to
despise Dominions, and speak evil of Dignities, Jude 8. under a specious
pretense of Liberty, had miscarried the Servants, so as they cast off all yokes
of service; and the Subjects, so as they broke asunder all bonds of obedience:
and now the new Christians were blown up into a prejudice; yea, into an
opposition against all Humane Government: Which justly opened the mouths of the
Unbelievers, to brand such Christians as evildoers; and Religion was now
reproached, and the Name of Christ and his Gospel was every where blasphemed.

Upon this, the Apostle in this part of the Epistle presses the new born Babes
to a greater care of a more becoming conversation; that by well-doing they
might put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. And without doubt, Piorum
Apologiacertissima and speciocissima, si vita eos purgat non oration, as Luther
upon the place. Holy Men purge themselves by Demeanor, better then Language;
and an Harmless Life is the Christians furest Apology: there being no such way
for them to silence Gainsayers, to choke Detractors, and disarm all Opposers,
as to lead lives quiet and peaceable, void of offense, in all godliness and
honesty. And this honesty of conversation is best discovered by readiness of
submission to the just Commands of lawful Governors; which brings our Apostle
to urge this of our Text, (...), etc. Submit, etc.

And as it was in the Apostles, even so it is in our days; we have such
Teachers and such Believers in the midst of us: Those that think and say, It Is
Reason and Religion to cast off all submission to Political, either Civil or
Ecclesiastical Laws; especially in their Poenal determinations: Pretending,
That meekness and mildness of disposition that is required, and that liberty
which is granted by the Gospel, is inconsistent with that rigor and exaction
that is used in the execution of those most wholesome Laws that are in force
among us.

Glad should I be, if I might undeceive any that are run into this error in
the midst of us: but if I cannot undeceive others, I shall satisfy my self,
that others shall know I am ready to give an account of my persuasion of that
my yielding subjection to Humane Ordinances, (even to those that may oppose
themselves) with mildness and godly fear. And as it is reasonable for me to do
it, so it is seasonable for you of this solemn Assembly to receive it; who are
met about the execution of Laws and Penalties, and urging subjection unto them.
And sure it cannot be improper to urge not only the lawfulness, but the
necessity and profitableness of the work; that so with faithfulness,
watchfulness, and cheerfulness, you may go about the designed employment; when
the undertaking is not only out of policy, barely for peace and advantage, or
convenience, but in piety, and for conscience sake; when either St. Peter was
no Apostle, or else this is undoubtedly the will of God, That we are to submit
to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake.

The Text is an Exhortation of St. Peter's to the scattered believing Jews, that
they would be subject to Government. And sure if it were their duty then to be
subject to the Laws of Heathens, it is much more ours now to be subject to the
Laws of Christian Governors. Be it agreed upon then, it is our concern to
regard the Exhortation; and then three things are observable.

1. Note the condition, or part, or manner of Government the Apostle would have
us subject to; it is (...), to every Ordinance of man.

2. Observe the manner of subjection we are to pay; it is not (...), lend an ear
only, but (...), submit; not to be done passively only, but actively; nor
only your wills, but your judgments, if the matter of the thing be
indifferent: Submit your selves.

3. Observe the reason of the submission of the Christian, the Obligation of
Humane Ordinances: the Ordinances may be Humane, yet their Authority and
Obligation is Divine: for submission must be given to Humane Ordinances, for
the Lords sake.

We are to begin with the first part; we are to observe the condition, the
manner of Government the Christian is not to neglect, but must be subject to:
it is (...), etc. To every Ordinance of man.

(...) signifies originally Creation or Creature; and when indefinitely taken,
it imports Ordinatam compagem; and so includes the order of Creatures in the
World, and is aptly translated to that order of rational Creatures in humane
Societies. For as it is in the Body of Creatures in the Creation, so should it
be in Political Bodies among Men; every one ought to be contented in that order
Gods Providence has set them in: The Superior to rule over the Inferior
without insulting, and the Inferior to be subject to the Superior without
murmuring; Whether to the King as supreme, etc.

But I like it better with our Translators, that the word (...) should be taken
to note things rather then persons; and to signify not only Governor, but
Government: And so (...), Graec. Schol.
i. e. (...), and signifies a disposition of that Civil Government which is
established amidst a People. And so Luther translates it, Omni humano statuto,
to every humane Statute: for Creare and statuere idem. So the Governors
Statutes may be said to be the Governors Creatures. Not only then to the
Creator, but the Creature; not Statuter, but Statute; nor Ordainer, but the
Ordinance, the Christian if he will be ruled by St. Peter, must yield
submission to: To every Humane Ordinance, etc.

Now a Law or Ordinance is, Hug. Gro.
Regula directiva humanorum actuum ad bonum Commune obligans ad id quod rectum,
A Rule directive of Humane Actions obliging to what is right, tending to the
public good where published and imposed: And so the Laws published by the
Magistrate, are far more obliging when imposed, then bare Swasions or Monitions
when proposed by the Christian Brother; and the transgression or neglect more
inexcuseable, when the malice of the Offendour by the publication is intended;
and the Transgressour discovers his obstinacy and impudence, when knowingly and
deliberately he sins contra instans praeceptum, against intimation of a present
Command, and so runs not only simplex malum, sed malum vetitum Committere.

Now of Laws and Ordinances there be two sorts, as it is plain from that
Government that was managed by Moses, even of God himself, who undertook to be
King and Ruler over Israel. Some Laws were Natural, that have intrinsece vim
obligatoriam, as the Moral Commandments from their own equity have an obliging
virtue, if there had been no public Position or Constitution of them by God
himself; and in themselves things of their own nature to every ordinary reason
would have appeared either good or bad, and would have been followed or
avoided, as approved or disallowed of the God of Nature, if he had neither
commanded nor forbidden them.

Now besides the Ten Words God gave to Jacob, there were some Statutes and
Ordinances which he gave to Israel; some Voluntary Laws, some Ceremonial, some
Judicial; things enjoined, that of their own nature were neither good nor bad,
but Praecipiendo debita, vetando Deus illicita fecit. Gods Authority being
uncontrollable, and his Wisdom unquestionable, they were to be followed or
avoided as most convenient for the welfare of that people in that present
condition.

What was naturally intrinsecally lawful, was unchangeably and universally
binding: Christ came not to destroy that Law, but to fulfill it. Heaven and
Earth may pass away, but not one tittle of that Law was to pass away, but ought
to be fulfilled. What was positive, particular and voluntary, was mutable and
changeable; and these have had their period, some of them at Christ's passion,
more of them at the dissolution of the Nation.

Now as it was with God and his Israel, so is it with godly Rulers and their
People: There are certain Rules and Statutes rationally agreed upon and
published, as the most just and best Directions conducing most to the good of
the Community where divulged. Among which, some are natural, that of their own
nature are intrinsecally good, and have an obliging virtue, and would be
binding as Laws of God, if no Position, if no Constitution from Man, such as
are necessary indispensable: neither are they to be abrogated or nulled by Man,
that cannot be made unjust by God himself.

But other Laws are Positive and Voluntary, which have their Position from Man
only, and so may be called Humane Ordinances, Laws of convenience, such
Constitutions as are established upon deliberation as most convenient, pro hic
and nunc, in the judgment of the most grave and sober Persons, for the good of
the Community wherein they live. And sufficit Ratio Universalis, and we are to
abide by it; that a thing suitable, and in reason tending most to the advantage
of the Society, should be established and be obliging. Yet such Constitutions
as they had their original and establishment from the reason of the supreme
Magistrate, consulting for convenience and the good of society; so the
condition of things and state altering, upon their burden and inconvenience,
such Constitutions by the same Authority that established, may be altered,
suspended, abrogated, and taken quite away; and yet till repealed, even these
Statutes are binding to private persons, if they will submit to St Peter's
direction, who are to submit to every, etc. And such Laws have we, Positive
Laws, Humane Ordinances, Constitutions for convenience established among us;
such as are our Rules about some Days, Meats, Vestments, and some Ceremonies,
and some external visible Gestures and Deportments; some I say advisedly, not
all: for certainly some Ceremonies and some Gestures are not indifferent, but
necessary, and in reason the rational Creature cannot decline them; and we
cannot be ignorant of their devices, who would bring a dis-repute upon, and an
opposition unto the Government established, by making a fair show of peaceable
dispositions, persuading that there might be no difference about trifles,
circumstances, needless and empty Ceremonies; and yet when observed, under
these pretenses strike at Set Forms of Prayer, all Uniformity in Devotion, all
Vocal Confessions united, all Bodily Prostration or Adoration, which are things
necessary in all public Congregations, for maintaining that society that
becomes Saints, and that communion that is fit for Christians. For it is not
only meet we should have suitable affections of fear, and love, and reverence,
and confidence to that supreme Being whom we must worship; but there ought to
be indication and attestation of those affections, to the exciting and
quickening others; which must be either by words or actions, and gestures of the
body, there being no other way in the state we are in of communicating our
intentions.

But yet Rules there be, as I said before, in Ecclesiastical matters that are
Positive and Humane; as about most of our Days, Meats, Vestments, and
Ceremonies. Such there be in Civil Matters also, as Constitution of Officers of
this or that condition, paying of Tribute or Taxes to this or that proportion,
manner of Vengeance, or measure of Penalties for this or that transgression:
all these, as it is confessed, are Humane and Voluntary, had their original and
rise from the Rulers discretion, and from him again upon inconvenience may have
their period and determination. Yet these are all binding, yea the Penalties
also now established by a positive Law, as long as not contrary to a natural
Law; and to these, though but Humane Ordinances, the Christian ought to pay
subjection.

I considerately made mention of Penalties, because some if they had their
minds, under a color of meekness and moderation, would have all the Penalties
determined upon the breach of every positive Law, and some natural ones, if not
rescinded, yet at least suspended. But that Punishment should be inflicted upon
the Offendour, that is Natural, that is Divine, though the constitution of the
measure of the Punishment be Humane: For God in the beginning did determine
that the Offendour should suffer; and the chief duty of the Rulers by Gods
appointment is to execute Vengeance; and the Sword is given him not as an empty
Badge of Honor, for a show, or for fashion, for ornament, but for employment,
for use, not in vain, but for a terror to them that do evil, Romans 13. If any
thing happens by transgression that is over grievous to the Transgressour, let
him blame himself, when sua voluntate se obligat ad poenam, The punishment
happens from his own election: For when Laws were agreed upon soberly and
deliberately, when published openly as most convenient; no man chooses the
transgression, but chooses the punishment: He knew the danger and ran into it;
His blood be upon his own head.

True indeed, we ought not to mock at Calamity, or rejoice when an Enemy
falls: Vengeance ought not to be the Godly Man's choice, which is not the
delight of God himself; and it is not agreeable with the nature of Man, Dolor
qua dolor satiari, to make himself pleasure at the torment of his Neighbor.
Yet it is reasonable and just the Malefactor should be punished, and that
Tribulation and Wrath should come on him that works Unrighteousness: And
certainly they have as little Charity as Reason, that blaspheme him as
malicious or mischievous, that accuses or punishes the Rebellious or
Injurious.

1. For Punishments as to the Malefactors prove but like bitter unpleasing
Potions, that work strongly for succeeding health; and their Bodies are
destroyed that their Souls may be saved.

2. To put a period to Malefactors wickedness, Ut quo uno modo possunt desinant
esse mali, Sen. That they who would not learn to be good, may at last be
restrained, and cease to do evil.

3. That others may be affrighted; for Poena ad unum metus ad omnes; that the
whole Congregation may hear and fear, and so by that means be restrained.

4. That the Righteous may be preserved; which cannot be but by Coertions and
Restraints upon the Wicked, keeping them in fear of punishment; when Inter tot
supplicia vix sontium satis tuta innocentia; when Innocence it self can
scarcely be safe, and is never secure amidst all the Punishments And to suspend
Penalties, is the way to make the Ruler contemned, the Law reproached and
slighted, the way to make the heart of the Righteous faint, and the hands of
the Wicked strengthened.

Upon these and other Reasons some dare not deny all Penalties, but would have
them inflicted only for breach of Natural and Moral Laws; not at all for
breach of Positive or Humane.

But I would have Dissenters in this point consider, that that cannot be
unlawful in probability, if done in the Government of men, which was so often
done and practiced by God himself in his dealings and actings amidst the
Government of his chosen people. And it may very easily be made appear upon a
little observation, that where God has most clearly manifested his care to
Persons or People, that there he required obedience not only to things
intrinsecally in their own nature good, but to those things that in themselves
were indifferent, when once commanded: in that he did not only take Vengeance
on them that despised his Moral Precepts, but executed it most severely on them
that transgressed his Positive Commands. Thus he most severely punished our
first Parents for eating the forbidden fruit; Achan for touching the unclean
thing; Saul for sparing Agag alive, and saving the best of the prey; the
Prophet for eating bread in the other Prophets house; Lot's Wife for looking
back. Thus the severest Judgments have always lighted upon those that
transgressed Gods positive Commands.

And how otherwise? Certainly upon good reason this was done: For when God will
maintain his Prerogative, and is tender of his Honor; How could he hold him
guiltless that would despise his Authority commanding, suspect his Goodness or
Wisdom, or both, directing, and seeks himself and his profit more then
obedience to his God? For, Obedientia in iis quae parva sunt exploratius
probatur, In doing those least things we give discovery of our greatest
obedience; when we bring our Reason under our Faith, and silence our disputing
with ready obeying.

But when persons shall obey God in those things only they conceive
reasonable, or think them profitable; only then when the nature of the thing
requires it, and their own interest or advantage is concerned; certainly in
such obedience it may be safely concluded, that such persons offend rather then
do what is acceptable; when things are done by them with greater respect to
please themselves, then out of reverence to please their God. And these
transgressions which have been so great offenses against God, must needs be
also when against his Deputies, even the neglect and breach of positive Laws.

1. For by this means persons discover their distrust of the Providence of God,
as if he had deserted the care of his own Ordinance of Magistracy, and had not
set Rulers over people for good; when God who passes by, and we see him not,
if any where, is to be found standing in the Congregation of the Princes, and
sits and judges among the gods: And by whom Kings reign, by him Princes decree
justice.

2. By this means the Authority of the Ruler is made vile and despicable, and
his Wisdom undervalued as contemptible; and others by thy disobedience are
prompted to harbor low conceits of their Governors, and to run with thee into
the like disorder and miscarriage. For what greater injury can thou put upon
thy careful Governor, then when his Contrivances and Determinations are
published for public good, that his Directions should be contemned, and by thy
Rebellion that thou should suggest to others, (what our disorderly Nature is
too ready to suspect) That their Rules are the Results of erroneous and corrupt
men? which ought to be looked upon as the Determinations of a Sacred Authority,
derived from a most wise and just GOD.

3. By this means there is opened a gap to let in all disorder, and nothing but
disquiet, contention and confusion is like to be found in the midst of a
people. For when persons think meanly of their Rulers, and cannot in honor
esteem them, nor think them better then themselves; when they once idolize
their own fancy, abound in their own sense, and are wise in their own
judgment, what can happen but as it did when there was no King in Israel?
Every one will do what is right in his own eyes: and being impatient of any
Judge to restrain or limit them, what can the issue be, but pride,
unyeeldingness, contention, division, confusion, and every evil work?

4. By this means the Morality of the fifth Commandment is quite destroyed, and
persons would be obliged to nothing by it but what is Ceremonious; as if the
honor there enjoined did tie us only to a formal (which often is feigned)
respect to the persons, and no regard to be had to the Commands of our
Governors: When no such discovery can be of love, as service, nor of honor to
our Superiors, as obedience to their commands: Neither can obedience to the
Rulers be any way so well evidenced as in obedience to the commands of this
nature, viz. to Humane Ordinances. For if the matter be unlawful that is
enjoined by our Ruler, then with the three Children, be not careful to answer
in that matter; it is better to obey God then man. If the thing be profitable,
thou servest thy own turn, thy own interest rather then obeyest thy Ruler: If
the thing be intrinsecally just, thou art obliged to do that, although not
enjoined it. So the truth is, the Rulers Authority and Subjects sincere
Subjection, is chiefly to be seen by submission to those Commands which enjoin
things that of their own nature are indifferent, and where neither the nature
of the thing, nor the Subjects reason nor profit is convincing, nor any other
by-respect induces him to the obedience. So that in sum, O Christian, thy
submission to Humane Ordinances, (as much as thou slightest them) is the
clearest evidence of thy subjection to the Higher Powers, which is undoubtedly
the will of Christ.

Let these suffice then for the unfolding of the manner of the Government that
the Apostle would have Believers to be subject to, viz. to Humane Ordinances;
not only natural, but positive Laws, agreed upon and constituted in wisdom
for convenience and benefit of the Public; and not only that the Laws
enjoined be observed, but Penalties determined, and in the measure agreed upon
be justly inflicted upon the Transgressour, it being a Humane Ordinance.

We come now to the second part, to consider the manner of subjection the
Believer is to yield to Humane Ordinances, as it is to be gathered from the word
(...), Be ye so subject as to submit your selves.

Part 2. You see it was our Translators sense that the word (...) be taken in
the active signification: A Negative Obedience will not be sufficient, if we
will fulfill St. Peter's mind; that persons do not rebel, do not resist, do not
oppose, do not murmur, (though I fear all are not so far subject) yet it is
plain this is not enough, if we mind what our Apostle exhorts; for the word
imports an orderly subjection, and implies a reverence of the heart, as one of
our own Critics observes; that Believers put their necks under the yoke, not
only patiently, but willingly; not be subjected, but submit, and subject your
selves; voluntarily, positively, of choice; not passively, but actively. Abel's
subjection was to be intentional, affectionate; not only external or formal,
his desires [must] be toward him, though by Gods constitution a Cain [should]
rule over him. And 'twas (...), every soul was to be subject, though a Nero
sat in the Throne. And as Servants to their Masters, so are Subjects to pay
respects to their Rulers lawful Commands, Ephesians. 6.6. With singleness of heart
doing the will of God from the heart, with good will doing service as to God,
and not to man. I confess therefore I think their expressions as far distant
from Reason, as their intentions from Loyalty, who to excuse themselves from
the just imputation of Rebellion, shall pretend their passive obedience; as if
they could satisfy the intent of the Lawgiver, or the Law, by undergoing the
penalties: certainly the inflicting Penalty is accidental to the Rulers
design, who being set over the people for good, with care contriveth Rules,
establishes them and publishes them, not for a snare to bring his Subjects to
vexation and penance, but to help on their peace and comfort, most likely and
probably to be effected by their conformity and obedience. Sure Laws were never
enacted and promulg'd for this end, to be slighted and contemned, but to be
observed and obeyed. To be passive for neglect of lawful Commands, and yet be
obedient to the same Commands, these are inconsistent, they are impossible: If
thou will be passive, thou art not obedient; and if thou would be obedient,
thou should not be passive.

Talk no more then of thy Sufferings for thy Nonconformity to the Law, which
are but evidences of thy Transgressions; thou gloriest now in thy shame, and by
these words condemnest thy self; when all the spots and wounds of this nature
that are given to thee or thy Estate, be as so many tokens by the order of
Heaven appearing, to give warning to others to avoid thy society, there being
such evident signs seen without, of an Infection that is raging within; when
in plain terms, thy passive submission, as thou call it, or obedience, is a
clear sign of thy wilful Rebellion, and intended disobedience. And when
nothing is good or bad but what is elective or voluntary, if thy Reason be not
quite lost, at last judge, and consider what satisfaction thy suffering can
give to God, thy Neighbor, or thy self, when thy suffering is involuntary and
against thy will, and thy transgression is voluntary, elective, and with thy
will; and thy ease, and quiet, and profit, are not so dear to thee as thy
disobedience.

If therefore thou would be subject, as the Apostle directs, it is not thy
passion, but thy action; not the offering of thy estate, but thy self; not
what is without, but within, that will please God and his Deputy. Not
sacrificing thy treasure, obedience is far better then only such sacrifice:
such a seeming compliance in a tender of externals to the Lords Christ, may be
found in the midst of his enemies. But his people shall be willing in the day
of his power; they will regard not only to fear and reverence the persons of
their Christian Governors, but they will be ready to keep and observe their
Laws; and not only negatively, but positively; nor only feignedly, but ex
(...) ex animo, sincerely, affectionately, submitting not only what is theirs,
but themselves.

Neither is this all the submission the Believer is to pay by the direction of
our Apostle, when he requires us to submit our selves: for I hope our will, the
appetitive part, is not, or should not be all our selves; the intellective
part, our judgment, our reason, is the best part of our selves; and we have
lost our selves if we leave out that: Not only then our wills and affections,
but our judgments and our reasons are all to stoop, to yield the subjection
that is required to the Constitutions and Rules of our Governors. So if the
thing be of a middle and indifferent nature, and then if the Ruler enjoin the
one side, and thy judgment should incline thee to the other, thou art to lay
aside thy own judgment, and abide and sit down by the determination of thy
Ruler: else with Peter, we will many times out of too much selfishness, as
savouring of worldly wisdom, and relishing of things of man, cross the best of
the counsels and dispositions of God. And certainly it is one of the most
necessary Lessons that Christ's Disciples ought first to learn, not only for
things of faith, but matters of peace, to deny themselves, to lay aside their
own judgments, or else they will hardly take up their crosses and follow
Christ.

Yea, good it is not to be overwise in doing our business, but to think soberly
of our selves in doubtful matters, committing our case to God, and trust his
Providence in ordering, who knows what is best for us, and will keep us in his
ways: for we are so short-sighted, as we cannot discover whether this be worse
then that. In determination therefore of indifferent things, it will be safe in
humility of mind to lay aside our own judgments, and to abide by the
Constitutions of our Rulers, and to submit to their Ordinances as the
Disposition of the Almighty, who judges among the gods, and has the Rulers
heads and hearts in his own hand, so as their Constitutions are to be looked
upon as the Ordinances of God; and as to their Masters, even so would our
Apostle have Believers submit to Governors Commands, not only those that are
good and pleasing, but (...), the harsh and unpleasing, if not unlawful, what
may cross, be above, yea contrary to our reason: for we are to submit our
selves, etc.

In sum, The manner of thy subjection (O Believer) ought so to be given to thy
Ruler, as thou submittest not only negatively, but positively; not barely
passively, but actively, not feignedly, formally, but sincerely,
affectionately: Nor is thy will to be subject only, but thy judgment, thy
reason; for thou art to submit thy self, and all for the Lords sake: so though
the Ordinance be Humane, yet the Authority and Obligingness is Divine, when
submission must be given for the Lords sake.

Part 3. For the Lords sake. I know some make this to be the limitation of the
Believers submission, and it is good to take it so; not in all things
absolutely promiscuously, but in omnibus quae Deo placent. Inferiori potestati
non est obediendum contra praeceptum Superioris, Aquin, So are we to submit to
the Commands of Ruling Men, as we do not contradict the Laws of the Supreme
God, who is to Rule over all. Per omnia ubi Dominus carnis Domino Spirituum
contraria non imperat, Jerome. In all things where the Masters of our Flesh do
not command things contrary to the Lord of Spirits. How shall we do this thing
and sin before God? What we do, we must do for the Lords sake.

Others take it to note the aim and intention the Believers have in their
submission; not for any selfish ends, but for Gods glory; for the Lords sake.
But I rather take it for the reason of the Injunction.

1. Because the Powers that are, are ordained of God: Rulers are his Ministers;
and he that gave the Rule to the beloved Titus, gave it to the hated Domitian;
he that gave it to Orthodox Constantine, gave it also to the Apostate Julian:
And Natural men, though they have no supernatural Graces infused, yet may have
Natural gifts imparted to them, that out of reason they will not transgress,
but defend the Natural Law, and may be the preservers of righteousness in their
generation: so who so despises, despises not man but God; for Gods sake
ordering Governors we are to submit.

2. God not only orders the Governors, but the Government: for he sits
Prince chief among the Gods, and by him Princes decree justice. He informs
Princes after his will, and teaches Senators wisdom. He then that resists
the Ordinance of man, resists that which ought to be looked upon as the
Ordinance of God.

3. Propter Dominum, for the Lords sake commanding: for we are to render to all
their due, to Caesar what is Caesar's; and not only to reverence the Persons,
but regard the Commands of our Rulers, if not unjust: For this is the will of
God, verse. 15.

4. Propter Dominum, for the Lords sake: that is, to be honored for the honor
of Christ and Christian Religion, that whereas they speak evil of you, verse.
12. as evildoers, they may seeing your good works glorify God in the day of
visitation: And with thus well-doing, you may put to silence, etc. Fleshly
Lusts dishonor Profession now, more then Pride, and Wrath, and Envy, which
bring forth Division, Sedition, and Rebellion: For Gods sake, that he may be
honored, pay your subjection, etc. Submit.

5. For Gods sake, for fear of God avenging and punishing: For they who resist,
receive to themseves Damnation.

1. From the Ruler, who is Gods Minister, and will pass sentence against such
disobedience.

2. From his own Conscience, who offers that to the Ruler he would not permit
to be offered to himself in his own Family.

3. The Damnation being indefinite, must include, as a Lapide has it, Tum ab
ipsa potestate temporariam, tum ab ipso Deo aeternam condemnationem. For if
Rebellion should prove prosperous, and persons escape the hand of Men, yet how
will they escape the hand of God? And if they that obey rightly shall of the
Lord receive the reward of inheritance, sure they that rebel shall receive the
just recompense of their disobedience. Shall not the Judge of all the earth do
right? Genesis 28.25.

In fine, the meaning of the Apostle must be this: If any respect to the Order,
to the Ordinance, to the Command of God; If any tender regard to honor Christ
and our Profession; If any fear of the Wrath and the succeeding Vengeance of
the Almighty; Christians are to subject not only their wills, but their
judgments; not only to Rules natural and necessary, but those that are
positive and humane; Laws made by Governors, and constituted for convenience,
if not unlawful: and though such Rules be Humane, yet their Obligation is to be
accounted Divine; For we are to submit to every Ordinance of man for the Lords
sake.

And now what have I done? How many have I this day made my Enemies for
speaking the Truth? And while the Zeal of Equity, and Righteousness, and of
just Obedience is eating me up, I may look even for this, that some may speak
evil of me in the gate; and the reproaches of them that are given to Sedition,
may fall upon me. And certainly if I would have had respect to the favor of
men, I should have pleaded this day for Indulgence, for Toleration, for
Dispensation of all Positive Laws, at least for suspension of their Penalty;
and not earnestly have urged obedience and submission to the Ordinances of men;
but that I never yet feared the face of man, having committed my cause to God:
neither durst I partially flatter, or by silence countenance any in their
opposition or neglect of that subjection which must be yielded for the Lords
sake. Yet there was never more love pretended to the Prince then in our days,
and never less respect unto his Laws; persons showing with what spirit they are
possessed, when they break almost all the bonds of Humane Laws asunder, and
cast away all those cords from them. And in those that are not quite broken, O
how stretched! how distorted! One Humor pulling the Ligament one way, another
the other way; and every Member is distracted, and full of Convulsion-fits; so
no wonder if the head be sick, the heart be faint, and the whole body be full
of pain. But certainly so it is, scarce any regard our reports; and either St.
Peter was no Apostle, or the Text has not been rightly expounded, or else
there has been, and is too too much wilful Disorder in the Nation.

I know what the Dissenter pleads, I honor my Prince, I love and reverence his
Person, I pay him Tribute willingly; but for some Humane Ordinances, to them I
cannot in Conscience submit: Shall I not have the liberty of my Conscience? may
not my Conscience be free?

To which give me leave to reply, That thy Profession of thy love is empty and
insignificant without thy obedience as required: Probatio dilectionis est
exhibitio operis, service is the clearest demonstration of thy love; and if
thou love thy God or his Christ, thy love to either is to be evidenced by
keeping their Commandments: And thy obedience to the Commands of things of a
middle nature, is the clearest and most unquestionable obedience.

And yet if we hear any thing from the Opposers, it is a Plea of Conscience,
they dare not do any thing against their Conscience, all these men's Asceticks
are acted in the lists and bounds of Conscience; and this the cry, They
exercise themselves to keep a Conscience void of offense toward God and toward
man. And so is the world filled with the noise, as a great part of it has lost
the thing Conscience. For if persons that palliate and excuse their Dissent and
Disorder with the cloak of Conscience, had not laid aside Reason, Religion, and
Conscience also, there could not be that distance and difference that is yet
among us. And if any that dissents from us in the Obedience urged, be crept in
among us, let him know (that if he will hear me with patience and without
prejudice) if do not make it appear, that in his not submitting he has no
Conscience; and if he has a Conscience, that he must submit, I will turn his
Proselyte, vow my self in his Persuasion, and come over to his side immediately.

There is only this to be done first, that we agree what Conscience is, and we
come to the point in hand instantly.

And Conscientia is concludens Scientia, a firm Conclusion, a settled
Judgment, a fixed Determination of the Intellective Part, from a certain
infallible Rule, from which we infer, assume, apply to our selves the Morality
of our Action, and determine of the subsequent issue accordingly. So Conscience
is nothing else but Syllogismus Practicus, a Practical Syllogism; in which the
Major part of Conscience is called (...) in the Major, the Understanding lays
down the Rule, the Revealed Will, or the Natural Law of God. Where Conscience
is, there is (...), the keeping together the Commands of God.

In respect of the Minor, Conscience may be called (...) for the Intellective
part casts one look on the Rule, another on our selves and actions, and
applies to our selves from our agreeing or disagreeing the goodness or badness
of our fact; and so it is a Witness.

In respect of the Conclusion, it is well called (...) There it plays the part
of a Judge; for having observed either our conformity or disagreeing with the
Rule, then the Intellective part passes a true sentence, and acquits or
condemns accordingly.

So then this is to be agreed on first, That Lex Dei solum obligat Conscientiam
hominis, The Conscience of a man is to be ruled by the Law of God. So no
example or practice of the most retired mortified men, can be a Rule for thy
Conscience; the most devout of men are not to be lords of our Faith, who at
best are but helpers of our Joy: Infallibility is not be granted to any
particular man, which is not to be granted to any particular Church of Christ:
Neither can Conscience be made up soundly from the practice of a fallible man,
but from the dictate of an infallible God. So that is not to be called
Conscience that is grounded on the examples of godly religious men. Nor is that
Conscience that has only former resolutions for its Rule; for wilful
obstinacy, tenaciousness of purpose, cannot be a part of Conscience, which is
not in the appetitive part at all: nor can humor, animosity, a sudden
precipitate engaging, be justified by a Plea of Conscience, when there must be
(...), Conscience cannot be without Deliberation: Nor can Deliberation without
applying or Determination be called Conscience; for while the Understanding is
fluctuating, and questioning, and inquiring, it may be in tendency to it; it is
not yet to be called Conscience till determined.

And here again they seem as far from Reason in their Expressions, as from
Obedience in their Actions, that call out for Liberty of Conscience, May not my
Conscience be free? And they would make the doubting reason against the
undoubted Command of the Superior in things indifferent, to be the weak
Conscience: but where liberty or doubting is, there can be no Determination of
the thing doubted; and where no Determination, there can be no Conscience.

Neither can any Plea of Conscience justify any Action or Undertaking that is
unlawful; when Conscience, which is but a Witness to a Rule, can be no more
then a subordinate Rule; neither can it give an absolute Law, which must be
determined by a Law; without which, it may be Humor, Animosity, Fancy,
Opinion, whatever it be, sure enough it cannot be rightly called Conscience.

And therefore that persons should be constrained through Penalties to examine
thoroughly the cause of their dissenting Judgments, (although it has gotten
through mistake a repute of harshness in the World) I know not why it should
seem unreasonable: For if persons will take up Resolutions without, yea
sometimes against a Rule, I think it is a greater deal of Charity, and there is
necessity to bring those by any means to a Rule, to bring them into the way of
truth, who have so long erred and have been deceived.

But be it agreed upon betwixt us, That Conscience is a settled Determination
of the Intellective Part, from a certain Rule inferring the Morality of our
Actions, and concluding the issue accordingly.

And now to our business in hand. That I or thou decline any thing in
Conscience that is commanded by a lawful Authority, it must be because the
thing is unlawful: For neither I nor thou ought to do any thing unlawful; that
we both abide by; What therefore we decline that is enjoined by lawful
Authority, we cannot decline unless it be prohibited or forbidden by the Law of
God. For if forbidden, then be not careful to answer; Vetitum est, is
sufficient.

But if the thing be not forbidden, and so not unlawful, though not commanded
by God directly or immediately, yet if enjoined by lawful Authority, we must
sin against Conscience in refusing or declining, much more in opposing, when we
ought to be subject to Higher Powers, and to submit, etc. to every Ordinance of
man: And yet these Ordinances of men not binding as the Arbitrary Impositions
of fallible men, but as having their Authority and Obligingness from a
superintending Command of an undeceiving God, who commands subjection to Higher
Powers, which cannot be better demonstrated then in things of this nature; nor
is the Fifth Command better observed, as has been proved sufficiently. So
there can be no justifiable declining or opposing the Superiors Command out of
Conscience, when the things declined are no ways unlawful nor prohibited by the
Word of God; For where no Law, no Trangression.

But now on the contrary, if we have any Conscience we must submit; and there
is just ground of our submission and conformity: For the thing being not
unlawful, and commanded by our Superiors, we are to submit, not only for fear
of wrath, but for Conscience sake: Conscience not simply of the Command of man,
but as the Command of God, who commands subjection, and that we submit to every
Ordinance of man for the Lords sake.

Yet the Dissenters oppose and complain of it as a great grievance, That
actions or things in their own nature indifferent, should by an Imposition be
made necessary and determined; and this bemoaned as a violence to tender
Consciences.

To which I must reply this, To demand what hurt is it if things or actions of
their own nature indifferent be determined? Those things that were indifferent
of their own nature might have been done or undone lawfully without
transgression before determined, but now determined, they are grievances and
unlawful.

Oh at last consider, How little thy Reason, how great thy Opposition to all
manner of Government? when an action of its own nature indifferent, and so
consequentially lawful, shall be declined by thee as a thing unlawful, only
because a lawful Authority has enjoined it.

Again, that the indifference is taken away, it is not taken away for the
nature of the thing, but for the use of it, it being determined in wisdom, as
then in that place being most convenient. Neither is it enjoined that thou
should believe thy obedience must be yielded to such Commands, as if they
were absolutely necessary to Salvation, but as conveniently necessary for
Peace, to preserve Order, and prevent Confusion. There is no question but such
Constitutions are peculiar, temporary, and mutable; yet the outward Power shall
bind and limit thee for the outward Act, but it leaves thee free for thy
Conscience: Conscience, I say, of the nature of the thing, not of the exercise
of the Act enjoined. For thou art bound to do as is commanded, not only for
wrath, but for Conscience sake, who art commanded to submit, etc.

Again, If indifferent things, as thou seem to desire, should not be
determined, what can be expected, from the unyeeldingness of men's nature upon
pretense of offense, but we must run into Schism and Divisions?

For to instance in that thing which is before our eyes, The Surplice in its
self is indifferent, whether worn or not worn; be it left so, and no
Injunction, and see what follows: Thou art persuaded in Divine Administration
it should be forborne; others with as much earnestness, and more reason, urge it
that it must be worn, it being decent and significant. If I wear it, I offend
one party; if I wear it not, I offend another: it were good to be without
offense, and to give none to either Jew or Gentile; but if this be left
indifferent, of necessity some must be scandalized; so as the Determination of
the Governor in this case is necessary, that people by his judgment may abide
quietly and live in peace, who if left to themselves, would inevitably run into
Contention and Confusion.

But I may leave arguing, and we have reason enough God help us, to break out
into Lamentation; and we may complain with Hilary, Our Faith facta est fides
temporum potius quam Evangeliorum periculosum ac miserabile tot nunc fides
existere quot voluntates! Our Faith is become the Faith of the Times rather
then the Faith of the Gospels! and what is dangerous and lamentable, we have
got as many Faiths as Wills, and Consciences as obstinate Resolutions. And when
Conscience which ought to be subordinate and under a Law, shall be accounted as
a plea sufficient to justify any man's attempts or actions, without any respect
to the absolute Law, no wonder we should run headlong in multitudes into a
lawless liberty and licentiousness, and into all manner of disobedience. The
Church of England, admired and envied of all strangers, has been like Joseph,
a very fruitful Bough; but the Archers have sorely grieved her, and shot at
her, and feared not: Those that have withdrawn themselves into the Synagogue,
are yet persecuting them of the Church, and lay things to their charge they
knew not of: For while they clamor against Superstition among us, let those
that obstinately will account things absolutely unlawful, that of their own
nature are indifferent, let them soberly consider whether they be not deeply
guilty of Superstition themselves.

But say what we can, the worst of our Enemies are those that have been of our
own Household; the Children of our Mother have fought against her, and they that
have eat of her bread, have lift up their heels against her: And when those
that have been our Friends and Acquaintance (though without cause) stand thus
afar off, no wonder if Strangers think some evil Disease cleaves close unto
us. And to make us more miserable, what has befaln the Church, will certainly
befall the State in all positive Laws, if Liberty and Toleration be granted,
that with impunity persons may persist in their unreasonable and lawless
Resolutions, under the name of Conscience. For Zions sake therefore I could not
hold my peace, nor for Jeausalems sake rest, nor find quiet in my own spirit,
till I had offered publicly, what if it were soberly and without prejudice
received, might make for the peace and quiet of the Nation. Suffer now but one
Word of Exhortion, that shall divide it self into two branches, the first
tending to those that are Dissenters, the second to those that are concerned in
the great business at hand, and I have done.

For Dissenters, I humbly beg of them to think soberly of themselves, and not
to be overwise in their own eyes, but to trust the ordering of Gods Providence,
who from the care he has of his own Ordinance, is likely to direct his Deputy
in determinations most convenient. I heartily crave they would abide
contentedly in that station God has set them in; and with a real humility that
they would sit down quietly, though in the lowest room. That they would suspect
their Consciences as erroneous and to be reformed, when they see they are not
to be brought under a certain Law. That they would consider the Sacred
Authority and Divine Obligingness of Humane Ordinances in matters indifferent,
from a superintending binding Command of an infallible orderly God; neither can
any, upon a pretense of Conscience, sin against that Rule, and be excused. Let
then the Authority of our Rulers, as of Gods Constitution, be uncontrollable;
let their Wisdom, as most probably to come from his Direction, be
unquestionable; and we may hope their Laws not barely as man's, but as Gods, may
be kept inviolably.

Yea, I beseech you lay aside all contentious Humors, and let no more a spirit
of opposition, contradiction, or singularity be found among us: Let us follow
those things that make for peace, and wherein we may best comfort and edify
one another. It Is true, we are called to liberty, and let us stand fast on Gods
blessing in that liberty wherein Christ has set us free; but let us not use
our liberty as a cloak of maliciousness, but as servants of God: Let us give
due reverence to the persons set over us; and that is best done by respect to
the Laws established among us: For so is the will of God, that we submit our
selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake.

Secondly, For you then that are interested in the great and necessary Concern
that is now at hand, in carrying on the great Design of this time, be pleased
to consider, You are hither come not barely to hear of the Notion, but for the
Execution of Righteousness; and are not severely to animadvert only upon the
Transgressors of the Moral, and natural, and necessary Divine Laws, but upon
those that break the positive, particular Humane Ordinances, that our Rulers in
wisdom have established for our good among us.

If persons were so well disposed, as Counsels and Monitions might persuade all
to be good from the Pulpit or in the Closet, then no need to urge any rigor
from either Bench or Bar: But here you are met for the Remunerative part of
Justice, and to be a terror to them that do evil, as well as a countenance to
them that do well. You see what unhappy success your remission and lenity has
had hitherto; it must be severity must do your business. Your method of leading
the people must now be like Gods leading his Israel from Egypt to Canaan; the
Conduct must not be only as in the day, to lead them by a cloud, but in this
night it must be by a pillar of fire. The eyes of this people have too long
been dawbed up with Honey; they must at last be opened by Gall: better to cause
some smart and cure them, then suffer them through blindness to run headlong
into the pit.

In short, our lives must be confused and uncomfortable without Laws, and Laws
are unprofitable without execution. Breath then at last fresh life into the
languishing Laws of a fainting Kingdom, by an impartial execution. Remember,
Faciens and consentiens eadem lege tenentur, Qui tolerat aliena peccata cum
tollere possit facit sua: Make not the rebellious man's sin thine by indulgence
or connivance, that have too many to answer for of thy own.

My Lord, For your part, your Integrity and Loyalty is so eminent, as we are
sufficiently assured no smoke of Passion can put out your Reason; no dust of
the World can take away your sight; no partiality can pervert your sentence.

To you therefore that are Assistants on the Bench, and to the Grand Inquest at
the Criminal Bar, we direct our suit: Offer the Sacrifice of Righteousness, and
take all care that Justice and Judgment may be executed in the midst of us.
For you to seem to be righteous, and not to be so, is to be like the Polypus,
to change into the color of the Rock to which he cleaves, whither while the
poor Fishes go in a storm to be sheltered, they are devoured. Remember, Lenity
to the Transgressour is Cruelty to the Innocent.

If you conceal and smother Disorder, wink at Wickedness, and countenance
Disobedience; O sad consequence! The King and his Deputy is deluded, the course
of Justice is hindered, the hands of the Wicked are strengthened, the heart of
the Orderly is weakened: You hurt the Offendour, his heart must be hardened, when
for his sin he is not corrected: You hurt your weak Neighbor, for he is
staggered, if not perverted: You hurt your own Souls, for you are perjured: You
are injurious to God, for his Worship is undervalued and contemned: You wrong
the King and the Governors under him, for the Laws are slighted. For the
Sinners, the Magistrates, your Neighbor, for your own, for the Kings, for Gods
sake, let there be no more halting, no longer connivance to be found in the
midst of us. Execute true Judgment without partiality; and if we cannot have
that Obedience to the Laws that is required, let the Offendour feel that just
Vengeance which is threatened. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for
that Lords sake, To whom be rendered as is due, all Obedience, and Service, and
Honor, and Glory, now and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

