BRITANNIA ANTIQUA ILLUSTRATA: OR, THE ANTIQUITIES OF ANCIENT BRITAIN, Derived
from the Phoenicians: Wherein the Original Trade of this ISLAND is discovered,
the Names of Places, Offices, Dignities, as likewise the Idolatry, Language,
and Customs of the Primitive Inhabitants are clearly demonstrated from that
Nation, many old Monuments illustrated, and the Commerce with that People, as
well as the Greeks, plainly set forth and collected out of approved Greek and
Latin Authors. TOGETHER With a CHRONOLOGICAL HISTORY of this Kingdom, from the
first Traditional Beginning, until the year of our Lord 800, when the Name of
BRITAIN was changed into ENGLAND; Faithfully collected out of the best Authors,
and disposed in a better Method than hitherto has been done; with the
Antiquities of the Saxons, as well as Phoenicians, Greeks, and Romans. The
First Volume. By AYLETT SAMMES, of Christ's College in Cambridge. Since, of
the Inner Temple.

-- Si quid Novisti rectius istis
Candidus imperti, si non, his utere mecum.
Horatius. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Roycroft, for the Author, MDCLXXVI.

This Book, entitled BRITANNIA Antiqua Illustrata, etc. Is Licensed to be
Printed by the Appointment of the Right Honorable

Sr. JOSEPH WILLIAMSON,

Principal Secretary of State to His Sacred MAJESTY.

March 8th. 1674/5. Roger L'Estrange.

TO The Right Honorable Heneage Lord Finch, BARON OF DAVENTRY, AND LORD HIGH
CHANCELLOR OF ENGLAND.
MY LORD,
IT was the constant Custom in all Ages, that Subjects of this High Nature,
namely History and Antiquity, wherein are preserved and rescued from Time the
Acts and Relics of Great Persons, should be Dedicated to the Great, and not
submitted to any ordinary Protection. This Consideration of it self might have
carried me in the Publication of these my Labors, to make this Humble Address
to Your Lordship, whose Eminent Virtues, though they may be more Illustrious in
that High Sphere wherein You are worthily placed, yet were they ever highly
conspicuous, and You have been long since in the eye of the World what You are
now in the Court of Honor. Let this Work therefore in all Humility be
Dedicated to Your Lordship, and if my Endeavors have been any thing answerable
to the Dignity of the Matter I have undertaken; if the Antiquities of this
Nation be thereby more illustrated, the History cleared, and the Methods of
former Writers rectified and amended, that is, if the Work in general be found
useful and sound, and with its Novelty in some points carries truth along with
it, I shall esteem it my chiefest glory that I have laid it at Your Lordships
feet, entreating favor for those things only, which Your Lordship, out of Your
Great Judgment and Goodness shall think some ways commendable; But if from my
great Labor and Industry I promise to my self more than possibly will be
allowed me, however the Work it self may serve to stand as a Testimony and
Monument of that Public Spirit eminent in Your Lordship, whereby at its first
appearance in the World You readily encouraged so promising an Undertaking,
which if well managed (as I hope in some measure it has been) would
undoubtedly be to the honor and benefit of Your Country. May God Almighty long
preserve Your Lordship in that high Station in which You act, to the Honor of
His MAJESTY, the Good of this Nation, and the desires of all Honest men. So
prays,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble, and devoted Servant, Aylett Sammes.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
HAving for some years past wholly employed my self in the diligent searching
into the Histories of our Nation, I found by experience, that the words of Livy
in his Preface to his Roman Decades were most true, where he writes, That the
Beginnings of Nations, and the times next succeeding those Beginnings, as
yielding least pleasure both to Writer and Reader, were generally neglected,
and Men naturally hastened to those Ages, which being not so far removed,
yielded a pleasanter prospect, and seemed more closely to concern their
knowledge. For how few are there who have taken the pains faithfully to
collect, and in a distinct Method to order rightly the scattered Records of
Ancient BRITAIN, which are only here and there to be picked out of diverse
Authors, and not to be found, much less well disposed with an ordinary
diligence or superficial enquiry? Most of our Modern Chronicles content
themselves with beginning from the Conquest, few go beyond it, as if with the
general sort of Readers they were impatient until they came to the Battles of
Cressy and Agencourt, the differences of the Houses of York and Lancaster, the
Insurrections in Kent, or something of that nature, which being of a later
Date, has yet left an uncertain sound in our ears, and is expected to be set
off with no small flourishes or vulgar elocution. And indeed the design of such
Writers is not to be discommended, who following the general stream of Mankind
consult their own advantages; For in subjects of this nature, as the Antiquity
and Original of Kingdoms, the question of the Poet may perhaps be easily asked,
and as soon resolved in the same verse, Quis legit haec? nemo hercule nemo, Vel
duo, vel nemo. Few there are who will trouble their heads to enquire by what
means their first Ancestors possessed themselves of those pleasant Lands, in the
fruitfulness whereof they at present rejoice, but content themselves to derive
their knowledge as high as their own Families only, and discourse the Chronicles
to the Beginning of their Pedigrees, as if there Nature and the World was at a
stop, and all knowledge beyond that was mere Chaos and Confusion; But
notwithstanding whatever might be objected of this like nature against this
present undertaking, I have not been discouraged in going through with it; For
if the Grecians, who had the best Historians in the World, were nevertheless
called Children by their own Neighbors, because they knew not, or neglected
their own Original; will it not be a shame for us also to be ignorant in the
Antiquites of our own Nation, a Nation great in its Infancy, and like Hercules
(one of its first Discoverers) deserving an History even in its Cradle?

But because there have been some who have already handled this Subject, and
that not without great Commendation, I shall not insist farther upon the
usefulness of the design in general, but only inform the Reader in short what
he is to expect in this present work, which has not been already fully
discussed by others, lest perhaps it may be thought, that I have only trod in
the steps of other men, and like those idle Imitators, whom Horace calls a
servile sort of Cattle, have only jog'd on in the long beaten road of former
Antiquities.

I confess, I might with greater security, and much more ease in the delivering
of the Antiquities of the British Nation have followed Mr. Cambden, out of whom
merely to collect has been counted praiseworthy, and whom to imitate is
esteemed not only safe, but honorable. As his Learning was great, so is his
Authority, and his very Name carries a certain veneration along with it, so
that it may be questioned, whether his Antiquities add more luster to him, or
he to his Antiquities. His opinions have been long received, and therefore sit
deep in the mind, and by some it is thought a piece of weakness only to dissent
from him; however it be, I have chose rather to follow that which seems to the
best of my judgment to be Truth, though never so naked and destitute of all
advantages, then by taking in with the Common opinion, to run on further in a
plausible Mistake, and to help to guild deeper what to me appears at best but
a glorious Error. Neither can the followers of Mr. Cambden be displeased with
me, if they will but inmate his Candor and Ingenuity, whose performances they
so worthily admire; who, when he had treated of this Subject, concludes in
these words, which may serve for an Apology for me also:

Thus you have ( says he) as touching the Original and Name of Cambden.
BRITAIN, mine Error or Conjecture, whether you will, which if it swerve from
the truth, I wish it were by the truth it self reformed. In this intricate and
obscure study of Antiquity, it is thought praiseworthy somewhat to err; and
remember we should withal, that such things as at the first sight being
slightly thought upon are deemed false, after a better review, and further
consideration, oftentimes seem true. Now, if any man should summon me to appear
before the Tribunal of Verity, I have no other answer at all to make; And as
for our Countrymen the Britains, such as be of the Learneder sort, I do most
earnestly beseech and desire them to employ all their labor, industry, wit,
and understanding in the searching out hereof, so long, until at last the Truth
with her own clear bright beams may scatter and dissolve all mists of
Conjectures whatsoever.

But I do not arrogate to my self the first discovery of these Antiquities,
neither would I, that the credit of so fair an hypothesis should depend upon so
weak an Authority. Bochartus, a learned Frenchman in this last Age, having
treated of the Phoenician Voyages through the whole World, and out of their
Language plainly and easily derived the Names of most Countries and Places
especially remarkable, at last brings them even to Britain and Gaul, and
discovers their Trade throughout all these Western Coasts. But as he is more
particular in his own Native Country, which he would chiefly seem to
illustrate; so have I been in mine, making use of the same method in laying
open the Original and Commerce of the Primitive Inhabitants of this Island, as
he has done largely of Gaul; For when I considered what Leland writes of the
British or Welsh Language, namely, that the main body of it consists of
Hebrew and Greek words, I began to collect with my self, how it should come to
pass that the Ancient Britains could have any Commerce with the Jews, who where
never known to send out Colonies, and of all People in the World weremost fond
of their own Country; Certainly I concluded, this could proceed from no other
root but the Commerce of the Phoenicians with this Nation, who using the same
Language with the Children of Israel in Canaan, even in those Primitive times
were great Traders and skilful Mariners, and sent out their Colonies through
the World; and this Mr. Cambden himself touches on, where he gives the
derivation of the British Caer Eske, now Exeter. For Caer, to tell you Cambden.
once for all (says he) with our Britains is as much to say, as a City,
whereupon they use to name Jerusalem, Caer Salem, Lutetia or Paris, Caer Paris,
Rome, Caer Russaine. Thus Carthage in the Punick tongue was called, as Solinus
witnesses, Cartheia, that is, the New City. I have heard likewise that Caer in
the Syriack tongue signified a City. Now seeing that the Syrians, as all men
confess, peopled the whole World with their Colonies, it may seem probable that
they left their Tongue also to their Posterity, as the Mother of all future
Languages.

What can be more plain than this? and yet this is but one example of ten
thousand; but I hope that in the following discourse I have plainly made out,
that not only the Name of Britain it self, but of most places therein of
Ancient denomination are purely derived from the Phoenician Tongue, and that
the Language it self for the most part, as well as the Customs, Religions,
Idols, Offices, Dignities, of the Ancient Britains are all clearly Phoenician,
as likewise their Instruments of War, as Slings, and other Weapons, their
Sithed Chariots, and their different Names, and several Distinctions; Out of
the same Tongue I have illustrated several Monuments of Antiquity sound out and
still remaining in Britain, which can no other ways be interpreted, than in
the Phoenician Tongue, where they have a plain, easy, and undeniable
signification. And as to that Concordance which was between the Ancient
Britains and Gauls in point of Language and some other Customs, I have shown
that it proceeded not from hence, that they were the same People, but from
their joint Commerce with the Phoenicians, and that in most probability Britain
was first planted by a German Nation, and not by the Gauls.

Mr. Burton, in his Learned Commentary upon Antonine's Itinerary, treating of
Rutupis now Richborough, asks the question how it came to pass, if the Modern
derivation of that place be true, namely, from the Welsh Rhyd Tufith, as Mr.
Cambden conjectures, that on the Coast of Barbary there should be a Town and
Harbor of the very same name mentioned by Pliny. Pudet, says he, a Britannis
Africae nomen mutuari, It is a shame to derive the name of a place in Africa
from Britain; But they who shall seriously read and consider, that not only
Rhutupis, but many other places in Britain have the same Names with others in
Africa, and that the Phoenicians from Africa traded into Britain, they will
unquestionably conclude, that to derive, on the other hand, Names in Britain
from those in Africa, is not only rational but necessary, and that it is
impossible that such vast and constant similitude could happen by chance or
blind fortune; For it ever was, and will be a Custom in the World, and is
constantly used in all our Colonies at this day, that places receive their
Names according to the resemblance they have with other places of those
Countries from which the Planters proceeded.

It is not to be expected, that I should have comprehended every thing that
might have been produced to the perfection of these Antiquities; It is
sufficient if there be enough to evidence the truth of them, and if any thing
be omitted through want of Intelligence, or through over-hastiness neglected,
as who is able at once to make a total discovery, It will be a spur for others,
to make a further progress with greater felicity.

As for the other Antiquities, namely of the Greeks and Romans, though at first
sight they may not seem proper for a Treatise of Britain, and I may appear to
some to have neglected the Counsel of Pliny, who advises to have often
recourse to the Title of ones Book, yet they that shall consider that few
things are therein touched, which concern not either, Monuments, Altars, Gods
and Customs, used by those Nations in Britain, and many other things which
serve for the explication of diverse Usages in this Island, though there for
brevity sake omitted, will charitably conclude that they also were not written
without some consideration. This I think may be sufficient to advise the Reader
beforehand concerning the Method and design of these Antiquities. It will be
needless to add, that the Map of the Ancient World was designed only at one
view to set before the eye the Progress of the Phoenicians, and the Names of
Countries as by them called, and not to show the exactness of Longitude or
Latitude, much less to represent Cities or Nations as they are known by their
Names at this day.

As for the Historical part, I have only this to say, that it is faithfully
collected out of the most approved Authors, and digested into the plainest and
easiest Method; Neither have I been so Nice as to refuse all before the Romans
time, for seeing that the Names of our Celtick Kings, Samothes, Bardus, etc.
are mentioned, not by Mr. Seldom only, but other learned Antiquaries, I thought
that the story of them was not to be neglected, if it were only to inform the
World of the cheat and forgery of Annius in his pretended Berosus; As for Brute
and his Successors, seeing their Names are made use of in Laws and Statutes of
this Realm, in Titles relating to the Crown since the Conquest, and seeing upon
the Trojan pretense in general descents of Ancestry, and other Exploits, are
yet continued, and will not easily be quitted, I have taken the pains to
rehearse them also. Some perhaps will censure me for needless curiosity in
observing Chronology through the fabulous part of this Work, scarce allowing
the recital, much less the nice timeing of their Actions to be tolerable; But
seeing it is necessary we should know the story of Brute and other Kings, for
the reasons abovementioned, so likewise it is very convenient, that the Ages
in which they are supposed to have lived should be marked out with certain
stops and periods; For in continued discourses, not distinguished by successive
and distinct Calculations, the head is apt after reading to confound the whole,
and by strange Parachronisms to run one story into another, and misplace the
actions of Ages very absurdly; For what though the History of the British Kings
were allowed a fable, yet how ridiculous does it appear to hear the Tale of
Brute told in the days of the Saxons, or to see K. Arthur placed above Julius
Caesar? It is fitting in Fables, as well as true Relations, to understand their
times, which make to the detecting of deceit, as well as the declaring of truth.

In the manner of Composing I have not used any jingling of words and Phrases
in ostentation of writing, but have fitted my words to the matter, and not the
matter to them, having an eye more to the benefit of the Reader, than his
extravagant delight. It is the miserable fate of an History to be turned into
Romance, for it never reaches to the delight of the one, and loses the
usefulness of the other. It is an easy matter to frame the Idea's of Princes
as it best pleases ones self, or best suiteth the present Humor, and then to
descant politickly on their Actions, and praise or censure their proceedings; I
have all along followed the footsteps of my Authors, and though I have not
burdened the Margent with every quotation of them, yet they who shall examine
into the contexture of the whole shall find, that throughout I have carefully
observed their very words and sense, and kept my self close to their meaning;
And though in some places the History may seem short and abrupt, it is the
fault of Time, which has eaten in and left unsightly gaps in the body of it;
for I have not Epitomized any thing worth the relating, but endeavored to draw
the lines of Ages so far distant after the largest proportions I could
possible. In writing the Lives of the Roman Emperors that possessed this Island,
I have purposely avoided the relating of their foreign Actions, as not
desiring to write an History of Rome, but Britain, and where there is little to
be found of the particular proceedings, I have studiously sought for some
Monument or Inscription whereon his Name has been preserved among us, and such
found, have faithfully inserted. I will not omit that I have taken notice all
along of the foundations of Cities, Castles, etc. and the reasons of their
Names, and times of their buildings, and such other things remarkable, so that
along with the History you will meet with the most memorable Antiquities of the
whole Nation. What pains and study it has cost me in the compiling I will not
stand to commemorate; I shall count my Labors sufficiently recompensed, if it
be received with as much Candor, as it was written with sincere endeavor for
the use and benefit of my Country. And I doubt not but my mistakes will be
pardoned, and the smaller faults passed over both in writing and printing,
especially when I consider, that I fall into the hands of the most Ingenuous
part of the Nation, the Nobility and Gentry, for whose use it was principally
intended.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE Renowned Island OF BRITAIN IN GENERAL.
CHAP. I. A Description of Ancient BRITAIN.
BRITAIN, the most Renowned Island of the whole World, was called by the
Ancient Greeks (...), afterward it took the name of BRITANNIA, but more truly,
BRETANICA, from the Adjacent Islands called, BARAT-ANAC, or BRATANAC by the
Phoenicians, from the abundance of Tynn, and (...)
Lead-Mines, found in them. It was always esteemed a very considerable part of
the World, even in the height of the Roman Empire, and much celebrated in the
Writings and Monuments of the Graecians; and, as if the Genius of this Nation
did prompt the Inhabitants, and insensibly lead them to Trade and Traffic, we
find that besides that, the Island received its name from it, insomuch, that,
in the first Ages, it was frequented by the Ablest Merchants, and Skilfullest
Mariners, the Phoenicians; who carefully, and studiously concealed this
Treasure from the World, being exceeding jealous, least the source and head of
their Trade being discovered, the busy Graecians might put in for sharers; And
least the fruitfulness of the Soil, the pleasant and delightful situation of
the Country, might tempt those of their own Nation to neglect their Barren
Soil, and betake themselves to this more temperate and blessed Clymate; we
read, that, by a public Edict of those States, care was taken to prevent it,
yea, all possible means used too, to stop the current which was visibly turning
that way.

In this condition BRITAIN continued during the time the Phoenicians
flourished, sending forth its Commodities to the Straights, and to all the
Mediterranean Seas, as likewise thorough Gaul, by Land, to Narbo, where the
Phoenicians held a public Mart.

About the declining of the Phoenician State, the Graecians began to Trade into
these parts, and they, who before had only heard of the Bratanacks, which in
the same sense they called Cassiterides, or the Tynn Islands; now learnt the
way to them, and conformed themselves to the Name the Phoenicians had given
them, calling them first the Bretanick Islands, afterward Britanes.

Upon the increase of the Roman Empire, and the fall of Carthage, the Trading
began to decrease, and the Graecians, for fear of that powerful State,
discontinued their Voyages into the Western Seas. And it may be supposed, that
Britain lay idle during the space of a hundred and seventy years, till Julius
Caesar's arrival.

From this Time begins Mr. Cambden's Antiquity of this Nation, and the first
Discovery of it, not admitting its Name to be known much earlier in the World;
Nevertheless I question not, but they that shall read the ensuing Chapters,
concerning the Phoenician Voyages into these parts, will be better satisfied
touching the great trade of Tynn and Lead exported from them. If the love of my
Country has not blinded me, it seems far more evident that it received its Name
from its Trade (for which in all Ages it has been renowned) than from any
barbarous Custom of painting, or dying their Bodies, wherewith the Adherents
to that opinion have too severely, and with too many Circumstances, branded the
Inhabitants thereof.

In evidencing this Opinion, I have not made use of any of the British
Histories, because their credit in the World is but small, but have grounded it
upon the Authority of Greek and Roman Authors, some of which, as Timagenes,
Polybius, and Festus Avienus, had made great Enquiries into Phoenician Records,
and for that Timagenes. Polybius. Festus Avicnus.
reason were more able than others, to give a true account of the Trade of that
Nation relating to Britain. So that for the present, granting the Bretannick
Islands to be so well known to the Ancient World, it will not seem fabulous,
that Orpheus, but more truly Onomacritus called them of old, The Seat of Queen
CERES; as afterward Onomacritus.
they were styled, The Granary of the Western World.

Neither will it seem Ridiculous what Mr. Cambden mentions, namely, That they
Cambden (...).
were supposed to be the fortunate Islands so much celebrated by the Ancient
Poets, where the ELYSIAN FIELDS, and HELL it self might be placed. Let us
consider, that upon the first discovery of them by the Phoenicians, they were
to the then known World, just as the West Indies were at first to Europe, and
that by the small progress the World had made, so early, in the art of
Navigation, the Voyage to them was as long, and as difficult. Add to this, the
many Stories the Phoenicians might relate to them, especially to the credulous
Greeks, and in a fabulous Age, when the digging in Mines might be interpreted,
A descent into Hell; and Chule, in the Phoenician Tongue, signifying Night and
Obscurity, might be called, The Kingdom of Darkness. No doubt on the other
side; The pleasant situation of BRITAIN, the Remoteness of it from the busy
and careful World, the flowery Valleys curiously decked by Nature, watered by
Rivers, and defended by Woods, Hills, etc. To pass over many other advantages
wherewith this Island is blessed above other Nations, when they came to be
related, by the Phoenicians, to that Nation, it created in them the Idaea's of
another World, and might be the groundwork of those Elysian Fields, and Places
of Rest, to which Virtuous Souls were carried after their departure out of a
temporal Being.

This was the Opinion of the Ancient Greeks concerning BRITAIN in those days,
when they had the knowledge of it by Hearsay only, from the Phoenicians, which
does evidently appear, if we consider, that upon the Real discovery of it by
them, and their better Acquaintance in these parts, they left not off to hunt
after those Imaginary places, still believing (according to the Ancient
Tradition) that they were here only to be found. And this gave occasion to the
Story of Isacius Tzetzes, a Greek of no small Repute and Credit with M.
Cambden; namely, Isacius Tzetzes.
That JULIUS CAESAR was carried from Gallia into I know not what Western
Islands, where the pleasantness of the place invited him to tarry, had he not
been obliged to depart by the Inhabitants, and so forceibly carried back by the
same Spirits that conveyed him thither. And, although this be but a Fable,
yet it shows the Opinion of those Times, and the strong belief they had, that
here were the Fortunate Islands, and the Elysian Fields.

This Famous Island is in Length, from Dunsby-Heate, the farthest Promontory in
Scotland, to Dover, DC and odd miles, and in Breadth, from Dover to the Point
of Belirium, or the Lands-end, CCLXXX, or as some reckon it, from the Lyzazd
Point in Cornwall (which lies on the Latitude of 50 degrees, and 6 minutes) to
the Straythy-head in Scotland (in the Latitude of 60 degrees, and 30 minutes)
it extends in Length DCXXIV Miles, and from the Lands-end in Cornwall (situated
in 14 degrees, and 37 minutes of Longitude) unto the Island Tennet in the East
of Kent (lying in 22 degrees, and 30 minutes) it is in Breadth CCCXL Miles.

Mr. Cambden, who measures it according to its Compass, makes, from the Point
Camb. Brit.
Tarvisium to the Cape Belirium DCCCXII miles, from Belirium to the Fore-land
of Kent CCCXX miles, from the Fore-land to Tarvisium DCCIV miles. But in his
Account, he allows for the turnings and windings of the Shoars, so that in
Compass it is MDCCC XXXVI miles, almost two hundred less than what Caesar
reported in his days.

For its Greatness it was esteemed by the Romans, at the first discovery of it,
to be a NEW WORLD, and if we curiously look upon the Form of it, as all Europe
represents a great Dragon, so this Island has some resemblance of a huge
Snake, whose Head, with a wide and gaping Mouth, looks toward Norway, and part
of Denmark, and his Tail to the West.

Ptolemy describes it under five Parallels, whereof the first is the sixteenth
from Ptolemy Geog.
the Equator, in the middle of which Parallel the most Southerly part of it is
placed, being 52 degrees from the Equator, and the most Northerly part of it
is in the 62 degrees of Latitude. But Ptolomy herein has too much straightened
it, and bending the North part of it far more to the East, toward Germany,
than it should be, he has taken away from its Latitude. Some, to cure this,
have cared it higher Northward, but gave it no more Latitude than it had
before, to remedy which, others have thrust it two degrees more Southwardly.

The truest Calculation is, That the most Southwardly parts lie in the Latitude
of The truest Calculation.
50 degrees and 6 minutes, in the beginning of the sixteenth Parallel, and
eighth Clymate, and the most Northwardly, in 60 degrees 30 minutes, in the six
and twentieth Parallel, or thirteenth Clime. So that the longest Day in the
South parts will be 16 hours, in the Northern, 18 and a half. Upon the North
and South, it points to the Ocean, on the West, it has Ireland, on the East,
we may measure its extent by the Continent, for it lies in the same Latitude
with part of France, Flanders, Zealand, Holland, Lower Saxony, and Denmark, so
that there can be no certain Rule given (as in lesser Kingdoms) of the
temperature of the Air, the nature of the Soil, the strength, growth, or
proportion of the Inhabitants.

It is now, as it was when the Romans first discovered it, that there seems to
be many Nations in it differing in the make and proportions of their Bodies.
The more Northward we go, the People seem to be sturdier, bigger made, and in
their Limbs more resembling the Germans, hardy and stout, and enured to Labor
and Cold, and to be of the same nature with the Daues and Saxons, in the
latitude of which Kingdoms they lie.

The Southwardly parts contain Men of neater strength, and more compact Limbs,
and what they want of the proportion of the others, they make out in their
quickness and agility, being hardy, and not unweildy, having not less strength,
but a better management of it. In a word, they seem to join the quick and brisk
temper of the French, with the staid and more fixed Humor of the Germans, and
as the People differ in the temperaments of their Bodies, so in this vast
Kingdom are many Countries, Cities, Towns, Villages, Colleges and Free-Schools
for the promoting of Learning, Hospitals and Almshouses for the Relief of the
Poor and Maimed, not inferiourto any in any other part of the World beside.
Diverse Languages, Customs, and Usages, which are not contrary one to the
other, but by the mixture of the Gentry, and the happy union of this Nation
under one Monarch, do meet together in the making up of the best compacted
Kingdom in the World.

The Languages in Britain are these.
1. THE first, is the ENGLISH, which is most purely and elegantly spoken in the
Southern parts, and especially at London, and it extends thorough all the
hither parts of Scotland, being the General Language of the most refined sort
of that Nation, who are called by the more Northern People, Sassons, as we are
by the Welsh. 2. The second, is the BRITISH Language, and is spoken by the
Inhabitants of North and South Wales, although with great difference of
Dialect. 3. The third, is the CORNISH and DEVONSHIRE Tongue, differing both
from the British and English, and not to be understood by either; but it agrees
most with the British, but especially of the Britains of Armorica, or Britain
in France, and those Words they preserve common with both those Nations, seem
to retain in them the footsteps of the most Ancient British Language, and have
in them the very Idiom's of the Phoenician and Greek Nations. 4. The fourth, is
the Language of the Wild SCOTS, and differs very little from the Irish in the
common Appellative Names, it agrees very much with the Welsh, as does likewise
the Irish, which argues, that before the Romans, and afterward the Saxons had
incorporated themselves in this Island, the Language of all the Inhabitants was
much the same, and that Ireland was rather peopled from Britain than from
Spain, as some have imagined. 5. The fifth, is the Language of the ORCADES, or
ORKNEY Isles, with those parts of Britain that shoot out upon them, there is
spoken the Gothic, or Danish Speech, which argues them to have been formerly
subjected to the Princes of Norway. It is a rough and unhew'd Language, and is
the root of the Dialect spoken more refined by the English, more roughly by the
Dutch, and the Inhabitants of Upper Saxony and Denmark. It is the very husk of
the Teutonick.
The whole Island divided into Britannia Major, as ENGLAND, and Minor, as
SCOTLAND, England being the Greater (and of more particular concern to our
present discourse) is in Length, by the computation of some, CCC LXXXVI miles.
Cluverius reckons, from Weymouth to Berwick upon Tweed, CCC XX, or LXXX German
miles. So that in Compass it is about MCCC miles, Cluverius Geogr.
reckoning the Creeks, and windings of Promontories. By computation it contains
thirty Millions of Acres, and is the Three hundred thirty third part of the
Habitable World, almost Ten times as big as the United Netherlands, and is to
France as 30 to 82.

And thus much for the Extent of this ISLAND, upon which account it was called
by the Ancients, a NEW WORLD, and upon a better survey of it, The Great Island.
As for the temperature of the Air, as I said before, it is different according
to the many Clymates it runs thorough. But concerning the Southwardly parts of
it, or Britannia Major, I will only Cite some Impartial Judges.

First, Caesar, who was well experienced in the nature and climate of Gaul,
writes, That BRITAIN is a more Temperate Country, and is not subject to the
sharp and Caesar. Com.
nipping colds of the Continent. The Reason is given by Minutius Foelix,
namely, That it is refreshed by the warmth of the Sea, flowing round about
Minutius Foe. lix.
it.

Experience teaches us, that the extremity of cold in this Country is blown
off from the Continent, and proceeds not from the North, but Northeast-winds;
and as it has not those Colds in Winter, it is not burnt up with immoderate
Heats in Summer. Here are none of those violent Thunders and Lightnings which
are so frequent on the Continent, nor do we ever hear of Serenes wherewith
those hotter Climates are infested. The heat of the Weather is allayed by
gentle Winds, and continual Breezes, and the Earth cooled and nourished with
mild and moderate showers.

Tacitus speaks very much of the temperate, and happy situation of it, for
Tacitus.
he says, There is nothing deficient in it but the Olive and the Vine, which
only grow in hotter Countries. But they that shall consider it more truly,
namely, that there are many places at this day called Vineyards, in ENGLAND,
where in all probability has been made Wine, will have small cause to complain
of the Country in this particular, but will rather attribute it to the cheap
and easy importation of that Commodity, and better improvement of the Ground.

But it is a great wonder to hear, what one Brietius of late has written
concerning Brietius.
the Temperature of the Air in BRITAIN, which, because it is the production of
his own Brain, and never heard of before in the World, it will not be amiss to
mention it.

[ Every One and twenty year (says he) the Plague rages in BRITAIN, which
proceeds from the extreme Heat of every Seventh year, which Heat is far
greater the Third seventh, for then the Waters lying in holes, putrify and
corrupt, and certainly cause a Pestilence.]

This Cycle of One and twenty years, and the Plague ensuing upon it, as it
smells Brietius Answered.
too much of the Cabbalistical number, SEVEN, to be true, and to be believed,
concerning any Nations; so is there not the least appearance of any likelihood
in it relating to Britain. The Plague has always been observed more to be
brought into this Island, than bred in it, and the Contagion has been kept up
by the Crowds of People, rather, than the malignity of the Air.

Tacitus, amongst the rest of his Observations upon the BRITAINS, says,
Tacitus.
[ That they generally lived to a great Age, which he attributes, especially to
the Air, and Climate of the Country.] And perhaps the same Remarks might be
made of the present Inhabitants; But certainly, if they are not so Healthy as
formerly, it is not the fault of the Country, but the difference of Times, the
Luxury of the People, the Trade of other Nations, crowding their Persons and
Interest together, and bringing oftentimes the Infections, as well as
Commodities, of other Countries.

Generally, the Soil of this Country is very Fertile, abundantly watered
throughout with Springs and small Rivulets, adorned with pleasant and fruitful
Valleys, easy and gentle Hills; nay, the Ground which lies waste in ENGLAND,
and neglected (by the Judgment of some) far exceeds the Soil of many Provinces
on the Continent.

What Opinion the Romans had of it, may be gathered out of the words of an
Orator to Constantius, the Father of Constantine. [It was no small damage
(says he) to the Commonwealth, to loose the very bare Name of BRITAIN, to
forego a Land so plentiful in Corn, so rich in Pasture, so full of Mines, and
veins of Metals, so accommodated with Havens, and for Circuit so large and
spacious.]

And as these things relate more particularly to the Southern part of this
Island, viz. Britannia Major, in which the Romans were most conversant: so we
may reckon the great price and value they put upon it by their care and
diligence, defending it, fencing it in (like a precious Garden-plot) with a
Wall of Eighty miles in length, from Tinmouth on the German Sea, to
Solway-Frith on the Irish Sea, least the Caledonian Boars (as one calls them)
might root it up.

The Saxons, who followed them, did not think this sufficient, till they had
secured it from the Cambro-Britain Foxes, and that with a Ditch of Ninety miles
in length.

The Normans, who had forsaken France to take possession of it, had not less
thoughts of it, as may appear in their Doomsday-Book, viz. the black Book of
the Exchequer, wherein it is called, a Paradise of PLEASURE.

And, if we add to this the Judgment of the Phoenicians and Graecians, we may
see that in all Ages the Possession of it did highly esteem and commend it.

It would be endless to speak of all things particularly, which the whole
ISLAND plentifully produces, insomuch that as it is separated from the rest of
the World, so it brings forth all things sufficient for the life of Man; And
if I should here reckon up all the sorts of Grain it bears, the abundance of
Cattle, their several kinds and uses, the plenty and variety of Fish, Fowl,
Fruit, Roots, etc. I should seem to Strangers, rather to number the works of
Nature, than set forth the Plenty of an Island.

As it affords all Food necessary, so it yields to the Inhabitants Raiment
also, as likewise all Materials for Architectures, Firing, the necessaries of
War, and all Conveniences that serve for Profit, or Recreation.

It produces a great quantity of Tynn, Lead, and Iron, it wants not Silver
Mines, likewise Brass and Copper, it has Quicksilver, Antimony, Sulphur,
Black-Lead, Orpiment Red and Yellow, Allom, the natural Cinnabarum, or
Vermillion, Bitumen, Chrysocolla, Coperas, the Mineral stone whereof Petreolum
is made, Cole, Saltpeter, Salt-Soda. And, as (if this was not sufficient) like
a kind Mother, it yields Physic to the Inhabitants, it has many Medicinal
Springs in it of great use and benefit, Hot Baths for the ease of Maims,
Bruises, Inward Aches, and Pains.

Add to this the number and conveniences of its Ports and Havens, and the most
ecellent Ad vantages it has from all parts of the World to take in Trade and
Merchandise, and we may safely conclude, there is not any One Kingdom in the
World that can be compared with it.

No wonder therefore that it has been possessed by several Nations, and coveted
by many more, being a Country (as One says of it) like the TREE in Paradise,
good for Food, pleasant to the Eye, and to be Desired. And whereas some
Countries are still held by their Aborigines, none thinking it worth the while
to dispossess them, it is harder to find out the first Inhabitants of this
ISLAND, than to number up the General Vicissitudes and Changes it has
underwent.

CHAP. II. The first Inhabitants of BRITAIN.
IT is in Great Kingdoms as in Mighty Rivers, the higher we trace their
Original, the more we are to seek from whence their principal Head and Scource
does proceed; And as Objects, by distance, are contracted till they scarce
become visible to the eye, and those things by far removal off, seem to be in
one lump, which, in themselves are really separated: So it happens that,
amongst many pretenders to the first Plantation of a Country, it is hard to
discern, to which the Priority is to be given, and the Map of the Ancient
World, by time, is reduced to so small a compass, that the many Colonies, like
little Rivulets, seem to meet in one point, and have so darkened and obscured
the lines and traces of Antiquity, that of necessity recourse must be made to
Probable opinions, and conjectures, those Artificial Glasses, by which the
footsteps of time are laid more wide and open.

In the enquiring out the first Inhabitants of this Island, I do not intend to
build any thing upon the British Histories, but will altogether wave them in
this place, neither relying on their Authority, nor questioning their Truth, in
which proceeding, I hope, I shall not incur the displeasure of any, seeing I
shall put them in a Treatise particularly by themselves. Neither will any one,
I hope, be offended, if contrary to the Judgment of some, I cannot suppose this
Island to be Peopled so soon as it is usually imagined. And, I think, to the
true stating of this matter, some Remarks and Observations will not be amiss,
touching the increase of Mankind in the Primitive Ages of the World, nor do I
take it to be beside my purpose, to make some reflections on the slow motion
and progress of Colonies, occasioned by their ignorance of Passages, and the
little knowledge they had of the conveniences of the Countries they arrived
at, all which they could never learn, until they had tarried and made some
experiment of them; To which may be added many other circumstances, as the want
of necessaries of Travel, and the small improvement of Navigation, as to long
voyages by Sea.

Touching the great and extraordinary increase of Mankind, supposed after the
Flood, the Scriptures make no mention of it. Noah had but three sons, Japhet
seven, Shem five, Ham four. The greatest number was Jocktans, who had thirteen,
a thing not unusual even in our days. Neither was the advantage of Polygamy so
considerable, as to swell the numbers of them to so great a height as is
supposed. Jacob with his Wives and Concubines had but twelve sons, and Solomon
but one.

But we shall see the Product of Mankind better, if we take a measure and
survey of them some hundreds of years after the Flood.

From the Flood to Abraham's days are reckoned CCXCII years, and yet the Land
of Canaan so fruitful, and so nigh to Armenia was not fully Peopled, as by his
words to Lot may be gathered, [ Is not the whole Land before us?] CC years
after, Simeon and Levi, without any other assistance, destroyed a whole City.

Afterward, when Jacob went into Egypt, the pleasant Land of Gosben lay
empty, and we may judge of the Inhabitants of all Egypt, by the single Progeny
of Jacob exceeding them, which Progeny, by a particular blessing of God,
increased; yet in CCC years to the number only of Six hundred three thousand
five hundred and fifty, besides Levites and Children, which being added in
proportion will not make at farthest, two parts of three of the Inhabitants, of
either London or Paris, and are a very small quantity to the Peopling of a
Nation.

The Phoenicians afterward driven out of their Seats, by the Israelites,
possessed many parts lying upon the Mediterranean, in Spain, Africa, Italy, and
other places of Europe and Asia, which could not be supposed to be very well
Peopled. How then can we imagine that Britain (lying so far West, having such a
vast Continent between it and Armenia, and being secluded by the narrow
Streights, from being easily accessible by Sea) should be Peopled in so short a
time when far nearer places lay empty, and desert?

If any one object and say, That the Islands of the Gentiles (among which
Britain is one) were given to Japhet and his Sons, and therefore Britain was
not so long before it was Peopled; Let them consider, that by Japhet and his
Sons, is meant his Progeny, and that in order to the enjoying of his Patrimony,
and taking their Possession thereof, the delivery of a Turf to him or his Sons
was not necessary, but sufficient that his Seed inherited the Blessing.

Some there are, who to show the great increase of People in the East, after
the Flood, have instanced in Ninus his Army, whom Eusebius says, lived CCL
years Eusebius. Herodotus.
after the Deluge: His Army (by Herodotus) is reported to consist of One
Million seven hundred thousand Foot, Two hundred thousand Horse, and of Sythed
Chariots above Ten thousand, an incredible number in any Age, and which might
startle us if the Author was not sufficiently known. But how came it to pass,
that the Assyrian Empire, in One hundred years time, afterward should be grown
so low, as with its Confederates, not to be able to resist Abraham and his
Three hundred men? What is become of all this Horse and Foot, that they did not
at least, hinder him in prosecuting his Victory? Certainly, as Herodotus has
outstretched himself in the number of the Army, so has Eusebius in his
Chronology.

Justin makes Ninus to be later than Tanaus King of the Getes, which Tanaus
lived Justin. Bishop Usher.
about the time of the Argonauts, and Bishop Usher has placed his Reign in the
year of the World MMDCCXXXVII, and after the Flood MLXXXI, or thereabouts, so
that we see almost a Thousand years difference in the circumstances of the
Peopling of Assyria.

Thus much being said in short concerning the increase of Mankind after the
Flood, namely, that their Colonies were not so great and numerous, as
sufficiently, to possess Asia, and all those pleasant and delightful Countries
about Armenia, in the space of four or five hundred years. Let us consider
whether it be reasonable to suppose our Forefathers, of so uneasy and
restless a disposition, as to be continually wandering from place to place, and
hunting after new Countries, having no Necessities to move them thereunto. Can
we think that they could be drawn into the North, into the cold and barren
Countries of Sythea, and Germany, to pass through the neck of Scandia, and
overcome the ascents and difficulties of the Mountain Taurus, if they had not
been reduced to it by those exigencies of affairs, by which, naturally, every
Nation is obliged, upon the too great increase of its Inhabitants, to cast out
the worst of its People, and disburthen it self of the superfluity of them. Nor
can we easily suppose, that one and the same Leader could induce his followers
to accompany him into Countries, wherein they were to undergo the speedy and
sudden changes of Weather. It is more reasonable to think, that Colonies crept
on by degrees, and every succeeding Generation added one step to the progress
of their Fathers, and so Mankind insensibly, in different parts, was accustomed
to different Climates, which became easy and familiar to them, by reason that
by long time, and short journies, they rather stole into them, than suddenly
jumpt upon them.

But granting, that in the first Ages after the Flood, Mankind increased faster
than now it does, and that the Progeny of Noab did desire to disperse it self
over the whole Earth, yet could they not do it because they wanted sundry
Materials and Necessaries for it, the forging of Iron, the curious working of
it is said to be found long after the Flood, an Art without which there could
be no stirring, and supposing that every Colony did know the way of managing of
it, it required time to find out Mines in order to the making of Instruments,
which must be supplied in every Country, though not producing that Metal, and
sufficient quantities be-provided before they could go on any further; In like
manner they must tarry for the growth of Provisions in the places where they
came, which would take up a year or two, before they could be produced. Neither
could Countries in a moment be cleared from Wood, or cleansed from Fenns, with
both which the Earth did then abound.

Sir Walter Rawleigh reports, That, the Spaniards, in some parts of America,
scarcely proceeded into the Continent ten miles in ten years, which if they
(with all necessary Learned Sir W. Rawleigh.
Instruments) could not do, how can we expect that in the first Ages after the
Deluge, Colonies could go on so fast, when they were to encounter with no less
difficulties, and had not the same means to overcome them; And if by this
measure we should calculate the progress of the first Planters we might not be
far out of the way, but certainly as Europe extends in length IOCCCC German
miles, so we might modestly assign so many years to the filling of it, which is
four times the speed that Note, A German mile is four English.
Spaniards made in America.

But because it is reasonable to suppose that the first Colonies took the
advantages of Navigable Rivers, which were more commodious for Situation,
Carriage, and many other respects: so it is to be imagined, that following
those conveniences they ran out in length far into a Country before they
filled the main body of it, and so in Germany might proceed down the Rhine, and
so come into these Western parts long before that vast tract of ground was
thoroughly Peopled.

This is the only Reason that induces me to believe, that this Island had
Inhabitants at the first coming of the Phoenicians, things being in this
condition as to Land Affairs some hundreds of years after the Flood. But let us
see what success the World had in Shipping in those Primitive Ages.

In the days of Solomon, about the year after the Flood MCCLXX, the
Phoenicians were arrived to a great perfection in the art of Navigation, they
made long Voyages, and imported many rich Commodities into those Parts; and
without doubt the greatest improvement of Shipping proceeded from those
quarters, which the Gracians themselves cannot dissemble, although they give
the Honor sometimes to Danaus, sometimes to Phoenix and Cadmus, whom they will
have the Sons of Agenor, so making Phoenix the name of a Man, which (indeed) is
the name of a Nation, and a Nation, which in all likelihood had Shipping far
before either Cadmus, or Danaus, as is gathered by their experience therein in
King Solomon's days, who lived much about their time.

But the Gracians (who by the Egyptians were always called Children) made it
their business to fasten all the great Actions, and Inventions of the Ancients,
upon something of their own Nation, and being better able to write than perform
great Matters, they brought down the original of Arts and Sciences to their own
low and pitiful Epoch.

Of this I shall have more occasion to speak in treating of the Name of
Britain, wherein their fraud and vanity will be made more evidently to appear.

Some say, that Shipping was first invented in the Red Sea, by King Erithras,
who is supposed to be Edom, others in the Mediterranean at Tire, but however it
be, the Phoenicians inhabited upon both those Seas, and it is most reasonable
(according to Tibullus) Prima Ratem ventis credere docta Tyrus. Tibullus.
To give them the Honor of Invention, who made the greatest progress in it.

If this conjecture be right concerning King Erithras, that he was the first
maker of a Ship, and was the same with Edom (as Scaliger supposes) then was
Navigation Scaliger.
begun in the year after the Flood CCCC, or thereabouts, and being brought into
the Mediterranean by the Phoenicians, there began an easy way of transporting
of Colonies to all those Seas, upon which account, we may suppose they were
Peopled long before the Inland Countries, and all the Islands of the Ionians,
and all the borders of Greece and Epirus, to Italy and Spain on one side, and
the Shoars of Africa on the other to the Streights, received their Inhabitants,
before the Continent of Europe was half filled with its Inland Colonies.

Now adding Four hundred years more to the improvement of Navigation, to its
first beginning, and it will be much about the time the Phoenicians entered the
Streights; about Four hundred years more the Phoenicians had built great
Shipping, and were accustomed to long and tedious Voyages, being hired by King
Solomon. Now it is that we hear of Danaus, and his great Ship Penteconteros, or
fifty (...)
Oars, in which he arrived out of Egypt into Greece, which Voyage may be
gathered out of an INSCRIPTION upon an old Marble, part of which by time is
worn out. It is thus.

(...) (...) (...)
(...)

By the Learned Seldom rendered to this sense.

Since the Ship.... came from Egypt into Greece, and was called Learned Seldom.
Penteconteros, and the Daughters of Danaus..... and Helice, and Archedice
chosen from the rest..... and sacrificed upon the shore in Para.... de in
Lindus, a City of Rhodes, MCCXLVII.

Having premised thus much concerning the general increase of Mankind, the
slow progression of Nations, and the advantage those People had that lay upon
the Midland-Sea, above those that traveled by Land. I will leave the
Phoenicians in the Mediterranean and return to those Nations whom I left on
their journey in the Continent of Europe, and we shall find them no sooner
arrived in these Western parts, and well settled, but the Phoenicians from the
Streights followed them.

The Reasons which induce me to believe that this Island was Peopled from the
Continent rather than from the Phoenicians or Graecians, as some have thought,
and from the Germans rather than the Gauls, are these.

First, The Language, although it has many Phoenician and Greek words in it,
and R. 1.
especially Greek, yet the Idiom of it, as to the main, appears to be
Teutonick, and those Words they received either with Trading with the former
Nations, or by the Invasion of the Gauls, seem to be much modelled to that
Dialect. This could not happen by the mixture with the Saxons in after Ages,
because the Armorican Britains, who fled over in the days of Cassibelan,
retain the same way of Writing and Pronouncing.

Secondly, That it could not be People from Gaul, Caesar methinks makes it R.
2.
evident (where he says) That the Inlanders of Britain reported themselves to
be Aborigines, that is, Home-born, which they could not have done had they
agreed in Language with those Gauls that had seated themselves on the
Seacoast of this Island. It would be vanity for any Country to pretend a
different original, and to want some distinction in Dialect, the chief
Criterion.

Thirdly, The Judgment of Tacitus in this point is, That the Germans planted
the R. 3.
most Northern parts of it, which he collects from the make of their Limbs, and
Tacitus:
several other Circumstances. Add to this, what I shall speak of more fully in
the Customs of the Britains, that what Caesar writes of the manners of the
Germans, agrees exactly with the description of the Inland Britains.

The greatest Argument produced to make this Island peopled from Gaul, is the
confinity of Language between the Ancient Britains and Gauls. The Confinity of
Language between the Ancient Britains and Gauls proceeds not from their being
one Nation, but from the Graecians and Phoenicians who Traded to both, and the
words produced by Mr. Cambden for that purpose, I shall show to be most of them
Phoenician, some Greek, and as for the rest they have little Analogy one with
another, and that which is, may proceed from the Invasion of Britain by the
Gauls, and the intercourse of Druids in both Nations.

Now, in my Judgment, the Phoenicians stand only in Competition with the
Germans, as for the Greek, it is plain, as I shall show, they were not in these
Seas till some hundreds of years after the Phoenicians Arrival. But because the
coming of the Phoenicians may (by many) not thought to be so soon, I shall wave
them also in this place, and proceed to show who where the first that peopled
this Isle from the Continent.

The Britains call themselves Kumero, Cymro, and Kumeri, and this name is so
Ancient among them, that Cymro, Pluraliter Cymri, is become to signify as much
as Aborigines. From this Appellation of themselves Mr. Cambden does think that
the first light of their Original does appear. The truth is, the similitude of
Name between these Cymri of Britain, and the Ancient people, the Cimbri of the
Continent, in things of so far distance, does give sufficient ground for a
Reasonable conjecture; But especially, if we consider what has been said
before of the slow progression of the first Planters, it will seem more
Reasonable the Cimbri, were the Forefathers of these Cymri, because in Eight
hundred years after the Flood the Name of the Cimbri might be in much use on
the Continent, and frequent in these parts, which could not be much before that
time, as will appear if we consider the true Original and progress of that
Nation.

This I will examine more paticularly, because Mr. Cambden seems to derive them
from this very same People, but in making them the Sons of Gomer, and
Inhabitants of Gaul, he has committed two great Mistakes, which I mention not
in derogation to so Worthy and Learned a Person, but out of sincere meaning,
and desire of Truth.

First, He Cites Josephus (who says) that the Gauls were called, of Gomer,
Gowari, Gomaraei, and Gomeritae. Indeed Josephus does say, that Gomer was the 1.
Father of the Galatae, but it must be understood of those Galatae who invaded
the Phrygians, and possessed themselves of their Seats, for by Gomer is meant
Phrygia (as Bochartus proves) and, by Ezekiel, is placed North of Judaea, nigh
to Togarmah; From these Gauls, Gallograecia, and Galatia, is derived, all which
Bocaitus. Ezckiel.
is far enough from being any part of Gallia, properly so called.

Secondly, In the next place the Cimbri are not the Offspring of Gomer, as
will appear by the first Seat and progress of that Nation, besides there is no
Authority 2.
to believe them descended of him, but rather to the contrary, and all such as
have thought so, have had no other Reason but some little likeness in the Name,
all which will manifestly appear in the History of the Cimbri, which in short
is this.

The Cimbri are supposed to be, the Relics of the Ancient Cimmerii, who by
contraction were called Cimbri. The Original of the name Cimmerii did not
proceed from Gomer, but from the Greeks, who called them (...), and (...). The
first, because they lived in the North in a perpetual kind of Winter, and the
latter, because they dwelt in a Cloudy and misty Air, for they lived under the
extremest part of the Mountain Taurus, in that neck of Ground called from
thence, Taurica Chersonesus. They were a Scythian Nation, and were the
Offspring of Magog; for the Scythians (as Josephus reports) were first called
Magogaei, and afterward Scythae by the Greeks. But of this we shall have
occasion, to declare the Judgments Josephus.
of other Authors, in the Antiquity of the Saxons.

These are supposed first of all to have chosen their Seats in Coelosyria,
beyond Araxis, where Magog built a City, called by the Scyrians after his Name,
and afterward Herodotus, lib. 4.
by the Greeks, in the days of Pliny, Hierapolis, being driven out of their
Seats by the Massagaetes that lived upon Araxis. Passing the River, they
possessed those vast and wide Regions which lay empty, and which afterward by
the Greeks were called Scythiae. Part of them which lived upon the Euxine Sea
and the Bospher, from the feirceness of their Manners and Hellish dispositions
were called Cerberii by the Greeks, in the same sense as they are now called
Tartarians.

Afterward these Cerberii being more civilized, as from (...), became (...),
they were called by the same Greeks, from the situation of their Country,
(...), and (...), but that they were called Cerberii before Cimmerii, Hesychius
witnesses, Hesychius. Pliny.
as also Pliny, who mentions a Town called Cimmerium, which before, he says,
was named Cerberium. And the Ancient Scholiasts upon Homer, in these words

(...)
(...)
Didimus Crates Scholiastes Aristoph. ad Ran.
There dwelt the People of Cimmeria,
Shrouded in Clouds and Darkness.
Instead of (...) read In Dictione (...).
(...), so that they received this Name long after the death of Gomer, being
not of his Offspring, nor any thing related to the Gomeri, having an Ancienter
Name than Cimmerii, and proceeded from Coelosyria their first Seat, and not
from Phrygia, the Possession of Gomer.

The Cimmerii in time, by contraction, were called Cimbri, according to Diod.
Siculus, and Plutarch, and being a Warlike Nation, they proceeded from Scythia
Diod. Sicul. Plutarch.
into the Countries called afterward, Sarmatia, and Germany, and in process of
time through several circumstances of Places they possessed, they were called by
several Names, and the general name of Cimbri was branched out into many
particular ones, sometimes they were called Germani, sometimes Celtae,
sometimes Galatae and Galli, from their Conquest of a great part of that
Country, and their many Victories over it, as Caesar himself witnesses. And
Suidas calls the Cimbri that fought under Brennus, Germans, but the name of
Cimbri is Ancienter than either Germany, or Caesar. Suidas.
Gaul; so it happened that those Cimbri that lived beyond the Rhine, in
aftertimes were called Germans, and they that Inhabited on this side, on their
Conquests, were called Galli.

From hence it proceeds that Florus says, The Cimbri came out of Gaul, and
they that sacked Rome, and went into Greece and robbed the Temple of Apollo,
Justin Florus. Justin.
calls Gauls.

Pausanias AElianus, and Athenaus, names them Galatae, and others Celtae, but
as Paus. AElian. Athenaeus. Suidas. Livy.
I said before, as to their Original, they are more truly (by Suidas) called
Germans, as also by Livy; so that we see there is great confusion made in the
naming of this People, and many Learned Persons not heeding these distinctions,
have taken the Aborigines of Gaul to be the Cimbri, when indeed, the Cimbri
only possessed part of that Country, and by inhabiting the same Seats received
the same Name.

In this Error Mr. Cambden proceeds, not contenting himself to make them the
Aborigines of Gaul, but deriving them from Gomeri, whom, he says, Anciently
possessed that Country, when the truth is, the Gauls only of Phrygia received
that name of Gomari, which was never heard of in any part of the Continent now
called France.

Moreover, we are to take notice, that before the Names of Gauls and Germans
were found out, both Nations were called both by the Romans and Greeks, Celtae,
but afterward, all the Tract of Ground beyond Massilia, they called Gallia
Celtica, and all on this side, to the Hercinian Mountains, and the further
parts of Germany to Sarmatia and Scythia, sometimes they named Germania,
sometimes simply, Gallia.

Hence it proceeds, that what Plutarch calls the German Tongue, Festus calls
the Gaulish, not that the German and Gaulish Tongue was all one, but because
the name Plutarch. Festus.
of Germany and Gaul was often promiscuously used; And because the Cimbri were
sometimes called Celtae as they possessed part of Celtica, hence it proceeds that
the Cimbrian Tongue is made the same with the Celtic, the Celtae being a
promiscuous Name of the Germans and Gauls; The Celtic Language is as much the
German Language as the Gaulish. The want of this distinction also was another
cause of Mr. Cambden's mistake.

The Cimbri therefore, though they were called Galli, Celtae, and Galatae, from
their Conquest of those People, yet were they a German Nation, as Caesar
himself Caesar.
testifies, and proceeding from Scythia, they passed through all the upper
parts of that vast Continent of Europe; from their mixture with the Celtae (as
I have said) they were called Celtae, and from their Original Celtecythae by
the Graecians, a Name which could not be proper to the Gauls, because they were
far from being of Scythian Original.

The Cimbri were an Ancient and valiant Nation. Tully writes of them, That it
was their joy and delight to die in Battle, and that nothing so much tormented
them as to Tully.
be taken away idly in their Beds. No wonder therefore if they conquered many
Nations, distressed the Romans themselves, and were a continual Thorn in the
sides of the Gauls.

They possessed all the Islands of the Sea called Sinus Codanus, all Jutia, which
from them anciently was called Cimbrica Chersonesus, and all the rest of the
Provinces of Germany upon the Sea, they had Frisia and Batavia in their
Jurisdiction, and all the Sea from the Cimbrick Chersonesus, or Jutia, to both
the mouths of the Rhine, that is to the borders of Flanders, was called
Cimbricum Mare. They possessed also many parts in the Inland Country, and many
Nations proceeded from them, although in after times they had lost their Name,
and those were only called Cimbri peculiarly who lived beyond the River Albis,
within the Chersonesus.

Caesar makes frequent mention of them, how they infested Gaul, and passed the
Rhine with their Armies; Nay, that they had overrun all that Country with the
Caesar. lib. 1.
assistance of the Teutoni, another German Nation, whom he constantly joins
with them. Moreover, he says, that most of the Belgae were of German Original,
which Belgae in another place he makes part of Gallia, and in another place he
makes part of the Nervii, a People of Gallia, to be descended of these Cimbri.

Thus we see these Cimbri by their Conquest established in many parts of that
Kingdom, but especially those that lay upon the Rhine, but even in Caesar's
days they were not so mixed, but that they preserved their own Language. For
the three Chief People of that Nation, the Celtae, Aquitani, and Belgae, Caesar
writes differed in Language, which they would not have done had they been all
of one Original.

From these Cimbri I have always thought that our Cymri in Britain have been
derived, because, for the Reason before mentioned, it is probable Britains were
of German Original, and there is no German Nation stands so fair as these
Cimbri for it. Besides what Mr. Cambden takes notice of, much conduces to this
purpose, namely, That Grammarian whom Virgil in his Catalects terms the
Britain, Thucydides Quintilian says was a Cimbrian, but that these Cimbrians
should be the Virgil. Quintilian.
Aborigines of Gaul, or proceed from I know not what Gomarii or Gomaraei, the
Sons of Gomer, is impossible.

Mr. Cambden says, Somer signifies, The utmost Border, and therefore it is
probable, that he or his seed seated themselves in these Parts; But seeing that
Moses in Cambden.
numbering the Progeny of Noah, seems to give the names of Nations, rather than
of particular Men (as many Learned do think) how can we imagine that Moses
should have the knowledge of the extremest parts in Gallia, seeing that God
never revealed to him many particulars in Geography, that more immediately
related to him.

Somer signifies the same as the Greek (...), and in all likelihood was
Phrygia, of which the Jews had heard of in their days, for Phrygia signifies
the same as Gomer, viz. A Land burnt up, as indeed Phrygia is. And the Greeks
(as shall be shown in another Chapter) did frequently translate the Names of
Places from the Phoenicians, or Hebrew Language, into their own; And this is
very visibly shown in the following Map of the Ancient World, wherein the names
of Countries and Cities in the Mediterranean, especially are put down as they
were called by the Phoenicians, and afterward by the Greeks.

I am not ignorant what Festus says, that the Gauls in their Language called a
Festus.
Thief or Robber, Cimber, his words are these, Cimbri lingua Gallica Latrones
dicuntur, as likewise Plutarch, (...). The Germans, that Plutarch.
is, the Celtae (for here Plutarch consounds the two Nations) call Robbers
Cimbri, but the word Cimber, as to its Original signifies no more a Robber or
Thief, than AEgyptius, one that is Superstitious, or Chaldaeus, an Astrologer,
or Sybarita, a dainty Mouth.

For these Cimbri living in an Age wherein Mr. Hobbs his Status belli was very
much in practice, and in a Nation too which disallowed, as Caesar writes, even
in his Age, Caesar. Com.
all manner of Propriety among themselves; It is no wonder if by their frequent
excursions upon their Neighbors, their Name became a common Appellative of
Thieves and Robbers, and more especially if we consider what is reported of
them by the same Author, namely, That they esteemed Cities most Honorable
which had the broadest wastes about them, and which by grievous Contributions,
and frequent Parties had made the greatest spoil and havoc of their
Neighbors. It was a peculiar sign of Manhood, that the Borderers were obliged
to keep off, and yield up their Possessions, and that none durst adventure to
inhabit near them.

Some there are who upon the words of Fesius and Plutarch, give another
Original of the name Cimber, viz. out of the German Tongue, wherein Kemtter,
Festus. Plutarch.
Kempher, Kemper, Kimber, and Kamper, according to different Dialects, signify
a Warryor, and that the words used by Festus and Plutarch, that is to say,
Latro, and (...), a Robber, are often taken to signify a Soldier, in a good
sense, and that Festus and Plutarch did not intend to say, that the Gauls
called a Robber, but a Soldier, Cimber.

To this I Answer, that Latro, and (...), in the days of Festus and Plutarch,
were always taken in an ill sense, and that those Authors, if they had had any
respect to Kampher, or Kimpher, as the Original of the Cimbri, they would not
both have agreed in an absolute word to express the meaning of their Name,
especially if we consider, that as Latro and (...) wre grown out of use, to
express Soldiers in the Greek and Latin Tongues, so neither can Kampher,
without a figure and some straining, be brought to signify a Warryor in the
German; Besides it appears more manifest that Kamper or Kimper, a Warryor, has
nothing to do in the derivation of the Ancient Nation, the Cimbri, if it be
considered that Kamper proceeding from Camp, in the German Tongue signifying a
Field where Soldiers pitch their Tents, seems to be derived from the Latin,
Campus, a Field.

Now the name of the Cimbri was long before ever the Latins can be supposed to
have carried any thing of their Language into Germany; But Lazius, the Author
Lazius.
of this Etymology of the Cimbrians, did not much rely upon the truth of it
himself, seeing in another place (forgetting what he had written before) he
names the Cimbri from I know not what King, called Cambrivius, the Grandson of
Aschenas.

As the name of the Cimbri, from their continual molesting their Neighbors,
was used by the Gauls in their Tongue, to express Robbers; so from the
exceeding proportion of their Limbs, being generally men of great and
extraordinary Stature, in After - times Cimber came also to be taken for a
Giant. In the Danish Tongue, Pontanus says, Kimber, Kemp, and Kemper, signify
properly a Pontanus.
Giant.

Now that the Cimbri were in truth very remarkable in this point, as likewise
the Cymri of Britain, according to Strabo, who says, He saw very Youths taller
by half a foot than the tallest Men; Caesar largely expresses by the general
Consternation Strabo. Caesar.
of his Army, in his march against Ariovestus their Leader.

They were described to the Romans, just as the Canaanites were to the Children
of Israel, and we may judge of the dreadful apprehension the Gauls had of them
by the like expression they used to Caesar, namely, That they were so exceeding
Tall, that other Nations seemed as nothing in their eyes; And that Cimbrian
whom Manlius encountered, is described by the Romans like a Goliath, of a vast
and unweildy Manlius.
Body, but whilst he stood in the rank of his own Army, there was no great
disproportion visible in him from the rest, but when he had stalked out some
paces, and came higher the Romans, they began to be amazed and astonished at
the sight.

And as Kimber, from the great proportion of these Cimbri, came to signify a
Giant in the Danish Tongue, so from a part of them called Getes, (...) also
came to signify a Giant, but as the Nation of the Getes is far Ancienter than
(...), a Giant, this word being derived from them, so the Cumerii, or Cimbri,
were a People long before either Kampher, Kimper, or Kimber, had any of the
aforementioned significations, for this cause the Cimbri could not receive
their Names from those words, the signification of which they themselves had
occasioned.

Many other remarkable Qualities these Cimbri had, which were also taken notice
of in the Cumri of Britain, namely, their exceeding swiftness, by which they
could lay their hands on the Mayns of their Horses and equal them in their
Race, as is witnessed by Caesar. This might give occasion to other
significations of the word Kimber in after Ages, among the Germans, viz. to
express Strength and Nimbleness.

Mr. Sherringham takes notice, that in Norfolk they say a Kemper Old Man, that
Sherringham de Anglorum Origins.
is, Brisk and Lively.

These Cimbri therefore who are supposed by Mr. Cambden to be the Fathers of
our Cumri in Britain, I think that none will doubt, but that they were a German
Nation, seeing their Name also continued long after in Germany, and in regard
their settlement in Gaul, and upon the Sea parts of it especially came by
Conquest and not Primitive possession.

But as all Nations, upon some secret and unknown causes, have often many ebbs
and flows, as to matters of Manhood and Courage: so it happened that before
Caesar's days, as he himself writes, the Gauls exceeded the Germans in Valor,
and possibly then it might be that the Gauls increasing in Number, and Power,
and recovering their Ancient Seats, might proceed into Britain also, and here
invade part of the Cimbri who had long before placed themselves in this Island;
And although these Gauls had obtained the Seacoasts, and entered far into the
Inland parts, so by long possession came to be called Britains, yet they were
looked upon by the more Ancient Inhabitants, as Encroachers only, they
esteeming themselves only as the Aborigines of the Island.

I have been more particular in treating of these Cimbri, because from a branch
of this very same Nation, in after Ages, our English Ancestors proceeded,
Providence so ordering it, that although the Ancient Cumri of Britain were
grievously molested by the Gauls, and afterward afflicted and kept under by
the Romans, yet may they be said to have recovered these Seats again, although
not by themselves, being but a small Relick, yet by the succession of a People
descended of the same Original.

But whether these Cimbri entered the Northern and Eastern parts of this Island,
before the Phoenicians arrived in the West, is a thing altogether unsearchable,
but I have showed, in all likelihood, that it was Seven or Eight hundred years
after the Flood before any part of it was Inhabited.

In the following Mapp, I show the progress of the Cimbri, on the Continent, on
one part, and the Voyages of the Phoenicians, from the Streights, on the other.

The Procession of the Cimbri is more Obscure upon the account, that all the
knowledge we have of them proceeds from the Greeks and Romans, there being
nothing of their Language remaining which we can say was particularly theirs,
nor any Records of that, as well as other German Nations, whereon to build any
solid foundation of Antiquity; But on the other side, all these Proofs are not
wanting in the Voyages of the Phoenicians, their Language is sufficiently
known, and by it they may, and are traced, not only through all the parts of
the Mediterranean, but on this side of the Streights also, even in Britain it
self (as shall be shown hereafter) a Nation of the greatest Antiquity, being it
self One, and Conversant with the most Knowing, and Experienced People of the
World.

As Learning and Science is especially got by Commerce, and they were the
Wisest People that lived on the Mediterranean, and followed Trading in the
Primitive Ages of the World; so that Phoenicians, in this point, exceeded all
other People, their Colonies were more numerous, and their Voyages greater,
than any Nation besides.

The Greeks did but Copy-out their Actions, and the Names that were given by
the Phoenicians, to all places they Traded unto, were translated by the Greeks
into their own Language, which will appear in the following Mapp of the Ancient
WORLD, wherein the Phoentcian names of the Countries are exactly put down, with
the Greeks, in all or most of those places, to which both those Nations, in
different times, Traded.

From these Phoenicians therefore, the first Antiquity of this Nation is to be
deduced, which will more evidently appear in the following Chapters, wherein it
will be manifest, that Britain, as well as the rest of those Nations mentioned
in this following Mapp of the Ancient WORLD, received its name of Old from this
People, So that to the full understanding of the design of the Mapp, the Reader
is referred to the following Chapter, which explains it.

But granting that the Cimbri from the Continent might be sooner in this Island
than the Phoenicians, and the Islanders called themselves Cymri, before they
were Britains, yet do I not think, that their sooner Arrival hither proceeded
from any advantage by a neck and Isthmus of Land, whereby Gallia, and this
Island, have been supposed formerly to have been joined; But because Verstegan
is very stiff and resolute in the maintaining of this Opinion, insomuch as he
fancies to himself, he has put it beyond all dispute or question; I desire the
Readers Patience while I examine all his Arguments, some of which he calls
Demonstrations, wherein, if I shall seem more tedious than is necessary, let
him consider, that if this Isthmus were admitted, then it would seem beyond
dispute, but that the Gauls peopled this Nation, which, for the Reasons before
mentioned can not be imagined.

It seems more glorious for this excellent part of the Earth to have been
always a distinct Nation by it self, than to be a dependent Member of that
Territory to which it has often given Laws.

A MAP OF EUROPE Wherein is shown the Progress of the PHOENICIAN Voiages into
the most Considerable parts of it With the Ancient names of Countries Cittys,
Rivers And Mountains of most remarke, as they were Originally called by that
Nation and afterward Varyed by the GREEKS
All which names for the easier reading are set down in Latin Characters. The
name marked with this Asterick x is the Greek the Other the Phoenician and more
ancient

To which is added the Procession of the ancient CIMBRI

A German Nation through the continent of Europe to the Western Seas, Being
supposed the first inhabitants of great BRITAIN



CHAP. III. The Explication of the Ancient Names of Kingdoms, Islands, Havens,
Cities, etc. as well those expressed in the foregoing Mapp, as others, which in
that narrow Compass could not be set down, gathered out of the Phoenician
Tongue.
BY which may be understood, how, and upon what account most Nations in the
World, especially those lying upon the Sea, received their particular
denominations in the first Age, namely, from some notorious Customs, Habits,
etc. of the People, Situation of the Place, or such like remarkable
Circumstance, or otherwise (which was most usual) from the different
Merchandise they afforded to the Phoenicians who were the first and most
Eminent Traders of the World, and gave Appellations to Places, according to
their respective Commodities and Manufactures, wherein if we do but seriously
consider, for what particular thing each Country, in former time, was most
especially taken notice of, and then apply the Phoenician Name of that thing,
let it be Custom, Situation, Trade, or any thing else, and we shall find the
Phoenician word so exactly agreeing with the nature of the Country so
expressed, that we must conclude it impossible so constant and general an
Harmony between them should happen by chance, but rather, that the Names were
imposed for some peculiar Reason and design.

And hereby we may plainly see the vanity and fraud of the Greek Nation, who
having received the names of Places, as well as most other things of greater
concern, from the Phoenicians, either new modelled them according to their own
Idiom, or quite changed them in sound though not signification, and then
imposed upon the World new Fables of their own, instead of the Ancient Original.

To begin therefore with Europe, Asia, and Africa, the general Divisions of the
then known World. The Greeks. The Phoenicians. The Interpretation. EUROPA, was
called by the Greeks (...), but why this part of the World was named Europa,
Herodotus their Ancient Historian, professes he knows not. It is probable it
was called by the Phoenicians Ur-appa, (from whence the Greeks made Europa)
because of the white Complexions of the Inhabitants, above those of Asia and
Africa. Ur-appa, signifies as much as a Country of white Complexions. ASIA, by
the Greeks is said to have taken its name from Asia the Mother of Promethem.
Asia, called so from its Situation, lying between Africa and Europe, and its
Position is so described by Pliny, Mela, and Eustathius. Asi, in the Phoenician
Language signifies the Country, Between, or in the Middle. AFRICA, from Afer
the Son of Hercules. Africa, so called from its plenty of Corn, and all sorts
of Grain, for which in all Ages, and by all Authors, it was highly celebrated.
Aphrica, Graecis (...), signifies a Land of Corn, or Ears, in the Phoen.
Dialect. LYBIA, so called from Lybia the Daughter of Epaphus. Lybia, a Dry and
Thirsty Country, per calidas Lybiae sitientis arenas. Lucan. Lub. Thirsty, Dry.
SPANIA (vulgo Hispania) from Pan. Spania, so called from the multitude of
Rabbats and Conies it produces, insomuch, that, that Animal was accounted
peculiar to that Country. Catullus gives the Epithet, Cuniculosa, to
Celtiberia a Province of Spain, and the Baleares Islands adjoining were so much
infested with that Vermin, that they sued to Augustus for Soldiers to destroy
them. Spanija, a Country of Rabbats, or Conies. ITALIA, from Italus, a Calf, or
Ox of Hercules. Called by the Phoenicians, Ataria, from the exceeding
quantities of Pitch it yielded (the letters R and L being easy convertible in
the Eastern Tongue) Old Italy contained no more than the Country of the Brutii,
or (...), which word signifies Black Pitch. Itaria, a Country of Pitch.
CALABRIA, a Province in Italy, called by the Greeks (...), or the Pitch
Country. Called Calabria, upon the same account as Old Italy. Calab, in the
Phoenic. Tongue, Pitch. LuSITANIA, from Lusus a Companion of Bacchus. Had its
name from the abundance of Almonds it produced, and which were in great
quantities thence exported into all Europe; Insomuch that in that Country, at
this day, there are many places which take their names from that Fruit, as
Calmende, Castelmendo, for Castroalmendro, and 2. Almendras, signifying
Almonds. Luz in the Phoenic. Tongue, signifies an Almond, tania is a Greek
addition. GALATIA (which is Gallia) called from Galates, a Son of Hercules.
Galatae and Celtae (or Gauls) so called from their yellow Hair, for which
Reason they are styled by the Latins, Flavagens, and Gr. (...), a yellow
Nation. Chalath, Chalta, or Chelta, in the Phoen. tongue, Yellow, or Saffron
colored, for the same reason are they termed by the Hebrews, Rhodanim, that
is, Yellow. BRITANNIA (according to our home Fables) from Brutus, called by the
Greeks (...), and (...). Britannia, from its Tynn and Lead-Mines, which was
exported by the Phoenicians from the west Coasts of Cornwall, and the Sylly
Islands, which were called therefore by the Greeks, Cassiterides. Bratanac, a
Country of Tynn. ALBION, from (...), White, or Albion the Giant. From its high
Rocks on the Western Coasts, where the Phoenicians first Landed, called to this
day Pens, or from the Whiteness of its Shoars. Alpin, in the Phoenician Tongue,
is a high Mountain. Alben in the same Dialect, is White. HIBERNIA, called also
Jerna. Had its Name from its Situation, being the last Country Westward,
further than which the Phoenicians never took Voyages. It may be supposed to be
called Ibetnae by the Phoenicians, from whence came Hibernia, likewise Nerne,
from whence is derived Jerna. Iber-nae, the last Habitation, Aher-nae, from
which the same Jerna, and it is remarkable, that, till the discovery of these
Islands by the Phoenicians, there were many places on the west of Africa and
Spain that were so named, as being then the uttermost Habitation. THuLE, says
Suidas, from Thoulis a King of Egypt. So called from its Dusky, and Dark
situation, lying in the North. Chule in the Phoenician Tongue, is Darkness.
CALEDONIA, a Province of Scotland. So called from its Rocky and Mountainous
nature, so that Mr. Cambden derives it from Kaled, Hard, in the British Tongue.
Galebtun in the Phoenician Tongue, is as much as a hard Hill.

Thus have I run cursorily over the Countries of most considerable note,
passing from Asia, and so Westward to these our Islands. It remains now, that
I return back to show the same consent and agreement in more private and
particular Places, which though not so famous as the forementioned, yet are
sufficiently known by all at this day, and were no less frequented by the
Phoenicians than the former. The Greeks. The Phoenicians. The Interpretation.
BALEARES, two Islands in the Mediterranean on the Coast of Spain, derived by
the Greeks from Baleus, a Companion of Hercules. These Islands were ever
Famous, as is notoriously known, for excellent Slingers, upon which account
they had their Name from the Phoenicians. Bal-jaro, a Master at Slinging, or an
excellent Slinger, in the Phoenician. CORSICA, otherwise Cyrnus, so named from
Cyrnus a Son of Hercules. It received both its Names from the Phoenicians, the
former from its Woodiness, the latter upon the account of its many Promontories
shooting, on all sides, into the Sea, upon which Reason AEthicus, Orosius,
Isidorus, all three give it the same Epithet of Multis Promontoriis Angulosa,
etc. and for its abounding with Wood, whoever reads of the Island cannot but
know it. Carno, or Curno, from whence Kupros, a Horn, or Promontory, in the
Phoen. Chorsi, from whence Corsica, or Corsis, signifies, a Woody place.
SARDINIA, otherwise Sardo, (...), from Sardus the Son of Hercules. This Island
received its name from the resemblance it had to the Foot of a Man, therefore
it was called by the Greeks, Ichnusa, and Sandaliotis. Sarad, and Sarda, in the
Phoenician Tongue, signifies, the Footstep of a Man. MELITE (now Malta) from
the Nymph Melite, of whom Hercules begot Hyllus. Some bring it from the Greek
(...), Honey, with which it never abounded, but it took rather its Name, from
the Commodiousness of its Situation and Ports, lying exactly in the middle
between Tire and the Streights, whither the Phoenicians Trafficked, insomuch
that upon all Occasions, either to Victual, or to secure themselves from
Tempest or Enemy, says Diodorus, in several Places this was a REFUGE to the
Phoenicians, having within it a Colony of their own. Melita, in the Phoenician
Tongue, signifies, a Place of Refuge, or Sanctuary, etc. and who knows not,
that many places in the East Countries have their Names upon the same account,
and we call the Midway to the East Indies, The Cape of good Hope, at this day.
GADES, called by the Greeks (...), Stephanus, Eustathius, and Suidas derive it
thus, (...), the Neck of the Earth. The Streights shut up the Mediterranean as
a Fence or Pinfold, a little passage only being left, and therefore are they
called Septum by the Latin, and (...) by the Gr. Gadir in the Phoen. Tongue,
signifies the same as Septum, and (...). ABYLA, a Mountain on the Streights,
it is sometimes written Alyba, the Letters transposed. Festus witnesses, that
this Mountain took its name from the Phoenicians, and signifies in their
Tongue as much as a high Hill. -- Abilam vocant. Gens Punicorum Mons quod altus
Barbaro. Ab-illaa, in the Phoen. Tongue, is a high Mountain, so is Al-aba, from
whence comes the transposition Aliba for Abyla. GALPE, another Mountain on the
Streights, answering to Abyla, on the side of Spain. This Mountain, on the
West, is open like an Urn, or Pitcher, and so is described by the Scholiast
upon Juvenal, and by Mela, and therefore had it its Name. Galpha, in the Phoen.
is an Urn, or Pitcher, and in Festus, Calparis is a kind of Vessel. RHODUS, an
Island in the Mediterranean, derived by the Greeks from Roses, which in their
Tongue are called (...). It took its Name from the multitude of Serpents it
produced, upon which very account it was called Ophiusa, by the Greeks, or, an
Island of Serpents. Rod, in the Phoen. Tongue, is a Serpent, or Dragon.
CERASTIS, which is, Cyprus. So called from its many Promontories, as Stephanus
witnesses. Keren, in the Phoen. a Horn, or Promontory, from whence comes
Kernaa, Kosno, and Kurno. SICILIA, a Scindendo, because it was cut off from the
Continent. It had its Name from the abundance and excellency of its Grapes,
with which it supplied Africa in former times, as witnesses Diodorus, who
says, that the Agrigentines once arrived to infinite Wealth by that Trade.
Segulaia, (...), as much as a Country of Grapes in the Phoenician Tongue.
SICANI, a People of Sicily. They inhabited the South and West part of the
Island that Buts upon Africa, and these only were properly called Sicani, and
their Country Sicania, and that from their Neighborhood with the Phoenicians
lying next to them. Secanim, signifies Neighbors, so are many People called in
the Land of Canaan, for their Neighborhood to the Jews. SYRACUSAE, the
Metropolis of Sicily. It is agreed, it took Name from a stinking and unwholesome
Marsb upon which it stood, called Syraco, which by its noisome Vapors, often
brought Plagues upon the City. Syraco, in the Phoen. Tongue signifies, an Evil
Savor. CHARYBDIS, a place much noted for Shipwracks. The Waters there run
round, and make a Gulf, insomuch as Seneca writes, Hiatu magno profundoque
sorbet navigia. Chor-obdam in the Phoen. signifies, Foramen perditionis, a Hole
of Destruction, as the Eastern Nations express themselves in such cases.
SCYLLA, another Rock that answers Charybdis, on the other side of the Sicilian
Straight. No doubt took its Name upon the same reason as Charybdis. Scol in the
Phoen. from whence (...) in Greek, signifies Destruction. AETNA, a burning
Mountain in Sicily; the Greeks give no derivation of it, but tell us a fable of
the Giant Enceladus, who by Jupiter buried alive, under the weight of this
Mountain, striving to disengage himself of it, breaths flames and smoke out of
his Mouth and Nostrils. Without question took its Name from the continual Fire,
and Smoke, which in all Ages, and to this day breaks from it. Attuna, in the
Phoen. Tongue, signifies 2 Furnace, or Chimney. AEtuna, signifies, a smoaky
Fog, in the same Dialect. ITHAGA, an Island of the Cyclades, the known Country
of Ulysses. Received its name from its hard and Rocky soil, It is like a Nest
in a Rock, says Tully, but I need not bring Testimonies of its barren nature
being sufficiently known; yet to see how great the love of ones Native Country
is, how often does Ulysses mourn and pine after it? Ithac, in the Phoen. Hard,
and Rocky. TINGIS (now Tangier) called by the Greeks (...), from Tinge the
supposed Wife of Anteus, slain by Hercules. It was a great Mart of the
Phoenicians, who had a Colony in it, according to Pomp. Mela. and lying so
opportunely on the Streights, from whence they sent other Colonies into Cales
and Spain; it was called for excellency, THE MART. Cigger, a Mart, from Cagger,
to Trade, in the Phoen. and Caggar, a Trader. The Greeks, out of Cigger made,
(...), changing the last Letter, which is frequent, but now called Tangier it
has regained its ancient Termination.

Hitherto I have laid down the Etymology of such Kingdoms and Places as are
generally and universally known, they that remain, for that they require some
competent knowledge in Geography, to discover where they are, how they bear to
other places, and such like Circumstances, which would be too tedious here to
be discoursed of; and because they carried other relations to the State of the
Phoenicians, then being, than now they do to the World, and had Customs,
Conveniences, Trades and Manufactures, then notoriously known, but now quite
left off and changed, it would be too far beyond my present purpose to prove
minutely every Circumstance of every particular Place. It will suffice that all
that are behind carry the same Reason and Analogy for their Names, as the
foregoing, and received them from the same Phoenicians, so that setting down
the Name only with the Reason of it, and the Phoenician word signifying that
Reason, I shall leave the disquisition of the Truth of every particular Reason
to be searched out of Bocartus, and Others, who have treated on this Subject.
Places which took their Names from Gods, or some Sacred Rites eminently
practiced in them.
The Name. The Phoen, word. The Interpretation. IDalium From Id-ala. The place
of the Goddess, i. e. Venus. Delus Daal, or Deel. The Island of God, i. e.
Apollo. Inopus, st. Ain-ob. The Fountain of Pitho. Naxus Nasca. A Sacrifice of
a multitude performed there to Bacchus. Amustra, called also Am-astarta, The
People of Astarta, the Phoenician Goodess. Mutistrata Mat-astarta. The City of
Astarta. Onobola Onbola. (...), consecrated to Venus, who had there her Temple.
Canthele From Canath-el. The possession of Saturn. Carteia Karthija. The City
dedicated to Hercules, called Melarthus Calduba Caltobal. The Refuge of Baal,
or Jupiter. Salduba Saltobal. The Dominion, or Shield of Baal Sonoba Saanobal.
The Prop of Baal. Onoba Onobal. The Strength of Baal.

All Ancient Cities in Spain, taking their Names from Baal, signifying Lord in
the Phoen. where the L in the end is left out, as in (...), and such like
Punick words. Ossonaba, an Ancient Town in Portugal From Usanobaal. The
Strength of Baal.

Places taking their Ancient Names from the Habits, Nature, Manners, and Arts
of the Inhabitants.
Corcyra From Carcara. Quiet Possession, namely of the Phaeaces. Cretes
Crethin. Archers, for which those Islanders were famous. Coa Cau. Fine Thread,
being the Manufacture of that Island. Amorgus Am-oregin. The Country of
Weavors, from the abundance of that Profession there. Sidon Czidon. From
Fishing. Imachara Amacherim. From Agriculture, the word signifies the Mother of
Plowmen. Galeotis Gelaiot. From Prophecies, in which that City so abounded,
that Prophets in the Sicilian Tongue were called (...). Latium Lat. From
Enchantments, not from Latendo. Rhodes, was called, Telchinis
Calchis. An Inchantor, with which sort of People, called therefore Telchines,
this Island abounded. Laestrigones Lais-tircan. A Ravenous Lion, from their
Fierceness, and therefore the same People are called Leontini, and were of the
Generation of Cyclopes.

Places taking their Names from different Animals they afforded or bred.
Philae From Phul. An Elephant, upon the same reason, that a City nigh to it is
called by the Greeks (...), from some Fair there held of that Beast. Lixus,
called also, Lizus
Lis. A Lion from the abundance of them there. Bomo Bohmo. Cattle, whence it is
called by the Greeks, Eubaea, upon the same account. Caria Car. A Lamb, or
Sheep, with which this place so abounded, that the Ionians called Sheep Cara,
and Car, from it, or else from the Phoenicians, Car.

But not to detain the Reader too long in a matter so manifest, the rest I will
briefly sum up together as they are in Bocartus, from whence the diligent
Enquirer into the Original of Places may fetch them, and have full satisfaction
to the particulars of their derivation; To proceed therefore with a Catalogue
derived from Animals.

From Serpents, etc. these Places take Name.
PElinas, Tenus, Salamin and Neae. From Cocks, Tanagra. From Crows, Lugdunum.
From Fish, Tagus, Icarus, Hyccara, Curium, Cuarius. From Mice, Gyarus. From
Foxes, Selambina, and Suel. From Horses, Caccabe.

From Woods and Groves, the Pyrenaei, Solymi, Anaphe, Ascra, Tabraca, had their
denominations. From Pasture, Parnassus and Parnes. From Deserts, Oasis. From
Drought and Barrenness, Boeturia, Cosyra, Myconus, Sicinus, Psyra, Jabesa,
Sorbiodunum, now Salisbury. Fertility, Bizacium, Adrumetum, Chalcia. Fruit,
Peparethum. Barley, Jabaduc. Corn, Ebora. From Vines, Grapes and Wine, Carmania,
Chremeses, Inicus, Anapus, Arvisium, Arambys. Figs, Ruspina and Ebusus. From
Olives, Zaita and Uzita. From the Turpentine-tree, AEla and Patmos. Saffron,
Corycus. Cheese, Cythnus. Honey, Calymna and Alabus.

From particular Stones, Charystus, Achates, Caridemni, Promont.

From Metals ( besides Britain) Thasus, Odonis, Siphnus, Temese, Carcoma,
Orospeda, Cassanitae, Debae, Dairi.

From Minerals, Ciniolus and Minius.

From Clay and Mortar, Adramittium, Thebae, Tenedos, Camarus, Camarina.

From abundance of Waters, Tacape and Arelate, took name. Apamia, from being
encompast with them. Rhene, Castalia, Castula, from the noise of Water.
Gargaphie, Zerbis, Physcus, from their swiftness: Arar, slowness. From Marshes,
Boetis, Bagradus, Decranum, Perca, Percusa. From bitter Water, Hymera: from
sweet, Holmius: from cold, Asines: from hot and warm, Emmaus and Helbessus.

From Fountains these places are derived, Cyrene, Enna, Enguium. From Fryths,
Asta, Menestheiportus, Nebrissa, Onoba, Lusturia. From Foards, Abara,
Abrotonum. From Shoars, Basti or Bastitani. From Havens, Hippo, Olisippo,
Hyccara, Cacypara, Rabbotis, Cyclopes, Cicynethus. From their Roads or Ports,
Leptis and Lapethus. From Rampires, Bucra, Herminius, Hermata. From Shipwracks,
Caphareus, Saso.

Again, from Fire breaking out (besides AEtna) Epopos, Mosychlus, Lemnos,
Liparae, were so called. From Heat, Sulchi: from Cold, Calaris. From the
North Wind (called by the Phoenicians, Carban) Carbasia took name: from the
South, Lacter: from the West, Jammona.

From Darkness, the Cimmerii. From Greatness, Cibara, Samatho, Symaethus,
Cypara. From Length, Motyr: from Breadth, Ampsaga: from Narrowness, Massicytus,
Ichus, Ocha, Capsa.

From the gaping of the Earth, Chalcis, Nisyrus. From Bending, Lydia, Hexi,
Camicus, Cephalaedis. From its Round form, Gaulus. From its sharp Point,
Drepanum, Lindus. From its inward Position, Bithinia. From its Corners, Carna
and Syme. For extreme Distance, Mauritania, Iberia, Cerne, Acabe, the Mountain
Cassius.

From Rocks and Stony places, Tyrus, Cilicia, Celenderis, Cragus, Ios, Scyrus,
Seriphus, Prepesinthus, Pholegandrus, Cythera, Cytheron, Solois, Dertossa.

Mountains, Ilipa, Ilerda, Illiberis, Gebennae, Allabroges, Elymi, Phocenses,
Entella, Eryx, Alontium, Abacaenum, Inessa, Hibla, Herea, Maro, Arne, Helicon,
Samos, Zacynthus, Telus, Mylias. From being in low Places, Hispalis, Amyca,
Ustica, Nantuates.

From Firmness, Strength and Defense, Amanus, Itanus, Butoe, Neetum, Herbita,
took their Names. Byrsa, Cersina, Tarraco, Acesta, Echesta, Acragas, from their
Forts. Pachinus, from its Watchtower.

From the Pleasantness of the Places, the ELYSIAN Fields (the description and
name of which Places, the Greeks had from the Phoenicians, and turned into
Fables) Hypsa, Enna, Ichana, Aganippe, Jalissus, Zuchabari. From its Antiquity,
Utica took name. From its new Foundation, Carthada or Carthago, which is as
much as, The NEW CITY.

CHAP. IV. Whether the First Planters of this Island came by Sea, or Land? and,
Whether BRITAIN was ever part of the Continent?
THAT this ISLAND has been joined to the Opposite Continent, by a narrow
Isthmus between Dover and Bullen, or thereabouts, has been the Opinion of
many: As of Antonius Volsius, Dom. Marius Niger, Servius Honoratus, our Country
Antonius Volscus, Dominicus Marius Niger, Servius Honoratus, John Twyne, Du
Bartas, etc. Pliny's Not. Hist.
man John Twine, and the French Poet Du Bartas.

That this has been the fortune of most Islands in the World, we may read in
Pliny, who makes Cyprus to be rent from Syria, Eubaea from Baotia, Besbicus
from Bithinia, with diverse others; nay, the Confinity of the two Promontories
of Calpe and Abyla, in the Streights of Gibraltar, has been the cause why some
have imagined, that Europe and Africa were, in Ancient times, conjoined, and
has given occasion to some Geographers themselves, to make Africa part of
Europe.

As these Opinions carry some pleasure with them, by reason of the Novelty and
strangeness of them: so do we find, they were most made use of by men of Fancy,
rather than Judgment, to imbellish and adorn their Histories with, that they
might render thereby more delightful to the Reader; Among which, not to name
many, Pliny may be reckoned for one, whom we always find, catching at any
thing that was strange and uncoutch'd, and although his History, by some, might
be thought the more delightful, yet assuredly, to such as understand it, it
proves more suspected, and so, less useful. But that this should be used by the
Poets, is no wonder, whose business is not to follow Truth exactly, but content
themselves with the Possibility of things, studying always what Opinion is
most pleasant. Of this nature was he, who turned the Verses of Sicily unto
Britany.

-- -- Britannia quondam
Gallorum pars una fuit, sed Pontus and aestus
Mutavere situm, rupit confinia Nereus
Victor, and abscissos interluit aequore Montes.
Britain and Gaul, was once, one piece of Land,
Till furious Billows did divide the Strand;
Now Nereus, 'twixt two Cliffs, victorious rides,
And washes both the Shoars, with swelling Tides.
We shall find this such a Trade amongst the Poets, that Lucan was hard at work
about the Isthmus in Peloponnesus, for after that the Sea had played upon it
for the space of two or three pretty Ingenious Verses, at last down fell that
little Damm, which Five thousand years separated the two Seas; And with no
small noise and impetuosity, Ionium AEgeo, frangit Mare -- I must confess,
Judicious Virgil (treating of the Narrow Seas between Sicily and Italy) speaks
of the breach the Sea made; Hesperium Siculo latus abscidit -- but puts in the
word Siculum to corroborate his Authority, without which he judged the Opinion
too light and trivial. The very Name of Sicily, which before was called
Trinacria, and the Promontory Regium, upon the very Straight of Sicily,
betokening by its signification, a BREACH, because at that very place the Sea
breaking through the Earth, might be some inducement for any to think it once
part of Italy. The constant Tradition in all Ages has been so, and to this day
it is accounted part of Naples, or Naples part of it, as men's thoughts shall
please to render it, so that the King of Spain is styled, REX UTRIUSQUE
SICILIAE, But for this Island of BRITAIN, there was never any such Tradition,
neither does there remain any signs or tokens of any name of a place that
signifies any thing relating to it, nay, on the contrary, Dover, where this
Breach is supposed, as it is derived in great probability, by Mr. Lambard, it
comes from the Lambard.
word Dufyrrha, which in the British Language betokens, a place steep and
upright, an evident sign of the Antiquity of those Cliffs, and Breaches, so
that what may be gathered out of the Name, is not indifferent, but makes
absolutely to the contrary; Indeed, for the Isle of Wight being part of
England, there is some probability from the Name, as it signifies in the
British Tongue, SEPARATION.

When Mr. Cambden had sought on both Shoars, to find some Place, or Promontory,
whose Name might have any thing in it that signified a BREACH, but finding
none, yet will needs set down Vitland, which we call Vitsan, near unto
Backness, in all likelihood, was that Itium Caesar writes of, from whence, into
Britain, he Records, was the best and convenientest passage, and so continued
until Vitsan. Haven was quite stopped up. It is to be observed, that in such
Breaches, the Name and Memory of the Separation ought to be sought for, on that
side of the Shore which contains the Minor part of the Division; As for
Example, The word SICILY, was given to Trinacria, and not to Italy. And WIGHT,
to that little Island, and not to England; For to speak properly, Sicily and
Wight were separated from Italy and England, and not Italy and England from
them, so that if we enquire for the Memory of this Breach, made between France
and England, we must examine our own Shore, where we can find nothing that
makes for it, but absolutely against it.

The word Vitsan (I lately spoke of) must be derived from Gwith, or it makes
nothing for their Opinion, and I leave it to any to judge, whether Vitland, or
Vitsand, formerly called Itium by Caesar, can claim its derivation from thence,
or whether, upon that account, it is any thing more reasonable to ground a
Separation once made from the Continent, than by the word Dehofden, by which
name the Dutch call their Streights, and which signifies two Promontories, who
do conclude, that those Promontories and Cliffs were always so, and that they
were never joined by any neck, or bridge of Land whatsoever.

Richardus Vitus, in his History, Lib. 1. says, That the Morini who lived on
the Hist. Richardi Viti, lib. 1.
French side of these Streights, were called so in the Ancient Celtick
Language, for Mor, signifies the SEA; Now the great Antiquity of the Celtick
Tongue, shall be shown hereafter in a more proper place, however thus much
appears, That from any Name there can be nothing gathered of this Isthmus, for
these Morini lived on the Seacoast, and not upon the end of the Isthmus.

Thus much as to the Name of these Streights, that they have nothing in them,
or contiguous to them, that can preserve the Memory of any such conjunction of
Shoars, or violent Separation made by the Sea, or dug by the labor of Man, a
thing easily to be expected, considering, that less mutations in the World have
left some Tradition behind them. Certainly, such a Breach as this, between two
such considerable Countries, must make more noise in the World when ever it
happened, than either Sicily, or the Isle of Wight, which to this day do retain
some Memory, of being cut off from their Neighbors.

Let us now consider, whether in the Reason of the thing, the nature of the
Streights themselves, the position and similitude of the opposite Soyls
themselves, and such Arguments are sufficient Inducements to engage any
Rational man to believe that Britain was once joined to Gallia. And it is not
to be doubted, but there has been several mutations and changes in the World,
before, and since Noah's Flood, Countries in some parts being swallowed up by
Earthquakes, which in these Colder parts of the World are never so violent, as
to be able to subvert twenty miles of dry Land together, and to cast it into
the Sea by that force. In the Northern Countries we have only experience of
some general Tremblings of the Earth, and where they extend to any length of
Ground, bring only fear, not distraction, on the minds of the Inhabitants. For
when any Earthquake is united and contracted, the most that we experience is
the removal of some Church, or the walking of some little Hill, as it has been
seen often in England, when as in Hotter Countries,, whole Cities have been
overturned, nay swallowed up, and for many miles together, Houses shattered and
demolished.

This is very easy to be imagined, if we consider the nature of Earthquakes,
and from what Cause they proceed, being very obvious to any that know and
consider the AEolopylae, how, by heat, the Wind and Vapors rarefied, are
forced out in great violence, for the force is augmented by the strength of the
Heat in its several Sallys: So likewise must it be with the Earth, which in the
Bowels of it having many Concavities that contain Vapors, the greater the
external Heats are that rarifie those Vapors, the stronger force will they
have, if they can find no vent and passage, for as the heat is greater, so must
the passages likewise be more suffocated, stopped, and choked up in dry
Countries, when as in cold Climates, the moisture of the Earth keeps open its
pores, and admits passages for the Vapors, agreeable to its proper nature, and
natural Constitution.

From hence it may be concluded, that such a Neck of Ground that is presumed to
have been between Britain and Gaul, of that length and breadth, could not (by
any Earthquake) be thrown into the Sea. What is alleged out of Ovid, will
make nothing material to our purpose; He brings Pythagoras, whose Soul for many
years, by Transinigration, had passed from one to another, and therefore must
be wondrous well fraught with the Ocular experience of things, we only hear of,
to speak these words,

Vidi Ego quod quondam fuerat solidissima tellus,
Esse fretum vidi factas ex aequore terras.
I saw what once was solid Earth, made Sea,
And dry Land there, where Waters used to be.
This I suppose must have been in those days of Yore, in which he says of
himself, Panthoides, Euphorbus eram -- Verslegan;
May not a very material Objection be offered, and say, That he did not really
distinguish the times of his Transmigrating to Fish and Flesh, and so mistook
Earth and Water, as he was longer or shorter in the Element.

But to come to the purpose, Verstegan, to make way for this Opinion, quotes
Genesis, cap. 14. Omnes hi convenerunt in Vallem sylvestrem, quae nunc est Mare
Salis Speaking of the Kings of Palestine.
. All these met together in the Wood Valley, which is now the Salt Sea; So
that, says he, many places are now Sea, which have been formerly dry Land.
This may be easily granted, where there are Reasons to induce one to believe
it: As the shallowness of the Sea, the position of the Ground, as we find to be
in the Red Sea, part of which to this day, and a considerable part too, at Low
Water, lies like a great Valley, and Plain of Sand, so that it is made a
public Road for Passengers, the Waters lying on both sides of them, and this I
have heard from one who passed through it himself, when he Traveled in those
parts. And this part might be that Wood Valley Moses speaks of, which lying so
low, might easily by degrees be turned into Sea, but that all the Red Sea
should once be a Wood Valley, the depth of it in many places, and the steepness
of the Shoars, do manifestly contradict it. Not to say any thing, that this
very Text may be understood otherwise, viz. Quae nunc est Mare salis, may in
the Hebrew bear, Quae nunc est ad Mare salis. It is not to be denied there has
been several Changes in the World, as Sea turned into Land, and Land into Sea,
although I am persuaded this latter to have happened more rarely, as will be
shown hereafter.

As briefly as I can, I shall Answer, now, Verstegan's Reasons, and take them
in order as they lie. The first Reason he gives for the liklyhood of it, Is the
nearness of the Land between England and France, not exceeding Twenty four
miles, and how one Shore is exactly answered with a Shore of like nature; as
for Example: Dover Clyffs are of Flints and Chalk, the opposite shore between
Bullen and Calais is of the same substance, I suppose he means Vitsan, Dover
Clyffs are broken, and so are they. Again, Calais lies upon a Flat and an Eaven
shore, so does Sandwich, which exactly answers it from England, therefore it
seems very probable, says he, that they were once joined. To Answer this, I
will not question, how, and by what Rule he makes his Opposites, nor enquire so
strictly, how the Clyffs correspond one with another, for it will happen as the
line is laid, and places at a distance may be thought to be one against another
as fancy leads the string. I say, that neither the nearness of position of the
two Promontories, nor the similitude of Soil, are sufficient Arguments to make
us believe a Conjunction here, more than in any other part of the World. And
here I must desire it to be granted, that the Earth continues for many miles
together, in most parts of the World, the very same under Water, as it is on
the next Neighboring dry Land, and that in no place, or very rarely, and by
accident, there is a mutation of the Soil just upon the Sea-shoar, I mean, that
upon the Sea, the uttermost bounds of the Earth shall be fat and sertile, stony
or minerally, and immediately where the Sea begins, it shall be of a different
nature.

The want of this Consideration seems to have been the Reason, why men in
several parts of the World have thought, by the likeness of soyls, there has
been a Conjunction of Earth, when, the truth is, it was nothing more but the
very fame Vein of ground which ran under Water, from one Country to another.

To Explain this matter, I will set down Descartes his Hypothesis concerning
the forming of the Earth, which whether it be true or false, as to the
Mechanical way he proceeds in, yet by it this Phoenomenon in Nature may be
solved, and serves as well as if it were true. And here I will not treat of
every particular Phoenomenon in the formation of this Globe of Earth, which
requires a continued series of progression, and depends on a link or chain of
Reasons, whereby he establishes and grounds his Opinion: But let it suffice for
the present that we know, That this Ball of Earth contains in its Center, Fire,
next to that Mineral Earth, made by that constant Furnace which is in it, next
to that Water, then Air, above all the Earth on which we live. Which will seem
strange to any that have not read his whole discourse; but supposing it for the
present, the Figure of the Earth in its first formation is thus:

V and F are the Air, part whereof is above, part under the upper Crust of the
Earth. E, D, is the Water. M and G, the Mineral Earth, upon which the upper
Crust E is supposed to fall. I, the Fire. Now supposing the upper Crust of
Earth, E, be dried by the heat of the Sun, it follows in time that it would
shrink, and so wanting the continuation of its parts which is necessary to
support the Arch, some of it would fall upon the Mineral Earth, C, whereby the
Water D, and Air F, would arise and be uppermost, and other parts of E remain
above, yet so hollow within as to keep Water in its Concavity, which drayned
through the Earth would produce Springs, and being rarefied into Vapors would
cause Earthquakes.

Now, that which makes to our business is this: Suppose all the distance
between 1, 2, 3, 4. to be of a Sandy and Rocky nature, if the breach be in the
middle point, betwixt 1 and 4, the shore 1, and shore 4, will be of the same
Nature, in respect the Earth is the same all along between them, which now is
supposed to be under Water between those two Points.

Again, Suppose the Earth between 1 and 4 be of a different Soil, so that from
3 to 4 is of a sandy and hard nature, and from 1 to 3 of a different Soil, if
the breach be in the point 3, then the shore 2, and the shore 4, will be of a
different quality.

E, E, E, the upper Crust of the Earth, 1, 2, 3, 9. V 6, the several Breaches,
the Breach at 9 and V makes the Mountain, whose top is at 4, the Concavity at
F. From 2 to 8, as likewise from 7 to X, the Water is above the Earth, and
makes two Seas, the shoars whereof are at 8 and X; from 8 to 9, and so to X,
is dry Land.

And because, in the Nature of the thing, it is more reasonable to imagine the
Breaches to be made where the Soyls differ, therefore it happens that different
and opposite Shoars are most commonly of a different Nature, yet it follows
not, that Shoars of the same Nature and Soil ought to be imagined of later date
in their Separation, than those which are of a different Nature; neither is it
material, whether the Shoars be steep and Cliffy, or whether plain and eaven,
or whether they answer one another, or no. For we find, in sounding of the
depths of the Seas, Hills and Valleys, as well as on the dry Land, neither does
it follow more, that the Cliffs of Dover and Bullen were a continued Ridge of
Hills, than that Highgate, and Penman in Flint-shire, are.

All that I think worthy to be observed is this, that where a Shore is high and
steep, there, as to the main matter, the further you go from Shore for some
distance, the fewer fathom of Water you find. And on the contrary, where a
Shore is plain, by degrees you go deeper and deeper, and in this also you must
allow for height of ground, which often casually happens in the bottom of the
Sea, as well as on the dry Land.

The Reason of it is this, because that Arch of Earth which we called Mineral
Earth, and was formed under Water, being a less Circle of vast proportion, as
included by two Outward ones, could not have Superficies enough for the upper
Earth to lie upon it, for where the fall is greater and steeper, of necessity
not far off must there be some Ascent proportionable, as we find Dover and the
opposite Clyffs exactly in the midway, an Ascent of ground called the Riff, or
Trowen Shoal, not sandy, but of a Rocky substance, scarce four Fathom deep at
low Water, the farther you go from it East or West being deeper and deeper,
still, as before, allowing for casual and accidental Hillocks in the bottom.

From all which, I think, that the similitude of Soyls, and equality of
Promontories, are no Argument to make us believe (that after the general
ordering the Earth) Dover and Bullen were more joined than any other parts
whatever, but were Primitively disjoined, as other Nations were. And this
Argument will hold good, whether, according to Des Carts, we suppose the Earth
above the Water, as a Postulatum only and no further, or whether, with Moses,
we certainly believe that the Waters were above the Earth, for according to
both the Earth must shrink, and by ascent and descent, gather it self together
to make room for the Waters, which in its hollow or concave places were to be
gathered together.

As for Verstegans Argument, That there is nothing broken but what was whole; I
think he might have joined the two Promontories, as easily, with any other
Principle, as two entire parts joined make a whole, or that the Parts are less
than the whole; Of the same force is his Observation, That steep places near
the Sea are called Cliffs, when as in the In-lands they are rather called
Hills, or Mountains, and this he would have to intimate as much, as if they had
been cleaved from some other Promontory. According to his Principle, Nothing is
broken in Nature, that has not been whole, a Principle undeniable, yet makes
no more for the Cliffs of Dover than any other in the World, which are not
answered by other Cliffs as perhaps Dovers are.

These are his Reasons that show the probability of such a Breach. Let us now
examine his Arguments by which, he thinks, he has put it out of all doubt, Such
as he calls evident Reasons, and remarkable Demonstrations, which, he says,
ought to be admitted as sufficient as Authors, nay beyond some who deliver it
by Hearsay; but to give my Judgment in this case, I should think the least
Tradition in Antiquity, that there was such athing, to be of more force than
all his Demonstrations, to persuade and convince a man of so great a change in
the World.

Although to him it might seem never so easy and common, yet we read, that
some who had rashly undertook to cut the Isthmus of ground on which Corinth
stood, they were daily and hourly terrified and affrighted with Noises, and
hideous Outcries, and their works, notwithstanding all their diligence, went
backwards. Nature will not easily permit such Changes, whether it proceeds from
guilt of mind, being a presumption that naturally would startle humane nature;
to set surer bounds to Kingdoms than first ordained, or whether it proceeds
from the hardness or impossibility of such an Attempt, sure it is, the Work was
discontinued to this day, notwithstanding all the Conveniences may be
alleged for it; for such a Cut would needs make the Trade to the Archipelago
much shorter and safer, when all the Cyclades, those little Islands, or great
Rocks, might thereby be avoided: yet if we compare that Isthmus to this Neck of
Land which is supposed to join Britain and Gaul, what a petty business it was,
either for the Sea sooner to break it down, or for Man to remove it?

The first Demonstration he gives us, is, That the Neatherlands, not only those
parts of Holland and Zealand, which at any time, by Cutting the Banks, may be
turned into Sea, but great part of Flanders and Brabant, which lie so high that
they can never be made Sea any more, have in former times been Sea, and he
quoats Hubert Thomas, sometimes Secretary unto Frederick Count Palatine of the
Rhine, who, in his description of the Country of Liege, says, that the Sea
has come up even to the Walls of Tongres, and that there remains to this day,
great Iron Rings, to which the Ships, that there sometime Arrived, were
fastened. Now Tongres lies almost an hundred English miles from the Sea, having
many pleasant and fertile Countries between that and the Sea.

That these Provinces have formerly been Sea, the Eaveness of them are
Arguments, besides the nature of the Soil, which in Flanders and Brabant is
Sandy, besides, in digging (in many places) two Fathom deep, are found
innumerable shells of Seafish, and in many places great Bones of Fishes, which
argues those places formerly to have been the Sea-shoar, because Shellfish is
naturally bred and nourished in the Flats, and Shore, and not in the Deep; So
that Holland and Zealand, must be supposed to have been deep Sea, because in
none of those Provinces are any Utrecht the Utmost bound of Land.
Shells found under ground; moreover in Brabant, there has been dug up
Anchors, and when that famous Cut was dug from Brussels, unto the River of
Rupel at Willebrook, begun Anno Christi 1550, and ended Anno 1561, through
Corn-lands, Wood-lands and Meadows, for fifteen English miles; an Undertaking
that shows the Richness of that City; In those days, there was found among
other things the Bones, or Anatomy of a Sea- Elephant, the Head of which being
reserved, Verstegan himself saw.

Now the cause why those places were Sea, and afterward became Land, Verstegan
thinks can be no other than this, That the Isthmus of Ground between France and
England kept up the Northern Seas, so that wanting passage they over-flowed
those Countries, and when they had workt themselves through this Neck of Land,
they left these Countries dry, so that never since they could be over-flown by
the Sea; I mean, those higher places of Flanders and Brabant: And that this
could not be the Reason, I hope to demonstrate by several Arguments.

He himself does acknowledge, that in some Vineyards of Campaign of France, a
high and Hilly Country, many shells of Fishes has been dug up, which he
attributes to Noah's Flood; and why, by the same Reason, may not those in
Flanders and Brabant have the same Originals, seeing they lie so deep under
ground as two fathoms, which argues a great Land-flood that could cover them
with so much Earth.

Neither does the multitude of them in Flanders, or the paucity of those dug in
the Vineyards, any thing alter the case, for without doubt, the Waters in the
Flood could not so easily carry them to the tops of Mountains, but that the
greater number would stick in the Low Countries, as is plain in those Firr
Trees which were found in the Neatherlands, and in some low Grounds of
Lancashire, and other parts in England, with their Roots to the south, and
their Heads to the north, which Firr-trees never grew on those Grounds
naturally, as it is a Tree of the Mountains, and thrives not but on craggy and
barren Hills, as the abundance of them in Upper-Germany do witness.

But supposing those Parts to have been Sea, those Iron Rings which, they say,
are yet at Tongres, do show, that they have been Sea a great while since this
Isthmus was broken down; For in the days of Julius Caesar, seventeen Hundred
years ago, there was no such thing, nor any memory of it, but the passage from
Itium and Gessoriacum, into Britain, was by Sea.

Now that Iron Rings exposed to the Weather, and Rust, should continue for
Seventeen hundred years, nay this supposed Isthmus, in all Reason, must have
been some Hundreds of years before Caesar's time, otherwise he would have
Recorded so memorable an Action, I leave to any Rational man to judge whether
it be possible so to be; the like may be said of those Anchors found under
ground, and not unlike of the Seafish bones and shells, though it is more
probable that they being generated in the Sea, and preserved in a Ground that
retained the natural Saltness of the Waters that flung it up, might be
preserved longer than Iron, which, by Moisture, quickly rusts and moulders away
into its first Natural constitution, Earth.

Besides, if this passage of Water through the Isthmus sunk the Sea northward,
then that Sea which was south of this Isthmus must rise but upon the very
Coasts of Sussex and Dorcet-shire, which lie south of it; the Inhabitants do
show several Marks, to which, they say, the Tide once did rise, which upon the
Level is very much higher than now it flows, and this does not happen among
them only, but the whole World over.

England is full of those Marks, and so are other Countries; and, I think, it
arises from a general decay of Moisture in the Universe, and that the Earth
continually grows dryer and dryer. And, although the Sea may be said to gain in
some places (that is) where the Earth fell lower than the Waters, and had
nothing to preserve it from being Sea but some continued Ridge, which, by
accident, kept the Sea out, and which as soon gone, the Sea broke in; yet as to
the whole, the Land has gained on the Sea, as all parts of the World do
evidence: Delos was not always visible, great part of Egypt was Sea in Homers
days, and Venice to this day keeps Marks of the falling of their Waters, of
which latter Ages have been very sensible; nay, they have a Tradition among
them, That the Sea, in future times, will forsake their City, and that then the
Government thereof, and the City it self must be destroyed.

But to return to England, I my self have examined many Coasts both on the East
and West parts of it, so that in most places I find there are plain grounds,
sometimes half a mile, sometimes a mile broad, which lie between the Sea and
some Hills, which Hills, by their steepness and being broken off, seem once to
have been washed by the Sea. The soil of those Meadows now lying higher than
the Sea, do argue much that they were once part of it: Neither could I find any
other Reason, excepting the general decay of the Sea in all Parts, why those
Coasts once lying under Water, ever became dry Lands. That this has happened in
other parts of the World is plain, viz. That the Water has left many places it
once possessed; Hybanda, an Island once of Ionia, in Pliny's days, was Two
hundred stadia from the Sea, likewise Ortygia is now become a Peninsula, by a
neck of Ground the Sea has either left, or flung up.

I am very certain there are many more Examples in the World of Peninsula's
made, than destroyed.

But I leave this to others to judge, whether this be the true Reason or no,
Why the Neatherlands, and some parts of England, formerly Sea, are now become
dry Land, and so will proceed to show, That such an Isthmus of ground between
Britain and Gaul, could not be the cause why they were drowned. Here the cause
is not the same (as Verstegan supposes) between these Seas and the Mare Rubrum,
that is, the Red Sea; For although it might be dangerous to cut the Isthmus,
and so let the Red Sea into the Mediterranean, by reason that the Red Sea was
the higher, and so inconveniently might be drayned on one side, and several
Countries on the other side lying on the Inland-Sea might be drowned, yet the
cause could not be so as to this Isthmus between France and England, as is
represented in this following Figure:

Here I am not to be understood, as though I speak of the Lunary Tide, but of
the general and constant Flux of Waters. Let A be this Isthmus that disjoyns C
France, and B Britain, D D D the North Sea, about the thirteenth Parallel, and
uttermost parts of Scotland; now this North Sea equally slows upon the Isthmus
A, and the same opposite Parallel E, so that when the Flood is at A, or between
Dover and Bullen, it will likewise be the same time at E, about South Wales,
and so going round about the Point F, it comes to the other side of the Isthmus
A, and there raises the Waters at G; so that the passage of the North Sea lying
so open by E and F, there can be no difference of the height of Waters at A and
G, which cannot be in the Red Sea, there being no passage for the Red Sea into
the Mediterranean, nor is it possible that the Waters of the Mediterranean can
be raised on the other side of that Isthmus, by the Red Sea, there being no way
for the Waters of the Red Sea to come into the Mediterranean but round about
Africa, and so through the Streights of Gibraltar.

The like may be said of that Isthmus of ground in the West Indies, between
Pannama and Nombre de Dios, for now there is no passage from the Pacifick Sea
(Core Mar del Zur) into the Atlantic Ocean; so that one Sea may be higher than
another, but it cannot be so with this English Isthmus, as has been already
shown.

But granting that the North Sea, about Britain D D D, be higher than the
Southern Sea coming in at F, yet will not the Shore H, which we suppose to be
Holland and the Neatherlands, be any thing the more under Water, by reason of
the Isthmus A stopping the passage of the Water, because, as was said before,
of the free course of the Northern Sea, by E, F and G, to the same Isthmus on
the Southside.

So, that if we could make an Isthmus from England to France, yet would it not
endanger the Low Countries, as we see in the Isthmus in Peloponnesus, the Sea
is equally high on both sides because of the short passage the Waters have
round that Peninsula; so although the nature of one side of the Sea and its
situation should be higher, yet it comes to a Level, because in so short a
turn it would raise the Waters on the other side.

But how comes it to pass, that the Sea on the North side of the Isthmus is
higher than the South, when as the Inland Sea, lying on the north and west of
the Red Sea, is lower? But this (amongst Verstegans other Opinions and
Demonstrations, says) is plain, as from the Current of Water which runs from
the North Sea; so that Old Shippers of the Neatherlands say, The Voyage from
Holland to Spain is shorter by a day and a halfs sailing, than from Spain to
Holland: This may proceed from several Reasons, as the insensible quickness of
some Winds from some Corners over others, and the convenience of Sea-Marks,
which are not the same in going, and returning, although in the same Voyage.

The Arguments to prove, that the Sea was higher on the North side, than the
South side of this supposed Isthmus, are taken from the sundry flats on the
North side, whereby the bottom of the Sea is supposed to be higher than the
bottom of that Sea on the South side, and consequently, the SEA also.

To consute this, let us first consider, If there had been such an Isthmus of
Land, the Sea working forceably upon it from the North side, would have carried
the Earth of that Isthmus southward, so that for some space of Sea, the bottom
would be shallower Southerly than Northerly; but we find it to the contrary,
for on the North side the Ryff, which is supposed a Relick of that Isthmus, we
find twenty five Fathom, on the South twenty seven, besides farther you go
Northerly the deeper the Sea is, excepting some Shelves, as off of Harlem,
eight or nine miles within the Sea, begins, De breed Verthien, reaching along
the Coast of Holland to the Plain of Ameland, where it ends.

To manifest this, I will set down the sounding of the North-Sea from the
Foreland.

Depths of the North Sea from the Fore-land.
IN the Channel, from England, Fore-land, and the Sands of Flanders, you have
twenty four Fathom; without the Shoald, between Zealand and the Texell, is
twenty six Fathom, as far as the Shoald which the Fishers call Dog sand, or
Doggar bank. In the Channel on England side, over against Yarmouth, is thirty
five Fathom: And against Flambrough and Scarborough point, is thirty eight
Fathom, where the White-shelf, called Dog-sand begins, from nine to sixteen
Fathom, and so reaches Northward, so that the Depth increases Northwards,
excepting these Shoalds.

All these things laid together, any Judicious man's Opinion may be convinced,
that the Isthmus here supposed is a mere Fiction, and that it could not be the
cause of drowning the Neatherlands, they having been Sea long after this
Isthmus could ever be in the World, as I have shown. Were there an Isthmus now
risen out of the Earth, it could not in the least endanger the Neatherlands.

I shall add this, that in those Countries that are Peninsula's, we see the
Isthmus lies on the end, and not on the sides of the Country, and where the Sea
has made a separation, yet there has remained some Neck of Ground that has
shot it self into the Sea, sharper and sharper, till it ended in a Point, an
evident sign that the Sea has wrought away the Earth before it. But to make a
Neck of Ground on the flat part of England and France, of twenty miles in
length, and six in breadth, to be joined to a Couple of plain and flat Clyffs,
seems rather to build a Bridge, than to evidence an Isthmus.

As for that Argument, How Wolves and Foxes came into England? I think it
altogether unnecessary to build them a Passage; for the same Reasons that
induced Noah to preserve their kind, would also persuade men to Transport them;
for their nature was not unknown to Noah, neither are those Creatures without
their use, in Countries that are not thoroughly Inhabited, God having so
ordered the natures of Animals, that one should destroy another, least the
Beast of the field should too much increase upon Man! So that in Countries that
are not thoroughly Planted, at Ireland, and some parts of Scotland, it has been a
great question, whether they do not more good than harm, seeing that any
Nation, when it is fully Peopled, can destroy them at their pleasure? as
England has done, by the Order of King Edgar, and Others, when the Tribute of
the Welsh Princes was, so many Wolves Heads yearly, till at last there was none
remaining.

If there were nothing else but the Recreation they afforded in Hunting, and do
yet afford, where the Inhabitants are not so many, but they can suffer
sometimes loss of Cattle; I say, if there were nothing else, we may easily
suppose, that the First Planters of Countries, after they had settled
themselves, would cause them to be Imported for their Pleasure.

The World in its Infancy was much given to Hunting, as Nimrod is said, to be a
great Hunter before the Lord, so was Esau, and Zenophon makes his young Cyrus
take great delight in slaying of Wild Beasts; so that though these Wolves have
been the destruction of two British Princes, Madan and Memprcius, yet they have
been the delight of many more. There is no one Convenience in the World, but
some Inconveniences or others may attend it.

Now the Reason why Foxes and Wolves are not convenient for such Islands, as
Wight, etc. and so are never Imported into them, is, because those Islands,
being small, cannot admit of them, either for sport or safety, by reason they
must be mixed with Inhabitants, for so small an extent of Ground, has none or
very little waste ground, where the Recreation can be carried on without mutual
invading of Propriety; whereas in so large Countries as England, where there
has been more waste ground than now there is, they have afforded most excellent
sport, with little or no peril, or inconvenience.

But, if this Argument should hold against England, it would in like manner
against many other Places in the known World, there being diverse Islands that
are far distant from the Continent than this is, and which were never supposed
to be joined with it, and have abounded with the very same, or as noctious
Animals as these; And so in many places in the East Indies, as Java, Sumatra,
and other large Islands, and of all the West Indies in general; for supposing
that the vast Continent northward of New England, should join with some parts
of the Continent of the Old World, yet were it impossible that way to bring
those Creatures, by reason of the vast Ice and Snows, covering the Earth, would
yield no nourishment for them in their passage, by reason there are no Beasts
to prey upon in those Climates, unless the Deer, and the Bears, which, as
Seamen witness, abound in those parts under the Cold, the first for their
swiftness, the other for their fierceness and strong natures. And if the Cold
in those Countries do not stop or destroy them, want of necessary food would do
it. Neither is it supposed for Beasts of Prey, to have any natural desire
farther than the present Object, or that they would leave the Flocks and Herds
in pleasant and fertile Countries, over which they had dominion, to seek out
new Acquests in cold and solitary places. On the South parts of America there
is no passage for them, unless we suppose the Streights of Magellan once to
have been conjoined, a thing not easily to be granted to these Isthmus Makers;
and what is as Ridiculous, as some Atlantick-Islands lying not far off Africa,
should extend either to the Caribee-Islands, or St. Domingo.

Granting a Passage at the Magellan Streights, yet the Heat of those Parts
would stop their passage as much as the Cold on the Northern side, there being
Beasts in the temperate parts of America, that can as little endure the heat of
some, as the extreme cold in other places.

St. Augustine, treating of this Subject, after he had laid down, that they
were transported for the delight of Man (meaning the Islands of the Old World)
for as yet, many Centuries after the New World was not found, had recourse to
the Ministry of Angels, and much more had it been necessary, had he lived in
our days, since, by the improvement of Navigation, the New World has been
discovered, and several Islands in the Atlantick-Ocean. To instance in
Barmudas, some hundreds of Leagues from any Continent, which nevertheless when
they were discovered, abounded in some sorts of greater Animals.

I remember, in reading the Prodigies of Old Rome, in observing of which some
Authors were very diligent, it is reported, that once, in via Fornicata, it
rained a Calf, if true, was it not a work of the Prince of the Air, to terrify
and amaze the People by so sudden a surprise? I question not, but the
Transporting of Wolves and Foxes, will be rather thought a work of the Devil
than Angels, especially by those that receive damage by them.

And in the stories of New Rome, which are very busy in employing of Angels, I
find but one Monument of their Actions in this nature, and that is Our Ladies
Chapel of Loretto, so that we will leave this solution of the Doubt, and pass
to the third Way, the same St. Augustine proposes, and that is this, in his own
words, following:

[ But if they sprung out of the Earth, according to their first Original (when
as, God said, Let the Earth bring forth a Living soul) then it appears much
more evident, That all kind of Living Creatures were in the Ark, not so much
for the increase and propagation of them, as to figure out sundry Nations for
the Sacrament of the Church, in case the Earth brought forth many Creatures in
those Islands, whereunto they could not pass.]

Here we see, St. Augustine grants, that the Earth might bring forth Animals
after the Flood, by that spirit of Generation that God had first infused into
it. This I leave to Divines to judge, as it is a mystical Relation, between the
kinds of Beasts in the Ark, and those that were to spring out of the Earth
(...), it is a flight peculiar to St. Augustine, whose volatile Soul often
dived into those Depths, common Capacities are not able to fathom.

In my serious thoughts, this Solution seems more rational than the other, for
who can ever imagine, that all Beasts of the Earth in their different kinds,
every kind should have one beginning of its Race to which it referred its
Original, and that they had some principal who might be reckoned to be Dux
gregis ipse caper -- It is sufficient that the Ark bore the types and forms of
all Species, and that the Earth in producing living Creatures, was to be
subject to those Patterns God had preserved for it, and not to be extravagant
or deficient in the number of the Species, and their forms, but to keep exactly
to all those lines that God had drawn in those Creatures in the Ark, he having
shaped them to that proportion of Limbs and strength, and distinguished them in
their several Natures and Capacities, as in his Infinite Wisdom he foresaw
would be most convenient for Man's use, and answerable to the Earths production.
And this order and government of Nature we find in the least and minute
Insects, which although they be various in their kinds, yet does not one kind
interfere with another, but a steady and certain method may be discerned in
their Production, one answering another in the same kind exactly, that it is a
great wonder to see the uniform symetery of their Parts, in so small and little
Models, so entirely preserved.

Hugo Grotius, in his Notes on his first Book, De veritate Religionis
Christianae, Hugo Grotius, De veritate Relig. Christ. lib. 1.
speaking of the Traditions of the Heathen corresponding with the Doctrine of
Moses, concerning the production of Animals, quotes diverse Authors, and amongst
the rest Sanchoniathon, who all with one consent agree, That all kinds of
Creatures sprang Sanchoniathon a Phoenician Author.
out of the Earth, and that it was the certain Traditions of those Ancient
times, wherein is also particularly described the manner of their Productions,
with the differences of Fish, Beasts and Fowls, in the nature of their
Generation, viz. How the Earth, being in the nature of one great Bogg, or Moor,
which must be imagined so to be, and so to continue long after the general
Deluge, out of the watery part of it produced Fish, whilst that part had more
spirit, and was more refined, gave being to the Fowls of the Air, who following
the volatile nature of their Original, took wing, some more, some less,
according as they consisted of a grosser or purer substance, whilst the
earthlier and drossy part of Matter gave being to those Creatures which are
styled Prona natura, and humi fixa, heavily creeping upon that Earth, from
whose deadest part they proceeded.

Not withstanding all this, we ought not to expect these Procreations from the
Earth, who long since have disburthened it self of those Forms at first it
retained in its womb, when it was pregnant with the Species of all Creatures,
it having long since lost its Moisture which then opened its Womb, so that it
is now become the dead Supporter, and final Receiver of its former and
primitive Births; yet in some parts of it, as in Egypt, where the Soil is kept
fat and moist by the Inundation of Nile, there is daily experience of its
generations, though small and abortive, as in Mice, and such like Vermin:
Creatures, though little in comparison of what it has brought forth, yet
great, in respect to what in other Places it produces. These remain now the
only Instances, and Monuments, of that wondrous fertility it once enjoyed: so I
think, to bring the Originals of all Creatures from any particular quarter of
the Earth, is a great disparagement to its other Parts. As the Jews fancy their
Country the Navel of the Earth, this would be to make its Womb at Babylon, or
some part of Mesopotamia, where ever the Garden of Eden was.

Now, to return to England, I think it not necessary at all to build any
Isthmus, in order to the bringing in of Wolves, or to solve such a little piece
of Philosophy, to make this Ancient and Renowned ISLAND, once a hanger on, or
part of the Continent.

It was ever the Glory and Safety of GREAT BRITAIN to be environed by the Sea,
and to command those Waters that encompass it, and whilst other Nations are
subject to daily Incursions, being separated only by Rivers, Hills, or Valleys,
and imaginary Lines, by turns, one Kingdom often Elbows out another; But Nature
has set BRITAIN such distinct Bounds and Limits, that its Empire is preserved
entire; and as it abounds in All things, both for the necessary delight and
support of Man, and needs not the World to sustain it, so was it always
esteemed, and called, Novus Orbis, and Orbis BRITANNICUS, by reason of its
Greatness, and especially Separation from the Continent, for proceeding from
the East through that vast Tract of Ground which contains so many Empires and
Kingdoms, and arriving on the Coasts of France, Normandy, Picardy, and the Low
Countries, ones Fancy tired with so long a Progress, would naturally imagine
that on that Shore was the uttermost bounds and limits of the Earth, and that
there was nothing Westward but a vast Ocean. But as soon as the British Island
discovered it self by its High and White Rocks, it is no wonder it should be
called, a distinct WORLD by it self, being of so large an extent, that for many
years after the Romans had discovered it, it was not known whether it was an
Island, or the beginning of another Continent Westward. That it ever was joined
Eastward to the Continent of France, as there is no Tradition for it, so there
is no real Truth in it, and so I shall leave it, as I found it encompast by the
Sea, with these Verses (out of Mr. Cambden) upon the Streights, the matter of
which, I question not, will be verified in all Ages to come.

-- Gemini qua janua Ponti
Faucibus angustis, lateque frementibus undis
Gallorum, Anglorumque vetat concurrere terras.
-- The British and the Gaulish Shoars
The SEA at distance keeps, through every Age,
Least the two LANDS each other should engage.
CHAP. V. When BRITAIN was first known to the Phoenicians, And how it received
its Name from them.
HAVING shown that BRITAIN was originally an ISLAND, and in the greatest
probability Peopled from the Continent by the Cimbri, a German Nation; I come
now to Treat of the Phoenicians, who although lived upon the most Easternly
part of the Mediterranean, as Tire and Sidon, yet by the advantage of Shipping,
and the many Colonies they had upon the Streights, are supposed not to be long
after, if not contemporary with the Cimbri in this Island. And from these
Phoenicians are the first Antiquities of this Nation to be derived, upon the
account, that their Voyages hither may be proved by the Authority of the best
Authors.

Their Language is sufficiently known, being a Dialect of the Hebrew, or Syrian
Tongue, by which Language they are traced through all the Coasts and Islands of
the Mediterranean Sea, giving Names to those Countries they Arrived at,
according to the respective Commodities they afforded, or the nature of the
Soil, or some such notorious qualities, which Names, though a little varied by
the Greeks, and afterward by the Romans, remained till the fall of those
Empires, and many of them remain unto this day.

And as they gave Names to all places on the Midland-Sea, so passing the
Streights they gave name to this ISLAND.

The truth of this will appear, when I shall have shown that they were here
long before the Greeks, and that the Greeks did take the name of BRITAIN, as
well as of most other Countries, from them; And before I proceed, I will here
speak something of the Custom of the Greeks in giving Names to places, they
being not so early Mariners as the Phoenicians, and finding that all Countries
had received some denomination or other from these Traders, they took the
Phoenician Name and translated it into a word of their own, agreeing with it
either in signification, or sound, The latter of which ways was the most
ingenious, because by so doing they preserved something of the true Original,
which will appear plainly in the foregoing Mapp of the Ancient WORLD, I have
collected for that purpose. Thus from Cham they made (...), Copher, (...),
Nahal, (...), Brat-anac, (...), and the like, and had they done no otherwise,
certainly the Original of names of Places had not been so obscure.

But we may find that in other Countries they were not so sincere, as when they
changed some material Letter, and then placed some fable or other of their own
Invention, for the derivation of that Country, as making the Phoenician Itaria,
or the Country of Pitch, (...), and so derived it from a Calf, so Borsa became
(...), Aschenas, (...), Goghasan, (...), and the like, upon all which some
ridiculous story or other depends.

But, the greatest falsification was, when they understood the sense and
meaning of a Phoenician Name, they translated it into a word of their own
Language, agreeing in signification, but not sound; thus Gomet they made (...),
Noammon, (...), Brat-anac, the Countries of Tynn, Cassiterides.

The Phoenicians therefore being the first Traders, from them are the Names of
this Island, ALBION and BRITANNIA, to be derived, and that it may appear more
evidently, I will first prove by sufficient Authors, that they first Traded
hither and that very early. In the second place, from several Arguments drawn
from the Greek Writers themselves. Lastly, from the footsteps of their
Language, as likewise their Customs and Religions settled in this ISLAND; of
all which I shall make manifest in their Order.

THE first discovery of this ISLAND, as may be gathered by Ancient Histories,
was by the Phoenicians, some say by Hercules, others by Himiclo, who was sent
with a Fleet through the Streights to discover the Western Seas, which he did
[as Fuller reports] by the help of the Lodestone, which he will needs have the
Carthaginians to have known, and to have kept as a great Secret.

But as their Voyages by Sea were so Famous and many, it gave occasion to
Fuller to think, that they exceeded other Nations by the virtue of this Secret,
so have we seen by what Motives he was mistaken; for because this Stone was
called Heraclea, he imagined the Name might be given it from HERCULES, in Greek
(...), and not from Heraclea, a City in Magnesia (from whence also it was
called MAGNES by the Latins) because, says he, it would have then been called
Heracleotis, not Heraclea, not considering, or at least dissembling, if it was
to be derived from HERCULES, it ought to be rather from the Greek Hercules than
the Phoenician, because the Greek Hercules was in Lydia, and resided about
Omphal, where he might find this Stone, for Magnesia is part of Lydia.

I presume, it will never be granted that such a Secret, so useful and
advantageous for Mankind, if it was known to the Phoenicians, could ever have
been lost. For granting that some Arts, once known to Mankind, have been by
time forgotten, yet we shall always find, that they rather concerned the
pleasure and luxury of Man, than his real profit, and which were supplied by
others with greater ease, and no less delight.

However it be, we shall find that the Phoenicians were the first that
discovered these ISLANDS long before the First Olympiad, [The beginning of
which, according to the Julian Account, was Anno 3938, from the Year of the
World 3256, from the Temple, etc. 263.] as I shall prove by and by.

Strabo, in his third Book, writes thus: First of all the Phoenicians Traded
thither, meaning the Cassiterides, now called the Isles of Scilly, not
divulging this Voyage Strab. lib. 3.
to any, and he reckons up the Commodities of the Country, Tynn, Lead, and
Skins, which they exchanged for Salt, Earthen-Pots, and Brazen-ware; and Pliny
writes, That Lead was first brought into Greece out of those Islands, by
Medacritus, viz. Melicartus, Hercules. Herodotus de Cassiteritibus. Diodorus
Sic. lib. 5.
Midacritus. Plin. Not. hist. lib. 8. Sancho.
And although these ISLANDS were not yet known to the Graecians, by reason the
Phoenicians kept them so private, yet Herodotus makes mention of them in these
words: [ I know not, says he, the Islands CASSITERIDES from whence comes all
our Tynn] for the Graecians bought their Tynn, and Lead, either immediately
from the Phoenicians, or the Veneti, or from the Narbonienses, to whom it was
brought by Land (as Diodorus in his fifth Book witnesses) a Journey of Thirty
days, so that it is plain, they had only heard of the Islands from whence those
Commodities came, and had never seen them.

Mr. Cambden himself Learnedly proves, that these Cassiterides were the Scilly
Cambden: Solinus. Eustathius.
Islands by their situation, described by Solinus, Diodorus, and Enstathius,
and also by the Mines of Tynn and Lead, which are not found in any but in these
BRITISH Islands.

Ortelius, makes the CASSITERIDES to be those Islands including Cornwall
Ortelius.
and Devonshire, and that England and Ireland were called by the Ancients
CASSITERIDES, of which I shall speak more at large anon.

Now, because these Islands were the first of all BRITAIN, as they were so
called, that were discovered by the Phoenicians, lying exactly against Spain,
on which Coast, it is supposed, the first. Adventurers in those Seas would
sail, it will not be amiss to give an exact account of them.

That these Islands of Scilly were the Cassiterides of the Ancients.
FIrst, We have the Authority of Strabo, as to their Position, full opposite to
the Artebri, that is, Gallitia in Spain, those Islands Northwards are
discovered, Strabo.
which are called CASSITERIDES, placed after a manner in the same Clime with
Britain. This Description cannot suit with any other Islands in the West Sea,
for the Asores bare westward of Gallitia in Spain, when the Cassiterides are
said to be northward; so that the Asores cannot be they, neither are the Asores
near the Eighth Climate, which is the uttermost Climate of the South parts of
England, and so could not be said by Strabo, to be almost in the same Climate;
In another place Strabo says, That the Sea, between Spain and the Cassiterides
is broader than that which lies between the Cassiterides and Britain; so that
Olivarius his Opinion is cut off, who makes them Olivarius.
Cysarga, for Cysarga lies on the Spanish Coasts, almost close upon the
Continent.

Next to him we have the Opinion of Solinus, in these words [ The Cassiterides
Solinus.
look toward the Coasts of Celtiberia;] Now the Asores look no more toward
that Coast, or bear no more upon it, than they do upon the Coast of Asrick; and
as for Cysarga, lying upon Spain, it cannot be proper to say it looks toward
it, for that term in Geography is used to Places that have some distance, yet
lie in some relation as to Parallels and Clymes. Diodorus Siculus writes, In
the Islands next to the Spanish Sea for their Tynn, are called CASSITERIDES,
which description is only proper to the Islands of Scilly, for Cysarga is not
next to the Spanish Sea, but in it, and as for the Asores, the Spanish Sea was
never extended so far.

That which has made the greater doubt, is, the words of Eustathius; There be
Ten Islands (says he) called CASSITERIDES, lying close together Northward,
Eustathius.
when as Mr. Cambden makes them in all One hundred forty five. Cambden.


To Answer this, let us consider that in no part of the Western Seas there are
Ten Islands lying close together, no more, nor no less, and we must understand
Eustathius either to have written of the Principal only, which are but Ten,
namely, St. Mary's, Annoth, Agnes, Samson, Silly, Brefer, Rusco or Truscaw, St.
Hellens, St. Martins, and Arthur, which is not unusual in Geographers; or,
which is most probable, that in those days of the Ancients, they had no
certain knowledge of these Remote parts of the Earth, more than we have now of
the Islands of Mar del Zur, the passage through the Streights of Gibraltar
being as full of Difficulties, or more, than those of Magellan are to us.

Neither can this number of the Cassiterides make, but that they are the Scilly
Islands, any more than the Hebades, which by Ptolomy are made Five, and the
Orcades Thirty, take from the truth of those Islands, because in the discovery
of them Prolomy. Cambden. Bochartus.
they are not found now exactly of that number. The Chief of them that have
Names are these;

S. Mary's, five miles over, nine in compass; Agnus Isle, six miles over;
Annot, Minwisand, Smithy-sound, Suartigan, Rousuian, Ronsuiar; the Cregwin,
Moncarthat, Inis-Welseck, Suechial, Rat Island, Anwell, Brior, Rusco, as great
as St. Mary's; the Round Island, St. Lides Island, Notho, Aving, Tyan, St.
Martins Isle, Knolworth, Snivilliver, Menwetham, Vollis, Survihe, Vollis again,
Arthurs Island, Guiviliner, Nenech, Gothrois.

That which is most material, is, that they have Veins of Tynn, which no other
Islands in this Tract have, and according to those descriptions of Strabo,
Solinus, Diod. Siculus, and Eustathius, have, as witnesses Mr. Cambden, and
Bocartus; Besides Mr. Cambden, according to his usual manner, has found two of
the lesser of them to have their Names from the Mines, as Minan Witham, and
Minuisisand; so that laying all Circumstances together in the words of Mr.
Cambden: Seeing these Islands of Scilly are opposite to the Artebri, viz.
Gallia in Spain; seeing they bend directly Northward from them; seeing they are
placed in the same Clime of Britain; seeing they look toward the Coast of
Celtiberia; seeing they are disjoined by a far broader Sea from Spain than
Britain; seeing they lie next to the Spanish Sea; seeing they lie hard one by
another toward the North, and TEN only of them of any good account; that which
is most material, seeing they have Veins of Tynn, as no other Islands have
besides them in this Tract, I think we have as much demonstration, that these
ISLES of Scilly were the Cassiterides of the Ancients, as we have for any
Kingdom under the Sun, whose description we find in Geographers.

This therefore being granted, that the Phoenicians Traded hither, which I
shall This Island took not us Name from Brit, Brith, or Canta.
prove, from hence may be gathered the Name of BRITAIN it self, and that from
these Islands, and part of Cornwall and Devonshire, this whole Island first
received its Name not from Brit, or Brith and Canta, as some will have it: so
that what Mr. Cambden ends his History of Britain with, viz. the ISLES of
SCILLY, from thence I shall begin to derive its Name, and clearly demonstrate
to any, that the Western-name of this Island, in process of time denominated
the whole, as in after Ages it happened to the Monarchy it self, the West
Saxons taking in the Heptarchy, united the whole Kingdom under one entire
Government.

Now the Reader is desired to recollect what before I have writ concerning the
Greeks, their way of denominating of Kingdoms, and it will be found from whence
and from whom they called these Islands CASSITERIDES, which could be from no
other than the Phoenicians, who alone knew them, as I have already made appear,
but for the better satisfaction shall discourse it more at large.

WHAT the Graecians call CASSITERIS, or the Country of Tynn, in the Phoenician
Language, which was but only a Dialect of the Hebrews (as all BRITAIN truly
derived from Bratanac.
know that have read Plautus his Poenus, or any of the Phoenician Records) is,
BARAC-ANAC, or BRACANAC, the first a or Patha being, according to the Eastern
Languages, silenced in a Sheva.

Now this word Bratanac in the Phoenician Tongue, signifies the very same thing
as Cassiteris, viz. A Country, or Field of Tynn, as Bochartus Learnedly proves,
Bochartus.
from whom I confess my self to have gathered it, and taken the first hints of
this Derivation upon this very account, in all reason it is to be supposed,
that the Greeks hearing the Phoenicians in their Language call these Islands,
to which they Traded for Tynn, Bratanac, they gave them the name Cassiterides,
signifying the same thing.

When the word Bratanac by the Phoenician Mariners prevailed more, and more,
then the Greeks were obliged to receive it, but mollifying it after their
manner, as I have shown, yet not so far as at first to make it (...) but
preserved the last c of Bratanac, by which they acknowledged it a Phoenician
derivation, which is very remarkable, so that Strabo all along calls it (...),
and (...), Bretanica, not Bretania; so that Bretanica is Ancienter than
Bretannia, as Punicum, and Poenicum, derived from Phoenix, are Ancienter than
Poenum, which yet seems to be of a more primitive extract, and nature. The same
may be said of Afri, Marmoridae, Messabatae, later in time than their
Primitives, Africa, Marmarica, Messabatica (as Learned Bochartus proves) from
whence they were derived.

Now the reason of this Chang of Bretanica into Bretania, by the Greeks, is
this, because (...) seems, according to the Idiom of their Language, to be an
Adjective, and so defective in sense without (...) joined to it, might give
occasion of mistake in Readers to understand it, which was always carefully
prevented by the Graecians, who studied nothing more than Elegancy of style.

In that little Book De Mundo, which is falsely fathered upon Aristotle, as,
besides other Errors, the Luxury of the style witnesses, I find (...),
Bretanica the primitive Substantive, by Error, turned into an Adjective. So
that when once Bretanica, or Bratanac, came to be Bretannia, we ought not to
wonder at the several Changes, as (...) in the body of the World as in its
Terminations, as (...), Bretania, Brettania, Britannia, Brittannia, the People
Britanni, and so on to Britones, Britus, Britton, for this is very ordinary in
Places themselves, whose Original Names are undoubtedly known, where men by
negligence mistake a Humor, or Dialect, often deviate from the true Original.

But to clear every point, I will further search this Termination of BRITANNIA,
which Mr. Cambden calls (...), which I think improperly, and ought to be only
(...), that being a frequent Termination of Countries in the World, as
Germania, Pomerania, Transylvania, and Romania; this I believe was the reason
too why Bretanica was turned into Britannia, because it corresponded with the
Idiom of other Terminations; and Mr. Cambden says, that (...) in the Greek
Glossaries, betokens a Region, which is granted in some Compositions, but
then must be considered, whether the word to be compounded, end in a Vowel or
Consonant, for if it ends in a Consonant, (...) makes the Composition, but if
it end in a Vowel, as Mauri, Aqui, the T is put in for sounds sake, because
Mauriania, Aquiania cannot sound well, and that T is a letter often used
Euphoniae gratia [as it is aster ce in French, cet un, and n among the Saxons
before a Vowel, as an Island,] among the Greeks, without any other
signification; as any one versed in that Language may understand. And this is
the true Reason, I suppose, why the Mauritania, Aquitania, and falsely
Britannia, as Mr. Cambden says, are the only Countries of note that end in
(...), because it did not happen in compounding in other Countries names, that
they ended partly in a Vowel.

Thus much considered concerning (...), let us see how it could be added to
Brith, to clear out Mr. Cambden's Britannia, for add (...) to Brith and it
makes Brithtania, which would have been written by the Greeks (...), according
to their Idiom; and let Mr. Cambden make as little as he will of the H, yet it
is the Shibboleth, or Caracteristical note of the British, and Teutonik Dialect
in general, and we know words as blithea, sith, which can never be made vlite,
site; with, teeth, become wit and teet, are clear of another signification
without the h.

And if (...) had been added to Brith, it would have made (...), which, I
think, proves, that Brith alone was not the name of these Islanders, but rather
Britani, as Pomerani, Pomerania, not Pomeranani; Romani, Romania, not
Romanania, if you give the name from the People so called, or, as I rather
apprehend, from Pomer, Rom, the any being rather taken from ania, than ania
from any.

So that when Bratanac was mollified first into Bretanica, as in Strabo, than
into Bretania; It is to be supposed, the People were called Bretani, Brittani,
by themselves, Strabo.
or something like it, according to the Dialect of their Neighbors, but
neither Brit, or Brith, but by diminution and corruption; as at this day we
call a Switzar, a Swis; so that although the Saxons called the Britains, in
their Language, (...), and Witigandus the Saxon every where names the Britains,
Britae, yet this proves not Brit to be the Primitive any more, than the
Phoenicians being called Poeni, prove that Punicum (as I said before) and
Poenicum were derived from it, when all the World knows Poenicum to be the
Primitive. For granting, just before the Saxons days they were called Brits,
Brittae, yea and in Caesar's days too, yet this makes not that Britannia came
from Brit, this Age being many hundred years subsequent to the first discovery
of it by the Phoenicians, and how Bratanac might be altered and changed in
those days, delivered only from mouth to mouth, in a Rude and ignorant Age,
wherein they had few Records and Writings, I leave it to the wisest to judge.

And here it is carefully to be noted, that in deriving of Nations and People,
we mistake not in the primitive and first Name, by thinking that to be it which
in reality is only part of the whole, and not a distinct composure by it self,
as here it is in Brit and ania, where Brit is only made part of the
signification, and ania, because it corresponds with other like Terminations,
is only a hanger on: To give one Example, of the Euxine-Sea, called (...) or
(...), where (...) or (...) is taken for the Primitive alone, A or Ev being
thought to be given to it only, as People stood affected or disaffected to the
Inhabitants upon it; so that if you make it (...), it is the most Barbarous
place in the World, if (...), pretty tolerable, however (...) is accounted the
Primitive, for A or Ev being joined to it, are of (...) real signification to
the Thing, but only to the Affections of Men; yet, in the diligent search after
the Antiquity of those Coasts, we find that the Alpha is a real and essential
part of (...), and not a privative Particle, for that (...) is derived from
Askenaz, from whom also came the River and Lake Ascanius, the Ascanean Islands,
the City and Country Asania.

In like manner may it undoubtedly be thought, has happened to Britania, the
(...), by reason of its similitude with other Terminations being neglected,
(...) alone carries the glory of the Derivation, when as in reality (...) had a
real part and share in it, as derived from Bretanica, and being Anciently Anac
signifying Tynn among the Phoenicians.

To show a little of these sorts of Derivations, I shall instance in two only,
BRITAIN, and LONDON its Famous Metropolis. I desire the Reader, for diversion
sake, to imagine himself living two or three thousand years hence, as Ovid
wittily makes his Pythagoras, and suppose likewise that some fatal Barbarism
should overrun the World, that most Writings and Records of Britain were lost,
and only the Name of it, and some of our present Language and Roman Histories
preserved, let us then see which way men would go to work; perhaps some or
other might happily blunder upon Brutus, but, by the wary and judicious, that
would soon be exploded, as too fabulous to derive Britannia; Well then, first
(...), that must be granted to have been a Termination of that Kingdom, which
in the Reign of King CHARLES the Second (as we find on an English-Coyn was
called BRITANNIA) so that it is evident it was named so in those days, all the
pudder will be about BRIT, but says one I have found it, Britannia was called
from the English word Bright, signifying Shining, and so, Britanni quasi
Brightania, for I find that the English in those days had a project to leave
out those Letters as superfluous which sounded not in the Pronunciation, so
that g and h being left out, Britannia is as much as the Light, or shining
Country, for I find in a Roman Satyrist -- minima contentos, noite Britannos.
In which words the Poet intimates its derivation, for the Britains have but
very little Night, and in some parts none at all, so that the business now is
ended, and we have a solid and unquestionable derivation of its Name.

In like manner would they proceed in deriving the Great and Famous Metropolis
LONDON. I have seen, says one, upon this great and noble River (but by what
name the Thames will be then called, God alone knows) the Ruins of a CITY,
which extends six miles in length, and in breadth not above one quarter of a
mile, and this I guess was LONDON of the Ancients, or Long-Cown, so called by
the English, by reason of its vast disproportion in length to the breadth of
it; and so you see London is also dispatched.

But if in truth I may deliver my Opinion, there is no way more fallacious and
deceitful, in deriving of Kingdoms and Cities, than from the Language of the
People, for I scarce think there is a Town, or any place in England, but by
fertile Heads may be derived from some word or other that is now in use among
its present Inhabitants, every place yielding something, either by Situation,
Soil, or else Creek of Rivers, Prospect of Hills and Valleys, Customs and
Manners, Battles, Buildings, with thonsands of other Circumstances too tedious
to mention, from whence they may be deduced.

Now I leave it to any Rational man to judge, whether it be not more proper and
consonant to Reason, to derive Places from their undoubted Trade, by which they
were known to all the World, as the Isles of SCILLY were, by the name of
Cassiterides of the Greeks, and Barat-anac or Bratanac of the Phoenicians, than
to deduce them from the uncertain sound and coincidency of a word, with some
light and trivial Custom among them.

The Reason that absolutely confirms me in the Opinion, the Scilly Islands gave
Name at last to this Great ISLAND, that now alone keeps the name of Britannia,
Pliny.
is, because Pliny writes, that this Island was called ALBION, when as all the
Islands adjacent were called BRITAIN: so that we see the name of Bratanac first
took place in the adjacent Islands, before it came on the main Land of Albion,
but in succession of Time the Name gaining footing in Cornwall and Devonshire,
it prevailed at last over all the Island, and the greater part swallowed up at
last the Name of the whole, although corrupted and distorted by the several
Dialects it ran through.

And that the exported Commodities of Countries gave Names anciently to People,
by which they were most commonly known, although they might have other Names
peculiar to themselves, will be manifest, if we consider how Africa and Ebora,
part of Spain, took their names from Corn, Iava, called of Old Iabaduc, from
Barley; Carmania, Cremetes, Sicilia, Inychus, Anapus, Arvisium, Arambys, from
Wine; Ruspina and Ebusus, from Figgs; Zaita and Uzita, from Olives; Lusitania,
not from Lysus the Son of Bacchus, but from the abundance of Chestnuts called
Luza, and the delicacy of them, a great Merchandise in those days, and brought
from those parts of Spain. Italy and Calabria took their Names from the Pitch
they yielded; Cythnus from its Cheese, Calymna and Alabus from its Honey;
Caristus, Achates, from certain Stones found there, and the British Islands
from its Metal; as also Chasus, Chryse, Odonis, Siphnus, Cimese, Carcoma,
Orospeda, with many others.

For considering the many diversities of People and Governments in this Island,
it is not reasonably to be supposed, that they had one common Name among
themselves by which the whole Island was known, unless they had it from
Foreigners who Traded with them.

If we examine the Original Names of all Nations, we shall find that the Name
by which they are known to the World, differs much from those Names they have
from themselves, and by which too they do distinguish one another; yet the
Major part of the World which is ab extra to every particular Kingdom, prevails
in the denomination, therefore it happens that those Kingdoms themselves so
denominated, are obliged to conform to those Appellations given them by the
Major part; and therefore that saying of Isidore, That the BRITAINS were called
so from something Isidore:
within them, in my reason as it makes no more for Brit, Painting, than for
King BRUTUS, is to be neglected. For the same Motives that could make an
Historian write so much, might have enabled him to have writ more; for he that
can positively affirm, that a NAME comes from within a Kingdom, and not from
without, in my Opinion, ought to be particular in valuable Reasons, otherwise
he had better be silent, being against the experience of the World; That
Nations receive their Names not from themselves, but others.

But if Isidore means, that BRITAIN had something within it from whence
Strangers gave it that Name, then none can deny it, for it is true, that these
Islands took their Name from the TYNN they yielded, though not all alike and at
the same time.

And here I cannot but wonder, that when Mr. Cambden had laid down, that CUMERO
was the primitive Name of the Inhabitants, by which they called themselves, he
then in answer to his own Questions, Whence then came ALBION? Whence came
BRITAIN? says, that those Names came either from themselves, or from others,
when just before he had given Examples, That Countries have different Names,
some Names by which they called themselves, others by which they were called of
Strangers, for as follows, I will set down his own words; They that were called
Israelites, says he, by the Greeks, were called Hebrews and Jews, by the
Egyptians Huesi, as witnesses Manethon: so the Greeks named those Syrians
(who as Josephus Manethon. Josephus.
writes) called themselves Aramaeans; they which named themselves Chusians,
were by the Graecians, for their black Faces, called AEthiopians, those which
after their own Speech were called Celtae, the Greeks named Galatae, so those
that nominated themselves, after their own Language, Teutsch, Numideans and
Hellens, by the Romans were named Germans, Mauri and Graecians: even so in
these days, not to speak of many others, they which in their own Idiom,
Musselmans, Magier, Czecchi and Bessermans, are by all Nations in Europe named
Turks, Hungarians, Bohemians and Tartarians: so even we our selves in England,
by our Native and natural Speech, call our selves English men, but by the
Welsh, Irish men, and the High-land Scots, Saffons, that is as much as to say,
Saxons.

Now what follows from this, but that the Inhabitants of this Island being
called CUMERO by themselves, were by some others named BRITAINS; No, for this
will destroy all, then they could not give themselves Brit, etc. from their
Painting, which assisted much to the derivation of BRITANNIA, therefore (says
he) mark I pray you, they were upon some other cause, by themselves or others,
named BRITAINS. But why by themselves? when he had proved before they were
called CUMERO by themselves, and by the Examples he brought, if they were
proper, he ought to have inferred, they received their Names of Britains from
Others, which indeed they did, as I have partly shown, and shall show more at
large hereafter.

Grant we then that Brit or Brith, etc. was the name of these Islanders, and
that the name signifies in their Tongue, Painted, depainted, dyed or colored,
yet it is not reasonable to believe, that Brit signifying a Britain, came from
Brith signifying a Coloring, but rather that Brith, Coloring, came from
Britha, a Britain: my Reason is this; Because that Customs in Nations, arising
from some general likings, and insensible creepings upon the People, are not so
much taken notice of by themselves, as by Neighbors and lookers on, so that
although they may be remarkable in themselves, yet are they not so to those who
by several gradations and steps have received them; for which cause I am not
deceived, if I think that names of Countries arising from some strange and
unaccountable Customs, have been given them by their Neighbors, who have been
absolutely surprised by them for the novelty of them. For instance of which
shall be Gallia Comata, not called so by themselves but their Neighbors, by
reason of their immoderate nourishing their Long hair.

The like may be said concerning the Aspect, Greatness, Situation, Nature, and
other Circumstances of People; and here is to be observed, that the Ethiopians
had nothing in their own Denomination of themselves that signified Black,
because it was no wonder in their own Country to be so, AEthiopem Albus
derideat; neither ought we to think, that the Islands of the Cannibals, now
called the Caribees, had any thing in their own Appellation given to
themselves, that denoted any such barbarous Action. But it was the Complexions
of the one, and Customs of the other, that gave occasion to Strangers to call
them so.

This is a good Argument to induce me to believe, that the Britains were not
called Brith by themselves, from their being Painted.

That which confirms most in this Opinion, is the connection of Reason, but
rather the coincidence of Words; It is certain, say they, that these Islanders
were a Painted-people, Brit signifying Painting, and these Painted-people were
called Brits, therefore Bryth must needs give them their Name.

To this I Answer, Let us consider how many names of Nations have become common
Appellatives, of some Customs peculiarly belonging to such Nations.

To instance in a few: A Sybarite, signifying a debauched Person, from Sybaris,
the most exquisite of Luxurious Commonwealths; a Ghaldean was a common name
among the Jews for any South-sayer; an Egyptian; was as much as to say a
Magician or Sorcerer: so it is supposed it happened with the Britains, when
they were immoderately given to Painting themselves, that their Neighbors, the
Gauls or some others, by long use, might call whatever was painted by the name
of Brit or Brith, as much as to say, Like a Britain, so that in time a
Painted-man and a Britain might be all one, the proper name Britain being
become a common Appellative.

To evidence this plainer, let us look farther into the word Egyptian, and we
shall see something more in its Derivatives that makes to this case. In the
time of the Saracens possession of Spain, there entered a sort of People into
Christendom calling themselves Egyptians, as much as to say Subtle or
Cunning People, and so took up the trade of Fortune Tellers, Egypt having in
those days kept up the repute of such Sciences; These sort of People used to
paint their Hands, Face, and Neck, as they do to this day, to make themselves
appear more horrid and strange, and are now at this day, among us, called
Gypsies, not that all came out of Egypt, or pretended so, but because they use
the same Arts in Painting and Fortune-telling, and in our Laws provided against
them are called Gypsies, or People coloring their Hands and Face.

Now some have derived, though falsely, these Gypsies from the Greek word (...),
which signifies Paint, because a painted Person in that manner, and a Gypsy,
is all one.

Now as Gypsy has no relation to painting it self, but by accident, and the
syllable (...) ought not to be the Root alone of its Derivation seeing it is
derived from AEgypti, primitively and immediately from the Egyptians, so I
think it is with the word Brit, signifying Painting, that it came from the
People called Britains, and not that the Britains came from it; so from Egypt
comes an Egyptian, from thence a Gypsy, and from whence, if I am not mistaken,
a Gyp, the meanest of Servants, a swarthy Turn-spit, etc.

In like manner I think that Brit comes from Britanni, and they from Britannia,
Britania, from Strabo's (...), which was the Bratanac of the Phoenicians: so
Strabo.
that their Painting comes in only by accident in the diminutive Brith, and
has nothing to do in the Original Primitive of Britannia, the Root of which
ought not to be Brit alone.

And although it is to be supposed that none can be so mad, as to derive Egypt
from Gyp, the Antiquity of the name Egypt being sufficiently known, yet it has
happened that the not considering of the Antiquity of Britannia, which really
was the Bratanac of the Phoenicians, has caused that Brith and Brits, whence
(...) of the Saxons (many hundred years after the First Olympiad when this
Island received the Name) which are diminutions and corruptions of the
Primitive word, have been accounted the Original.

To manifest this, let us hear what Humphry Lloyd, a Gambro-Britain, and a
Humphry Lloyd.
Learned and diligent Searcher after Antiquities, says, concerning BRITAIN,
namely, he confidently and boldly affirms, that there is not any British word
whose first Radical Letter is B; if this be true, then it plainly appears that
the word Brith and Brit, if not the same with Pride, are not genuine British
words, but are derived from some Foreign Name, which crept by degrees into
their Language, which exactly agrees with the Bratanac of the Phoenicians, or
the Greeks (...), and (...), words by Trading and Custom introduced into their
Language, whose Idiom in their own genuine production admits not of a B in the
first Radical.

Hence I believe it might proceed, that when the Greeks had named them (...),
and their Country (...), the Islanders after their own manner turned the B into
a P and called themselves Prydayns (as Humphry Lloyd proves out of Ancient
Copies, and Traditions of their Old Poets, and Bardi) for it is Recorded by
Bishop Cooper something to this purpose.

At Evy Church (says he) two miles from Salisbury, in the digging down of a
Bish, Cooper:
Wall, a Book, containing twenty Leaves of very thick Velom was found, which
from the hands of Mr. Richard Pace, Chief Secretary to the King, I read, but
being sore defaced, could read no one Sentence through, yet could I well
perceive in several places the word Prytania.

If this Book be admitted of any considerable Antiquity, as that Humphry Lloyd
speaks true, that there is no first Radical Letter B in the Welsh Tongue, but
that they were called Prydayns by themselves, I believe, without doubt, the
Greeks, from this way of the Islanders, derived them from (...), Prytania,
signifying Metals in their own Language, for they knowing that the first
Original Name Bretanica came from the Phoenicians, in which name the Commodity
of the Country, Tynn, was expressed, and finding it corrupted by the Natives
into Pretan, Prytan, or something like it, easily making (...), wittingly
embraced this occasion to derive the Country from a word from their own
Language, signifying Metals; so that if there be any truth in the Derivation
of (...), it must of necessity proceed from this Fountain.

The like may be said of Bretta, the Spanish word Earth, from whence some have
derived it; For if there be any kind of Truth delivered by Tradition of such a
thing among the Spaniards, then it must come from those Spaniards which in
former times were called Iberi, that is, Diggers in Mines, and as the word
imports, it was derived from the Phoenicians.

That these Iberi might be employed by the Phoenicians in the Tynn Mines in
BRITAIN is not unlike, for Tacitus says, That the Complexion of the South
Tacitus.
part of Britain differs much from the Northern, and both from those parts that
lie upon France; and therefore he is of Opinion, that the North parts were
Peopled by the Germans, the Eastern Coast by the opposite Neighbors the Gauls,
and the South parts by the Iberi. This he gathers by the different Complexion
of the People, the North Britains being Fair, having large Limbs, long Yellow
hair, as the Germans have; the South Britains being Swarthy, and Curled hair
like the Spaniards; the Coast lying upon France, agreeing in Language,
Customs, and in every thing with the Gauls.

It is difficult to persuade me, that Primitively any part of Britain could be
Peopled out of Spain by entire Colonies, but rather that it is more natural,
that this Island being peopled by Colonies descending down the Rhine, and
filling France, Belgium, and all that Tract of Ground, the Spaniards came to
the South part as Miners only, being very active and expert in that Trade,
having plenty of Mines in their own Country, as the Roman Histories witness,
continued unexhausted even to Hannibals days.

According to this account, it must certainly be vainly supposed of the
derivation of Britain from Bretta, signifying Earth in Spanish, especially when
considered, this Island once in conjunction with the Continent; but from the
Spanish Mariners, who took Bretta from the Phoenician Brat, the first syllable
in Bratanac signifying Earth. For it will frequently happen, that the Truth of
things is delivered down, though the Reason by which men would evidence them,
are often vain and frivolous, according to the diverse apprehensions and
conceptions of Men.

The time when the Phoenicians came from Tire and Zidon, their own Native
Country, to discover BRITAIN.
THE next thing I shall show, is about what time the Phoenicians, from Tire,
came into the Western Seas, and when in all reason it may be supposed they
discovered and named this Island, for from the Certainty and Antiquity of their
Navigations will depend the evidence of our Derivation. And I shall also make
it appear, that the Tyrians before the Trojan War, under their Captain and
Country man Hercules, having Trafficked to all the parts of the Inland Sea, at
last passed the Streights of Gibraltar, having first built several Cities on
the Streights, and possessed Tartessus, Erythea, and Gades, Islands, with great
part of the Continent of Spain and Africa, lying on the Sea Coasts, as many
Monuments of their Language and Customs do evidence; And that the Western Sea
was discovered before the Trojan War, we learn from the Ancient Poets Orpheus,
and Homer, with whom nothing is more frequent than those sayings, That the
EARTH was an Island, and encompassed round with the SEA. And first Orpheus,

(...)
(...)
The Sea around the Earth her Water throws,
And in that Circle does it all enclose.
Upon this very account was it called AMPHITRITE by Homer, its going round the
Earth, as Herodotus speaks in his fourth Book. Herudotus, lib. 4.


Homer makes the Sun to arise and set in the Ocean, and in the first Mapp of
the World, as I may call it, the Shield of Achilles which Vulcan makes him, we
find that the Earth was in the midst of the Waters, for the SEA was placed
Vulcanus.


(...)
Upon the extreme borders of the Shield.
From whence could Orpheus and Homer have this, if not by Tradition from the
Phoentcians, for Colaeus Samius was the first of the Greeks that discovered the
Western Ocean, and he lived four hundred years after Homer, besides he never
went farther than Tartessus, but contented himself with the discovery of the
Streights mouth only, and to have seen that Ocean, so that we must suppose
Homer had it by Tradition from the Phoenicians, as Bochartus proves him to have
had many Names Bochartus.
of Places, particularly the ELYSIAN FIELDS, in Hispania BETICA.

Let us hearken also what Strabo says to this business, speaking of the
Phoenicians; Strabo, lib. I.
They (says he) went beyond HERCULES Pillars, and there built Cities even to
the middle of Lybia on the Sea Coast, a little while after the TROJAN War; and
Mr. Milton says, that he thinks that ALBION has some relation to these Actions
in Lybia, quasi Alebion, so called by the Phoenicians, which in my opinion is
the Milton.
most probable Derivation I ever read of ALBION. However we see that the
Navigations of the Phoenicians into these Seas were Ancient.

Herodotus makes mention with wonder of some Phoenicians sent by Nero, how
Herodotus in Melpomene.
they failed round Africa and returned through the Streights of Gibraltar,
having in their Voyage the Sun on their Right hand, part of which story
Herodotus will not believe. It must needs be true, for after they had passed
the Tropic of Cancer, beyond which Africa runs out many degrees. Now this
story so innocently told by Herodotus as a Wonder, argues the Ignorance of the
Greeks, and the great Experience the Phoenicians had in those Seas, all along
the Coast of Africa.

This, I conjecture, is the cause why men, beyond Reason, have drawn their
Voyages even to the East Indies under King Solomon, and to the West under Hanno
and Himilco, a Fate we often see that attends Great Actions, when over-fond men
out of a desire to magnisie things Famous beyond their true proportions,
inconsiderately stretch them beyond the bounds of Truth and Modesty.

Having said thus much of the Derivation of BRITANNIA, that it came from the
Phoenicians Bratanac, let us see whether the Graecians might not take the name
ALBION from that Nation also; It is agreed on most hands, that it had its
denomination of ALBION from its Whiteness, and it is observable that Orpheus,
or rather Onomacritus calls it (...), the WHITE ISLAND, and the British Poets
name it Inis Wen, the White Island, whether from the Plasterish Soil (as
Faucastorius thinks) or the White Rocks about it, is uncertain.

That it came from the Latins ALBIS RUPIBUS is impossible, because it was known
to the Greeks by this Name long before the Latins, and that it proceeded from
(...), signifying WHITE in the Greek Tongue is very unlikely, because being
called Albion when the rest of the Islands about it were named Bretanicks; It
may be supposed to have gone by this Name long before the Greeks entered these
Seas, when the Tynn Mines in Cornwall and Devonshire were not yet found out; For
upon the discovery of the Mines in those Countries the name of BRITAIN was
given to part of this Island also, and ALBION by degrees began to grow out of
use.

From ALBEN therefore in the Phoenician Tongue, signifying WHITE, it may with
most probability be derived, and as the Greeks translated Brat-anac, the
Country of Tynn, into Cassiterides, and afterward (...), why might they not
turn likewise Alben into (...), and (...), or White Island, and afterward vary
it into Albion.

Bochartus takes notice that the Mountains upon France, commonly called the
Bochartus.
Alps, were sometimes named ALBIA, from their continual Whiteness. Now seeing
that the Phoenicians were in Liguria and those parts of France, as likewise in
Britain before the Greeks, it is rather to be supposed that ALBION, and ALBIA,
came from their Alben than the Greeks (...), White, and it may be easily
thought that both the Latin word Albus, and Greek (...), were both originally
derived from the Phoenician, Alben.

I will only set down one conjecture more of the name of Albion, and that is
ALPIN, which in the Phoenician Tongue signifies a high Mountain. In the Country
of the Silures, now South Wales, there are many high Cliffs, which the
Britains, from the Phoenicians, call Pens to this day.

Now seeing it may be supposed that the Phoenicians Landed in those parts, why
might they not call that part of the Island Alben or Alpin, from whence Albion
might afterward proceed, the B and P being easily convertible, and seeing that
the name of ALBION is so Ancient, it is far more probable it was taken from
those parts where the first Traders arrived, than from the Cliffs of Dover,
frequented only by the little Traffic of the Continent.

And that which makes further to the confirmation of this Derivation of Albion
from Alben, White in the Phoenician Tongue, or Alpin, High and Mountainous in
the same Dialect, is, that the High-land Scots who were once part of the
Britains, and to this day retain the British Language, call that Country which
they inhabit, Alban or Albin, whereupon Blondus terms the Scots, Albinenses as
well as Albienses, and Buchanan, Albini, why might not therefore the whole
Island in former times be generally Blondus. Buchanan.
called Alban or Albin, and afterward Albion by corruption, seeing that the
same Author names the Scots, Albienses and Albinenses, promiscuously.

Moreover it is to be observed, as to the Derivation of Albion from Alpin, that
St. Hierom inveighing against a Pelagian, a Scot by Nation, calls him an
Alpine Dog, which Mr. Cambden would correct, and in the place of Alpin puts in
Albin, by which name the Highlanders call their Country; Because, says he, of
Alpin Dogs I never remember I have read ought, but Scottish Dogs were very
famous at Rome even in those days. As if St. Hierom by Alpin Dog, meant a Dog
of the Alps and not of Scotland; I see therefore no reason why the word should
be changed, for if the Greeks could call the Alps as well (...), Albions as
well as Alpions, and that from the Phoenician Alben and Alpin, why might not
St. Hierom call the Scots Alpins as well as Albins, upon the same account,
especially seeing the change is so inconsiderable.

What the Highlanders call Alban and Albin, the Irish call Allabany, and Mr.
Cambden puts the question, whether this word Allabany may not have some
token in it of the ancient ALBION? but why does he not rather ask, whether
Alban and Albin, by which the Natives call their Country, does not rather carry
some footsteps of Albion than Allabany, a Foreign word, pronounced after the
broad and scattering manner of the Irish.

The Reason is plain, Alban and Albin have nothing in them of the Scottish,
which is also the British, or of the Irish Tongue, higher than which he never
goes. But Allabany will afford matter for a pretty Derivation.

It is Question, says he, for a liberal and searching Wit to travel in; he
gives therefore two Conjectures as touching the name of Allabany, but not one
of Alban or Albin, might it not come of Whiteness, says he, which they call
Ban, and import as much as Ellan-Ban, that is a White Island, or from Banne, by
which the Irish Poets call their Country, and (...) the Greek word, signifies
ANOTHER, so that Allabany may sound as much as another Ireland; for, says he
(pray mark the Reason) Ancient Historians call Ireland, Scotland the Greater,
and the Kingdom of the Scots in Britain, Scotland the Less; but I never heard
that they were called Ireland the Greater, and Ireland the Less, so that
Allabany, allowing Banne in the Poets sense, will never truly derive it; as for
his joining a Greek word to make out the Derivation, I pass it over, seeing it
is no more than what he has done in Britain it self.

Thus you see he takes care for the Irish Allabany, but as for Alban and Albin
of the Highlanders, carrying the true footsteps of Alpin and Alben in the
Phoenician Tongue, and the undoubted Mother not only of the Ancient Albion, but
the more Modern Albania, and this corrupt Allabany he provideth not at all, yet
I doubt not but the derivation of this Island from Alben or Alpin in the
Phoenician Tongue, and the Natives pure pronunciation thereof Alban and Albin,
will be more satisfactory to the Enquirers into Truth, after the name of
ALBION, than any thing that can be produced from the distorted Pronunciation
thereof, ALLABANY.

Mr. Milton will have it Alebion, and to have some relation to Lybia from the
Milton's Nist. of England.
Greek Colonies in those parts, but had he considered that they were Phoenician
Colonies, as shall be shown in the sequel, their names only being Greekified,
he might have given a more solid Reason.

As for the Giant Albion, and Albina Dioclesians Daughter, I think they are not
worth the mentioning in this place, as the Original of ALBION. Likewise King
Brutus for BRITANNIA, I will pass over, leaving the Truth of that story to be
discussed in the British History.

Concerning the Phoenicians on the West Coasts of Africa, because Mr. Milton
says, that Albion has some relation to Lybia, I will be more particular,
especially seeing he takes notice only of the Greeks, and not Phoenicians who
were many years before acquainted with those Places, and from whose Idiom
Alebion is easily derived.

In HANNO's Navigation, written by himself in the Phoenician Tongue, and The
Phoenician HANNO's Navigations.
set out in Greek by Sigismundus Gelenius at Bazil, Anno 1533, I find that the
Phoenicians on the West part of Africa built diverse Cities: The question is
what Hanno this was?

Gerardus Vossius makes him that Hanno whom the Garthaginians sent against
Agathocles Gerardus Vossius. Isaac Vossius.
, but Isaac Vossius proves this Hanno to be Ancienter, because Scylax who
flourished under Darius Nothus, records Cities built by that Hanno.

For my own part, I verily believe it was Hanno who is mentioned by AElianus,
who desired to be esteemed as a God, no doubt as his Predecessor Hercules had
AElianus.
been, for his excellency in Navigation, a manifest sign he lived early in the
Deifying Age of the World.

However it be, with a great Fleet of Threescore Sail, and accompanied with
Thirty thousand Men, he passes the Streights of Gibraltar, and after two days
Sail finding a pleasant Plain of Ground, he built Dumathiria, so called from
its low Situation, although corrupted by the Greeks, after their manner, into
(...), and the like; Afterward passing a Promontory, to which he gave the name
Solois or Solountis, for its Cragginess, he came to a Lake, a days Sail, where
he built Caricum, Gytta, Acra, Melitta, Arambe, the last of which is only
remaining; so that all the Coast West of Africa, from the Streights Mouth to
Cerne, Chernaa of the Phoenicians, signifying the last Habitation, was filled
with the Colonies of Phoenicians, and beyond Cerne they had not one Colony.

From this Cerne or Herne ((...) Cheth being resolved in h) I think the Ancient
name of Ireland, Erne and Jerne as Strabo calls it proceeded, rather than from
Strabo. Bochartus.
Ibernae as Learned Bochartus shows it, although both of the same
signification, and implies as much as the uttermost Habitation, as indeed
Ireland is, Westward. But if Hibernia be not derived ab Hiberno tempore by the
Romans, which I think not, by reason that Ireland has not such sharp Winters
by far as England; Then, I think, Iberne of the Phoenicians takes place,
signifying the uttermost Land, for naturally from it proceeded (...), Juverna,
and from Herne comes Jerne, and Jerna, and Jernis, as Orpheus, or rather
Onomacritus taught by the Phoenician, Onomacritus.
writes,

(...).
It lay against Jerne Isle.
These Derivations I take to be truer than to fetch it from Erin of the
Natives, and that from Hiere signifying the west Wind among them, because I
have shown before, that Countries that have their name from Scituations and
Customs, receive them from ab extra, for to the Natives Ireland is no more a
West Country than England, unless they compare it with Eastern parts; But to
speak the truth of the matter, every Country by its situation receiving a
Name, has it from its Neighbors, as the West Indies and East Indies are called
as they lie to us, there being no such name known among them. So Anciently
Gallia was divided by the Romans into Cisalpina and Transalpina: In like manner
you may imagine the East Saxons were called by the West, and the West Saxons by
the East, or else by some Third Person.

It is easy to imagine how Jerne might by long use come to be Erin among the
Natives, if we do but consider what strange Alterations and Mutations have
happened in the English Tongue it self in a few years, yea how one Dialect
varies from another, as may be seen in the Chapter treating of that Subject.

The Reason which concludes me in the Belief that Ireland took its name from
the Phoenicians, is, because in the uttermost Coast of Spain westward, is a
Promontory called by Strabo, Jerne, and the River next unto it is called by
Mela, Jerne: so Strabo: Pomp Mela.
that we see when Spain was the uttermost bounds of the knowledge of the
Phoenicians, Spain was called (...), but when these Islands were discovered,
then Ireland took the name as being the Uttermost: I cannot imagine how the
Names should so exactly correspond, if they had not the same Original; Besides,
in the farthermost parts of Ireland there is a River called by Ptolomy, Jernus,
agreeing in name with the River Jerne in Spain, and all this cannot be from
Hiere, signifying West in Irish, because Ptolomy.
there is no Language in Europe, besides the Irish, that have any such kind of
word to signisie the West; for we find those Countries that have any thing of
West Position, are in the Teutonick called so, adding West, as Westrich,
Westphalia, to Germany; Westminster, Westchester, etc. to London.

So that Mr. Cambden is much to be suspected, as guilty of a mistake in his
Derivation of Ireland, and Irish men, whom he fetches out of Spain from the
point Jerna, from whence supposing they came. By the way of my discourse let me
ask this Question. By whom was the River and Promontory Jerna in Spain called?
if he says, By the Inhabitants themselves, from Hiere, it being west of Spain,
I would be glad to know from whence came this Hiere, it having no relation to
the Spanish Tongue, nor any Dialect or Language in Europe besides, and we know
none that lived Anciently in those parts of Spain but were either Phoenician or
Greek Colonies, which have nothing like in their Languages relating to Hiere,
signifying the West; But in the Phoenician Tongue the derivation is so easy
from Iberne or Herne, to bring Berne and Jerne, that seeing the Phoenicians
lived west of any in Spain and Africa, and called the uttermost part of both
after that Name, as is manifest out of the Periplus of Hanno.

It is therefore reasonably to be supposed, when they came to discover these
Lands, and found Ireland the Uttermost, that then they gave it the name Jerne,
so that the Derivation of Ireland runs thus: Herne or Iberne of the Phoenicians
turned by the Greeks into Jerne, as Orpheus, Aristotle and Claudian have it;
(...), Orpheus. Aristotle. Claudian. Eustathius. Martian. Juvenal. Pomp. Mela.
Diod. Siculus.
as Eustathius; and (...), by Martian of Heraclea; by Juvenal and Mela,
Juvernia; by Diodorus Siculus, Iris; by the Natives, Erin; from the Britains or
Welsh, Yuerdon; and the English, Ireland.

Now I think the Derivation of it is not to be sought from Eria, and that from
Hiere, which is made the Root of all these Derivations, according to Mr.
Cambden's way, than which nothing is more easy and fallacious, but from the
Phoenicians.

Seeing we have said thus much of Ireland, it will not be amiss to treat of
THULE also, a place Famous in the Writings of the Ancients, because the
examination of the Name of this Island, and showing of it to be of Phoenician
derivation, will conduce much to the confirming and proving of what has been
said concerning the Original name of BRITAIN.

For since it is not to be doubted but the Phoenicians Traded into these parts,
it could not happen by chance, that the Names of all these Islands should
preserve so entirely (as they do in the Phoenician Language) the very marks and
footsteps of those things for which they were so taken notice of by all the
Ancients; so that the consent and harmony of the names of so many Places, with
their very natures, both in sense and sound, confirms each others derivation,
and puts it beyond dispute, that Britain was named Bratanac by the Phoenicians
for its Tynn, for which only thing it was famous to the then known World, as
Ierue or Iverue was called so from its Western, and Thule, as shall be shown,
from its Northern, or Dark situation.

Bochartus mentions three Opinions of the Ancients concerning the Position of
Bochartus.
THULE.

The first and worst of them makes it Scandia, which is Procopius his Judgment,
Procopius.
but Scandia is not an Island as Thule was supposed to be, but a Peninsula, I
think his Opinion is not so much to be blamed upon that account, seeing this
was never absolutely defined. But his singularity is rather to be condemned in
fixing of it in that quarter of the World, so remote from those parts others
thought it lay upon.

The second is of Pytheas Massitilensis, that it lies six days Sail northward
of Britain, and has the Summer Tropic, for the Artick Circle, and in the
Solstice Pytheas Mass.
has little or no Nights, and no Days in Winter, which agrees exactly with
Ireland.

The third Opinion is of Marinus and Ptolomy, by whom THULE is Marinus, Ptolomy.
made no great Island, situated in the sixty third Degree, where the longest
Day is twenty hours, and not above two days Sail from Britain, which agrees
with Schetland, one of the Orcades.

But I rather believe Bochartus, that there was no such particular place as
Thule, but that the Phoenicians sailing Northward on our Seas, and being
obliged to return upon the account of the Suns turning from his Tropic, they
gave the name of Thule to those places which were the Extremest, and by reason
of their approaching Darkness, put a stop to their further Navigations, and
that the Tradition of this was delivered by them to the Graecians, and by them
to the Romans, so that they called that THULE which was the Extremest part of
the then known World.

With this description of Thule agrees exactly the word Tule or Thule of the
Phoenicians, signifying Darkness; for Teth by them is often expressed by Theta,
as in Cadmus his Alphabet, although AEthicus writes it, Insula Tilae, and
Gerirat Thule, Cadmus his Alphabet. AEthicus.
is with the Phoenicians, The Island of Darkness.

We well know the Northern Climates of the World are taken notice of for their
Darkness, not so much by reason of their long Nights, as their gloomy and
obscure Days, for with Homer, (...) (Odyss. 1. v. 25.) to Darkness, is the
same with Homer, Odyss. 1. verse. 25. Statius, lib. 4. ad Marcell. lib. 5. in
Proterp. ad Crispinum, Suidas.
(...), to the North; and Thule by Statius is called Nigra and Nigras.

Now the truth of this Derivation will more evidently appear if we consider the
vanity of all others hitherto produced.

Suidas brings the Name of it from Thulis a King of Egypt. THULIS (says he)
reigned over all Egypt to the Ocean, and called one of those Islands lying in
it Thule, from his own Name; But of such a King as this we never read of either
in Manethon, Herodotus, Diodorus and Africanus, besides it is strangly
ridiculous to extend the Dominion of Egypt to the uttermost bounds of the North.

Some bring it (...), but then it would be (...) not (...). And to make it come
from the Saxons is worse, viz. from Tell, which in that Language signifying a
Bound, to make (...), Tell.

Isidore, that makes the Sun to keep his Summer Solstice in it, says, that
beyond it is no Day, derives it from thence very ill, if we may judge by his
skill in Geography.

These are the Opinions of THULE, so that I leave it to any man to judge,
whether it be not most probable to be derived from the Phoenician Thule,
agreeing exactly both in sense and sound, with the notions of all Ages
concerning this Island, and the Appellation of it.

But to return to BRITAIN, The Reason which makes Mr. Cambden in all his
Antiquities of Names to have recourse to the Language of the People, to the
Welsh for Britain, and to the Irish for Ireland, and so looked no higher,
proceeds from an opinion he took by the misunderstanding of Polybius, That
Britain was but late known, yea not long before the days of Caesar.

The words of Polybius are these, faithfully translated out of his Third
Polybiur, lit. 3.
Book.

For as concerning Asia and Lybia, where they join with one another about
AEthiopia, no one can say perfectly, to this day, whether it be a Continent
running to the South, or whether it be encompassed by the Sea. So likewise,
what lies between Tanais and Narbo, stretching Northward, is unknown to us at
this present, unless afterward by diligent Enquiring, we learn something of
it. They that speak or write any thing of these matters, are to be thought to
know nothing, and to lay down Fables.

These are the words of Polybius, by which he only means, That as it was
doubtful whether the Sea encompast the South parts of Africa, so it was unknown
whether the North parts of Europe, above Narbo, were encompast too.

Now Mr. Cambden understands the words, as if they were spoken in general, when
indeed they related only to that particular Question, Whether the North Tract
of Europe be environed with the Sea? which, notwithstanding the great
improvement of Navigation, stands unresolved even to this day.

It is manifest Polybius spoke not this in General, because he himself
describes the Fountains of Rhodanus and Corbilo on Ligeris, and many other
Places of France, which all lay above Narbo.

In his Third Book he promises, particularly to write of the Outer or West
Sea, and of the Occurrences that happened in it; And, which is more to our
purpose, to write of the Bretanick Islands, for so he calls them, and of their
manner of making of Tynn, which promise of his requires more than a Cursory
knowledge to perform, and urges that the Trade into those Seas was very great.

Nay this Promise he performed, as we gather out of the Second Book of Strabo,
where Polybius is brought in describing of Europe, and comparing the Opinions
of Strabo. lib. 2,
Pytheas, Dicaearchus, and Eratosthenes, concerning the Magnitude of BRITAIN.

This Work of his, had it not perished, would undoubtedly have made much for
the Honor of Our Nation: And we might have expected (from so Ancient an
Author, living Three hundred and seventy years before Christ, and from so
accurate and worthy a Person, as who, with Scipio the Great, had been an
Eyewitness of most Places of Note, and had seen most Phoenician Records) some
notable History of Britain; But thus much we are sure, that in his days the
Islands were called BRATANACS, preserving the C of their first Original, as in
his Works is found.

Those three Persons, Pytheas, Dicaearchus and Eratosthenes, whose Opinions
Strabo introduces Polybius, comparing and confuting (as they writ of Britain)
all three of them, so were they much Ancienter than Polybius. As for
Eratosthenes, Suidas makes him to live in the One hundred twenty sixth
Olympiad, in the days of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus. Dicaearchus was the Scholar
of Aristotle, Ancienter than he; and Pytheas, cited by both of the former,
precedes them both, so that I find three most Eminent Persons among the Greeks
to have written concerning Britain, even in those days when Mr. Cambden
imagined it to lie in a Nook of the World, obscurely, and unknown; For as the
Trade of it was great for Tynn and Lead, so that the Graecians had none but
what was brought from thence, as Mr. Cambden himself confesses, so it
manifestly appears that the Cassiterides were known before Homers days, who
writes of Lead, which otherwise he could not do.

(...).
The Goddess to the bottom fell like Lead.
Now let any judge, whether the Scilly Islands could be discovered, and many
Voyages made thither, and this Island of BRITAIN to be unknown.

As for those Verses of Avienus, which Mr. Cambden seems to slight so much, as
to call them Credulous, who give any belief to them, although he makes use of
them afterward, in his description of the Scilly Islands. Thus much is to be
said in general.

Festus Avienus professes that himself had read all the Navigations of Himiko,
in the Punic Annals.

Haec olim Himilco Poenus, Oceano super
Spectasse semel and probasse retulit;
Festus Avienus.
Haec nos ab imis Punicorum Annalibus,
Prolata longo tempore edidimus tibi.
These things of Old on Western Sea,
Himilco says, he tried and saw;
From hidden Punick Annals, we
Relate, what we from thence did draw.
Certainly, it is unreasonable to condemn an Author upon no ground in the World
but Humor, neither do I think it a fond Credulity but an act of true Judgment,
to give Assent to a Person who professes himself to have read it, and
especially where there is nothing related but what agrees with the whole
consent and current of those times.

And this way of proceeding is unequal, to Reject, without being able to give
some Reason; so it reflects upon the Authority of all Ancient Writers, whose
Veracity cannot be made out otherwise, than by their constant assevering, that
they have Heard and Read such things which they relate, without Assent to which
their Histories become dead and useless.

Now to deny that to Festus Avienus, which we grant to other Authors, without
giving any Reason for our dislike, but only because it makes not to our
purpose, seems to me rather the Act of a Judge, than an Inquirer or diligent
Searcher after Antiquities; And looks as if it proceeded from the thoughts of
having obtained the utmost heights and top of Truth and Antiquity, so that it
is lawful to judge and condemn Authors at pleasure.

However Festus Avienus, in this matter, agrees with all Antiquity, as to the
Sailing of the Phoenicians into the Western Sea, there arriving at the Isles of
Scilly to Traffic for Tyun and Lead with the Inhabitants, all which things are
made out from Strabo, Diodorus Siculus, and Solinus, and therefore needs not to
lie so heavy upon the Credit of Festus Avienus, as though he were the only
Person that sustained them.

And here it will not be amiss to take notice how Mr. Cambden, although he will
not have Britain to be known long before Caesar's time, that the beginning of
his Antiquities (to speak the truth) in time are very much below the discovery
of this Island, may seem to be of a higher date than indeed they are; yet where
he speaks of the Plenty of this Nation, how the Ground was enriched with all
sorts of Corn, he cites Orpheus, who reported it to be the very Seat of Lady
Ceres:

-- (...)
(...) --
Lo here the stately Hall of Ceres Queen.
And says, that this is meant of BRITAIN, which, if he means as he speaks,
certainly he contradicts himself in saying, It was not known but by Name only
to the Ancients, seeing that Orpheus, one of the Argonauts, treats in
particular of the Commodities in this Country, in which it is blessed above all
Nations in the World even to this day.

But enquiring closer after the Truth, you will find Orpheus to be of a later
date than he is generally thought to be of; for in his days Britain was not
discovered to the Greeks, but the Phoenicians who kept it private to
themselves, as I shall show hereafter out of Strabo, so that this feigned
Orpheus, is indeed the true Onomacritus, as may be learnt out of Tacitus and
Clemens Alexandrinus, an Athenian Poet who Tacitus. Clem. A ex.
lived in the days of Pisistratus, and, as they say, in the Fiftieth Olympiad,
but rather in the Five and fiftieth, before Christ five hundred and sixty
years, when the Graecians began, by the discovery of the Phoenicians, to enter
the Atlantic Ocean, and to be Eye witnesses of those Places they formerly had
only by Hearsay.

And when (no doubt as Pliny writes) our Island was celebrated to the Greeks,
Plin. Not. hist.
not only for its Mines of Tynn and Lead, by which it was useful to all the
World, but its plenty of Provisions also, by which it sustained and blessed its
Inhabitants; so that Mr. Cambden, forced by the Truth, oftentimes confesses
what in other places he would have lie dark and obscure, namely, That BRITAIN
for a long time was unknown, but here I suppose we must take him in his
Poetical humor only, and so I shall leave him, and proceed to show what
Footsteps the Phoenicians left among the Ancient Britains of their Language
and Customs, and what remains to this day.

And first I will begin with Strabo, because what he speaks of has relation to
the Plenty of England for all sorts of Grain; in his fourth Book, Artimidorus
asserts, Strabo, lib. 4.
That there was an Island near Britain, I suppose one of the Scilly Islands,
and in most probability St. Mary's, in which they worshipped Ceres and
Proserpina, with the same Rites they did in Samothrace.

Now this Artimidorus lived in the days of Ptolemeus Lathyrus, before Colaeus
the Greek had ever discovered any thing of these Seas, so that the Graecians
could not introduce the Worship of Ceres and Proserpina into any British
Island. It remains therefore, that they were brought in by the Phoenicians, who
had taught the Samothracians first their Worship, and the Mysteries of their
Cabiri, which were so many that Juvenal takes notice of them:

-- jurent licet and Samothracum
Et nostrorum ar as --
Now, that the Worship of the Samothracians, and consequently of the Britains
who had the same Rites, were taught them by the Phoenicians, I will prove.

First, The word Cabiri, signifying their Gods, is a Phoenician word signifying
Power and Greatness, and they were worshipped chiefly at Beritus by the
Phoenicians, as Sanchoniathon in Eusebius witnesses, which place was dedicated
to the Honor of Neptune, a great God with them, and the Cabiri. Sanchoniathon.


Now the Mysteries of these Rites were accounted so Sacred and Powerful, that
whosoever was initiated in them, immediately received, as they thought, some
extraordinary gifts of Holiness, and that in all their Dangers they had a
present Remedy and Expedient about them to deliver and rescue them; but that
which most affected the Phoenicians was a confidence they had, that those
Religious Ceremonies preserved them from Dangers by Sea, Therefore it is no
wonder that Arriving in Britain, they taught the Inhabitants that Worship, to
which they held themselves most obliged for their Safety.

These Rites of the Samothracians, by their mysterious Obscurity (as it happens
that things best understood are most admired) prevailed so much in the World,
that besides many of the Ancients, as Jason, Orpheus, the Greek Hercules,
Agamemnon, and Ulysses, Castor and Pollux, that were Devoto's to them; Philip
the Father of Alexander, a wise and politic Prince, was initiated in them; and
from these mystical and unintelligible Rites of the Cabiri, in which I suppose
the Phoenicians preserved the main part in their own Tongue, I conjecture the
word Gibberish to Gaber, amongst us proceeds, a frequent name given by us to
any long harangue of words which we understand not; And I find that these Rites
were in Britain, or some Island nigh it, which could be brought by none but the
Phoenicians.

In the next place is sound in Hesychius that Cotes was a Priest of the Cabiri,
and I find in Mr. Cambden that Coi-fi (I know not what fi means in the Ancient
British, but with them it was frequent to compound Monosyllables) is the name
of a Cambden, (...).
Heathen Priest in Britain, when Paulinus preached the Gospel here; so that we
see Cotes, a Priest in the Phoenician rites, continued its name even to the
Saxons. But of this I shall speak more, when I come to treat about the Ancient
British Gods. It will suffice in this place, that Ceres and Proserpina were
worshipped in the British Islands, after the manner of the Samothracians,
before ever the Greeks had any knowledge of these parts, and that this Worship
could be introduced by none but the Phoenicians.

The next footsteps we find of them is among the Silures, about which part of
England it is to be supposed the Phoenicians Landed; I find, in Solinus, an
Island Solinus.
called Silura, lying upon that Coast which the British Danmonii, or Cornish
Men possessed.

This name Silura, with the transposing of one Letter, proceeds from the
Phoenician Sirula, signifying that Garment called Bracca, which the Ancient
Britains as well as the Gauls wore, as Martial witnesses, Quam veteres Braccae
Britonis Pauperis -- Martial.


Now, that the Phoenicians might call the Britains from this Garment they sound
them in (as part of France was called Braccata from the same) it stands with
reason; and although all the Britains might use the same Garment as all France
did, yet would not the Name pass through all the Island no more than it did in
France, the novelty and edge of the Derivation being by Custom taken away when
the Phoenicians had greater converse with them.

It will not be improper in this place to put down the Conjectures of Tacitus,
who from the swarthy Complexion and curled Hair of the Silures, believes them
to be Tacitus.
derived from the Iberi, which Iberi, as Bochartus makes out, were a Colony of
the Bochartus.
Phoenicians placing themselves in Tartessus, for, as for any other Iberi, they
had not the experience and knowledge enough to send out Colonies.

Upon the Coast of Cornwall and Devonshire I find a Promontory, called HERCULES
his Promontorv by Ptolomy, and called to this day Herty-point, containing in
Ptolomy.
it two pretty Towns, Herton and Hertland, whereof Herton is the greater and
corruptly called Harton; Now as I will not aver as ever Hercules was here and
named it so, as Franciscus Philelphus and Lileus Geraldus aver, because Mr.
Cambden says there was three and forty Hercules's, as Varro will have it, he
cannot admit of one Franciscus Philelphus. Lileus Geraldus. Varro.
of them to arrive at this point. Well let it be so, though I think Diodorus
Siculus, nor any of the Greeks, to be competent Judges of the Voyages of the
Phoenicians, yet I do believe that the Phoenicians rather than the Gracians
might give it the Name, and build some Temple in honor of their own Hercules,
as he almost got the Honor of the Temple in the Streights, so has he almost
robbed the Phoenician Hercules of this also.

But is it absolutely against Reason to say, that Hercules might arrive at this
Island? Certainly No, as it has some probability in it, if we consider what
Pliny writes, Pliny's Not. Hist.
viz. that Midacritus was the first that brought Tynn out of the Cassiterides.
Now who should this Medacritus be? we are assured it is a Greek name, and a
Gracian could not be the first that brought Tynn from thence, wherefore
Bochartus thinks Bochartus.
it ought to be Milicartus, or Melcartus, a known name of Hercules.

Of this Hercules Phoenicius many things are Recorded, as to his Voyages, even
to this ISLAND, but we advise none to rely on the truth of them, we desire not
to heap up Fables, as many have done, and usually do to make good their
Opinions, for the truth of the Phoenician Voyages into Britain under other
Captains, appears plain enough, and their Trading into these Parts, only thus
much may be averred, that where any remembrance of Hercules remains, it it
rather to be attributed to the Phoenician than the Grecian, as the Learned
know, especially upon Promontories and Seaport Towns, as Hercules Rock in
Campania, Hercules Haven in Liguria, the Promontories of Hercules in Mauritania
and Galatia.

Now, because we have found one HERCULES his Promontory in our Seas, we will
relate another Monument concerning him, found Anno MDXIIII, at the Mouth of
Scaldis in Zealand, where a Tower or Temple dedicated to Hercules was found.
The Stone had this Inscription:

HERCULI
MARCUSANO
M. PRIMIIUS
TERTIUS
V. S. L M.
Now this Inscription is thought to belong to the Ancient HERCULES whom the
Dorienses followed into Gaul, as Marcellinus out of Timagines writes,
Marcellianus ex Timagi.
and not to the Greek HERCULES, as some have gathered by his Followers, the
Dorienses, whom they have imagined to be Greeks, when indeed they were
Phoenicians of the City Dora, or Dorus, in Phoenicia, of which Stephanus thus
writes: Dorus in Stephanus. Josephus. Pausanias.
a City of Phoenicia, as Josephus and others write, the Name of the People was
Dorites, but Pausanias calls them Dorienses. Some think that Petronius should
be read for Pausanias, for an Epistle of his is extant in Josephus, where the
Inhabitants of Dora are called Dorienses. The Inscription of the Epistle is
this: P. Petronius The Ambassador of Tiberius Claudius CAESAR Augustus
Germanicus, To the Chief of the Dorienses, Greeting.

These Dorienses, as Marcellinus writes, who followed the Elder Hercules, could
not be Gracians, because in his days (I mean the Elder Hercules) there was no
such People so called among the Greeks, for Dorus the Father of the Greek
Dorienses lived after the Phoenician Hercules.

Enidius and other German Writers, upon those words of Marcellinus, The
Dorienses following the Ancient Hercules, inhabited the Sea Coasts of Gallia,
by Gallia they Enidius.
think is meant Germany, because all Germany was called so Anciently, and by
the Sea Coast, Beligium, and in particular an Island of the Zealanders, called
Wallacheia. And this Inscription is brought by him to confirm his opinion.

Now as this Inscription is in Latin, as V. S. L. M. viz. Votum solvit Lubens
merito, shows consequently of later date than Hercules his days, and in memory
only of him, so the word MARCUSANUS has puzzled the heads of many to find out
its meaning.

Geropius derives it from Marchius, signifying among that People the Bounds or
Limits, Geropius.
Because (says he) the Romans, before the dominion of the Franks, had a
Limiting Castle in Zealand, from whence it was called Marchius on the Uttermost
shore, which was consecrated to Hercules the Preserver of Bounds and Limits,
who upon that account was called Hercules Marcusanus.

But because this relies on the Credit of Geropius without any Authority, and
because it seems unprobable, upon the account that Marchius is a General word
with them, signifying any Fort or Gastle upon the Borders of any Territory, it
is thought Hercules could not be denominated from it, it being never found it
was his office to serve instead of the God Terminus; besides Learned Mr.
Sheringham observes, that Hercules (and I may add other Gods too) derived his
Sir-names from proper Appellative Sheringham.
names of Places, and was never called the City Hercules, or Town Hercules, or
Castle Hercules, from City, Town, or Castle. Therefore Mr. Sheringham derives
it from Man, and Cpyran, the first in the Cimbric Tongue signifying a Disease,
loss, and evil, and Cpyran to beat off, or quash, which word quash, as I take
it, preserves something of Cpyran.

And this Derivation he grounds upon a Greek name given to Hercules; (...), the
driver away of Diseases, and he quotes Plutarch who makes Hercules a Physician,
Plutarch.
so that Map signifying a Disease, as we see in Night Mare, and the Dutch have
it Die nacht Maet, a disease proceeding from oppression of Wind in the Stomach,
likewise to spoil and hurt, as we say to mar a thing, and Cpyran signifying to
quash, in which word, I think, Cpyran is preserved, therefore he thinks it is a
genuine Derivation of Marcusanus; but with the leave of so Worthy a Person,
from whom I would not willingly dissent, but for Truths sake, I cannot take
this to be the meaning of Marcusanus, by reason it is fetched from an Epethite
rather than a name of Hercules, which way is very uncertain. As for Example:
why may not Marcusanus as well be derived from Mapc, signifying a Horse, and
Cpyran, to tame, both of the same Language, because we sometimes read Hercules,
(...), Domitor Fquorum, a tamer of Horses, or from Mapp, signifying Death, and
Cpyran, from his conquering of Death in his return from Hell; all which in my
thoughts bear the same probability.

Besides, this Epithet (...) was proper only to the Greek Hercules, whom
Marcellinus brings not to this Coast, but says, it was the Phoenician
Hercules, followed by the Dorienses who came hither. So that the Derivation
must (without doubt, be sought in the Phoenician Language, in which I find Mat
to signify a Lord or Prince; and upon which account Cusanus comes in I know
not, unless Marcusanus be from Mat Cus, Lord of the Cussites, of whose race
were the Dorienses whom Hercules Commanded, but rather as I think from the
known Surname of Hercules the Phoenician ought we to derive it, to wit,
Melcarthus or Marcarthus, Mel and Mat signifying the same thing in their
Language, viz. a Prince, so allowing the abbreviation Marchus for Marcarthus,
which is frequent in syllables of the same sound, I think we have an easy and
true account of Marcusanus; But if any think it more natural to bring it from
the Cimbric Language, I shall not contend, only I could wish that instead of
Map a Disease, they would take Mop the Sea, it being more Honorable for so
great a Traveller as the Phoenician Hercules, to be a Skilful Pylot than a
Physician.

But to return to England, as the Silures derived their Name from the
Phoenicians, so likewise did the Danmonii, the Inhabitants of Cornwall and
Devonshire, in which two Counties the Phoenicians were very conversant, by
reason of their abounding in Tynn.

Upon this account some have derived them from Moina, in the British Tongue
signifying Mines, but the Question is, whence the Dan or Dun proceeds? for
Solinus calls them Dunmonii; Ptolomy, Domnonii, and in other Copies (as Cambden
Solinus, Prolomy.
says) trulier Danmonii, although I think the transposition is very easy and
usual, and hides not at all the Original Dan or Dun.

In the Ancient British Language, as also in the Phoenician, Dun or Cun (for in
composition we sind both ways) signifies a Hill, and Dan of the British, Down
of the Phoenicians and English signify Low.

Now whether we derive them from Dan, from their Low habitations in Valleys,
or, which is righter, from Dun or Cun, or Monia, signifying Hills of Tynn; I
sind both ways that they are of a Phoenician Derivation.

Besides, this word Dun, being a frequenter word in derivation, and extending
to the Language of the Gauls, who called an Hill Dun, I think more proper to
derive Dunmonii from it, for from Dun, a Hill, many Cities of high Situation
both in Gaul and Britain take their Name, as Augustodunum, Axellodunum,
Juliodunum, Laudunum, Melodunum, Noviodunum, Sedunum, Vellannodunum. Clitophon
expressly, Clitophon.
Lugaunum, Corvi Collem, because it was placed on a Hill; likewise Andomatunum,
with a T, in Ptolomy, the Metropolis of the Lingones.

The first Country of the Danmonii Westward is Cornwall, shooting into the Sea,
and running into a Point of Belirium, the Name of which Country, if we examine
the Original of it, and what at this day it is called by the Inhabitants, and
the similitude it bears with other places, exactly agreeing in Name and Nature
with it, we shall find it could be called so by none but the Phoenicians.

To prove this, let us consider it is agreed unto by all hands, that it
received its Name from being like a Horn, running sinaller and sinaller, with
little Promontories, as if they were horned on either side: And this is brought
from Korn, Plur. Kern, signifying Horns in the British Language.

Now as this Kern or Korn is derived from the Phoenician Cheren, signifying the
same, so the manner of calling Places after that sort came from them also, a
thing so frequent in the Eastern Countries, to call any Corner or Angle made,
by the name of Horn; As for Example, Cyprus called Cerastis, and (...) in
Taurica Chersoneso; that we are not to doubt but Cornwall, called Kernaw by the
Inhabitants, proceeded from the Phoenician here.

To give an Instance, the City Carnon, as Pliny calls it, Carna, as Ptolomy,
merely Pliny's Not. Hist. Ptolomy.
upon the account of its standing upon an Angle, cut out by two Highways that
met there in a point on which Carna was built, one of which Roads from Mecca
leads to Tasph, the other to Sanaa.

But this way of the Phoenicians was frequently in Promontories whose Angles
were more discernable, by being made of another Element, as we find Corsica,
called by the Phoenicians Carnatha, afterward mollified by the Greeks into
(...), and all this, from its having so many Promontories, which by the
Phoenicians were called Kern.

That Cornwall was called Kernaw by them rather than the Inhabitants, will
appear,

First, Because there is no other Promontory in this Island so called,
notwithstanding the British Language was in use through the whole.

There are other Places that run into the Sea as much like a Horn as this,
which, in my Judgment, is an evident sign of the Phoenicians in this part of
England above others.

Secondly, Because it is more natural to imagine, that Sailers (to whom the
shapes of Countries appear at a distance, more than to the Inhabitants) should
give the Name, than those that only plied upon the Shoars in small Carows, or
Leather and Wicker Boats, as the Britains did.

It is to be observed that Meneg, a part of Cornwall, which of the South Sea
does make another direct Horn, is also of a Phoenician derivation, agreeing to
that description Mr. Cambden gives of it, viz. that it is a Demy-Island, Meneog
of the Phoenician signifying kept in by the Sea, and which he proves in the
Menna which Jornandus describes out of Cornelius a Writer of Antiquities; so
that to Sailors afar Jornandus ex Cornello.
off, Cornwall appears with two Horns, striking it self into the Sea, which part
of England, I believe, was first discovered by the Phoenicians, who, without
question, finding a world of Tynn in them, secured them for themselves.

And although Meneg is now destitute of all Metals, as long ago exhausted, yet
that there were such Mines in it, hear the same Author:

It has great store of Metal Mines, very full of Grass and Herbs, bringing
forth more plentifully all those things which serve for Pastorage of Beasts,
and nourishment of Man.

I will only mention one thing in this Peninsula, which seems to me exactly to
preserve its Phoenician Name, and that is a Fortification of Stones only
without any Cement or Mortar, lying as upon the Lake Leopole, a Fortification
after the manner of the Britains, as Tacitus describes them, Rudes and informs
Saxorum compages, which was the way of the Eastern Nations, as the Scriptures
themselves inform Tacitus.
us.

This Rude heap of Stones the Inhabitants call to this day Earth, without giving
any Reason for so Ancient a Rampire, and of so great a Compass as it is, so
that none can induce me to believe but that it took its Name from the Lake on
which it lies, for the Phoenicians called all Lakes, Arith, so that this
Military Fence called, as I have said, Earth, I believe from thence received its
Name.

There are many Places in these two Counties, Cornwall and Devonshire, which
retain exact footsteps of the Phoenicians, that cannot be found any where
else, which I shall omit as nothing easier than to fancy Similitudes (...)
especially where, perhaps, they will not be allowed of.

The truth of Phoenician Trafficks in these Parts do not depend upon such
Conjectures, but evidenced by Authentic Histories, so that I will not mention
Note, Godolanac is a place of Tynn, from which Godolcan is derived.
Godolcan, a Hill famous for the plenty of the Mines of Tynn, as Mr. Cambden
witnesses, which plenty of that Metal is included in the very word it self,
only here let me observe, that in the West and South parts of England, even
where the British Language prevails not, we find many places begin with Pen,
namely, such as are of a High situation, which, without dispute, is an
Argument, that Pen, a Hill in the British Language, came from the Phoenician
Pinnah, signifying the same thing, because we find it most used in those parts
of England the Phoenicians frequented most; nay through all this Island we
shall scarce meet with any Northward, when on the West and South Coasts, we
cannot go six or eight miles but we find them.

To instance in the south side of Cornwall only: Penrose, Pensans, Pengersick,
Penrose again, Penwarron, Pendennis, Penkeivel, Penwyn, Pentuan, Penrock, to
which may be added that infinite number of Towns beginning with Tree, as
Treewofe, Trenowth, Tregenno, Trewarveneth, Trevascus, Trenona, Trewaridreth,
Treworgan, Tregernin, Trelistick, Trefusus, Tregamian, Tremadart, Tregonoc,
which those very same Parts can have no other account given of them, if they
proceed not from the Phoenician Cira, and by contraction Cra, signifying a
Castle, so that they were Forts built by them to secure their Trade.

Now give me leave to instance here in some British words that agree exactly
with the Phoenician, which I shall put down in English Characters, leaving the
Examination of the words, and the Roots of them, to the Learned. Brit.
Phoenician. English. Crag, or Careg, Carac, Crac, A Hill. Corn, plur. Kern,
Coran, plur. Kern, A Horn. Caer, from whence came Caerlyle, Caer, from whence
Carthago, A City. Get, Gwith, A Breach. Caturfa, Kat. erva, A Troop. Penn,
Pinnah, The Cliff of a Hill. Cum, Cum, Low. Dan, Douna, Down. (...), Furthest
off, whence Mr. Cambden brings Belirium, Peli, To remove away. Mead, Mawath, A
Plain, or Valley. Ara, Ahari, Slow. Garw, or Garaw, Garaph, Swift. Dun, Cun, A
Hill. Bro, Baro, A Country, or Region. Gwith, Guet, A Separation.

I will proceed now to show, how that most of those Words of the Ancient
Britains and Gauls, which Mr. Cambden brings to prove them one and the same
Nation, proceeded from the Phoenicians, and that there is as much, or rather
more similitude between the Phoenician and British, than between the British
and Gaulish.

And here I cannot but wonder, why there should be any dispute concerning the
first Inhabitants of this Island, for, I think, it is not to be doubted but
that we did receive them from the Continent of France, but whether from that
Part now called Belgium, or from Piccardy, or any other particular place, it is
impossible to be known. For as Mr. Cambden fetches his Antiquities little
higher than Julius Caesar's days, so if we will bring the Britains from those
particular Gauls that then inhabited that Country, I think it is not reasonably
to be allowed him, because it is at least seven or eight hundred years after
the Trading of the Phoenicians into these Parts, in which time Gallia might
have many and great Revolutions, there being nothing commoner in those days,
than great fluxes and refluxes of Nations, and incursions made by whole and
entire People.

Now that the Language of the Gauls and Britains (I mean those that lived in
Caesar's days, or thereabouts) was the same, or alike, I think none will deny,
or at least, that they agreed in several things. This is so far from needing
proof, that I cannot imagine how it could be otherwise, considering the
vicinity of them, and how the Sea Coast of Britain, as Caesar witnesses, was
inhabited by the Gauls that came thither to make War, and a prey of their
Neighbors; Besides, several Britains that warred in Gaul, and so returning
into Britain, might bring a great deal of their Tongue, for it was one of
Caesar's Reasons he gave for his entering Britain, that they had assisted his
Enemies the Gauls, so that the Britains going into Gallia, and the Gauls coming
into Britain, they interchangably mixed their Language.

It is not to be doubted but that Traders hither, such as the Phoenicians were,
did impart much of their Language, as to the Britains especially, so to those
Inhabitants of Armorica on the Sea Coast of France, which congruity in Language
appears to have proceeded much from the Phoenicians as shall be next shown, and
especially in those very Words Mr. Cambden brings for Examples, to evidence the
Gauls and Britains were the same People.

First then, for TARAMIS, whom Mr. Cambden calls Taranis, that it may agree
better with his Caran, Thunder, was a Gaulish God, and without dispute
worshipped by the Britains under the same name. Now this God was Jupiter (...),
or Tonans, the Thunderer, to whom Augustus Caesar built a Temple, as many
others report.

Now Caram in the British Tongue signifies Thunder, and is supposed so to
signify in the Gaulish, upon the account of the name of this God; But Carem,
Thunder, in the Phoenician Tongue, I believe is the Original of the British and
Gaulish word, and that the Phoenicians were the cause that this God called by
the Britains Chor, whom (in treating particularly of the GODS, I will prove to
be the most Ancient God Jupiter) was called Caram, the Thunderer, and I verily
believe that Taram and Taramis both, have the same Original.

The Gauls had another God called by Lucan, HESUS, this Hesus is thought to be
Mars, as we may learn out of the History of the Ancient Gauls, which not long
since Antonius Gosselinus put forth; And the name Hesus comes from the Syrian
(...) or (...), signifying strong and Powerful in War, from which word the
Phoenicians Anton. Goll. lib. 1. cap. 29.
had their name of Mars, as out of Jamblicus Julian the Apostate shows in his
Oration of the SUN; I will, says he, out of the Phoenician Theology produce
something, Jamblicus. Julian the Apostate.
They that inhabit Edessa, a place always sacred to the Sun, place Monimus and
Hazizus with the Sun; which Jamblicus so interprets, that Monimus is Mercury,
(...), Mars; and in another place of the same Oration, Mars is called Hazizus
of the Syrians, which Hazizus comes of (...), from whence comes (...), all of
the same signification, so that Hesus of the Gauls. and Britains differs little
from them.

That this Hesus was worshipped in Britain, methinks is very plain from many
Places that retain his Name; besides Tacitus and Caesar witnesses, the Gauls
and Britains had the same Gods; As for Heus, I cannot believe him to be the
same with Tacitus. Caesar. Lactant.
Hesus, but rather that he is confounded by Lactantius with the known name of
Bacchus and Hues which was worshipped in these parts, as I shall show in the
particular Chapter of the British GODS; And granting him to be Anubis Latrans,
and so his name to be preserved in the British word Haud, a Dog, yet could he
be brought to these Countries by none but the Phoenicians, who received Him of
the Egyptians.

That Tutates was worshipped in these Parts is most certain, Tutates horrensque
feris Altaribus Hesus. Lucan.
Lucan declares; and that he was Mercury, Livy witnesses in these words,
Scipio in Tumulum obversus quem Mercurium Tutatem appellant. Livy.


Now that this Tutates was a Phoenician God none can doubt, if they consider
what Philo Biblius writes out of Sanchoniathon the Ancient Phoenician Writer;
Philo Bibl. Sanchoniathon.
Taautus was born of Misor, he invented the first Elements of Writing, whom the
Egyptians call Thoot; the Alexandrians, Thouth; the Greeks, Hermes or Mercury:
He was promiscuously called Thoot, Thouth, or Theuth; by Plato, in his
Philaebo, he is called Theuth, and in his Phoedras, THAMUS King of Egypt, who
has a Plato's Phil.
long conference with him of the use of Letters, where he is called the Father
of Letters.

Tully calls him Thoyth and Theuth; Lactantius, Theutus and Thot; from whence
it Tully. Lactantius.
plainly appears, that this name of Mercury, Tutates, is not of a British
Original, as Mr. Cambden makes it derived from an Office of his, To guide in
Journeys, Diw Caith, signifying the God of Traveling in the British Tongue.

This was but the smallest of this Gods employment, for although that
Derivation may found prettily to them that know not the Antiquity of the Name,
TUTATES, and seek not further than the Welsh Dictionary, yet it is certain to
those that examine higher, that this God was brought by the Phoenicians, and
his name, Cutates, known long before either Diw, or Caith, might be in the
World.

This God Teuth ought not to be confounded with Tuisco, their Offices,
Employments, and Regions from whence they proceeded, being so Geometrically
opposite, Teuth being a God of Arts and Learning, and came from the
Phoenicians: Tuisco, on the other side, a great Warryor, and Leader of the
Northern Nations. And seeing the Graecians had their Letters from the
Phoenicians, it is to be considered whether the Letter Teth had not its name
from Teuth.

The next word Mr. Cambden brings is Dusit, by which the Gauls termed their
lucubi, upon the account of their filthy Uncleaness practiced continually
amongst them; but how this should come from the Welsh Duth, signifying only
Continually, without any thing of their Practice, I cannot imagine, for if one
would strain Etymologies, one might as well bring it from Dud of the
Phoenician, signifying the love of those unclean Spirits; but we desire here to
be excused.

As for Divona, signifying Gods Fountain, according to Ausonius, in this Verse
of his, Divona Celtarum lingua fons addite Divis. It is acknowledged that Dyw,
signifying Gods, and Uonan, a Fountain, in the British Tongue; but here we must
consider, that as the Britains and Gauls used this word Dyw before they
conversed with the Romans, and so could not receive it from Deus, as some may
think, so it may easily be supposed that they received it from Dai of the
Phoenicians; but we cannot be so bold as to derive the Uonan, although we know
a River in Sicily called Danus by the Phoenioians, for its Weediness, and we
might bring this Divona from Daionus, but it shall suffice to show that both
Nations had their Dyw from the Phoenicians.

The next word Mr. Cambden produces is Senae, and this he would read Lenoe, but
it cannot be allowed him, as I shall evidence; For these Senae were Religious
Women, as Pomponius Mela writes, attending upon a certain God, whom the Pomp.
Mela.
Gauls, and consequently the Britains, worshipped.

Now this God, or rather Gods, I shall evidence to be the Phoenician Cabiri,
when I come to treat of the British Idolatry, and had their Priests who were
called Coies and Coes by the Greeks, and by the Phoenicians Coen, and the Women
Coenae, afterward written with an S, Senae.

Now if Mr. Cambden will derive his Lean-Minster from Consecrated Virgins,
named Leanes by the Britains, now called Nuns, he must be contented with the
word Laena of the Latins, which word was not always of evil signification
among the Romans, but taken from them, and used by the Britains in a good
sense, although afterward in an ill one; as Latro and (...) among the Greeks
and Latins, and Villain and Knave among us. For undoubtedly these Senae are the
same with Pomponius Mela's Cenoe, which Bochartus will have read Coenoe, and
are not to be changed, and brought so low as to derive Lean-Minster. The words
of Pomponius Bochartus.
Mela, are these;

SENA, in the British Sea, lying against the Osismick Shoars, is famous for an
Oracle of some Gaulish God, whose devotaries being said to be Nine in Number,
Sacred, by a perpetual Virginity, are called CENAE by the Gauls.

This Sena is now caled Sayn, and lies on the farthest Armorica. Now, what
Reason there is to turn Senae into Lenoe, to make a similitude between the
Ancient British and Gaulish Language, let any judge.

The Gauls, says Polybius, in their own Tongue call their Mercenary Soldiers
Gessatae, and at this day the Welsh Britains call their hired Servants,
Guessin. Thus Polybius. Cambden.
Mr. Cambden.

I confess, not only Polibius, but Plutarch and Orosius say as much, but I am
Plutarch. Orosius.
afraid that this Opinion proceeded from the same motives Euphorius in
Stephanus did, viz. because they derived them from the word (...), Gaza,
signifying Money, or Treasure; for Strabo makes them a distinct Nation, and so
does Suidas. And Others derive them from a sort of Weapons called Gesa, as
Servius on the Eighth Servius, 8th. AEneid.
AEneid, where he reports, that Valiant Men among them were called Gesi.

So that among these several Opinions, we must seek out the true Derivation,
and not depend on the similitude between the Gessatae, and Guessin, hired
Servants, upon the account only that the Gassatae might be hired.

We find in the Syrian Dialect (which the Phoenician used) Gaisa, and in the
Plural Foeminine, Gaisata, to signify an Army or Armies, and from thence
undoubtedly proceeded the Gessatae of the Gauls, and Guassdewr of the British,
signifying a Valiant Man, and Guessin, an Hireling; for I suppose Gessata was
equally communicated to the Gauls and British.

To show more plainly that this Gessatae was of Phoenician Derivation, let us
consider Gessum, a Weapon, said to be peculiar to the Gauls, and if we find the
very name of it, and the same use of it to be among the Eastern Nations, lying
upon Phoenicia, I hope none then will dispute but that it was received from
them, for it was altogether unknown to the Greeks and Latins.

It was a kind of a sharp-pointed Spear-Dart, which they used to push or dart
with as they saw occasion; It was made all of Iron (as Hesychius witnesses)
and Hesychius.
every man carried a couple of them in his hand.

The Syrians had the use of this Weapon, and the name of it from the beginning
was called Gisa. In the 2 Samuel 18. 14. they are called Gisessin with the S
doubled. 2 Samuel 18. 14
And this Weapon was first carried by the Phoenicians to Tartessus, and
afterward, without doubt, brought into our Seas.

As for Caterva of the Gauls, and Katurfa of the Britains, as they were the
same as a Legion, and so consisted of diverse sorts of Soldiers, I think they
ought to be referred to Caterva, signifying the same thing among the
Phoenicians. To this word I think Kadwarr and Kadern, the strength of War in a
Legion, both British words, ought to be referred; so likewise, if you please,
Cateia, a Warlike Weapon among the Gauls.

Galba, exceeding fat, from whence Mr. Cambden brings the British, Galvus, that
betokens passing big, comes from the Phoenician Cheleb, fat, and Galbanum
from the Phoenician Chelbena, signifying the same thing.

The next word is Trimarcia or Trimarcisia, signifying (as Pausanias says) the
Order Pausanias.
of Horse-fight among the Gauls, consisting of three in a Rank; Now this word
is derived from Marca, and the British Marc signifying a Horse. For allowing
Ramac, a Horse (among the Phoenicians) only to be transported in a letter,
which is frequent in Derivations, and we have the true Original letter of the
word.

Rheda is a Gaulish word, and was introduced into the Latin Tongue in Tully's
time, as Quintilian avers, and being of a different make than what was used
among the Quintilian. Pliny.
Greeks and Romans, must therefore have a different Original.

Now we find this very word Rheda, among the Syrians and Phoenicians, to
signify a Chariot, and therefore no doubt but the name and thing was brought
by them into Britain and Gaul, and so from thence came Rhediad, a Course,
Rheder, to Run, and Redecfa, a Race, all British words; and it is not to be
disputed but that Eporedia, a City of the Salassians, had the same Original,
for Pliny says it took its name from Horse-breakers. Salassians, viz. Gauls.


Essedum, was a Gaulish and British Wagon, from the Syrian Hassedan, signifying
the same thing; from whence also we have this Proverb, The Cart before the
Horses.

Expressed by them thus, Hassusin acher Hassedanim.

Pen, from whence came the Mountain Penninus, and the Apennini in Italy, was
learnt from the Britains, Pen, signifying a high and steep Hill, by which name
they have many called in this Island, as Penmanmaur, Pendle, Pencohcloud,
Pennigent; and the Britains from the Phoenician Pinna, signifying the same
thing.

The Arverni, a People of Gaul, says Sidonius, called the In-born Thieves of
the Land, Vargi, these sorts of People were partly Soldiers, and partly
Robbers, which answers exactly to the Farkin of the Phoenicians; but as to the
British, Viriad, I know not what it has to do with either words.

As for Mr. Cambden's Bauchada, the Gaulish Rebels in the days of Dioclesian,
under Amandus and AElianus then Captains, Eusebius calls them Bagaudae;
Orosius, Eusebius. Orosius. Eutropius. Salvianus. Prosper. Eumenius.
Vacaudae; Eutropius, Bacaudae; Salvianus, whom we ought most to credit in a
word of his own Nation, constantly calls them Bagaudae (where Mr. Cambden has
his Bauchadae, I know not) and shows by this name to be understood the same as
Boguedim in the Eastern Countries, viz. Rebels; and Prosper calls Rebellion,
Bagauda, in these words, All the slaves of Gaul conspired in one Bagaud; and
Eumenius the Rhetor, calls it, a Bagaudian Rebellion.

These Bagaudae were not Rural People only, as Mr. Cambden makes, to derive his
British word Beichiad, signifying Swine-heards, and Country Gnoffs, but many of
the better sort, who being intollerably oppressed by the Romans, were forced to
take Arms, as Salvianus witnesses, so that this word also is of the Phoenician
Original, Salvianus. Allobroges.
Allobroges says, an excellent Scholiast on Juvenal, were so called, because
Broga in French, signifies a Region or Country, and alla, another. But alla
signifies not another in the French, but in the Greek, and Broga is to be
suspected.

Now the British Bro, a Region or Country, comes from Baro the Phoenician, and
perhaps there might be such a word as Broga derived from it. The Allobroges
living on the Mountainous part of Savoy, I think they may be better derived
from Al, High, and Bro or Broga, a Country, than from Allan in the British
Tongue, signifying external, or without.

Brachae, a Common Garment to the French and Britains, descending below and
covering the knees, from whence it took its name, viz. Berec, the Knee, from
whence also came Braciar, signifying a skin, or any covering of the Knees; so
that it is easy from Brachym the Plural of Berec, to derive Brachae.

Lainae, an old Gaulish word in Strabo, where he writes the Gauls weaved
themselves Casiocks of Thickened Wool, which they call Lainas. It is to be
considered, if it ought not to be (...), with which the British word Glawn,
signifying Wool, has more correspondence.

But by Laina I judge is meant Linna, with the Weaving of which, Plautus
writes, Gaul was universally employed; Isidorus and Diodorus affirm it, to have
been a soft Isidorus, and Diodorus.
sort of Cloth, and may be derived from the Syrian Lina, signifying Softness.

Bardus, says Mr. Cambden, in the Gaulish Tongue signifies a Songster, one
that sang and played together; Now as it may be derived from Parat, exactly
signifying their Canting in a certain Modulation, so the Nablium, much like the
Harp on which they played, was a Phoenician Instrument of Twelve strings.

That these Bardi might disperse themselves and their name in Gaul and Britain,
is no wonder; for, from Bardus Cucullus comes Bardo-Cucullus, Cucullus being
British, and Cucul is the very same with the Phoenician Cucla, and Bardus in
the Gaulish and British Language, is the same Garment with the Phoenician
Borda, but more of this in the Habits of the Britains.

Pempedula, Sinkfoyl, is partly AEolick and partly Phoenician, for in the
Ancient British and Gaulish Tongue, sometime before Caesar's days the Greeks
brought hither by the Phoenicians, from whom they learnt the Voyage to these
Parts, introduced a great many of their words both into Britain and Gaul, as
will be shown when I come to treat of the British Language.

It Is no wonder to see Words of different Languages meet together in
Composition, this was frequent with the Romans, witness Biclinium, a Room with
two Beds and two Tables; Epitogium, a Garment worn upon a Gown; Anti Cato, a
Book written against Cato; Epirredium, a kind of Wagon, the same may be
instanced in other Languages, but I have not time, so that this Pempedula,
Cinckfoyl, though it be immediately derived from Pymp in the British Tongue,
five, and deilin, a leaf, or from Pemp, five in the Armorican British Tongue,
and delis or delion, a leaf, or dula of the French, yet Pymp or Pemp comes from
the AEolick variation of (...), and deilin, delis or delion, and dula, from the
Phoenician Dalioth.

The like may be said of Petoritum, a Chariot, so called, as says Festus, of
its four Wheels. Now as the British and Gauls had these Chariots of the Greeks,
as shall be shown at large, so their names also proceeded from them; for the
British Pedwar, and the Gaulish Petor, signifying Four, manifestly sprang from
the AEolicks, with whom (...), and (...), signified Four, for the Massilenses
who taught the Gauls in after times their Numbers, were a Colony of the
AEolians that came out of Phocea, a City of the AEolians.

The like may be said of Dercoma, called so by the Gauls, a composition of Wine
and Water; now as (...) is a frequent word among the Greeks in any thing
compounded, so no doubt Dwr of the Britains comes from the Greeks (...), Aqua.
But since it has been found that the reading it Dercoma is a mistake, for it
should be read De Corma in two words, so that the Liquor it self is Corma, and
is of the same nature and composition as the Phoenician Drink called Chorma, as
is made more evidently to appear in the Chapter of the Customs of the
Britains. So that it clearly appears, that those words in which the Ancient
Britains and Gauls did agree in, did not proceed in their being one and the
same People, but were introduced by Foreigners who traded to both Countries.

By the Ancient Gauls here, I mean those that lived some time before Julius
Caesar, for as I cannot, so I will not deny, but that Britain was Peopled from
the Continent of Gaul, yet I cannot but think, but that the Antiquities of
Britain ought to be searched for higher a great deal than those times in which
Mr. Cambden looked for them.

The other Words Mr. Cambden produces, to prove the Gauls and Britains to be
the same Nation, are either of manifest Greek Derivation, and brought in by
them into both Nations, as Ratis, Gaulish, Redin, British; From (...), an Elder
Tree, Taria, Thireos; from (...), Gliseo and Glys; from (...), Tripetia, and
Tripet, a three footed Stool, from (...), a Plow, (...); Coch, Scarlet, from
(...); or else they were of so late use among the Gauls and Britains, that they
seem to be of a Roman Derivation, such as Cent, a hundred, from Centum, unless
(...) be admitted; so Vetonica Marga with the British Betony, Marl, Glastum,
Glasswoad, Cedos, Caesar, Let Caesar go, from Ceao, from whence possibly Geduch
of the Britains might come; or lastly have very little relation one to another,
as Gessa and Cethilon, Bulga and Butsiel, Taxea and Tew.

Moreover it is to be observed, that in the British Language many Saxon words
are crept in, yea French too, which have been modelled by them to their own
Idiom, so that it is carefully to be heeded that those words which have been
received from the French in latter days, be not unravelled and divested of
that Dialect the Welsh have put upon them, and then produced to derive the
People themselves.

The Termination of Towns taken notice of by Mr. Cambden, to prove the Gauls
and Britains the same Nation, are, Dunum, Briva, Ritum, Durum, Magus, and these
we shall find to be either Phoenician, or Grecian, and first for Dunum.

All Towns ending in Dunum or Tunum, for it is all one, are of high Situation,
such as Augustodunum, Axellodunum, Guleodunum, Laudunum, Melodunum, Noviodunum,
Sedunum, Vellaunodunum, Lugdunum, Andomatunum; and this proceeds from the
Gaulish and British, Dun, a Hill, and this proceeds from the Phoenician Cun,
signifying the same thing as has been showed before.

In Briva ends Antoninus his Duro co Brivae, and in this Island were one or two
Duro Brivae; in Gaul, Briva Isara, now Pontois. Briva Oderae and Samaro-brivae,
all (as Mr. Cambden says) Passages over Rivers, whose names they carried: so
that Briva, among the old Britains and Gauls, signified (as he supposed) a
Bridge or Passage over a River, which conjecture (if true) may be referred to
the Phoenician Ehra, signifying a Passage; but seeing that this signification
is the same with Ritum following, I should rather think that these were Bounds
of particular Territories, as we find Duro co Frivae was, and that Birja of the
Phoenicians, signifying bounds and limits is the Original, as Marchius is the
same in the Teutonick.

Places either beginning or ending in Dor, Dur, or Dour, have their Original
from Dour or Dwr, signifying in the Welsh Tongue Water; As for Example,
Durocases, Durocottorum, Dordonia, Doromellum, Divodurum, Breviodurum,
Batavodurum, Octodurum, which Dour or Dwr signifying, is very probably
conjectured to come from the Greek (...), Water: so that if this word was
common to the Gauls, with the British, it is to be attributed to the Graecians
in both Nations, and proves not that they were the same People.

In Ritum, and such Places as these stand upon Fords and Passages over Rivers,
as Augustoritum, Vagoritum, Darioritum, of Gaul, Camberitum of Britain; and
these are derived from the British Rid (for T and D, as in Dunum and Tunum, are
the same) signifying a Ford, as Geraldus Cambrensis testifies, which Rid is the
same with Rid Geraldus Camb.
of the Phoenicians, signifying the same thing.

In Magum ends several Towns both in Britain and Gaul, as Rhotomagum,
Caesaromagum, Neomagum, Noviomagum, Drusomagum, Argentomagum; and some have
made Magum to signify a Ford, but unadvisedly, for at Rhotomagum the Seyn is
not fordable, nor the River Padus at Bodincomagum, which the word Bodincum
testifies, being in the Gaulish Ligurian Tongue, as much as to say wanting a
bottom. But trulier Rhenanus, Ortelius and Mr. Cambden, interpret it a
Habitation and Town, following Pliny, who calls Bodincomagum, a Town on
Bodincum: Now what is plainer Rhenanus. Ortelius. Cambden. Pliny.
than that Magon among the Phoenicians signifies a Habitation, and that in the
East Country it was a name of several Towns, as Magon a City of Judaea, and
Magon to which the Israelites served, Baal. Magon, a City of Moab.

Garw or Garaw, in the Welsh signifies Swift, from whence Mr. Cambden thinks
the River Garumna was derived, because of its Swiftness. Claudius says,
Pernicior unda Garumnae; now why may not Garaw be brought from Garaf, to hurry
away, as it is used in that Language of Torrents.

The River Arar for its slowness, is called Lentus Arar, the slow Arar, so
likewise Mr. Cambden in Brigantibus, makes mention of a River Ar, that g ideth
so slowly, that one cannot discern with ones eyes which way the stream goes.
Now Arar in the British Tongue signifies slow, or still, so does Ahar in the
Phoenician.

The Hills Gebennae run out far into Gaul in a continued Ridge, and Keven among
the Phoenicians sounds as much as a Ridge of a Hill; and Mr. Cambden says,
in Yorkshire, he himself saw a long chain of Hills, which the Inhabitants call
Kevin. Now it is not unlike that from this Keven the Gebennae, in French, Les
Cevennes, are derived: But let us consider that Gebina in the Phoenician, is
the Ridge or Back of a Hill, and that the Britains and Gauls might have Keven
from Gebina of the Phoenicians.

About the side of that part of France called Narbonensis, where is reported
Hercules and Albion fought, there are so many Stones scattered all about, that
one would think it reigned Stones, by Writers, called, Stony Strond, and Stony
Field; the French call it La Crau, and Stones in the British Tongue are called
Craig, and in the Phoenician, Crac.

Arelate, a most famous City in Gaul, seated on a Moist soil, from whence it is
thought it took its name, viz. from Ar, Upon, in British, and Laith, Moisture,
and why may not Laith come from Laiith, signifying the same with the Phoenician.

Uxellodunum is derived from Uchel of the Britains, signifying Steep, or Lofty,
and Dunum, a Hill; now Uchel of the Britains is Uhel of the Phoenicians: of
Dunum we have spoken before.

The Town Tolon, upon the Promontory Citharistes, by Antonius called Telo
Martius, and may better be read Telon; Now says Mr. Cambden ask our Welsh
Britains what is an Harp, and they will tell you by and by, Celen, and if you
could raise an Ancient Phoenician, and ask him what are songs played on the
Harp, and he would answer you, Cillsh.

Dole, by the Britains, is called a Plain, or Valley, lying to the Sea, or a
River, and in Ninnius, an Ancient British Writer says, Caesar fought a Battle
upon Dole; from thence the City Dole in Armorica has its name, and all from
Daula, a Plain in the Phoenician.

The Northern part of Britain was divided into that Region the Caledonii
inhabited, which is as much as to say, the Mountainous, and Maiatae as much as
to say, the Plain Country: Now as Caledonii is derived from the word Kaled,
Hard, in the British Language, and Dun, a Hill, so it is in the Armorican
British Kalet, and exactly Kalad, Hard in the Phoenician. Of Dun or Don, I have
spoken before; so likewise Maiatae, from Mead in the British, a Plain, and
that from Maijth, the same in the Syrian Dialect.

Camulodunum, Malden, a Town in Essex, written by Ptolomy, Camudolanum;
Antoninus. Dio Cassius, Pliny. Tacitus.
Antoninus and Dio Cassius, Camulodunum; Pliny and Tacitus more exactly,
Camalodunum; Dio Cassius calls it the Court of Cunobelin; Camol signifies a
Prince and Governor in the Phoenician Tongue, and Dun a Hill, so that this may
be called the Kings Hill, as Mons Capitolinus at rome, Jupiters Hill, and in
favor of this Interpretation we may find the Court of Arthur called Camalot.

Sorbiodunum, as formerly there were in Britain two Salisburies, the Ancienter
of them stood on a dry Hill and had no Water migh it, of this Salisbury
Gulielmus Malmsburiensis writes in these words: There is such a scarcity of
Water, that it is a Gul. Malmsb.
great Commodity there to Traffic withal; and Mr. Cambden brings in a Poet
writing of it in these words, Est ibi defectus Lymphae, sed Copia cretae.

This Ancient Salisbury, in Antoninus his Itinery, is called after its Ancient
Name, Sorbiodunum, which Mr. Cambden, out of the British Tongue, interprets,
the Dry Antoninus (...) Itinery.
Hill, from Dunum, a Hill, and Sorb, Dry; now as Dunum, so Sorb or Sorba,
signifies exactly in the Phoenician Dialect, the very same thing, to wit,
Dryness.

The Promontory of Ptolomy, called Abravanus, Mr. Cambden truly derives from
two words, Aber and Ruan, the first of which signifies in the Welsh Tongue, a
Haven, and Ruan is a River that disburthens it self into the Sea, by this
Promontory; But we must understand, that Haber does not only signify an Haven,
but any place where two Rivers meet together, as Silvester Giraldus intimates,
a Welsh Writer, who lived about five hundred years ago. His words are these,
Aber in the (...). Girald. lib. 2. cap. 1, 5.
British Tongue, is the place where one River falls into another, and in his
Description of Wales, in his Fifth Chapter, Aber is in Welsh every place where
Water meets with Water.

To make this more plainly appear, I find Towns in Wales that seem to have
their Names merely upon this account, as Aber Avon, a small Market. Town in
Glamorganshire, standing upon the River Avons Mouth, and Aber Conwey, a Town in
Caernarvonshire on the very Mouth of Conwey; and to prove Silvester Giraldus
his words true, Abergevenny, in short Abergenny, a Town on the meeting of the
(...) and Gerenny in Monmouthshire, and Mr. Cambden interprets it the
Confluents of Gevenny, so that we see whether a River be joined with the Sea,
or with another River that place is called Aber; Now Aber or Haber is properly
a Phoenician word to signify such a Conjunction of Waters, and no doubt from
them had the Britains their Aber.

Cetrae, was a short sort of Shields; Plutarch and Silius attribute the
invention of Plutarch; Silius Itals Tacitus, Bochartus,
them to the Spaniards, Tacitus, to the Britains, and how this may be the
Phoenician Cetera, a Shield, read Bochartus.

The Mauri called them Citurae, as the Old Scholiast on Juvenal witnesses in
these words, -- Et Getulus Oryx. Old Seol. on Juvenal.
Oryx, says he, is a Beast something less than a Buff, which the Mauri call an
Unx, whose Skin makes Cituras, i. e. the lesser sort of Shields among the
Mauri. What can be plainer, than that Ceitrae, short Shields, used by the
Britains, had their name from Cetera of the Phoenicians, signifying the same
thing, as likewise the Citura of the Mauri.

Another great Argument that the Phoenicians were very conversant in this
Island, Caesar, Com.
is the manner the Britains had in numbering the Days and Nights, a way
peculiar only to the Eastern Nations and them, viz. To make the Day to sollow
the Night, and not the Night the Day, as the Romans and Germans did, and this
is witnessed of them by Caesar.

Names of Offices and Gods, in Britain and Gaul, of Phoenician Derivation.
THere were two BRENNUS's, Famous Men in Gaul; the Eldest sacked Rome, the other
robbed the Temple of Delphos, Suidas calls Brennus Bren.

The Welsh, to this day call a King, Brenniu, the Armorican Britains call a
Judge, Baruer, and Barn, to Judge, and Parnus from the Root Parnus, to Feed,
with the Phoenicians, was a Prince, Judge or Governor; in the same
signification Agamemnon, Homers Prince, is by him called (...), the Prince, or
Shepherd, of the People.

Mar, or Maur, as it is now pronounced in the British Tongue, signifies GREAT;
Quoere nominae BRITANNICA.
From this word, without doubt, many British and Gaulish Names of PRINCES were
compounded, as Condomarus, Cwismarus, Combolomarus, Induciomarus, Viridemarus,
Teutomarus; Now Mar of the Phoenician, is a Lord or Prince.

Rir, is a great word likewise in the termination of Great Men's names, as
Sinorix, Dumnorix, Orgetorix, Ambiotrix, Vercingetorix, Eporedorix; and,
without doubt, this Rix was written Rich by the Gauls and Britains, as the
Armorican British now write it.

Rich, signifies Powerful and Strong, from whence, in an Ancient British Book,
entitled the Criades Caradauc, u, rich fras, is as much as to say, Caratacus
with the strong Arm; Now Rik, in the Eastern Language, is Strong and Powerful.

Paterae, were the Priest, of Apollo, who were worshipped by the Britains and
Gauls under the name of Belenus, and this name of theirs is derived from Patar
in the Phoenician Tongue, signifying to Interpret, because they were the
Interpreters of his Oracles; And Joseph was called Potar, because he
interpreted the King of Egypts Dreams, and as this Belus was brought by the
Phoenicians into Britain, and is a peculiar God of theirs, as shall be shown in
the Treatise of the British Gods, so without dispute this word PATERAE is to be
referred to a Phoenician Original.

Ausonius, writing of Attius Patera, or Paterius, has these Verses:

Beleni sacratum Note, Ducts, I think should be ducitis, as it is spoken of the
Derivation of Paterius, and Delphidius.
ducis e Templo genus,
Et inde vobis nomina.
Tibi Paterae sic ministros nuncupant
Apollinares mystici.
Fratri, Patrique nomen a Phoebo datum
Natoque de Delphis tuo.
Your sacred Race from Belius Temple spring,
From thence, you all your Names receive.
You from your Mystic Priests, your Name do bring,
Paterae height, Phoebus himself does give
Name to your Sire, and Brother, and your Son,
From Delphick Oracle his Name begun.
St. Hierome, writing in his one hundred and fiftieth Epistle ad Hedebiam,
says St. Hierom ad Hedeb.
thus, Thy Ancestors Paterius and Delphidius, oue taught Rhetoric at Rome
before I was born, the other, whilst I was but a youth, with his Prose and
Verse illustrated all France; So that we see, as Paterius was derived from
Paterae the Priests of APOLLO, so they received his name from being
Interpreters of his Oracles.

Of the Religious Persons Cenae we have spoken before, and have made it appear
they were of the Phoenician derivation.

The Bardi are sufficiently known to be Poets, and Songsters, both in Britain
and Gaul, and it is also manifest, they never Rehearsed any thing to the People
but in a tone, always having some Instrument or other, to which they sang the
Famous Deeds of their Ancestors.

Posidonius witnesses, that they were Poets, who, with Music, recited the
Encomiums of Great Persons, and Strabo calls them Poets and Singers, and Festus
says, Posidonius, Strabo, Festus.
that a Singer in the Gaulish Tongue was called a Bard (and by the Britains, at
this day they are so called) because he sang the Praises of Great Men.

Certainly, there can be no easier Derivation than to bring them from Parat,
signifying to sing in a Recitative manner, for P and B, likewise T and D, are
Letters of the same nature and element, and in common Speech are every day
confounded, not only in our present Language but in all as ever I could hear of.

Now as the Bardi are derived from Parat, so I have shown before, that the
Nablium, or Instrument on which they played, was a Phoenician Instrument, and
was called exactly so by the Phoenicians, viz. Nabal, so that we ought not to
doubt, but that as well the names of the Persons as their Music, were of
Phoenician derivation.

If Turnebus may be Credited, Bardaea and Bardala, is a Lark with the Gauls;
His words are these, Bardi apud Gallos sunt Cantores, and Bardaea and Bardala
Alauda, and possibly this Bird might be derived from the same Root Parat, to
sing, for which excellency she is chiefly admired.

Thus in short have I run over all the Words used by Mr. Cambden, to prove the
Gauls and Britains the same Nation, with intention not to deny but they were
used by both Nations, with variation only in Dialect, but to show that this
consent and harmony, in some points of their Language, cannot evidently
demonstrate them one and the same People, but that it proceeded from the
Phoenician Traffic into Britain, and the Mart for Tynn which they kept in
Gaul. To which may be added, that the Gauls, as Caesar witnesses, sent their
Children into Britain to be Educated in Caesar.
Learning and Religion, where, without any doubt, they learnt great part of
their Language; For Britain being the Learneder Nation of the two, could not
proceed from any other cause than the Concourse of Phoenicians and Greeks to it
upon the account of Trade, but especially the Phoenicians, of whom the Greeks
themselves confess they received their Letters.

As it is not my intent in this place, to search into the Language of the
Britains, A (...) account of this Chapter.
but only what relates to the proving of the Phoenician Traffic into these
Countries, and that the Name of BRITAIN proceeded from them, and not from any
such word as Bryth and Cania, so give me leave summarily to recount what has
been said of this Matter.

How that the Phoenicians, about the time of the Trojan War, sailed into these
Seas, first discovering the Scilly Islands, and finding them full of Tynn
Mines, they called them in their Language BRATANAC. From hence they carried all
the Tynn the Greeks afterward used, who from the Phoenician, Bratanac, called
them in their Language word for word the same, namely, CASSITERIDES; But when
Bratanac prevailed, then the Greeks used Bretanica long before Britannia, as
has been proved. And that some Islands about Albion were called Britains before
this it self was called so, I have manifested out of Pliny, which Islands could
be none but the Scilly Islands; But when the Phoenicians had discovered the
Mines of Tynn and Lead in Cornwall and Devonshire, then began the Name to
prevail over this Island also. To make this evident, I have shown many
Footsteps and Remains of their Language and Customs, remaining to this day
among the Britains, and especially in Cornwall and Devonshire, and have given a
short Catalogue of Words, relating to the situation and nature of Places which
most frequently occur, in the composition of Towns, Cities, Forts, Hills, etc.
in the Western parts of England, where they most conversed.

And all this, that the Phoenician Voyages to Our Island might appear the more
clear and evident, and that Britain it self received its Name from them, as
well as other more particular Places, which Mr. Cambden in one particular
himself confesses, when he says, That the Syrians, meaning the Phoenicians,
sending out so many Colonies, left great part of their Language in most places
of the World; Now if he had seriously considered, and not have deceived himself
by misunderstanding Plybius, That Britain was but lately known, certainly he
would have given a more exact account of this most Renowned Island, and never
have derived its name from Bryth, Painting, a Custom among very few of them,
and that many hundred years after it was called Bretanica.

THE Antiquity and Original OF THE PHOENICIANS, THEIR Correspondence and
Agreement WITH THE JEWS.
HAving discoursed thus much of the Phoenicians in this ISLAND, it will not be
amiss to show from whence they derive their Original.

Bochartus (in his first Book, and first Chapter, concerning Canaan) learnedly
and evidently proves, that they were the same with the Canaanites, from the
Identity of their Names (although promiscuously given them) Scituations,
Language, Institutes, Arts, Manners, Customs, Gods, Rites and Ceremonies. By
promiscuousness, I mean, when as the Land of Canaan is called, the Land of the
Phoenicians, and the Phoenicians the Canaanites; As for Example, the Rahab.
Woman in St. Matthews Gospel is called a Canaanite, by St. Marks
interpretation is made a Syrophoenician, which clearly demonstrates the
promiscuous way of naming that People, although all of one Original.

And Bochartus further shows, that the Phoenicians were the Sons of Anak, and
therefore says, that the Greek word (...), is most properly to be derived from
the the Hebrew (...), the Son or Sons of Anak; insomuch that the Greeks from
the (...)
Canaanitish word, Ben Anak, and by contraction Beanak formed (...), from
whence more truly sprang (...) and (...), for Phoenicia.

And the Graecians, through Ambition, endeavoring to fasten all the honor of
Primitive knowledge upon their own Ancestors, obscured the true Antiquity of
most Nations (and that evidently appears, in their attributing more Honor to
their own Hercules than the Phoenician, from whom they had received most of
their Arts and Sciences) foisting in those words to derive their Originals, as
best seemed agreeable to The interpretation of (...), and (...). The Latins
from (...) made Puniceus, and from (...), Poenus.
their own genius and probable conjecture; so that in giving (...) for the
Original of Phoenicia, which by interpretation was a place in that Country
where a multitude of Palm Trees grew, they also put (...), signifying Red, in
allusion to the Red Sea, upon which those People bordered, from which they were
also called the Idumaean Tyrians, and so (...), Phoenicians; And still
proceeding, after that ingenious Method, of naming People according to the
product of their own Brains, as I have instanced in other matters, in another
place, they sounded also the word (...) Marther.
upon them, agreeable to the Jewish Institution, as they suited with them in
their strange kind of inhumane and unnatural Customs in sacrificing to their
Gods; For as the Jews sacrificed their Sons and Daughters to Devils, viz. unto
Molock, that god was in high esteem with the Phoenicians, and although it
discovers the near Alliance and Correspondence between the Jews and
Phoenicians, yet was it altogether improper from thence, to derive the Original
of Nation, and a People too, so considerable as they were, upon no better
foundation of Antiquity.

This Molock was also the God of the Ammonites, and the same with Baal, etc.
the Original of whose name proceeded from Belus or Bell, the King of the
Phoenicians or Tyrians, and this also gives some light from whence the Old
Romans (of whom I shall treat particularly by themselves) might receive the
first Institution (a though perhaps performed after another way and Method) of
consecrating their Princes, after death, to be no less than Gods.

The Canaanites were willing to receive the names of Phoenicians, Syrian, ie.
Syrim, then (...) and Syri, and by prefixing the Article Hassurim, was brought
in Assyrian.
Syrians, Assyrians, Sidonians, and Syrophoenicians, rather than Canaanites, to
blot out the Remembrance of that great and terrible Persecution they received
from the Jews, ensuing the Curse laid on their Father Canaan, so that in truth
the word SYRIAN, became a Common Name to them, and their neighboring Nations,
proceeding from Tire the Metropolis of Phoenicia, yet all the Canaanites, who
from that time received all these Names, were not all of one and the same
Family and Lineage, for they must be distinguished into two parts: 1. Those that
came from Tire, the grand City in Phoenicia, were called Syrians, Assyrians,
and Syrophoenicians. 2. But those that came from Ashur, and dwelt beyond
Euphrates, were of another stock, and so known by Sidonians, and Phoenicians,
by themselves. Thus Hesychius.


To treat now a little of the Correspondency and Agreement between the Jews and
Phoenicians will be necessary, and as we have had occasion to set down the
Original of the Phoenicians, so in brief shall that be concerning the Jews,
more especially, when it is to be considered there happened so mutual a
Friendship and Correspondency between them.

The word HEBREW in most likelihood proceeded from Eber, or Heber, the father
of Phaleg, so called from the Confusion of Languages, and it must be
understood, that all the Nations of the Canaanites, by different Sir-names,
were derived from the best known Authors of their Families, which in a
particular manner is described by Moses himself, in his Book of Genesis, Chap.
the 10th. and so it happened with Heber and Phalegs Generations, who were the
Issue of Shem; yet all the People that sprang from the Hebrew Nation, etc.
differed not in their Language Grorius in Epist. ad Gall. 114, p. 242.
Hesychius.
save only in Dialect, and it is instanced in the Punick Language, to show the
Agreement between the Phoenicians and them; and it is further Argued, that the
difference in latter times did more plainly appear, foisting, by long
continuance, many things into the Punick which were intrinsic thereunto,
insomuch that those words that did agree with the Radicals of the Hebrew,
differed only in the flexions of Vowels in sound, and yet not in signification.

The Hebrew continued in its native purity until the Captivity of Babylon,
which Language, beginning from the Creation, was preserved very near Three
thousand and forty years, and then, and not before, it degenerated from its
primary Institution; for the Jews, after their return from the Captivity,
suffered the Chaldee, Syriac, and Philistin Idioms to intrude into it, and
therefore no wonder there happened in process of time, some variance relating
thereunto, that at last they lost both the Language and Worship they were born
in.

And whereas the word HEBREW was particularly appropriated to Israel, it was
because the Israelites possessed the Land of Canaan by a divine Decree, and the
Hebrews had not enjoyed their Language so long as they did, had it not been for
the benefit of the Patriarks, to make their Peregrination in Canaan the more
easy.

In the first Ages of the World, between the Jews and Phoenicians, there
happened a great disagreement in maintaining of Interests, Rights and
Ceremonies; but after some debate between them, the Jews taking a fancy to the
Phoenician Worship, the Phoenicians answered their kindness, by affecting their
mysterious Doctrine and Ceremonies, and so, making Religion like a Merchandise
of Goods, they exchanged the one for the other, the Jews sent them Traditions,
Laws, and Mysteries, in lieu of which was returned, a set method of Idolatry,
Custom; and the Name of the Phoenicians which happened so early as to receive
its first birth in the time of the Judges, yet grew not up to its nature and
full perfection till Solomon's time, and if the true Original of the
Phoenicians, according to the Greeks, is to be derived from (...), intimating
the Red Sea, which relates to the passage of the Israelites through the Red Sea
into Egypt, as they agree in Names, so must they be one and the same People
without such need of distinction, insomuch that where Herodotus, under
Herodotus.
the name of Phoenicians treats of the Jews, speaks, that those Jews that were
Circumcised in Palestine were called Syrians, which was an additional name to
Canaan, and a great probability of it, Syria lying as near Judaea as one County
or Village in England can properly be said to border one upon another, so that
in time, what by Commerce and Neighborhood, they might be best known by one
and the same Name.

The cause of making the Phoenicians so early Mariners, was not only through
their ambition of Empire, and particular genius to Navigation and Merchandise,
but through necessity of inventing the best and safest way of escaping the
hands of Joshua, who persecuted them with an Army of Israelites, who after they
had made themselves Masters of most part of the Land of Canaan, they were
driven up into a slender Nook of Earth, too narrow to contain so great and
numerous a Body, disceded themselves into good Shipping, to seek their Fortunes
in most parts of the World, of whose Company Britain received a considerable
share.

These were the People so publicly commended for distributing Arts and
Sciences, and if we should attempt to trace them to the end of their long
Voyages, value the Richness of their Merchandise, we must measure the Heavens,
and number the Stars, which certainly is beyond the Art of Arithmetic to
accomplish.

CHAP. VI. The Greeks in BRITAIN.
COncerning the Phoenicians Traffic into this ISLAND, I have discoursed at
large, and have proved, that long before the Greek COLAEUS had discovered the
West Ocean, Britain had been Famous for its Commodities of Tynn and Lead,
through all the Mediterranean Seas, and that the name BRETANICA, was many years
known in their Parts, before ever the Greeks had so much as the least knowledge
of these Islands. I come now to treat of the Greeks arrival in BRITAIN, the
discovery of these Cassiterides or Bretanick Countries which before they had
known only by Hearsay, and of which they had writ so much upon the Relations
of the Phoenicians, that Pliny says, BRITAIN Plin. Not. hist.
was famous in the Greek Monuments long before the times of the Romans.

The usefulness of those excellent Commodities imported from Britain into those
Parts, rendered the Greeks very curious after the search of them; It is not to
be doubted, but the Phoenicians very studiously concealed this Treasure from
them, as we find they did from the Romans, because they being the great Trading
Nation of the World, they were jealous least these Mines once discovered to
their Neighbors (who by this time had learnt of them the Art of Navigation)
they should lose the Advantages, that infinite Trade of Tynn and Lead, which
had hitherto been a peculiar Monopoly to themselves, and which they had
dispersed and sold to all Nations at their own prizes.

That this is true, Strabo in his third Book of his Geography witnesses: 'At
the Strabo, lib. 3. Geogr.
beginning (says he) the Phoenicians alone Traded to Britain from Gades, and
concealed from others this Navigation; but when a Roman Vessel followed a
certain Master of a Ship, that they themselves might learn this traffic of
Merchandise, he upon a spiteful Envy ran his Ship on purpose upon the Sands,
and after he had brought them, that followed after, into the same danger of
destruction, himself escaped the Shipwreck, and out of the Common Treasury
received the worth of the Commodities and Wares be had lost.

Now if this diligence were used by them, after the Greeks had discovered the
source of their Trade, how jealous ought we to imagine them to be of this
Secret, when as it was preserved entirely and peculiarly to their own Nation;
So that as the Greeks knew these Islands long before the Romans, so are they to
give place to the Phoenicians, who were their Masters and Instructers in the
Art of Navigation, as well as in all other Arts and Sciences whatsoever.

But, although the Greeks were later than the Phoenicians in these Coasts, yet
they were far earlier than Mr. Cambden will acknowledge them, which I mention
because the Derivation of the word BRITANNIA depends altogether upon the true
stating of this matter. For if the Greeks arrived hither not above one hundred
and sixty years, or there abouts, before Caesar's time, under Phileus
Taurominites, as Mr. Cambden Cambden.
out of Athenaeus seems to intimate, higher than which he will not admit of the
Antiquity of Britain, then it might be indeed supposed, that since all Nations
were so far Civilized as to wear Garments to cover their nakedness, the
hardiness and customs of the Britains to the contrary might give occasion to
Forraigners, to denominate them and their Nation from the Painting of their
Bodies, which but very few of them used as the only covering of their Nakedness
in that more civil and resormed Age. But if the Greeks were in this Island in
those Early days, when it was not any strange and unusual thing for Travelers
to find Nations rude and uncloathed, it cannot be supposed this Island of all
others should meet with the ill luck to have a Name stamped upon it, as a
perpetual monument of its savage Custom, and Barbarity.

To omit here, that if the Greeks had named them from this Custom of Painting,
they would have done it as they did by other Nations, by a word totally
peculiar to themselves (as we find the Picti, on the same account, so called by
the Romans) and not have borrowed the better half of the word from the
Britains, and have made it up only with a termination of their own.

We find no such respect shown by the Greeks to any Nation they gave name unto,
for their Ambition suffered them not to be so modest in imposing Names upon
Countries they discovered, by borrowing any thing from the Nation it self, as
might be shown in many Instances, as Egypt, AEthiopia, etc. and more
particularly in Britain; For when they had learned the word BRATANAC, by which
the Phoenicians called this Country of Tynn, they gave it a clear contrary
name, though of the same signification in their own, GASSITERIS.

It is to be supposed it was a great while before they could be induced to
follow the Phoenician name, till such time it made them as it were deaf, by
being so rung in their ears by the Phoenician Mariners, so that it was grown
so frequent in all men's mouths, that had any concern in Trade, that they saw
themselves obliged to conform to the universal consent of Saylors, in calling
it something like Bratanac, viz. Bretanica, and afterward Britannia, and all
this long before any Greek had either set foot, or seen any part of these
Islands; so that BRITANNIA was famous in the Monuments of the Greeks, long
before either Brith or Brit, a diminutive Corruption of the ancient Name had
prevailed in this Nation. This will appear plainly, if we show the Voyages of
the Greeks hither, are much Ancienter than what is commonly supposed, or is of
necessity to be allowed by Mr. Cambden in the making up of his Antiquities; for
by his misunderstanding of Polybius, as has been evidently shown before, he ran
himself into this Error, That Britain was not known to the Ancients long before
Caesar's time, and upon that great Mistake, though but few apprehend it, begins
his structure of the Antiquities of this Nation, not so high as he ought justly
and truly to have done.

And here I doubt not but it will be easily granted, that the Graecians arrival
into these Parts, was not the same way we suppose these Countries to be Peopled
by, that is, through Germany, France, and so by successive Colonies drawn along
through those spacious and vast Territories, but that they came through the
Streights of Gibraltar., as Merchants, to Traffic in these Western Seas. This
will more evidently appear, if we consider, that between the Greeks and Romans,
in the days of Alexander the Great, and long after, there was not the least
mutual knowledge one of the other, so that their passage could not be over the
Alps, through Gaul, and as for Germany, we are certain how that was shut up to
all Passengers by the reserved and Warlike temper of the Nation.

Livy, when he comes to write of the state of Rome, in the days of Papirius
Live7.
and Manlius, Consuls, when Alexander had arrived to the full pitch of all his
Glories, and had now made himself Master, as he thought, of all the World, sets
down the posture of Affairs in Italy, the strength and Order of the Nation, the
excellent Commanders it enjoyed, their Policy and Conduct in War, the Martial
temper of the Soldiers, their long accustomedness to War, and the Experience
they had gained in their habitual exercise in it, the severe Discipline they
underwent, the least breach whereof was unpardonable, though in a Son to his
Father, as was seen in Manlius. This concludes, that if Alexander had attempted
them, as no doubt he would had he heard of them, he had found them an equal
Match, and his full careir of Victory had met with a sudden Rub, and probable
obstruction in his design.

This Argues, that the Graecians had not arrived to any knowledge of the
Western Parts of Europe, on the Continent, and that wheresoever we find them,
as most certainly we do on the Sea Coast of Spain, France, Belgium, etc. is to
be attributed to their Sea Voyages, by which all along the skirts of Europe
abounded with them.

Thus we find St. Hierome, in his Questions upon Genesis (setting aside the
ground of his Hypothesis) out of most Ancient and Authentic Writers, showing
the matter St. Hieroms Quest. on Genesis
of fact, That the Sea Coast of Europe, and all the Isles throughout, even to
Britain, were inhabited by the Greeks, and this he proves out of Varro's Book
of Antiquities, Varro's Antiq.
Sisinius Capito, Phlegon the Greek, and diverse others.

If then the Greeks did at first only inhabit the Sea Coasts of Europe, there
must some competent time be allowed before they could penetrate very far into
the Inland Country, especially if we consider them as Navigators only, whose
business was not to settle any considerable Colonies where they arrived, but to
keep Marts only, and to fix themselves in convenient Parts for the carrying on
of Trade.

But in Caesar's days, we find the Greeks, in the very heart of Gaul, settled,
both in their Customs, Language and Religions, which, in my opinion, is a
perfect demonstration that they had long before been in those Western Seas. For
can it be possible, that a Nation coming so far as they, and arriving at
Britain and the Sea Coasts of Gaul, could (without Conquest) fix themselves,
their Customs and Religions, and not some hundred of years past.

Besides, it is to be supposed, the Greeks were much sooner in Britain than
Gaul, and much more conversant, if we consider how the Gauls used to send their
Children to be instructed of the Druids of Britain, and how in this Island, and
in Man, and Anglesey, were public Assemblies, and general Rendevouz held by
all the Learned, to which People from neighboring Nations, and all Parts, did
repair.

In Caesar's days, we find the Greek Language not only in Britain, but even in
those barren and Mountainous parts of Gaul, which the Helvetii inhabited.
Learning by this time had found its way even unto those Parts out of which the
Inhabitants themselves, weary of their Country, scarce could find a passage;
For the Helvetii, after they had burnt their Houses, and agreed upon a general
March of the whole Nation, to seek out some New Plantation, the first
difficulty we find them encountering with, is, how to get out of their Country,
so securely bounded as it was with Hills and Rivers, that it seemed to them
rather a Prison than a Defense, and yet upon their return, being beaten by
Caesar, there was found (as he himself writes) and brought to him Table Books
written in Greek Letters, wherein was Recorded exactly the number of all that
went forth, how many bore Arms, besides old Women and Children.

We see what footing the Greeks had gotten in these parts, in the days of
Caesar, and therefore I leave it to the Reader to judge, Whether in a hundred,
or two hundred years time, Traders out of the Mediterranean, could so fully
plant themselves and their Language in these Parts, as to be trusted with the
managements of the Records of a whole Nation?

The Footsteps of the Greeks are so ancient and frequent in these Islands,
that it has given occasion to many to think that they were the first Planters
of them, and the Reasons they give are these.

1. They must needs be planted by Navigators, because they are Islands.

2. The Graecians, in the first Ages of the World, were esteemed among the best
Navigators, taking in the Ionians, and the Inhabitants of the Mediterranean
Islands, all of Greek extraction, and differing only in Dialect.

3. It is certain that their Colonies were very numerous through all the
Mediterranean, and that they passed the Streights is undoubtedly true, after
Colaeus the Greek had first, of all that Nation, discovered the West Seas, so
that it is probable, they wan'ed not People to plant even in these Islands also,
as well as in several places in Lybia and Spain that lay to the Sea Coast.

4. They suppose the Greek Language, or a Dialect thereof, altogether used in
these Islands, till corrupted and grown out of use among the People, It was
preserved only entire among the Druids, whom they cannot otherwise imagine
could have that Language, unless there had been some plantation of the People
formerly in these parts.

What makes them the more confident in this Judgment, is, That the Druids had
the very same Interests, and used the very same practice as the Roman Clergy
do, in sticking fast to the Ancient Latin Tongue. And they took notice of a
great jealousy in the Druids, least their Learning and Religion should be too
much understood and divulged; so that it was grown to that height, that it was
accounted almost unlawful to reveal any of their Mysteries, or to set down in
writing, what they thought most safe and honorable for themselves to deliver
by Tradition.

5. Their manner and expert way of fighting in Chariots, after the Ancient
manner of Greece and the Countries adjoining, when it was unknown to the Roman
Territories.

Now this is a great Argument of the Grecian Antiquity in these parts, and
Caesar in his Commentaries takes notice of it as a wonderful thing, and a great
novelty, where he describes their way of Fighting, and much admiring their
dexterity and agility of Body, their nimble and sudden turns; and here it will
not be amiss to put down his very words.

In Fighting, for the most part, the Britains employed their Charioteers, first
these drive about through all parts of the Battle, and fling Darts, and with
the terrible sight Caesar's Comment.
of Horse, and rattling noise of the Wheels, they do most commonly break their
Ranks, and put them in disorder, and after they have once forced themselves
within the Troops of Horsemen, they descend from their Chariots and fight on
foot. The Chariot Guiders in the mean time withdraw a little from the hurry,
and place themselves in such postures, that if the other be overpowred by the
number of Enemies, they may readily, and without hinderance, retreat in safety.

Thus in their Fights, they performed the quick motion of Horsemen, and have
the steadiness of Footmen. By daily practice and experience so ready in their
Service, that on the descent of steep Hills they can stop their Horses,
although in full Carreer, quickly turn short, and yet moderate their Course,
run along the spire-pole and beam of their Chariots, rest upon the yoke and
harness of their Horses, and from thence jump again, with ease, into their
Chariots.

Where, by the by, we may take notice; that the expertness they had in their
Chariots, argues, that they long had known the use of them, and consequently,
that the Greeks had been longer in these Islands than is for the most part
conceived, and yet not so long as to be the first Planters; and that the
Nakedness and Painting of some of them, was rather a corruption and
degenerating from the Greeks Civility in those points, than the reason of their
Name; For the Greeks are supposed to be here long before any such Custom, and
if at first the Greeks did find them Naked, yet was it long before any such
word as Brith was used among them, which is not conjectured by Mr. Cambden, to
be long before Caesar's time.

6. There were two different Nations in Britain taken notice of by Caesar, one
of which proceeded out of Gaul, to which People I think Mr. Cambdens
Antiquities only refer, who came out of a desire of Conquest, and so planted
themselves on the Sea Coasts.

The other sort were they within the Land, of Ancienter date and settlement,
who acknowledged themselves to be derived from none of their Neighbors, either
because they were ignorant of their Original, or perhaps thought, according as
the Greeks did, that there was no greater honor than to be sprung from that
Earth they possessed, and so gave out, according to the usual Custom of those
times, that they were Aborigines, so that the Greeks called them (...); and
this People it is they imagine to be of Greek Stock, and to be the primitive
Planters of this Island, being, as Caesar and Tacitus write, they were of a
different Stature and Complexion from Caesar. Tacitus.
those whom they gather to have come out of Gaul, besides their similitude of
Language and Manners.

7. Another Reason they give for their Opinion, is, that although they do not
believe all the History of Brute to be true in every point concerning the
Trojans, who, on the matter, may be accounted Graecians, if we consider
Dardanus their Founder, and the vicinity of the two Nations, so they cannot
imagine but there was some Truth in the ground of that History, although so
obscured with the Fabulous superstructures of some Writers, that not being able
to undergo the test of Wise men, the whole Story has had the fate to be
accounted Idle and Ridiculous. For, say they, if one consider the consonancy of
the Greek Language with the British, likewise, several Manners and Customs the
British had, which were peculiar to them only, and the Greeks, and to no other
of these Western Nations, certainly we may reckon them to be of one Stock or
Language, yet the first Historian finding this great Probability, might be
ambitious (according to the Customs of those times) to derive his Countrymen
from a Trojan Race, and so put this general Truth into a particular dress of
his own.

These are the Reasons given by Wise men, by which they verily think the
Britains to be primitively of a Greek Original, which though it cannot be true
(considering how I have showed before, that the Phoenicians Traded into these
Islands some hundred of years before ever any Greek entered these Seas) yet
does it plainly show, that they were of longer standing in these Islands than
is commonly supposed.

1. Now as for the first Reason given, That these Islands must be planted by
Navigators. ^
I think will not hold good, unless we call there Navigators who in small
Wicker Boats used to row between Britain, Gaul and Belgium; for, from that
Continent do I rather believe the first Planters to come, than from the
Mediterranean through the Streights.

2. To the second Reason I answer, That the Greeks were not in the first Ages
of the World esteemed the best Navigators, but that the Phoenicians preceded
them both in time and experience in those Arts, has been shown already.

3. To the Third, That although their Colonies were numerous, yet were they not
so early as those of the Phoenicians.

4. To the Fourth, That although their Language was very frequent in Britain,
and the Welsh to this day has very much in it, yet cannot we reasonably suppose
that it was the only Language of the Country, because we find not their Tongue
in any Country so soon, and so much corrupted, so as in Caesar there is no
notice taken of it at all, which he certainly would have done, if he had found
the British Tongue only a derivation from the Greek, or corruption in Dialect,
and not a quite different Language.

As for the similitude that is made between Druids and Roman Clergy at this day
(I think) it holds better, if we suppose the Religion and Worship of the Greeks
brought hither, and preserved in its Native Language, than to conjecture, that
the People understood it at first, but by time and ill manners lost the
knowledge of it.

5. To the Fifth, That the Chariots of Greece, as well as other Customs of
theirs used by the Britains, argues the Greeks to have been here indeed, but
proves not they were the only Planters, or brought those Chariots to take
possession of an empty Country.

6. To the Sixth, Although there were two different Nations in this Island, yet
Caesar and Tacitus takes no notice of the Inland People, more than the Gaulish
Britains, Caesar. Tacitus.
as I may call them, as being of a more Greekish extraction.

7. To the Seventh, That although there may be some Truth couched in the
History of Brute, yet do not the Histories of Brute, prove, but that there were
others before him in this Island, which makes me wonder at Mr. Cambden, and
Others, that think, that in adhering to the History of Brute, we must cast off
the search and enquiry into the Antiquity of the Inhabitants of this Island.

Mr. Sheringham, to prove that the Greeks and Britains had no Commerce
together, Sheringham, de Orig. Angl.
brings in an Ancient Poet in Eustathius, who reckoning up all the Greatest
Islands known to the Graecians, never makes mention of Britain, which he would
have done in the first place, had he ever heard of it. The Verses are these:

(...),
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
Of the Seven ISLANDS Nature made,
SICILY the first place had
For Greatness, next is SARDO Height,
Then CYRNUS, next Jove's Country, CRETE,
Narrow EUBEA then, and CYPRUS, last
Of all is Little LESBOS placed.
But to this may be Answered, That this Poet, as usually all Poets, do reckon
only the Islands of the Mediterranean, which were most obvious to the Greeks,
and troubled not himself with the exactness of things, as we see by his (...).

Besides, it may be Answered, That although the Islands about Britain and
Britain it self, were known to the Greeks, yet at first they did not know this
to be an Island, having nothing to do in the more Northern parts; It was not
long before the Romans time, when Thule, and six days say I beyond Britain,
was discovered, of which Pythias makes mention, The Graecians, as well as the
Phoenicians, at first, contented Pythias,
themselves with the Commodities of the Southern and Western parts of these
Islands, and no doubt but they secured themselves, by little and little, of the
nature of the People, and conveniences of Ports, and all other Provisions,
before they ventured too far Northward.

Now, in my Opinion, this makes nothing against the Greek Voyages into these
parts, to whom the Cassiterides, or the Scilly Islands, and Cornwall and
Devonshire, might be known, yet they had not discovered Catness, or the
extremest point of Scotland.

What he says afterward, That before the Arrival of Caesar into this Island,
the Name of Britain cannot be found, is a great mistake and madvertency, for
Polybius, Polybius, lib. 3.
in his Third Book, makes mention of it particularly, and by Name, where he
promises to give an account, (...), of the British Islands, and the making and
ordering of their Tynn, which he performed, if we may believe Strabo, who
brings him in conferring and confuting the Opinions of Pytheas, Dicaearcbus,
and Eratosthenes, concerning the Magnitude of Britain. Thus Mr. Sherringham ran
himself into the same Error of Mr. Cambden, I suppose, by mistaking of Polybius.

But granting that we do not find the Name of Britain, or very rarely, before
Caesar's time among the Greeks, yet the Name of Cassiterides was sufficiently
known, likewise Albion was in frequent use among them. And if any Object, That
this Island was not any of the Cassiterides, yet let any one judge, whether it
be reasonable to imagine those Scilly Islands discovered, and yet Britain that
lies in sight not to be known to them, especially considering, that Cornwall and
Devonshire did not less abound in Tynn and Lead.

The Reasons why we meet not with BRITAIN oftener in the Writings of the Ancient
Greeks, may be these.

1. Because it lay so far off, and did not concern or relate to any thing of
the Greeks Polity, as to be taken notice of by their Historians; They sent no
Governors hither, nor any that presided over the Colony, but the Commodities
of the Country were sent either through France, up to a Mart in Narbo, or else
to the Veneti, or else, by Sea, through the Streights of Gibraltar, so that the
Learneder sort of the Graecians could not attain to much information of those
places, from whence they that went to them seldom returned, having no Reason so
to do, upon the account of the plenty of the Soil, and pleasure of the Country,
and the Dominion the wiser sort had gotten, by their Learning, over the minds
of a rude and barbarous People.

2. Besides, the Greek Historians concerned themselves, more, in relating the
Actions of their Countrymen, as they had respect to their Neighbors,
extolling the puissance of their Commonwealth in comparison of those States
that bordered upon, and often invaded them; Their resolute and vigorous defense
of their Laws, and Liberties, against the frequent and numerous Expeditions
made against them, is the greatest subject made use of by their Writers, in
extolling their Policy, and Conduct.

It had been a vain thing, and besides their purpose, to have Recorded their
New Discoveries and Acquests in the Western Seas, as Britain in particular,
when all the World saw them struggling at home, not to increase Empire, but to
preserve their Lives and Liberties.

3. It would have been esteemed a strange and extravagant humor, if whilst they
were almost overrun by the Persians, Athens burnt, and they forced to betake
themselves, according to the Oracle, to their Wooden walls. And afterward,
when Philip, a powerful and politic Prince, had designed and almost perfected
their Rume, with many other Calamities they underwent, both among themselves
and from others, that their Historians then should be comforting themselves
with their great Atchievments in a New World, as these Islands, for their
Remoteness might have been esteemed. What laughter would this have raised do we
think in their Reader, if then they should have given blessed and exact
descriptions of the Fortunate Islands as these were, thought probably to be
esteemed by them, when they were every day contending for their own Country, of
which they accounted themselves '(...), or Aborigines.

Indeed, BRITAIN, being of so foreign a concern to them, as to the Polity of
their Government, although they were concerned in the Commodities of Tynn and
I. ead, I never could wonder why we hear no more of it in their Writers,
especially when I consider, that the Romans (whom for their increase and
growth, the whole World began to have an eye on) were so lately discovered unto
them, certainly it is vain to infer, because the Romans were not mentioned
either in Thucidides or Herodotus, that therefore the Greeks had no knowledge
of Italy. Yet certainly, Thucidides. Herodotus.
that Country is as little mentioned by the Greek Historians of that time, as
Britain, although Pythagoras, some say, before others, after the days of Numa
Pompilius had seated himself on the Sea Coasts, which afterward was called
Magna Graecia, and it is manifest to all that have read any thing of the Greek
Voyages, that they traded to that part of Italy called Ager Brutiorum, by them
(...), for Pitch.

And it happens with Britain, in this respect, the same as it did with (...) in
Italy, because the Greeks contented themselves to trade upon the Sea Coasts of
Italy only, so that they make little or no mention of the Inhabitants;
therefore we must think them to have no Commerce at all with them, when indeed
it is only true, that they were ignorant of the higher and Northerly parts
only, but not of the whole Country. Insomuch as we find in Stephanus, that in
those days Italy was no more (than the Country of the Brutii) with the Greeks,
(...). Stephanus, in voce (...).
And if one had asked a Greek what Italy was, he would have told him (...),
which was but a Province, and a small part of the flourishing Country. And, I
seriously believe, the same account would he have given, should one have
demanded, whether it were an Island or no.

If it happened so with Italy, which was so nigh unto them, what great account
can we expect of Britain from them, whose distance rendered it more capable of
an exact account.

For, although it be no question, but that the Greeks Traded hither, and that
several Colonies of the AEolians had seated themselves in these parts, yet do I
judge, that they were for a long time altogether ignorant of the greater part
of this Island, nay, they knew not whether it was an Island or no, contenting
themselves at first with the knowledge of the Scilly, and adjacent Islands, Man
and Anglesey, likewise Cornwall and Devonshire, small parts of this large and
spacious Dominion, and that the name of Britains was first given to them alone
from the Phoenician Bratanac, or a Country of Tynn.

What exact account can be expected from them, I say, who first must be
supposed to employ all their time in the Traffic of the Country, and the
heaping up of such Commodities as would make amends for their great Costs and
long Voyages?

It is not to be supposed, that when they had set footing on so plentiful a
Place, as this was ever esteemed, that they would return on purpose to give
true Relations of it, to satisfy the natural Inquisitiveness of their Country
Men after News, or quit the possession of a peaceable Trade, to run the hazards
of continual War at home.

Yet, seeing these ISLANDS are mentioned by their Historians, sometimes under
one Name, sometimes under another, and it is agreed on all hands, that the
Scilly Islands were the Cassiterides mentioned by Herodotus, and that Polybius,
above two hundred years before Christ, makes particular mention of Britain, and
the Commodity of Tynn thence exported, we may in all reason suppose them to
have been discovered by the Greeks, though upon the aforesaid accounts given,
their Authors make no such particular relations of them, as some, in vain, have
expected.

Having premised thus much concerning any Intercourse that might happily pass,
between them of Greece and their Country men that first Landed in these parts,
I shall proceed to show, what Remains the Greeks have left in this Island, and
shall set down the Opinions of Authors as touching their Language, the progress
they made in promoting their Customs and Language, and the designs they
carried on in managing of their Authority with the People, and then I shall
leave it to any to judge, whether that great esteem and veneration their Druids
were in, when Julius Caesar entered this Island, and that vast opinion all had
of their Judgment and Integrity, so that recourse was made to them in all
matters of moment and difficulty, could be acquired in so few years, as is
generally supposed, and whether it be likely, that a Nation so stubborn and
hardy as the Britains, are easily conjectured, would submit so quickly to
foreign Customs, and yield their necks to the yoke of Greek Sacrifices, which
spared not often their dearest Children, and nearest Relations.

Where, by the by, we may take notice, that this sacrificing of Men, Women, and
Children, devoting the lives of Captives and Prisoners to the Altars of the
Gods, as we find the Druids used to do, was a Custom left off by the Graecians
of the latter Ages, and was the peculiar Blemish of their Forefathers, in the
times of their Great Hero's, when the shedding of Blood was a Princely thing,
and was so esteemed for its own sake; so that it is not to be in the least
imagined, that these Druids, men generally reported of a moral and honest
Conversation, would begin such Bloody Customs, had they not for a long time
received them from their Predecessors, and so on, till we come to that Age of
the Graecians, which first sent Colonies into these Nations, and brought over
those Customs which were then esteemed commendable even in Greece it self.

The Landing Place of the Graecians.
THe Places where the Greeks first Landed, is guessed, by some, to be the two
Islands, Man, and Anglesey, or one of them, and the Reasons given are these.

First, Because the Druids, whose Name proves them of a Greek Original, upon
the discovery of this Island, the more known Parts of the World principally
resided in these Two; There they had their Head quarters, as I may say, hither
resorted as to public Seminaries, all that desired to be instructed in their
Learning, or initiated in their Religion, here they studied privately, and
retired, sometimes twenty years together, to learn their Mysteries, which was
not permitted them to carry away, otherwise than in their Memories; When
Britain was invaded, to Anglesey then retired the Southern Druids and their
Followers, not as a place of more Safety, for then they had fled Northwards to
Scotland, because this was supposed to be their Original and Capital Seat, and
so either out of Superstition, that, that Land which first gave footing to
their Forefathers, would be most fortunate to them, or else, because it was
really best Fenced; It was looked upon as their own Patrimony, the Woods of it
being so Sacred, and so inviolably preserved for the exercise of their
Religious Adoration, that it yielded more shelter for them than any other
Parts; Whatever the Reason was, certain it is, it has given occasion to some
to think, that these were their primitive Habitations to which they so
naturally had recourse.

What is said of the Southern Druids, and their Retirement into Anglesey, the
same may be said of the Northern, into the Isle of Man. A President was kept
there, to whom once every year they repaired from those parts to take Counsel
for the management of Affairs, and after They of Anglesey were expulsed that
Island, the Remainders fled hither as to their last Refuge, and here remained,
until King Cratilinth, An. Dom. 277, with great difficulty drove them out.

Moreover, about those Parts they have this Tradition, Mon mam Cumri, Man is
the Mother of the Cumri.

Now the more Northern Britains are supposed, Anciently, to be called, CUMERO,
I mean, those Britains that lived in the Inland parts of Britain, and not the
Gaulish-Britains; Sure I am this has given some Reasons to think, that the
first Britains came out of Anglesey, auciently called Mona, and if they be of a
Greek Stock, that the Graecians first Landed here; likewise there are who have
thought, that these two Islands are the same which Anciently were celebrated by
the Poets under the Name of the Fortunate Island, and the ELYSIAN Fields.

Isacius Tzetzes, a Greek Author, in his Notes on Lycophron, reports, they were
Isacius Tzer. in Lycoph.
among the Britains; and Homer, by one is brought in to say, they were on the
Coasts of Britain, and here I will put down the following chief Reasons, and so
leave it to the Reader to judge.

The Fortunate Islands lay in the Atlantic Sea, and so do these with the rest
of the British Islands.

The Fortunate Islands were Two, so are these, the lesser and bigger MONA, one
the nearer, the other the farther off.

The Fortunate Islands were a Type of the ELYSIAN Fields, and are so called
promiscuously, sometimes by one name, sometimes by another. They were said to
be Places of Ease, Pleasure, and Rest from all Labors, to all who lived
Virtuously and Regularly, as that the Conversation of just and upright Persons
was the most valuable Happiness.

The strict Life of the Druids might therefore render these Two Islands more
valuable than others upon all the accounts aforesaid, as they were sequestered
from the Cares of the World, Men of upright and moral Conversation. Here was
their General Meetings, here they taught and discoursed of nothing but Virtue
and Piety. Their Solemn Assemblies were all concerning the Principles of
Divinity, Morality, the immortality of the Soul, and the World to come; so that
this Conversation might well be esteemed for its Retiredness and Gravity, to
come nighest those Idaea's that the Philosophers and Poets, lovers of Virtue,
had of the Rewards of another World.

The Druids had that Authority, that they were made Judges of Controversies
both in Britain and Gaul, to which esteem they could never have arrived, unless
they had been strict Enquirers and Searchers into the Lives and Manners of
those they had admitted into their Order.

Because these Two Islands were the Fountains from which proceeded all their
Streams, no doubt but the greatest care was taken, that they should be
preserved pure and untainted, and this strict enquiry, and severe examination
of Souls, is supposed to be made by Judges, before their admission into the
Elysian Fields, as the Ancient Poets witness.

Their Retiredness, which is so much spoken of by the Poets and Philosophers of
the Elysian Fields, is intimated in the very Names of these Islands, they being
called MONA, as has been said before, from which Greek word the Monastic Life
had its Mirae
denomination.

The Elysian Fields, or Fortunate Islands, were said to be full of Shades;
Anglesey was called Ynis Dowil, a Dark and Shady Island, because the Druids
planted here many Woods and Groves, as necessary for the exercise of their
superstitious Rites and Ceremonies.

The Greek and Latin Poets Anciently accounted the North their Right hand, and
the South their Lest; from their way of looking to the West toward the Elysian
Fields and Fortunate Islands, and, in the Judgment of the best Authors, were
seated on the Western Coasts of Britain.

Plutarch, on the Life of Sertorius, writes of him, That at his retreat from
Spain, Plutarch on the life of Sertorius.
he was obliged to take the Sea, where, not being secure, nor permitted safely
to Land upon the Spanish or African Coasts, being then in the Mediterranean
Sea, he passed the Streights, and turning on the Right hand of the Spanish
shore, he met diverse Saylors from the Fortunate Islands, seated 10000 furlongs
from the Coast of Africa, to which Islands he intended to go, had not the
Cilician Privateers (who understood his design) forsaken him. Thus Plutarch.

The Islands MONAE are about the same distance, and the Ships coming from them,
arriving from the Spanish Coast, seems to make it more probable that they were
Islands Northward on the British Coast, than those which go under the name of
Fortunate Islands.

Now if there be any likelihood of truth in these Conjectures, certainly the
Plantation of the Greeks here is very Ancient, and must of necessity be long
before those times Mr. Cambden assigns for the first discovery of these Islands
by them; and so consequently Brith could not give name to them; For many
hundred years before Julius Caesar's days, or before ever Philaeas Taurominites
had been in Britain, the name of the ELYSIAN Fields, and Fortunate Islands, was
sung by all Poets.

Mr. Cambden reports out of Robert of Avesbury, That when Pope Clement the
Cambden cut of Rob. of Avesbury.
sixth had given the Fortunate Islands to Lewis of Spain, he made great
preparations in mustering Men in France and Italy, in order to the taking
possession of them, that the English verily believed that all those Levies were
made against them, and our Leigier Ambassadors at Rome, Prudent Personages, as
he calls them, were so strongly possessed with this Opinion, that they withdrew
from Rome, and hastened for England, to give warning of it.

Mr. Milton, after most of the former Conjectures, thinks, there are no Two
such Islands, so probable as the Monae are to be the FORTUNATE ones, seeing
Milton's Hist of England.
undoubtedly they were in the Atlantic Sea, and upon the British Coasts, as
they were strongly reported to be in Ancient time.

But leaving these Conjectures, I come now to show, what Footsteps remain of
the Greeks, and certain Evidences of their being once very conversant in these
Islands. And I shall begin first with their Language, and afterward with their
Customs, Manners, Habits, and Religions, which were continued even to JULIUS
CAESAR's days, and are not as yet utterly rooted out from among them.

And here it is to be observed, as touching the British Language, that above
all Nations in the World they have been curious in preserving of it entire,
without mixture, and carefully and studiously avoided the entertainment of any
strange and foreign Words into it, as may be seen in Merlyn and Thaliassen, two
of their Merlyn, and Thaliassen.
Poets, who although writ so long ago, yet setting aside some sinall
variations, is the very same Language spoken by them at this day, not only by
the Britains of England, but of Armorica also in France, a thing much to be
wondered at, did we not consider the exact Orthography they preserved, so that
if you take half a dozen Scribes, and dictate to them a sentence of their
Language, they will all agree in the same way of writing, which exactness is
not observed in Our, or any other Language, but that there will be as many
ways of writing, as there are men appointed for that purpose. This Observation
was made by Sr. John Price, who made an Experiment Sr. John. Price;
of it.

Now, this exact Orthography, and the natural care that through all Ages they
had of preserving their Language, has been the cause that the Old Language of
the Britains (setting aside what Words crept in by force from the Romans, and
Saxons, who conquered them) has been preserved so entire as it is.

The Footsteps of the Greek Language is evidently seen not only in particular
British Words, which agree in sound and sense, but in the very nature and Idiom
of the two Languages.

Some are of Opinion, that the Greek Characters were used in Britain, and that
Joh. Price; Defen. Hist, Brit. c. 1.
they were changed by the Roman Conquest, who always were very careful to
obtrude their Language upon them whom they overcame, as a certain sign of
Dominion over them, and a surer Union with such Provinces; And this I am apt to
credit, because Caesar, after the Conquest of the Helvetii (as I said before)
found their Public Records written in Greek Characters.

The Ancient Greeks had but Two and twenty Letters, no more had the Britains,
and as afterward the Greeks, for convenience, did receive two more into their
Alphabet, so have the Britains.

Moreover, it is to be observed, that the British Letters agree exactly in
sound with the Greek, as is most remarkable in c and g (not to instance in d
and u) which c and g are always pronounced by the Britains, as, (...) and
(...), and not as now they are before i and e, where c is pronounced like an s,
and g like an j Consonant.

Of Vowels, the Britains had Anciently six, now they have added a seventh, viz.
a w, but this relishes of the Teutonick.

Their Consonants, after the manner of the Greeks, are divided into semivocales
and mutas, and these again into tenues medias and aspiratas, which, in the
flexion of Nouns and Verbs, pass one into another exactly after the Greek
manner.

R, in the beginning of words, is always with an Aspirate, as it is in the
Greek Tongae, out of which Observations in the British and Greek Language, I
would note these things. 1. First, That the Druids of Britain and Gaul, by the
number of Letters having only twenty two, as may rationally be supposed, after
the manner of the Ancienter Greeks, came into Britain very early, when the
Greeks had not as yet learnt the use of their other Letters, or if they had,
notwithstanding they were not frequently known among them. 2. Secondly, The
Druids, using the same Characters which were common in Greece, in the time of
Julius Caesar, it appears, that neither were they of so Ancient a standing in
this Island and Gaul, as the first and primitive Times of Greece, when the
Greeks learnt their Letters from the Phoenicians, and without doubt something
nigh their Character.


Besides, Pliny observes, out of an Ancient Inscription in the Greek Tongue,
that formerly the Graecians had very nigh the same Characters with the Latins;
If I be Plin. Not. hist.
not mistaken, did write an H instead of their Aspiration, after the manner of
the Phoenician, and if the Phoenicians did not themselves bring the use of
Letters, and the number of them into Britain, but contented themselves with
Trading only hither, yet I am sure the Graecians had not only the first number
of their Letters from them, but Characters also, and as may be very rationally
conjectured, might bring them into this Island, after they had new modelled
them, and before they had added any new ones to them.

The true attaining to the just Circumstances of Time, as to the Navigations of
the Phoenicians and Graecians, makes much to the stating of the Antiquities of
Britain. But care must be had, that as we bring not the Greeks too early into
these Islands, as by the more Modern Characters they used do appear, so we must
not assign the time, too late, of their discovering them, which their long
settled Customs in Britain, the great esteem they had gained with the
Islanders, the very Idiom of the Greek Language introduced, and their Religious
Ceremonies and Rites, though never so cruel, allowed and approved by the whole
State, argues them of a very Ancient standing in these Parts, and that not
suddenly, but by long use, and against much opposition, they were at last
admitted and entertained.

Seeing we have here spoken of the Concordance of the British Tongue with the
Greek Idiom; it will not be much out of the way, if we take notice, that as the
number of their Letters agree exactly with the Phoenicians, though we will not
suppose them to have received them immediately from the Phoenicians but the
Graecians, so there are a world of Words in the British Language (as partly has
been shown upon another occasion) which agree exactly with the Syrian or
Phoenician Tongue; For, I verily believe, that the extreme number of
Aspirations, and guttural pronunciations, were peculiar to no Western Nation,
but only the Britains of Armorica, and Wales, and the Irish (which may well be
supposed to be peopled out of Britain, or else to have been Traded unto by the
Phoenicians themselves) is an evident sign of the Phoenicians once conversing
in these Islands; For it is to be observed that the Eastern Languages, and that
they as well as the Greeks, contributed much to the making up of that Language
which was used here in Caesar's days, and since, the mixture of the Saxon,
Roman, and Norman Tongues, only excepted.

But to return to the Greeks, besides the peculiar conformity of Idiom, which
the Britains have of their Language in general with the Graecians, it is to be
observed, that the Numerals of both Nations are most the same, where sometimes
our Britains, sometimes they of Gaul, have the greatest resemblance. As for
Example, I will set down in order. British. Greek. English. Un, (...), One.
Daw; Armorican, Dow, (...), Two. Tri, (...), Three. Pedwar, (...); AEol. (...),
Four. Pump, Armo. Pemp, (...), (...), Five. Chuech, Armo. Huech, (...), Six.
Says, (...), Seven. With, Armo. Eith, (...), Eight. Naw, (...), Nine. Degrees,
(...), Ten. Un at degrees, (...), Eleaven. Deuddeg, (...), Twelve. Ugain, (...),
Twenty. Cant, (...), a Hundred. Mil, (...), in the Latin Mill, a Thousand.
Myrdd, (...), a Million.

Most of these may easily be supposed to come from the Greek; if we consider
how variously that Language alters the Letters of Foreign words it receives.
And if any think that some of these may better be referred to the Romans than
Graecians, as Un, Daw, Tri, Cant and Mil, I shall answer them in Mr.
Sheringhams words, That Sheringham, De Angl. Orig.
besides these so like the Greek Numerals, the Britains have no other to
express themselves by. But if these words were lately introduced, it behoved
that the Old Terms should have remained in their Writings, as the Old Saxon and
Latin words, though out of use, remain still in the Writings of the Ancients;
But I fear, by his words lately introduced, he supposes the objection made, as
if they were brought in later than Caesar's days, perhaps by the Clergy of
Rome, otherwise it is not improbable but they had some of these from the
Romans, although there be no mention of any Ancienter words of the same
signification in their Old Poets, because they have no Writings of such
Antiquity, and Numerals are (of all other words) used according to the
acceptance of the present time. But the greatest Argument, in my opinion, that
the Britains had not any of them from the Romans, is, because that the
Armorican Britains in Gaul, who fled over (not long after the coming of the
Romans) into this Island, cannot be supposed (in so short a time) to change so
considerable a part of their Language, do notwithstanding keep the same
Numerals as our Britains of Wales do, setting aside some small variation, as
Dow for Daw, which is rather to be attributed to a difference in Dialect, than
that they had them from the Greeks.

But, besides the names of Numbers, the Britains have in their Language a whole
Lexicon of Words, whose Original is undoubtedly Greek, I will put down some
Examples out of Mr. Sheringham, which he collected, most of which, as he
writes, has no synonimous words to express them. British. Greek. English.
Agos, (...) a Neighbor, or that which is near at hand. All, (...) Another. Am,
(...) Round about, of all sides, or of all parts. Amwyn, (...) to Defend, or
afford aid or assistance.

An, is a Particle Privative, as it is among the Greeks.
British. Greeks. English. Arth, (...) a Bear. Bloesy, (...) a Stammerer.
Brochi, (...) more Cruel, hasty, or unruly. Cade, (...) Strong, or valiant.
Carthu, (...) to Purge, or clear. Casmai, (...) an Ornament, garnishing, or
decking of any thing. Caul, (...) Grewel, or Pottage. Civ, (...) a Shell, or
Cabinet. Claiar, (...) Warm. Cledr, (...) a Rafter. Clod, (...) Praise, or
Commendation. Cnithio, (...) to Strike. Cnoi, (...) to Bite, or gnaw. Deysif,
(...) a Petition, or request. Diliis, (...) Manifest. Dor, (...) Water. Drysi,
(...) an Oak, or Grove of Trees. Eiddo, (...) Proper, or particular ones own.
Elin, (...) a Cubit.

The Particle Er increases his signification, as (...) does among the Greeks.
British. Greeks. English. Etto, (...) Yet. Faelu, (...) to Err. Fair, (...)
Fairs. Flaw, (...) a Cut. Forrior, fur, (...) a Thief. Gatan, (...) a Crane.
Geyleisio, (...) to Tickle. Malen, (...) Salt. Paul, (...) the Sun. Medd, (...)
Mead, or Metheaglen. Mis, (...) a Mouth. Moccio, (...) to Mock. Ni, (...) We.
Nyddu, (...) to Spin, or Weave. Porthwys, (...) a Ferry-man. Rhechayn, (...) to
Sneeze, or Snort. Rhyn, (...) a Hill. Seban, (...) Soap. Sirig, (...) Silk.

And thus ad infinitum, but let these few Examples suffice to show the
Agreement of the British Language with the Greek, which could proceed from no
other cause than some Plantation of Greeks in this Island.

If any object, that in the Saxons Language, there are many Words likewise
which may be referred to the same Original (as appears in Mr. Cambden's
Remains) let them consider first, that their Number is not so great, also that
the Idioms of the two Camb. Rem;
Languages are very different, which is not so with the British and Greeks, as
is visibly seen in their Flexion of words and Aspirations, by which Letters
they are easily resolvable into others of the same kind.

Lastly, It is to be supposed that the Germans bordering upon the Gauls, and
always infesting and incroaching upon them, even unto Caesar's days, when
scarcely they could be quieted, might either take some Druids in War, or else
entertain them in times of Peace, to learn those Religions and Rites for which
they were in much esteem among their Enemies.

And, that which induces me to believe this, is, because the Saxons, a People
of Germany, in their Tongue, as Alfricus writes, called a Wise man or Diviner
(...), Alscricus, a Saxon Writer in King Egberts days.
which carries with it the very Name and Profession of the Druids, they being
very much given to the Art of Magic, of which, the foretelling of things to
come, was always an inseparable Companion.

Besides the Names of things common to all Nations, as, Fire, Air, Earth,
Water, Hills, Rivers and Valleys, the use of which is understood by all
Nations, and so cannot be supposed to want Appellations in any; There are other
words which depend upon skill, either in Physic, Astronomy, Geometry,
Agriculture, Architecture, Habits, Wars, Customs and Religions, etc. which
cannot be supposed in any Nation before the use of the thing it self, and that
particular Science be introduced; Where we see two or more Nations agreeing in
these Circumstances, we may rationally think, that the more Learned Nations did
not only communicate the things themselves, but the Names also with them, as we
see, to this day, the Inventions of Arts and Sciences, to the great honor of
Industrious people, preserved entire in the Language of the first Inventors.

In regard, to treat of this Subject fully would be endless, we will confine
our selves to some particular Words that Mr. Cambden has brought, to prove the
Gauls and Britains one and the same Nation, and will show, that, in all
probability, those very words were introduced by the Greeks, as we have shown
in others by the Phoenicians, and that in all likelihood, the things themselves
as well as Names were brought in by them, and therefore the promiscuous use of
them in Gaul and Britain, argues no more the Nations to have the same Original,
than the word Astronomy, or Geography, used by both, will prove them Graecians,
or the word Admiral, Turks or Saracens.

The first I shall instance is Thireos, which he collects out of Pausanias, by
Cambden cut of Pausanias.
which word the Gauls call their Country Shields, and the Britains to this day
Carian, but I pass over the similitude of these two words, which I doubt not
but some will count very little.

Let us consider Thireos without the Termination Pausanias puts upon it, and we
shall find it to have a far greater relation to (...), a Breast Plate amongst
the Greeks, and if some shall say that Thireos signifies not a Breast Plate but
a Shield, let him consider that in the nature of a defense they are the same,
and although the (...), or Breast Plate, might be brought in by the Greeks, yet
the Gauls and Britains accompanying themselves in Skirmishing and sudden
On-sets, rather than to set or fixed Battles, that which was fastened to their
Breasts they thought more convenient to wear loose before, than in the nature
of a Shield, from the weight of which they could easier disengage themselves
upon any sudden occasion of retreat, and served better, or at least as well, to
desend their Bodies; And this I think is the true Original of their Thireos,
the shape and make of which was, without any doubt, different from their
Neighbors.

As for the word Carian, by which the Britains in our Island and Armorica
called their Shields, I think it may have more relation to Caran, Thunder, by
reason of the flames on all sides painted on their Shields, issuing out like
Lightning from Thunder, or else from a God much of that name, who with their
Shields preserved them in War, and affrighted their Enemies; For the Britains
had on their Shields a terrible visage painted like a Gorgon, to amaze their
Enemies, which, according to the horrid manner of those Times, represented
their Deities, may very easily be supposed some Tutelar God, under whose
protection they thought themselves secured in the day of Battle; Others there
be that derive it from (...), because it was long in the manner of a Door.

Circius, a vehement Wind, so called by the Gauls from its force and violence,
is derived by Mr. Cambden from Cyroch, signifying Violence, and does suppose
this Wind was so called by the Gauls and Britains; (...), in the Greek,
signifies to exasperate or make violent.

The Galathians, who spoke the same language with the Gauls, had a little Shrub
which they called Coceus, by which they dyed Scarlet, and the Britains called
this Color Coch; Now as I believe the use of Dying, so this color also of
highest estimation among the Greeks was brought by them into these Parts, for
it is manifest they called it (...); It is very easy to imagine, that when the
Britains and Gauls found the use of this Herb, they might give it the name of
Coch, from the tincture it produced.

Petoritum, Festus says, was a Chariot used in Gaul, so called from its four
Wheels, Festus.
the name whereof is manifestly Greek, for (...) signifies Four in the AEolick
Dialect; And no doubt but the Britains and Gauls, as they had the use of these
Chariots from Greece, so did they retain their Names in the Language of the
Inventors.

The same I have shown before in another place, of Pempedula dercom a Ratis, to
which may be added the Gauls Glico marga, and the Britains Gluys marl, White
Marble, from (...), white; Tripitia of the Gauls, and Tribet of the Britains, a
three-foot Stool, from (...); Gaulish Phanarat, and Arat of the Britains, a
Plow, (...) of the Greeks, the same thing; Rodanus, a swift River in Gaulish,
Rhedec, Swiftness in British, from (...) to flow apace.

All which things put together, as they argue the Greek to have brought many
words both to the British and Gaulish Language, so if we shall add these words
with those that have been already shown to be Phoenicians, we shall find no
ground to judge, that the Britains and Gauls were the same people, seeing that
most of the words brought in by Mr. Cambden to prove them so, relate to public
Customs, Magistrates, Honors, Manners of War, Gods, Arms, Arts, Priests,
Habits, Agriculture, Measures, etc. the use of all which, as is manifest they
did, so might they receive the very names of them from some third Nation, and
that they had them so, some from the Phoenicians, others from the Greeks, as
has been apparently shown.

Tacitus writes, that the People of the Estii used the fashions and the habits
of the Tacitus.
Suivians, but in Language came nearer to the Britains. Now seeing there were
People in Gaul that differed from them both in Language and Habits, in the
first of which they agreed with the Britains, in the latter with the Suivians,
a People in Germany, I am apt to believe, that these Estii had something of
German Original by their Habits, and therefore that their agreeing with the
Britains in Language, that is (as I judge) both differ from the pure German or
pure Gaulish, argues the British to be somewhat of a German Race, although
mixed with their Neighbors the Gauls. That they have something of them it
plainly appears, if we do but consider there were two sorts of People in this
Island, the Maritime and Inland, the latter of which did pretend to be
Aborigines, which they never would have had the confidence to have done, had
they been of the same Language with the Maritime Gaulish Britains, or the Gauls
themselves.

Besides, in comparing the Old Gaulish Language and the British, we shall
always find the British to have something more of the Teutonick, even in those
very words they received from the Greeks, and others. This cannot spring from
the Saxons conquering them, since the Armorican Britains, who were long before
in Gaul, ere the Saxons were called to the Britains to assist them, retain the
very same Teutonick Dialect.

A few Examples here will not be amiss.

G. Teutates, B. Diw Taith, the God of Traveling. G. Caterva, B. Caturfa, a
Troop. G. Covin, B. Cowain, a Wagon. G. Laina, B. Glawn, Wool. G. Petor, Note,
G. stands for the Gaulish Language, and B. for the British.
B. Pedwar, Four. G. Betal, B. Bedw, a Birch-tree. G. Scovies, B. Iscaw, the
Elder-tree. G. Gliscomaga, B. Gluys marl, White marle, whereby the w, u, y, the
peculiar Characters of the Teutonick Dialect so frequently being in use amongst
the Britains, we may plainly (in my thoughts) gather that they were originally
of a German Original.

Mr. Cambden, to avoid the words of Tacitus concerning the Estii, a People of
Gaul, who agreed with the Britains in Language, and the Germans in Habit
(because this implies the Britains to differ from the Gauls in Language, seeing
that the Estii, a People of Gaul, spoke not the same Language as the Gauls, but
seemed of a German Race, and so speak like the Britains) says, That the
Languages most remote in some parts agree. And gives an Example, how Busbequius
(not long since) Ambassador (from Frederick the Emperor) to the Turk, found
many Dutch and English words in the Taurica Chersonesus. By this Mr. Cambden
implies, as if it were absurd to think they of Taurica Chersonesus, and the
Dutch and English, have any relation one with another. But of this we shall
have more occasion to Treat in the Saxon Original, wherein shall be proved they
are of the same Original, both by their Idiom, way of Numbering, and several
particular words that agree with the English and Dutch, and so must refer it to
its proper place; so that if according to Mr. Cambdens own words, Languages
most remote in some points agree, it is no wonder if the British and Gaulish
have some similitude; If we take away the words which were introduced into
Britain and Gaul, either by the Phoentcians or Greeks, or last of all by the
Romans, possibly no two Languages may be judged more remote than theirs was,
and then Mr. Cambdens large Catalogue of Words will be reduced to a small
number indeed.

As for the Primitive Original of the Britains, I will not treat of any farther
in this place, it being the concern of this Chapter only to show, that the
Greeks were more Ancient in these Islands than Mr. Cambden supposed them to be;
For his Derivation of Britannia, which has been shown by their Language and
some particular Customs herein mentioned, all which could not be so fully
settled, as they were in Caesar's days, had not the Druids been of longer
continuance in these Parts, as will more evidently appear when we come to treat
of their Customs and Manners, as likewise of their Gods, Religion, Rites and
Ceremonies.

THE ANTIQUITY AND ORIGINAL OF THE GREEKS.
GREECE, in the present Latitude thereof, is bounded on the East with the
Propontick Hellespont and AEgean Seas, on the West with the Adriatic, on the
North with Mount Haemus, which parts it from Bulgaria, Servia, and some part
of Illyricum, and on the South with the Ionian Sea; But at first, the name of
Greece being proper only to Attica and Athens (the considerable place in
Attica) being more remarkable and conspicuous above any part of Greece, in its
present extent, and for Learning, Valor and Navigation, we shall confine the
present discourse to the Religion, Civil Government, and Extraction of the
Athenians only, who are supposed to have succeeded the Phoenicians in the
discovery of this Island.

All Relations concerning the Greeks before the beginning of the Olympiads,
through length of Time and a mixture of erroneous Fables with truth, are so
obscure, confused and imperfect, that they seem like Inscriptions upon Ancient
Coyns, half defaced and eaten out by Time; the sense and true meaning of the
defective part being to be picked out and guessed at, from the remaining
Characters.

Attica formerly was called Ionia, and the Athenians, by Homer, are called
Iaones, which carries a great affinity and cognation with the word Javan, the
fourth Son of Strabo, lib. 9. page 392.
Japhet, by whom Greece was certainly planted, (...) and all Greece, Dan. 8.
21. is called Javan; but the Athenians (least the Joseph. Antiq. Dan. 8. 21
nearness and similitude of sound betwixt Iaones and Javan should discover them
to be Upstarts, and of yesterday) they pretended that their Country was termed
Ionia, from one Ion the Son of Xuthus, Son of Deucalion, making it purely a
Greek Name, and that they themselves were (...), Aborigines, being not content
to spoil the Egyptian, in attributing to themselves the Honor of inventing
all kind of Sciences, unless they could also rob them of the Glory of
Antiquity, in which they were ever known to pride and boast, yet Plato
(concerning the Greek Letters) says, that the Greeks received them from
Barbarians more Ancient than themselves.

Cratylus taught Thucidides to confirm the other Report, who tells us a
pleasant story, Cratyl. f. 426. Edit. Steph. Thucid. lib. 1.
How that the fruitfullest parts of Greece often changed its Inhabitants, the
pleasure and profit of their Seats constantly exposing them to the fury and
malice of more potent Enemies; and the Traders foreseeing that they were as
liable to expulsion as others had been formerly, tilled so much of their
Grounds only as served for present necessity, neglecting the rest, not being
willing to go away muttering like those in Virgil,

Impius haec tam culta novalia miles habebit?
Barbarus has segetes; en queis consevimus arva!
Shall the rude Soldier this rich Corn possess?
See with what care, for Rogues, our Land we dress!
They were resolved, that the fruits of their Labor should never draw upon
them their own Ruin, so that all Greece (says he) was not (...), firmly or
fully Inhabited, by reason of these continual flittings and removings; But
Attica, through the barrenness of its Soil, being worth no man's Ambiticn or
undertaking, -- (...). Was always inhabited by the same men, till at last it
was so crammed and crowded with its own multitude, that the Land it self would
scarce contain, much less maintain its Inhabitants, that they were forct to
send Colonies (for the ease and relief of the rest) into a part of Asia Minor,
calling it after their own Country, Ionia; thus far reaches the Grecian
sigment. But he that can believe, that Attica was so well stored with People
before Asia the Less had any, may as reasonably conclude they were Aborigines,
i. e. sprung out of the Earth also.

Strabo out of Hecataeus asfirms, That the lones came out of Asia into Greece,
Strabo ex Hecat.
which Opinion is probable enough, for why might not Javan impart his Name to
that Province, or part of Asia Minor, which is called Ionia, as well as he did
afterward to that part of Greece which is generally known by the name of
Attica.

Most Greek Authors bring the Name of Ionia from this Ion, which we (in favor
to their Memory) shall not be much against, supposing we may have leave to
conjecture that Ion himself took name from Javan, it being a Custom observable
in the Histories of all times to retain the ancient Name of a Fore-father in
some, the principal of his Issue.

Others have supposed, they were derived from the Egyptians, grounding that
St. Walter Rawleigh's Hist. World, p. 357.
Supposition upon the nearness and similitude of signification between Sais and
Athene in Greece, and that they were formerly Colonies from Sais (a City of
Egypt, situated near one of the Mouths of Nile) is concluded on from the
Identity of many Customs, common as well to the Saitae as the Athenians; For
as the Athenians distinguished their People by three divisions: viz. into
(...), or Nobility; (...), or Pcasants; and (...), or Mechanics: in like
manner also did the Diod. Sic.
Egyptians the Athenian '(...), who were totally addicted to the search of
Learning and Wisdom, and therefore being had in great estimation by the
People, we may compare them to the Egyptian Priests; nay some of the chief
Families in Athens had the Priesthood by Succession, as Eumolphidae, Ceryces,
Cynidae, the Geomori, Archaeolog. At. lib. 1. c. 4.
who had Lands assigned them for the maintenance of the War, are not unlike
them in Egypt, who hold Possessions on these terms, viz. to provide Soldiers
when need should require to fight.

The Demiurgi resemble those Plebeians, who (skilful in some Art) did set-out
their Labor to daily hire; and Herodotus is of opinion, that they had their
Religion Herodotus in Terpsich. p. 48
from the Egyptians, although it is stiffly denied by Plutarch the Reader,
who, according to his inclination, may make choice of which Opinion he pleases,
but the first is the most probable, and best received.

But that which detracts much from the Antiquity of the Athenians, is, that
CECROPS, the first King and Founder of Athens, who, according to St. Augustine
was contemporary with Moses, was the first that reduced the Greeks (living
before like Savages or Brutes, without Law or Religion) into a form of a Body
Politic St. Aug. de Civit. Dei, 1. 18. c. 10.
He first advised them to offer up Sacrifices to Jupiter, and divided the
People into four Tribes, taught them to dwell together civilly in Villages (the
People of Attica before, being ignorant of the benefit of Societies and
Corporations.) Afterward, Theseus collected the People of Attica into a Body,
and incorporated them into the City of Athens, which he had beautified and
enlarged; but at first Greece was inhabited by Villages and not by Towns.

Athens was governed by this Cecrops, and his Successors, by no other Title
than that of KING for the space of Four hundred years and upwards, till the
time of Thucid. lib. 1.
Codrus, who in the Wars against the Dorienses (being advertised by the Oracle,
that his Enemies should come off Conquerers, if they did not kill the Athenian
King, for the honor of his Country and safety of his People) put himself into
the habit of a Common Beggar, and entered the Enemies Camp, where he behaved
himself so strangly, that they were forct at last to kill him; But when the
Dorienses understood what they had done, they were so discouraged that they
dismissed their Army in haste, and so departed homewards.

The Athenians resenting this noble and generous Action of their King so
highly, they thought no Man in the Commonwealth, nay not his own Son, worthy to
succeed him as King, resolving that as he had proved himself to be the best of
Kings, so they, in honor to his Memory, would make him the last, intimating
that all Royal Qualifications departed with him, therefore laying aside
Monarchy they constituted Princes for term of life, differing from Kings only
in this, That the one claimed by the right of Succession, the other by Election
and favor of the People.

The first of these Archontes, or Princes, was Medon, Son of the late King
Codrus; and (...).
these ruled Athens three hundred and sixteen years; After this they chose a
Governor, in whom resided the chief Authority for ten years only, expecting
Justice and Moderation from his hands, who at the end of Ten years was to
become a Private man, and consequently, upon any Injury or Affront committed,
was liable to the power and severity of his Successors.

Seven of these Decennial Governors only ruled Athens, which compleats
Threescore and ten years; then the Government became Annual, the City being
Governed by Majors or Burg-Masters, and this form of Government was not only
disturbed and shaken, but quite dashed in pieces by Pisistratus, in or about the
time of Solon, for he having calculated his Laws purely for the Meridian of
Democracy, and made it his business afterward to put the Supreme Authority
into the hands of the People (to which the People of Athens ever had a natural
inclination) he not only in his own time saw his Laws violated, as quite raced
out of force, but the Government changed into a Monarchy by Pisistratus; for
observing a potent Faction in the City, and striving for Superiority, the one
animated by Megacles, the other headed by Lycurgus, took an occasion of raising
a third; And as he pretended, in defense of the Liberties and Privileges of
the People, the ruin and suppression of which he gave out was the aim of the
other two.

This Pretense gained him such credit and esteem among the Common People, that
when he complained in a Public Assembly, That his love and affection toward
his Country had raised him up such implacable Enemies, that he could not pass
the Streets without danger of his life, showing at that instance some Wounds
and Cuts, which he said, he had lately received for their sakes, though really
he gave himself those Wounds on purpose to promote his Interest, they
voluntarily and unanimously, it being unknown to them, allowed him a Guard for
defense of his Person, with which Ingratitude to the People he seized on their
State-House, taking upon him the Government of Athens, from which he was soon
after expelled, and beaten, partly by the dis-inclinations and ill resentment
the People bore toward Monarchy, and partly by the sudden friendship and union
of the two other Factions.

But Megacles soon after, being suspicious of Lycurgus's Power, called in again
Pisistratus to his assistance, who again made himself Master of both his
Factions and Government, but after some new Misdemeanour and Insolency, was
again forced to relinquish it, and to retire to Eretria, where, after Eleven
years abode, he again obtained the Principality of Athens, and left it to his
two Sons, Hippias and Hipparchus, as his lawful Successors.

Hipparchus, according to Plato, a Prince and Master of many eminent Virtues,
was Murdered by Harmodius and Aristogiton; and Hippias, though he governed
with great Moderation, mistrusting the like fate, was resolved to rule them
with greater Rigor and Severity than ever, to try whether he could scare them
into Obedience and compliance with his will, since his Gentleness and mild
usage had so ill effects upon them; But the Athenians (a tender neckt People)
impatient of Tyranny, stirred up a Noble Man, called Clisthenes, who by the
assistance of the The Faction in which Megacles was head.
Alcmaenidae, and an Army of Lacedaemonians, delivered them from the Tyranny
they so much complained of.

Hippias, for fear of such potent Enemies (voluntarily forsaking Athens) fled
to Darius Emperor of Persia, to whom he made his Applications and Redresses to
be re-instated, making him also Judge and Revenger of his wrongs, which
enterpise at last Darius undertook to his immortal disgrace, and to the eternal
Honor and memory of the Athenians.

Darius lived only long enough to give the first blow and onset on the
Gracians, dying not long after the defeat he received at the Battle of
Marathon, leaving his Son Xerxes Heir both to the Empire and this War; he was
so earnest and intent on the prosecution of it that he would hear none of his
Counselors, nay, he hated all those that laid before him the Inconveniences
he might probably meet with in that War, as his Father had done to his great
dishonor; But on the contrary, imagining the disaster at Marathon, proceeded
merely from the sinall number his Father had levied for that Battle, he gave
order for the raising such vast numbers, both for Sea and Land, that the very
noise of his Preparations might save his Army the labor of reducing them by
their Swords, under his obedience. Their great Forces, by the Wiser sort, were
looked upon more for ostentation, yea impediment, than use, for the Greeks from
thence perceived his fear and folly under his painted Vizard, and ever after
esteemed their own Valor as very considerable.

Xerxes commanded, that a Bridge should presently be framed on six hundred
threescore and fourteen Galleys, lincked together, for the transporation of his
Army over the Hellespont, putting to death the chief Workmen that built the
other, which a little before was torn asunder, and separated by a Tempest; in
the space of seven days and seven nights his Army, which consisted of
Seventeen hundred thousand Foot, and Fourscore thousand Horse, past over into
Europe.

Xerxes being seated on a convenient place, where he might take a general view
and survey of all his Forces, began to think on the many miseries and
inconveniences the Greeks, by their Obstinacy, were in a short time likely to
come to, yet not without some reflections on his own Happiness, who was absolute
Commander of so great an Army, compounded of so many different Countries; but
those thoughts soon passed over, and gave place to others of a quite different
Complexion, when he found how briskly his whole Army was entertained by an
inconsiderable number of Lacedaemonians, and a few of their Confederates, who
two days together defended the Streights at Thermopylae against the whole
Army; a narrow passage lying between the Mountains which divide Thessaly from
Greece, and might have done longer, to the Infinite disadvantage of the
Persian, had not a Grecian Renegado taught them a secret way of ascending
those Mountains, by which the distressed Lacedaemonians, and their Confederates
that stayed with them, miserably encompassed; yet they so resolutely maintained
their Post that they had undertaken, without showing any kind of fear or desire
of flight, that though the Persian came off Conqueror, yet the glory and
honor of this Battle ever was attributed to the Lacedaemonians, and Xerxes
himself raised such a conclusion from the success he had in this Fight, that he
ever after seemed to mistrust the strength of his Forces and goodness of his
Fortune, especially when he heard that Greece had more Men of the same temper
and Courage.

But the Athenians, against whom this War was chiefly intended (for that they
with the Ionians, late Rebels to the Emperor of Persia, had taken part with
them against that Crown, and been equally instrumental in the sacking of
Sardis, the Metropolis of Lydia) abandoned their Country to the fury and malice
of their Enemy, their Wives and Children they secured in Troezene, AEgina, and
Salamis. The Common Treasury, and a great part of their private Wealth was laid
out in building a Navy, which afterward was the Reason they became the most
famous and strongest part of Greece, from whom the Persian received the
greatest overthrow; for being better Seamen, and having more Shipping than all
Greece could show, besides not only by Themistocles, encouraged by a Stratagem
of his, forced the rest of the Graecians to venture one brush at Sea with this
invincible Armada; For the Peloponnesians hearing that a Persian Army was sent
to invade their Country, were resolved to leave the Common good of Greece, and
to defend, with the best of their blood, their private interest at home.

But Themistocles knowing the ill consequence, this their separation might
prove to all Greece, sent privately to the Persian, under color of Friendship,
advertizing him of the flight, and consequently of the fear of the Graecians,
telling him withal, that if he sent part of his Navy about the Island Salamis,
where the Grecian Fleet lay, they might be circumvented, as formerly were the
Forces under Leonidas, at the Streights of Thermopilae. The Persian took all
the advantage they could of this Information, for in the Morning the Greeks
found themselves encompassed, and obliged to fight, if they respected their own
safety, and the delivery of their Country.

Themistocles, whose contrivance this was, well knew the advantage a small
Fleet had over a vast and numerous Navy in narrow Seas, therefore animating the
rest of the Greeks by his own personal Valor, he gave the Persian a very
memorable and signal Overthrow, which proceeded partly from the good conduct of
so excellent an Admiral; From the fright and confusion of those vast numbers,
Xerxes was so timorous and heartless after it, that being cunningly forewarned
by Themistocles of the intent the Greeks had in breaking down the Bridge, if he
did not secure himself by sudden flight, made such have out of Greece, that he
is said to have escaped in a small Vessel obscurely, respecting neither
Ceremony nor Honor, although he came thither attended with such a numerous
Retinue.

Mardonius the Persian General staid behind, with Three hundred thousand under
his Command, who had flatteringly undertook and promised Xerxes, either to
reduce Greece under his obedience, or at least put a stop to the Precipice of
his too hasty declining Fortune; But he and his Army were utterly cut off, by
the united Forces of the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians, in the Morning.

In the Evening of the same day, the rest of the Persian Forces which lay at
Micale, a Promontory of Asia, was totally disabled and broken by the Conduct of
Leutychides the Spartan, with Xantippus the Athenian, Admirals of the Grecian
Navy.

Xerxes, after this, being altogether incapable of making an offensive War upon
Greece, gave the Athenians leisure enough of re-building their City, and of
resetling their frighted and dispersed Families; They also, the better to
secure themselves for the future, fortified and encompast their City with a
strong Wall, contrary to the advice of the State of Sparta, who were grown
already too jealous and suspicious of their rising Greatness; However, they
wisely dissembled their dislike till their Affairs were in a better posture.

Things being thus managed at home, the Athenians were resolved to carry the
War into the Emperors Dominions, to receive some satisfaction for the loss
they had so long sustained by those vast multitudes of Barbarians in their own.
In pursuance of which, the Athenians set forth thirty Galleys, strengthened
with twenty others from Sparta, and some of the Cities Confederate, who came in
to their assistance, with which they took several considerable places in
Cyprus. After this, they embarked and set sail for Thrace, where they stormed
and took Byzantium, now Constantinople; The Lacedaemonians, whether wearied
with these continual Sea Fights, or somewhat discontented that the best of
their Actions were eclipsed by those of the Athenians, as being more expert in
Maritim affairs, soon after recalled home their Forces, leaving the prosecution
of the War to the Athenians, the rest of Greece also, except Peloponnesus
committing the management of their Affairs solely to the wisdom and disposal of
that People.

The Athenians glad that they were thus peaceably left Lords of the Sea, and
without any Copartners in the profit and glory they expected, dispatched Cimon
their Admiral.
Cimon, Son of the brave Miltiades, with a considerable number of Galleys, well
Manned, to set upon the Persian Fleet, then riding in the River Eurymedon in
Pamphylia, which he soon overcame, taking some, and sinking others; he
overthrew also their Land Forces, encamped on the Shore, and on the same day
(happily meeting with a Fleet of Phoenicians, coining to the aid of the
Persians) he seized upon their Navy, forsaken by the Owners almost before he
could put himself into a posture of Battle, or, as King Edward said of Charles
the Fifth of France, concerning the Duchy of Guien, Took it without ever
putting on his Armor. The Phoenicians at the first appearance of Cimons making
up to them ran their Vessels on shore, escaping, as many as could, this
victorious Enemy by Land.

The Persian being thus quite disabled at Sea, and the Phoenicians worsted and
defeated in every Battle, the confederate Cities also, out of a strange
Largness, concluding rather to pay in what money the Athenians allotted them, to
find Ships and serve in them, themselves, against their common Enemy the
Persian. It must be evident therefore to any man's Reason, from all these
Accidents concurring together, that the Athenians must needs prove the
expertest and ablest Seamen, and exceed any Nation at that time in the number
of Shipping, it being made out that most of their strength consisted in their
Navy. And I hope it will not be irrational to conclude that they traded into
Britain, from these following Reasons. First, From their measuring all their
Actions by profit, undertaking any Voyage, how long or tedious soever, if they
could promise themselves to be well recompensed for their labor and hazard.
Secondly, Their Ambitious endeavors in getting into their hands all Islands
they could, witness those in the Greek Seas, and their adventuring such
infinite losses, as the ruin of their whole Fleet, rather than quit their
pretenses to Sicily, which is in no respect to be compared to this our Island.
Thirdly, Why might not some false and cowardly Renegado Phoenician, who had
formerly Traded hither, discover to them the situation and fertility of this
Island, as well as a Renegado Greek, show the Persian a way over a ledge of
Mountains, whereby the Lacedaemonians were encompassed, at the Streights of
Thermopylae, which otherwise, in all probability they had never found out;
Neither could they long be well ignorant, of the Phoenicians transporting their
Commodities of Tynn and Lead from this Island, considering the great number of
their Ships roving in most Seas, so that some of them must needs meet with the
Phoenicians in their way homewards, whom constantly they set upon as Assistants
to Xerxes, at the Invasion of their Country. Fourthly and lastly, They were
likely to understand the goodness of this Island from the Phoceans, an Athenian
Colony, who dreading the Persian Tyranny, set sail with their Families, never
settling themselves till they landed in France, where they founded Marseilles.


Now, that these AEolians traded into these parts, is sufficiently proved in
the precedent discourse, and that the Athenians, who had abundantly revenged
their wrongs on the Persian, had intelligence from these, is probable enough
from the nature of Mankind, who after their afflictions past, are inclined to
let their Friends and Allies know, how happily they live in other parts, which
is daily confirmed from those that come from the West Indies, extolling the
Fruitfulness of the place, partly to invite others over to live with them of
the same temper, and partly by such Accessions to strengthen their Colony,
whereby they may enjoy it more secure.

But suppose the Athenians themselves were not acquainted with these Parts, yet
the Phoceans being of their Colony, very probable were inclined to the same
form of Government, and did retain in general many of their Customs, though
they differed in some circumstances, wherefore it is hoped that this present
account may not altogether prove ineffectual, especially to those whose
education or business has not given them full opportunity, of being acquainted
with the Customs of the Athenians.

After all these several Defeats, the Athenians grew so proud and conceited
with the strange notions of their own Merits, that now every private Citizen
looked upon himself able enough to be a Statesman, and nothing but Democracy
would please their palate, as if Themistocles had managed the War against the
Persian, not so much by his own cunning, as by the direction of the Athenian
Commonalty; Now they began to oppress (and insolently Lord it over) their
Allies, now it is that we hear no man's Virtue, or Innocence, was sheilded
strong enough against the malicious darts of an envious Tongue; The People
condemned rather by reports or events, than by a just enquiry and search into
the matter. This made Alcibiades, when he was commanded to return from Sicily,
and answer for his life at home, refuse to go, as a thing very dangerous and
uncertain, for being asked, Will thou not trust thy Country which begat thee,
to be thy Judge? No, not her (said he) that brought me forth, least she not
receiving the Truth, mistake the black for the white Stone. The Greeks formerly
Condemned by Black Stones, and Absolved by White.

But these two things, viz. Pride toward their Confederates, and an over hasty
Condemnation of their best Captains, in the end proved their Ruin; the one
weakening their Army, the other alienating the affections of their Friends, the
Lacedaemonians, who had long lain still, but ever jealous of the aspiring
Greatness of the Athenians, and consequently watchful in taking all advantages
of them, at last entered into the War, which was called the Peloponnesian; It
was fought a long while between them with various success, but at last the
Athenians, through the sudden and frequent revolt of their Allies, the
banishment of the old, and neglect and inadvertency of the new Captains, were
totally beaten at the Battle of AEgos Potamos, by the fortunate Conduct of
Lysander, and were at last forced to submit to these Conditions; That the long
Walls, leading from the Town to the Port, should be thrown down; That all the
Cities subject to that State, should be set at liberty; That the Athenians Sr.
Walter Rawleigh's Hist. World.
should be Lords only of their own Territories, and the Fields adjoining to
their Town; That they should keep no more than twelve Ships; That they should
hold as Friends or Enemies, the same whom the Lacedaemonians did, and follow
the Lacedaemonians as Leaders in the Wars.

After this Athens was Governed by thirty Tyrants, who under the notion of
compiling a body of Law, and Governing the People accordingly, soon abused
their Authority to the grievance of that City, which at first they had governed
with great Moderation, and to the good liking of the People, but afterward
they Condemned any Citizens, if by them suspected, as they had formerly done
the lewdest and worst, without due trial or legal proceeding, from which
Tyranny they were delivered by Thrasibulus and his Party, after which they
continued free till the death of Alexander.

Who were the first Attick Legislators, is very much doubted amongst the best
Authors I ever conversed with; some make Solon the Chief founder of their
Justin. lib. 2.
Laws, others have given that honor to Theseus, from a passage in Plutarch,
where he says, That after Theseus had gathered together the dispersed People
of Attica, and settled a Democracy, he received to himself only the chief
Command in War, and the custody and preservation of the Laws, which in my mind
rather intimates, That they had Laws amongst them in force before this their
Incorporation, of which he desired the keeping; For if he was their first
Legislator, and his Laws easy, reasonable and just, whom can it be supposed
the People could better entrust with their Laws than their King, who is most
able to see them put in execution, and would be sure to keep them most free
from corruption and alteration, every Change (unless upon mature deliberation)
implying impotency and weakness, at first, in the Author.

Triptolemus, who taught them first to Till and sow Lands, was the first that
delivered Laws unto them. Porphyrie, lib. 4. (...). It is (says he) affirmed,
Porphyr. lib. 4. Hermip. l. 2.
that the most ancient of the Attick Legislators was Triptolemus. And
Hermippus, in his second Book (...), They say that Triptolemus gave Laws to the
Athenians. And Xenocrates the Philosopher writes, That there remains in the
Eleusine Temple three of his Laws, (...), that Parents are to Honored; (...),
that the Gods are to be worshipped with the Fruits of the Earth; (...), that
flesh was not to be eaten before Solon Draco gave Laws to the Athenians; but he
was too much above Humanity to be a good Lawgiver, not considering in the
least the frailty of humane Nature, for he punished with death almost every
peccadillo or little slip, prosecuting him that had stole a Pin, or any
inconsiderable trifle, with as great rigor as he would have done a Murderer;
and Aristotle says, They ought to be remembered for nothing but their Severity.
But the Athenian Laws were never exact and complete till Solons time, who
abrogating what old Laws he thought inconvenient and useless, and adding what
new ones he thought necessary, most of which he brought out of Egypt, made so
excellent a composure, that Athens for many years was happily governed by them,
and afterward they became the ground of the Roman Government.

These Laws of Athens were engraven in Wood, and kept in the Acropolis,
translated afterward to the The Place where they met together in Council.
Prytaneum by Ephialtes, besides there were Decrees established by the Senate,
to which the consent of the People was not required, these were in force but
for a year only, but those Decrees to the ratisying and confirming of which the
peoples Votes were necessary, remained firm for a longer time. Before any
Decree came out, the Senate sat in Consultation, to weigh and consider of the
advantages and disadvantages it might bring upon the State, then the Prytanies
wrote upon certain Tables, on such a day, and about such a time will be an
Assembly, to Consult of these, and these Affairs. The People being gathered
together and purified, the Decree is read, which, if approved by the People,
was confirmed, if otherwise, of no force. But least through variety of
Circumstances, and in length of time, Inconveniences might arise, which at the
making of them could not be foreseen, they appointed a day of examination and
inspection into their Laws, which was on the Eleventh of July, for preventing
and correcting all such disadvantages, Whosoever would introduce a new Law, was
to write it in a Table, and let it up in some eminent and conspicuous place,
where every Citizen had liberty of spending his Judgment upon it as he pleased;
They slew one Eudenues for bringing in a Law that displeased them.

The People in their Assemblies, deposed or confirmed their Magistrates in
their places, according as it was known they had behaved themselves. They heard
Causes, took cognizance of confiscated Goods, and Possessions left by
Inheritance; they gave Audience to Ambassadors, and took into their
consideration those things that belonged to the worship of their Gods.

But there was a Court, or Senate, consisting (after their Tribes were
augmented from Four to Ten) of Five hundred, who by their advice and care
instructed the People in those things which were to be handled, least any thing
might be proposed without due consideration, or unworthy of so Reverend an
Assembly; without the consent of this Senate the People approved of nothing,
neither would They confirm any thing without the good-liking of the People.

The Power and Authority of this Council consisted in making Laws, confirming
Peace, denouncing War, imposing Tributes, or of taking notice of all Civil
Transactions, and the affairs of their Confederates, raising and collecting
Money, looking after the due performance of Sacred Rites and Ceremonies,
appointing Keepers for Prisoners, Guardians for Orphans, taking an account of
all Offices discharged.

The whole management of the Commonwealth belonged to this Senate; none was
admitted into this Council under Thirty; afterward by the addition of two
Tribes more they became six hundred. Out of these were their Judges chosen, and
this honor fell to none under Threescore; being thus constituted they met
together, bringing a Table and a Wand, on which was written a letter that did
betoken some Judicatory, for there being ten Tribunals every one of them was
noted with a Red letter, A, B, r, etc. to K, etc. over the Door; Time calling
them to sit, they drew Lots, and the person to whom A fell sat in the
Court-market with A, and so the rest according to the Letter drawn out; you may
see the manner of their proceedings more at large in Archaeolog. Attic. l. 3.
c. 3. out of which partly this is abstracted. Archaeolog. Attic. lib. 3. cap. 3.


The great and famous Council, Areopag. very much renowned for its Widom and
Justice in deciding Controversies, had at first an unlimited Authority; they
were Judges of all wilful Murders, Wounds given through malice; to them
appertained all Blasphemies against their Gods, violating of Religion, and
divulging of Mysteries. They enquired into the Behaviors of Men, in this not
unlike the Roman Censors, when the Supposed to be the Druids.
Persians invaded Greece, by their Advice was the War undertaken, but this
their Power was extraordinarily lessened by Pericles himself, being an
Areopagite, who took from them a great part of their Prerogative in deciding
Differences, referring them to the Judgment of the Common People: The
Areopagites judged in the dark, that they might not regard the Speaker, but
what was spoken in this Court, they did not pass Sentence by word of Mouth, but
wrote privately on Tables, C if they Condemned, A if they Absolved, and N. L.
if the Case was not manifest. No Appeal lay from this Court to any other
Tribunal; their Determinations in all things being so just and upright, that
neither Plaintiff or Defendant could ever complain of the Injustice of their
Sentence.

We shall give an account of their Gods and Ceremonies in a discourse of the
Pagan Roman Ecclesiastical Government: The Gods of these Nations being almost
the same.

CHAP. VII. The Customs and Manners of the BRITAINS; Their Laws and Government.
IN speaking of the Manners and Customs of the BRITAINS, we shall distinguish
and sort them according to the several Nations, from which (in most likelihood)
they received them. Some Usages they had particular to themselves, of which no
account can be given, but others there are (which, as they differ from those of
their Neighbors) so they carry an apparent congruity with other more remote
Nations, such as the Graecians, who, upon the account of Trade, planted
themselves in these Parts.

As this Work was never yet undertaken by any, so I hope it will receive the
more favorable Construction, seeing all that is aimed at or intended is but to
lead the way, and incite others to a more exact and curious Enquiry into the
Antiquity of this Nation, and no: to rest upon so low a foundation as hitherto
has been laid.

Although the Customs of the Britains herein mentioned, are collected out of
Caesar, Tacitus, Strabo, and many other Latin and Greek Authors, whose Writings
are far Caesar. Tacitus. Strabo, and Alii.
inferior in Time to the Customs themselves, yet these Customs have
Originals which they themselves that wrote of them understood not, partly
because Books, and the Intelligence between Nations, was not then so universal,
or perhaps, because they neglected to give serious accounts of a Nation, which,
in their esteem, was then justly to be accounted Barbarous.

But that which more especially moves me to this undertaking, is, the hopes I
have, that when this similitude of Customs and Manners, between the Britains
and the aforesaid Nations, shall be shown, there will be no ground to doubt but
that their Commerce with these Nations was Ancient, and that, without question,
the Bretanick Islands (for so, Anciently, they were all called) as they were
named CASSITERIDES by the Greeks, signifying Islands of Tynn, so did they
receive their name from the Phoenician BRATANAG, signifying the same in the
Phoenician or Samaritan Dialect, but of this I have more largely discoursed in
another place.

The most Ancient Order of People in Britain are justly esteemed the BARDI, and
these were before the Druids, although in time these got the start of the other
in great Esteem. They were (as Strabo writes) Poets and Songsters, and at this
day Strabo. Posidonius. Festus. Diodorus. Hesychius.
are called by our Britains, Bards, Posidonius and Festus writes, they sang in
Recitative Music, the praises of Great Men, and Diodorus calls them, Composers
of Verses only, and to that purpose must that of Hesychius be interpreted, who
writes, the Bardi were (...), which is to be read (...), Singers or Poets.

The Name of these Bardi, as likewise the Nablium and Cynira on which they
played, we have proved word for word to be Phoenician. They were not Harps, but
some think like to them. The Cynira had Ten strings, and was played on with a
quill, or some such thing; the Nablium had Twelve strings, and was played on by
the Fingers. Mr. Cambden (I suppose) relying on Ammianus, calls them Harps, but
Diodorus says they were Instruments only like Harps.

These sort of People were (no doubt) at first of a Religious Order, and made
use of in the Deifying of Great men, singing the Praises of Hero's at their
Apotheosis, which in Ancient times was not only esteemed glorious for the Dead,
and useful to the Living, but also a Religious and acceptable act to the Gods.

This Custom was derived from the Eastern Nations, first to the Greeks, and
afterward to the Latins. The Ancient Greeks had not only the whole body of
their Diirnity in Verse, but upon all occasions, as Marriages, Funerals, etc.
their Religious Rites and Ceremonies were performed in them, likewise upon
occasion of some great Deliverances and notable Victories, they sang the
praises of their Gods in Verse, composing Odes and Hymns, which in solemn
manner, and with music, they rehearsed to the People.

This sort, exactly as the Bardi in the Phoenician Tongue, were called '(...)
(as in the Scholiast upon Pindar) in their own; and Hesiod by some The
Scholiast on Pindar.
is thought to be the first of the Greeks upon misunderstanding of his Verses,
in which he says not absolutely he was the first, but that together with Homer
he sang the Praises of Apollo in Delos. The Verses are in the Scholiast of
Pindar thus:

'Ev (...),
(...),
Pindar.
(...).
Homer, and I, first Bards in Delos Isle,
Sang in new Hymns, and new composed Lays,
The Golden bair'd Phoebus, Apollo's Praise.
But before them were Musaeus and Orpheus the Argonauts, and before these
others Musaeus.
likewise, as Musaeus intimates in his Poem on the Loves of Hero and Leander,
'(...). No Bard as yet has Sacred Marriage praised. Which proves there had been
Bards, or Songsters, before him, although they had not treated of that subject.

The Greeks received this manner of Composing of Songs from the Phoenicians,
Herodotus, lib. 5. cap. 48.
from whom also they received their Letters themselves, and from whom Homer,
one of the first of necessity, must have learned that the Earth was encompassed
with the Ocean, the Greeks having not as yet encompast the Western Sea.

But that which makes me believe that the Britains did receive this Custom
immediately from the Phoenicians, and not from the Graecians, is, because the
Britains preserve the very Phoenician name of these Singers, viz. Bardi,
entirely, although the Greeks, after their Custom, translated it into '(...),
signifying the same thing.

It happened that in continuance of time, the DRUIDS got the upper hand, so
that these Bardi (who formerly were the only Religious Order, and whose
composures were used in the most solemn Rites, and whose Persons, without
doubt, were esteemed most honorable) degenerated, by degrees, into the nature
of common Ballad-Makers, and they who formerly sang of the Essence and
Immortality of the Soul, the works of Nature, the course of Celestial Bodies,
the order and harmony of the Spears, the Praises of the Gods, the Encomiums
and Virtues of Great Men, became the divulgers of idle and empty Genealogies,
in which they studied more their proper gain than the advancement of Virtue.
Instead of rehearsing the past Actions of Worthy Men, which were useful to the
encouragement of the People to Great Enterprises, they gave themselves up to
the composing of Mystical Rhimes, stuffed with Prophesies of things to come, to
Charms, Spells, Incantations, the Art of Magic and Necromancy, insomuch they
had sundry Verses to that purpose, which were accounted of wonderful power and
energy.

That BRITAIN was sorely infected with these Doctrius, the Roman Authors Many
Roman Authors. Sr. Joh. Prices defense of the British Hist.
sufficiently witness, and Sr. John Price, in the defense of his British
Histories, says, That the Welsh, even to this day, are prodigiously adicted to
them.

The next Order of People in Britain were the DRUIDS, who did not totally
abolish all the Customs and Opinions of the Bards, but retained the most
useful parts of them, such as the Immortality of the Soul, to which they added
the Transmigration of it, according to the Opinion of Pythagoras, about whose
time, or a little after, I believe the Greeks entered this Island. Moreover they
continued the customs of rehearsing things in Verse, which they either brought
out of Greece, or continued it as they found it established here.

A Druid


The Haebits and Fashion of these DRUIDS, in the English Tongue, has not
hitherto been discovered. Mr. Seldom Janus Angl. lib. 1. page 32.
describes them after this manner, taken out of Old Statues found in Germany
about Wichtelberg; as he delivers them I have here expressed, with the words of
that Author.

Erant sex numero (lapideas dicit antiquas imagines ad radices Piniferi Montis
Apud P. Metulam in Cosm. part. 2. lib. 3.
Wichtelberg, vulgo in vicinid Voitlandiae, in Coenobio quodam sibi visas, quas
credit iconice Druidas prahibere) ad fores Templi parieti insertae, I Will. pedum
singulae, nudis pedtbus, capita intectae, Graecanico Pallio and Cucullato,
perulaque, barbara ad inguina usque promissae, and circa naris fistulas
bisurcata, in manibus liber and Baculus Diogenicus, severa front, and tristi
supercilio, obstipo, and figentes lumina terris.

They were in number Six, found at the foot of the Mountain, which abounding
with Pines was therefore called Peniferus, and in the German Tongue
Wichtelberg, upon the Confines of Voitland, in a certain Monastery, which being
dug up and exposed to view, Conradus Celtes (who was then present) in his
Judgment, thought to be the Figures of Ancient Druids; His description, and the
Place where they were found he thus delivers: At the Gates of the Temple they
were placed, Seven foot in height, barefooted, their heads covered with a
Greekish Hood or Cukil, with a Budget by their side, and a Beard descending to
their very middle, and about their Nostrils plated out in two divisions, in
their hands was a Book and a Diogenes Staff, which is supposed Five foot in
length, a severe and morose Countenance, and a Forehead down looked, and
sorrowful, and much intent upon the matter, their Eyes fixed upon the Earth.

That which follows in Mr. Seldom is this.

Quod ut cum iis quadrat, quae de eorum Aureis Ornamentis, tinct is vestibus,
armillis, rasis Britannorum genis, and mento, at que id genus aliis a Caesare
and Strabone recensentur viderint quorum interest.

How this can agree with the description given otherwise of them, namely, of
their Golden Ornaments, painted Garments, Bracelets, and the shaving the
Britains used, which are delivered by Caesar and Strabo, let others judge; And
indeed the business is not so intricate to be judged, for that Golden Ornaments
in a Statue should be expressed, is both difficult and unnecessary, as likewise
their painted Garments and Bracelets, not to be preserved in Stone. As for the
Shaving of the Britains, we know that the chief distinction they used from
other Nations, was in their Upper-lip, and if all this should fail, the Druids
were Priests of other Provinces as well as Britain, and it may easily be
supposed (as we find it even in these days) that they being Priests, and
proceeding from Greece, might preserve their own Customs in so small
circumstances, and not conform with the Laity in those points, whose Manners
only Strabo and Caesar describes.

These Druids committed nothing to public Writing, both which Customs relish
of the Ancient Greeks; For Pisistratus (as Agellius reports) was the first that
exposed to common view, Books of the liberal Arts and Sciences at Athens, and
the Agellius.
way of composing altogether in Numbers, was left off in Greece a little before
the days of Herodotus, who notwithstanding entitled his Books by the names of
the Muses.

The way of delivering their Mystery by the secret Cabbala savours of the Jews,
from whom in all probability the Phoenicians learnt the Custom, and so taught
it to the Greeks, but it was preserved longer in Britain than in Greece it
self, so that to the days of Caesar the Commonalty were kept in Ignorance, and
none permitted to understand any thing, unless they admitted themselves of this
Order, and underwent the severities of a long and tedious Discipline.

Their Public Records were preserved in the Greek Tongue, and in Greek
Characters, Caes. Com. lib. 1.
which being unintelligible by the Vulgar, none could have recourse unto but
persons of Repute and Learning; They were not permitted to take any thing away
in Writing, but by Memory only, and a Trust was reposed in some particular
Persons, who by their singular integrity, and long experience of their Fidelity
and Learning, were chosen for that purpose.

Whereas Britain was divided into several Petty Governors, as to Civil
Affairs, Kent alone having four distinct Kingdoms within it; The Government of
the Druids was Universal over the whole Island, and some part of Gallia also,
so that their Power and Interest was infinitely the greater, being subject only
to two Primates, whereof one precided over the North Druids, the other over the
South; the former of which is supposed to have his Residence in the Isle of
Man, the other in Anglesey, although it is thought by some, there was but one
in Chief, so that although the Secular Power might often clash by reason of its
many decisions, as parcelled out into many Kingdoms, the Interest and Authority
of the Druids was preserved entire by their unity under one head, to whom once
a year they had recourse in public Meetings and Assemblies. This Custom of
the Druids, I am of opinion, was received from the Bardi, and delivered down
from the Phoenicians Originally.

For in the Eastern Nations, as India, Egypt and Syria, we find that the power
of the Priest was in a nature distinct from the Civil Government, and calling
of Assemblies, and general Meetings was absolutely in their power, and
independent of the Temporal Magistrate, which Custom nevertheless in those
days was often abridged by wife and politic Princes.

The Primate of these Druid Priests was constituted by Election, and being a
The Druid Government by Election.
place of eminent Repute and Authority, in its vacancy there used to be many
Competitors or Strivers, as I may say, for it, insomuch as often as the Secular
Power was engaged in the quarrel, every Prince endeavored to oblige his
Favorite, and to strengthen his Authority by that Seat, to which a Creature of
his own was advanced.

They had Excommunications much after the manner of ours, this (as Caesar
reports) Caesar, Com. lib. 6.
was the greatest Punishment that could be inflicted. A Person so interdicted
could not be admitted to any Sacrifice, but was esteemed in the number of the
Profani, i. e. Wicked wretches; All persons studiously avoided his Person, not
daring to approach near him, or converse in Talk, although at a distance, for
fear of being infected with the contagion of so dangerous a Curse. They were
utterly incapable of any Honorable office, and excluded from the benefit of
the Law, as to their Estates.

Many other ways the Druids had to punish the Contemners of their Religion,
and yet had considerable Rewards for the Obedient.

They were made Judges of all Controversies, both private and public, as
Murder or Manslaughter, Theft, etc. or if Suits arose about Inheritance, or
Strife about the bounds of Lands, they absolutely gave Judgment, and used not
to execute their Decrees by the Temporal Authority, but issued out their
Excommunications upon the Nonperformance of them, which, as they were of all
punishments the most grievous, so were they thundered out not only upon
private, but public Persons, which public Persons, mentioned in Caesar, no
doubt, extended to their Magistrates and Governors themselves: A Custom used
in Ancient days by no Nation else but the Eastern.

They were the sole Interpreters of Religion, in the exercise of which their
Persons were absolutely necessary to be present; they proclaimed public
Sacrifices as they saw occasion, and no private ones could be performed without
them; They sacrificed Men as well as Beasts, which were for the most part
Enemies, or Malefactors, but sometimes innocent Natives, by which means they
were feared and reverenced by the People; The absolute power rested in their
hands to determine what person was fittest for that purpose, and whose Blood
would be most acceptable to the Gods.

Probable it might be, that this sacrificing of Natives, entered upon the small
contempt of their Decrees and Excommunications, and not upon the will and
pleasure of the Priest, but however it was, no doubt, it commanded such an awe
upon their persons, as due Obedience was offered unto all their Commands.

The Druids were exempted from the services of War, and paid no Taxes as the
rest of the people did, by which Immunities many were invited, on their own
free wills, to enter themselves into that Order and Discipline, and many were
sent by their Friends and Relations to learn it, and although it was taught in
Gaul as well as Britain, yet most perfectly in this Island, although more
probably in the Isles of Man and Anglesey, whither, they that desired to be
fully instructed, repaired, insomuch as Caesar writes, that the Order it self
began in Britain.

The Druids had the Oak in great veneration, but especially the Missletoe upon
Plin. Not. hist. lib. 16. cap. 4.
it, or any thing they found growing to it; neither did they perform any
Sacrifice without a branch of it.

The Missletoe it self they gathered with many superstitious Ceremonies, and
great devotion, cutting it down with a golden Bill; They chose Groves of Oak
only to officiate Divine Service in, for which purpose they planted many in the
Island, from whence they received their Name, and from whence they were also
called Saronides, (...), or (...), signifying the same as (...) in Greek, Derw
by our Britains, and Deru the Armoricans, to wit, an Oak; the derivation of
(...) I have spoken of in another place.

When they found Missletoe upon an Oak, they accounted it a sure sign the God
they served had chose that Tree; and the Circumstances they observed in
gathering are many.

First, They principally observed that the Moon was six days old, for on that
day they began their Months, and New Years, and their several Ages had their
Revolution every Thirtieth year; And Mr. Seldom notes, that (...), by the
Judgment of Heraclitus and Herodotus, was by the Greeks included in the same
measure of Learned Seldom.
time.

In the next place, Having prepared their Sacrifices and Feasts under the Tree,
they brought two young Bullocks, milk white, whose Horns, then, and not before,
was bound up.

Then, the Priest who clymb'd the Tree, being clothed in a white Vesture, cut
it down, and they below received it in a white Soldiers Cassock, then they
sacrificed and blessed the Gift, by mumbling over many Orations; all which
Ceremonies duly performed, it was esteemed a sovereign Antidote against all
manner of Poison, and an especial Remedy against Barrenness, both in Men,
Women, and Beasts.

This Institution undoubtedly sprang from the Greeks, who had their (...), and
Hamadryades; And Mr. Sheringham, in comparing the Druids of Britain with those
Sheringham, de Orig. Angl.
of Greece, takes notice that the latter Nation had only them of the Female
Sex, whereas the Druids of Britain and Gaul were of both. And although the
Druids of Greece were esteemed Nymphs, and half Goddesses, yet no doubt,
principally they were Maidens, who dedicated themseves and their Virginities to
the Gods, and to that purpose retired into Groves and Deserts, to have freedom
in their Devotions.

This seems to be another Argument, that these Druids in Britain Originally
came out of Greece, in the early Ages of the World, and not so lately as some
have imagined, when the names of Dryades, and Hamadryades were grown out of use
in that Nation.

Geropius Becanus, is certainly much mistaken in the derivation of the Druids
of Geropius Becanus.
Britain, who brings them from Trowis, signifying in the German Tongue one
skilful in Truth, for, setting aside the harshness of the Etymology, the
Germans had no Druids, as Caesar writes, or if they had, they were so few as
not to be taken notice of, so that it is very absurd to bring the derivation of
an Order of People from a Caes. Com.
Nation who were altogether ignorant of such an Order.

Others there are, who are guilty of the like absurdity, and derive them from
Trutis, signifying, in the Old British Tongue, a God, and that they were called
Truti, as much as to say Religious persons, for, as I said before, they could
not receive their Names from a People that knew them not, or had only heard of
them, so that they being undoubtedly Greeks, and writing in Greek Characters,
in Caesar's days, they were undoubtedly called Derwydden by the Britains, from
Derw and Deru, both proceeding from (...), an Oak.

The Druids held an Opinion, that the life of a Man, either in a desperate
Sickness, or in danger of War, could not be secured unless another suffered in
his stead, so that in such cases they either offered Men in sacrifice, or else
vowed so to do after their delivery.

The most acceptable Sacrifice to their Gods, they esteemed Murderers,
Thieves, and Robbers, and also other Criminals, but for want of these Innocents
often suffered. In some places this Custom was observed, which, I suppose, was
common to the Druids of Britain and Gaul; They made a Statue or Image of a MAN
in a vast proportion, whose Limbs consisted of Twigs, weaved together in the
nature of Basket-ware: These they filled with live Men, and after that, set it
on fire, and so destroyed the poor Creatures in the smoke and flames; the
strangness of which Custom, I have here thought not amiss to represent to the
view.

The Wicker Image


The Ceremony observed in sacrificing of Men to their Idols, in a Wicker Image,
as it was strange, so, without any question to be made, it was not begun by
chance, but upon some great occasion, and something extraordinary may be sought
for in the Magnitude of the Statue it self, whence it proceeded.

The Heathens, in their festival Fires, which were most usually attended with
the Sacrifices of Beasts, but sometimes of Men, as this was always used to
represent the occasion of the Solemnity, which they did by some visible sign of
an apparent signification, a Custom not left off at this day, as sometimes by
burning the Effigies of the person, either to his Honor, as in Deifying him,
or else in public detestation of some high and notorious Crime and
Misdemeanour; sometimes they burnt Living persons themselves (even for
pleasure, on their public Feast days) to the Honor of their Gods, and the
mirth and jovialty of their Barbarous Spectators. Thus Nero wrapped the
Christians in Hemp and Pitch, and made them serve as Torches to his Theater in
a mock (as some write) of that saying, Ye are the Lights of the World.

But certain we are, that in these great festival Fires, they always had
something which set forth to the Eyes the occasion of the Solemnity. I cannot
believe, but the Britains and Gauls (in making these vast Images) did represent
something, which had been formerly in great detestation amongst them.

Now, there is nothing that does so easily occur to our first apprehension, as
that they might do it in the Remembrance of the Phoenicians, who were Men, as
shall be shown, of vast and exceeding stature, who for a long time had subdued
and kept them under (and without doubt, if Credit may be given to the British
History) they were those Giants that so long infested the Land; Wherefore in
public detestation of that Slavery they once endured under them, this vast
figure of a Man, made up in Wicker or Osyer work, might be introduced as in
scorn and derision of them, having now lost their power over them, although the
cause why they were first made (as it often falls out) might be forgotten, and
so the Representation only remain.

Many idle Tales and Fables have been reported concerning Giants, which some
have advanced to that incredible Greatness, that many have had just cause to
suspect, whether there were ever any that exceeded the usual stature of Men. Of
this opinion is Geropius Becanus, to which also Mr. Cambden seems to incline:
That the Phoenicians were Men of exceeding stature Mr. Sheringham learnedly
proves, and Gerop. Bec. Cambden. Sheringham, Orig. Angl. cap. 1, and 4.
the Scripture it self testifies.

I will set down some Monuments, in England and Germany, which do confirm this
Opinion.

Lazius reports, that he was an eye witness of many Monuments (near Vienna) dug
Lazius.
out of the Earth, but almost worn out by Time, in which Monuments were the
Bones of vast proportions found, and Epitaphs upon them in Hebrew Characters,
which the Phoenicians used without points, and out of many he collected four
only; The first of which I will set down out of the Translation of Franciscus
Stancharus an Italian, and Christopher Milander, a Jew by Birth and
Conversation. The Inscription Franciscus Stancharus, Christoph. Milander.
was thus word for word.

MORDECAI
EX GENERE GIGANTUM
VIR MAGNUS ANNO
A CREATIONE MUNDI,
MMDLX.
By this Inscription, and the others there mentioned, and the wonderful
Greatness of the Bones, besides the concordance of time with the Canaanites
expulsion (from their Land) by the Jews, we may gather that they were
Phoenicians, who planted themselves there.

In Essex, in a Village called Eadulphness, the Monk of Cogshall reports, that
there The Monk of Cogshal.
were found two Teeth of a certain Giant of such a huge bigness, that two
hundred such Teeth as men now adays have might be cut out of them; These
Teeth, he sales, he saw himself, but not without great Admiration. And a
Gentleman, named R. Cavendish, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, reports also,
that he saw some Relics of R. Cavendish.
this nature near the very same place.

That which Geropius and Mr. Cambden answer to this, out of Suetonius, seems
frivolous, That the Bones of Sea Fish have been taken for Giants Bones; Men
certainly may easily distinguish between them, neither is it ever to be
rationally supposed men ever entombed Fishes, as those in Germany were found to
be.

But that which comes nearer to our purpose, concerning the Phoenicians in
Britain, and their Gigantick bodies, is the Tradition which has been preserved
in Cornwall, a place they most resided in for the sake of their Tynn Traffic,
which Tradition of the being of Giants in those Parts was preserved to the
days of Havillan the Poet, who lived four hundred years since; In some of
whose Verses the Havillan the Pott.
Phoenicians seem to be exactly described, neither can this relate (as Mr.
Cambden implies) to the Great bodies of Cornish men, who are not so
disproportional to their Neighbors, as to create so serious a description. The
Verses are these of Cornwall.

-- Titanibus illa,
Sed Paucis famulosa domus, quibus uda serarum
Terga dabant vates; Cruor haustus, Pocula trunci,
Antra Lares, dumeta Thoros, Coenacula rupes,
Praeda cibos, raptus Venerem, spectacula caedes,
Imperium Vires, animos suror, impetus arma,
Mortem pugna, sepulchra rubus: monstrisque gemebat
Monticolis tellus: sed eorum plurima tractus
Pars erat occidui, terror majorque premebat,
Te furor, extremum Zephyrt Cornubia limen.
Here Giants lodged, a brood of Titan's Race,
Raw Hides their Clothing, Blood their drinking was;
Their Cups were hollow Trees, their Houses Dens,
Bushes their Beds, their Chambers craggy Pens;
Hunger with Prey, their Lust with Rapes they cased,
The sport of slaughtering Men, their Eyesight pleased,
Force gave them Rule, their rage did Arms supply,
Being killed, in Groves instead of Graves they lie.
These Monsters every quarter did molest,
But most of all, the Cornwall in the West.
This description of them agrees exactly with the Character the British
Histories, all along, gives of those Giants that lived before Brutes entrance
into this Island, which Histories, though by some are esteemed Fabulous, yet
let any one consider, whether it be not much more probable to imagine, that
there were many Truths delivered down, and so taken up and corrupted by those
Writers, than to think they had no grounds to begin their Histories, or that
they were so unreasonably given to Deceiving, as to have no other motives in
the publishing their Writings, but to put Tricks and Cheats upon the World,
especially in the matter of Giants, a thing which they could not but foresee,
would (in all Ages) be hardly credited.

Now, if there be any truth in the British Histories, those men of vast
Proportions, called by them, GIANTS, could be none but the Phoenicians, as the
Time of the being of such Giants, viz. about the year MMDLX, this Island
corresponding An. MMDLX.
with the Age of the Phoenicians Navigation hither, does plainly show.

I do verily believe (from their hard usage of the Islanders, whom they found
at their first entrance, and whom all along they oppressed) this custom of
making of Wicker Statues, and firing them upon special occasions was
introduced; for we see even to these days, the burning of Persons, in Effigle,
is preserved in many civilized Nations, but the making them in Wicker rather
than any other Materials, may very easily be attributed to the manner of the
Boats the Britains used on their Coasts, thereby, in their own little Models,
representing the Phoenicians Navigation, their Wicker Vessels, becoming an
Emblem of the Phoenician Ships that enslaved them.

That the Skiffs they sailed in were made of this sort of work, Caesar
testifies, when he writes, Ships they had, of which the Keels and Foot-stocks
were of slight Caesar. Com.
Timber, but the Bodies were winded and worked with Osyers, and covered with
Leather. These sorts of Vessels Lucan also describes, after the same manner.

Primum Cana Salix madefacto vimine parvam
Texitur in puppim, caesoque induta juvenco Lucian.

Victoris patiens tumidum super emicat amnem;
Sic Venetus stagnante Pado, fusoque Britannus
Navigat Oceano --
At first with twisted Osyers Boats were made,
And when the Wicker was with skins o're-laid;
These Vessels on the Seas the Britain guides,
On swelling Rivers the Venetian rides.
This shall suffice to have been spoken of this Custom of the Britains in
making these Wicker Statues, which I have treated of more largely, because in
reading the British History, where frequent mention is made of Giants, we may
know to what Nation we may refer and their Original. Although, after the manner
of those Historians, the greatness of their Stature, and the cruelty of their
Natures, may be too much magnified, yet seeing the Trading of the Phoenicians
is made out from undoubted Authority (as from Greek and Latin Historians, whose
testimony, in matter of Fact, is necessary in other respects) we ought not to
question but they were the Phoenicians, men of Great bodies, who gave first the
occasion of this Tradition, and who by their Traffic hither might bring that
Thraldom on the People, the remembrance of which they preserved after the
Phoenicians themselves had forsaken them.

But to return to the Customs of the Britains. They used a Drink made of
Barley, as Solinus witnesses, a Custom used by us at this very day, a thing
unknown in Solinus.
former Ages in any Country of Europe, Britain only excepted; For in other
Nations they used Wine and Water, either by themselves or intermixed, even in
colder Countries than Britain, which of it self is not deficient to produce
Grapes, and to ripen them, so that excellent Wine, may, and is daily produced,
did not the richness of the Soil invite the Natives to more useful improvements.

We find Ovid in his Tristibus complaining of his banishment among the Getes,
Ovid. deTrist.
giving this instance of the Coldness of the Country, That they did not draw
their Wine out of their Vessels as in hotter Countries, but that they were
constrained to take the Hoops off, and so opening the Vessel, brake the frozen
Wine with Chizels; having thawed it by the fire, drank it.

We do not find any Country that had the use of making drink of Barley, but if
the Country of it self would not bear Wine, they had it brought them from
hotter Countries, or else pleased themselves with Water only. Now we must seek
elsewhere for this Custom of the Britains, and we shall find that this also
they might have from the Phoenicians; To the proof of which, let us consider,
that the Phoenicians, by their Colonies, planted themselves on all the Sea
Coasts of Africa, even to Carthage and the Streights of Gibraltar, that Egypt,
a place of great fertility without any question, was much frequented by them.

We read in Herodotus, that the Egyptians did make a sort of drink with Barley,
and the invention of it was very Ancient in that Kingdom, the particulars
thereof Herodotus.
he describes.

Now, why may not this Custom be thought to come from them by the means of the
Phoenicians, who found Britain very fruitful in that Grain, and not inferior
to Egypt it self in the wonderful production of it. For as Egypt was esteemed
the Granary of those parts, so was Britain of these; yea, as Orpheus calls it,
The very Orpheus.
Seat of the Lady Ceres, so that the usefulness of this Invention of the
Egyptians (who abounded in Corn) was not less to the Britains.

This Drink which we call Ale, by the Britains, at this day, is called Kwrw, by
the Gauls, Korma; so Athenaeus, (...), which is corrected by Causabon out
Athenaeus, 1. 4: Causabon. Dioscorides. Marcellus.
of Manuscripts, as thus, (...), and by Dioscorides, (...), by Marcellus,
Curmi. Dioscorides names it not wrong, seeing Marcellus and Athenaeus agree
with him; For although at this day the word be depraved into Kwrw, by our Welsh
Britains, yet (no doubt) Anciently and Primitively it was called Corma, Cormi,
or Curmi, or else something like it; By transposing of the R and M, making
Comra for Corma, we have the very Phoenician word of this Liquor, which the
Britains drank instead of Wine.

If any shall say, that Chomra in the Phoenician Tongue signifies Wine and not
Ale, let them consider that at this day we give that name of Wine to Drinks not
produced of the Grape; And seeing the Britains used it instead of Wine, no
doubt (as Bochartus says) they gave it the same Appellation.

Now, seeing this Custom was used only in Britain, and the parts adjacent,
having Bochartus:
plenty of that Grain, and in respect we read of no other Nation but the
Egyptian that used it, since the Phoenicians were frequent in Egypt, and Traded
also into these Islands, and more especially since the name of this Rwrw, or
Curmi, is Phoenician, we have not the least cause to doubt of the original of
this Custom, but that the Britains received it from this fountain.

Pliny writes of the Britains, that in some solemn Feasts and Sacrifices they
colored Plin. Not. bist.
themselves like AEthiopians all over their Bodies, being naked at the
Solemnities; whence could the Britains have this Custom, if not from the same
Original. As in Egypt, so in Britain (as Gildas says) Ugly Specter, merely
Diabolical, nay, in the number of them, Britain, as he reports, rather
exceeded Egypt.

These they placed upon their Walls, within and without, and as they cut them
in the same shapes as the Britains did, so, I suppose, by the like placing
them, they esteemed them of a Talismanical nature, to expel Mischief, and to
defend their Walls. Some of these Representations were remaining, in the Ruins
of their Cities, to Gildas his days, who describes them to have ugly
Lineaments, with stern and grim looks, after the manner of those of Egypt;
Perhaps they might be Monkies, or Gildas.
Baboons, Creatures much worshipped in those Countries. But of this I shall treat
of more fully in the Chapter which concerns the Idolatry of the Britains.

To the same Original may be reduced the great opinion the Britains had of the
Art, Magic, which by a peculiar name was called, the Learning of the
Egyptians.

Pliny says, the Britains were so wholly devoted to it, and had such entire
Ceremonies, in the performance, as a man would imagine, that the Persians
learnt all their Pliny Not. bist.
Magic from them; which Flourish of Pliny, I conjecture, gave occasion to
Annius Viterbiensis, in his seigned Berosus, to make Magus a King of this
Island, who taught Annius Viter.
this Art, and spread it abroad in the World. Upon such slender foundations, do
Confident men ground their own idle and ridiculous Inventions, and these very
Customs the Britains learnt of the Phoenicians.

Mr. Seldom sets down a British Custom, namely, that when any Great man died,
his Relations made great enquiry of his Wives (if they suspected cause)
concerning Seldom.
his death; If they found them guilty, with Fire, and other Torments, they
proceeded against them. Sr. Edward Cook refers to this Original the Law of
England, for burning Women that kill their Husbands, etc.

The Britains, as Caesar reports, did not esteem it lawful to eat either Hare,
Hen or Caes. Com.
Goose, but kept them for pleasure; and their delicate Diet, as Pliny says,
were the Plin. Not. bist.
Chenerotes, Fowls less than wild Geese, which some have made to be Brauts, or
Soland Geese, so that Caesar and Pliny, do (after this account) disagree in
their Relation, unless we believe that the Britains had left off this Custom
not long after the Arrival of the Romans into this Island. However this
distinction of Meats, their making some lawful, others unlawful, some clean,
and others unclean, Mr. Seldom says, relished something of the Jews, and was
rarely observed in any but Eastern Nations, as Phoenicia, Egypt, and Syria,
etc. with whom the Jews conversed. With the Syrians, the Britains agreed in
that Custom, in not eating of Fish, but seeing this is by Dio Nicaeus only
reported of the Northern Britains, and that the Custom of Diets do vary
according to the diversities of Ages, it cannot be expected that exact accounts
Dio Nicaeus;
can be given of it.

Their usual Diet was of any sort of prey, as Venison, Fruit and Milk, but they
Caesar. Strabo.
had not learnt to make Cheese of it. They inured themselves to Hardness, so as
to be able to endure any cold, hunger and labor whatever.

Dio Nicaeus reports of them, That they would stick themselves in Boggs up to
the heads, and there continue many days together without any sustenance, and
upon occasion, Dio Nicaeus.
retiring and hiding themselves in the Woods, they fed on the Barks and Roots
of Trees, as the Indians at this day are wont to do; But I cannot imagine, what
Meat that should be which Dio says they preserved on all occasions, whereof,
if they eat but the quantity of a Bean, it satisfied their hunger and thirst.
Dio Siculus reports Diod. Sic.
in general, That the Food they eat was simple, not dainty, according to the
luxury of rich Nations, likewise, that they howed their Corn, and brought it in
by Sheaves, but never threshing out more than what served their present
occasion, which is a perfect sign that they did Till their Grounds; Pliny
says, They did manure them Plin. Not. hist.
with Marle. Dio Nicaeus writes of the Northern Britains, that they Tilled no
Ground; and Strabo says, That some of them were altogether ignorant not only
in Gardning and Planting of Orchards, but in all other parts of Husbandry.

Thus what Dio Nicaeus says of the Northern Britains only, and Strabo of a few
of them, Mr. Speed confounds the whole Nation, making Diodorus Siculus, and
Pliny, to Speeds Chron.
contradict Dio Nicaeus and Strabo, whereas indeed, their Authors treat only in
those places of particular People in Britain; For it is manifest that there
were two sorts of the Britains, one of which was more Civilized, namely, those
that lived upon the Seacoasts, and (as Caesar says) they of Kent exceeded all
the rest.

These had their sumptuous Houses, Gardens and Orchards, after the manner of
the Gauls; they did not go Naked, but had their Apparel after the Custom of
the same Nation, and were experienced in the most exquisite way of Manuring
their Grounds with Marle. They were daintier of their Diet, having particular
Dishes in great request among them, and positively, not superstitious, in the
eating of Hen, Hare or Goose, as the Chenorotes, their delicate Diet, may
witness.

It is very probable they understood the use of Milk in all its productions,
Cheese not excepted, for Strabo, when he speaks of the ignorance of the
Britains in those points, speaks only of some particular places, as may be
easily gathered from his own words. Some of them (says he) for want of skill,
can make no Cheese, although they have plenty of Milk. This is not to be
understood of the Maritim Countries (for it is probable, that the Phoenicians
who Traded into this Country (insomuch as Cythims received its name from them
upon the account of the abundance of Cheeses there made) taught the Britains
the use of it) which necessary Art, in a Kingdom abounding with Milk, cannot be
supposed ever to be utterly lost.

Another sort of People there was in this Island, whom necessity or choice made
them seem more Barbarous; These had no Houses or Cities, not because they knew
not the use of them, but by reason the Circumstances of their lives did not
permit them to build any, living continually in War, and making daily
excursions upon their Richer Neighbors, so they that had built Houses would
have been daily subject to spoil; and it could not be but altogether against
their design to settle themselves in any fixed Habitations, whose business was
to Range about at liberty, whose livelihood depended upon sudden Excursions,
private and obscure Retreats.

These are they of whom Strabo is to be understood, when he says, That Woods
stood them instead of Cities and Towns; For when they had, by felling of Trees,
encompast Strabo.
and fenced a spacious round plat of Ground, there they built for themselves
Hutts and Cottages, and for their Cattle set up Stalls and Foulds, all for the
present use, and not to stand long, just after the manner of the Cossacks in
the Ukraine, who, although are daily exercised in the Sieges of great and
sumptuous Cities, and know all the Arts of Building and Fortifying, yet live
exactly after the manner of these Britains, retiring into these Tabors, made
like the British Holds described by Caesar, senced in with Trees, and trencht
about with Ditches and Rampires, into which they draw all their Cattle and
Carriages, the necessity of their condition being much the same as these
Britains.

Being attacqued by the Polanders lately, they retired into their Bogs and
Fastnesses, just as the Britains did, living upon Barks of Trees, and enduring
the same hardships, so that we must not esteem a People barbarous, for those
Customs, to which the necessity of their forced condition, not Ignorance,
leads them unto.

These were the Britains which tilled no ground, because they tarried not so
long in any place as to expect a Crop; They went naked, keeping no Sheep, a
Creature slow in motion, and apt to be surprised, besides subject to Beasts of
Prey, as Wolves and Foxes, which were in great number in the Wood-land
Countries of this Island. They made no Cheese, as it was heavy in Carriage, but
satisfied their Hunger with the prey of Venison, and natural Fruits of the
Earth; It had been a piece of madness in them to have made delicate Gardens, or
planted curious Orchards, when they could not tarry so long as to enjoy the
fruits and pleasures thereof.

These Inland Britains, as they exceeded the Seacoast or Gaulish Britains, so
I believe they were in perpetual Hostility with them, being, as may be
conjectured, of a quite different Original, the Custom of these Inlanders
exactly corresponding with the German Nations that Caesar describes, which
Customs of the Germans I will set down in his own words, because it seems to
be an exact description of these Britains, and may partly evidence the
Primitive Inhabitants of this Island, not to have been of the Gauls but German
Race.

The Germans spend their lives in Hunting, and in the exercise of Military
Affairs, from their Youth they give themselves to Labor, and to endure
Hardships. They cover Caes. Com. lib. 6.
half of their Bodies with the Hides of Rhenos, they take little or no notice
of Tillage, the greatest part of their Diet is Milk, Cheese and Flesh; they
have no measure or certain bounds of Lands, least by Tillage they should forget
the use of Arms; they build no curious Edifices to keep out Cold or Heat, least
the more powerful should drive out the weaker; they keep their People in unity
by making all things Common.

This seems to be the Method the Inland Britains used, who by the very same
motives were induced to it, so that seeing there was two sorts of Britains in
this Island, it is carefully to be heeded, least in reckoning up their
Customs, we take those to be general which indeed were peculiar only to a part
of them; This is not observed either in Caesar, Pliny, Tacitus, Strabo,
Solinus, or any other that writes of them, so that they do frequently
contradict each other, and sometimes agree not with themselves.

In this particular Mr. Speed is strangely confused, for in his relating the
Customs of the Britains, he makes no distinction of the times of his Authors
writing, but Speeds Chron.
huddles up a Rhapsody of their Manners, without the due consideration of the
diversity of Circumstances the Britains were in, partly by long continuance,
and partly by the Subjection they underwent by the Romans. To give one or two
Instances; Caesar (says he) reports, that they used to dye themselves with
Woad, to make Caesar.
themselves more terrible in Battle; Herodian says, They did it out of an
opinion that it was very gay and handsome; and thus he brings these two Authors
clashing, not considering Herodian.
that when Caesar entered this Island, the Britains had some sort of Rayments,
as is clear by his own Writings, and that a few of the Inlanders only went
naked, the rest painting their bands and faces; But in Herodotus his days, the
Romans had reduced all the Britains in general, that held against them, to the
same Method of living, which formerly only Inlanders used.

Now, it is no wonder if they used the same hardships in going Naked, and
distinguished themselves one from another by the shapes of Beasts, curiously
worked upon their skins, when they had no Rayments else to deck and adorn their
Nobility; so that, that might become a badge of Honor in time, and upon such
necessity of Affairs, which was first introduced for Terror to their Enemies;
The like confusion he makes in the description of their Persons, sometimes
their Hair is long, sometimes short and curled; now they are clothed,
presently again they are but in part, sometimes not at all; So they are Cruel,
Barbarous, build Houses, have none at all; Till the Ground, and by and by
understand nothing of it; have Houses, and yet live only in Woods, with a
thousand other ridiculous Contradictions in themselves, which nevertheless must
be granted to be all true, upon the testimony of his Authority, which indeed
are true if understood aright, as distinguishing them into the diversity of
their Originals, the circumstance of Time, and the different ways of Living,
by the exigences the Inlanders were obliged unto.

Having premised thus much concerning the diversities of Customs and Manners,
according to the diversity of Nations in Britain, I will treat of the Custom
of Painting and Dying their Bodies, a thing so frequent and universally used
among them, that Mr. Cambden derives the Name of BRITAIN from it.

First, Caesar reports, that all the Britains did stain themselves with Woad,
which Caesar Com.
creates a blew color, to make themselves more terrible to their Enemies in
fight.

Pomponius Mela says, Their bodies are dyed with Woad; whether it be to make a
gallant show, or for what else, is uncertain.

Dio Nicaeus says of the Northern Britains, that, They went Naked, and Unshod.

Pliny says, There grows an Herb in Gaul like unto Plantain, named Glastum,
Dio Nice s.
that is, Woad, with the juice of which the Women of Britain, as well married
Wives, Plia. Not. hist.
as their young Daughters, anoint and dye their Bodies all over.

Solinus says, That the Country is partly Peopled with Barbarians, who, by the
means of Artificial Incisions of diverse forms, have, from their Childhood,
sundry Solinus.
figures of Beasts printed upon them, and having these Characters deeply
engraven on their Bodies, as the Man grows in stature, so do these painted
Characters also. Neither do these Savage Nations think any thing shows their
Courage more, than undergoing these lasting Stars, by which their Limbs drink
in much Paint or Color.

Herodian says, They knew no use at all of Garments, but about their Belly and
Neck they wear Iron; their Bodies they mark with sundry Pictures, representing
all Herodianus.
manner of living Creatures; and this is the cause they will not be clad, for
hiding forsooth, the painting of their Bodies.

These are the Authorities upon which the Painting of the Britains is built,
but as they must not be questioned, yet let us consider a few things concerning
them.

Caesar, who was the first of the Romans that entered this Isle, only says,
that Omnes Caesar Com.
Britanni se Glasto inficiunt, quod caeruleum efficit Colorem, atque hot
horribiliore sunt in pugnae aspectu. Here is no mention made of any delight and
pleasure they took in the variety of Figures, but only a plain coloring and
dying of their Hands, Arms, Faces and Necks, much like to Gypsies now adays,
whereby they thought they looked more terrible; That they painted their whole
Bodies in Caesar's days, I cannot believe, seeing he reports of the Inlanders
(which of all were the most Barbarous) that most of them were clothed with
Skins, so that then they had no Pride, as in Herodians days, to show their
naked Bodies, or to discover the curious embroidery of Scars and Colors.

In the next place, it may be thought, that they used only this Custom in War,
or Plin, Not. hist.
in some particular Sacrifices, which Pliny makes mention of, at which they
danced naked after the Customs of the Heathens; For if promiscuously they all
used this Custom both in Peace and War, how could they expect by that means to
look more terrible in Battle one to another; Neither can it be expected they
dyed themselves to amaze foreign Enemies alone, and I am confident this will
not be granted by those who stand most for their Painting; It remains
therefore, that they put on these terrible vizages when they went to War, when
one side would not lose that small advantage of looking as grim as the other.
Neither did they use this Custom when they went to the Wars in Gaul, for,
under hand, they assisted that Nation against Caesar, which they could not but
publicly have done, had they been so notoriously branded and stigmatized, as
in after Ages they have been reputed; Besides, Caesar reports, that before his
entrance into this Island, he strictly enquired of Merchants Caesar Com.
and could hear nothing of them, concerning the nature of the People in War, or
their Customs by which they lived, which, had their Painting been so general,
then (as is pretended) he could not but have heard of it.

Whereas he speaks, that all the Britains stained themselves with Woad, the
word is Britanni, meaning the Men only, and such as were in Wars, for, without
doubt, at his arrival all put themselves into a Warlike defense and posture. I
cannot believe, that Comius, and the Ambassadors that came to him into Gaul to
leave Hostages for the Britains, were any ways depainted; or, that in the
days of Claudius Caesar, Caracticus had any thing unseemly about him; Since we
find that Claudius, and his Empress Agripptna, were taken with his Behavior.
And if any say, that upon such great occations they might wash off the
Painting, I will not deny it, but since they thought themselves to look
terrible by it, certainly in Peace, and in their familiar Conversations, they
did not use it; Besides, Tacitus, in laying down the Nature of Tacitus.
the Britains, guesses at a different Original, upon the account some looked
Swartheir, others Fairer, which could not have been distinguished had they all
been Painted.

The Gauls sent their Children into Britain, to be instructed in the Mysteries
of Caesar.
the Druids; now what opinion could the Gauls have of the Civility of a Nation,
which, contrary to the practice of the whole World, did so barbarously
disfigure themselves. Certainly it would have amazed their Youth, to have seen
a whole Island in that shape, by which their Priests, in their Sacrificing, did
represent their Demons.

When we read of the wisdom and good nature of Comius the Britain, praised by
Caesar, who was intimate with him, the great conduct of Cassibelan the British
General, his prudent and politic management of the War, by Caesar's own
confession, we cannot naturally suppose them to be so barbarous as this Custom
would make them, and seeing we have no Authority to believe it practiced only
in War, where it was not without its use, we ought to think that Caesar's
words, Omnes (...), is meant of the Men only, and that in time of Battle.

In after Ages, wherein the Authors aforementioned lived, in succession, it
came to pass that the Britains, being driven out by the Romans of their
Possessions, betook themselves, Men and Women, to their Arms, having Leaders
promiscuously on either part, whose Authority they followed; Then came the use
of Painting into much request, partly because it was terrible to their Enemies,
so that many had continual use of it, partly because they were reduced to a
Savage life, wanting. Clothes, had this only for the distinction of Dignities,
then Women as well as Men Painted themselves with terrible Creatures, but never
(as I could read of) with Flowers, because Women as well as Men were in Arms,
and because being exposed naked in Fields, and often subject to wet Weather,
then, and not before then, do I believe, they took up the custom of making
Incisions into the flesh, whereby to keep in their Painting. From hence, in
succession of Time, these Britains were called Picts, from their Coloring, but
were not named Britains on the same account.

Isidore gives the Derivation of the Picts rightly, but when he speaks of the
Britains, he says they received it from a word of their own Nation, but
declares not Isidore.
what that word signified, which he would not have failed to have done, if both
the Names had had the same Original.

Now, as for the word Brith, signifying Painted, I conjecture it came from
Brithon, rather than Brithon from it, for it is usual now to call Tawney, or
Sunburnt Persons, Gypsies, and the Borderers (as I have shown before more
largely) might bring the name of a Britain to be the common Appellative of a
Painted Person.

Certain I am, that the British Islands were famous in the Monuments of the
Greeks for Tynn and Lead, but as for this Custom of Painting themselves, it
made no such noise in the World, as to be ever likely to give Name to the
Island, no not in Caesar's days, who (had it been so remarkable as later
Authors make it) would not surely have given so slight an account of it as he
has done, especially, as he does not stick to acquaint the World of their
superstition in Hares, Hens, and Geese.

As for those Fancies of Mr. Speed, according to which he has modelled the
Cuts of the Naked Britains, where he brings in the Maid, with Flowers and
Herbs, painted curiously on her Body, whereas Married persons were pounced with
the stamps of all sorts of Ravenous beasts, I shall omit them, as I am jealous
of the Authority he grounds them on, or if they were true, yet they relate to a
more Modern time than those Ancient Britains we are treating of; For it would
be endless to speak of the diverse and barbarous Customs of the wild Britains,
which they took up after the Romans had reduced them to a Savage and brutish
life, insomuch that the Attacotti, a British Nation, according to St. Hierome,
feed upon Man's flesh, St. Hieroms.
nay, so much were they given to it, that when they lit upon any flocks of
Sheep, or herds of Cattle, they preferred the Buttock of the Herdsmen or
Keepers before the other Prey, and accounted the Paps and Dugs of Women the
most delicious Diet.

I shall only only treat in this Chapter of the Customs, which in all
probability were taken up before Caesar's days, referring the rest as they
shall fall in the course of the History, to which later number, I think, their
delicate and various Painting may be referred, and, as I suppose, is more
properly to be reduced to the Picts, than Britains, of whom Claudian writes,
Perlegit exanimes Picto moriente figuras. Claudian.
As if the breathless Shapes seemed to languish at the death of their
Supporters, and the Painted Figures die away by degrees, as their Master loses
his strength.

Mr. Cambden, in confirming his Opinion concerning the Painting of the
Britains, Cambden.
has produced many Names of their Chief Leaders, in the composition of which he
relates the manifest Prints, and some Color to remain; For Example,

Coch or Goch, Red in the British Tongue, is seen in Cogidunus, Argentocoxus,
Segonax.

Du, Black, is seen in Mandubracius Cartismandua, Togodumnus, Bunducia,
Cogidunus.

Gwin, White, in Venutius and Immanuentius.

Gwelw, a Wan or waterish Color, appears evidently in Vellocutus,
Carvillias, and Suella.

Glass, Blew, in Cuniglasus.

Aure, a fair Yellow or golden Color, in Arviragus, Cungetorius.

Ceg, a lively and gallant Color, in Prasutagus and Caratacus.

But (he says) if the Britains borrowed the Names of mingled Colors, together
with the very simple Colors themselves, then from

Prasius, Leek-blade green, comes Prasutagus.

Minium, Red, Vermilion, Acliminius, King Cenobelins's Son.

Thus far Mr. Cambden.

Now, it is confessed the Britains did take many Names of Colors from the
Romans, as Werith for Veridis, Green; Melin for Melinus, that is, a Quince
yellow Color; Aure from Aureus, a Golden Color, because perhaps the Mixture
of these Colors was taught them by that Nation; But where does Mr. Cambden
read that the Britains ever painted themselves with such diverse Colors, seeing
he brings in many Names of Persons so colored, who never had any thing to do
with the Romans, but were always in hostility with them.

Caesar says, they dyed themselves with Blew only, and we see in all the
aforementioned Names, Cuniglasus has the most resemblance with his Color, viz
Giass, Blew; why may not the Color Ceg, as well as Du in Togodunus, and Coch
in Cogidunus, so that the former Person will be black, and yet of a lively and
gallant Color, the latter black and red.

And whereas Mr. Cambden says, there are not above four or five more Names of
Britains in Ancient Writers, and doubts not, but the skilful in the British
Tongue might reduce them to some Color, I am verily of his mind, and methinks
my Eyes begin to open, and I see the very prints and express tokens of Coch in
Comius, and Melinus in Cunobelinus, Ceg, Taximagulus, as plainly as he did Gwin
in Venutius, and Gwellw in Suella, Vellocatus and Carvillius.

If we do but consider the great numbers, and wonderful power of the forenamed
Syllables, in putting themselves into any shape as well as color, I believe,
one would find it no difficult matter to find four or five Names in any
Language whatsoever, which had not some relation to some of them.

But I suppose Mr. Cambden, when he derived Britannia from Brith, Painted, was
resolved to bring in as many Colors as possible he could, although he could
not be ignorant that it was called Britannia, before any such diversity of
Painting was used, namely, in Julius Caesar's days, when in all probability
they were wont only in time of War, or Sacrifices, to discolor themselves, and
that only with Glastum that gave a blew Tincture, which seems to be more
reasonable, upon the account that other Nations in the East, from whom our
Britains received many Customs, used this manner of Coloring themselves, as I
have read in Herodotus, at their Sacrifices, and if I Herodotus.
am not mistaken, in their very Wars also.

As for the word Brith, if I may have leave to give my conjecture, I believe it
is of a Phoenician derivation, from Borith, signifying any thing used by
Fullers to get out Spots or Stains, with which Borith they besmeared their
Clothes first, and afterward cleansed them, and this Borith, in time, I
believe, might be brought to signify any thing stained, painted, dyed or
colored; so that if any will yet contend for the derivation of Britannia from
Brith, they may understand, that this way also it proceeds from the
Phoenicians. Thus much for the Painting used by the Britains.

The Ancient Britains, as to their Persons, are said (by Strabo) to be taller
of Stature than the Gauls, an Argument that they were not of Gaulish
Extraction, their Hair Strabo.
not so yellow, nor their Bodies so well compact, knit and firm, and but bad
Feet to support them; And, he says, he saw diverse Youths at Rome made after
that proportion, but as to the other lineaments of their Bodies, they were well
made, and had excellent features.

Herodian writes, that about their Bellies and Necks they wore Rings of Iron,
supposing that to be a great Ornament and sign of their Riches, esteeming it as
highly as Herodianus.
other Nations do Gold.

Caesar reports, that in his days Iron Rings, and Brazen pieces, was their
Money, Caesar Com.
but makes no mention of their wearing of them about their Necks and Bellies, I
suppose, a Custom took up afterward, when they were driven about by the
Romans, which being first begun out of a necessity of Carriage, afterward
became an Ornament. This is observable in their Coyns, that one sort of them
had a figure of a Shield embost, and on that side a certain Image, the device
was within, which kind of Coin was in use in no part of the World but in some
places belonging to Greece, which, although it be not (as some do imagine) a
sign of a Greekish extraction, yet it is a proof of the long continuance of
Graecians in this Island.

It seems Iron and Brass were in much esteem among them, although they wanted
not better Metals of their own, the abundance of which brought down their
value, as may appear by the little Commodities they exchanged them for. Strabo,
relating their Traffic, says, That for Tynn and Lead, Skins and Furs, they
received Strabo.
Earthen Vessels, Salt and Brazen wares of the Phoenicians, who first of all
Traded hither, and concealed their Navigations from others. And, although Mr.
Speed makes only mention of their Skins and Furs, and says that their Trading
was inconsiderable, yet their Tynn and Lead were the greater Commodities, from
which the Scilly Islands, likewise Cornwall and Devonshire, received their names
of Bratanac first, and afterward Cassiterides. Hence it is that Iron and Brass
was so much esteemed among them, upon the account they received them from
Foreign Nations, the latter of which is more Malleable, and the former more
serviceable than their Native Metals.

They wore the Hair of their Head, and upper Lips, long, and shaved it off in
all other parts, according to Caesar; where we read of their going Naked, or
the modesty Caesar Com.
of some, in covering only those parts which Nature would have hid, it must be
attributed either to the Inland Britains, or to those whom the Romans had
reduced to the same Exigences, being it is related by Authors, that lived when
it was a Roman Province, who stick not, in a horrid manner, to describe those
Barbarisms of the Inlanders, to which they themselves had brought them.

As for their diverse Complexions, mentioned by Tacitus, their good Constitution
of Tacitus. Plutarch. Strabo. Solinus.
Body, taken notice of by Plutarch, so that they lived to an Hundred and twenty
years; as likewise their fair and good Dispositions, recorded by Strabo and
Solinus; the Beauty of their Women, their making of War under the conduct of
them; their Riches in Cattle and Lands, their small Carroghs, in which, as long
as they were under sail, they never used to eat any thing; with many such
things, recorded by Roman Authors, after their Conquest of them, I purposely
omit, and will treat of some of their Customs which seem to be of long
continuance in the Island, of which some account may be given.

First, The Britains as well as the Gauls, as has been touched of before,
exactly (according to the Customs of the Eastern Nations) began their day at
the setting of the Sun, not at his Rising, as the Romans, or at Midnight, as we
now use it, so that what the Latins call Septimanae, at this day they call
With-nos, that is, eight Nights, and two Septimanae, Pimthec-nos, that is,
sixteen Nights, following the Law of Nations, wherein Darkness precedes Light,
which was observed in those Countries that most conversed with the Jews, who by
Moses were taught, That the Evening and the Morning were the first day.

This Custom, I belive, was brought into Britain by the Phoenicians, who, in
all likelihood, used it.

Add to this their observation of the New Moon, the beginning their Months and
New Years, yea their several Ages according to the Cycle of Thirty Years, in
her first Quarter, and methinks there is something of the same Nation in it.

Pliny writes, that the Druids called an Herb Samolus, which grew in wet
places, Plin. Not. hist.
and used these Ceremonies in gathering it; First, they were fasting, next,
they ought not to look back during the time of their plucking it, lastly, they
were to use their left hand only.

Now what Herb this Samolus was, he does not tell us, but it seems very
probable, that from the last Ceremony, namely, in gathering it with the Left
hand, the Herb took its name, that is to say, Samol, signifying in the
Phoenician Tongue, the Left hand. Seeing many of the Plants have Greek names
given them by the Britains, why may not this receive its name from the
Phoenicians. This Herb so gathered with all its due Ceremonies, was esteemed of
sovereign virtue to the curing of all Diseases in Swine, or other Cattle.

The Habits of the Britains were much after the manner of the Gauls, according
to Caesar, and, I believe, had much the same Names, many of which we have
proved Caesar Com.
to be of Phoenician Derivation, in the Chapter treating of the Phoenicians, so
that we need not here speak much concerning them.

I will only mention two more; The first out of Varro, is called Gannacum, from
whence our word, Gown, seems to be derived; It was a thick covering made of
Varro.
Course Wool, and had a Nap upon it on both sides, much after the nature of
Freeze, it was called by the Greeks (...), and was esteemed by some of them to
be a Persian, by others a Babylonian Garment. I suppose the Name was introduced
by the Phoenicians into these Parts, for the Galdees called it Gouneca, or
Gunca; It was worn by the Gauls, and better sort of Britains to keep out the
Cold.

This Gaunacum in the Glossary of Isidore is expounded Gausapa, and may have
its original from Gulpak, signifying thick and hairy Garments, so that Martial
esteemed it a Paradox, Mense vel Augusto sumere Gausapinas.

Bardiacus (which as Bochartus thinks) was called Bardus, from whence
Bardocucullus Isidore.
was compounded (of which I have spoken of before) was a Garment wore Bochartus.
by the Gauls and Britains, of which Martial thus writes,

Lassi Bardiacus quod evocati
Malles quam quod oles olere Bassa. Martial.

This Garment was of diverse Colors woven together, and made a gaudy show,
without doubt very pleasant to the Britains in those days, as we find the
Indians to be much taken with the like. It is called Bardes in the Phoenician
Dialect, and Board or Borda by the Arabians, and no doubt by the Phoenicians was
brought into these parts, which words are very sufficient also to prove from
whence the Bardi received their Name. The Arabians wore it mixed only with black
and yellow, but generally it was made up of some colors in the nature of our
Fools Coats. Hence it is that St. Augustine, in his 68th. Epistle of the
Circumcelliones, says, Presbyterum St. Aug. 68. Epist.
burda vestitum, etc. they clothed a Priest in this habit, and showed him as a
ridiculous spectacle. But however odd this Garment seems in our days,
certainly it was worn by the chief Nobility, and greatest Princes of the
Britains.

If Mr. Cambden, from the diverse Colors which he finds out in the Names of the
British Princes, would make them to be diversely Painted, he had better have
look for it in these Coats than in their Skins, for, as for their Bodies, they
used but one Color in the dying of them.

Mr. Speed, with whom Mr. Cambdens Derivation of Britannia from Brith is all
Gospel, in confirmation of it has exposed two Naked Britains to view, not
considering Speeds Chron.
the Circumstances of time, how that it was long after they were called
BRITAINS they took up that Custom; To Answer him, Since I suppose Britain to
be truly and rightly derived from Bratanac in the Phoenician Tongue, signifying
a Country of Tynn, and upon the account, that from hence that useful Commodity
was dispersed by them through the whole World; upon the very same account are
these Islands called by the Greeks the same as Bratanac, namely, Cassiterides,
the Tynn Islands.

I will represent one Person of the Bretanick Islanders, who lived, I suppose,
in the Forelings or Scyllies, in which Islands, together with Cornwall and
Devonshire, Metal most abounded. The description of which is given by Strabo.
They are Inhabited (says Strabo.
he) by Men wearing black Garments, clad in side Coats descending to their
Ankles, going with Staves like the Furies in Tragedies; Mines they have of Tynn
and Lead, which they exchange for Earthen-Pots, Salt, and Brazen ware.



Megens Phoenicum condemnavere metallis;
Polluit hino yultus eruta terra meos.
Quamvis ore niger yidearg, inyestibus atrox.
Candidus interea moribus esse feror
These are the Silures of whom Tacitus writes, That their Hair was black and
Tacitus.
curled, differing from the rest of the Britains in their swarthy Countenances,
by which he reckons them to be of a Spanish Original, namely, the Offspring of
the Iberi, who were great Miners, but we have shown (treating in the Chapter of
the Phoenicians) that in all probabillity they were called Silures from some
Colony of Pliny.
the Phoenicians Trading with them, as their Name in the Phoenician Tongue
imports. And we may observe, that as the adjacent Islands (the Sorelings
especially) were Solinus, cap. 22:
called Bretanick upon the account of their Tynn Mines, when this was known by
the name of Albion only, so there was an Island called Silura, lying off of
Cornwall, which, I believe, gave the Name to the Silures in South Wales; So that
Britannia in general, and the Silures in particular, both took their Names from
Bretannick, or Tynn Islands, which we have proved to be first discovered by the
Phoenicians.

The Habits of these Western Britains were remarkable for their Length and
Color, the former of which, together with the Staff they used to carry, argues
that some Eastern Colonies, and especially the Phoenicians, traded with them,
and although by the Black color of their Hair and Garments, their Swarthy
complexions, and their Staves, they seemed like Furies in Tragedies, yet are
they described by the same Author to be of a gentle and kind Disposition, of a
fair and honest Behavior, simple and sincere in their Conversation, and
generally the Britains, by most Authors, are so set out. They have not, says
Diodorus Siculus, the craft and subtilty of other Nations, but are fair
Conditioned People, of a plain and upright Dealing. Diod. Sic.


They had all things in Common amongst them, and would not admit of any
Propriety at all, after the manner of the Germans described by Caesar, from
whom in all probability they descended, insomuch that the same Author reports,
That ten or Caes. Com.
twelve of them agreed together in the promiscuous use of one Woman, Brethren
with Brethren, nay Parents with their own Children; The Issue they had by them
they nurtured and brought up by a Common-stock, though they were reputed his in
a more especial manner, who married the Mother in her Virginity.

This incestuous Custom was frequent among the Athenians before Cecrops days,
as Mr. Seldom notes, and I conjecture was only used by the wilder sort of
Britains, and continued it was a long while after the Romans had subdued this
Island; For we Seldom.
read that Julia the Empress of Severus, twitted the Wife of Argentocorus with
it, who replied in this manner, We, British Women, do truly differ herein from
you Roman Ladies, for we satisfy our selves with the accompanying with the
Worthiest men openly, but you with every Base fellow in a corner.

These are the most memorable Customs used by the Britains, in which they
agreed sometimes with the Gauls, sometimes with the Germans, according as they
were derived from either, and some Customs we have shown they had particular
to themselves, of which no account can be given, and others also which could
have no other Original but from the Phoenicians or Graecians, which Originals
(besides the congruity the Britains had with no other Western Nation, their
Neighbors) is evidently shown out of the very Names of the Customs
themselves. Certainly, it would take up a Volume, if any one better skilled in
the Phoenician, Greek, and British Tongues, and in the customs of these three
Nations, would sit himself down, seriously and fully to compare their
respective ways and manner of Living, their Habits, Coyns, Laws, and other
Circumstances; In all which, as likewise in their manner of Warring, there
seems such an apparent similitude between the aforesaid Nations, that they seem
rather Neighbors than to be so far disjoined as they are; But it will suffice,
if by this small account given of them, a way may be opened to an ingenious
Undertaker, to search deeper into the matter, and so I shall pass on to their
Customs in War.

CHAP. VIII. The Custom of the BRITAINS in their Wars, and Manner of Fighting.
BRITAIN, at the first entrance of it by Julius Caesar, was divided into a
great many petty States and Governments, insomuch that the different Interest
of Princes was the cause of continual Wars and Dissensions among them.

Sometimes Ambition, only to increase their Rule and Sovereignty, prompted some
to make Incursions on their Neighbors, so that they who had the greatest
desire to sit quiet, were obliged to stand in a posture of Defense, and to be
always ready against such Invasions, whose greatest strength and force lay in
their being swift and sudden; Sometimes the Druid Interest engaged the Secular
Power in its Quarrels, every Prince desiring to advance a Creature of his own
to the Primacy and Superintendency over the whole Island; The whole Nation
being always in a Warlike posture, it is no wonder to hear what some ancient
Authors write of them;

That every one delighted in picking Quarrels; that it was their daily exercise
and pleasure to be Skirmishing; that they were continually going out in
Parties, Fortisying, and Intrenching, many times rather out of delight, than
any necessity.

For being constrained to keep standing Forces, it was absolutely requisite
they should be kept in Exercise, for it was impossible, in the circumstances
this Country was then in, for any Prince (though desirous of Peace) to keep his
Soldiers in Order and Discipline, unless they were sometimes let loose, and
afforded those liberties and advantages which other men of Fortune had, under
more Ambitious and turbulent Governors.

But the greatest bone of Contention among them, which never suffered these
Dissensions to heal and close up, was the eternal fewd, as I suppose, between
the Inland Britains, the first Possessours of the Island, and those that came
over from Gaul and Belgium.

These drove all the Ancient Inhabitants from all the Seacoasts, seizing their
Estates, and securing the Trade of the Island into their own hands.

And although, in process of time, these different forts of People might mix
very much in their Allyances, Language, Customs and Religions, yet the first
Injuries of the Invaders was, no doubt, upon occasion, very often, severely
resented by the Inlanders, and I believe, in their common Union, against Caesar
and the Romans, never heartily forgotten.

This being the condition of Affairs in Britain at that time, it is no wonder
that Caesar, at his Arrival, was much deceived in his expectations, for by the
small preparations he made at his first Invasion, we may guess what a low
opinion he had of the Temper, Courage and Conduct of the Britains; and at his
second Attempt, by the increase of his Levies, and number of Ships, being in
all Eight hundred, we may on the other side judge, what warm entertainment he
received the first time from them; So that the Courage of the Britains, and
their skill in War, is not to be questioned, in respect they lived among
themselves in the continual exercise of it.

It remains only, that their Manner of Fighting, with the several Customs they
used, differing from other Nations their Neighbors, be described and explained.

The first and most memorable thing that occurs, is their Fighting in Chariots,
after the manner of the Ancient Greeks (as Diodorus Siculus expresses) at the
Diod. Sic.
Trojan War. Of this Custom of theirs I have treated in the Chapter of the
Greeks, and I doubt not (since it was peculiar to the Britains, and a few
adjacent parts in Gaul, that Coesar relates it for a wonder, in the Western
parts) but that will be thought to proceed either immediately from that Nation,
or else from the Phoenicians.

As for the Names of the Charriots they fought in, are clearly Phoenician, as
Benna, Carrus or Carrum, Covinus, Essedum, Rheda, and so it is but reason to
think, primitively were introduced by them; The Gracians added and altered them
according to the Custom of their Country, for one sort they called Petoritum,
from its four Wheels, and of the ordinary Rheda they made their Epireda, I
suppose with two stories in it to carry the more Men.

The Wagons and Chariots they thus fought in, were exceedingly well Harnassed
and Armed, for at both ends of the Axeltrees they fastened Hooks and Scyths, so
that driving furiously into the Enemies battle, they made whole Lanes of
slaughtered Men, the Scyths cutting them off in the middle who did not give
speedy way, and such as escaped them were caught up with the Hooks, which were
placed for that purpose, so that hanging upon them they were miserable
Spectacles, and suffering intolerable pains and torments, were constrained to
write upon the Triumphs of their Conquerours, being dragged along before and
behind their Chariot Wheels.

These sort of Chariots were called Covini, and in the British Tongue at this
day, Cowain, signifies to carry in a Wagon.

Lucan calls it constratus Covinus, being possibly of an evener and broader
make, more open than their other sorts of Chariots, and probably it carried no
men at Lucan.
all, but only him that guided it; For we read in Tacitus, that Covinarius is
as Tacitus, in Agric.
much as to say, Auriga; And this they did that the Chariot might be more
expedit, and the Horses with more ease might draw the Scyths and Hooks through
any opposition.

The Essedum, called by the Phoenicians, Dassedan, by the Greeks (...), was
another sort of Chariots, which, I believe, carried no Scyths or Hooks, in
which Caes. Com. lib. 4.
were only Armed men.

How the Britains used these we read in Caesar; The Charioteers, called
Essedarii, ride through all the parts of the Battle, and bestowed their Darts,
with the terrible appearance of their Horses, and the noise of their Wheels,
usually break their Ranks; And when they have wrought themselves into the
Enemies Horse, they fling themselves from their Chariots and fight on foot, the
Chariot Guiders in the mean time withdraw a little way out of the Battle, and
place themselves so, that if their Party were overpowered with the number of
Enemies, they might retreat with more ease and security.

By this means, in their fighting, they perform the nimbleness of Horse, and
the steadiness of Foot; By daily use and exercise they arrived to that
perfection, that in the steepest descent of a Hill they could hold their Horses
to a full Careere, stop of a sudden, turn short, run upon the Spire-pole and
Beam of the Chariot, stand upright on the Yoke and Harness of their Steeds, and
immediately again whip into their Chariots.

This exceeding nimbleness and dexterity in the management of their Esseds,
oftentimes foiled Caesar and his heavy Legions. Sometimes they would feign
themselves to fly, by that means to draw his light Soldiers to follow them,
and immediately turning again, and skipping off their Chariots, they often gave
them notable Repulses, driving them to their main Body, where they were forced
to shelter themselves. Upon this very account they never fought thick or in
clusters, but dispersed themselves into diverse and distant stations, which
before hand was, for the most part, agreed upon; relieving one another as they
saw occasion, and retiring when weary, so came on again as they had refresht or
relieved their Horses.

By this their scattered way of Fighting, the Romans knew not which way to bend
their main strength, besides hindered on all sides to make Excursions, were
obliged to close Marches, not able to forage in parts, a thing very
destructive to them in a strange Country, so that by the conduct of Cassibelan
their General, the Roman Legions were in a manner made useless, serving only as
a Refuge for the Horse, who were often beaten upon them.

It is very difficult to distinguish among so many Names they had of their
Wagons and Charriots, to what proper and particular uses they put them.

Their Carri or Carra, from whence our word Cart proceeds, were made use of in
carrying of their Arms and Baggage, and seem not to be engaged with the Enemy,
but were always secured by a Trench and Rampire, insomuch the Britains, upon
any Rout given to them, retired, and taking out their fresh Horses left their
wearied ones to recruit.

The Benna, called by the Germans at this day Benne, and the French, Banneau,
seems to be the same with Petoritum, both receiving their names from their
Wheels, one from the Greeks, the other from the Phoenicians, but whether these
were used for their pleasure only, or in War, is uncertain; that they differed
from all the rest in the numbers and make of their Wheels, is unquestionable.

The Covinus was the Chariot with the Scyths and Hooks, as Pomponius Mela
witnesses, and their Esseda were not Armed Chariots, but carried Men only in
them, as Pomp. Mela.
may be understood out of Caesar's words, where he says, That the rattling noise
of Caesar Com.
the Wheels, and terrible appearance of the Horses, put his Men into dis-array,
making no mention of their Scyths, which certainly he would have done if in
these Esseda there had been any.

It is very probable, in their first Skirmishes with Caesar, they would not be
brought to a set Battle, as they used these Esseda only, and reserved their
Covini for other occasions, as they should be offered.

Their Rheda, from whence proceeds Rhediad, a Course, Rheder, to Run, Rhedecfd,
a Race, in the British.

If we look to the Original, being Rheda in the Phoenician Dialect, as it is
used in the Chaldee Paraphrase upon Exodus 14. 25. where mention is made of
Charriots of Egypt, then we may conclude it was a Chariot of War, but whether
with Scyths, or Exodus 13. 25
without, is uncertain, although the former be more probable, seeing that the
Eastern Countries, as likewise Egypt and Africa, where many Colonies of the
Phoenicians had seated themselves, used the like. But that it might be made and
used without Scyths, and was the Chariot wherewith they ran Races, and at
public Games exercised themselves, as it cannot be denied: So Eporeda, a City
of the Salassians, seems to testify, which received its Name, according to
Pliny, from Horse-breakers, and possibly might be called Hipporedia from them.
Add to this Rheda the Epitheda, with a Greek addition to a Phoenician name, and
we have all the sorts of Charriots which were ever mentioned, or may be
gathered of the Gauls, or Britains.

And we are to observe, that Tacitus writes concerning the management of these
Charriots, that the greater Personage guided them, and that his waiters and
followers Tacitus.
fought out of the same, which is not taken notice of by Caesar, and may not be
used in his days; For we find in him, that the Chariot Drivers often retired
out of the Battle, and there waited the success of those he had carried in,
that he might bring them off again, which office can very hardly be supposed to
be executed by their Princes and Leaders.

The Horses the Britains used in their Chariots (according to Dio Nicaeus) were
Dio Nicaeus.
small and swift, but whether their breed was generally so, or whether they
chose them such, as easier to be managed, and fitter to climb Hills and endure
Labor, is not resolved me by any.

The Harness they put on them, may be gathered to be not only substantial, but
curiously wrought and engraven upon, out of the words of Propertius, Esseda
caelatis siste Britanna jugis. Propertius;


Because this their way of Fighting may be better described and set out to the
eye, than painted out in words, I have thought good to expose to view their
three sorts of Chariots, the Covinus, Essedum and Epireda, which seem to have
the greatest difference one from another, as may be seen in: this following
Figure. The Battles A, the Covinus or Cythed Chariot; B, the Essedum; C, the
Epireda.



The Britains fought in Bodies called Caterva, now Caturfa, as the Romans had
their Legions, and the Macedonians their Phalanx, and this Caterva we have
shown to be of Phoenician Derivation, and to this word Mr. Cambden reduces Cad,
signifying War in the British Tongue, and Kaderue, a Legion.

Their strong Holds and Towns (according to Caesar and Strabo) were nothing
else Caesar Com. Strabo.
but a round spot of Ground, fenced about with Trees felled down for that
purpose, and secured on all sides with a Ditch, and Rampire, and this served
them in their Retreats, and this is all that can be learnt of their general way
of Fighting.

We will proceed now to particulars.

The Britains were very swift in Running, neither did they burden themselves
with any Armor, which they could not at their pleasure fling from them. They
had a Shield and short Spear, in the nether part whereof hung a Bell, by the
shaking of which they thought to affright and amaze their Enemies; They used
Daggers also, those that went Naked, girded their Swords by their sides by an
Iron Chain.

There is no mention made of Authors, by what Names the British Arms were
called. The Gaulish Weapons are Spatha, Gessum, Lancea, Sparum, Cateia, Matara
or Mataris, Thyreos, and Cetrum or Cetra.

This Cetra is attributed to the Old Britains, by Tacitus, and we have shown it
to be the Phoenicians Cetera; Many others of them are reduced, by Mr. Cambden,
to the Tacitus.
British Tongue, and are supposed by him to be (in his making the Gauls and
Britains the same Nations) used promiscuously; by both those words cited by
him, I have proved to be Phoenician, and by all probability brought by the
Phoenicians into Gaul and Britain; It will not be amiss to show, seeing the
other Weapons might be in use here in Britain, that they are also of Phoenician
Derivation, for seeing that the Phoenicians Traded into the Bretanick Islands,
it would be unreasonable to imagine, that the Britains did not learn the use of
the same Weapons from them, as the Gauls may be proved to do, setting aside,
that it is very probable that the Gauls, as they sent their Children to be
Instructed in this Island in Arts, Sciences, and Religion, so might they learn
of them also many things very conducible in their Wars.

The first sort of Weapon (for we omit those we have spoken of in the Chapter
of the Phoenicians) is the Spatha, the Italians Spada, and the Spaniards
Espada, Isidore calls it Spata, and says it was a two edged Sword, with which
they cut and did not Isidore.
thrust, for Polybius and Livy says, it had no point. The Britains wore
Daggers Polyb. lib. 2. Livius, lib. 32.
which served to thrust with; some have derived it from the Chaldee word, Sphud
or Spud, signifying a Spit, which the Italians call Spedo, the Dutch, Spett, we
our selves call Spit, and the Germans, Spissz, but the Derivation cannot hold
with the description of the Spata, which was nothing like a Spit, and was not
for thrusting but hewing and slashing. It is more probably derived from Spatin
in the same Dialect, which being a plural word, and signifying only Staves, yet
by adding the word Biszel, or Iron, they are general interpreted words.

Sparum, another Weapon used in Gaul, Festus derives from Spargendo, but
probably it may be supposed to be called Sparon by the Phoenicians, from the
Root Sapar, Festus.
from whence comes Sophron, signifying an Iron Edge.

Cataia, according to Isidore, is a Weapon made of the softest Metal, which,
by reason of its weight, did not fly far, but with great force brake through
wherever Bochartus.
it lit; and why may not this come from Catat, signifying to break in pieces,
and scatter the Enemies Forces. Bochartus thinks these Cataia are meant, those
Ingentes Clavae, made mention of by Ammianus, which were set on fire, and
which, he says, Ammianus, lib. 31.
the Barbarians flung on their Enemies, and with which, together with their
Swords, they brake through their Left wing, but I never read of any Fire ever
made use of by the Britains in their Fights, but only when the Romans invaded
Anglesey, and whether they were these Cataiae which Tacitus calls Firebrarnds,
it is hard to judge.

Lancea comes, according to Festus, from the Greek (...), and perhaps was
brought immediately by the Graecians into Britain, for it is very difficult to
bring Festus.
it from Romcha, changing R into L, although there wants not several Examples
of that nature, as (...), Lilium, (...), Clibanus Pereginus, the Gaulish
Peterin.

Matara, another Weapon, which I suppose was their Darts they flung out of
their Charriots, it is also called Mataris and Materis, but by Hesychius,
Madaris. Hesychius. Strabo. Pollux.
Strabo says, it is of the kind of Weapons called Palta; And Pollux says,
Paltum was a Medish Dart, so that we may gather it had its Original in the
Eastern Countries, in whose Dialect Matara signifies to dart.

To these names of their Weapons, I will only add two more of their Instruments
in War; The first Manga, Mangana, and Mangonale, an Engine to fling Stones
with; the French call it Mangoneaux, by the Greeks, (...), but whether brought
by them or the Phoenicians into these Parts, is doubt worthy, but in the
Phoenician Dialect Manganon signifies the same Engine.

Add to this Carnon, a Trumpet in the same Language, in the Arabian Dialect is
called Carnon, in the Syrian, Carno or Carna, so that this also proceeds from
the Phoenicians; And now, this shall suffice to have been spoken of the Armor
used by our Britains.

The Britains, before they undertook any War, are reported (according to the
Customs of other Nations) to have enquired into the Entrals of Beasts, yea,
and of Men also, and, I suppose had the same methods of judging, whether
Success was portended or no.

They fought under the Conduct of Women, discolored their Faces, and shaped
their Bodies into diverse figures; they used Superstitious and Magical
Exclamations in the beginning of their Battles, with many other Rites and
Usages, which will more properly be shown in the course of the History, seeing
they relate to the Britains, after they were subdued by the Romans, and are not
of so Ancient a date as to be placed here, where nothing was designed to be
spoke of but what was almost of equal standing with the first Plantation of
this Island it self.

CHAP. IX. The BRITISH Idolatry; their several GODS, and superstitious Rites
and Ceremonies of Worship.
IT is certain, by the Testimony of Caesar and other approved Authors, that the
Britains had the same GODS with the Gauls, Caesar Com.
and agreed with them in their manner of Worship, using the same religious
Rites and superstitious Ceremonies they did; Neither indeed could it be
otherwise, if we do but consider what care the Druids took (who were the common
Priests of both Nations) to preserve the unity of Religion, and the exact
observancies of their Order; For besides the yearly Synods held in the Isle of
Anglesey or Man, under a President (who had Jurisdiction over all Britain, and
great part of Gallia) they had a solemn and general Sessions in the Marches of
the Carnutes about Charters, a Country held to be in the middle of all France.

To this great Assembly resorted the Druids from all Parts to hear Causes, and
to consult about the affairs of Religion, in which Consultation the British
Druids carried the most eminent Authority; having learned their general
Discipline in a Country where it was first begun, and more exactly taught, and
to whose Schools the Druids of France resorted to be more fully instructed in
the more hidden and more abstruse Mysteries of their Religion.

This consent of both Nations in the uniformity of Worship, does not argue them
to be of the same Original, but is to be attributed to a Druid Interest, who,
notwithstanding the continual Animosities arising between petty Princes, and
the great Heart burnings between the Inland Britains, and the Gauls, that had
invaded them; Nevertheless they kept up their Authority and Interest on all
hands, partly by the Holiness of life, and partly by the assistance of the
Secular Power, thereby so brought it about that they were the only Interpreters
of Divine Mysteries, that no Sacrifice, either public or private, could be
performed without their assistance, or solemn Feasts proclaimed without their
consent, and upon this their pretenoe it past current, as necessary for the
maintaining of any Religious Worship.

Moreover, it is to be supposed, that in their publik Assemblies they agreed
upon the number of their Gods, and the particul Honors due to them; they also
Instituted public Feasts, and set Sacrifices, upon set times of the Moon, that
the day might be celebrated uniformly through all their Jurisdictions.

And seeing the GODS of the Gauls, as Apollo, Minerva, Jupiter, Mars, Mercury,
etc. were Greek Gods, and Idolized by the Britains, with the same Rites and
Ceremonies as in Greece, and had the same Offices ascribed to them, it is
manifest they were introduced by the Druids, and so worshipped in Britain
before Gaul, and from thence translated into that Nation; So that considering
the Original of the British and Gaulish Gods, proceeded from the same Authors
of their Religion, and considering likewise the great care the Druids used in
preserving Uniformity, least they should break out and divide into Factions
among themselves, it is not to be questioned (the Authority of Caesar also
bearing witness) but that the Gods of the Gauls Caesar Com.
were also worshipped in Britain. And although in many particular places, the
People might have private and Tutelar Gods, whose Denominations extended not
beyond a Hill, River, Fountain or Spring (as shall be shown in the sequel) and
which Gildas numbers amongst the British Idolatry, yet as to those Gods called
(by the Latins) Dii Gildas
majorum gentium, of the highest rank, and whose Power was universal, they were
equally common to both Nations; These Gods, I will endeavor to set down their
Names, Originals, and Offices, from what Countries they were derived, and by
whose means they were brought into Britain and Gaul, by which Circumstances it
will more evidently appear, the great Confinity and Alliance once made between
these Nations, and the Phoenicians and Greeks.

JUPITER was worshipped under the name of Taramis, or the Thunderer, JUPITER,
and Caran, or Caram, signifies at this day in the British Tongue Thunder, as
Donder in the German, and Thor in the old Swedish Tongue, from whence the
Germans called Jupiters day Donders-dagh, the Swedes, Thors-dag, and we
Thursday.

Adam Bremensis of the Swedes, writes, that they held Thor to rule and govern
the Adam Bremensis of the Swedes.
Air, and that from him proceeded Thunder and Lightning, Winds and Storms,
likewise that the gave sair Weather, and brought forth the Fruits of the Earth;
likewise in another place, that he was made holding a Scepter in his hand, and
was esteemed the same as Jupiter, the King of the Gods, in which sense he was
called in the Phoenician Tongue, Moloch. It is observable, that as the
Canaanites (of which Country Phoenicia was a part) offered humane Sacrifices to
that God, making their Children to pass through the Fire, so likewise did the
Gauls and Britains to this TARAMIS, or Thunderer, whose very Name, in another
place, we have shown to be the Phoenician Carem, in their Tongue signifying
Thunder. Of this God Lucan thus writes, Et Taramis Scythicae non mitior ara
Dianae.

Upon the Altars erected in Honor of this Jupiter, the British Blood was often
Lucan.
poured out in great abundance, but perhaps more in Gaul, by reason that that
Country is more infested with sudden Thunders and violent Storms, that they
ostner attoan'd that Power under whose hand they lay, than the Britains, who
enjoyed a more temperate and evener Weather. And although to this God, as
likewise to some others, they offered for the most part heinous and notorious
Malefactors, yet oftentimes the Innocent Natives suffered, and men, for their
health in some dangerous sickness, or upon some great necessities and streights
in War, often vowed to sacrifice Humane Offsprings, which Vows they were
obliged to performat their recovery or deliverance.

This Custom, together with the Name of this God TARAMIS, was brought in by
the Phoenicians, who are described by Havillan the Poet, writing of their Race
in Cornwall, That their Spectacula, or Public Games, in Honor of their Gods,
were Hntillan.
the slaughter of Men, and not only so, but they drank their Blood. Neither did
the Druids (who were otherwise men of civil and upright Conversation) alter
these bloody Ceremonies, because it is to be supposed that they came out of
Greece in those early days, when the sacrificing of Men and Women was also
useful in that Nation.

Another God they had named TUTATES, and him they had in especial Honor
TUTATES, viz. MERCURY.
above all the rest. He was esteemed the God of Traveling, and by the Britains
may be supposed to be called Diw Caith, the God of Journeys, and the great
Honor they gave him above all other Deities, is conjectured by some to be a
sign of the Britains Peregrination from far Countries, and upon that account
they so particularly honored him as their Guide and Leader.

By Livy he is called Mercurius Tutates, where he writes, That Scipio turned up
to a Livy.
Mount called Mercurius Tutates, by this it appears that the Britains and Gauls
did cast up Mounts, and consecrated them to his Honor, especially where many
ways met. Upon these ascents of Ground there was frequently erected a Statue
of Mercury, which pointed out the different Ways, or if there was no Statue,
yet the place was called a Mercury from the Advantage of ground, which gave
them opportunity to discern out and discry to what parts the different ways
would lead them. These places they called Mercuries sometimes with an addition
of some other of his Names, and oftentimes of a Town or Village, Hill or River,
adjoining. But seeing in Livy the name Tutates is added to Mercury or Hermes
(for so he was called without doubt by the Druids) I am induced to believe that
Tutates has some other Original than Diw taith, or the God of Traveling,
because it seems a kind of tautology to put two Names together of the same
signification; This Tutates therefore is to be referred to the Phoenician
Ca-autus, according to Sanchoniathon, the most Ancient Phoenician, cited by
Sanchoniathon cited by Philo Biblius, etc.
Philo Biblius. Ta-autus, says he, was the Son of Misor, he was the first
Inventer of Letters.

The Egyptians called him Thoot, the Alexandrians, Thouth, the Greeks, Hermes
or Mercury. Plato calls him Theut, a God or Divine person, and in his Phoedrus,
the Father of Letters. Tully, Thoyth or Theuth; Lactantius, Theutus, and Thot.
And this Theut or Mercury was the God of Eloquence, called also Monimus; But as
to this particular we shall have occasion to speak of him under BELINUS the
British God, otherwise called the Sun, to whom he was made an Assistant and
Coadjutor.

In the Greek Epigram we find, (...) So that we see here is two Inventions
assigned to him, besides his office of Directing of Travelers, namely, the
Invention of Letters and the Sickle. And seeing he was esteemed above all the
rest of the Druids Gods, and had in more especial veneration and Honor, I am
apt to believe it was rather upon these latter accounts than the former; For we
find, that the first Inventers of useful Arts and Sciences (though they may
seem never so mean and Mechanical) had their Names recorded to all Posterity,
in grateful remembrance of the usefulness of the things they Invented, when the
swelling Actions of Ambitious men, although they might seem great, and fill the
World with more noise, are buried in the dust; and in perpetual oblivion.

The Scripture it self takes notice of Tubal-Cain for his excellent skill and
his first experiments upon Iron, and this Tubal is Recorded for his Invention
of Musical Instruments, when the Founders of great Kingdoms, and builders of
famous Cities, were not so much as once mentioned.

We read also, that when men have arrived to the greatest Empire, and have
encouraged Altars to be raised, and Sacrifices to be offered to themselves,
although an Age or two, perhaps, in obsequious Flattery to them and their
Successors, has performed it, yet we seldom read that they lasted above three
or four Generations, when as the Inventers of Arts and Sciences have been
Deified throughout all Ages, and their Altars extended as far as the Inventers
themselves: Upon this, it seems to me more reasonable to ground the Name of
TEUTATES, and the Honors performed to him in Gaul and Britain, upon the
account of his Invention of Letters, and the use of the Sickle, than upon the
supposition of Diw Caith, the God of Traveling.

The Phoenicians who taught the Greeks the use of Letters, which they
acknowledged to have learnt of this Theut, whom they delivered to them as a God
or Divine Person, might also bring his Name into Britain to be worshipped; And
this, I think, is the true Original of Teutates.

As for those who would have this Teutates to be the same with the German
Tuisco; or Mars, mentioned by Tacitus, from whence we call Mars his Day,
Tuesday. Tacitus. Livy.
But if we consider how, by Livy, he is called Mercury, they have no other
ground for their Opinion, but only the like founding of part of the first
syllable, and so they may easily be convinced.

To this God MERCURY, there is no mention made what Sacrifices were offered to
him.

Caesar writes, that there were a great number of Statues erected in his
Honor, and Caesar Com.
that the Invention of all Arts and Sciences were attributed to him. That he
was the Leader in all Journies, and Guide in all ways, and that he had
moreover a wonderful efficacy for the promoting gain in Money, or any
Merchandise, a power no doubt highly esteemed of by the Phoenicians.

MARS was worshipped by the Gauls and Britains under the Name of Hesus, and
this Hesus we have proved to be of Phoenician Derivation, in another place,
HESUS.
viz. Hizzus, by which Name the Phoenicians as well as Britains called their
Mars, so that there is no doubt to be made, from whence, and from whom this God
proceeded.

Caesar says, the Gauls attributed to this God the government of War; He was
likewise Caesar Com.
called Camolus or Camulus, signifying in the Phoenician Tongue a Lord or
Governor. In an old Coin of Cunobelinus, Mr. Cambden reports he saw the
Cambden.
portraiture of an Head stamped, with an Helmet on it, also with a Spear, and
these Letters, CAMU.

From this Camulus came Camalodunum, or Mars. Hill, now Maldon in Essex; And
methinks the very name of Mars, and Dunum a Hill, are yet preserved in its Name.

This Hesus, Mars or Camulus, I conjecture, was not only worshipped as the God
of War but of Peace also: We find one Coin with an Ear of Corn upon it, with
these Letters CAMU, likewise a Tree, with I know not what Beast lying by it,
with the same Inscription, and these both Cunobelins's Coin, Prince of
Camolodunum; Besides, there was a little Altar cast out among Rubbish-stones,
near Riblechester in Lancashire, with this Roman Inscription;

PACIFE
TO MARTI
ELEGAUR
BA POS.
VIT. EX VOTO.
And is thus interpreted; To Mars, the bringer of Peace, ELEGAURBA Dedicated
this out of his own Vow.

But how favorable he was in time of Peace to the Britains, I know not, but
certain it is, that to him, as well as Taramis, Men were often sacrificed, as
appears by this of Lucan, Horrensque feris Altaribus Haesus. Lucan.




Lactantius calls this God, HEUS, but here it is to be considered, whether by
the similitude of Names he does not confound two Deities, for Dues is a known
name of Bacchus, and it is very probable that since the Ancients say that
Bacchus was born near Phoenicia,

(...).
Upon Phoenicia, nigh to AEgypts Banks; Homer;

That the Phoenicians might bring this God into Britain, as well as Ceres and
Proserpina (as shall be shown by and by) the name of Bacchus is the Phoenicians
Bacchus, the Son of Chus, as Damesec is used for Dacmeset, the City Damascus.

This will give some light to what I have in another place written, of the
Inscription found in Zealand, namely, HERCULI MARCUSANO. HERCULES the Lord of
the Cusites, viz. those of the Dorienses, that followed him out of Phoenicia
into these Western Parts.

But to come to HEUS; This name was given to Bacchus from one of those
barbarous and loud Exclamations used at his solemn Feasts, namely, (...), which
are all of Phoenician Derivation. hues, as Bochartus thinks, signifies
Bochartus.
He is the Fire! Att-es, Thou art the Fire! for at his Orgia the People used,
in his Honor, so to call him, for he was esteemed by the Ancients to be the
Fire. (...), or Orgia, viz. A Festival of Bacchus.
(...), was the term used by the Ancients in Exclamation to any that they found
to be Drunk, and Saboi in the same Phoenician Dialect, proceeds from Saba, to
be Drunk.

From these different Roots many of Bacchus his Ancient names are derived, but
it will be too long here to discourse of them all; It shall therefore suffice,
that Heus here mentioned by Lactantius, in all probability was Bacchus, and
introduced by his Countrymen, the Phoenicians, into this Island.

We find in the Superstitions of the Britains, something very like unto Bacchus
his Orgia, although the Name of the God be not put down by Pliny, where he
says, That the Britains dyed themselves like AEthiopians at some solemn
Sacrifices, and performed their worship with Men and Women going naked. For
this was the Custom of Pliny:
the ancient Heathens, that at the public Feast of Bacchus, having drank up a
large quantity of Wine, and using many shrill and horrid Out cries, he was
esteemed most Religious who could run about the maddest, insomuch as they tore
their Clothes from their backs, and not only so, but the weaker sort were
oftentimes endangered in their Limbs. In this manner they ran promiscuously,
Men and Women together, cutting and slashing each other till the heat of their
Wine was allayed, either by loss of Blood, weariness, or want of sleep.

Now, the reason of the Britains Painting themselves like AEthiopians at these
Sacrifices, might proceed from the imitation of Bacchus himself, who was
feigned by the Ancients, to have maintained long Wars in India and AEthiopia,
and was always painted with a swarthy and black Complexion, and drawn with
Tygres, Beasts very frequent in those hot Countries.

As for that Heus, named by the Author of Queroli Anubis Latrans, viz. the
barking Anubis, for as he was made in the form of a Dog, so he is to be
referred to those deformed Specter of Britain mentioned by Gildas, who
exceeded almost in Gildas
number those of Egypt, and without doubt were derived from that Country by the
Phoenicians; So that it being an Egyptian Hieroglyphick in the shape of a Dog,
might be called Huad, or something like it, Huad signifying in the British
Tongue, a Dog, but as for Hesus, the name of Mars, and Hues, of Bacchus, they
have no reference at all to it, but were general Gods both to Britain and Gaul,
and were the Hizzus and Hues of the Phoenicians, whereas these sorts of
deformed Specter were found only upon the Walls of Cities, according to
Gildas, and it may be in some particular places only, and had the Tuition of
such Cities and Towns, according to the Superstition of the Egyptians.

To the God Hues or Bacchus, I suppose those Priests mentioned by Marcellinus,
Marcellinus;
and called Euuges, or Eubages, are to be referred, for, as the Acclamations
from whence Bacchus received that Name, was (...), so we may apprehend that
these Priests were called Eubages and Euugaes, and signify as much as (...),
Persons dedicated to Hues.

Eochartus is of opinion, that Marcellinus might read in Timagiues (...) for
Bochartus.
(...), Vates, and he gives two Instances of the like nature, (...) for (...)
in Theophrastus, and (...) and (...) in Hesychius; But I cannot imagine how
Eubages should proceed from (...), for I believe by their Name and Employment,
a particular Order of Priests is signified, for they are represented as Persons
who gave themselves to the study of the mysteries and secrets of Nature, the
course of the Heavens, the motions of Celestial Bodies, to Astronomy,
Necromancy and Magic, to the last of which the Britains were strangly
addicted. And this I take to be the true Original of the Eubages mentioned by
Marcellinus, whose Name being Recorded by no other Author besides, many have
thought him to be mistaken in the right denomination of them, and that there
were no such Priests of that Name either in Gaul or Britain.

And because I have taken occasion to speak of their Duad, or Anubis Latrans,
it will not be amiss to represent to the eye some of those deformed Specter
wherewith Egypt abounded, which like Locusts were brought over into our Western
Seas, and did spread themselves over most parts of the World, by the means of
the Phaenicians, who placed them at the Poops and Sterns of their Ships as
Tutelar Gods.

The Hyraglyphicks


The next God of the Britains was APOLLO, worshipped under the name of BELENUS,
and that Belenus and Apollo may be gathered out of the words of Julius
Capitolinus, who writes, That when the God Belinus or Belenus, by his Paterae.
Priests, Julius Capit.
had declared that Maximinus should be overcome, Maximinus his Soldiers
afterward gave out, That Apollo fought against them. He is called Belis by
Herodian, and that Apollo and Belenus, or Belis, is one and the same God is
manifest, in that the Herb Herodianus, lib. 8.
called by the Latins Apollinaris, by the Gauls was called Belinuntia, and the
Spaniards at this day call it Veleno.

Now, the Phaenicians called Apollo Belus, so that this Belis or Belenus of the
Gauls and Britains, from hence received his Original, and we find the Name
differs only in Termination, by which both those distant Nations called the Sun
in the Laconian Dialect, (...), signifying the Sun, and in the Gretick, (...),
as Hesychius Hesychius.
witnesses, and both from the Phaenicians.

Sometimes the Phaenicians gave him a Surname, as Philo Biblius, out of
Sanchoniathon Philo Bibl. ex Sanchon.
evidenceth, who called him Belsamen, viz. the Lord of the Heavens. We find
some Altars erected to him in Britain, with other denominations added to his
Name Belis, or Bell, which superadditions I will interpret out of the Phaenician
Tongue; And although the Monuments and Inscriptions on them be Roman, yet it
makes not against my purpose, seeing that Nation erected Altars to the Gods of
those Provinces they conquered.

The first Inscription was dug out of the Ruins of an old Town, near Kirby
Thore in Westmoreland.

DEO
BELATUCAD
TO LIB. VOTU
M FECIT
IOLUS.
Thus interpreted: Deo BELATUCADRO liberum Votum fecit Iolus; To the God
BELATUCADRUS Iolus has made a free Vow.

The second was an Altar, found, among many others, in Vaults under ground,
where formerly had stood some ancient Town, near to Jerby in Cumberland. It was
thus made and Inscribed.

BELATU
CADRO
JUL. CI
VILIS
OPT.
V. S. L. M.
Thus interpreted: BELATUCADRO Julius Civilis Optio Votum solvit libens Merito;
Unto BELATUCADRUS, Julius Civilis Optio has paid his Vow right willingly.

Another after this manner,

DEO
SANCTO BELA
TUCADRO
AVRELIUS
DIATOVA ARA E
X VOTO POSUIT
LL. MM.
Thus Interpreted: Deo sancto BELATUCADRO Aurelius Diatova Aram ex voto posuit,
lubens lubens, merito merito; To the holy God BELATUCADRUS Aurelius Diatova set
up this Altar most willingly and most duly.

And since Mr. Cambden, there was a piece of his Statue found near Brougham in
Westmoreland, with this Inscription,

SANCTO DEO
BELA TUCADRO
By the form of which it was judged to be the Effigies of Belinus or Apollo.

These Magnificent Inscriptions to BELATUCADRUS Deo and Deo sancto, as likewise
the distance of places these Altars were found in, proves, that he was not a
particular Tutelar God, but rather that he was worshipped over the whole
Island, and was that Belinus, or Belis, to which the Britains and Gauls were
much devoted, who was the very same with Belus of the Phoenicians, but what the
addition of atucadrus may signify, I will lay down some conjectures.

We must know that Bell, or Belus, was the God of the Assyrians, and from that
Country brought into Phoenicia, and there Idolized. Now the Phoenicians, who
called Assyria Atur, and the Sun Cares, why may not Belatucadrus be as much as
Bel-atur-Cares, signifying, APOLLO the Lord of the Assyrians, for I have shown
before that Bell was Apollo, or the Sun, in those Nations. As for D in the last
syllable, it is not much to be regarded, because the mollifying of words is
often set before R; Probably Bel-atu-cadrus might be Bel-attir-cares, or Apollo
the Ancient Bell, for in reality there were two BELLS, the Assyrian and Tyrian.
To the latter of which the Phoenicians attributed all the famous Actions of the
other, and upon that vanity might call him the Ancient; or perhaps he might be
called Belatucadrus from Bel-hoddu-cadar, viz. BELL of the black Indians, for
Cadar signifies in that Dialect to be made black by the heat of the Sun, and
Hoddu is an Indian, or perhaps it might come from Bel-Atur-Cadar, for the
Assyrians were of a Swarthy Complexion, to which Color also Cadar is referred,
and is the same with Hazle in the French, namely Sunburned or Tanned, from
which Cadar the Arabians called Kadareni, a Nation of the Saracens had its name.

But I cannot imagine, how this Belatucadrus of the Britains could be a
particular God, as some would have him, unless we derive the last part of his
Name from Gadir, signifying an Uttermost bound, so that he was placed as
Terminus by the Romans, upon the Limits of grounds, and his Office to decide
and determine all Controversies arising upon those accounts, as the peculiar
Overseer of Landmarks, but I think some of the forementioned Conjectures are
more reasonably to be heeded.

Seeing I have entered so far into the Derivation of BELATUCADRUS, and the last
part of it Cadrus, I will take notice of two other Inscriptions, that possibly
may have some relation to this God; They were drawn out of the River at
Risingham in Northumberland. The first had in it, DEO MOGONTI CAD; the second,
DEO MOUNO CAD, and may be seen at large in Mr. Cambden, who reports that the
Inhabitants have a Tradition, That a God MAGON made good this place (against a
Soldain, or Heathenish Prince) for a long time. The Inscriptions are Roman, but
the God is British, for I have shown that the Romans worshipped the Gods of the
Nations they conquered.

Mr. Cambden makes this a Tutelar God, and interprets CAD, Cadenorum, the
Protector of the Cadeni, but it seems the People were called Gadeni, so that
it should be Gad not Gad, but granting time might make this small alteration,
yet we find not in other Inscriptions to the Tutelar Genius's of particular
places, that the name of the Place is signified in any, neither was it
reasonable it should, being that such Altars were made for private use only,
and needed no Inscription to signify what they were.

In my opinion the signification of these Inscriptions are to be sought
further. The God Magon or Mogon, to whom these Altars were erected, seems to be
brought into Britain by the Phoenicians, and in all probability may be the God
of the Canaanites, Baal-Magon, the Lord Magon; For as from Dag, a Fish, they
made their Idol Dagon, so this Idol of the Sun, from the melting quality that
Planet has, might from Mag (which signifies to melt) be called Magon, and that
this Magon the British God was the Sun, and so consequently of Phoenician
Original this addition of Cad seems to verify.

The Assyrians (from whom the Phoenicians had his name Belus also) called the
Sun, according to Macrobius, Cad, and Cadcad, by duplication, and Macrobius
Saturnal. lib. 1. c. 31.
says, that the interpretation of his name signifies, One or Only, and Cad in
the Chaldean and Syrian Tongue signifies One; And this Attribute they gave to
him, because (as the same Author reports) he was the greatest and almost the
only God, and all the rest accounted but his Assisters and Coadjutors.

In the Inscription, DEO MOUNO CAD, MOUNO is the same in Greek as CAD in the
Phoenician Dialect, viz. the (...), viz. Only.
Only.

Julian the Apostate (after he had revolted from the Christian Religion, and
forsaken the only true God) embraced this Cad, viz. the Sun, an only God, so
falsely called.

In his Oration of the Sun, he makes Azizus (whom we have proved to be Hesus)
that is, MARS, and Monimus (whom we will show to be Theut or Teutates) that is,
MERCURY, to be his Assisters. His words are these, (I intend to speak something
of the Phoenician Theology.)

They that inhabit Edessa, a Place consecrated (from all Ages) to the Sun, make
Monimus and Azizus, placed, or seated with him.

Jambicus interprets it, that Monimus is MERCURY, and Azizus Jambicus,
MARS.

Mercury who is called Theut, here we find called Monimus, and much upon the
same account, for as Theut was the Inventer of Letters, so Monimus was the God
of Eloquence, both Attributes of Mercury, the latter of which names is referred
to the Phoenician Minom, an elegant and quaint Speaker, which we have mentioned
in this place, because seated with this Belinus or Belus.

In Palmyra, a City of the Phoenicians, there was this Inscription (which
because it refers to this God Belinus) I will put down.

(...)
(...)
To Agli-Belus, and Malach-Belus, Native or Country Gods, that is, as some
interpret The Interpretation.
it, To the Winter, and Summer Sun; for upon the Marble on which this
Inscription was found, He was both ways represented, but the Britains
represented him with a Harp, as may be seen in an Ancient Coin of Cunobelinus,
and without question had all the opinions of him, as the Greeks and Phoenicians
had.

That this was a God greatly reverenced in Britain, we may gather from
Cunobelinus and Cassobelinus, two great Princes who bear his Name; and as in
the Eastern Countries it was esteemed a great Honor to be descended of him; so
a Poet in the commendation of a Bowl, says,

-- Belus, and omnes
A Belo -- --
That it was the Cup of BELUS, and his Race, so undoubtedly many Princes in
Britain esteemed it an Honor to be called by his Name.

We will see therefore what is the meaning of CUNO, for it is no more the part
of Cunobelinus, than CASSI is of Cassibelinus, who, by Ninnius the Britain, is
Ninnius the Britain.
called simply Bellinus, and by Dio, Suellan for Vellan, or Mellin, which are
all corruptions of Belin, as Mr. Cambden himself confesses. Cuno therefore
being not part of the Name, but in all likelihood some Honorable Office or
Title of this Prince, let us see what it might signify among the Britains, for
seeing this God came from the Phoenicians, why might not this Title of Cuno
also be derived from them.

Upon this we may suppose, that Cuno Belinus might be as much as Cohen Belinus,
the Prince of Belinus, according to that saying Rex idem Hominum Phoebique
Sacerdos; The Priesthood in those days being worn by the greatest Princes, so
that Cuno might become (upon that account) an Honorable title, as worn by
several Kings, as Cuneglasus, Cunedaglus, Cungetorir, the last signifying a
High Priest, as likewise Hanibal, Asdrubal, and Maharbal, of the same
signification among the Carthaginians.

But all these Names might have very easy Interpretations relating to this way
(were it not too far beyond my purpose) likewise Cuno Belinus, may signify the
Son of Belinus, for Cuno signifies born or begotten. And as the Phoenicians
esteemed it their highest Honor and Credit of their Princes to be derived from
Bell, why may not the Old Britains desire to initiate them in this, so that all
the significations of Cuno, mentioned by Mr. Cambden, may very rationally
relate to this Original.

But to return to Belinus or APOLLO, he is called by the Greek (...), Yellow,
and from hence, possibly, Belinus in the British Language might come to
signify that Color, but that the color Belinus should give name to this God,
as Mr. Cambden supposes, is impossible, for these following Reasons.

1. Because he is called Belis as well as Belinus, but the Color Belinus (in
all its corruptions) retains the N, as Belyn, Melyn, Felyn, Villan and Suellan.
To speak the truth, Melinus, not Belinus, is the proper name for Yellow, the
word of which Color was also taken from the Romans, and Melinus cannot be
imagined to give name to Cuno Belinus, who lived in the days of Augustus and
Tiberius, when Caesar had only visited this Island, and no Roman Colonies had
been planted here to change the British Language. And here I will take notice,
that Dio calls Cassobelinus, Suellan, which Suellan Mr. Cambden derives from
Gweliw, signifying a waterish Color, not a yellow.

Such confusion has the Suppositions of diverse colored Paintings, among the
Britains, created.

2. In all Inscriptions of this God we find him written BELL, not Fell, Vel, or
R. 2.
Mel, which might have happened, had he received his Name from that Color.
Besides, in all the Additions to his name this Color is absolutely excluded,
as he was entitled Belsamen by the Phoenicians, that is, Lord of Heaven; so
possibly in Britain, for his Sister the Moon was called Belisama, as much as to
say, Queen of Heaven; Not yellow Heaven, or yellow Moon, which is very absurd,
but it might happen, that Dio not knowing the Original of this God Belinus, and
knowing that Belinus signified Yellow, might mistake, and call Casso Belinus
Suellan for Belin, intimating Dio. Cass
thereby a Color.

Thirdly and lastly, As I have shown before, the Britains did not use so many
Colors, but were called (...) from the variety of Shapes, not Colors; and R.
3.
such as have sought for this Invention in the Britains, have made the same
Princes of diverse Colors. Thus Gildas calls Cuneglasus, a tawny and dark hu'd
Butcher, Mr. Cambden makes him blew; but to pass over many great
Contradictions, I conclude, Gildas. Cambden
that it happened by chance that this color coincidated with the name of the
God Belinus, but concludes no more that he received his name from Yellow, than
the God to whom the Inscription DUJ was found in Yorkshire, received his from
Du Black, in the same Tongue; so that Cunobelinus had his Name from the worship
of Belinus (as Mr. Cambden in one place grants) and Belinus is derived from Bell
of the Phoenicians.

To omit an AEstuarium or Frith in Britain, called Belisama by Ptolomy,
possibly Ptolomy.
from some Temple of that God, I shall prove it from the Moon worshipped in Gaul
under the name of Belisama, as is gathered from an ancient Inscription,

MINERVAE
BELISAMAE
Found on an old Stone in Aquitain, by which some have concluded that Belisama
was the Gaulish name of Minerva; But seeing that Belisama is the same as
Belsamen, this being the Lord, and that the Lady of Heaven, it is more probable
that by this is meant the Moon, or Urania, called by the Canaanites the Queen
of Heaven, and once a great Idol of the Israelites.

DIANA, who is the same with the Moon, was much worshipped in those parts, as
Poliaenus testifies, Camma (says he) was a Votress of Diana, whom the Gauls
most DIANA, viz. the Moon. Poliaenus, lib. 8.
especially honored, but that Diana should be confounded with Minerva is no
wonder, if it be considered how frequent it was for the Ancients to bestow the
Attribute of one Deity upon another, as they favored them in honor and
affection.

That Diana was worshipped in Britain is very certain, an Image of hers, Anno
1602, was dug out of the ground in Monmouthshire, being girt about, and short
trussed, bearing a Quiver, but her Head, Hands, and Feet, were broken off. It
was found upon a pavement of square Tile in Checker-work, and by an Inscription
not far off it was found to be her own Image.

Mr. Cambden gives many Reasons, That where the Relics of St. Paul's Church
stands, there was formerly a Temple of hers. But because this may proceed
from the Romans rather than Britains, I will only mention her name Ardurena and
Ardoena, being the same in the Gaulish, as Nemorensis in the Latin Tongue,
namely, Diana of the Woods or Mountains, for we may suppose Den to have
signified in the Ancient British Tongue, a Wood or Mountain (as Den Forest in
England) and not Arden as Mr. Cambden would have it, for Ar signifies Upon in
the British Tongue, so that Arden, is, upon a Wood; For although there be a
great Wood in France called Arden, yet it is not unlikely but it might first
have been called Den, and that the Provinces lying on it, Arden, and afterward
the Wood it self; for it runs out to such a vast extent, and takes up such a
quantity of ground, and lies upon so many Countries, that Travelers may be
said to be always upon it, but never truly in it, or well out of it.

But to return to DIANA, the Britains, no doubt, were great admirers of her,
for their Habitations were most in the Woods. Hunting was their chiefest
Recreation, having most excellent Dogs for that purpose, as Strabo witnesses,
and Mr. Cambden Strabo.
takes notice; that Dogs called Agasaei by the Greeks, and so much praised and
esteemed by them, were of the British Race, and to this day are called by us
Gasehounds.

ONVANA, a Goddess of the Gauls is supposed to be MINERVA, ONVANA, or, MINERVA.
Stephanus.
whom Caesar accounts one of them, and very probable it may be so, for Minerva
by the Phoenicians was called Onca and Onga, as in Stephanus. Now changing the
G into a V, as Walls for Gauls, or wave in English, wage in High and Low Dutch
and French, and we have this very Phoenician name of Minerva.

This Minerva was much worshipped in Britain, and where the Cathedral Church of
Bath now stands, there was a Temple erected to her Honor, but whether ever
worshipped by the name of Onvana I know not, but if that name be allowed to be
Phoenician then there is no doubt of it. I dare not be too bold as from her
name Onca, to derive the famous Hill Badonicus, as much as to say Bath-Onca,
the Temple of Onca, although this Mountain be not far from the City, and
always written Badonicus, not Badon or Badonis, which, in my judgment, is an
Argument it might be once Badoncus, and corruptedly made an Adjective, but
however it be she was the Patroness of the Baths, and upon this account was the
City Bath called by the Ancient Britains Caer Palladur, or the City of Palace
or Minerva's Water.

Another Goddess the Britains had, called ANDRASTE by Dio, and in ANDRASTE
another place of the same Author, Andrate, although corruptly for Andraste or
Adraste, for so by some it is read.

This was the Goddess of Victory, that British Amazon Boodicia called upon,
after her great Victories over the Romans, having destroyed 80000 of them; Her
words were these, I yield Thee thanks O Adraste, and being a Woman, I call upon
thee O Woman.

Mr. Cambden made great enquiry after her Name in the British Tongue, but could
find nothing (which related to her being a Goddess of Victory) but Anaraith,
signifying a great Overthrow; but I think this will hardly derive her Name. Let
us consider therefore what Goddess she was, that so we may the easier arrive to
the understanding of it.

She was supposed by many to be VENUS, but then the question will arise, which
way she could be the Goddess of Victory?

Pausanias writes, That the Cytheraei (taught by the Phoenicians) worshipped
Venus Armed, and esteemed her the Goddess of War, and the Cyprians (taught by
the same Pausanias.
Phoenicians) made her with a Spear The Spear called Hastata.
; the Lacedaemonians set up her Statue in Armor; Ausonius, Armatam vidit
Venerem Lacedaemone Pallas. Ausonius.
The Romans had a Temple of Venus Victrix, or the Conqueror, the same as
Victorii of the Britains, and at the Dedication of this Temple twenty Elephants
fought in Tully de not. Deor.
the Circus.

Now, let us take the Phoenician name of Venus, and we shall find it not to
differ much from Adraste of the Britains, viz. Astrate, by which name Cicero
also calls Cicero.
Her.

This Goddess had a Temple at Camalodunum or Maldon in Essex, and before the
destruction of that Colony by Boadicia. Tacitus writes thus, That the Statue of
Tacitus.
Victory at Camalodunum, of it self fell down and was turned backwards, as if
it yielded to the Enemies.

It seems the Goddess favored the Britains, although forceably detained by the
Romans, for in those days they had a Custom of chayning the Statues of
Captive Gods, and so forced them to their Protection.

To this Goddess Nero for a long time was strangly devoted, but it seems,
finding her extremely dull and stupid, upon a sudden humor he made a
Pissing-block of her, first profaning Her himself, and then leaving her to all
Passengers; to be affronted by his Example.

The Britains had Her in great veneration, they sacrificed to her in Temples
and in Groves, which were called by her Name the Groves of Andate. Here, in a
most savage and horrid manner they sacrificed Prisoners alive, spending the
time in Feasts and Banquets.

To this Astrate some refer the Saxon Goddess Eoaster, and there are many Towns
in England bearing Her name, as High Easter, Good Easter, and Easter-Ford in
the County of Essex, but whether so called by the Britains or Saxons, I am not
able to say; But it may not be a wonder that Astarte, a Phoenician Goddess, was
worshipped in Germany, seeing that part of the Swedes sacrificed to IRIS, a
known Idol of the Egyptians; but of this I shall have occasion to speak
further in treating of the Saxon Idolatries.

Hitherto I have treated of the chief and general GODS of the Druids, mentioned
Caesar. Com.
by Caesar, namely, Mercury, Apollo, Mars, Jupiter and Minerva, to which are
added Venus or Adraste, Diana or Belisama.

It is very much to be observed, that the Druids attributed the very same
Offices to these Gods, as had been formerly given him in Greece, which will
evidently appear, if we compare the opinions the Greeks had of them, with those
of the Druids; The Greeks called Apollo, Alexiacus, because he dispelled
Diseases; Minerva, Talaergos, because she was the teacher and performer of
curious Works; Jupiter, Olympius, from his governing the Heavens; Mars,
Polemistes, by reason he presided in War.

The very same sentiments had the Druids of them; I will put down the words of
Caesar. The Druids believe APOLLO the expeller of Diseases; that, MINERVA
taught the first rudiments of Arts and curious Works, and although this was
attributed to Mercury also, yet he had other Employments; He was the Guide of
Ways and Journies, and had great power attributed to him in procuring gain in
Money and Merchandice. MARS was their God of War, and JUPITER had the Empire of
Heaven; So that we see all these GODS, Belinus, Onva, Taramis, Hesus, Teutates,
though they came into Britain from the Phoenician Original, yet the Greek
Druids gave them many and particular Titles of their own Invention.

I will take notice here of what Strabo writes in his fourth Book, where
Artemidorus affirms, That in an Island near Britain, CERES and PROSERPINA
CERES, and PROSERPINA. Strabo, lib. 4.
were worshipped with the same Rites and Ceremonies as in Samothrace.

Now I have shown, that in the days of Artemidorus, who writ under Ptolemaeus
Lathyrus, none of the Greeks had entered this Island; It remains therefore,
that Ceres and Proserpina, and the Rites and Ceremonies performed to them were
brought hither by the Phoenicians, from whom the Samothracians themselves had
learned them; to evidence which, I will show 1. What these Gods were; 2. What
Ceremonies were used in their Worship; and Lastly, What Island this might be;
to which I will add and show, That in all probability they were worshipped in
Britain also, and that in this sense, this Island might be called the Seat of
Queen CERES.

The Worship the Samothracians received from the Phoenicians, were the Rites
and Ceremonies of the Cabiri, which Cabiri it seems were in a British Island
also. The Cabiri (in another place) I have shown to signify as much as
Powerful Gods. Now what these GODS were I will also show out of Learned
Bochartus, who has proved Bochartus.
them to be of Phoenician Derivation; as first,

'(...).
Axieros, CERES, in the Phoenician Tongue Achzi-eres, as much as to say, The
Earth is my Possession.

'(...).
Axiokersa, PROSERPINA, in the Phoenician, Achzi-cheres, My possession is
Death; she being the Queen of Hell.

'(...).
Axiokersos, PLUTO, The King of Hell.

(...)
Cadmilus, MERCURY, in the Phoenician Language Cadmel, The Servant of the Gods.

This Mercury I have shown to have been worshipped in Britain, but under the
name of Cadmilus I cannot find him, unless the Inscription, DEO MOUNO CAD, be
read, Deo Mouno Cadmilo, and so make it different from Magon Cad, but this I
leave to be examined by stronger Judgments than my own.

And for those Phoenician names of Ceres and Proserpina, time has quite worn
them out in Britain, the names of their Priests only are remaining; Cohen
signifies a Priest, and the soeminine Coena, a holy Votary in the Phoenician
Tongue, and from this Root proceeds Coies or Coes, a Priest of the Cabiri; from
hence came an Heathenish Priest in Britain called Coi-fy, as I have shown in
another place.

To Proserpina Women used in Ancient times to devote their Virginity. Mela Mela.
writes, That in Gaul, religious Women attending upon a certain God (for
Proserpina and Pluto were promiscuously used) were called Cenae not Lenae, as
Mr. Cambden would have it. Without doubt this God or Goddess was Proserpina or
Pluto, for their Priests we find to be called Coenae.

The Island mentioned by Strabo, where these Rites were performed to Ceres and
Proserpina after the Samothracian or Phoenician Custom, in all probability was
the Strabo.
Sayn lying upon Armorica, anciently called Sena, and possibly from these,
Coenae, but the Devotresses themselves were not called Senae, as Mr. Cambden
writes, but Coenae.

The worship of the Cabiri was performed in this Island by these Women, being
Nine in number, according to Mela, and here was an Oracle according to the same
Author.

This is all I can gather of these sort of People about Britain, but it is to
be judged, as Proserpina and Pluto, had the same names, so they might very well
have the same worship; and seeing they were worshipped here as the Cabiri in
Samothracia, it will not be amiss to put down some material particulars of the
Ceremonies.

They were called Sacred Mysteries, and I have shown before, that many Great
persons had been initiated in them, accounting the Ceremonies of these Cabiri
to be of great Holiness, and wonderful Power to protect them against any
Dangers.

The words used at the solemn performance of these Rites were in an unknown
Tongue, and mystical Circumlocutions, from whence, I suppose, our word to
Gaber, and Gaberish might proceed.

I will add, that the Statues or Effigies of these Gods were made in ridiculous
Herodotus.
postures, like to the Statues of Vulcan, which made Cambises, when he entered
his Temple at Memphis, instead of being devout, he burst out in laughter at the
strange posture he was carved in. And the same Cambises, when he entered the
Fanum of the Cabiri, to which none but Priests were admitted (in the burning of
Fanum, a place of Devotion.
their Statues) he would not refrain from Jesting, seeing in what Antic manner
they were represented. Hence it proceeded, that the Jews called a Bussoon, or a
Ridiculous Fellow, Samodracos, as much as one of the Samothracian Gods: That
these sorts of Ridiculous Specter were worshipped in Britain, I have shown out
of Gildas.

The Gauls referred their Original to PLUTO; Caesar calls him Dispater, and
Caesar Com. Bochartus.
Bochartus thinks him to be Diespiter, or Jupiter. The French to this day when
they affirm any thing, say, Ouy Dea, from the Greeks (...), which comes from
the Phoenician Dai, or God, and the Britains at this day call God Diu.

There was an Altar found at Gretland in Yorkshire with this Inscription, D U
J, without any particular name of a God joined to it, so that whether this
might be Pluto or no, I am not able to say, although by a general name calling
him God, not particularizing him, they might seem to mean (...), or by way of
Excellence, that God to whom they owed their Original; Nor will I strain to my
purpose, how this Pluto, by the Heathens, was called the black God, from the
dark and infernal Regions he lived in, and that Du in the British Tongue
signifies Dark, which word is derived from the Phoenicians, although Mr.
Cambden makes use of the Color Belyn to derive Belinus.

To this Pluto and Proserpina, I suppose the Nocturnal Sacrifices of the
Britains were performed, but especially upon the increase of the Moon, when she
was six days old. In these Night Solemnities, the Heathens committed very
strange and horrid Villainies; The Blood of Sacrifices, mixed with Wine and Milk,
they poured on the ground to these Infernal Deities, and made Merriments with
the Flesh and remaining Wine, provoking one another to horrid Lusts, and
unnatural Incests. This might be the cause that the Britains, by the frequent
use of these Sacrifices, might esteem it at length no crime at all, although
Fathers with Sons, and Brothers with Brothers, promiscuously joined in the use
of one Woman, a Custom (by Caesar's reports) was very frequent and common among
them. Caesar. Com.


We find that JANUS was worshipped in Britain, out of a Coin of Cunobelinus,
JANUS, and Dea Syria, aut CYBILE.
wherein he is pictured with two Heads, as likewise Dea Syria or CYBILE, as
appears by an Altar erected to her, being in regard these might be brought into
Britain by the Romans, and so cannot be proved to be Ancient British Gods, I
will here pass them over in silence.

There were Altars erected in Britain with this Inscription DEIS MAT.. BUS,
which kind of Inscriptions are not found in any other part the World, so that
Mr. Cambden confesses he knows not what to make of them. Mr. Seldom thinks,
that Seldom.
by these Deae Matires, are meant those Greek Goddesses which they called
(...), and (...), so that these Altars were brought by the Greeks into Britain.
The Mothers of the Gods among the Heathens, were Berecynthia, Jano, Cybile,
Tullus, Ceres; And some of these might be worshipped by the Britains by the
Titles of the Mothers of their Gods. These might be those (...), as Mr. Seldom
thinks, who gave the name to the Semnothei, i. e. Britain, falsely called
Samothei.

The Britains had, besides their great Gods, other particular Deities or
Genius's, and Tutelar Gods of private Places, as Viterinus, Verbeia, etc. some
being called by the names of Springs, others Mountains and Groves, and Rivers,
and to all these the Britains used to sacrifice.

No doubt but their Idolatry was as various as other Nations, but I will not
treat of any but what may be derived from the Phoenicians or Graecians, and
especially such as do most prove the Antiquity of those Nations in Britain.
When the Romans entered this Land, a way was cut open for all the Luxurious Pomp
and multitude of the Gods of Rome, as shall be shown in its proper place.

Considering thus much, I will conclude the British Idolatry with the Life of
OGMIUS, or the Phoenician Hercules, who was worshipped in these parts, partly
because this Hero or Worthy, has many remarkable things in his story, and
partly, because herein will be manifest the Artifice and vanity of the
Graecians, in attributing the Actions of Great Men to some of their own
Country, but more especially, because hereby will clearly and evidently appear,
the first progress of the Phoenician Colonies, which, in time, grew to be of so
large an extent, and so exceeding numerous, that there were few Countries of
the then known World, to which, by their great skill in Navigation, and
wonderful propensity to Trade, they had not an easy and frequent access unto.

In writing his Life, I have curiously avoided on the one hand, least I should
confound his History with the fabulous Reports of the Graecians, who made forty
three Hero's of this name (as Varro reports) and so make him a sharer only in
their Actions, On the other side, I have studiously heeded, least I should
depress his Honor with the great load of those Actions the Ancients attributed
to the same Name, but to different Persons. I am persuaded, that his Credit was
so great in the World in these primitive Ages, upon the account of his many
Voyages, that there were few who desired not to be called by his Name. The
Graecians esteemed it the greatest Honor they could give to their Hero's, if
they attributed the Title of HERCULES to them, so that in reading his Life, if
we meet with strange and incredible Monsters destroyed, vast Giants and great
Nations subdued in a moment by his Prowess, we are to bewail the calamity of
those Times, who never thought they advanced the Dignity of them they undertook
to praise sufficiently, unless they stretched their Atchievments beyond a just
proportion, and advanced them to the levels of Gods and not Men.



Primus ego terras lustrari nauta Britannas
Littus vbi vena divite proestat opes.
Ad Thulen: migrans descendere dicor in Orcum
Sed coelum nobis terra Britanna dedit
THE LIFE OF THE Phoenician Hercules, AN HERO.
THIS Hercules was the Son of Demarus King of Tire, as his Name MELICARTUS
signifies, namely, King of the City, for so the Philo Biblius, ex Sanch.
Phoenicians called Tire. The Amathusians, who descended of the Phoenicians,
named him simply MALIGA, The King. He was called by the Greeks Manners, from
the Phoenician Machario, signifying Terrible. From his admirable skill in
Navigations the Graecians made him the God of the Sea, but feigned him to be
the Grandson of Cadmus, calling him Palaemon, and having modelled him
according to their own Fancies, they gave him a numerous Offspring. But from
Cadmus to the Theban Hercules are numbered Ten Generations, all which time is
far inferior to this Hercules, who, by many, is supposed to be contemporary
with Moses, and to have flourisht in the days of Josbuah, when the Israelites
expelled the Canaanites from their Land, part of them flying into Boetia, part
into Africa and Spain. This is manifest out of two Pillars found in the Kingdom
of Tangeir, upon the Streights, with a Phoenician Inscription,

WE FLY FROM THE Procop. Van. lib. 4.

FACE OF JOSHUA THE
SON OF NAVE THE
ROBBER.
By this it appears, that in those days the Phoenicians began to frequent
those Parts. And although the Greeks do attribute these Voyages to their
Hercules, yet the Temple upon the Streights, dedicated to that God, manifestly
proves him to have been a Phoenician, for he was worshipped according to the
Rites and Ceremonies of the Phoenicians, and not Graecians.

The Temple is said to be built by the Tyrians, and magnificent Sacrifices
performed to him after the manner of that Nation. Strabo is particular upon
what ground Strabo: Applanus. Diodorus. Arrianus. Philostratus.
it was built, and the occasion which moved the Tyrians to the Work, all which
may be read in that Author.

But to return to HERCULES; Leaving his own Country, and being attended with a
multitude, who were forced to the same necessity, he coasted about Spain and
AEschylus. Strabo. Dionysius, and alii.
Africa, and by the care and diligence of his Followers he built many Towns and
Cities, conquering all Iberia, and those Western Tracts, is said at last to
come into Gaul, and there built Alesia and Nemausus.

In a Battle against the Ligurians, and their two Leaders, Bergion and Albion,
or as others say, Alebion and Dercynus; when he had no other Weapons left him,
they feigned it rained Stones from Heaven in his favor, and that all the
fields were covered with them. The occasion of this Fable is the multitude of
Stones lying scattered between Arelate and Massilia, which to this day is
called La Crau.

He is said also to have passed the Alps, but this is looked upon by Livy as a
Fable also; for the truth is, it is not probable that his occasions would
permit him to make too great Inroads into the Continent, but by far likelyer,
that he contented himself with possessing the Seacoasts, the Ports and Havens
of those Countries to which he arrived. In Liguria there is a Haven that bore
his Name, at this day it is known by the name of Monaco, and was anciently
called Herculis Monaeci Portus, the Haven of Hercules Monaecus.

At his first Landing the Ligurians opposed him, and of this Fight not only the
Poets and Historians make mention, but the Astronomers also, and they do not
only mention it, but add, that the Remembrance of it is placed in the Heavens,
in the Sign which Firmicus calls Ingeniculum, or the bending of the Knee, for
by weariness in the fight Hercules it seems was reduced to that posture, and so
placed in the Heavens. Firmicus.


Hitherto I have attended HERCULES in his Voyages within the Streights, I shall
now follow him into the Western Sea, and that upon the Authority of
Marcellinus, Marcellinus upon Timagines.
who recites Timagines for his Author, viz. That the Dorienses followed the
Ancient Hercules, to inhabit the Seacoasts of Gaul, lying upon the Ocean.

Let us see now by what Circumstances Marcellinus writes this Voyage of
Hercules, that the truth of it may more evidently appear.

First, He complains of all former Writers, Timagines only excepted, namely,
that in their Histories of Gaul they had delivered down things by halves only,
and so had given the World a very slender, or little or no account of the
Original of that Country.

Secondly, He applauds Timagines for his diligence in searching out those
things which were unknown to other Authors, and that he did it out of many
Records.

Thirdly and lastly, He promises out of Timagines, to report the truth clearly
and distinctly.

Now, these Records that this Timagines searched into were in all probability
Phoenician or Syrian, and for that very reason unknown to the Greeks and
Latins, for this Timagines (as Bochartus proves) was a Syrian, and so
understood their Language, and Bochartus. Plutarch.
Plutarch reports, that he wrote a History of Gaul.

By the Authority therefore of this Timagines, we find that this Hercules, with
his Dorienses', possessed the Seacoast of that Nation that lies upon this
Western Ocean. That this Hercules was the Phoenician no doubt is to be made,
seeing he is called the Ancient, and that the Dorienses, his Attendants,
received their name from him (as I have in another place evidenced) viz. from
Dora a City in Phoenicia, and not from the Graecians.

Seeing that Hercules arrived into those Seas, why may he not be supposed to be
in Britain also. Pliny writes, that Midacritus first brought Tynn into Greece,
now it is certain (as before has been shown) that Metal was carried from the
Cassiterides Plin. Not. bist.
long before any Greek had entered the Western Sea. This very thing induces
Bochartus to think that for Midacritus, Melicarthus should be read, and that
this Hercules first of all showed the Phoenicians those Mines, which afterward
proved so profitable to that Nation. As upon the Seacoast of Belgium there was
an Altar inscribed to Hercules, so in Devonshire, a Country abounding in Tynn,
there was a Promontory called by his Name, which to this day retains something
in two little Towns, Hartlow or Hertland, alias Herton, as also in the
Promontory it self, called Herty-point.

Add to this, the Opinion the Ancients had concerning the Elysian Fields, how
they were supposed (as I have writ in another place) to be upon the Coast of
Britain, or at least in the Western Ocean, as likewise the story of Isacius
Tzetzes, an Author of no small credit with Mr. Cambden, concerning Julius
Caesar, which story, though it be a Fable, yet it shows the Opinions of the
Ancients, namely, That Caesar was carried, by I know not what Spirit, from Gaul
into a Western Island inhabited by Ghosts only, and by the same brought back
again. We have little reason to doubt, but that Hercules his descent into Hell,
might be grounded upon his Navigation into these parts.

After his death, He was worshipped as a God in all Nations; in some places young
Youths were sacrificed before him, and no Women admitted into his Temple. His
Bones were preserved in his Temple upon the Streights, and Divine Honors
performed to them; although the main part of his Worship was Phoenician, yet
the Greeks intruded also, hanging up several Trophies of their own inventions.

He was placed upon a Stone Altar, a Hydra on one side, and Diomedes his Horse
on the other, in memory of those two Monsters destroyed by him. He was worshipped
in Gaul and Britain, under the name of OGMIUS, and possibly from the Phoenician
Lucian.
Og, signifying the Compass of the Sea, and especially the Western Ocean, which
Ocean Hercules was the first that discovered it. From this Og the Graecians had
their (...), signifying the same thing. Bochartus is of opinion, that he is to
be derived Bochartus.
from Agemion, signifying a Stranger and Forreigner, but I scarcely believe the
Britains or Gauls would borrow a Phoenician word to revile one of their own
Nation.

This OGMIUS was represented (as may be seen in the foregoing Figure) An Old
and decrepid Man, bald Pated, his Hair white, a wrinckled Skin, and Sunburned,
Lucian.
after the manner of Old Seamen, a Globe in one hand, with a Compass in the
other, to show his excellent skill in Geometry and Astronomy.

There is but one place in Britain bearing his Name, and that is Hartlow; many
Effigies of him have been dug out in several places, as at the Baths he was
found Hartlow in Devonshire.
streyning two Snakes. All Hot Baths (according to Athenaeus) were consecrated
to him; Likewise in Northumberland, near Risingham, two Altars were inscribed
by Athenaeus.
his Name, but these of later date than what I intend here to speak, and so I
will pass them over.

He was pictured drawing a multitude of Men after him, with golden Chains
proceeding from his Mouth, and fastened to their Ears, to show his Eloquence.
Likewise he was esteemed the God of Woers, as he gave good success to Lovers,
upon which account he was named (as some think) Diodus, from Dioda, signifying
in the Phoenician Tongue Love. But I rather think he might be called so from
his wandering life, which word will bear the same Derivation as a Wanderer.

This is a brief account of the true Phoenician Hercules, called OGMIUS, as
much as relates to our present purpose. As for his great Labors and
Atchievments, I have purposely omitted, because they seem rather Allegories
than real Actions, and require rather a skilful Mythologist, than an honest
Historian.

THE NAMES OF THE KINGS Of this Island, FROM SAMOTHES the first Ruler thereof,
to the Entrance of the ROMANS.
The Celtick KINGS, under which SAMOTHEA, now BRITAIN, was contained.
SAMOTHES, the Founder of the Celtick Kingdom, A. M. 1910, named this Island
SAMOTHEA, and Reigned 46 Years. Magus his Son, 51 Sarron, 61 Druis, 14 Bardus,
75 In his days came ALBION the Great. Longho, 25 Bardus the Second, 37 Lucus
Protector, 11 Celtes, 13 Hercules, 19 Years. Galathes, 49 Narbon, 18 Lugdus, 51
Beligius, 20 Jasius, 50 Allobrox, 68 Romus, 29 Paris, 39 Lemancs, 62 Olbius, 05
Galathes the Second, 48 Namnes, 44 Remus, 40 Phranicus; In his days King BRUTE
is supposed to enter this Island.

The British Kings.
BRUTE, after his Arrival Reigned, 24 Years. Locrine, 20 Madan, 40 Mempricius,
20 Ebranck, 40 Brute the Second, Surnamed Greenshield. 12 Leil, 25 Lud, 39
Baldud, 20 Leir, 60 Cordeilla, Queen, 05 Cunedag and Margan, 33 Rival, 46
Gurgust, 84 Silvius, whom I derive from the Trojans, not by Brute, but by the
Silvii, Kings of Alba and Successors of AEneas, Reigned here in Britain, 49
Jago, 28 Kimmacus, 54 Gorbodug, 63 Ferrex and Porrex, the last of the Line of
AEneas, whose Reign, and the Heptarchy that ensued on their deaths, under
Rudaucus, King of Wales, lasted Clotenus, King of Cornwall, Pinnor, King of
Loegria, Statorius, King of Albania, Yevan, K. of Northumberland,
53 Molmutius, 40 Belinus and Brennus, 22 Gurguint, 19 Guintelyn, 26 Silvius
the Second, or Sisilius, 15 Kimarus, 03 Elanius, or Danius, 10 Morindus, 09
Gorboman, 10 Archigallo, deposed after he had Reigned, 01 Elidure his Brother,
03 Years. Archigallo restored, 10 Elidurus again, 01 Vigenius and Peridurus, 09
Elidurus again, 04 Gorbonian, 10 Morgan, 14 Emerianus, 07 Ydwallo, 20 Rimo, 16
Geruntius, 20 Catellus, 10 Coilus, 10 Porrex the Second, 05 Cherimus, 01
Fulgentius, 01 Eldred, 01 Androgeus, 01 Urianus, 3 Eliud, 05 Dedantius, or
Dedacus, 05 Detonus, 02 Gurguineus, 03 Merianus, 02 Bleduus or Bladud, 02
Capenus, 03 Ovinus, 02 Sisilius, 02 Bledgabedrus, 10 Archimalus, 02 Eldolus, 04
Rodianus, 02 Redargius, 03 Samulius, 02 Penisillus, 03 Phyrrus, 02 Caporius, 02
Dinellus, 04 Heli, 01 Lud, 11

In the days of his Sons, Audrogaeus and Theomantius, when Cassibelan their
Uncle, usurped the Kingdom, Julius Caesar entered the Island.

THE CHRONICLE OF THE Celtick Kings.
CHAP. X. The Celtick KINGS unto BRUTE.
VARRO divides the Ages of the World into Three Varro Antiq.
great Periods; The first, from the Creation to the Flood, (...)
containing MDCLVI, He calls "(...), that is, Obscure and Uncertain. The
second, from the Flood to the first Olympiad, Anno Mundi MMMCLXXXIX, He names
(...), that (...)
is, Fabulous. The third Age, from the first Olympiad, and before Christ, 774,
to the present Age, He terms '(...), that (...)
is, Historical.


This division of Ages is generally received with such great approbation of
Judgment, that it is made use of to the utter overthrowing of all the BRITISH
History, as taking its beginning Three hundred and thirty years besore the
first Olympiad; But here it is to be considered, that in relation to the Greek
and Latin Nations, the division of Fabulous and Historical Ages from those
Periods is partly true, although in this also Authors differ.

Pliny makes the Historical Age of Greece not to begin till the One and
fiftieth Pliny Not. hist.
Olympiad, and all the time before to be Fabulous, upon this account respect
must be had to the Nations for which those Periods are designed, Had Varro
lived, and written among the Jews, it would have obliged him (according to the
Custom of that Nation) to have acknowledged every Age Historical, and not to
have curtailed their Histories to the fisty first of Uzziah, or the first of
King Jotham, because then Iphitus began the Olympiads.

On the other side there has been Nations so ignorant and barbarous, that could
not extend their Historical Ages beyond the days of their Grandfathers, and
all the time preceding was rather absolutely Obscure than Fabulous, so that
respect must be had to the Learning of every Nation, their several ways and
methods of Recording the Actions of their Ancestors, and the advantages some
People might have above others. For this very cause, the measuring of the
British Histories are not so strictly to be examined by the Standards of other
Nations, neither can they absolutely be rejected upon that account, without
manifest Injustice done to them.

It is certain the Britains had their Bards and Druids, and Traded very early
with two Learned Nations, the Phoenicians and Graecians; Their Priests had
peculiar Methods of composing and rehearsing the Lives of Famous persons, and
so continued their Memories to Posterity by mystical Rythms and Numbers.
Neither can it be gathered out of Caesar, that any Law or Superstitious usage
of the Druids, obliged the Britains not to transmit to Posterity the memorable
Actions of their Ancestors. All that was forbidden, was the divulging in
writing the mysterious Doctrines and Ceremonies of their Religion, but in most
matters else, both private and public, amongst which History is one; the Greek
Tongue was allowed them, neither could the same Policy which restrained them in
Religious matters, have any weight as to move them to keep the People in
ignorance and darkness, as touching the knowledge of Times and Ages.

So, that although in the British Histories there are many things altogether
impossible, others very improbable and fabulous (as indeed, what Histories are
free from such Vices?) yet because there may be a great many Truths couched
under those Fables, I have thought it not amiss to give an account of them,
partly upon that very Reason, and partly, because many Judicious Persons do not
utterly reject them.

In the progress of the History, I shall make some reflections upon the most
observable Circumstances, as they carry either the appearance of Truth, or the
marks of Falsehood and Forgery, contenting my self that this Chronicle be
divided (as the Ages of the World since the Flood) into Fabulous and
Historical, following rather the Ancient Custom, in yielding something to the
Zeal of Antiquity, whereby the Original of Nations is made more venerable, than
by erring on the other hand, to bring the Antiquity of a Nation lower than its
just proportion.

Yet, in following of the Judgment of Varro, I have ventured to bring down the
Genealogy of SILVIUS, or Sisillius, who is supposed to Reign in Britain about
Varro.
the first Olympiad, in another Method than hitherto has been done; And if the
Progeny of AEneas must needs be granted to govern this Island, I shall show
that it is far more probable to suppose him the First rather than BRUTE, whose
Name was never known in Alba or Rome, till the first Consul, by a feigned
stupidity, had contracted it, so that it is not likely that the name of Brutus
could be given as a disgrace to the Consul, which before had been an Honorable
Title of one of their Princes Sons.

But referring the disquisition of this matter to its proper place, I will
begin with the most Fabulous part, namely, the GELTICK Kings, as they are
delivered by Berosus, or, as Mr. Seldom says, Fathered upon him by Annius
I'iterbiensis, Berosus. Learned Seldom.
and thrust into the World under the specious name of a Chaldaean Priest, to
which I will add the Succession from Bardus out of Count Palatine, not yet
extant in the English Tongue. We must understand therefore, that

NOAH divided the Earth into three Parts, according to the number of his Sons,
giving SHEM the possession of that part now called Asia, to HAM or Prima Terrae
divisio.
CHAM, Africa, and to his Eldest Son JAPHET, Europe, and all the Islands
appertaining to it, of which BRITAIN was the Chief.

JAPHET divided Europe among his Sons; Mesech for his Lot, received all JAPHET,
the first British Monarth.
the Countries lying between the River Rhyne, and the Pyraenean Mountains; He
is supposed to be called SAMOTHES, and DIS, and is made the founder of the
Celtick Kingdom. Others make these Parts to have been Peopled first by Gomer,
and asterwards driven out of their Seats by Samothes.

It would be endless to trace all the Absurdities and Contradictions herein
contained, seeing that MESECH, the Son of Japhet, is supposed upon better
grounds, to be the Father of the Moschi, and GOMER not of the Gauls but
Bochartus.
Phrygians, his latter Mistake arising from not distinguishing that People in
Gallia, their Ancient Possession, and in Phrygia, their after Conquests.

Now, as in all Forgeries there must be some marks of Truth to carry it out, so
this Samothes must be called Dis, because Caesar writes that the Gauls derived
their Caesar. Com.
Original from Dis Pater, or Father Dis.

His name Samothes is given him, because he must be made the Father of a Sect
falsely called (as Mr. Seldom proves) Samothei for Semnothei.

H. Stephanus, quoted by Mr. Seldom, gives the Original of their Name two
ways, Seldens Jan. Ang.
either because they had always in their mouths (...), or because they seemed
like venerable Deities, the former opinion Stephanus follows, and Mr. Seldom
the latter.

The Custom of the Gauls and Britains, in measuring their Time by Nights and
not Days (as is reported by Caesar) is fathered upon this Prince by
Basingstoak, a Richard. Vit. Basingstoak. Palate. Historia d. Antiq. Brit.
Count Palatine. He is reported also to excel in the knowledge of Celestial
Bodies, the course and motion of the Stars, and the nature of Inferior
Creatures, with all the Sciences Moral and Politic, and to have delivered the
same in Phoenician Characters.

From Him this Island is feigned to be called SAMOTHEA. He began his SAMOTHEA
A. M. 1910. viz. Ab orte (...).
Reign, Anno Mundi MDCCCCX, according to Basingstoak, and so reigned six and
forty years.

MAGUS his Son succeeded him, a Prince no doubt, by his Name, excellently
skilled in the Art of Magic, and so we find him named the Founder of the Magi
in Persia, and this is grounded upon that Hyperbolical saying in Pliny, namely,
That the Plin. Not, hist.
Britains were so addicted to the Art of Magic, that the Persians might seem
to have learnt it from them. And this is ground enough for a bold and confident
Writer to say no worse of Annius, to create this Prince Magus, who being
granted to Reign in these Parts, we have a Founder of those many Cities ending
in Magus or Magum, both in Britain and Gaul, as Sitomagus, Neomagus, etc.

This King first reduced Men into distinct Tribes and Cities, whereas before
they lived dispersed in Woods and Mountains; He first brought in Propriety, and
set out bounds and limits of Grounds, all which he performed by his wonderful
Eloquence, persuading the Barbarous People to the conveniences of such
distinctions.

He is supposed to have begun his Reign Anno Mundi MDCCCCLVI, and to have
Reigned fifty one years, leaving his Kindgom to his Sou

SARRON, the third King of the Britains and Celts. He was not famous for any
new Laws (as Stephanus Forcatulus, quoted by Mr. Seldom, witnesses) but for
establishing S. Forcatulus. quoted by Seld.
the Constitutions of his Father and Grandfather, under severe Penalties, to
which purpose he is said to have reduced them into one Volume, and to have
erected Public places for Students.

He is seigned to be the Founder of the Sect of the Sarronides, when indeed the
Sarronides were but another name for the Druids, as appears by the derivation
of their Name from (...), being the same with (...), an Oak, as likewise by the
description (...), idem. Diodorus Sic. Caesar. Com.
Diodorus gives of them, namely, that without the Sarronides, no Sacrifice
either public or private, could be rightly performed, which is the very same
Caesar writes of the Druids, so that we see this King and the following Druids
should be the same Person.

The word (...), from whence the name Druid is derived, proceeded from the Oaks
that grew in the Plain of Mamre in the valley of Hebron. Genesis 13. 18.
Mamre, under which, in times past, those Religious Men called Druids, to whom
the office of Priesthood was committed, lived most devoutly. That it was a holy
place we read in Genesis, that blessed Abraham dwelt among the Oaks of Mamre,
where he pitched his Tent, and built a Tabernacle and Altar unto the Lord, in
which he offered Rams, Geats, Calves, etc. in Sacrifice, and moreover that he
performed there all other Sacerdotal Rites and Ceremonies appertaining to his
Priestly-office in those days; From these Oaks of Mamre (which some call
otherwise Palm Trees) sprang the Original Sect of Druids, which reached up as
high as Abraham's time, and it is positively recorded by some Authentic
Authors, that the Druid Colleges flourished also very eminently in the days
of Hermio, a German Prince, which happened not long after Abraham's death; This
I esteem to be very much assisting to a clearer proof and evidence of the
Antiquity of that Sect, whom I do make appear were Ancient Priests and
Governors in Ecclesiastical and Civil matters in this Nation; And by Reason
Abraham lived under those Oaks of Mamre so piously, the Druids in Example
thereof (although degenerating from the true substance and intent of so good an
Example) chose Groves of Oaks under which they performed all the invented Rites
and Ceremonies belonging to their Religion.

To speak further, we must confidently (according to the Rule and Method of the
British History) believe Sarron to have Reigned as a British King, from Anno
Mundi MMVII, to MMLXVIII, when being Ambitious to extend his Empire, he ended
his life and kingdom, and now we hear of Druis his Son.

DRUIS the Son of Sarron, or as Basing stochius writes, his Grandson, by his
Son Namnes who died before him, succeeded in the Kingdom. He is made the Author
of the Druids, a famous Sect of Philosophers, he began his Reign Anno Mundi
MMLXVIII, and held the Government but fourteen years. Then

BARDUS the Son of Druis, next entered upon the Kingdom. This is the King of
Poets. Musicians and Heralds called from him Bardi, they were very much given
to composing of Genealogies, and rehearsing them in public Assemblies, but
notwithstanding their great skill in this matter, we see they have the
misfortune to be put after the Druids in Succession, whereas, in the foregoing
Antiquities, it is probably made out, they were an Ancienter Order than they in
Britain.

This Bardus began his Reign Anno Mundi MMLXXXII, and possessed the Scepter
seventy five years.

Now, who would not have thought BRITAIN, or SAMOTHEA, an happy Island, having
so many Philosophers for their Kings, but see the mischief of it. Let Samothes,
Magus, Sarron and Druis, teach never so Divinely, and Bardus Sing or Pipe never
so sweetly, yet the People will be Adders still, there is no reclaiming of the
Multitude; No wonder therefore, that giving themselves to a loose and luxurious
life, and not keeping up to the strict Rules that had been prescribed to them,
they were the sooner conquered and subdued by the Giant Albion, so that
Samothea was wrested from the Celts, the Line of Japhet, and brought in
subjection to the Progeny of Ham.

Now it is that stories complain of the miserable Thraldom of this Island by
the Sons of Neptune, and the delivery of it in part by the death of Albion,
slain by Hercules, though long after it was molested by Giants until the
Arrival of Brutus, all which Circumstances I will pass over, not because they
are more Fabulous than the rest, but because they seem (if they were well timed
and cleared of all the Ignorant Rubbish, that by age and malice of Writers has
over-burthened them) to carry some footsteps of the Phoenicians in this
Island, who were Men of exceeding proportion, and of the Lineage of Ham, and
early Traders into these Parts.

Likewise the story of Dioclesian, or, as Mr. Hollinshead corrects it, Danaus
his Hollinsheads Chron.
Daughter, I will omit, as too tedious a Fable, and so proceed to the
succession of the Celtick Kingdom, of which Britain is feigned a part. This I
do not for Truths sake, but Convenience; It follows therefore out of
Basinstoak: Basingsto. chius.


LONGHO, the Son of Bardus, succeeded him in the Kindom of the Celtae.

He made War upon Scandia, and gave name to the Longo Bards, who afterward
proceeded from that Country. I pass over, how ridiculously and against all
Geography, Scandia, by Basinstochius, is placed about the Coasts of Britain,
and made an Island.

These are small faults; He begun his Reign Anno Mundi MMCLVII, and reigned
twenty eight years.

BARDUS the Second succeeded him; He carried Music into Germany, which had
been first taught in Celtica by his Grandfather. He Reigned seven and thirty
years, and left a young Son called Celtes, who being not ripe enough to
Administer the Kingdom,

LUCUS was elected King, who Reigned but Eleven years, and then,

CELTES assumed the Crown; From this Prince the Celtae took their Denomination.
His Mother was called Galathea, in honor of whose Memory he gave that name to
his Daughter, and afterward married her to Hercules, by whom she had a Son
named Galathes, from whom the Galli are derived. He reigned but thirteen years,
and then

HERCULES and GALATHEA succeeded. This Hercules built Alexia, and passing the
Alps, he gave his younger Son Tuscus the Kingdom of Italy, and his elder Son
Galathes the Celtick Dominion. The first Prince reigned nineteen years;
Galathes held the Kingdom of the Celts forty nine years, and then left it to
his Son

NARBON, the Son of Galathes, during his Fathers life had the Island of
Samothea entrusted to his Government, but after the death of his Father he
passed into Gallia, and there built a City after his own Name, he reigned
eighteen years.

LUGDUS his Son succeeded him; he built Lugdunum and reigned fifty one years.

BELIGIUS followed, who gave name to the Belgae, formerly called Beligici, he
died without Issue after he had reigned twenty years, and the Kingdom of the
Celts devolved on

JASIUS. This Prince was of the Line of Hercules, and the year before was
created King of Italy, so that the two Kingdoms of Celtica and Italy were
conjoined in one Man, Anno Mundi MMCCCLXXXIV. This raised Envy in his Brother
Dardanus, who began a Civil-War, but not being able to prevail by force of
Arms, he had recourse unto Policy, so that feigning Reconciliation with his
Brother, he takes all his Goods, and Shipping them, enters into his Brothers
Palace, and there Murders him as he was Bathing, this being effected, he flies
into Samothrace, afterward into Phrygia. Jasius had a Son named

CORYBANTUS, he succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of Italy, but not of the
Caeltes. Jasius reigned fifty years.

ALLOBROX, of the line of Hercules, obtained the Kingdom of the Celti, he
Reigned sixty eight years, and

ROMUS his Son succeeded him, he Governed twenty nine years.

PARIS the Son of Romus Ruled thirty nine years.

LEMANES the Son of Paris Reigned sixty seven years.

OLBIUS the Son of Lemanes Reigned five years. From this Olbius, Basinstochius
derives Albion, the Name of this Island.

GALATHES the Second succeeded him, and Reigned eight and forty years.

NAMNES followed and Governed forty four years, and being about to end his
days he bequeathed the Kingdom to his Son Remus.

REMUS the Son of Namnes Reigned forty years. He left only a Daughter, which he
had married before to Phranicus, a Prince of the Blood of Hector.

PHRANICUS held the Scepter in right of his Wife, but leaving Samothea to be
Governed by the Druids, he betook himself to the Continent called by his Name,
France, so that the Britains readily received King BRUTUS at his Arrival into
this Island, as is pretended by those who desired to claim an honorable Title
from that Race of the Trojans.

This is the account of the Celtick Kings before BRUTE, according to Berosus
and Basinstochius; Who can but wonder at the exact and punctual Chronology in
Berosus: Basinstochius:
things of so vast a distance, the Religious care of the Historiographers, lest
the minutest Circumstances should be omitted? Who can but admire at their
ingenious Contrivances, least the Reigns of these things should want some
diverting Circumstances, and their Governments run dully without the usual rubs
of Ambition and Usurpation. If we seriously consider these matters, we may
easily find that the Government of these Princes began not many hundred years
ago. The Opinion of Isacius Tzetzes, Isacius Tzetzes.
concerning imaginary Regions in the British Seas was never more true, then
when we consider these Aerie Princes, and their fantastical Governments, so
that hitherto we find rather an History of Utopia than Britain.

From Samothes his Reign, beginning An. Mundi MDCCCCX, which is 254 years after
the Flood, to the end of Phranicus his Reign, are 945 years, so that the
Entrance of Brute into this Island, according to this account, is in the year
of the World MMDCCCLV, and after the Flood 1199 years; But, as if there were
some great truth in this matter that required wonderful Exactness, we find much
variance in Authors.

Berosus makes Samothes's Kingdom about 152 years after the Flood, and that it
continued 335 years in his Posterity. Mr. Hollinshead says, 310, and then
Albion Berosus. Hollinshead.
Arrived, but from Samothes to the end of Bardus his Reign, is but 247 years,
so that here a vast Inter-regnum is made between Bardus and Albion; Besides,
the differences between 254 and 152 years, in which Samothes is said to begin
his Kingdom, cuts short the seventy five years of Bardus his Reign, which are
assigned him by the Count Palatine.

The Entrance of Brute, according to this Computation, differs something from
Basinstochius.
that which is generally received, namely, That he arrived at this Island in
the year of the World 2887, and after the Flood 1231, in the Eighteenth year of
Eli his Priesthood, and before Christ 1059. And here Mr. Speed comes upon
Brutes History with his Scripture Chronology, like a Goliath, Let us see to what
purpose. Brute (says he) is the fourth descent from AEneas, namely thus,
AEneas, Ascanius, Silvius, Brutus. Now allowing, favorably, according to
Herodotus (and I add according Herodotus.
to the Britains) Thirty years for a Generation, we shall find (that if Brute
entered this Isle Anno Mundi 2887) that the Trojan War in the days of AEneas,
happened Anno Mundi 2768, in the Eight and thirtieth year of Gideons Government.

But this cannot be says Mr. Speed; why not? Because (says he) Clemens
Alexandrinus Speeds Chron.
alleged out of Pergamenus and Letus, places the Trojan War fully Two
hundred and thirty years after, namely, in the Reign of King Solomon, so that
Brute entered not this Island in Ely's Priesthood, but in the Usurpation of
Juda's Kingdom by Athaliah, in the year of the World 3118. and so we see Brutes
Antiquity cut off Two hundred and thirty years. O wonderful exactness in
Chronology! will any one henceforth be able to defend Brutes History? no
certainly, especially if they consider the deadly blow that is coming. Josephus
(says he) confidently affirms, he is able to prove by Phoenician Records, that
the City Carthage was built by Dido, Sister to Pigmaleon, 155 years after the
Reign of King Hiram, which was Solomon's Friend, and 143 years and eight months
after the building of his most beautiful Temple.

Now Dido and AEneas, according to Virgil, were contemporary. By this
computation Virgil.
we find Troys destruction fell out about the twentieth year of Joash his Reign
over Judah, which was in the year of the Worlds Creation 3143, to which if we
add One hundred and twenty years for the Four discents from AEneas to Brute,
then will Brutes Conquest of this Island fall with the twelfth of Jothams
Reign, in Anno Mundi 3263, and thus we see Brute has miserably lost again 375
years of his Antiquity.

The greatest loss is to follow, and here it is that Mr. Speed says, that he
has made a deep breach into Brute's History. Manethon (says he) the Historian,
Priest of Manethon.
Egyt, in his second Book cited by Josephus, affirms, that the Israelites
departure from Egypt was almost 1000 years before the Wars of Troy, and this,
Mr. Speed says, Josephus Josephus.
seems to allow; By this measure Brute is lessened 752 years, but I would fain
know why he thinks Josephus allows this Computation, when as before Josephus is
brought in confidently maintaining another Account, and that out of the
Phoenician Annals. Josephus might allow this Computation of Manethon the
Egyptian perhaps according to the Egyptian manner of Years, which consisted of
three Months, and so the 1000 years will (in reality) be but 250, effectually.

But what makes all this against Brute, whose time depends upon the timing of
the Trojan War, for can any one be so mad or simple, as by any Scripture
Computation to bring down the War of Troy below the days of Alexander, and
almost equalling it with the Punick. Clemens Alexandrinus might err in this
Chronology, and Virgil is generally reproved for making AEneas and Dido
contemporary. The Trojan War it self is so disputable, that who can expect an
exact timing of it. If the Author that Jeffery of Monmouth pretends to have
translated, did place the Entrance of Brute under the Priesthood of Ely, it was
a fancy grounded upon some Computation of his own, which whether it be true or
false, concerns not the question of Brutes Arrival, who knew not, and
consequently, could not deliver down his Entrance in the Priesthood of Ely?

There are too many Circumstances that condemn the story of Brute, and it is
vain to confute an Author in a small matter, whereas greater things may be laid
to his charge, like him, who declaiming against Nero, insisted most in his
defects in Music; so if there were nothing to be said against Brutes and
Samothes's stories but the ill harmony of Time, possibly they may be found as
perfect in those points as most Histories. But the destroying of Brute by any
Computation, is, as if one would by the same Weapons prove there was never a
Trojan Horse, or Minerva's fatal Statue, and so I proceed to Brutes History.

THE CHRONICLE OF THE British Kings.
CHAP. XI. The History of BRUTE.
BRUTUS, Brito, or as the Basingsto. chius.
Count Palatine calls him Brotus, is on all hands agreed to be the Offspring
of AEneas, but whether by his Wife Creusa, or Lavinia, there is great variance
manifested in Authors.

To clear this Controversy, that the Reader may better judge of the whole
matter, I will set down the Progeny of AEnaeas by both his Wives;

AEnaeas dying, he left his Kingdom to, Ascanius, whom he had by his first Wife
Creusae. Lavinia his second Wife surviving and finding her self big with Child,
began to dread the power of Ascanius, least the odious name of a Stepmother,
and the jealousy of an half Brother, and Competitor in the Kingdom, might
carry him on to some violence against her Person; Upon this she fled into the
Woods, and was delivered of a Son, whom she named Silvius Posthumus, from the
place of his Birth, and by reason he was born after the decease of his Father.

But, it seems (the People ill resenting the flight of Lavinia) Ascanius was
obliged to re-call her, and giving to her and her Son the City Lavinium, he
built Albae Longa, where he Reigned. At his death he bequeathed his Kingdom to
his Son Iulus, between whom and Silvius, Controversies arose concerning the
Right of Government; at last it was found that the People inclined rather to
Silvius, as being descended of Lavinia the Daughter of Latinus, and inheriting
the blood of the Trojans and Latins, the whole Kingdom devolved on him. By
this, Iulus was constrained to take up with the Priesthood.

There is great uncertainty in Roman Authors concerning the Line of AEnaeas,
and Livy doubts whether Iulus was the Son of AEneas by Creusa or Lavinia, but
Livy.
this seems to be the clearest Genealogy.

To this Genealogy, gathered out of Roman Authors, John of Weathamstead, Abbot
John of Weathamstead.
of St. Albaens, a right Judicious Man, had respect in his Censures long ago
upon Brutes History, where he says, That Ascanius begat no such Son as had for
his proper name SILVIUS, but left Issue an only Son Iulus, from whom the Family
of the IULII afterward proceeded, and that Silvius Posthumus (whom perhaps
Jeoffery of Monmouth means) was the Son of AEneas by his Wife Lavinia, who
begat AEnaeas Silvius, and in the Eight and thirtieth year of his Reign, ended
his life by a Natural death. How therefore could he be slain by his Son Brute?
or if any such thing had happened, how came so memorable an Accident to be
omitted? This argues the story to be Poetical (as he says) rather than
Historical, and that Jeoffery, or whoever compiled it, was altogether ignorant
of the Genealogy of AEnaeas, which will appear more evidently by the sequel.
Let us see therefore to which Line our supposed Brute, can with most reason be
referred.

The Author of the Book, which Jeoffery of Monmouth pretends to have
translated, makes AEnaeas his Genealogy thus;

In this he seems to confound Silvius with Iulus, making them the same Persons,
who indeed were but Competitors in the same Kingdom, so that Silvius in the
Line of Lavinia, is brought into the Line of Creusa.

Others, to mend the matter, make Brute descend of AEnaeas and Lavinia, but
then they bring Ascanius of the Line of Creusa in to the Line of Lavinia, and
so make him the same with Silvius Posthumus, by that to have begotten Iulus the
Father of Brute, whereas Silvius Posthumus begat Silvius AEnaeas, and was the
Father of those many Silvii who succeeded in the Kingdom of Alba.

Hitherto we see Brute the Grandfather of AEnaeas by a mixed Genealogy, but
Gyonan Villani, cited by Mr. Hollinshead, brings his Line absolutely from
AEnaeas and Gyon. Villani cited by Hollinshead.
Lavinia, and seems to make him the Grandchild of AEnaeas, by his Son Silvius
Posthumus, who (marrying the Niece of his Mother Lavinia) had Issue BRUTE so
called because she died in Travail of him. I suppose he means Brotus, but how
ridiculously (...) is made to signify any such thing, I leave it to the
Judicious to determine.

But how comes it to pass, that he should fly his Country, fearing (as is
said) his Grandfather Silvius Posthumus, when as there is no mention made in
Gyonan Villani of another Silvius (in this Line) the Son of Silvius Posthumus,
and the Father of Brute. However it comes to pass, Brute must be the Offspring
of AEneas, and we must not be too busy in asking questions, for if one demand,
how the name of Brute, (which was afterward given to the first Consul for his
feigned Stupidity) to be a name of the Princes Son in the same Kingdom, it will
be answered he was called Brotus, not Brutus, because his Mother died in
Childbed of him.

If it be asked, why he sted for the accidental killing his Father? the Count
Palatine says, it is a mistake, for it was only a Rumor spread of him and the
truth was rather by other discontents that he was moved to flight. If enquiry
be made, how it comes to pass that the Latin Writers (who reckon up the Progeny
of AEneas) and the Silvii, make not the least mention of him, and Gildas the
Ancient Britain has Gildas.
Altum silentium in this point? The Reply is easy, That it is not the business
of every Author to mention every particular, for the Romans contented
themselves with what related to their own Nation, and Gildas made no mention of
it, being a thing beyond dispute.

For the present we will attend this BRUTE, the supposed Son of Silvius, with
the same care and diligence we have done the Celtick Kings.

Being of the Age of fifteen he left his Country, and arriving at Greece, he
found a number of the scattered Trojans, who lived under the Dommion of
Pandrasus. Pandrasus, ^
Finding them a discontented Party, he managed his Interest wisely with them
(often inculcating the Nobility of their Ancestors, and the slavery of their
present condition) he offered himself to be their Head and Leader, and so
encouraged them to stand upon honorable Terms; They willingly embraced this
motion, and many of them being in Authority under Pandrasus, revolted, and so
brought over great Parties with them.

BRUTE being thus strengthened, great numbers continually flockt to him, with
encouragements to execute his designs; securing himself in Woods, and making
sure to him many considerable Forts and strong Holds, but first writes a smart
Letter to Pandrasus, wherein he demands the liberty of his Trojans.

The King amazed at his sudden Imperiousness, but considering with calmer
thoughts the Paucity of the Rebels, resolved (by force of Arms) to chastise
their Arrogance, by reducing them to Obedience; In all haste he levies a
considerable Power, and marching against him with greater heat than conduct,
and supposing his Enemies to be hid in the Woods, near a Town called
Sparatinum, he is set upon by Brute, who had three thousand of his well
appointed Trojans in Ambuscado for that Expedition, so that Pandrasus his Army
marching loosely, and without order or discipline (as if they had not expected
an Enemy so near them) were quickly routed and put to flight.

Brute pursues his Victory to the River Akalon, in which many of the Graecians
miserably perished; Neither could the Courage of Antigonus, Brother to
Pandrasus, prevail, although he often, from small Parties, rallyed and made
Head against the Enemy; for by the general Consternation of his Men he was
defeated and taken Prisoner.

After this success, Brute entered Sparatinum, and placing a Garrison in it of
six hundred Men, he returns with the rest of his Body into the Woods, bringing
them the joyful News of his eminent Victories.

Pandrasus being overcome (with shame and sorrow, for the loss of his Brother
and this unexpected Defeat) resolves at last, with a greater Power, and more
care and circumspection, to renew the War. To this end, he gathers up his
dispersed Soldiers, and with fresh supplies from all parts of his Kingdom,
lays Siege to Sparatinum, wherein he thought Brute in Person resided.

This Opinion made him carry on the Siege with more violence, storming it at
several places at once, but finding greater resistance than he expected,
altered his resolution, hoping to reduce them by want of Provisions, so that
beleaguring the Town on all sides, with great impatience, expected a surrender.

The Garrison (by a private Messenger) signifying their mind to Brute, by way
of Requests, for speedy Assistance, not being able to answer them with Forces,
had recourse to Policy, swearing Anacletus, whom he had taken Prisoner, to be
faithful to him; By the means of this Guide he marched by Night, and in the
dark sets upon Pandrasus in his Trenches, which Enterprise took such good
effect, that the King himself was made his Captive.

The excellent luck of this our HERO was attended with an honorable Peace, the
Conditions of which are very observable, in that they were advantageous for
Brute only, as I find no Consideration for the Kings satisfaction; The Articles
were these.

That Brute should marry Innogen the Kings Daughter, and in consideration of
her Dower, should have a Fleet given him, with liberty to transport all such as
would be willing to follow his Fortunes, without the least let or molestation
from the Graecians.

It is no wonder that we find not Antigonus included in these Articles, because
it may be supposed he desired not Liberty, for who would not desire to follow
so Happy a man as Brute, the Darling of Fortune, who could make those Terms
with a Prince, and yet (as Mr. Hollinshead says) never touched the Prerogative
of his Hollinshead Hist. of Brit.
Kingdom.

BRUTE, with his Wife Innogen embarks, and after two days and one nights sail,
arrived at an Island called Leogetia, or Lergetia, for Authors differ. Where
this Island should be, let Geography it self speak, I am ignorant, but here it
was that Brute first learnt to bend his Knee, and prostrating himself before
the Oracle of Diana, he desired her to assign him some place for a fixed
Habitation, in these words.

Diva Potens nemorum, terrestria jura resolve,
Dic certam sedem, qua te Venerabor in avum.
Goddess of Woods, Terrestrial Rights foretell,
Assign some place, where I may happy dwell.
The GODDESS Answer,

BRUTE, sub occasum solis trans Gallica Regna,
Insula in Oceano est, habitata Gigantibus olim,
Ilanc pete, namque tibi seeds erit illa Perennis.
Hic de Prole tua, Reges nascentur: and ipsis
Totius terrae subditus Orbis erit.
BRUTE, in the West, beyond the Gallick Land,
An Isle of Old by Giants held, does lie.
Go seek this out, for to thy Trojan Band
This is the place designed, by Destiny.
Here from thy Loins shall Kings proceed, and they
Over all Nations shall their Scepter sway.
This was delivered to him in a Dream, and I doubt for no other will it be
taken, but, hoysing up his Sails, passes the Streights of Gibraltar, and
Coasting on the Right hand, see the luck of it, he met with another Company of
Trojans led thither by Antenor, lying upon the Tyrrhen Sea.

Mr. Hollinshead corrects this mistake in the British History, and will needs
have it Hollinsheads Brit. Hist.
the Pyraenean Sea; But, what had Antenor to do in the Ocean in the West of
Spain? We read in History, that he brought his Colony to the Tyrrhen, but never
to the Pyraenean Sea, so that here we find the late fortunate Brutus, with some
Magic or other, brought back again through the Streights, and cast into the
very mouths of his Enemies, even upon the Coast of Italy, to answer for the
death of his Father, or else some other misdemeanour.

Notwithstanding this Geography, we must suppose him on the Coast of Spain,
where he meets with Corinaeus the present Captain of these dispersed Trojans,
who understanding Brute to be of the same Nation with himself, a Man of great
Spirit, and the Master of so powerful a Nation, makes Propositions of uniting
to him, which Brute g'adly received, so that joining Forces, they proceed
together in seeking out new Adventures, and after thirty days sail, Brute,
with his new Confederates, entered the River Ligeris in Aquitain.

Goffarius (was King of this Country) Surnamed Pictus, descended of the
Agathyrses, a Painted Nation, and some hold that this Country from hence was
called Poictou, and that part of Britain was named Pight-land upon the same
account of Painting.

Goffarius being informed of the Landing of these Strangers, sent some of his
Officers to learn their Numbers, and to observe their Motions, who meeting with
two hundred of the Trojans that went a Hunting with their Leader Corinaeus,
there happened a dispute between them, insomuch that Imbert, the Captain of the
Gauls, shot an Arrow at Corinaeus, which proved the engagement of a terrible
Battle, and Corinaeus to require him, with one slash clave his Head asunder,
upon which Accident followed a Victory to the Trojans.

Goffarius by this time had mustered up his Forces, and resolved to revenge
this Insolence committed on his Subjects: Fortune seconded not his Attempt, for
Brute with the assistance of Corinaeus, defeated all his Army, and forced his
security by flight.

It seems these two Overthrows did but whet the Revenge of Goffarius, and so
with new Forces sets again upon the Trojans, over-powring them in Numbers, for
it is said he had Thirty for One, and at last constrained them to take refuge
in their Camp, where he olosely besieged them with his whole Army; Brute and
Corinaeus, by private Messages, resolved to set upon him on both sides at one
instant, whereupon Corinaeus with three hundred Men, lying in Covert all night,
charged the next Morning the Gauls, then Brute seconds him with a brisk Sally,
and here again Goffarius is defeated, yet not without great slaughter on both
sides.

Brute in this Battle lost his Nephew Turinus, a valiant Youth, in honor of
whom he built Turonium, now called Towers, and in Revenge harasses the Country
of Goffarius, and with Fire and Sword prosecutes his Victory.

Goffarius being thus expelled his Kingdom, solicited his Neighbor Princes to
undertake his quarrel, and now all Gaul was united against the Common Enemy,
which Brute understanding, calls a Council of War, where it was finally
concluded, That upon the account of their great Losses received in the former
Encounter, they should not prosecute Goffarius any further, considering more
especially it was beside their main design, this not being the Country allotted
them by the Oracle: so that collecting all their Forces, they embarked, making
as must haste as they could to the Promised Island, where, after a few days
sail, they arrived at the Haven now called Totness.

The time of Brutes Landing is supposed, about the Year of the World 2887, The
time of: Brutes Landing in Britain is judged uncertain.
and after the Universal Flood, 1231. The Count Palatine places it in the Year
2855, and Mr. Hollinshead 2850, and after the destruction of Troy 66; but of
the great difference in Calculations I have treated already, and once for all
it may be said, That a true and just Chronology cannot be expected till the
coming of Julius Caesar.

Brute having at last (through many dangers and difficulties) attained the long
wished for Island, he Lands his Trojans, and marches up into the Country to
take possession.

Joyful was he to see the pleasant prospect of so large a Dominion, and blessed
the Gods that they gave him so glorious a Reward for all his labors. But all
things were not so well as he imagined, for, from the Clyffs and craggy Rocks,
he began to perceive mighty Giants arising; This sight he communicated to
Corinaeus, who, at first, was much surprised at the Object, but at last they
both plucked up their wonted Spirits, and with a few Trojans valiantly assailed
these Monsters.

In a few Conflicts they found not their Weapons to want success, so that they
soon convinced these Goliahs, that no strength or vastness of Limbs, was able
to resist a Trojan Puissance.

Corinaeus, after several general Engagements, had a longing desire to enter
into a nearer trial of skill with some one of them: Gogmagog undertakes him,
and a day of wrestling was appointed, and attended with great expectation.

The Giant at his first grapling, by a close-Hug, breaks a Rib of Corinaeus,
but sorely paid for it, by the fall Corinaeus gave him from the Clyff of Dover
to his utter destruction, which from hence is said afterward to be called
Cwymp y Cawr, or the fall of the Giant. This was a good Omen of the Trojans
further success, and Corinaeus for this piece of service was rewarded with the
Principality of Cornwall.

Brute by degrees destroyed the whole Race of these Giants, and quietly
possessing the Island, the first work he undertook was the building of a City,
which he called Troy-novant, now London.

In this City he kept his Royal Court, ordaining and enacting, that from
henceforth the whole Island should be called after his Name, BRITAIN, and so
the Inhabitants, Britains,

Being at the point of Death, in the fifteenth year of his Reign, and the four
and twentieth of his Arrival, he divided his Kingdom to his three Sons; To
Locrinus he bequeathed that part now called ENGLAND, To Camber, WALES, To
Albanact, SCOTLAND, and so called it after his name, Albania.

Brute in that sickness is supposed to have died, and was buried in his new
City TROY - Novant, but the particular place where, was never yet discovered by
any, and I much question whether it ever will.

SOME OBSERVATIONS UPON THIS History of Brute.
IT is not material whether this story of BRUTE be to be referred to Jeoffery
of Monmouth, Henry of Huntington, or Segibertus Gemblasensis a Frenchman, who
lived an hundred years before Jeoffery, and treats of Brute and his Trojans
Arrival into Gaul, and his passage into Britain; For if Segibertus, or any
other Person, had the name of Brute before Jeoffery, and some particular
Actions of such a Prince, yet the composing of his Genealogy, the methodizing
the Circumstances of his Life, the Timing of his Entrance, the Succession of
his Line, depends all upon the Credit of Jeoffery, and the truth of his
Translation, and so was esteemed in the days in which he lived, and put forth
his History; For, how long a Trojan Original might be in these parts, or how
long Britannia might be derived from Brutus, is not the thing in question; but
this was the custom of Ancient times, to derive Nations from some particular
Persons, even amongst the Greeks and Romans, and was an old Vanity of the
World, to refer their beginning to some Divine HERO.

To make this pretended Brute to be a Trojan, and to fasten him upon a
Genealogy contrary to the truth of those Histories from which that Genealogy is
fetched, and upon whose Credit it depends, is the thing for which Brutes History
is chiefly condemned.

Segibertus Gemblasensis might have the same design in deriving his Britain in
France, from Brutus, as the Britains might derive their Britannia.

I do not deny, but Jeoffery of Monmouth might have several hints of Brutus,
nay a British History of him, but it will not justify the Fiction, neither can
the multitude of Authors, in, or about that time, take away from the Credit of
Ancienter Historiographers, as Caesar, Tacitus, Gildas, Ninius, and as many as
wrote twelve hundred Caesar, Tacitus, Gildas, Ninius.
years since, who make no mention of any such Person; more than that, do
profess by all their Enquiry, they could learn nothing of the Britains
concerning their Original, so that whatever Original is pretended, nevertheless
the story of the Trojan Brute, and all the Legend of his life, seems to be
brought into the World not long before those times, as appears by Mr. Cambden
and Speed, nay, Mr. Sheringham of late in his Vindication of this story, in one
place ingeniously confesses, That these Tales Cambden. Speed. Sheringham, de
Orig. Angl.
might be invented, and so intruded upon the Vulgar. But where ever the story
of Brute is to be told, the Character of it, and the Compiler ought never to be
omitted.

It is the saying of William of Newborough, who lived in the Age of Geoffery ap
Arthur of Monmouth, and writes thus of him; In these our days (says he) a
certain Writer is risen, who devises foolish Fictions of the Britains, he has
to Name Geoffery, Will. of New-borough.
and a little after, With how little shame, and with what great confidence does
he frame his Lies.

About the same time was Francio invented for the Francks, Scota, Pharaolis
Daughter, for the Scots, Hiberus for the Irish, Danus for the Danes, Brabo for
the Brabanders, Gothus for the Goths, Saxo for the Saxons, and is Brutus for
the Britains any thing truer? who can think it.

Scriverius, in his Preface to the Antiquitics of Ancient Batavia, falls
severely Scriverius.
upon Jeoffery of Monmouth, and gives his History the name of, Groote grove
lange dicke taste lijck end unbeschaemte, logen, that is, A most impudent Lie,
a great one, a heavy one, a long thick one, which (like the Egyptian Darkness)
was so palpable it might be felt. Never had a Lie so many dimensions given it
before, nor so much substance ascribed to it. Well fare Brute and his Trojans,
above all stories this carries the Honor of the day.

That which gave some Authority to this Fiction, was the use King Edward the
first made of it, in vindicating his Title to Scotland against the pretense of
Pope Boniface, and the Church of Rome, who laid claim to that Kingdom, by
Ancient Right, as part of St. Peter's Patrimony, and that Churches Demesne.

This Action of the King stamped some Character upon this late Invention, and
the Judgment of so wise a Prince in favor of Brute, in a matter of so high a
Concern, brought this new Embrio into some credit in the World. It will not be
amiss therefore, to examine the whole Circumstances of this debate between the
King, Pope, and Barons of this Realm.

King Edward having made a considerable progress toward the Conquest of
Scotland, and being there in Person, receives a Prohibition from the Pope (who
was backed on by the French King) to proceed any further in that business, until
he had proved his Title at Rome, to which place the Pope by his Bull, drew the
hearing of the Cause; the King received this Message from the Archbishop of
Canterbury, who, through many hazards, brought the Bull to him into Scotland,
and thereby finding that the Pope had started an unheard of Claim to that
Kingdom, returns this Answer to the Bishop, That he could not reply to the
Popes Letters without the consent of his Barons, most of which were at that
time in Britain.

The next year coming into Britain, he summons a Parliament at Lincoln, Octabis
Sancti Hilarii, to advise with his Prelates, Nobles and Commons, how to defend
the Rights of his Crown against this new Papal claim. Upon reading of the Popes
Bull, it was long debated whether the King should return any Answer to it, but
in fine the Affirmative carried it.

The King, to justify his Title to Scotland, and to prove it was always a
Feudatory Nation, and that their Kings through all Ages, paid Homage to the
Kings of Britain, begins his Claim from Brute, and the division of the whole
Island among his Three Sons, Locrine, Camber, and Albanact, wherein this
constitution and Custom of Troy is asserted, Ut dignitas haereditatis
Primogenito perveniret, and so he follows on his Title through many British
Princes, as it may be seen at large in the Records in the Tower of London, Anno
29. Edvardi primi. Here we see Brutes story Records of R. Edw. l. An. 29
made use of in a Claim to a Crown, then in real debate, so that here a few
things must be considered.

Who were the Persons that might be thought to have a great stroke in compiling
this Letter. The Writs the King issued out were to no less than three and forty
Abbots, Priors and Deans, besides many others of the Clergy, to search the
Records of their Monasteries and Covents, and to send up to Lincoln any thing
which might concern the present question.

It appears, that the Monks and Friars had a great hand in making out this
Title by Brute, whose Story now was new vampt, and from all Parts sent out of
those shops where at first it had been forged and hammered out; And this does
more evidently appear, if we consider many other parts of the same Letter, as
it is found in the Records cited by Mr. Pryn, but especially that Miracle of
King Adelstane, who ( in perpetuam rei memoriam) to give an evident sign of his
Right to Scotland, with his Sword struck such a blow upon a Rock near Dunbar,
that he clest it, at least, an Ell wide.

It is no wonder if King Edward did oppose the Spiritual Right of the Pope with
no less Aerie Titled, and it was not unnecessary that he should endeavor to
beat him at his own Weapons, having so many Myrmedons to assist him, who were
excellently skilled, and so fitter to return upon Rome a Title which had no
less pretenses of Antiquity and Holiness than the Popes, so that the Fable of
Brute here made use of, in the Circumstances of those Affairs, was prudent and
Politic, yet makes not to the credit and reality of his History, but shows,
that a wise Prince took the advantage to destroy an impertinent Demand with a
Politic return.

Besides, Albanact the Son of Brute, by this time had been received by the
Scots, who were as Ambitious to derive their Nation from the Trojans, as the
English were contented with a younger Brother for their Prince, seeing the
English had prevented them in the right of Primogeniture by Locrinus, so that
Locrinus's Title against Albanact is good, although, in truth, neither be
valuable. And so I leave the story of Brute and his Trojans to the Credit of
its first Devisors, and how far it may be taken has been sifted sufficiently
by all Authors. I will only reply to one Argument, often produced in favor of
Brute, to which hitherto I have seen no Answer.

It is taken from the words of Thaliassen, an Ancient Poet, supposed to live in
Hannes Thaliassen, a British Poet.
the days of Mailgon King of Venedotia, or North Wales, in his Book entitled,
Hannes Thaliassen, or the Errors of Thaliassen.

Mia deythymyma at Wedillhion Croia.
I return to the Relich of Troy.
Now granting this to be the true work of Thaliassen, I see not why, from
hence, the Britains must be concluded of Trojan Original. The Phrase of
Reliquiae Trojae, aut Reliquiae Danum, may elegantly be used to express any
Nation that is miserably brought from its Ancient Glory, and reduced to so
small a number as the Britains were by the Romans, and especially by the Saxons.

It is a Poetical Elegancy used by Thaliassen to express the Calamities of his
Nation, yet such small Figures have often created great Kings in the Inventions
of Fanciful Men, as Magus the Celtick King took birth from the Poetical saying
of Pliny, and I believe verily, Brutus from this of Thaliassen.

I have not time to instance in all the ridiculous particulars in Brutes
History, and how Troy-novant could signify Troia nova, before ever the Romans
had brought the More of Troi-novant, in the Reign of King Lud.
word Novum into Britain, but it may be supposed that this conceit of
Troy-novant, took its beginning from that Cities standing in the Country of the
Trinobantes, so called by Caesar, and they who followed on the contrivance of a
Trojan Original, might make use of the least similitude of Words to confirm
their Opinions.

And this might give occasion to those words of King Edward the Confessor, to
streagthen the Privileges of the City of London, as to their Hustings and
other Courts, for he says of the same City thus, Fundata erit olim and
adificata ad instar, and ad modum, and in memoria Veteris Magnae Troiae. Every
Fiction muttlye sometime in the Womb, before it can be brought to perfection,
and so it happened in thus, that first the matter of a Trojan Original being
prepared, and by Tradition only received, it grew up by the use Princes made of
it; Afterward it received its form from the Writing of the Learned in those
days, and so finally brought to maturity, and delivered by Jeoffery, and all
this structure, perhaps, lying upon no other foundation than Britannia, Brutus,
Trinovant, Trivovantes, and that elegant saying of Thaliassen, Y Weddillhion
Croia, and this more evidently appears where I have treated of the Custom of
the Greeks, in giving Names to Nations, and feigning of false Originals.

Many of the like I omit, because they have, by all Authors, been sufficiently
exposed to the view of the whole World, I will only mention how the Count
Palatine makes the Britanni and Brotones, two different Nations, and that the
former were in this Island before Brutes Arrival, and the latter took their
Name from him; For my part let Brute enjoy his Britones, so the Britanni may be
freed from so fond an Original, but both sides will not agree in this
composition, and I am afraid the case will be the same as when Caesar with his
two Names subscribed two Consuls, That (as one said) if Julius be safe, Caesar
has no reason to complain.

Let therefore the case of Brute remain (as it did in Mr. Cambdens days) to be
decided by the Senate of Antiquaries and great Clerks, to the number of which
cited by him, namely, are, Boccace, Ludovicus Vives, Hadrian, Junius, Polidore,
Buchanan, The Learned Writers against Brutes History;
Vignier, Genebrad, Molinaeus, Bodine, who all reject this story.

I will now add that famous Antiquary Mr. Seldom, who asks this Question. If
the right of Primogeniture invested the eldest Son absolutely in the Kingdom,
according Mr. Seldens Question, not yet answered.
to the Custom of Troy, as it is found in the succession of the Trojan Kings,
How comes it to pass that this Custom was not brought over into Britain? a
Question not hitherto fully Answered, no not by Mr. Taylour, Author of the
History of Gavelkind, who will have Mr. Seldom to be in jest and merriment,
when he demands upon this account, How our Britains claim their descent from
the Trojans, when as this Question was but sober and rational, and has true
reference to the Custom of Troy, where the Eldest Son always Inherited the
entire Dominion of his Father, which by many of the British Kings was not
observed. Nay, this usage of Troy was Religiously observed by the Successors of
AEnaeas in the Kingdom of the Latins, for when Silvius Posthumus and Iulus
contended about the Right of Government, Iulus was utterly deposed, and
invested only with the Priesthood, and there was no thoughts of sharing the
Kingdom.

By this, it is manifest Mr. Seldom had relation to the Custom of Troy, and
not to any Gavel-kind among the Welsh; And now I will proceed to the second
British King.

LOCRINE, the eldest Son of Brute, began his Reign Anno Mundi 2874, over this
part of the Island since called England, which Portion was allotted to him by
the division of his Father, as being the fairest parcel of his Empire.

During his Reign, his Brother Albanact was Invaded by Humber, King of the
Hunns, or Scythians, and finally by him slain.

Locrine and Camber raised Forces to revenge the death of their Brother, and so
marched into the North to seek out Humber, and finding him upon the borders of
Scotland, then called Albania, they gave him battle, and speedily vanquished
him, so as himself and Army, after a hot Chase, were drowned in a River, and
from that time the River was named HUMBER.

In this pursuit he took three fair Ladies, the most beautiful of which, named
Estrild, a Scythian Princess, he most doted on, that notwithstanding a former
Contract between him and Guendolaena, Corinaeus his Daughter, resolved to take
this Lady to wife, but the power and authority of Corinaeus forced him to lay
aside that present Resolution, so that marrying Guendolaena, nevertheless
privately enjoyed his beloved Estrild, keeping her in secret during the life of
his Father in Law Corinaeus, which he performed (says the Count Palatine) by
the help of a Vault, to C. Palatine;
which (under pretense of sacrificing to the Infernal Gods) he often resorted.

No sooner Corinaeus was dead but he owned her for his Queen, which so incensed
Guendolaena, that although Locrine was strengthened by the accession of
Cambria, upon the death of his Brother, yet she goes into Cornwall, and by
powerful Solicitations in the behalf of her self and young Son Madan, the
Cornish are brought to assist her.

With these Forces she marched again Locrine, and in a pitched Battle nigh the
River Stour, he is overcome and slain, upon this (according as she would have
it) the Kingdom fell to her Son.

MADAN, the Son of Locrine by Guendolaena, although a Child, yet succeeded his
Father Anno Mundi 2894. During his Minority his Mother was made Regent of the
Kingdom, which she administered with all Justice until the full Age of her Son,
and after the resignment of her Power she retired into Cornwall.

This Kings severity, in putting the Laws in Execution, was esteemed a Tyrant,
and after he had Reigned forty years, he was devoured with Wild Beasts.

He built Madancaster, now Dancaster, but Dancaster or Doncaster took its Name,
as Mr. Cambden supposes, from the River Dona upon which it stands. This Madan
left two Sons behind him, Mempricius and Manlius.

MEMPRICIUS, the eldest Son of Madan, began his Reign Anno Mundi 2949, over the
whole Island, but Manlius his younger Brother rebelled against him. To suppress
this Rebellion, Mempricius signified a desire to Treat with his Brother, who
consenting to it was treacherously, at a meeting, Murdered.

The King having put an end to that trouble, wallowed in Ease and Luxury, and
not content with his Wives and Concubines, he falls to horrid Rapes, and at
last to unnatural Sodomy; but in the conclusion of all, was slain by wild
Beasts, after his Government had lasted about twenty years.

EBRANCKE the Son of Mempricius by his lawful Wife, began to Rule Anno Mundi
2969, he had two and twenty Wives, of whom he had Issue twenty Sons and thirty
Daughters, the Eldest of which was named Guales, or Gualea.

These Daughters, under the Conduct of their Brothers, he sent to Silvius Alba
the Eleventh King of Italy, and the sixth King of the Latins, and this he did
because he heard the Sabines would not give their Daughters in Marriage to the
Latins.

What a ridiculous Prolepsis is this of an Action that happened many years
after, in the days of Romulus, and how, without any sense or reason, is it
ascribed to these Times? The Sabines denied their Daughters to that scum of
People Romulus by his Asylum had picked up, but why should they do it while the
Kingdom of the Latins was in splendor under the Kings of Alba.

In making of Silvius Alba the sixth King of the Latins, Jeoffery of Monmouth
is in the right, and now we have a Clue to lead us in to the understanding of
this Genealogy of AEnaeas, namely, he makes the Kings of Alba to succeed
lineally from Father to Son, and therefore because Silvius Posthumus followed
Ascanius in the Kingdom, he is ignorantly supposed his Son, whereas Iulus was
the Son of Ascanius, who being deposed by the People, Silvius the Son of
AEnaeas by Lavinia was advanced to the Crown, succeeding Ascanius his half
Brother, not his Father in the Kingdom.

By the same Mistake we find, in the British History, One and twenty Kings from
Porrex to Minnegen to be made of a Lineal descent, and yet but Ninety two years
allowed for all their Reigns, so that they begat one another at four or five
years old, whereas, if there be any truth in the Lives of those Kings, they
ought to have been made Contemporary, and to have Ruled different parts of the
Island, as the Government thereof was found divided in the days of Julius
Caesar (when Kent alone had four Princes) a little before whose time these
KINGS are supposed.

But to return to Ebrancke; After that his Sons had conducted their Sisters
under the Conduct of their Brother Assaracus to Silvius Alba, being provoked by
the Germans, they entered that Nation, and, by the assistance of Silvius,
Conquered it: Some write, they were Aided by their Father, who had Invaded, and
by this time Conquered all Gallia, so that we see a vast part of Europe in the
possession of Ebrancke, and his Sons.

The Line of BRUTE never in so fair a way as now, toward the Conquest of the
whole Earth, promised by the Oracle, and performed (as the Britains say) in the
Person of Constantine the Great.

This Prince built Caerbrancke, now York, and erected a Temple to Diana, in
which he placed an Archi flamen.

Mr. Cambden derives Eboracum, or Eburacum, from Eb-Ure, standing upon the
River Ure, as the Eburovices in France, the Eburones in the Netherlands, and
Eblana in Ireland, from the Rivers Fure, Our and Lefny in those Countries.

This King also built in Albania, now called Scotland, the Castle of Maidens,
by King Eden afterward called Edenborough.

This Maiden Castle has since deserved the name of Prostitute, being most
Treacherously betrayed in the late Scottish War (to Cromwell) by Dundaste, to
the then great dis-service of his present MAJESTY, and the dishonor of that
Nation.

Ebrancke dying was buried in the Temple of Diana which he had built, and the
Ceremonies were performed with great pomp and solemnity; He Reigned forty years.

BRUTE GREENSHEILD his eldest Son succeeded him, Anno Mundi 3009, he perfected
the Conquest of Gallia, and revenged some Indignities put upon his Father, by
Brinchild Prince of Hannonia, or Hanault, conquering him upon the banks of the
Sheld: he received his Surname from a Green-shield he used to wear in Battle.

He has the report of a most excellent Prince, just and merciful, a most exact
observer of his Word; He reigned twelve years, and was Interred in his Fathers
City, Caerbranck.

LEIL, the Son of Brute Greensheild, began his Government Anno Mundi 3021, he
built the City Carlisle, called also by the Romans and Britains Lugurallum, or
Luguballium, or Luguballa, from Lugus or Lucus, a Tower, and Vallum, a Trench,
the Ruins of which is seen nigh the City, and he repaired Carleon, now called
Chester, which was supposed to be built by the Giants before Brutes time, the
vast Stones and Arched Vaults therein gave occasion to this Report.

He was a good Prince till the latter end of his days, when falling in to
several Vices and Enormities, created great Dissensions in the Nations, which
ended not in his life.

He was buried at Caerlile, after he had swayed the Scepter five and twenty
years.

LUD, or Lud Hurdibras, is also called Rud, and Rudibras, Surnamed Cicuber, he
began his Government Anno Mundi 3046. The first thing he undertook was the
ending of the Troubles began in his Fathers days; finding happy success in so
great an Undertaking, he studied nothing more than to beautify Britain.

He built a City which he named Caer Gaut, or Kaerkin, now Canterbury, and
there placed a Flamin, likewise Caerquent, now Winchester, and Caer Septon, or
Caer Palladur, supposed to be Shaftsbury, and having Reigned thirty nine years
he died.

BALDUD, the Son of Hurdibras, Anno Mundi 3085, succeeded in the Kingdom. He
studied many years at Athens, and from thence brought four eminent Philosophers
to instruct the Britains in all Liberal Sciences, assigning them Stamford for
the place of their Teaching.

He built Caerbran, now Bath, and is said by the Art of Magic to have found
out those Hot waters. These Springs he dedicated to Minerva, erecting there a
sumptuous Temple in her Honor. This Town Mr. Cambden takes to be Palladur.

This Famous City is seated in Somersetshire, on the River Avon, and is called
by Ptolomy, from the Hot Baths in it, (...), that is, the Hot Waters; by
Antoninus, Aquae Solis, that is, the Waters of the Sun, by the Britains, Yr
ennaint Twymin, Prolomy: Antoninus. (...) Hot Waters.
and Caer Badon, by the Saxons (...), and (...), and from the great resort
thither of maimed People, Akmanchester, the City of sickly Folk.

It is seated in a Low Valley, and the same not great, encompast about with
Hills almost of an equal height, from which certain Springs and little Rivulets
of Water descend to the great commodity of the City. Within the City it self
there boils up three Springs of Hot-waters, which were caused by the wonderful
Art of this Blayden, named Cloyth, i. e. Bleyden the Magician, but as the Monks
will have it, it must be by William of Malmsb.
St. David, who coming to Bath cured the Infection of the Waters thereabouts
and by his Prayers and Benedictions gave them a perpetual Heat, and made them
very healthful and sovereign for many Diseases, to the wonderful comfort and
assistance of all England to this present time.

These are the two Opinions, Heathen and Monkish, that are given concerning the
production of these Springs.

The Water that bubbles or boils up is of a bluish or Sea-colour, and sends up
a thin Steam and Vapor of a strong scent, caused by the veins of Brimstone,
and some Bituminous matter it passes through.

These Baths are not wholesome at all hours, but do require a time of purgation
from that filth, which by the exceeding heat and fermentation of them is cast
up, so that until (by their Sluices) they cleanse themselves, they are shut up,
and none permitted to enter them.

The first and greatest is called the Kings Bath, in the very heart and bosom
of the The description of the BATHS.
City, and nigh to the Cathedral Church. It is enclosed within a Wall, and is
accommodated with two and thirty Seats of Arched-work for Men and Women to sit
upon, who, when they enter, are covered with Linen Garments, and are conducted
by Guides who attend for that purpose.

Where the Cathedral Church now stands, in Ancient times (as the Report goes)
was that Temple consecrated to Minerva, the Patroness of Hot Springs, and this
is collected out of Solinus, who writes of these Baths in Britain. Solinus.


The other two are in a Street on the West side of the City, not two hundred
foot one from the other; One of which is called the Cross-Bath, from a Cross
that formerly stood in the midst of it. It is of a mild and temperate warmth,
and has twelve Seats of stones upon the brinks of it, and encompast with a
Wall.

The other is much hotter, and is called the Hot-Bath.

Nigh these is a Spittle or Lazarus-House, built by Reginald Bishop of Bath,
for the relief of poor diseased People.

I will conclude these Baths with the Verses of Necham.

Barthoniae Thermas vix proefero Vergilianas.

Thus translated,

The British-BATHS to Virgins don't give place.
To Aged Limbs, They, a warm Youth bestow;
And he who crazy, maimed, and feeble was,
His Limbs benumbed; from hence does active go.
Nature on Crutches does not here repair,
But springs, and dances, if once bathed here.
Some think, that dark and subterraneous fire,
With Vestal heat, under these Waters glow,
And that inth' Head from whence these Springs retire,
Natures great brazen Caldrons does bestow.
Such Limbicks foolish Chemists do create,
These Springs from Sulphur only take their Heat.
But to return to King Baldud; Presuming too much either to his skill in
Magiok, or his Philosophical invention of Wings, he brake his Neck from off the
Temple of Apollo in Troy-novant, from a Pinnacle whereof he endeavored to have
flown. He Governed Britain twenty years. Then

LEIR the Son of Baldud succeeded, Anno Mundi 3105; He built Caerleir, called
Legecestria, Leogora, Legeo-cester, and now Leicester, and there placed a
Flamen; He had never a Son, but three Daughters, Gonorilla, Regana, and
Cordeilla his Darling.

In his Old Age, being jealous of their Affection, he called them before him,
and demands, that they would give him some assurance of their Love.

The two Eldest called Heaven and Earth to witness, that they loved him ten
thousand times dearer than their own Souls, that they were not able to express
their infinite Kindnesses, and at last concluded their Flattery, with horrid
Oaths and Asseverations of their Sincerity.

Cordeilla could not be heard amidst all this noise of Affection, so that her
Father turning toward her quickly, by his Countenance gave her to understand
that he had expected something from her also, wherefore with a modest look and
humble deportment, she assured him that as a Father she had ever loved and
honored him, and as her bounden duty was, as a Father, she should reverence
and always esteem him.

This Answer satisfied not the old King, but he showed his Resentments by his
neglect of her, and the sudden advancement of her Sisters, marrying Regana to
Henninus, Duke of Cornwall, and Gonorilla to Maglanus, Duke of Albania,
reserving no Portion for Cordeilla, but it so happened that Aganippus, King of
Gallia, hearing of her Virtue, desired her in Marriage, to whom she was welcome
without any Dower but her own Excellence.

King Leir having thus disposed of his Daughters began to grow Gray, yet
Youthsome, giving hopes to his Subjects of a long life and Government. This
pleased not Gonorilla nor Regana, who began by this time to reflect upon their
Father as the only obstacle of their Happiness, often wishing him removed, and
from wishes they passed on to desires and longing expectations after his Death.
This brought a contempt of his Age, and afterward neglect and hatred of his
Person; finally, being instigated and assisted by their Husbands, they offered
so many Indignities and Violences to him, that in the end he was constrained to
leave the Realm, and take Refuge with Cordeilla.

This rejected Daughter of his received him with all signs and testimonies of
Affection, and, what was more significant, assisted him with powerful Aids, and
in Person went to revenge his wrongs, so that bringing a great Army into
Britain, she destroyed his Enemies, and restored him to his Crown, which he
held for the space of two years, whose Reign in all is computed to be full
sixty years, and was buried at Leicester.

CORDEILLA, the youngest Daughter of Leir, was admitted for Queen An. Mundi
3165, She governed the Realm discreetly for five years, during which time her
Husband Aganippus died. Margan and Cunedage, her Nephews by her Sisters,
Gonorilla and Regana, disdaining to be under the Government of a Woman,
rebelled against her, and so prevailed that they took her Prisoner, but being a
Woman endowed with a high Spirit, she slew her self, rather than to live under
their Tyranny.

CUNEDAG, and MARGAN, possessing the whole Government, Anno Mundi 3170, they
divided the Land between them. To Margan fell Albania, to Cunedag all the
Country on this side of Humber. Margan was not long content with his Portion,
so he invaded his Brother, but driven by him into Wales and there slain, giving
the name of Glan-Margan to that Country.

Cunedagius Ruling alone, erected a Temple to Mars at Perth in Scotland,
placing there a Flamens Seat; He also built a Temple of Minerva at Bangor, and
one to Mercury (Mr. Hollinshead says, Apollo) in Cornwall, he died and was
buried in Troynovant, after he had Ruled 33 years.

RIVAL, the Son of Cunedag, came to the Crown Anno Mundi 3203, in his time it
rained Blood for three days together, from the putrefaction a noysom and
venomous Fly was bred, which in swarms infested the whole Land, and brought a
Contagion both on Man and Beast, and great was the Mortality that ensued in
this Kings Reign.

Rome is supposed to be built about the eight and twentieth year of his Reign,
and in the year after Brutes Arrival 356, some say in the thirty second year of
Rival; He Reigned 46 years, and bidding adieu to the World

GURGUST his Son succeeded, Anno Mundi 3249. In this Kings Reign the Olympiads
were instituted by Iphitus, namely, in the year of the World 3256, and in the
seventh year of his Government.

Sr. Walter Rawleigh places the building of Rome four and twenty years after
Sr. Walter Rawleigh.
the Fourth Olympiad, namely, in the year 3280, and seven years after the next
King Silvius, or Sisilius, with which Prince I will begin the next Period,
supposing him to proceed from the Line of the Kings of Alba, after the
expulsion of Amulius from the Kingdom, by Romulus and Remus, the time so
exactly agreeing with Silvius his leaving the Crown of Alba, and this Silvius
reigning in Britain, that from the driving out of Amulius and his Family from
the usurped Kingdom of the Latins, and to the beginning of this Kings Reign in
Britain, there seems a just competent time allowable for a Voyage.

They who have respect to the British Histories, let them consider that this
Intercourse between Alba and Britain, here supposed, is no new thing, being
practiced in the days of Ebrancke, who sent his Daughters to Silvius, Alba,
then King of the Latins; likewise let them take notice, that this way the
British Kings Succeeding, are grafted into the Family of AEnaeas, by a Line not
so questionable as Brutes, namely, the Kings of Alba, called all SILVII, and
the undoubted Offspring of that Silvius Posthumus, upon whom Brute cannot with
reason be Fathered.

In the next place let them consider, that the Line of the British Kings, at
Silvius, begins to be strangely confused, the Lineal descent being ended in
himself, and a Collateral one begun; so that although Silvius be made the
Brother of Gurgast, yet I take it to make much to my purpose, that he is not
made his Son according to the way the British History is over fond of.

Let them consider likewise, what Wars and Tumults are reported, in the days
of Silvius and his Successor Jago, the constant Accidents attending new
Invaders; and seeing, that Polidore Virgil could venture to place and displace
Kings at his pleasure, inverting, in many places, the long received Order of
the British History, and yet deserve commendation for it, I hope I cannot be
much blamed for setting down my Conjecture, which although it be new, yet it
does not derogate in the least from the Honor of the Britains, being derived
from the same Head, although in a different Channel; And I doubt not, that any
would willingly deny them either the Offspring of AEnaeas, or the Relics of
Troy, if he could make out their Title to that Original, by any other means
than Brute.

THE CHRONICLE AND HISTORY OF Ancient Britain.
CHAP. XII. SILVIUS the First King of BRITAIN, who descended from the Kings of
ALBA, and not from BRUTE.
SILVIUS, the first King of Britain, is supposed to descend from the Kings of
Alba, and to have forsaken his SILVIUS, the first K. of BRITAIN, A. M. 3287.
Olymp. 4.
Country under one of those two great Revolutions of State, the former of which
was caused by the Usurpation of Amulius upon his Brother Numitor, the latter by
the vindication of Numitor's Right by his Nephews, Romulus and Remus.

The truth is, Silvius seems rather to proceed from Amulius than Numitor, upon
the account that Numitor's Issue was destroyed by Amulius, and his Daughter
Ilia made a Vestal Nun, so that none of Numitor's Male-Issue surviving, this
Silvius appears the Son of Amulius, who upon the deprivation of his Father
might seek out new Fortunes.

The Reasons that make this seem probable to me are these;

1. The Intercourse of the British Histories mentioned between the Kings of
Alba and Britain, and that very Intercourse must needs be about this time by
the very Circumstances produced by those Histories themselves; For by their own
confession, it was in those days when the Sabines denied their Daughters in
Marriage to the House of AEnaeas, which happened not (according to the Roman
Histories) till the days of Romulus and Remus.

2. There has been such an Intercourse between both Nations, that they seem to
allow it, who have derived Britain from a Country in Italy of the same Name, as
in Polybius and other Authors is seen.

3. The time of Silvius his Reign salleth about the Greeks first coming into
Britain, namely, about the days of Pythagoras, at the beginning of the
Historical Age, nigh the first Olympiad; Then it is that we find Silvius
mentioned in the British Histories, just upon the dissolution of the Line of
the Alba Kings, called SILVII.

4. It is probable the Family of AEnaeas might (by Ancient Tradition) be
delivered down to Govern this Island in Ancient times, which Tradition, by
BRUTE, cannot possibly be made out, nor so likely by any King as this SILVIUS.

5. We find that the Transmigration of the Soul was taught by the Druids of
this Island, insomuch that Lipsius says, That he knows not whether they
learnt it of Pythagoras, or he of them.

Now Pythagoras lived (by the consent of most Writers) not long after those
days of Silvius, if not equal with him, for who (in things of so vast a
distance) can calculate Time exactly.

6. There are many words in the British Language taken notice of, which, (in
great reason) seem to be derived from the Kingdom of the Latins, and show from
thence their Original, which words were out of use before Julius Caesar's time,
and so could not be introduced by him.

The Old Latins called Deformed persons Meriones, the Cambro-Britains at this
day do call ugly and Rustic Women, Metrtones. The Old Latins call Deceit,
Falla, the Cambro-Britains, Faell. The Old Latins called a Great eater, Glutton
and Gluvia, the Cambro-Britains, Glwth. The Old Latins called a Dug, Ruma, the
Cambro-Britains, Rhumen. The Old Latins called the Chief Magistrate of the
Osci, Meddix, and with the Cambro-Britains, Meddu signifies to be in Authority
and Power. The Old Latins called a Fool, Dalivus, the Cambro-Britains say
Delff, a stupid Fellow. The Old Latins said Clueo, I hear, the Cambro-Britains
call Hearing, Clyn, and to hear, Clywed, to which are added many Ancient Names
of the Old Latins, which have some signification in the British. Clodius, Clod,
Praise; Drusus, Drws, a Door; Sylla, Syllu, to See; Celius, Celu, to Hide;
Cornelius, Cornel, a Corner; Marcus, March, a Horse; Silanus, Silyn, an
Offspring; Cinna, Cynne or Cynnew, to Burn. The Names of Women, Mammea, Man,
Mother; Livia, Lliw, Color; and many more, which are left to the Britains to
find out, who best understand their own Language.

The Introduction of all which words into Britain cannot so well be attributed
to Brutus (had there ever been such a Person) as to this Silvius, upon the
account that Brute was not so long in Italy to learn the Latin Tongue, neither
can the Latin Tongue be supposed to have been in those days (as most Learned
persons do think) any other, than a Dialect of the Greek, which mixing
afterward with the Sabins and Etruscans, became to be the Original of that
Tongue, afterward most in use in Italy, so that Brute being excluded, none can
be found so likely as Silvius, to be the Introducer of it into Britain.

7. Seventhly and lastly, The Cassiterides we find are called Scilly Islands,
whether from the first Arrival of this Prince, which may be supposed in those
parts upon the account of Trade, or from the Rock Sylla, upon the Coast of
Italy, is uncertain, but the former Opinion seems most likely, so that I shall
conclude, seeing that the time (does very well accord) of the Expulsion of
Silvius Amulius, and the Landing of this Silvius in Britain, and seeing an
Alliance between the two Kingdoms of Alba and Britain, is absurdly imagined
before this time, and with great Reason may be referred hither, for seeing
Varro's Historical Age now begins, and some Records of the Greeks remain
relating to these days, I will venture to begin the Historical Age with
Silvius, not condemning all the Traditions of the Britains about AEnaeas and
Troy, nor yet justifying every thing in those Histories of the following Kings;
But this I will say, That many things in them contained may be Truth, although
Fabulously written. For about this time, as I said before, the Grecians began
to keep Records, and much about the same time began their Voyages into Britain,
as may be seen in the foregoing Antiquities.

The Line of SILVIUS from NOAH may be reckoned thus:

This King SILVIUS, in the British History, is also named SILIUS. Nothing is
Recorded of his fifteen years Reign but Brawls and Tumults, and Harding calls
him also Sicilius, and the Son of Gurgust, when as others make him his Brother,
which difference demonstrates the Line of Brute but loosly fastened about this
place.

SICILIUS his Son then did succeed,
Harding, the Old Poet.
In whose time each man did other oppress.
The Law, and Peace, was exiled so indeed;
That Civil wars, and slaughter (of Men express)
Was in every part of the Land, without redress,
And Murderers foul, through all his Land daily,
Without redress, or any other remedy.
Most agree that this King reigned nine and forty years, some say but two, a
vast difference and not econcileable, unless the distinction of Entrance and
Conquest be allowed; But of this I shall say no more, but proceed to his Cousin
Jago.

JAGO, Cousin to Silvius (although in all likelihood not akin at all, this being
a Phoenician name) began his Reign in the year of the World 3336, and died of a
Lethargy, without Issue, after he had reigned twenty eight years, leaving
nothing memorable behind him but his Tyranny.

KINIMAGUS, or Kimmacus, according to most likelihood Son of Silvius, but
others will needs have him Brother of Jago, succeeded Anno Mundi 3364. There is
nothing Recorded of this Prince, but that he was buried at York after he had
reigned four and fifty years.

GORBODUG, the Son of Kinimacus, the fourth from Silvins, An. Mundi 3418, is
stigmatized with the same reproach of Tyranny, and was buried at Troy-novant
after he had Ruled (rather to complete the account of Histories, than in truth)
sixty three years. He left behind him two Sons, Ferrex and Porrex.

FERREX, and PORREX, began jointly to reign Anno Mundi 3476. This is the third
time that the Kingdom fell not entirely to the Elder Brother.

As after the Laws of Troy, the Sovereignty,
Harding.
And all resort of Right, does appertain
To the Eldest Brother; in Property,
The Eldest Sisters right, so by right should have been
Sovereign Lady, and over them all, Queen
By equitee of that ilk Law and Right,
In place where it is holden Law perfeight.
These Brothers for five years in great Amity ruled the Island, until Porrex
the younger, inflamed with the Ambition of being sole Governor, attempts
privately upon the life of Ferrex; But it seems, Ferrex had notice given him of
his Brothers design, thought it proved not so timely as to give opportunity to
avoid the stroke by any other way than flight; Gallia was esteemed the nighest
and securest retirement, where Arriving, he sollicits the Princes of that
Realm, and especially Gunhardus, or Suardus, to assist him in vindicating his
Right to the Crown.

This just Request being obtained, he returns into Britain, and with a mighty
Army gives his Brother battle; Fortune not favoring the just and equitableness
of his cause, his Army was defeated, and in the Battle himself lost his life.

Porrex enjoyed not long his unnatural Conquest, for his own Mother Idone, or
Widen, looking upon him as the bloody murderer of her Son Ferrex, by a deed no
less Barbarous, prosecutes her Revenge, for finding Porrex asleep, privately
murdered him; neither could Motherly pity assuage her Anger, until she had cut
and mangled his Body in a thousand pieces; For this unnatural and much admired
Cruelty, she was slain by the sury of the Multitude.

This extinguished the House of Gorboduc, and periodized the Line of AEnaeas,
insomuch as the Kingdom fell into innumerable divisions, from thence into a
Heptarchy. One seized Loegria, another Cambria, a third Cornwall, a fourth
Albania, and the fifth division is not specified distinctly by any Authors, but
is supposed to be Northumberland or Kent, which in old Pedigrees their names
are cited to be these,

RUDAUCUS King of Wales.
CLOTENUS King of Cornwall.
PINNOR King of Loegria.
STATORIUS King of Scotland.
YEVAN King of Northumberland.
Histories make particular mention of Pinnor, otherwise called Pireman, King of
Loegria, and of Rudacus King of Cambria, Staterus King of Albania, Cloten King
of Cornwall, but are silent in the other Princes names.

This Heptarchy is conjectured to have continued One and fifty years, until
Dunwallo Son of Cloten King of Cornwall, whether by the clearest Right and
Title, or the longest Sword, obtained the whole Kingdom, is uncertain.

According to the foregoing Computation, we need not with Polidore Virgil,
invert the Order of the British History in this place, but continue the
succession of Monarchy from this Period with Guintolin, and not Donvallo
Molmutius; For allowing Molmutius to follow immediately after the Heptarchy,
his two Sons Belinus and Brennus will be found to be Kings of Britain about the
time when Rome was sacked, and so may not be obliged to set those two Princes
any farther backward, as Polidore has done three hundred years, but rather a
little more forward; For from the Entrance of Brute, Anno Mundi 2850, to
Belinus and Brennus, Anno Mundi 3574, are 724 years, whereas Rome is supposed
to be sacked in the seven hundred and tenth year after Brutes Arrival, as is
gathered by Polidore Virgil out of Eusebius. P. Virgil ex Eusebius.


This Controversy, with some others, relating to the same Belinus and Brennus,
is particularly managed by Sr. John Price against Polidore Virgil, as also by
many others. But seeing the true evidence of this matter is to be made out by
Computations, Sr. Joh. Prices Hist. of Brit.
which account in seven hundred years, according to diversity of Authors,
differ half in half, it is the safer way, in my Judgment, to follow the usual
method in the Succession of the British Kings, than by the dependence of the
uncertainty of Chronology, in things of so vast a distance, to invert the whole
Order of their Reigns, and so like Witches, who would conjure them out of the
World, read them backwards.

MOLMUTIUS, called Du^nvallo, Son of Cloten, King of Cornwall, either judging
himself to have the better Right or longer Sword, invaded his Neighbor Princes.

First he began with Pinnor King of Loegria, whom he overcame and slew, before
he could join with his Confederates, Rudacus King of Cambria, and Staterius
King of Albania; After this success he sets upon the forementioned Princes
with an Army of thirty thousand Men, but the Victory hanging too long for his
eager expectation, he made use of a stratagem, for counterfeiting the Arms of
his Enemies, he gave them a terrible overthrow in the Encounter.

The King of Northumberland, or Kent, is not mentioned in this Battle,
wherefore he is supposed, beforehand, to have surrendered his Kingdom. By
thismeans Molmutius Dunvallo, called also Donebant, became the sole Monarch of
this Island, Anne Mundi 3529.

If he got the Crown by Oppression, he managed it with no less prudence and
moderation, enacting several excellent Laws, translated out of the British
Speech into the Latin, by Gildas, and afterward out of the Latin into the
English Tongue, by Alfred King of England.

And these Laws are Recorded by Count Palatine Of the Seven Molmutian Laws.
, and are taken notice of by Mr. Sheringham, and particularly recited by Mr.
Seldom in his Janus Anglorum. They were to this effect. 1. Ut Templa Deorum,
etc. That the Temples of the Gods should enjoy such Privileges and Immunities,
that no Malefactor flying to them for Sanctuary could be seized, or by force
drawn from them, before he had obtained pardon. 2. That Highways leading to
Temples, or Roads to great Cities, should have the like Privileges. 3. That
Ploughs, Oxen, and other Laboring Cattle, should enjoy the same Immunities;
and the reason of this Law is given, because otherwise the Ground might lie
untilled, and the People perish for want of Bread. 4. He set out the number of
Ploughs that should be in every Shire and Hundred, with severe Penalties upon
all that should be the occasion of lessening the Number. 5. The fifth is the
same almost with the third, only it seems a little to restrain it, namely, That
no Oxen or Laboring Beast should be seized for Debt, unless there were no
other Goods or Chattels to make satisfaction. 6. He ordained set Weights and
Measures for buying and selling. 7. A Law against Thieves and Robbers.


These are the Molmutian Laws, or rather Heads of Laws, but how they should be
translated by Gildas, who professes he knew nothing of the Britains before
caesar, I know not.

The bringing also of the four great Roads that ran cross Britain, are referred
to this King, but Mr. Cambden with more Reason brings them down to the Romans
time, whom Mr. Seldom intimates.

He is supposed to build Malmsbury, and two neighboring Castles, Lacoc and
Tetbury; Malmsbury was called by him Caer Bladon, but upon what account Authors
make no mention. The Ancient name of it was also changed by the Saxons into
Ingleborne, Maildulfburg, Adelmsberg, Marleberg, and in Antoninus his
Ittnerarium, is thought to be that Cunetio mentioned by him, situated upon the
River Antoninus's Itin.
Kenet.

Another place built by this Prince is the Vies, called Devisio, Devies, and
Divise. He erected also a Temple in Troy-novant, and dedicated it to Peace and
Concord, in the place afterward named Blackwell-Hall.

He is reported the first Prince of Britain, that was enstalled with the Rites
and Ceremonies of Coronation, wearing a Golden Crown, and other Kingly
Ornaments at his solemn Inauguration, a Custom neglected by his Predecessors,
as having more Right, and so needed less state and formality.

Having Reigned forty years, and appointed his two Sons his Successors, He
departed this life, and was buried in the Temple of Concord, in Troynovant.

BELINUS and BRENNUS, his two Sons succeed him, Anno Mundi 3574. Princes famous
in the Roman Histories, for their sacking Rome, their Conquest of Pannonia,
Macedonia, and the destroying of Apollo's samous Temple at Delphos.

Sr. John Price supposes Belinus to be that Belgius mentioned in those
Histories, and that the mistake in naming him Belgius for Belinus proceeded
from this cause, The (...) Price.
Scribe might write Belius for Belinus, then n for shortness being writ over
the head, which being over seen by those that transcribed it, afterward came
to be written Reljus, with the j Consonant, and afterward for sounds sake made
Belgius; concerning which, they that desire to be better satisfied may have
recourse to his Defense of the British History, where also he proves against
Polidore Virgil, that Brennus was the same person that sacked Rome, and
destroyed the Temple at Delphos, where he also shows, that he died not in
Italy, and that the destruction of that Temple did not happen so long after the
sacking of Rome, as Poltdore would needs have it, concerning all which
Circumstances, and many others, the Reader is referred to Sr. John Price,
because I intend not to write a History of Rome (save only what shall relate to
the Roman Antiquity) but of Britain, the Actions of Brennus and Belgius being
sufficiently known, as they relate to that City. And, in the Judgments of most
Persons, it will seem unequal to hang the Antiquity of the Roman Writers upon
the credit of the British.

BELINUS and BRENNUS being left Coheirs of the Kingdom by their Father, fell
to the dividing of it.

Belinus gave to his younger Brother Albania, reserving to himself all the sair
Possessions on this side the Hamber; This division being so Ancient and equal
yet contented not Brennus, whose Ambition aimed at higher matters, to the
effecting of which, after seven years peacable Reign, he endeavored to
strengthen himself with powerful Allies, and to that purpose sails into Norway
(after he had, according to some, secured his Interest in Armorica, called
Britain, in France, and in the Country of the Allobroges) here he marries the
Daughter of the Norwegian King, Elsin.

Belinus hearing of these Actions of his Brother, and doubting the Consequence,
especially because he understood him to be a Feudatory Prince, and so bound to
give an account before hand of his Actions, entered and seized all his
Dominions, securing his Forts and Navies; Brennus advised of this prepares for
his Return, and was attended with the Navy Royal of Norway, accompanied with a
mighty Army.

After a few days sail, he was set upon by Guilthdacus King of Denmark, who
had been a long Suitor to the Daughter of Elsin King of Norway; In this
Conflict the Norwegian Fleet was worsted, and the Ship wherein the new Bride
was conveyed is taken, but Brennus escapes by flight.

Afterward it happened that a mighty Storm arising, Guilthdacus, by force of
Weather, was driven upon the Coast of Northumberland, where he was detained by
Belinus. In some reasonable time after that, Brennus having recollected his
scattered Navy, and new Rigged, and furnished his Ships with Men and
Provisions, he sent to his Brother Belyn to restore him his Wife and
Possessions, injuriously by him detained; this Request being denied
notwithstanding the Justness, occasioned him to Land in Albania, and marching
up into the Country, at a Wood named Calater he met and Encountered with his
Brother, but was overcome to the utter ruin of all his Army, so that with
twelve only of his Retinue he fled into Gallia (whether this was his first or
second Voyage thither is uncertain) where he found kind entertainment from
Seguinus, or Seginus, King of Armorica, or Britain.

Whilst he was securing his Interest in that Nation, Belinus his Brother calls
a Council of his Kingdom, where it was debated what Proceedings to use toward
the King of Denmark, and finally concluded, that he should enjoy his Liberty
upon doing Homage to the King of Britain, and paying a yearly Tribute to the
value of a thousand pound, which being agreed to by that King, sor himself and
Successors, he was honorably dismissed.

After these happy Successes, Belyn set himself to the finishing of that great
Work begun by his Father Dunwallo, the making and paving four great Highways
through his Kingdom of Loegria, now called England.

The first is named Fosse, and begins at the Corner of Totness in Cornwall,
and passes through Devonshire, and Somersetshire, and so to Coventry,
Leicester, and from thence (as Ranulph, a Monk of Chester records) through
the Wastes to Newark, and ended at Lincoin. But what these Wastes should be,
Mr. Cambden is at a Ranulph, a Monk.
stand, who says, that the Common voice was, That it went full North through
Notinghamshire, and that Antonine the Emperor seems to carry it Northwards,
through Leicestershire into Lincolnshire; And he adds, that of this Way there
are some Tracts of it found by Old Ruins, but none in the other.

The second Way is named Watling street, and runs South-east into
North-east, and crosses the Fosse. It begins at Dover, and passes by the
middle of Kent, over the Thames beside London, by West of Westminster, and so
on by Sr. Albans, and by the West Side of Dunstable, Stratford, Toucester and
Wedon, and by South Killingborn, or Killebourn, by Athriston to Gilbert's Hill,
that now is named Wrekin, and so by Severn, passing beside Worcester, and
thence to Stratton, and so to the middle of Wales to a place called Cardigan on
the Irish Sea.

The third Way is named Erming street. This goes from West North west, unto
East South-east, and begins at Menevia at St. David's in Wales, and runs
on to Southampton.

The fourth, Hekencldis-street, or Kikeneldis-street, which goes forth by
Worcester, Wickham, Bermingham, Leichfield, Darby, Chester-field, and by York
to Tinmouth.

By this time Brennus had got so sar into favor with Seginus the Duke of
Armorica, that he married his Daughter, and by the consent of his Nobles, in
case he failed of Issue-Male, the same Duke was admitted Heir of the Crown, and
not long after by the death of the said Prince, he was accordingly received as
their lawful Prince, all States of the Realm swearing Fealty to him.

Being now in the possession of a Kingdom, Brennus raises a powerful Army, and
Lands in Britain, intending to revenge the wrongs done him by his Brother
Belyn; And now was it that both Armies were ready to give Battle, when their
Mother Conwenna interposed as a Mediatress between them, and by her many tears
and powerful persuasions brought them to a Friendly accord, so that embracing
each other, they were heartily Reconciled, to the exceeding joy of all
Spectators.

After their Arrival at Troy-Novant, they consulted which way best to employ
their Armies, where the motion was made by Brennus, and accepted by Belinus, to
join Forces, and undertake the Conquest of all Gallia, which Enterprise was
attended with a Fortune beyond expectation; For they did not only Conquer all
Gallia but Italy, and great part of Germany also, and in the end sacked Rome it
self, where (some say) Brennus lost his life; others, that he survived that
great and general Overthrow.

Some make Belinus a Partner with him in his Greatness, others say, he went not
into Gallia with him, or if he did, that he soon returned, leaving the
management of all those Foreign employments to the Conduct of his Brother
Brennus, whom we will leave to the Histories of the Romans (as if so be this
were the same Brennus that sacked Rome) to receive what Fate in most probability
is assigned to him.

Vitus makes him, to have killed himself at his Repulse before Delphos. R.
Vitus.


BELYN, now absolute Monarch of Britain, sets himself to the beautifying of his
Dominions. He built Caerleon upon Uske, called from thence Caer Uske, and Caer
Huth, where he placed an Arch-Flamen; He also adorned Troy-novant, with a Gate,
called to this day Belings-Gate, on the top of which he caused a Tower to be
made, and at the Basis or Foundation thereof, an Harbor for Ships to Ride in.

He is said to be the first Founder of the Tower of London; After he had
Reigned two and twenty years he died, being the first of all the British Kings
whose Corpse was consumed in a Funeral-pile, and his Ashes carefully gathered in
a Brazen, some say, a Golden Urne, and preserved on the highest Pinnacle of the
Gate or Arch he had built, as some think, for that purpose.

GURGUINT, Sir-named Brabtruc, according to others, Barbarous, i. e. the
Red-beard; the English Chronicle calls him Corinbratus, and was the Son of
Belyn, and succeeded him Anno Mundi 1596.

In his days the Danes refused the payment of their Tribute, whereupon he
sailed into Denmark, and, by sorce of Arms, obliging them to renew their
Treaty, received Homage of their Kings and Chief Nobility, then Embarked again
for Britain.

In his Return he met with a Fleet of thirty Sail about the Isle of Orkney,
these he Encountered, and having taken their Captain Bartholoin, or Partholoin,
he demanded of him what he was, and the reasons of his Adventures into those
Parts. Partholoin answers, That He and his Followers were named Balences, or
Basclenses, and were Exiles of Spain, and banished their Country with their
Wives and Children, and thereupon struck out to Sea to seek out an Habitation.
It is said the King gave them Ireland, being a place not then Peopled.

After his Arrival into Britain, the King made it his business to establish and
confirm the Laws of his Ancestors, and in his Reign that Famous University of
Cambridge was Founded, by Cantaber, Brother of Bartholin.

This King also built Caer-werith, or Lancaster, Caer-Peris, or Porchester, in
Hampshire, the Seat of a Flamen, and Caer-Gaurvie, now Warwick, where he was
buried after he had reigned nineteen years.

GUINTELINUS, or Guintellus, the Son of Gurguint, was Crowned King Anno Mundi
3615; He was a Prince learned, prudent, and of singular Justice and Moderation,
and that which conduces more to the Glory of his Reign, was, that he was blessed
with a Lady with no less Endowments and Excellencies, her names was Martia;
From this Lady, that Law called Mathehelage, or Marchenelaghe, had its
beginning, and Name translated by King Alphred, out of the British into the
Saxon Tongue. Mr. Hollinshead wonders and admires at Providence, that two such
wise Princes should come at once to the management of the Kingdom, especially
at a time when so many Civil Discords were reigning; But I find none of these
Civil Discords reigning, either in his own, his Fathers, Grandfathers, or
Great-Grandfathers days. It Is true Belyn had War with his Brother, but in a
few years it was wholly ended, to the great satisfaction of them both. Where
then are these Civil Discords? Indeed Polidore Virgil, out of his great
Providence places this King before his Great-Grandfather, which I suppose he
did for the wonderful wisdom of this Prince and his Wife, whom he thought best
able to end the Civil dissensions caused by the Pentarchy, and therefore where
Polidore admires the wonderful Providence of God, we ought to take him as
applauding his own Invention, for never before him was ever such an Invention
made for the stating of the British Kings; But Mr. Hollinshead, who follows
on the Received course of the Succession, ought not to complain of Civil
Discords in this Kings Reign, because they had been long since ended. And this
I take notice of more especially, because I find the same Error in other
Authors, who have written after Polidore, which was grounded from the delight
of their own Fancies, rather than to deliver the truth exactly down to the
People.

This King Reigned twenty six years and was Interred at Troy-Novant, now London.

SICILIUS the second, and Son of Guintolin, being about seven years of Age, was
received as King, under the Regency of his Mother Martia, Anno Mundi 3641, and
it seems, that those Laws called Martiae were exacted by this Queen, during
the Minority of her Son, rather than in the life of her Husband.

The Count Palatine will have this King to have reigned fifteen years alone,
but it is generally thought he Governed not above fifteen in all, seven under
the Tuition of his Mother, and eight after his full Age, and having given the
signs of a hopeful Prince, he was suddenly snatched out of this World by Death,
and then the Government fell to

KIMARUS, the Son of Sicilius, who began his Reign over Britain A. M. 3656, and
being of a wild and ungoverned disposition, as given up to all manner of Lusts
and Exorbitances, was killed in the Woods, in his pursuit after his game of
Hunting, some say by an ambush of Men, others, by Wild Beasts. He reigned but
three years, and was buried at Caer-leon.

ELANIUS, or Danius his Brother, succeeded Anno Mundi 3659; this King was not
inferior to his Predecessor in wickedness of his life, in so much as some
Chronicles make him one and the same Person, sor so exactly did these two
Princes correspond in their Vices. He held the Scepter ten years, then

MORINDUS, bastard Son of Elanius, by his Concubine Tonguestula, was admitted
to the Crown A. M. 3669, a Man of great strength, neat proportion of Body and
of beautiful Features. As to the quality of his mind he was liberal and
bountiful, but withal exceeding passionate. In his days the Moriani, or rather
Morini, a People of Gaul, Landing in Northumberland, with fire and sword wasted
that Country, which Morindus hearing of, with all expedition gathered up his
Forces, and with long and wearisom Marches, made up to them, and in one battle
utterly defeated them.

It is said (in this Encounter) Morindus showed all the signs of personal
Courage, Anger and Revenge, lifting him up beyond the common ability of Humane
nature. The Captives that were taken felt the severity of his wrath, being
every one of them (by several exquisite and new devised Tortures) sacrificed to
his severe Resentments, so that in the punishment of these Miserable wretches,
it is a question whether he showed more his Skill or his Cruelty. Going along
the Seacoast for his Recreation, he espied a hideous Monster arising out of
the Irish Sea, which immediately seized and devoured many, who for their
pleasures were walking upon the shore; The King beholding the lamentable
destruction of his Subjects, put Spurs to his Horse, and with great fury and
haste assailed this Devourer; The Contest held a long time doubtful, but at
last great was the joy and shoutings of the Spectators to see this Monster
fall, but in the end greater was their sorrow when they saw the King with his
fall overwhelmed and destroyed.

This happened in the ninth year of his Reign. He left five Sons behind him,
Gorbomannus, Archigallo, Elidurus, Vigenius and Peridurus.

GORBOMANNUS, the eldest Son of Morindus, possessed himself of the Kingdom Anno
Mundi 3678, a Religious Prince he evidenced himself to the World for repairing
of decayed Temples, and erecting New ones in several places in his Dominions,
in which he placed Flamens.

He is said to build Grantham in Lincolnshire, and some say Cambridge,
Anciently called Granta, Caer-Grant, and Grant-chester, although others will
have it built by Cantaber, and walled about by a Count named Grantinus, see
Cambria Triumphans, page 68. He reigned ten years, etc. Camb. Triumph. p. 68.


ARCHIGALLO, the second Son of Morindus, succeeded his Brother Gorbomannus,
Anno Mundi 3688. He endeavored to depress theNobility by depriving them of all
Power and Command, to which purpose he contrived Plots, and then discovered
them, having his Engines secretly employed, who at any time would accuse (whom
they pleased) of Delinquency, or at least dissatisfaction to the present
Government; These pretended Crimes they redeemed with great Fines, and
intolerable Compositions for their Estates. Many other things he committed, as
the advancing of Unworthy persons to Dignities and Offices, and the spoiling
and robbing of his Richest Subjects, for all which he was Deposed after one
years Government. Upon this

ELIDURE his Brother was (with the general consent and applause of the whole
Realm) chosen King Anno Mundi 3689. He was called by his Subjects, Elidure the
Meek.

Hunting one day in the Wood Calater, in the Thicket of the Wilderness he
espied his Brother Archigallo, and being struck with pity of his Misfortune,
he secretly conveyed him home to his House at the City Aldud, or Acliud,
where feigning himself sick, he assembled, by his Writ, all the Nobles of his
Realm, and there, partly by Persuasions, and partly by Commands, he engaged
them to receive again his Brother Archigallo for their lawful Sovereign,
afterward calling an Assembly of his Commons at York, he there publicly
resigned his Crown, and taking it off his own Head, placed it on his Brother
Archigallo's, after he had Reigned three years.

ARCHIGALLO being restored to his Crown, Anno Mundi 3692, by his wise and sober
deportment, he redeemed the Affections of the Nobility, and the love of his
People. He discards his former Favorites, and adheres to the sage and prudent
Advice of the best of his Nobility, and Reigning to the general liking of all
his Subjects for the space of ten years, he died and was buried at Caerbranck
at York.

Elidurus, after the death of his Brother was lawful King of this Island, and
so with much Honor and Reputation received the second time the Crown, An.
Mundi 3702, but was soon deposed by the Ambition of his Brothers, Vigenius and
Peridurus, after one years Government, when being seized by them, and his
Person confined to the Tower of London, they divided the Kingdom. Peridurus
received Albania, and Vigenius the Country on this side Humber.

Vigenius died after he had reigned seven years, so that the whole Kingdom came
to Peridurus, who managed it (as some write) with great Moderation and Justice;
as others say, with Tyranny and Oppression, but he died not till after he had
Governed nine years in all, and then was buried at Pykering, a Town he himself
had built.

Elidurus again resumed the Crown, being delivered out of Prison, where, some
say, he was confined by his own Election, and not by the Injustice of his
Brothers; This was in the year of the World 3712, and after he had Reigned four
years, to the general applause of all men.

He died and was buried at Caerlisle.

GORBONIANUS, the Son of Regni and Grandchild to Elidure, was Crowned King of
Britain Anno Mundi 3716. He reigned with the general approbation of all People
for the space of ten years.

Jeoffery of Monmouth makes this Regni the Son of Gorbonian, a worthy Prince.

MORGAN, or Margan, succeeded Anno Mundi 3726, he was the Son of Archigallo; he
ruled fourteen years with great peace and tranquillity. After him

EMERIANUS, another Son of Archigallo, was advanced to the Crown Anno Mundi
3740. He was of a quite contrary disposition to his Brother, so that Governing
by Will and Pleasure, and not according to Law, he was laid aside after he had
sat in the Throne seven years.

YDWALLO, the Son of Vigenius, followed Anno Mundi 3747. By the Example and
Misfortune of his Predecessor, he avoided Tyranny, and held the Scepter twenty
years.

RINCO, the Son of Peridurus, an Heroic Prince, and a great Warrior, assumed
the Royal Dignity Anno Mundi 3767, and reigned sixteen years.

GERUNTIUS, the Son of Elidurus, followed him Anno Mundi 3783. He gave life to
the Laws of his Predecessor, and Governed with Justice and Moderation for the
space of twenty years.

CATELLUS, his Son, reigned after him in the year of the World 3803; he was the
great Patron of the Poor and Distressed, insomuch as he hanged all such as were
their Oppressors. He reigned ten years and was buried at Winchester.

COILUS began his reign Anno Mundi 3813, and reigned ten years, then was buried
at Notingham.

PORREX, the second, began Anno Mundi 3823. This was a good Prince, he reigned
five years.

CHERIMUS, Surnamed the Drunkard, succeeded Anno Mundi 3828, and swayed the
Scepter one year. Then succeeded

FULGENTIUS, the eldest Son of Cherimus, Anno Mundi 3829, and reigned also but
one year, after him.

ELDRED, the second Son of Cherimus, reigned another year more, Anno Mundi 3830.

ANDROGEUS, the third Son of Cherimus, enjoyed the Government another year,
being 3831.

URIANUS, the Son of Androgeus, began his reign Anno Mundi 3831, and he lived
three years, and in that time gave himself to all Riot and Intemperance.

ELIUD, Anno Mundi 3835; He was a great Astrologer, and ruled five years.

DEDANTIUS, or Dedacus, A. M. 3840, and he Ruled five years.

DETONUS, A. M. 3845; he reigned two years, as Mr. How affirms, the Count
Palatine speaks nothing of this King, but places Clotenus after Dedacus, so
likewise does Fabius, and after Clotenus he sets Gurguenites, the same (as I
suppose) with Gurguenius, put in the same Order by Count Palatine, so that
supposing this Detonus to be the same person with Clotenus, the next Prince is

GURGUINEUS, A. M. 3847, reigned three years; Merianus (by the consent of all
Writers) reigned two years; Bleduns, or Bladunus, two years; Gapenus, three
years; Ovinus, two years; Sisilius the third, two years. Then

BLEDGABREDUS succeeded, Anno Mundi 3861; He so far exceeded all men (says the
Count Palatine) in the Art of Singing, that he seemed to be the God of Music,
and besides his skill in Vocal, says Galfridus, he was expert in all
Instrumental harmony. He reigned ten years.

ARCHIMALUS succeeded, he was the Brother of Bledgabredus, and Ruled two years.

ELDOLUS began his Government Anno Mundi 3873, and Reigned four years. In his
days many Prodigies in the Heavens (as flakes of Fire breaking through the
Element, loud Noises) appeared.

RODIANUS, or Redian, succeeded, and reigned two years.

REDARGIUS, Count Palate. calls Roderecius, he reigned three years.

SAMULIUS was King two years, Penisillus three, Fabian says, Samulius
Penisillus was the same Person, and reigned five years.

PYRRHUS, Pyrrus, or Phyrrus, according to Fabian, was King two years, and
CAPORIUS two years, after him

DINELLUS, the Son of Caporius, Fabian calls Glyguell Dinell, who began his
Reign Anno Mundi 3891. Com. Pal. commends him for many Princely Virtues, he
reigned four years, and then died.

HELI, his Successor, reigned not a year, so that we see the beginning of King
LUDS Reign (who succeeded Heli) falls in the year of the World 3895, twenty
years before Julius Caesar's Arrival into this Island, who is supposed to have
made it Tributary in the ninth year of Cassibelan the Successor of Lud, so that
taking in the Eleven years of King Lud, and the Ninth of Cassibelan, and we
shall find the time to fall exactly.

I know there is great difference in Authors, not only concerning the Names of
these Princes but the Numbers of them, and the times of their Reigns, and
thereby great confusion is made in the British History, but more especially
from Elidure to Lud; But this Calculation I have faithfully gathered, by
comparing the Authors of most Credit, and so have set down their Names as they
are most generally Received; And seeing there is so little time allowed, from
Elidure to Lud, for such a number of Princes, being two or three and thirty,
and but 186 years allotted for their Reigns, we cannot give Hely forty years,
according to Jeoffery of Monmouth, but are forced to comply with others, who
abridge him seven Months. Likewise Coel the First, by the Count Palatine, has
twenty years assigned him, whereas others allow him but ten.

But to give my Opinion concerning this matter, I think that the making of so
many Kings, from Elidure to Lud, to succeed one another, cannot agree either
with Truth or Reason, for as also the latter Princes of this Catalogue, for
above twenty years together, have not (excepting three or four of them) above
one, two, or three years at most assigned them for their Reigns, so the
Compilers of this History have been too profuse in the time they gave for the
first Kings Reigns, and this will appear, if we consider Elidure died an Old
man, in the year of the World (according to the best of their Computations)
3716. Yet we hear of a Son of his named Gurguntius, beginning his reign Anno
Mundi 3783, that is sixty seven years after his Fathers death, and continuing
his Reign twenty years, so that he lived in all after his Fathers decease
eighty seven years; now allowing his Father to have begat him but twenty years
before his death, which is but reasonable, considering his years, and we shall
find Gurguntius to be 107 years Old, a prodigious Age, so Rimo lived seventy
one years after the death of his Father Peridurus, so strangly prodigal were
the Composers of this Genealogy to the former Princes, and so exceeding
niggardly to the latter.

It is more rational therefore to believe these Kings, not to have all of them
succeeded one another, but many of them to have been Rulers contemporary, of
particular Provinces of the Island, as the Government thereof was found to be,
even twenty years after, at the Invasion of it by Julius Caesar.

King HELY built him a Palace, and resided most especially in that part of the
Kingdom, called after his name Ely; but Bid derives the Isle of Ely from Eels,
Polidore l'irgil from the Greek Helos, signifying a Fennish or Morish Ground.
Beda. Pol. Virg. (...). Hum. Llhoid.


Humphry Llhoid, whom Mr. Cambden follows, from Nelig, in the British Tongue
signifying an Osyer or Sallow, which grows in abundance in those Parts, and of
which the Inhabitants make great profit, by weaving Baskets and such like
Wares; This King was buried in the same Island.

LUD, the eldest Son of Hely, began his Reign Anno Mundi 3895; He was endowed
with all the excellent qualities belonging to a Prince, and is set down as an
excellent Pattern of a wise and prudent Governor.

Amongst the most remarkable Monuments of his Reign, was his Repairing or
building the Walls of Troy-novant, and on the West Side thereof erecting a most
sumptuous and beautiful Gate, called at this day Lud-gate.

Verstegan will by no means suffer that this Gate took its denomination from
King Verstegans Antiq.
Lud, because of the last termination of it, Gate, shows the Name to be of
Saxon, and not British, Original; but Verstegan might have considered, that the
Saxons, although they expressed the Names of many British Places by words of
their own Language signifying the same thing, yet what could they substitute in
the room of a proper Name, which remains always the same in all Languages;
Besides, he forgot clearly that there are many Places in England that remain
mixed compounds of both the British and Saxon Tongues. As for Example, Durham,
Dunholne, Dorchester, and a thousand more I could name had I time, besides many
Usages and Customs in England, which participate of both Languages alike. To
instance, in the Compounds of Iavel, a British word, signifying a Tenure among
the Welsh, we find Gavel-kind, Sand-Gavel, Gavel Oat, Swine-Gavel, and many
others; Why therefore may not Ludgate be Luds-Gate, although it has both
Languages mixed in it? Let us hear therefore Verstegan's ingenious Derivation;
Ludgate (says he) is as much as to say, Leodgate, or the Peoples-Gate, Leod
signifying People.

Here Mr. Sheringham asks him but a reasonable question; What, did the People
Sheringham, de Orig. Angl.
pass only through this Gate, and the Bards and Druids through the other only?
And I may demand of him also, upon what grounds he supposes the Concourse of
People to have been greater through this Gate than any other.

Indeed, since the Suburbs have been built and increased, above the greatness
of the City, and since his MAJESTY and the late Kings of England, for many
successions have been pleased to live in the Western parts of them, the Trade
by necessity has been drawn into these quarters, and so Ludgate has been made
the greatest Thorowfare, but before the Suburbs were built, or before they were
brought into Credit by his MAJESTY'S Royal Person and Court, or when the Kings
of England lived in the City it self, How came Ludgate to be the Gate of the
People more than of the rest?

Neither is Lelands Opinion any thing more to be embraced, who calls it
Fludgate, Leland.
from the little Rivolet running beneath it. It is a thousand pities (for the
sake of this invention) that the Gate was not built upon the Rivulet, but now,
as the case stands, this most miserable Derivation is not to be helped out,
but by a faith that is able to remove Mountains.

Let therefore King Lud enjoy the Honor of that Structure, whose very mute
Statue (as Mr. Sheringham says) seems to call out against those who would
deprive him of it.

But besides these two Magnificent Works, the Wall and the Gate, this Prince is
said to have taken such exceeding delight in this City, that he built himself a
Palace not far from Ludgate, supposed by some, to have been in the place where
the Bishop of Londons Palace stood, Others think, at Bernards Castle. he is
thought to have built a Temple also not far from his Court, where St. Paul's
Cathedral afterward stood, and by these great Works, and his continual
residence in that City, the name of Troy-novant was changed into London or
Lundain, that is, the residency of King Lud.

The British Histories write, that the changing the name from Troy-novant into
Lundain, was the cause of great dissension between King Lud, and a bold
Commander of those times, Nennius, who eagerly opposed this Innovation, whereby
the Memory of Troy, which so long bad been preserved, would be utterly
abolished; But this story is very much suspected of late to have been
altogether Fabulous, and there are other Derivations given of the Name of that
most Famous City.

Erasmus brings it from a City in Rhodes, called Lindus, but this is rejected
by Mr. Erasmus. Camb. Brit.
Cambden, who in the place of it puts down two Conjectures. The first is, That
seeing the Britains called any place fenced with Trees, a Town, or City, which
they expressed by the word Lihwn, that this City by way of Excellence might be
named the Lihwn, and afterward by corruption London. But the second is more
probable, That it was called London from Lihong, signifying in the British
Tongue, a Ship, and Dinas in the same Language, a City, so that it is as much
as the City of Ships; And to confirm this Opinion, he proves that it was called
Anciently Longidinium, and by an Old British Bard, Lihong-Porth, that is, a
Harbor of Ships.

In my thoughts, this seems to be the truest Etymology of that most honorable
City, which in all Ages has been a place of great Traffic and Commerce with
the whole World, and by the convenience of its Situation upon so Navigable a
River, can receive Ships of great Burden, and in great Multitudes, so that the
Masts of them appear to be what the Britains called Llhwun, namely, Woods and
Forests.

As concerning the Name of TROY-Novant, by which this City is supposed to The
true denomination of Troy-novant.
have formerly been called (because I am now taking my leave of the British
History, and am come to the time of the Romans) I will freely put down my
Conjecture.

Nant, in the British Tongue, or Novant (for they are both one as Mr. Cambden
shows) signifies a Valley, and Cre, Cri, or Cra, a City, and both taken from
the Cambdeu.
Phoenicians, as I have shown by several Places in Cornwall; Crinovant
therefore, is as much as the City of the Valleys, for the People who were under
the subjection of this City, lived Low, upon the River Thames, and the whole
Region, in a manner, lay in a Valley, so that they may be supposed to have been
called (as other places have been upon the same account) Noantes, Novantes, or
Nantuates, and this City Crinovant, or the City of the Novantes, the similitude
of which Name (as I have shown in another place) gave occasion to those who
began the Trojan Original, to call it Troy-novant, or the New-Troy.

King LUD, after he had Reigned eleven years, and was Interred in his Temple
near Ludgate, left behind him two Sons, Androgeus and Theomantius.

Com. Pal. says, that this Lud was Sir-named Immanuentius, and was slain by
his Count. Palate.
Brother Cassibelan at Troy-novant, and that his eldest Son Androgeus was
Sir-named Mandubratius, and was the same Prince of the Trinobantes, whom we
find in Caesar's Commentaries, to have sled into Gallia, and to have put
himself under the protection of Caesar.

Of this Mandubratius, I shall have occasion to speak in the History of the
Romans in this Island, whom we shall find Invading it in the next Kings Reign,
called cassibelanus.

And seeing now we are come to the Times of the Roman Histories, the Authority
of which is unquestionable, I shall faithfully Collect the Government of
Britain under their Emperors, from the Latin Writers themselves (yet, not
altogether so, as to neglect absolutely the British Histories) in the Lives of
their Kings, and the Circumstances of their Government.

This I do, because that the Histories of the Romans, concerning this Island,
as their Government in it, is often broke off and interrupted, and those
Breaches are supplied by the continuance of the British Succession, but I shall
place the Roman History in the first place, as infinitely surpassing the
British in its Authority, and all along, the British History shall be set under
it, as attending only, and subservient to it.

THE NAMES OF THE Roman Emperors WHO GOVERNED THIS ISLAND, FROM The first
Invasion thereof by Julius Caesar, until it was quitted of the Roman
Jurisdiction by Honorius, immediately before the Entrance of the Saxons. AND A
Catalogue of the Lieutenants employed by them.
JULIUS CAESAR, The first Invader of the Britains, after whose Second
Expedition and Death, there ensued an Inter-regnum of the Romans in this
Island, until the Conquest thereof by Claudius, and his Lieutenants. CLAUDIUS,
the second of the Romans that subdued this Island, Reigned 13 Years. Aulus
Plautius, P. Ostorius, Aul. Didius,
His Lieutenants. NERO. 13 years. Verannius, Paulinus Suet. Petilius Crealis,
Petronius Turpilianus, Trebellius Maximus,
Lieutenants. GALBA, 7 months. Trebellius Maximus, Lieutenant under both. OTHO,
95 days. VITELLIUS, 8 months, 4 days. Vectius Bolanus, Lieutenant. VESPASIAN
the Elder, 10 years. Petilius Crealis, Julius Frontinus, Julius Agricola,
Lieutenants. Titus VESPASIAN, 2 Years. Julius Agricola, Lieutenant. DOMITIAN,
15 years. Julius Agricola, Cne. Trebellius, Salustius Lucullus,
Lieutenants. NERVA, 1 year. The Lieutenant not known. TRAJAN, 19 years. The
Lieutenant not known. HADRIAN Reigned 21 years. Cne. Trebellius, Licinius
Priscus, Jul. Severus,
Lieutenants. ANTONINUS Pius, 22 years. Lollius Urbicus, Lieutenant. ANTONINUS
Philosophus, 19 years. Calphurnius Agricola, Lieutenant. AURELIUS Commodus, 13
years. Ulpius Marcellus, Helvius Pertinax, Clodius Albinus, Junius Severus,
Lieutenants. HELVIUS Pertinax, 2 months. Clodius Albinus, Lieutenant. DIDIUS
Julianus, 7 months. Clodius Albinus, Lieutenant. SEPTIMIUS Severus, 18 years.
Heraclianus, and Virius Lupus, made Joynt-Lieutenants by Severus, one of the
South, the other of the North.

After the days of Severus, we find not any more Lieutenants in Britain,
partly through the neglect or decay of Historians, and partly through the
Troubles of the ensuing times, which lasted until the days of Constantine, who
altered the Government. Years Reign. Antoninus Bassianus Caracalla, with Geta
his Brother, 6 Opilius Macrinus, 1 Antoninus Heliogabalus, 4 Alexander Severus,
13 Julius Maximinus, 3 Balbinus, Pupienus,
1 M. Ant. Gordianus, 6 Philip, 5 Gn. Messius Quintus, Trajan, Decius, 2
Trebonianus Gallus, 2 P. Licinius Valerianus, 7 P. Licinius Galienus, 9
Claudius, 2 Years Reign: L. Domitius Aurelianus, 5 M. Claudius Tacitus, 6
Months. M. Aurelius Probus, 6 M. Aurelius Carus, 2 Dioclesianus, Maximianus,
20 Constantius Chlorus, 4 Constantine the Great, 13 Constantinus Junior, 3
Constans, 2 Constantius, 16 Julian the Apostate, 2 Fla. Jovianus, 2
Valentinianus, 12 Fla. Gratianus, 3 Fla. Theodosius, 14

Honorius. In the days of this Emperor ( Rome being seized by Alarick) the
Roman Soldiers were drawn out of Britain, and Letters of Discharge written by
Honorius to the Britains, whereby they were acquitted of the Roman Jurisdiction.

A Catalogue of the British KINGS, in the days of the Romans, from Julius
Caesar to the Saxons.
CAssibelan (in whose days Caesar entered the Island) Reigned 19 Years.
Theomantius, 17 Gunobelyn, 35 Guiderius, 23 Arviragus, 25 Marius, 53 Coelus
Primus, 50 Lucius, Surnamed Lever Maur, 12 And then came an Inter-regnum of 15
Years. Severus, in Right of his Wife, 15 Antoninus Bassianus, 6 Heliogabalus, 3
Alexander Severus, 13 Maximinus, 3 Gordianus, 6 Another Inter-regnum of 13
Years. Claudius, 2 Another Inter-regnum of 7 Years. Bonosus, 4 Another
Inter-regnum of 4 Years. Carausius, 7 Allectus, 3 Asclepiodotus, 1 Coel the
Third, 1 Constantius Priscus, in Right of his Wife, 11 Constantine the Great,
30 Constantinus Junior, 2 Constans Priscus, 9 Magnentius, 3 Constantius Junior,
10 Julianus, 2 Valentinianus, 11 Gratianus Priscus, 8 Maximus, 5 Theodosius, 7
Honorius, 14 In whose days the Britains chose three other Emperors. Marcus,
him they suddenly Deposed, in 3 Months. Gratianus Ruled 4 Months. Constantine
the Third, 4 Years. Constans his Son, Caesar, 2 Years.
JULIUS CAESAR The first Roman that Discovered and Invaded Britain.


THE WARS BETWEEN THE BRITAINS AND ROMANS.
CHAP. XIII. JULIUS CAESAR'S first Preparation, and Voyage into BRITAIN.
JULIUS CAESAR, having subdued most part of Anne ante Christum, 24.
Gallia, quieted the Germans, and stopped their Incursions into his Province by
Locking up the Rhine and Scheld, resolves for an expedition into Britain; His
pretenses were, that the Britains had underhand sent supplies to the Cities of
Armorica, who the year before had Revolted from his Obedience, and had joined
with the rest of Gallia in a general and dangerous Rebellion; Not only so, but
that they had received into their Protection his Enemies, the Bellovaci, who
had fled to them for aid and succor.

These seemed sufficient Causes to justify an Invasion, especially to a mind
wholly possessed, as Caesar's was, with the desire of Glory, and unlimited
Conquests; so, that notwithstanding many Cities of the Britains (having notice
of this design, and fearing the consequence of his Ambition, and usual success)
sent Ambassadors to him, with a promise of Hostages and Obedience to the Roman
Empire, yet he altered not his Resolutions, but after Audience given, sent them
back with fair promises and exhortations to continue steadfast in the same mind,
and with them Comius his Creature and Confident, whom he had obliged with no
less Bribe than the Kingdom of Arras, giving him private Instructions to gain a
Roman Party in the Island, and secretly to manage his Interest with the States
of Britain; And what gave most Authority to his Embassy, to signify to them
his Intentions to come speedily in Person to them. Neither could the time of
the year defer his design, it seeming to be too high advanced for any new
undertakings, the Summer being almost spent, and his wearied Legions expected
rather their Winter Quarters, than to be transported into a Foreign War.

Certainly, Caesar had more than ordinary Motives to this sudden expedition,
and (...). de vtta Jul. Caes.
however he might give out among his Soldiers, the vastness of the British
Pearls, their exceeding weight and value, and the great numbers and quantities
of them, yet these were but as so many Baits to entice and allure them to his
purposes, and to draw them greedily to swallow his Motions; such Cajoals as
these, were frequent with him, during the course of his whole life. By his
future Actions, we may guess that his main design (in Invading BRITAIN) was to
inure his Soldiers, and to accustom them to the most barbarous Enemies, that
they might not be terrified at his most dangerous Enterprises, but depend
solely and entirely upon his Fortune and Conduct.

And indeed, during all the Civil-Wars, which no doubt by this time he had fore
cast in his head, we find these Legions his main prop and support, they blindly
following him in his most difficult undertakings. Neither could the love of the
Commonwealth, or the Authority of Pompey, ever shake them in their Alliance,
and although they were harassed about from Country to Country, yet the change
of Soil, nor Enemy, could ever break them asunder, or shatter them.

In his Wars in Africa, against Juba and his Confederates, with what assurance
did Caesar Com. (...). 4.
he pronounce before his Army, the advance of the Enemy with an Army five times
superior to his own, as not doubting, they would be frighted at the Chariots
of Africa, who had been accustomed to those of Britain, and this appears to be
the intention of his Invasion of this Island, the total Conquest whereof, as he
never performed, so he seems never to have designed; and, I believe, what he
said himself of his first years Invasion, might be properly spoken of his
second also, namely, That he thought it sufficient to see the Island, and try
the Nature of the Enemy, and so pass away.

In order to this Design, he endeavors by diligent Enquiry to learn out the
Nature Caesar Com. lib. 4.
and Situation of this Island, the Places of most easy Access, what Ports and
Havens were commodious for his great Shipping, what, and how great, Nations
inhabited the Island, their customs in War, and their several Usages, all
which, he says, was unknown to the Gauls. For, except some few Merchants and
Traders, none scarce ever went thither, and they too only to the Seacoasts
that were next unto Gaul, so that not being able to sift out any thing srom the
Merchants themselves, whom, for that purpose, he had called together from all
parts (and who, possibly, studiously declined to give him any Information) he
sends Caius Volusenus in a Long Gally, with Orders to make discovery of this
Island, and that done, to return as soon as possible he could.

In this Relation of Caesar, touching the Ignorance of the Gauls and their
Merchants, in all the forementioned Circumstances relating to Britain, many
have required the diligence, or at least the memory of Caesar; For how is it
possible they could be so ignorant of the Asfairs of Britain, seeing they sent
their Children thither (as he himself reports) to be instructed in the Learning
and Discipline of the Druids, the Common Priests of both Nations, and seeing
they that were sent for that purpose, often tarried in Britain twenty years
fully, to know the Mysteries of that Religion, and in all that time, could they
get nothing of the Customs and Manners of the People, the Greatness of the
Nation, their Laws and Government?

Again, Caesar reports in another place, that they of Rhemes informed him, That
(...) Com. 2.
one Dividiacus, a mighty King of the Soissons, not long before, and in the
memory of Man, had Britain also under his Subjection. How therefore came this
Island to be so much forgotten on the Continent, seeing one of their Princes
had so lately the Dominion of it? Could he be chosen King of a Country, that
neither he nor any of his Subjects had ever seen, or with which there had never
been any Commerce at all?

Moreover, in the Wars of Gallia he writes, That the Britains assisted the
Armoricans with continual supplies, and that they received the Bellovaci into
their Protection. Could these endearments happen between Nations, that are here
supposed to have so little knowledge one of another?

To all which Circumstances, if we shall add, How that the Seacoast of
Britain, next to Gallia, was Peopled (by his own report) from Gallia and
Belgium, and that many of those Provinces in Britain received their names from
those People, we shall have little reason to doubt, but that in this Relation
Caesar had more respect to his own Honor than to Truth, it seeming far more
glorious to invade a Nation, of which he had but slender knowledge, and found
the success not answerable to his expectations, than to seem to be baffled in a
design, the Consequences whereof by due Informations he had weighed and
considered. Now this partiality of his in Recording his own Affairs, is the
greatest blemish with which his Commentaries have been especially marked, and
in the particular account of his British Victories, in this Suetonius de vild
Caesaris.
very point, he is much to be suspected and blamed.

CAESAR having sent C. Volusenus to spy out the Coasts, in the mean time drew
his Forces into the Country of the Morini, about Bulloign, from whence was the
shortest cut into Britain. Here he commands a general Rendezvous of all his
Naval Forces, summoning from all parts the Shipping which the Summer before he
had made for the Armorican War.

Hither, after five days sail, C. Volusenus returned to him with those small
Discoveries he had made of the Island, not daring to Land for fear of the
Britains. But what little Notices he had gotten from aboard his Ship he
communicates to Caesar, who, after he had taken Hostages of the Morini, for
their good behavior in his absence, left Sulpitius Rufus with sufficient
Forces to make good the Port, and secure his Return, in case his Affairs in
Britain succeeded not to his wishes, or the Gauls, a fickle and unsteady
Nation, upon the least disaster, might change their Faith; with eighty Ships of
burden, beside what Galleys had been distributed to his Chief Officers, about
the third Watch of night, with a prosperous Gale sets off for the British shore.

In this Expedition he carried two Legions, which are supposed to amount of
Romans and their Allies, to five and twenty thousand Foot, and four thousand
five hundred Horse. The Foot were transported in the eighty Vessels, the Horse
had eighteen assigned them, which, by reason of contrary Winds, were kept in
Port about eight mile from the General Rendezvous. Thither Caesar commands the
Cavalry to march, and with all speed to embark and follow him, but his Orders
being not so soon executed, the next day, between ten and eleven of the Clock
in the Fore noon, Caesar with his first Ships only came upon the Island, where
he sees the Hills covered over with Britains, who were drawn up in Martial
array to oppose his Landing. The nature of the place was such, that by the
position of the narrow Cliffs that ran out into the Sea, and hung steep over
it, the Britains had the advantage of flinging their Darts and Javelins upon
the shore beneath, so that this place was found too warm for Landing.

Caesar therefore, till three of the Clock in the Afternoon, lay at Anchor,
waiting for the coming up of his whole Fleet, and in the mean time called a
Council of War of his Chief Officers, where he imparts to them the Discoveries
C. Volusenus had made to him, giving them Orders how to behave themselves upon
all occasions, chiefly warning them, that the discipline of War in general, but
especially the floating kind of flight they were to expect (at their Landing)
required, that they should be quick and nimble in their motions, ready to
relieve each other, and to shift and change places as they should receive
Orders, all which being said, he dismisses them; so with a favorable Wind and
Tide weighs Anchor, and sailing along the Coast, about eight Mile distant he
arrived at a plain and open shore, commonly thought about Deal in Kent.

The Britains all this while observed his motions, and sending their Horse and
Chariots before, their Infantry following, they stood not there to be mowed at,
but with undaunted Courage furiously drove into the Waters, and fought the
Romans under their very Ships, not suffering any to descend from their Vessels
without the loss of their Lives.

Such was the Resolution of them upon this occasion, that Caesar himself
confesses it a very smart Welcome. And although he would find out matter to
excuse it, namely, That he could not bring his great Ships to work, that his
Soldiers were on an unknown Coast, their hands full, their heavy bodies laden
with Armor, that at the same time they were to jump from their Ships, stand
among the Waves and engage the Enemy, and on the other side, that the Britains
were on the dry ground, or else in very shallow Water, that they were light
Armed, and quick Motioned, that they were acquainted with the shoars, and their
Horses accustomed to that kind of Duty; yet all this seems to be confessing
rather than excusing a Defeat.

The Romans being to encounter with all these Difficulties, but especially with
the undaunted Courage of the Britains, and being gauled with this unusual
manner of Fighting, stood as men absolutely astonished, not knowing which way
to turn themselves, until Caesar seeing them beginning flatly to yield to the
impression of the Enemy, draws off his Long-boats and Galleys from his Ships of
Burden, and orders them to be placed against the open flank of the Enemy.

The very sight of this kind of Shipping amazed the Britains, the swiftness of
their motion, and the number and rattling of the Oars; but, as on the other side
they were exceeding surprising to the Britains, so they struck no less Courage
and Resolution into the daunted Romans.

But the first impressions being over, notwithstanding the force and greatness
of their Galleys, with which, as being strongly workt by the multitude of Oars,
the Britains were almost overwhelmed; yet left they not off still manfully to
defend their Country, and expose their Chariots and naked Bodies to the Ships
and Armor of their Enemies.

Caesar finding, that by plain Force he was not able to attain the Landing,
orders his Engines and Slings to be set up in all his Galleys, and that they
should be played against the open side of the Enemy. And now, whole showers of
Stones and Darts were discharged upon the naked Britains, and the Roman Ships
something cleared of their close Engagers.

The Britains, notwithstanding all these dangers, did not quit their ground,
but with the loss of their lives, and although the thick shot falling round
about the Roman Fleet, made them stand at a Bay, yet durst not their Enemies
venture to quit their Vessels, fearing (as is reported) the depth of the Sea,
but more probably the re-advancement of the Enemy as soon as their Engines
should leave working.

In this general Consternation of the Romans, an Ensign-bearer of the tenth
Legion, having first invoked the Gods, that what he intended might succeed to
the good of his Legion, breaks out into these words, Fellow Soldiers, desert
if you please your Ensign, and betray it to the Enemy, I for my part will
perform my Duty to the Commonwealth, and my General; having thus said, with a
loud voice, he jumps into the Sea, and, advancing the Eagle, he marches upon
the Enemy; The Soldiers began to recollect their Spirits, and exhorting one
another not to suffer the disgrace of loosing their Standard, with one consent
followed their resolute Leader. Others incited by their Example, do the like,
and now, in several Bodies, they advance to the Enemy.

Here began a terrible fight on both sides, wherein the Romans received great
damages, partly for want of sure footing, and partly, because in eagerness to
rescue their Ensign, they observed no Order, every one out of his Ship
advancing to that standard that was next to him.

On the other hand, the Britains managed their Advantages with great prudence
and Resolution: Where they saw the Enemy boggled either in the Depths or the
Sands, they presently assaulted them, cuting them off in all Parties, and
wheresoever they perceived any few making up to their Standards, driving
furiously between, they intercepted their passage, and with ease dispatched
them. Others there were who attempted the main Body which was gathering about
the Standard, and with their Darts very much anoyed them, which Caesar
perceiving, he commanded all his Boats and Shallops to be filled with
Soldiers, and where he saw any distressed he received them into his protection.

By this means the Foot were all dis-embarkt, and having got into some Order,
they made up to the Shore, where, after a sharp dispute, the wearied Britains
were put to flight, or rather retired, having observed, by the disburthening of
all the Ships, that the Romans had no Horse to follow them, which indeed proved
true, by reason that through negligence they did not, or by contrary Winds
could not arrive so speedily as they were ordered. This proved a great vexation
to Caesar, who never used to get Victories by halves, and this is the first
time we ever find him complaining against his Fortune.

The BRITAINS send for PEACE, but upon an Accident to the ROMAN Fleet, change
Counsels.
THE Britains (for what cause is uncertain) but probably from Divisions in
themselves, and a Roman Party crept in amongst them, send Ambassadors to
Caesar to Treat of Peace, promising to give what Hostages he should demand, and
to submit to his disposal.

With these Ambassadors Comius of Arras also returns, whom, I said before, was
sent by Caesar into Britain, him (after his Landing) the Britains had
apprehended as a Spy, and having understood his Order, had laden with Irons.
And now, to ingratiate themselves with Caesar, they send him back, laying the
envy of his Imprisonment upon the Common Rout, and desiring, that if in
yiedling to the Multitude they had done imprudently, they might obtain pardon
for their Error.

Caesar complaining, that of their own accords, having sent to him on the
Continent for Peace, they should give the first occasion of War, was willing
nevertheless to take their Acknowledgments, and accept their Excuse, but
demands Hostages, some whereof were immediately sent, others that were to be
fetched higher in the Country, they promised should be ready in a few days. The
mean while, the People being dis-banded and sent home, the adjoining Princes
met together, and submitted themselves and their States to Caesar, at his Camp,
which is supposed to have been at Barham-Down.

The Peace thus Concluded, an Accident happened that put the Britains upon new
Counsels. The eighteen Ships which transported the Horse, being loosed from the
Harbor with a small Gale, in four days sail came in sight of the Island, and
might be descried from the Camp, when of a sudden a Tempest arising, dispersed
them, some being cast back to the Port from whence they came, others driven
Westward of the Island. But finding no safety in those parts, nor being able
to ride at Anchor in such high Seas, were forced at night to make for the
Continent, and (as Orosius says) Orosius.
most of them perished.

The same night it happened, the Moon being Full, at which time the Floods are
highest, that unawares to the Romans the Springtide filled and covered those
Galleys which had been haled on shore, and which were intended to serve for the
transporting of the Army.

On the other hand, the Ships of Burden that lay off at Anchor, were sorely
shattered by the Tempest, the Romans all the while looking on, not being able
to apply any Remedy. Thus many of their Ships were utterly broken in pieces,
others having lost all their Tackling were rendered unserviceable.

This gave matter of great affliction to the Army, and to Caesar himself, who
having not provided sufficient stores for his Soldiers, was necessitated to
Winter in Gallia, and now saw himself sadly deprived of the means of conveying
them thither, having no other Ships for that service, and besides, wanted
materials for the repairing of his broken and shattered Hulks.

The Britains considering all these Circumstances, especially their Enemies
want of Horse, and imagining the Foot to be fewer indeed, than they were, from
the narrow compass of the Roman Camp (which was less than usual, because Caesar
by that means was minded to ease the Duty of his wearied Soldiers, and the
Legions besides had been transported without their Carriages) resolves to renew
the War, and so hindering the Romans of Provisions, to protract the business
unto Winter.

Having entered into this Consultation, they who left Hostages, or out of
curiosity had long resided amongst the Romans, secretly, one by one, withdrew
from the Camp, and by degrees, removed their Families and Cattle higher into
the Continent, encouraging one another, once for all, to redeem the Liberty of
their Country, not questioning but if they could intercept the Return of the
Romans, and destroy them, none never after would venture to Invade their Nation.

Caesar, though as yet he knew not of their designs, yet suspecting that the
loss received in his Navy might give Courage to the Enemy, and occasion new
Councels, perceiving withal, that the Hostages were privately retired, others
which were to be sent in cunningly, delayed, resolves to prepare for the worst,
and to that end lays in what provisions of Corn he could gather, and with the
scattered remnants of those Ships which were utterly broken, patches up the
remainder of his Fleet, and what with Materials fetched from the Continent, and
the indefatigable diligence of his Men, in a few days all but twelve Ships
were made fit for sailing.

In the mean time the seventh Legion being gone out (according to their
custom) to Forage, there being no open breach made, and many of the Britains
still remaining about the Country, and going and coming freely into the Romans
Quarters, news was brought unto Caesar from the Sentinels, keeping Guard at the
Camp-gate, that they descried a greater Dust than ordinary, arising upon that
quarter of the Country to which the Legion had taken its March.

Caesar suspecting, what indeed happened, that the Britains had taken new
Councels, commands the Cohorts of his Guards to follow him thither, ordering
two others to succeed in their places, and the rest speedily to Arm and come
after.

When he had passed some distance from the Camp, he perceived his Legion
overborn by the Enemy, and not able to sustain their violent Charges, being
already hudled up, and on all sides sorely gauled by Darts and Javelins. For
the Britains finding, that where the Romans the day before had been Reaping,
they had left part of the Crop, and judging the next day they would return to
the same place, secretly in the Woods lodged an Ambuseado of Men, who (as soon
as the Romans had laid by their Arms, and were dispersed about their work)
suddenly brake in upon them, and cutting off some, routing the rest, at last
encompast them about with their Horse and Chariots.

The manner of the Britains fighting, upon this, and such like occasions, was
in this wise.

First, They ride with their Charriots through all the parts of the Battle, and
fling Darts, and with the terrible noise of their Horses, and rattling of the
Charriotwheels, they often break the ranks of the Enemy. When they have wound
themselves into the Troops of Horse, they alight from their Charriots and fight
on foot. The Charrioteers in the mean time retire a little from the Battle, and
place themselves in such Order, that in case their Party should be over-powr'd
with the Multitude of Enemies, they might have a safe Retreat, so that at once
they perform the swiftness of Horse, and steadiness of Foot. By daily exercise
they are so expert at it, that down the steepest Hill they will hold their
Horses to a full Career, stop of a sudden, turn short and wind them about; now
running along upon the Beam, then standing upright upon the Yoke, and from
thence nimbly recover their Boxes.

This sort of Fight is described by Caesar in this place, to excuse the general
rout of his Legion, although they could not but be acquainted with the nature
of the British Charriots, even at their first Landing, and it was but high time
that he came to their relief, for the Legion was sorely oppressed by the Enemy,
and in great confusion.

At his appearance the Britains retired, having done sufficient execution for
that day, and Caesar was so sensible of his loss, and the general consternation
of his Army, that he durst not venture, at that time, to think of Revenging it,
so that abstaining from Battle, he only kept his ground for a while, and then
with his main Force retired within his Trenches, carrying with him all the
Forage he had taken.

For many days after the Weather continued so foul, that the Romans kept
themselves encamped, and the Britains attempted nothing upon them, but employed
the time in dispatching of Curryers to all parts, to signify to what small
numbers the Enemy was reduced, and the great hopes of Booty, and the freeing
their Country for ever from the like Invaders, if they could manfully beat the
Romans from their Camp, and so make them a severe Example.

This change of Council, from protracting the War to a speedy ending of it, was
not so successfully executed as rashly undertaken by the Britains, for
although, from all quarters there flocked infinite numbers both of Horse and
Foot, yet were they too light and unarmed to engage with the heavy Legions,
whose strength consisted most in being united and compacted together, whereas
the advantage of the Britains was in quick Onsets, and sudden Skirmishes, and
in being assailed rather than assailing. However, they gathered together about
the Roman Camp, which Caesar perceiving, although he had but three hundred
Horse, which Comius of Arras had transported with him, and knew well that the
Britains, though worsted, might (as before) escape the pursuit, yet resolves to
give them Battle, and so drew out for that purpose before his Camp.

After a small and trivial dispute, the Britains not able to endure the force
of the Legions, fly in disorder, and were pursued, but with greater
destruction of Towns and Villages than of their Persons, Caesar burning every
thing that lay in his way, and not returning to his Camp without Blazing tokens
of his Conquest.

The Britains, after this Defeat, resolve to make Conditions, and to that end
send Ambassadors to Caesar, who no doubt rejoiced at his good Fortune, that,
having made no progress at all into the Island, nor ever been in capacity of
gaining a considerable Victory, for want of Horses, on the contrary, having
received very considerable losses, both in his Fleet and Legions, and now
reduced to the very point of forsaking the Island, or else perishing for want
of Provisions, the Winter season drawing on a pace, and September somewhat
advanced, he could now Retreat not only with safety, but some show of Honor,
having this to say, That he was attended at his Departure, with the States of
Britain, and all the signs of Submission, although there wanted the substance
and reality.

For, if we consider the consequences of this Treaty, we shall find that these
Ambassadors were sent rather to Complement him at his Departure, than to make
any real Proposals, for the Hostages of their Submission were not to be
delivered till his arrival on the Continent. And it is observable, that for so
great a breach of Faith, nothing else was enjoined but a double Number, a
Custom Caesar never used, in his Treating with barbarous Nations (as he called
them) having in the late Armorican Revolt put all to the Sword, that lay
security for the Good Behavior of their respective Cities.

And as the Britains never intended any such numbers of Hostages, so Caesar in
vain expected them, two only Cities, and they without doubt of a Roman Faction,
sending them, the rest totally neglected it.

That his Atchievments in this Island were not so great as he makes it in his
first Expedition, is the mind of Suetonius, a Grave and substantial Author, who
says, that he only discovered, but not delivered the Island up to the Romans,
and Lucian is Suetonius.
peremptory, that he was beaten out of it.

Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis. Lucan.

He sought the Britains out, and then he fled.
And Horace has these words, to invite Augustus to a British War;

Intactus ut Britannus descenderet Horace.

Sacra catenatus via.
That Britains yet untouched, may
Be led in Chains, through the Sacred way.
And Propertius,

Te manet invictus Romano mart Britannus. Propertius.

By Roman Force unconquered yet,
The Britains for thy Triumph wait.
CAESAR, after his first Expedition, with his shattered Fleet about midnight
makes for the Continent, being blown off the Island with a fair and prosperous
Gale, after some stay in Gallia he takes his Journey to Rome, where the fame of
his Actions, sent by his own Letters, prevented his Arrival, so that for his
British Conquest, or Discovery, twenty dales of Supplication is decreed by the
Senate.

But before I pass further, the remarkable Courage of a Roman, namely, SCAEVA,
is not to be omitted, which I put down here, because some are particular in the
circumstance of its Time, placing it at the first Landing of the Romans.

This Soldier having engaged too far amongst the Enemy, and beset round, first
with his Spear, and afterward with his Sword, with incredible Constancy
defended himself against a whole Multitude, but at length, being wearied and
sorely wounded, after great execution, having lost his Helmet and Target, with
two Habergeons, he swam unto Caesar, and humbly begged pardon for his rash
Adventure against Discipline. This modesty of his in asking Forgiveness, where
others would have been craving a Reward, worthily preferred him to be a
Centurion.

This is that Scaeva, who afterward showed he had not forgotten to do the like
upon other occasions, for indeed, eversince he esteemed himself an equal match
for a whole Army, which he made good in the Battle near Dyrrachium, where
single, against the whole Forces of Pompey, he maintained the Fight so long,
until Caesar Rallied. And Lucan writes of him,

Parque novum fortuna videt Concurrere Bellum,
Lucan.
Atque virum -- --
Which might equally be said of this his British Action.

Some intimate that this Scaeva was the first that set footing on Britain, but
Julian brings in Caesar ascribing that Honor to himself; but this would be to
set his Julian.
Personal Valor above his Conduct, being an Action unbecoming the place of so
great a General.

But, if it were true, we ought to judge him in some strange exigence of
Affairs, being obliged to such a hazardous push, and admire his prudence in
concealing of it himself, and ascribing it to another, in his Commentaries.

THE British History, RELATING TO THE FIRST INVASION BY CAESAR.
CASSIBELAN (according to the British Histories) was King of this Island, or
rather Protector, chosen by the States, during the Minority of his two
Nephews, Androgeus and Theomantius, Anno ante Christum 54.
and in the ninth year of his Regency the First Invasion of Caesar is placed.

A Man of greater Valor and Conduct, but of no less Ambition and Cruelty, and
certainly, his Vices may be reckoned greater than his Virtues, for by the
former he was the occasion of enslaving his Country, and by the latter was not
able to defend it. He slew his Brother, King Lud, Surnamed Immanuentius, and
distributing to his Nephews, the Sons of King Lud, two small Principalities to
be held of him; to Androgeus, London and Kent, Com. Pal:
to Theomanntius, Cornwall; he usurped the Kingdom to himself.

Not content with this, as thinking himself little secure, during the life of
his lawful Sovereign, Androgeus, he molested him with continual Jealousies, and
at last put such Indignities upon him, that he flies unto Caesar, and there
resigns his Crown unto him, and his Person to the protection of the Romans.
This Androgeus was Surnamed Mandubratius, and is the Person whom Caesar makes
mention of in his second Expedition.

These Actions of Cassibelan were the causes of continual Wars and Dissensions
among the Britains.

As for the Virtues of Cassibelanus, his Valor and Conduct (which we shall
better hear from Caesar's own Relating, in his next Invasion, for in his first
no mention is made of him) take this from the British Histories.

When Comius of Arras had delivered to him the Message of Caesar, in which
Homage and Subjection to the Roman Empire, and a certain Tribute was required,
he made Answer in these words.

Cassibelan's Answer.

That the Ambition of the Romans was insatiable, who would not suffer Britain
(a NEW WORLD, placed by nature in the Ocean, and beyond the bounds of their
Empire) to lie unmolested. Tribute was the mark of Slavery, but the high
Nobility of the Britains, and their alliance to the Romans in Blood made them
disdain a Subjection to them. If you take our Friendship we are ready to grant
it, but if you would deprive us of our Liberty, know this, That if the Gods
themselves should endeavor it, we could not but Resist.

Comius still persevering, for his Insolent Demands was cast into Irons; In
pursuance of this Resolution he manfully opposed Caesar at his Landing, not
suffering him, as he intended, to come up the River Thames, but drives him
lower on the Island, and after great slaughter of his Romans, having invited
him to come on shore, in a pitched Battle (being assisted by Ederus King of
Albania, now Scotland, Guitethus King of Venedocia, now North Wales, and
Brituel King of Demetia, or South Wales) he gave him a great Overthrow.

After this Victory, having encouraged his Soldiers, in token of his
Thankfulness, he sacrifices to his Gods.

In this Battle Belinus was his General, and Nenius his Brother performed great
Acts, for in a single combat with Caesar, it so fell out, that he got his
Sword, and, by a furious blow made at him, stuck it fast in his Shield. And
although he received his deaths wound with the stroke, and the disarming of
Caesar proved fatal to him, yet afterward, with his own hands, he slew
Labienus, one of the Roman Tribunes.

Caesar discomfited with the bad success of his Affairs, bends all his thoughts
in order to a speedy retreat from the Island, and having patched up his Fleet,
sufficient to transport the remainder of his Army, which by his losses was
reduced to a small number, leaving all his Baggage behind, in the Night
secretly embarks, and with a still Wind, as it were, he steals from the Island.

CAESAR, HIS Second Expedition INTO BRITAIN.
CAESAR, having Arrived safe to the Continent, long and in vain Caesar lib. 5.
expected the Hostages of the Britains (as his yearly custom was) prepares for
his Journey to Italy, to spend the Winter at Rome, but before he goes, he
leaves Orders with his Legate, who had the charge of the Legions in their
Quarters, that during his Absence they should use all diligence in providing
what possible Shipping they could, and set all hands on work to repair his Old
Vessels, and build New ones. To that purpose he gives them several Models,
after what fashion he would have them made.

First, They were to be lower built than ordinary, for the advantage of easier
fraughtage, and better haling ashore, and because he observed, that by the
often changes of Tides, the British Seas did not run so high as the
Mediterranean.

In the next place, They were to be broader, thereby to be of greater Burden,
and to be more able to transport a considerable number of Horse, which Caesar
was resolved, in his next years Expedition should not be wanting.

Lastly, He leaves Commands to make them fit for Rowing, for which purpose
their Low-building was very advantageous; And as for Materials to strengthen
and fortisie them, he provided them out of Spain.

These Orders were diligently executed by his Legates, during his absence, so
that at his return he finds six hundred in readiness, new built, according to
the prescribed Model, and twenty eight Ships of Burden, and what with
Adventures and other Hulks above two hundred, Cotta, one of the Legates and
Overseers of this work, wrote them (as Athenaeus says) in all a thousand.

Caesar having commended his Soldiers for their diligence, and his Officers
for Athenaeus.
their care and trust, Commands them, by a day, to be ready at the Port Iccius,
now Bulloigne, where they all met accordingly, except forty, which by contrary
Winds and ill Weather, were beaten back into the Port of the Meldi, from whence
they had set out.

Caesar in the rest, about Sunset, embarks with five Legions of Foot,
amounting, according to the computation of some, to 620000 Romans and their
Allies, and two thousand Horse, leaving behind him three Legions of Foot, and
two thousand Horse, to make good the Port against his Return.

Having weighed Anchor, he stands for Britain with a slack South west Wind (but
at Midnight is becalmed) so, that not able to hold on his course, he is driven
at random by the Current, and at Daybreak descries the Island to bear left of
him; turning therefore about with the Tide, which now changed, with all his
Fleet, he began to make for that place which the year before he had found so
convenient for Landing. The Soldiers with all alacrity tugged at the Oars, and
although the Galleys were heavy laden, and drew much water, yet by their
indefatigable labor they kept course with Ships under sail.

At Noon Caesar arrives with all his Navy on the Coast, and finds no Enemy to
oppose his Landing, for the Britains, terrified with the sight of so vast a
Fleet, which seemed to cover the Seas, had forsaken the defense of their
Shoars, and withdrawn into the Higher Countries.

Caesar forthwith landing his Men, chooses a convenient place to Encamp, and
having learnt of some Fugitives the place to which the Britains had retired,
leaving his Ships at Anchor upon a plain and open shore, with ten Cohorts, and
three hundred Horse, under the Command of Q. Atrius, to guard them; about the
third Watch of the same night, with his main Body he advances into the Country
to find out the Enemy. After twelve miles March he descries them drawn up on
the banks of a River, commonly thought the Stowr in Kent.

The Britains with their Horse and Chariots had possessed themselves of the
Upperground, and began now to oppose the March of the Romans with smart
charges, but being driven from their ground by the Enemies Cavalry, they
retired into the Woods, to a Fortification made strong both by Art and Nature,
and cast up, as is thought, after the British manner, during some Civil War
among themselves. The Passages on all sides were blocked up with huge Trees,
which were felled and laid over thwart one another.

The Britains, in dispersed Parties, fought within their Trenches, and suffered
not the Romans to enter their Works, but the Soldiers of the seventh Legion
having raised a Mount, and marching on close and knit together, under the
coverts of their Sheilds, which lay like a Roof upon them, without much loss of
blood took the place, and so drove the Britains from their Holds.

Caesar forbad any pursuit to be made, as wanting the knowledge of the places,
and judging it more convenient, great part of the day being spent, to employ
the remainder in sortifying another Camp, and refreshing his Soldiers.

The next Morning he sent out early three Bodies of Horse and Foot, in Parties,
to seek out the Enemy and pursue them. They had not gone so far, but the last
of them were in sight, when in post-haste News is brought from Q. Atrius, that
the Fleet that night, by a sudden Tempest arising, had suffered a grievous
Wrack, that many of them lay split upon the shore, that, through the violence
of the Weather, the Anchors and Cables being broken, the industry of the
Seamen could not hinder but that many of them fell foul on one another, and
were dashed in pieces.

At the news of this Disaster, Caesar commands the Forces that were upon their
March to hault, and give over the design for the present in following the
Enemy. In all haste he returns to the Ships, and there with his own eyes is
witness of the sad Ruins of his Navy.

About sorty Ships were utterly lost, others, although put upon great
difficulty, yet seemed not past hopes of recovery. To that end therefore he
drew out of his Legions such Shipwrights as he had with him, and sends over
into the Continent for others, withal writing to Labienus (with those Legions
he had) to fall a building as fast as he could, and in the mean time sets
himself to the Repairing of his shattered Vessels. And, although it seemed a
difficult task to be undertaken, yet he thought most convenient to draw his
Ships into the Camp, and encompass them within the same Trenches.

In these Affairs he spends ten days, giving no respit to his Soldiers,
either day or night, until he had drawn them all within the Works, and strongly
secured them with Ditches and Rampires.

Having thus made every thing sure, and leaving the same Guards upon them as
before, he returns to the place from whence he had driven the Britains, where
he finds far greater numbers re-assembled.

The Britains, in a General Council of all the States, invested Cassibelan with
the full power and management of the whole War; His Territory was bounded on
the South by the Thames, which divided it from the Provinces of Kent and Surry,
and it extended eighty Miles from the Sea. Before the Arrival of Caesar he was
in continual Wars with the Neighboring Cities, but in the common danger of
Foreign Invasion, they unanimously chose him (for his right experience in
Martial Affairs) to be their Leader.

Having gathered great Forces together, the first thing he undertook was to
oppose the licentious Marches of the Roman Cavalry, and (if possible) to cut
them off. To this end, with his Horse and Charriots, he gives them a sharp
Charge, but finding himself over-match'd, he retreats to the Woods and Hills,
giving liberty to the Romans to pursue, who too eagerly following in the Chase,
were many of them cut off by the Britains, who sometimes rallied, and sometimes
came out in fresh Parties against them.

After this, the Britains for some time did not appear, but lay secretly hid in
the edges of the Woods, insomuch that the Romans not suspecting any Enemy, laid
down their Arms, and betook themselves to the entrenching and fortifying their
Camp.

Whilst they were in this General security, every man employed in his
particular work, the Britains of a sudden brake out of their Coverts, and
furiously assaulted an inconsiderable Body that kept Guard before the Trenches.
Here was some Execution made, and when Caesar took the Alarm, he sent two of
the principal and choicest Cohorts, drawn out of two Legions, to rescue them,
but they being terrified with the Novelty and fierceness of the Fight, stood
like Men in a Maze, having not the power to join Parties, insomuch that the
Britains perceiving a Gap betwixt them, brake through, and so returned in
safety to their main Body. In this days Engagement Q. Laberius Durus, a
Tribune, was slain on the Roman side.

In this sort of Skirmishing lay the especial advantage of the Britains, and
Caesar himself confesses (who in this Engagement stood as Spectatour only)
that the Roman way, both of Arming and Fighting, was not so well fitted to this
kind of Enemy, for the heavy Armor of the Legionaries, suffered them not to be
quick in following the sudden flights of their Enemies; and it was a breach of
Discipline to stir from their Ensigns. As for the Horse, they never engaged
without manifest disadvantage, for the Britains out of design would often give
back, and when they had drawn them off some distance from the Legons, would
turn upon them, and, jumping from their Charriots, assault them on foot; so
that it was equally hazardous to the Roman Cavalry, whether they gave back or
advanced, besides, the Britains never fought thick, but scattered and in great
distances, having set stations allotted, to which, upon occasion, they retired,
and from whence releif was sent of fresh Parties, to bring off the wearied.

These Advantages at first were wisely made use of by Cassibelan, and it argues
his great experience in War, for by this means the heavy Legions were wearied
and soyled, their Spirits spent upon an unstable and dodging Enemy; Their
Courage turned into Vexation to be mastered by those, whom they were sure they
could Overcome in the grapling. And had Cassibelan stood steady to his
Resolutions, and not suffered the greatness of his Spirit to consult more with
his Honor than Interest, the Romans must of necessity have been obliged either
to quit the Country, or by flinging off their Armor, to conform to the same
manner of Fighting.

Next day the Britains kept the Hills, some distance from the Camp, and all the
Morning showed themselves in small Parties, now profering Battle, now Retiring,
then in light Skirmishes engaging, then presently again Retreating, not
thinking it convenient to engage too deeply with the Roman Cava'ry.

At Noon Caesar sent out three Legions, and all his Horse, under pretense of
Forage, but withal, commands that the Foot should not go far from their
Ensigns, and that the Horse should keep up close with them.

The Eritains, who expected not such order in Forragers, as their Custom was,
with great fury flew upon them, but were mightily deceived in their
Expectations; for the Romans stood ready to receive them.

The Britains, perceiving their mistake, suddenly recoyled, but it proved too
late, for the Roman Cavalry seconded by their Foot, who kept up with them, so
closely pursued, that the Britains had not leisure to Rally, to stand, or come
down from their Chariots, but were in great confusion, many of them slain, and
the rest generally routed.

After this Overthrow, Cassibelan entered upon New Counsels, and resolved in a
manner to change the whole nature of the War; He perceived there was nothing to
be attempted upon the main Body of the Romans, wherefore he signified his
Resolutions, never after to put his Affairs into the hazard of a pitched Battle,
and disbanded many Auxiliary Forces that from all parts had been sent unto him;
with the choicest of his Men, and four thousand Wagons, he set himself to
attend Caesar in his March, judging these a sufficient Number to hinder the
licentious Incursions of the Enemy, and by the advantage he had in the
knowledge of the Country, he knew he was secure from being forced to flight.

Caesar understanding his design, drew his Army upon the Fronteirs of his
Kingdom, which was bounded by the Thames, a River fordable only at one place,
and that with great difficulty, about Coway, near Oatlands, as is supposed.

Arriving hither, he perceived the Enemy in great numbers drawn up on the other
side to oppose his Passage, if he should attempt it, the Bank being all set
with Piles of Wood sharpened at the end, after the manner of Pallisado's, and
the Ford (as he learnt from the Captives and Runagates) knocked full of sharp
Stakes, lying hid under Water.

This excellent design of Cassibelan, being Treacherously discovered, had not
the hoped-for success. For the Romans with greater care and circumspection
entered the River, the Horse first, and afterward the Foot, wading up to the
Neck in Water; The Britains, who expected them to fall into Disorder and
Confusion, and were ready to make use of the Advantage, perceiving them to
avoid the Stakes, and to pass them without any annoyance, were sorely
discouraged at the miscarriage of their Design; And seeing the Enemy came up
with great heat and Resolution, having bestowed a few Darts upon them, they
forsook the Banks and retired.

I call this a Retiring rather than a Flight, because it was against the
designed purpose of Cassibelan to enter into any close Engagement with them,
which he must necessarily have done, had he continued too long in opposing
their Passage, the Legions coming up apace and seconding their Cavalry. He
therefore, in time, rids himself out of the way, and bestows his Forces into
Woods and secret Coverts, lining with his Horse and Charriots, the Roads
through which he expected Caesar would March, driving all the Inhabitants, and
their Cattle into places of Security within the Woods.

By this means the Romans were extremely straightened for want of Provisions,
and when their Horse went out at any time to bring in any prey or booty, and
were scattered about to fetch in Cattle, which were left here and there on
purpose to tempt and invite them, the Britains through secret and Bypath
sallyed out upon them with their Charriots, and having made great slaughter,
again through hidden Ways, and only known to themselves, retired to their main
Body; so that it came to pass, that the Roman Horse, not daring any longer to
make any Excursions, or to stir out of the protection of the Foot, were rendered
unserviceable, and the whole Army keeping together for their security, could
have nothing provided for them, unless they all joined entirely in the seeking
it.

By this means the Britains prevented any broad destruction of their Towns and
Villages, and nothing was exposed to plunder or burning, but what lay just
within the March of the whole Army. And if at any time for Sustenance they were
necessitated to divide, yet were the Cavalry obliged to contain themselves to
the dull and slow motion of the Legionaries, and by plain force always, but
never by slight, could wrest any thing from the Britains.

Amidst all these difficulties, Caesar (according to his usual Fortune) when
his Assairs had the worst aspect, received welcome News of a Dissension among
the Britains, and joyful tidings of a supply for his half-starved Army. The
Trinobantes (as it usually happens, when the Ruin of a Country proceeds from
it self) one of the chief of the British States maintained a Faction against
Cassibelan, which no doubt was heightened by a Roman Interest. For they grew so
high in these Greivances, that they sent Ambassadors unto Caesar to be releived
in them, putting themselves under his protection, and promising Subjection to
the Roman Power.

The cause of this Revolt, was, that Cassibelan had slain Immannentius, whom
they pretended was their Lawful Sovereign, and forced his Son Mandubratius
(whom Orosius calls Androgorius; Beda, Androgius) to secure his life by flight
into Gallia. They desired therefore, that Mandubratius might be rescued from
the Injustice of Orofius. Beda:
Cassibelan, and sent to them, to take possession of his Right, and enjoy the
Crown and Dignity of his Father.

Mandubratius was then with Caesar, and, without question, was his great
Instrument in giving light to him in many things that conduced to the Ruin of
his Country. For after his flight into Gallia, he applied himself unto Caesar,
and was ever since his Attendant in all his Enterprises.

Caesar having much obliged him, by undertaking his Protection, and revenging,
as he thought, the Injuries of Cassibelan, sends home to the Trinobantes,
having first demanded forty Hostages of them, and Provisions for his whole Army.

These Conditions being punctually performed on their parts, Mandubratius
without doubt returns home, with great Praises and loud Acclamations, of the
goodness and generosity of the Conqueror.

No wonder therefore, especially led by the Example of so powerful a State,
that the Cenimagni, supposed to be the Icini, and Regni, the former of which
were the Cambden.
Inhabitants of Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridgshire and Huntingtonshire; the latter
of Surrey and Sussex, and the Seacoasts of Hampshire. As likewise the
Ancalites, possessing that part now called the Hundred of Henley in
Oxfordshire; the Bibroci, the Hundred of Bray in Barkshire; the Cassi, the
Hundred of Caishow in Herefordshire, by their Ambassadors sent their several
Resignation of their States unto Caesar.

This dangerous Revolt, of such a considerable part of the Nation, put life
into the designs of Caesar, who, but a little before, by the weary proceeding
of Cassibelan, began to lose all his hopes of a speedy ending of the War, and
would have been very willing, with any tolerable Conditions, to have rid
himself of so troublesome and vexatious an Enemy. But now having made so great
a Party of the Britains, and being sufficiently accommodated with Provisions,
he resolved to take his March directly to Verulam (not far from the now St.
Albans, supposed to be the Chief Seat of Cassibelan) being instructed by his
new Allies, that it was a place of great importance, strongly sortified with
Woods and Marshes, and full of Men and Cattle.

Following these Guides, he arrives at the place with his Legions, and found it
(as all the British Towns were) encompast with a Ditch and Mud-wall, and all
the Avenues blockt up with great Trees lying over thwart them.

Caesar gives Order for a storm to be made at two places at once, which
accordingly was executed, and with such Valor and Execution, that after a
small dispute on both sides, thought it safest to quit the place, and to fly
out at a Postern Gate, leaving the plunder of the Town, and the hindermost of
his Men to the mercy of the Enemy, than by the forsaking his design to hazard
all in too great an Engagement.

Thus Cassibelan having lost the principal Seat, and greatest Magazine of his
Kingdom, being withal continually Allarum'd with the noise of the Revolts of
the Neighboring States, began to betake himself to his last Refuge, the
assistance of such Friends that still faithfully adhered to him, during the
worst of his Fortunes. The Kentish Men subject to four Princes, Cingetorix,
Carvilius, Taximagulus, and Segonex, still kept to the Union, and forsook not
their plighted Faith to Cassibelan. To these therefore he sends, that with what
Forces they could gather together, they should make some sudden Attempt upon
the Camp, wherein the Romans had lodged their Ships, hoping by this means to
drive Caesar to the defense of his Navy.

The Kentish Princes accordingly raised the Country, and with greater haste
than good speed, brings their Raw and unskilled Soldiers before the Roman
Trenches, for not being able to endure one Sally, with great slaughter and
confusion they were totally routed, and Cingetorix one of their Princes taken
Prisoner.

Cassibelan immediately waited the success of this Enterprise, and taking it
into his consideration, Reserves as his last Card, being now informed of their
Defeat, the Calamity of his Subjects, and more especially the Treason and
Treachery of his Revolted Cities, and resolves at last to make Conditions
himself (after having performed what Man could do) for the preservation of his
Country.

By the Mediation of Comius of Arras he sends his Ambassadors to Caesar, who
wittingly accepted of them, for that the Summer was to Caesar high spent, and
his Affairs in Gallia called for his speedy Return. The Enemy he now dealt with
was grown cautious and wary, and likely to spinout the War to a greater length
than his occasions would permit him to attend; Having therefore enjoined him
not to molest Mandubratius, and the Trinobantes, and settled the Tribute which
the Britains should Annually pay to the States of Rome, he commands Hostages
only, which being received, he draws his Army to the Sea, where having viewed
the remainder of his Ships, which had been repaired since the last Storm, and
finding them too few, after their Losses, to transport at once his Army,
Captives, and Baggages, he resolves to make two Embarkments of them.

But having long expected the return of his sixty Sail, which had carried the
first Party over, and were kept back by contrary Winds, misdoubting the Season
of the year, September being begun, and possibly the return of the Britains
after the division of his Forces, he places his Men thick into those few
Vessels he had with him, and weighing Anchor, at the beginning of the second
Watch, with a favorable Wind sets Sail, and next Morning early arrived at the
Continent.

This is the Account of the Second Expedition of Caesar, taken out of his own
Commentaries, though other eminent Authors relate, That in his British
proceedings, he speaks too advantagiously of himself.

Among the rest, Tacitus writes of Caratacus, that encouraging the Britains he
often Tacitus. Sueronius. Orosius. Dion. Cass. Quintillian. Eutropius.
invoked the Names of his Ancestors, who drove Caesar, the Dictator, out of the
Isle, by whose Valor they were freed from the Axes and Tributes of the Romans,
and preserved the Bodies of their Wives and Children, undefiled. And Dion.
affirms, That once in the Second Expedition all his Foot were routed; Orosius,
That another time all his Horse; and it is manifest, that for many years after
Britain was Governed by its own Kings, and its own Laws.

Nevertheless, at his Arrival at Rome, attended with the long Procession of the
British Captives, whose odd Attire, and strange Behavior, drew the eyes of all
the Beholders, and seemed the Witness of his glorious Enterprise, he ascends
the Temple of Venus Genetrix, the Patroness of his Family, and there solemnly
offers a Corslet of British Pearls.

Some of the meaner Captives he employed for services in the Theater, to attend
the Tapestry Hangings, wherein he had caused to be curiously woven the figures
of the Britains, and his Victories over them. Of these Virgil writes thus,
Purpureaque intexti tollant Aulea Britanni. Thus were the poor Britains, either
continual Spectatours of the Calamities of their Country, or else the constant
Witnesses of the Vanities of Caesar.

A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE OF JULIUS CAESAR.
HE is worthily esteemed the Idaea or Pattern of an absolute General for Julius
Caesar's Life.
his excellent and Industrious Contrivance, quick Dispatch, Courage in his
Dangers, and Laborious in all his Affairs; Of so little Pomp, that at his first
coming into this Isle, he is credibly reported to have had but three Domestic
Servants in his Retinue. The whole course of his Life, even in his lowest
Fortunes, had still something of Greatness in it.

At seventeen years of Age he was made Flamen Dialis, seven years after Questor
of Spain, where, at the Streights, beholding the Statue of Alexander in the
Temple of Hercules, he inwardly groaned to think, that at that Age wherein
Alexander had Conquered the World, himself had done no memorable Action.
Thereupon he lays down his Questorship and repairs to Rome, watching every
occasion to grow Popular, entering into many Factions, and some not without
suspicion of Conspiracy, yet were all his Actions ever taken in a favorable
construction, the States finding it more convenient to flatter him into a kind
of Obedience, than to make too severe an Inquisition into his Affairs.

In a public Funeral Oration in Praise of his Aunt Julia, he derived himself,
on Caesar's Pedigree, declared by himself.
the Mothers side, from Ancus Martius an Ancient King of Rome, and, on his
Fathers side, from the Gods. He was after this made AEdilis, then Pontisex
Maximus, which Honor he carried against two Competitors of the greatest Age
and Authority. Being Consul, he obtained Gallia for his Province, which he held
ten years, part of the time being spent in the Invasion of Britain.

Whilst he was busy in the Conquest of this ISLAND, he received News of the
Seneca.
decease of his Daughter Julia, whose death drew with her a trayn of Public
Calamities. Her loss he passed over with the same Constancy of mind he used in
the rest of his Affairs, and it is possible that his Ambition overcame his
Sorrow, for her Life and Interest, with Pompey, seemed the only debar to his
future Advancement; As, not long after he entered into the Civil War, the
Commonwealth being grown so Heady, that it seemed impossible to be Governed but
by a single Person.

During all the Civil War, those Forces he had employed in Britain and Gallia
were always his Unbroken strengths; The hardships of these Countries, joined
with Roman Discipline, and the confidence in their Leader, had so Spirited
them, that as Scaeva, single, durst twice undertake a whole Army: so these few
Legions seemed a match for the whole World.

After great Contendings with is Countrymen for the Supreme Power, and much
effusion of Blood, having at last arrived to the end of his Labors, the top
and highest pinnacle of Honor, whilst he thought his Enemies either all
destroyed, or by his Clemency not only in sparing but advancing them,
sufficiently obliged in the midst of the Public Assembly of the Roman Senate,
where he had often received the Thanks and Acknowledgments of the House for his
great Services, after fifty several Battles fought with success, five Triumphs,
and four Consulships, laden with Honor, he was basely murdered by a
Conspiracy of Senators, and so fell at the feet of his Son in Law Pompey's
Image, whom not long before he had Conquered. And, what made most to the
remarkableness of his Misfortune, he was slain by those to whom he had shown
the greatest Kindness, and that with many wounds, the deepest whereof was given
by his near Relation Brutus, to whom once he had designed a great share in his
Estate, and that Brutus the Son of Servilia, supposed his Base Child.

THE British History, RELATING TO THE SECOND EXPEDITION OF J. CAESAR.
CASSIBELAN (preparing against Caesar's second Invasion) Anno ants Christush, 53;
stuck the Thames, in one place, full of Iron and Lead stakes, on purpose to
hinder his sailing to the Trinboantes, in which design he so well prospered,
that Caesar lost many of his Ships, and was afterward beaten in a pitched
Battle.

For joy of this second Victory, Cassibelan made a great Feast at London, and
there sacrificed to his Gods, in which Solemnity Hirilda, Cassibelans Nephew,
and Ewelin, Nephew to Androgeus, falling at variance, Hirilda was slain,
whereupon Cassibelan summons Ewelin to appear before him, to answer for the
death of his Nephew, but being encouraged by Androgeus, refused to obey the
Summons; Upon this, Cassibelan begins to make War upon Androgeus, who finding
himself not able to deal with him, fled unto Caesar, into Gallia, and invited
him to return into Britain (for Caesar upon his ill success, had left the
Island) Caesar took Hostages of him, and among the rest Scaeva, Androgeus his
Son, and so returns, where encountering at his Landing with Cassibelan, he was
worsted, until Androgeus coming upon the back of the Britains, totally
overthrew them.

Neither had the Romans any success against the Britains, but what they
obtained by the means of Androgeus, whom (I said before) is called by Caesar,
Mandubratius, and the aforesaid Reason is given by the British Histories of his
flight unto Gallia.

Count Palatine writes, that when Caesar was led by Androgeus, he found the
Britains drawn up at the Stowr in Kent, he drove them from the opposite Bank
with an Elephant Com. Pal.
armed with Iron-plates, and a Tower upon his back, and that the British
Horses, like those of Greece, and no doubt all of Trojan breed, could not
endure the scent of the Elephant, and so gave back, drawing the Britains in
their Charriots after them.

Likewise, that the Breast Plate stuck with Pearls, which Caesar dedicated to
Venus Genetrix, was presented him by Cassibelan at his departure from the
Island, and that Caesar, in return of so seasonable a Gift (for he had no time
to gather any himself) recompensed him with no less honorable Munificence.

After the final departure of Caesar, Androgeus Mandubratius was not restored
to the Kingdom of the Trinobantes, but whether through the Ill will of
Cassibelan, or the general Hatred the People had to him, for the enslaving of
his Country, is uncertain, so that leaving Britain, he again be took himself
unto Caesar, and attended him to Rome, where he was entertained as King of
Britain, and saluted Friend to the Commonwealth. At last, he was slain in the
Battle of Thessalia, against Pompey.

Cassibelan (after the Departure of the Romans) reigned ten years, which time
he employed in Revenging himself upon the Cities that had Revolted from him
during the Wars with Caesar.

He was Buried at York, in the year before Christ 42, and after the building of
Rome, 705.

THE Inter - Regnum OF THE ROMANS.
DURING the last ten years of Cassibelan, and till the time of the Emperor
Claudius, the Britains were free from the yoke of the Romans, and were ruled by
their own Kings, and governed by their own Laws, so that, for a while, we must
take our farewell of the Roman History, collecting it only as we find it
scattered, here and there, and follow the Succession of the British.

THEOMANTIUS, or Tenantius, Nephew of Cassibelan, succeeded his Uncle in the
Kingdom, having before enjoyed the Principality of Cornwall, far remote Anno
ante Christ. 45.
from the Troubles of the times, and by that means not engaged, by assisting
his Brother, to take to a Roman Interest, or by ayding Cassibelan to justify
his Violences, by which indifferent Carriage, by the general Applause of the
People, he assumed the Crown, Anno ante Christum XLV.

In this Kings Reign, Octavius (the Grandchild of Julia, Caesar's Sister)
obtained the Empire of Rome, but before he had fully possessed himself of it, and
was yet struggling with Antony and Lepidus, Theomantius sends his Son Kymbelin
to him, to attend upon him in his Wars, hoping thereby to ingratiate himself
with Augustus, and obtain a relaxation of the Tributes; And indeed Cunobelin so
behaved himself, that he grew into especial favor with the Emperor, and
accompanied him to Rome, where he was saluted by the name of FRIEND, of the
Commonwealth, and bred up in all the splendor and magnificence of the Court.

During his residence there, Tenantius paid in Tribute, which the British
Histories set upon the score of this great Favorite of Augustus, but the Roman
Authors seem generally to imply, That the Troubles of the Empire, and the
bandings of Great men after the death of Caesar, were the causes of the Quiet
of the Britains, during these Civil Dissensions.

This carries most probability with it, for we find Augustus no sooner settled
in the Roman State, but he began to cast his thoughts toward Britain; And,
although Tacitus draws the neglect of this Island in Augustus, to a wholesome
State-Maxime, of not making the Empire too unweildy; and Strabo would have us
think, that he absolutely Tacitus, Strabo.
slighted it, as a place of no importance, Dion. Cass.
and whose Enmity or Friendship conduced nothing to the good or ill of the
Empire, yet we find him August. antc Christ. 32.
twenty years after the Departure of Caesar, Advanced as far as Gallia, in
order to the Reducing of it; For had not a Revolt in Pannonia diverted him, he
had certainly Attempted it.

About Antc Chr. 25
seven years after, with the same Resolutions, be once more drew down into
Gallia, and the Britains hearing thereof, sent their Ambassadors, and promised
their Tribute, which Submission at the present he accepted of, because some
Commotions in Gallia arising, he was willing to give himself totally to the
Suppression of them. The year following, some differences arising about
performance of Covenants, he was again hindered by disturbances in Spain, the
Biscans, and they between Gallicia and Portugal, having Revolted.

This last designed Invasion, was in the two and twentieth year of the Reign of
Tenantius, who in the thirtieth year died, and was buried at London.

KYMBELIN, or KUNOBELIN, succeeded him in the Third year before CHRIST; And if
he was not Educated at Rome, yet the kind Correspondence Anno 3. ante Dom.
between the Romans and Britains about these Times, gave fair occasion to the
British Writers so to imagine it, for now the Britains began to learn all the
Arts and Intreagues of Courtiers, to flatter for Advantage, and by Gifts to
appease a Prince, and buy off a War. They sent some Presents to Augustus, and
others to the Roman Gods, to be offered (with their Submission) in the Capitol,
with such like obsequious Addresses. This, I suppose, gave occasion to Horace
to write,

Coelo tonantem credidimus JOVEM Horacei

Regnare: praesens Divus habebitur,
AUGUSTUS, adjectis Britannis
Imperio, Gravibusque Persis.
JOVE, we believe the Heavens do sway;
CAESAR's a God below.
He makes the Britains Homage pay,
And the stiff Persians bow.
But although they shifted off the Tribute, yet they yielded to Taxes and
Impositions, which were of more dangerous consequences to them. For by that
means they admitted the Romans into the Trading part of the Nation, and
although their Commodities, vented on the Continent, were inconsiderable, such
as Ivory-Bones, Iron-Chains, and such like Trinckets of Amber and Glass, yet by
this means the Roman Collectors were of necessity to be Admitted, and their
Enemies got more insight into them by this Amicable Correspondence, than ever
Caesar could do in both his Expeditions. Nay, by this means the Islanders came
to be debauched, receiving for their Trifles as many silly Luxuries of the
Continent, insomuch that afterward they became so tame, that one Band of
Soldiers, with a small Troop of Horse (as Strabo witnesses) was able to hold
them under in Obedience; Nay, so highly obliging were they to the Romans, in
the days of Tiberius, who lived also Strabo.
in this Kings Reign, that when some of Germanicus Army crossing some part of
the Seas, were cast upon their Shore, they entertained them Courteously, and
sent them back to their General.

Nay, so comfortable to the Romans was this Kymbelin himself, that he caused
Coyns to be stamped after the Custom of that State, whereas before, the
payments of the Britains were made with Rings of Iron, and Plates of Brass,
sized at a certain weight. His Image was made exactly after the manner of the
Emperors, and on the Reverse was CAME, signifying Camalodunum, or Maldon in
Essex, his Royal Seat, and it is more than to be suspected, that Tribute
likewise was paid, for in a Cambden.
Coin of his, TASCIO, is found in great Letters, with a Man sitting a
hammering, which word implies Tribute.

Com. Pal.
In the Third year of this Kymbeline, and in the Two and fortieth of Augustus,
being the Year of the World 3966, and after the Flood 2311, from the Arrival of
Brute 1116, Britain, and all the World, being blessed with a General Peace, the
Savior of the World, JESUS CHRIST, was miraculously born of a Virgin, the
influence of whose Birth not long after extended unto Britain.

Some there are that affirm Cunobeline to have been at Rome, and to reside in
the Emperors Court, when the News of our Saviors Birth was brought to
Augustus, but the time agrees not; For by the latest Account, he is made King
of this Island three years before our SAVIOR, and by some twenty three, but
the former Computation seems the truest. For we find no other King between
him and Guiderius, who Reigned in the days of Claudius Caesar, and was the Son
of this Cunobeline; For how is it likely, that Cunobeline should be King of
this Island in the beginning of Augustus's Reign, and yet have a Son that
Reigned above fifty years after in Claudius his days, for the space of twenty
eight years, and after him a younger Son Arviragus, that Reigned twenty eight
years more, so that it seems this King Ruled in the latter days of Augustus,
and twenty of the twenty three years of Tiberius, if not all of them, and some
part of Caligula's also.

TIBERIUS was a dissolute Prince, given to Sloth and Luxury, he thought it
sufficient if he could maintain the Bounds of the Empire as Augustus left it,
producing for his Excuse, a Schedule written with Augustus his own hand,
wherein was contained the whole Body of the Roman Empire, how many Cities and
Allies were in Arms, the list of their Navies, Kingdoms and Provinces, to which
was annexed the Convenience of the present Limits of the Empire, the necessity
to bound it on the East by Euphrates and Tigris, two considerable Rivers, on
the North, by the Rhine and Danube, on the West, by the Ocean, so that Britain
was excluded.

This Maxim, so convenient in it self, and so much conducing to the Ease of
this Emperor, was the Excuse that no Attempts was made upon this Island,
during the three and twenty years of his Reign; And Tacitus, where he reckons
up what Legions Tacitus.
were maintained, and through what Countries distributed, never makes mention
of many Forces in Britain in these Times. It is certain that they paid Custom
and Tolls, but more for the convenience of Trading, than out of Compulsion, the
Strabo.
Romans collecting them after a precarious manner, and (as Strabo says) not
daring to compel them, besides their Courtesy to Germanicus his Soldiers had
much obliged the Romans; all which Circumstances helped to procure their quiet
under this Emperor.

Cunobeline, I formerly spoke of, had five Sons, Guiderius, Adminius,
Togodumnus, Com. Pal.
Caradocus and Arviragus, to those, as may be supposed, he divided the Island,
and allotted them Principalities before his death. For we find in Suetonius.
Roman History, that Adminius was banished by him upon some misdemeanour, and
fled unto Caligula, and yet in an Ancient Coin Adminius seems to have been a
King. The Inscription on the Coin is this, (...) ETIMINAIOY BA, METROPOLIS
ETIMINII REGIS. Which Mr. Cambden judges to have been this Adminius, of whom I
find nothing else in the Roman or British Histories. But this is to be taken
notice of, that Cunobelin's Reign extends through the days of Caligula, for
Adminius was banished by his Father during his life, and took the protection of
Caligula, and, I suppose, not without some reason, he submitted his
Principality to him, which gave such occasion of Braggings to that Emperor,
that he made more noise of it than had been requisite, if he had taken the
whole Island, of whose British Exploits take the account out of Roman Authors.

It is certain, he had once an intention to Invade Britain, but by his shittle
Head, Anno Dom. 43
sudden repentance, and mighty designs against Germany, all came to nothing. To
terrify the Britains, and Germans, with some mighty piece of War, he once made
a Bridge over a Creek of the Sea in Campania, three miles and six hundred paces
in length. He was a Prince idle, and abounding in vain Conceits. Having in
Belgium taken into protection Adminius the Son of Cunobelyn, banished by his
Father, he sent boasting and magnificent Letters to Rome, as if the whole Isle
had been brought under his Subjection, giving especial charge and command to
the Post, that at their Arrival at Rome they should drive their Charriots
directly into the Marketplace, and the Curia, and in no wise deliver his
Messives to the Consuls, but in the Temple of Mars, and in a full Assembly of
the Senate.

After this, he brought all his Army to the Belgic Shore, where he received
the News, That the Britains had levied the strength of their Nation, and stood
ready to oppose his Landing, if he should make any attempt upon them. This
affrighted not Caligulae, Suetonius. Dion. (...).
who resolved not to maintain Fight but at sufficient distance, and to keep the
advantage of the Sea, which secured him against the too near approaches of the
Enemy. Having therefore first commanded his Men to take a full view of the
British Forces, as if they had all such Prospective Glasses (as Roger Bacon
fancies) Caesar discryed the Country with, from the same Coasts; and having
encouraged them not to Roger Bacon,
be daunted at their Numbers, with Manhood not to be equalled, he rowed a
stones cast or two from the Shore, and there gave a notable defiance to them.
Then, as if expecting to be assaulted, he commanded all the Engines of Battery
to be set up, the Trumpets to sound a Charge, and the men to fall on, but no
Enemy appearing, as if upbraiding the Cowardice of the Britains in great
Triumph, he orders his Soldiers to fill their Helmets and Laps with Cockles,
Muscles and other Shells, calling them the spoils of the Ocean, and due to the
Capitol and Palace, and as a Trophy of his great Victory he erected a mighty
high Tower, out of which as from a Pharohs lights might every night blaze to
direct Mariners in their Courses, the Ruins of which Pharoh's are sometimes
seen at Low Water on the Shore of Holland, and called by the people, there
inhabiting, to this day Briten-huts. Having performed this mighty Exploit, he
pronounced a Donative of an hundred Denaries to every Soldier, and, as if he
had exceeded all Examples of Liberality, he bids them depart joyful with Plenty.

Had he stopped here, and not proceeded any further in this vanity, one might
have thought he had been ashamed of so frivolous an Attempt, but so fond was he
of his Conceit, that he carried of the Shells to Rome, requires a Triumph and
divine Honors for this foolish Enterprise. Finding the State averse, he was
once in the mind to have murdered them all, as envious of his Glory.

Thus stood the Affairs of Britain during the Reign of Cunobeline, and long
might they have so lasted in Freedom and Liberty, had not this Nation, by the
Example of this Prince, been too much addicted to the Roman Factions. It is
observed by some, that about this time the British Potentates sent their Sons
to Rome to be educated, as not esteeming any Breeding that was not derived from
that City. No wonder therefore, they were in the next Age enslaved by that
People, whose Customs they had already submitted to; and, what made most to
their Misfortunes by a Prince of very small endowments, no Conduct, and of
equal Stupidity with Caligula. Cunobelin died in the forty fifth year of his
Reign and was buried at London.

GUIDERIUS, the eldest Son of Cunobeline, succeeded his Father in the Kingdom
of the Britains. In his Reign Claudius the Emperor Invaded this Island, but
because Anno Dom. 42.
in the Roman Histories, to which we are again Arrived, there is no mention
made of this Prince, I shall refer Him and his Actions to be related to their
proper place.

Drusus Claudius CAESAR. the 2.d Roman in Britain.


THE WARS UNDER CLAUDIUS.
CHAP. XIV. DRUSUS CLAUDIUS CAESAR's Invasion of BRITAIN, out of the ROMAN
Histories.
THE Britains, ever since the days of Julius Caesar, enjoyed their Laws,
Customs, and Liberty, they lived Anne Dom. 44.
entirely within themselves, and although they paid Tolls and Impositions, yet
it was not out of an acknowledgment of Submission to the Continent, but from
the necessity of Trading with it. Being free from Foreign Disturbances, which
vented the Ill humors of the State, they brake out into Inward Factions, those
secret Cancers which eat out the heart of a Nation, and undermine the strength
of it, whilst to Lookers on it appears the freshest.

The different Parties, which scarcely in Caesar's time united against the
Common Enemy, now the Roman Rods, for three Emperors, that were taken off
their backs, were laid on again with greater Violence; And whilst every petty
state, upon little Interest, grew peevish one with another, and pusht on for
Principality, they were swooped away by the Roman Eagle, who at several Morsels
easily mastered that Prey, which in a lump would have overgorged it.

Affairs grew to that height, that by unnatural Ambition the Son rebelled
against the Father, and many adhering to that, and other Factions, being
overtaken or prevented in their designs, out of secret Guilt, and fear of
deserved Punishment, fled their Country, forsook their Allegiance to their
natural Sovereign, and betook themselves to the protection of Rome; And like
Vipers, having eaten their way out of the bowels of their Common Mother, they
took especial care that the wounds they had made should not be healed, nor the
Breaches closed. This they did by laying open the weakness of their Country,
and the easiness of a Roman Conquest. They had a Party in the Island that
wanted only opportunity of Rising, and at the appearance of any to Head them
would rise up in a moment.

These Practices were so openly carried in the Court of Rome, that the British
Potentates hearing thereof, sent their Complaints, and required that these
Fugitives might be delivered, and sent back to receive their due punishments.
What Answer Suetonius;
was returned is not known, but certain it is that no satisfaction was given in
that point; For continually others, upon the same account, flocked to Rome, and
were kindly entertained by the Emperor, insomuch that that City (as at its
first Founding) was continually made the Asylum, or Sanctuary for all such as
were disaffected to the present Government of their Country, or any Villainies
that had incurred the penalty of the Laws.

Adminius, in the time of Caligula, led the dance, and now Bericus (what he was
further is not known) was grown into such favor with Claudius, that the
Britains could no longer dissemble it, but in a general Commotion and Uproar
rose against the Romans, who for Trading resided in the Island.

This News was brought to Claudius, who, by the instigation of Bericus,
resolves to Dion. Cass.
revenge it, and by force of Arms reduce the whole Island to the Roman
Subjection. To this end, he sends Orders to Aulus Plautius (at that time
Praetor) to transport the Army, then lying in Gallia, into Britain, and withal
commanding him, that upon any great emergencies of Affairs, he should not fail
to give him intelligence.

Plautius, in prosecution of his Orders, calls his Army together, but having
laid open the Design, they all fell into Mutiny, complaining that they were to
be led into a NEW WORLD, and to make War out of the compass of the Earth.

In this matter they trifled out the time, until Claudius sent his Freed-man
Narcissus to appease the Soldiers, and to hasten their Embarking; But such was
their Indignation, at the sight of him who had formerly been a Slave, that when
he ascended the Tribunal to make an Oration to them, they generally cried out,
10 Saturnalia! an Exclamation used in those Feasts where in the Servant takes
place of the Master, but immediately touched with the sense and shame of their
Backwardness, unanimously followed their General.

Plautius divides his Army into three Bodies, and Embarks them in as many
different Squadrons, thinking thereby to secure his Landing, which might be
obstructed if they should all make for the same Port. Having put to Sea, they
were driven back by cross Winds and foul Weather, which so much disheartened the
Soldiers, that had not a bright Meteor, shooting from the East to the West,
seeming to direct their course to the Island, put new life into them, they had
certainly drawn back, and desisted totally from the Enterprise.

This happy Omen, as sent by the Gods, and presaging some good success, so
raised their Spirits, that they resolved again to try the Sea, which fell out
so well, that in a short time they were cast upon the Island, and found no
opposition at their Landing, for the Britains, who before had Intelligence that
the Roman Army was in a Mutiny, resolved against the Expedition, and were
negligent in preparing for them.

And now finding them safe Arrived on the shore, and in Weather when they least
expected it, bereaved of all other Counsels, they betook themselves to the
Woods and Marshes, hoping this way to weary out the Romans, and by a dodging
War so to linger out the time, as the Courage of their Enemies being spent, and
their Edge abated, they might be forced to return without any great Exploit
performed.

This Policy Cassibelan, with success, maintained in his Wars against Caesar,
and had it been prosecuted now with the same Constancy, no doubt but that it
would have had the same effect; For we find that Plautius, with heavy Marches
and troublesome Journies, had more labor and trouble to find them out, than
found, to Conquer them.

The British Armies, as well as their Counsels, were divided, both led on by
two young Sons of Cunobeline deceased, Caratacus and Togodumnus, who (upon what
designs is not known) keeping their Forces separate, and being too hot and
heady for the thoughts of Delay, and rashly engaging one after the other, were
both overcome and put to flight, first Caratacus, and afterward Togodumnus. No
wonder therefore, if some of the British States relying not much on their
Conduct, desired to make their Peace with the Conqueror; For after this
Defeat, the Boduni, or Dobuni, seated about Oxfordshire and Glocestershire, and
subject formerly to the Catuellani, the Inhabitants of Buckinghamsbire,
Hertford and Bedfordshire, submitted themselves, and received a Garrison.

Plautius, after this Success, Marched on to a certain River, where he found
the Britains on the farther side encamped, lying secure and careless, because
they thought the Romans, without a Bridge, could not possibly get over. These
Romans having Germans mixed with them, who in Armor were accustomed to swim,
with ease, against the strongest Currents, were commanded to take the River,
and unawares to assail the Enemy, but especially their Horse; For the Germans
having got footing on the other side, fell unexpectedly on the British Camp,
and, as they were ordered, spent all their Darts and Javelins upon the Horse,
whereby they were so gauled, that the Britains not able to sit them, were
forced to alight, and those which drew the Charriots, falling dead in their
Geers and Harness, were not only made useless, but cumbersome.

The Britains being now many of them on foot, and their Charriots
unserviceable, Plautius sends Vespatian (who afterward was Emperor) with
Sabinus his Brother to second the Attempt; These coming on a sudden upon the
Britains, and assaulting them unawares did much Execution, but the Britains,
with the rest of their Forces, for that time retired. The next day re-uniting,
they gave Battle to the Romans, and with such Courage and Resolution, that for
a long while the Victory hung doubtful, until Cajus Cidius Geta charged
furiously upon them, and engaging almost beyond recovery, turned the scale on
the Roman side, for which great piece of Service (although no Consul) he
obtained afterward at Rome Triumphal Honors.

After this, the Britains retired to the mouth of the Thames, where being
acquainted with the Shallows and Sand-banks, they easily past it, but the
Romans unadvisedly following them, were in great hazard to be lost upon those
dangerous Flats, but the Germans, some by swimming, others by help of a Bridge
that was higher, having got over, so encompast the Britains, that they made
great slaughter of them, but afterward, in the heat of Pursuit, following too
eagerly, in blind Bogs and Marshes they lost many of their Companions.

Plautius thought it not safe to proceed any further, having considered into
what Traps the Britains had drawn him, and fearing that through the ignorance
of the Country he might be led into greater dangers. With all, he perceived
that the Courage of the Enemy, by so many Defeats, was rather inflamed than
quelled, and that the death of their Prince Togodumnus (who, in one of the
former Encounters had been slain) had so enraged them, that laying aside all
thoughts of yiedling, they were bent upon nothing but Revenge; Besides, he had
lost many of his Soldiers, the Countries he held, were his rather by Courtesy
than Compulsion, and he well understood the faith of Revolters, that upon the
least turn of Fortune, they were ready to wheel about and fall into their
ancient Allegiance.

According to his Orders therefore, he sent unto Claudius, signifying in what
posture his Affairs stood, the danger of proceeding any further with those few
Forces he had, and the hopefulness of the design of Conquest, if assisted with
greater Numbers. In the mean time, he employed himself in securing what he had
got, and in placing Garrisons In the most necessary Passes, so that with the
residue of his Men he Encamped at the Mouth of the Thames, to make good the
Landing of new Supplies.

Claudius receiving this Intelligence, being now the third time Consul, and
desirous of a Triumph, chose Britain for his Province. CLAUDIUS, in Person.


In his setting out from Ostia, he had like (by foul Weather) to have been
drowned, upon the Islands Stachades, then on the Coasts of Liguria, where being
at last set on shore, by Land he went to Marseilles, then to Callice, with such
vast Preparations, as argued the difficulty of the Enterprise he was
undertaking; For, besides his Roman Legions, and the Auxiliaries of Germans and
Gauls, he carried with him many Armed Elephants to terrify the Britains, and
to amaze that Courage, which to that time no Force could daunt.

With this Equipage he embarks, and having in a short time crossed the Channel,
he joins directly with Plautius, who lay waiting for him at the Thames Mouth.
Then taking into his hands the entire Command of the whole Army, he passes the
River to find out the Enemy, where he discovers them drawn up ready to give him
Battle; For the Britains were impatient of Delays, and had embraced those
Counsels which had more heat and spirit, than true Conduct, and settled
Resolution.

Never had the Conduct of Old Cassibelan been more necessary than at this time;
The Roman Army was great and unweildy, requiring vast Provisions, and lugging
much Baggage after them, their Courage in a little time would have been
wearied, and their Spirits spent, and their Elephants once constrained to
follow through Bogs and Marshes, would have been foundered and rendered
unserviceable. And the first heat of the Army in receiving their Emperor being
over, no doubt but the Soldiery would have flagged in time, and mouldered
away. But to engage with them just upon their receiving fresh Supplies, when
they were newly animated with the presence of their Emperor, and the
impressions of Joy not quite over, argues the young and raw Counsels the
Britains then were under.

And as this Fight was rashly undertaken, so were the consequences fatal, for
the loss of Camalodunum, or Malden (the Royal Seat of Cunobelin) followed it,
with the Surrender of many other Places of Importance, whose Inhabitants were
dealt with according to their greater or lesser Obstinacy in yielding, some
being received into Mercy, and others quite driven out of their Dwellings.

For these successes Claudius was oftentimes, by his Army, saluted with the
Name of IMPERATOR, a Title never given to any in the same War but once, but now
often reiterated with the universal Acclamations of all, but whether out of
flattery to his Person, or that some extraordinary circumstances in the Wars
with the Britains above other Nations, deserved it, is uncertain. Afterward he
disarmed the Britains, and thought that sufficient for his security, without
proceeding to the confiscation of the Goods of the Nobility and Gentry, for
which Clemency of his they erected Temples and Altars to him, and, with
Sacrifice, worshipped him as a God.

Having thus gained sufficient Honor, he prepares for his Return to Rome,
sending before him Pompeius and Silanus (who had married his Daughters) to
carry the Tidings of his Victories, leaving behind him also Plautius, to finish
what he had so well begun, and to subdue the remainder of the Island. All this
was accomplished within sixteen days, for no longer was he in Britain, and with
so little noise and trouble, that it gave occasion to Suetonius, not long
after, to write, That he subdued the Country without any Battle fought, or the
least Blood shed. At his Return to Rome, whence he had been absent in all but
six Months, he received a most Magnificent Triumph, and, as if his Atcheivments
had exceeded all Example, the Senate decreed yearly Games to his Honor, and
set up stately Arches, not only in Rome but at Bulloigne also, the place from
whence he set out. In this Expedition, they gave moreover to him and his Son
the Surname of BRITANNICUS, a Title no less glorious to them than that of
Germanicus Africanus, or Asiaticus, to others, and conferred on A remarkable
Instance to the Honor of BRITAIN.
them with far greater circumstances of Acknowledgment from the State. And this
may be said to the Honor of our Nation, that even in the height of the Roman
Empire it was esteemed so considerable a part of the World, that it was held
not Inferior to any of the forementioned Provinces, and cost as many Legions
in preserving it, as all Asia, and was never forsaken by the Romans, but in
their last extremity.

At the Triumph of Claudius, to make it more splendid, the Governors of
Provinces were summoned to appear, and, as in a public Jubilee, all Banished
persons, for what Crimes soever, were for that time admitted into Rome. Upon
the Loover of the Palace a Naval Coronet was fixed, as if at that time BRITAIN
had been the Mistress of the Sea, and that the Ensign of its new Subjection.
Provinces presented their Crowns of Suetonius.
Gold; Gallia Comata, or France, one of nine pound, Spain one of seven pound
weight. He ascended the Capitol by the stairs on his knees, supported on each
sides by his Sons in law, Pompeius and Silanus. He entered in Triumph the
Adriatic Sea in a stately Vessel, more like a Palace than a Ship. To his Wife
Messalina, by the Senate, was allowed the Highest place to sit in, and in his
Triumph, she followed his Chariot in her Caroch or Hanging-Coach, after them
followed Valerius, Asiaticus Julius Silanus, Sidius Geta, and others, on whom,
in respect of this Conquest, he had heaped Triumphal Ornaments, the rest
followed on foot, and in their Robes. After this he exhibited Triumphal Sports
and Games, having assumed for that end the Consular Office and Authority, and
besides the Solemnities in the Theaters, he instituted Horse Races for Prizes,
between every Course, which were ten in all. Bears were killed, Champions
fought, and the choicest Youths out of Asia danced the Warlike-dance in Armor.

In the Field of Mars he exhibited a Warlike show, wherein he represented the
storming and sacking of a Town, and the Surrender of the British Princes,
himself presiding in the Robes of a General.

To Licinius Crassus Frug. he gave the Honor to follow him in his Triumph,
mounted upon a Trapped Courser, with a rich Caparison, and arraied in a Robe of
Date-tree work; Upon Posidius the Eunuch, he bestowed a Spear-staff without a
Head; Upon C. Gavius, Chains, Bracelets, Horse-trappings, and a Coronet of
Gold, and all in memory of his British Conquest.

THE British History, CONCERNING THE EXPEDITION OF CLAUDIUS, And these Times.
CLAUDIUS, at his coming to Land at Portchester, besieged that Town, to the
Releif whereof came Guiderius, and the Battle Anne Dom. 44.
went on the Britains side, until Hamo a Roman, disguising himself like a
Britain, got the opportunity of killing the King, and retiring. Arviragus,
least the Britains should be discouraged, concealed his Brothers death, and
dressing himself in his Armor, as King, continued the Battle, and so obtained
a great Victory. Claudius fled to his Ships, and Hamo to the next Woods,
whither Arviragus pursued him, and hunting him out to the Seacoast, there slew
him at a Haven before he could take Shipping, called afterward by the name of
Hamon's-Haven, and Hampton, and at this day Southampton. Thus died Guiderius in
the year of our Lord Forty five, and Arviragus his Brother, for want of Issue,
succeeded him.

ARVIRAGUS, the youngest Son of Cunobelin, and Brother of Guiderius, received
the Kingdom in the year of our Lord forty five. No mention is made of this King
in the Roman Histories of these Times, which makes the Reign of this Prince
too much suspected, considering that in these days many memorable things were
done and Recorded by the Romans concerning this Island, and more Inferior
Persons taken notice of, and so it seems more strange, that a Sovereign
Prince, of so active a Spirit as Arviragus is made, and so Victorious against
the Romans, should be totally neglected by their Historians, so that I am
afraid, as well his Encounters with Hamo, as his Marriage with Genuissa, a
supposed Daughter of Claudius, as likewise his Treaty with the Emperor, his
Homage to him, the naming of Caerleon, or Glovernia, Claudiocestria, in honor
of his Nuptials with Claudius his Daughter, as likewise his Exploits against
Vespatian at Richborough, will be all accounted of the same stamp, and for that
reason I will omit them; And I will only make mention, that about the sixth
year of his Reign, Joseph of Arimathea, sent by Philip the Apostle, preached,
as is generally supposed, the Gospel of Christ in this Island, having a place
assigned him about Glastenbury by this King, whom afterward he converted to
the Christian Faith, if Harding writes true,

Joseph converted this King Arviragus,
By his preaching, to know the Law Divine:
And Baptized him, as written has Nennius,
The Chronicler in Britain Tongue full fine.
But his Authority may be supposed to be as bad as his Verses, for we find but
two Nennius's, one Brother of Cassibelan, and long before this time, the other
called Bancharensis, and writ not in the British Tongue, but in the Latin;
However, it is agreed, that about these times the Christian Faith was
propagated in this Island, but Math. Parker.
whether by Joseph of Arimathea, who (as the first Protestant Bishop says) had
a Seat allotted him in the very ends of Arviragus his Dominions, or by Simon
Zelotes, or St. Paul himself, or some others, is uncertain. But it is plain out
of Tertullian, that Tertullian.
the British Nation, to which the Romans had no access, had owned Subjection
unto Christ, which was in this Age.

But the most received Opinion of the Inhabitants, and which seems to carry
the greatest Antiquity, is, That JOSEPH of Arimathea, the same who embalmed our
Saviors Body, was sent into Britain by St. Philip, where he preached the
Gospel, and founded a Church in a place called Ines withren in the British
Tongue, now Glastenbury, which place was granted to him by this Arviragus King
of Britain, the dimensions of which Church, according to the Custom of those
Primitive (...). (...). Eccles.
times, not very Magnificent, is taken out of* Sr. Henry Spelman, as he
collected it from a Plate which was fixed on a Pillar in the New Church, and
preserved after the demolishing of that Monastery; the words of the Plate are
these.

ANno post Passionem Domini xxxj. duodecim Sanai ex quibus JOSEPH ab Arimathea
Primus erat, buc venerunt: qui Ecclesiam bujus Regni primam in hoc loco
construxerunt, qui Christi in honorem suae Matris and locum pro eorum Sepultura
praesentialiter dedicavit, Sancto David Meneventium Archicpiscopo hoc testante.
Cui Dominus Ecclesiam illam dedicare disponenti in sompnis apparuit, and eum a
proposito revocavit: necnon in signum quod ipse Dominus Ecclesiam ipsam prius
cum Cimiterio dedicarat: manum Episcopi digito perforavit, and sic perforata
multis videntibus in (...) apparuit. Posten ver o idem Episcopus, Domino
revelante, ac Sanctorum numero in eadem crescente, quendam cancellum in
Orientali part huic Ecclesiae adjecit, and in honor Beatae Virginis
consecravit, cujus Altar inestimabili Saphiro in perpetuam hujus rei memoriam
insignavit. Et ne locus aut quantitas prorsus Ecclesiae per tales
augmentationes oblivioni traderetur, erigitur haec Columpna in linea per duos
Orientales angulos ejusdem Ecclesiae versus meridiem protracta, and praedictum
Cancellum ab ea abscindente. Et erat ejus longitudo ab illa linca versus
Occidentem lx. pedum, latitudo vero ejus xxvj. pedum, diffantia centri istius
Columpnae a puncto medio inter praedictos angulos xlviij. pedum.

Thus rendered into English.

THere arrived here XII. Holy Men, of whom JOSEPH of Arimathea was Head, in the
year from the Passion of Our Lord XXXI, who built in this place the first
Church of this Kingdom, who, viz. Joseph of Arimathea, appointing a Place for
their Burial, dedicated it in honor of the Mother of Christ, David Archbishop
of Menew attesting the same, to whom (the Lord intent on the Dedication of that
Christian Church) appearing in a Dream, recalled, deterred and advised to
desist from that purpose, and in token that the Lord had before dedicated that
Church and Churchyard, he bored the Bishops hand through with his finger, which
appeared so bored through on the Morrow to many Eyewitnesses. Afterward the
same Bishop, the number of the Saints of that Church increasing (the Lord
revealing it to him) added to that Church on the Easternpart, a Chancel, which
he consecrated in Honor of the Blessed Virgin, the Altar of which, for a
Memorial of the same to future Ages, be adorned with a Sapphire of unknown
value, and least the place and platform of that Church, through such
Augmentations might be forgotten, there is erected a Column or Pillar, in a
Line drawn through the Eastern Corners of that Church, toward the South,
dividing the aforesaid Chancel from the same; and the length of it was, from
that Line toward the West threescore feet, its breadth twenty six feet, the
distance of the Center of that Column from the middle Point, between the before
said Corners, forty eight feet.

The first Church of the Christians In Britain.


a, b, c, d, The compass of the Churchyard, the extent whereof is not
certainly known, but so large as to contain (according to Melkinus, who lived
in the year of our Lord 550) a thousand Graves, amongst whom lies Joseph of
Arimathea, etc. Melkinus.
about the South Angle of the Oratory, about K and f, where also St. Patrick,
Abbot of this place, was also Entombed under a Stone Pyramid, which was
afterward (according to the devotion of the time) overlaid with Silver.

e, f, The length of the Church, sixty foot.

f, g, The breadth of the Church, twenty six foot.

b, The Walls of the Church (according to Malmsbury) made of Twigs winded
Malmsbury.
and twisted together, after the Ancient Custom that Kings Palaces were used
to be built; So the King of Wales, by name Heolus Dha, in the year of our Lord
940, built a House of white Twigs, to retire into when he came a hunting into
South Wales, therefore it was called Cyguyn, that is, the White House. For, to
the end it might be distinguished from Vulgar buildings, he caused the Twigs
(according to his Princely quality) to be barkt; Nay, Castles themselves in
those days were framed of the same Materials, and weaved together, for thus
writes Giraldus Cambrensis of Pembroke Castle. Arnulphus de Montgomery (says
he) in the dales of King Girald. Came.
HENRT the First, built that small Castle of Twigs, and slight Turf. Such Reed
Houses as these we all along see in Ireland, and in many places in England.

I, The Roof, which (according to the usual Custom of the Britains) was of
Straw, or after the nature of the soil in that place, of Hay or Rushes. So
Bid; Hist. Bid lib. 3. cap, 10.
A great fire being kindled in the midst of the House, it happened that some
sparks, flying high, set the Roof of the house on a flame, which easily took
fire, because it consisted of Wicker, and Straw; After the same manner was the
Old Roman Capitol it self built, according to Ovid,

Quae fuerat nostri fi quaras Regia nati, Ovid.

Adspice de Canna, Straminibusque domum.
Ka, the Door, the top whereof reaches to the Eeves of the house, which in
those days were very low.

Kb, the East Window over the Altar.

KKK, the South Windows.

Having delivered thus much concerning the Antiquity of this Christian Church,
I will conclude the same with some necessary Observations thereupon.

Observations upon the beforementioned Inscription, in memory of the first
Christian Church in Britain.
THe Character upon this Plate is not so Ancient, as not above 300 years old,
if so much, and though there might be in other places (which is difficult to
prove) Churches built so early, yet that they were encompassed according to the
Modern Custom, with Church yards, will hardly be granted. There were many
Churches in the Cities of Britain soon after the first Times of Christianity,
but never any Churchyards till the time of Cutbert, the tenth Archbishop of
Canterbury, from St. Augustine, who in the year of our Lord 798, procured the
privilege of having Churchyards in Cities from the Pope; Whoever of the
Ancient and Primitive Christians, made mention of burying any body in Churches,
or in those Times, of the dedication of Churches to Saints, or that the Blessed
Virgin Mary was called upon, and worshipped by her Contemporaries? And this is
to be observed, that there is no mention made concerning Dedication, before the
time of the building of that Church, which is reported to have been in the year
from the Passion 31, nor in the time of Joseph of Arimathea, or about five
hundred years afterward, until St. David, who was made Archbishop of Menew,
Anno Dom. 519. and held that Seat 65 years, for he is reported to have lived
145 years that first discovered it.

THE CONTINUATION OF THE Roman History, UNDER CLAUDIUS BY HIS LIEUTENANTS.
AULUS PLAUTIUS left by Claudius in Britain, after the Emperors departure,
gave himself to the diligent prosecution of the War, and so behaved himself in
quieting the Rebelling Countries, and gaining new Conquests, even to the West
of the Island, that Claudius decreed he should have a petty Triumph, and at his
Entrance into Rome, himself went to meet him, giving him the Right Hand both in
his going and coming.

Neither were the Actions of Vespatian (afterward Emperor) less remarkable in
this War, for partly under the Conduct of Claudius himself, and partly of
Plautius, he fought thirty Battles with the Britains, two most powerful
Nations, and above Suetonius;
twenty Towns, together with the Isle of Wight, he brought to his Subjection,
for which Worthy Deeds he received Triumphal Ornaments, and a little while
after, two Sacerdotal Dignities, and a Consulship.

His Son TITUS served under him in quality of a Tribune, and was much renowned
for his Valor and Diligence. He had the good Fortune to rescue and relieve his
Father, and his Modest Behavior was as signal as his Courage, as appearreth by
many Inscriptions upon his Images, dispersed through the Provinces of Germany
and Britain. Camb. Brit.


OSTORIUS SCAPULA succeeded Plautius, in the quality of a Propretor, a Man no
less experienced in Martial Affairs. At his first entrance into Tacitus, di
vit. Agri.
Command, he was welcomed with many Commotions and Troubles, for that part of
Britain which was not yet subdued, broke in upon their Neighbors who had
entered into League, or made any Submission to the Romans, wasting their Fields,
and with so much the more vigor, for that they thought this new General (not
yet acquainted with his business, nor having experience of his Army) would not
be able to Revenge it, especially considering that the Winter season was
drawing on, and the time unsit for Action.

But Ostorius knowing that the first Success makes the greatest impressions of
Fear, or Confidence, resolves to put a stop to their Inroads betimes, before
they proceeded too far, and to that intent he snatched with him some of his
lightest Cohorts, and unexpectedly set upon them, killing many, and following
them that sted so clofely, that he gave them not time to Rally, and lest for
the future he might be continually plagued with a dangerous and unfaithful
Peace, which would be always beating up his Quarters, and give neither to
himself, nor his Soldiers, any rest, he disarms all whom he suspected might
Revolt, and set Garrisons on the two Rivers Sabrina and Antona, thereby to tie
up the Incursions of the Enemy.

By this means he reduced the most Southerly parts of the Island into the
nature of a Province, and to secure his Conquests the better, he gives several
Cities to Cogidunus, to be held of the Romans under the Title of a King, by
which Bribe he engaged him deeply to his Party, it being an ancient practice of
that State to flatter Princes for their advantage, and by a specious show of
Honor and Respect, to make them Instruments of their own Ambition, and Vassals
to their will, a haughty Pride observable in Commonwealths. First they drew
them up with the Plumes of Majesty, and seemed to adore them, and afterward,
their turns once served, with as great Contempt and Ingratitude they trampled
upon them. And this I take notice of here, because Tacitus seems to glory in
it, and it way possibly be the Humors of others as well as the State of Rome.

The Iceni, or the People of Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridgshire and
Huntingtonshire, a potent Nation, and not yet wasted by War, because they had
voluntarily entered into Alliance with the Romans, finding (that upon the least
suspicion) they might be disarmed as well as their Neighbors, and perceiving
that they should be enclosed in the Roman Line, which was stretched as far as
the Severn and Avon, or, as some think, the Trent Northward, could not brook
these proceedings of Ostorius, so took Arms, and by their Example encouraged
many of their Neighbors to do the like. This done, they encampt in a place
chosen for that purpose, casting up a Rampire of Earth, and leaving the
Entrance narrow, for fear the Enemies Horse might break in upon them.

Ostorius, although he had not his Legions with him, but only his Auxiliary
Forces, yet resolved, if he could, to break down this Fence, which he perceived
was but rudely thrown up, and setting all his Cohorts to work, the Horse also
allighting to that Service, he giving the signal, at once they rent down the
Works, and fell upon the Enemy, and levelled their narrow Trenches.

Here the Britains were sorely straightened, but knowing, that if they were
overcome, the reward of their Revolt would be slavery, and that if they had a
mind to escape, their own Fortifications were against them; They did whatever
men in Anger and despair could do, bravely revenging themselves upon the Enemy.

In this Battle M. Ostorius the Son of the Lieutenant gained the Honor of
having saved a Citizen. But at length being overcome, other States, by their
sad Example, were confirmed in their Obedience to the Romans, having hitherto
waited the success of the Iceni, standing in a doubtful posture, between War
and Peace.

After this success, Ostorius marches into the Country of the Cangi, supposed
to Cambd. Brit.
be a small Territory in Somersetshire (for I cannot imagine them to be the
Inhabitants betwixt the Iceni and the Humber, because they lay not in the way
to the Irish Seas, as by the following Progress we may imagine the Cangi did)
where he plundered and laid waste their Fields, they not daring to give him
Battle; And, if at any time they ventured out of their secret Coverts, to fall
in the Rear, and endeavored to cut off his Marches, they always met with
sharp entertainment. At last he came to the Irish Sea, where News was brought
him that the Brigantes, supposed the Inhabitants of Yorkshire, Lancashire, the
Bishopric of Durham, Westmoreland and Cumberland, were up in Arms.

Upon this he resolves to return, being fully purposed not to attempt any new
Design till he had fully quieted these Commotions behind him, which he found no
great difficulty in performing; For they, after a few losses, and a general
Pardon to all that should lay down their Weapons, readily submitted and
embraced it. But the Nation of the Silures, the Inhabitants of South Wales,
were not so easy to be managed, for neither by fair words and allurements, nor
by threats and Menaces, could they be brought to a Compliance, but needs they
would have a War, and seemed not to be bridled or kept under without Garrisons
of Legionary Soldiers.

To effect this, Ostorius sends to the Colony at Camolodunum, confisting of
Veterane Soldiers, these he placed in his new Conquest adjoining, that they
might be an obstacle to new Revolts, and a means to train the People into a
Conformity to the Roman Customs and Laws.

This done, he went against the Silures, who, besides their natural and inborn
Fierceness, were much exalted with the opinion they had of the Courage and
Conduct of Caratacus, a Prince, who by many doubtful, and some fortunate
Attempts, had raised himself to a greater Reputation in Arms, than any of the
British Generals; He finding himself over-matched in Strength made use of
Policy, he knew that his advantage lay in choice of Ground, and in places that
were fittest for Ambush. To that end he makes the seat of the War in the
Country of the Ordovices, or North Wales, a Region full of Narrow passes, Rocky
and Mountainous, and easy teneable by a few.

Having drawn into his Society all that were Ill affected to the Roman
Alliance, he resolves here to try it out to the utmost. Ostorius followed him,
and finds him drawn up, and resolutely prepared for Battle.

The place he had chosen was strangly fortified both by Art and Nature, the
accesses to it were full of difficulties to the Romans, and of no less security
to the Britains, either in Advancing or Retreating. It was situated between
craggy and broken Mountains, and when any Gaps or Passages lay open, he stopped
them up with huge Stones ramb'd in between, and that ground which lay level he
fortified with a Ditch and Rampire.

There was but one side left that the Romans could attack him at, where there
ran a River not to be foarded, without some confusion and disorder on the
Enemies Party. Against this place he set the choicest of his Soldiers to
assault them at their passage, drawing a Line behind them of slight work, to
break the impression of the Enemy, if they should be forced to Retreat.

The place where Garatacus drew up his Army, is supposed, by Mr. Gambden, to be
a Hill on the West of Shropshire called Caet Caradoc, at this day situated
among many doubtful Foards, and the Ruins of the Rampire as yet remain.

Things thus ordered, the Leaders of the several British Nations went about the
Army encouraging the Soldiers, and exhorting them not to be daunted with vain
Fears, praising such as they saw cheerful and eager for Battle, and raising the
Spirits of others where they perceived them drooping, with comfortable
expressions, and such like allurements of War.

Caratacus especially bestirs himself, and with quick motion stirring from
place to place, This, he cried out, was the Day, and This the Field which would
be the recovery of their Liberty, or the beginning of perpetual Slavery. And
here he invokes the Names of his glorious Ancestors, who had driven out Caesar
the Dictatour, and by whose Valor they had hitherto been freed from the Roman
Bondage and Tribute, and their Wives and Children preserved from dishonor.

After these and such like speeches, the Army testified their Joy by loud
shouts and acclamations, and every one, according to his Country superstition,
bound himself by Oath, That neither Darts nor Wounds should make them yield.

This courageous and cheerful Alacrity startled the Roman General, withal he
descried the River before him, and the Rampire made upon it, both of great
difficulty to be passed. The steep Hills full of Armed men, and hanging over
their heads, gave a dismal prospect, and a terrible scene of War; But the
Common Soldiers were eager for Battle, and required the Signal, crying out,
That to Valorous men nothing was impregnable, and this their Impatience was
increased by the Prefects and Tribunes, who gave out the same words.

Then Ostorius, having first variously sought out which Fords were passable,
which not, whilst there he had continued, he led them on, and with no
difficulty wades through the River. When they were come up to the Rampire, and
within ken of the British Darts and Javelins, they were sorely gauled by them,
and because the Britains had the advantage of the Higher ground, and the Romans
were to fling their heavy Piles up hill, their losses were far the greater.

And during this distant Fight, such was the great slaughter on the Roman side,
that not able longer to endure it, the Legions took to their Ancient discipline
of making of a Testudo, which was done by their coming to their close Order,
locking their Targets one within another, over their heads, the manner of which
is described in the following Figure.

But in speaking more particularly of this TESTUDO, we shall describe it
according to the Directions of Livy, Tacitus, Dio Cassius, and others.

To the Amphitheatre (a Place people accustomarily resorted to see any strange
thing Acted) was brought a considerable number of Men, who after some motion
and seemly March, suddenly cast themselves into a square Troop, and locking
their Targets close together, over their Heads, the first Rank of men stood
upright, the next bowing their Bodies a little downward, the third and fourth
imitated it by degrees, in manner of a Descent, insomuch that the last Rank of
men kneeled upon the ground, so that their Targets on the outside seemed
bending like the Tiles on a House.

Upon this Roof or Testudo (being applied to the Wall of a Fort or Castle) Men
ran Armed to fight those that stood ready to defend themselves, and in case
their Scaling-Ladders (wanting length) proved unserviceable, then they erected
one Testudo upon another, which Tacitus justifies, when he says, That in case
of necessity, the Roman Soldiers climbed up a Wall, super iteratam Testudinem,
building one Testudo upon another, and these were contrived with such speed and
Art, that they could as soon be built as demolished.

It farther appears, that the Romans used a single Testudo to break through and
disorder the Ranks of Horsemen on a sudden, although fixed in a good order for
Battle. But for Mirth and Divertisement they usually made one Testudo upon
another, on which they Vaulted and showed Tricks, not only to evidence the
nimbleness of their Bodies, but the strength and good use of so ingenious an
Invention.

The Name, TESTUDO, was given to those Shields so united, not only for their
strength, but because on the outside it seemed like the backs of some Shells or
Tortoises; and thus much may suffice to show the use and reason of the Name
TESTUDO, which is represented in the precedent Figure.

Thus under the shelter of their Shields, which were as a Roof over them, they
advanced to the slight Works the Britains had cast up, and with no great
trouble did cast them down, and so went to grapling.

The Britains not able to endure the close fight of the Legions, strive to
disengage themselves, and to get up to the top of the Mountain, hoping from
those steep Precipes to regain their advantage of flinging their Darts. But
such was the eagerness of the Romans that they followed them at their heels,
the light Armed first, and after them the heavy Legions.

The Britains who had gotten up, bestowed their Darts plentifully, but
nevertheless the Romans went on, and breaking into the Ranks, some they flung
down headlong, others they killed and wounded, as having neither Helmet or
Breast Plate to defend them. And now the Britains knew not which way to turn
themselves: if they engaged the light Armed and Auxiliary Forces of the Romans,
they were beaten down with the broad Swords and massy Pikes of the
Legionaries, if on the other side they set upon the Legionaries, the light
Spears and pointed Swords of the Auxiliaries were as equally fatal to them, so
that not able to hold up any longer, they flung down their Arms, a few only
escaping.

This Victory was rendered famous by two Noble Captives here taken, the Wife and
Daughter of Caratacus, and it had been well if that Princes Misfortunes had
here ended, for his two Brothers (after his Overthrow) revolted to the Romans,
and he himself (as adversity is seldom safe) having escaped the pursuit, and
fled to the Protection of Cartismandua, Queen of the Yorkshire, Lancashire,
Bishopric of Durham, Westmorland Cumberland. Scotch Hist. Buchanan. Tacitus.
An. Dom. 53, or 54.
Brigantes, was most basely delivered up and sent in Irons to the Conqueror.
The Scottish Histories say, the Brigantes were a People of their Nation, and
Buchanan reads the verse of Seneca, Scuta Brigantes, Scota Brigantes, and truly
this Nation would very easily incline us to yield to their pretention.

This great Overthrow happened in the ninth year of the Invasion of (...) under
Claudius Caesar. The fame of Caratacus, heightened by the story of his sad
(...), not only spread it self through the neighbor Islands, and adjoining
Provinces, but reached even to Italy. Every one longed to see that man, who
(for so many years) had stood out, and bad defiance to their greatest Forces.

His name at Rome was no less celebrated, the Emperor thinking he did Honor
to himself in praising the worth of a Person, and advancing the Credit of a
Nation, over both which before he had Triumphed.

Being come to Rome, the People were called together as to a public and solemn
Spectacle. The Emperors Guards were drawn out, and stood to their Arms before
The manner of Caratacus Reception at Rome.
the Camp to receive them. First entered the Kings Retinue, bearing Chains and
Caparasons, and diverse Trophies he had won in other Wars, next his Brothers,
then his Wife and Daughter, and last of all himself appeared.

The Prayers and Submissions of others, through Fear, were base and degenerate,
but Caratacus, Great, even in the midst of his Misfortunes, with a steady and
erected Countenance, and a look that yet retained its Majesty, stands before
the Tribunal of Claudius, and speaks to this purpose.

If my Moderation in Prosperity had been as great as the quality of my Birth
and Fortune, I might have come to this City rather as a Friend than a Captive.
Neither Observe how elegantly Mr. Speed has translated this Speech.
could you have disdained an Alliance with one descended of so Ancient and
Royal Blood, and commanding many Nations. My present condition to me is
disgraceful, but to you glorious. I had Horses, Charriots, Men, Arms and
Riches, no wonder if I was unwilling to forgo them. If of necessity you must
Command all things, it follows all must Obey. If I had sooner been betrayed to
you, my Misfortune had made less noise in the World, and your Conquests had not
been so Renowned. After my death I should have soon been forgotten, but if you
let me live, you make me a lasting Monument of your Clemency.

Claudius, being taken with his Behavior, pardons him, his Wife and Brothers,
and commands their Irons to be knocked off; After which they did their Reverence
to the Empress Agrippina, who sitting by in State, expected it, giving her the
same Thanks and Praises they had done to the Emperor.

After this, the Lords of the Senate assembled, where many and magnificent
things were discoursed concerning the Captivity of Caratacus. And it was
generally agreed that this Action was not less Honorable to Ostorius, than the
taking of King Siphax by P. Scipio, or the Macedonian King Perses, by Lucius
Paulus, or any others who had led Princes in Triumph, and therefore for his
eminent Service to the Commonwealth, they decreed him Triumphal Ornaments.

But the like Fortune did not attend Ostorius in his succeeding Actions, for
whether the Romans were grown careless and negligent, being rid of so
considerable an Enemy as Caratacus, or whether the Britains, in compassion of
the Misfortunes of so great a Prince, were more eagerly bent upon Revenge,
whilst the Camp-Master and some Legionary Cohorts were left to fortify some
certain places in the Country of the Silures, the Britains encompast them
about, and if succor had not speedily arrived from the neighboring Towns and
Garrisons, there had not a man of them escaped; Nevertheless, the Camp-Master,
with eight Centurions and many of the forwardest Soldiers, were slain.

Upon the neck of this, followed another loss on the Roman side, for a Party
being sent out to Forage, were suddenly set upon, beaten and dispersed,
together with some Troops of Horse, who came too late to relieve them. Ostorius
sends some of his Foot, lightly Armed, to succor both Parties, and to try to
make them Rally, but they served but to increase the Flight, until the Legions
coming up undertook the Battle, and by main strength first poised it, and
afterward turned the Scale.

The Britains got off with little or no loss (the day being almost spent) and
never after appeared in great Parties, but out of Woods, Boggs and Marshes,
made frequent Sallies in small Bodies, as Conduct or Chance led them, upon
Necessity or Valor, Anger or Prey, sometimes commanding others although
without Command. And this way of Skirmishing, though taken up by the Britains,
out of Necessity rather than Choice, yet had it greater success and proved more
fatal to the Enemy than their great Bodies. This the Silures well perceived,
and wisely managed the advantage, and above all the British Nations, they
entertained a mortal Hatred against the Romans, and watched all opportunities
to do them mischief. They had heard that the General should give out, That he
would root out the very Name of them. A saying that they could never forget,
and although often courted to a Compliance, they ever afterward looked upon
the Romans not only as their Enemies, but the haters of their Nation.

This exasperating of a People, of it self not very tractable, proved of ill
consequence to the Romans; For they seeking out all means to vent their spite,
at last met with a comfortable occasion, two Cohorts, led on by the Avarice of
their Commanders, were gone out to pillage and plunder the Country, and it
seems, following their business with more greediness than heed, were insensibly
drawn too far from their Head Quarters. Upon their returns laden with Spoil,
they were intercepted, many of them slain and wounded, and the rest all taken
Prisoners.

The Silures made good use of this good success, and in scornful manner sent
about the Captives to the Neighboring States, as Presents, at once revenging
themselves on the Romans, and encouraging others to assist them in their
Revolt, by making them partake of the guilt; And that these Captives might be
more acceptable, they sent along with them much spoil, by all which Arts they
procured many to declare for them.

Ostorius now tired out with so vexatious an Enemy, and sensible how he lost
daily Ostorius dead.
in his Reputation, died for very anguish and grief, the Britains triumphing,
that although no particular Fight, yet the adverse War had taken off so
considerable a Commander.

AUL. DID. Propretor, succeeded.
Caesar hearing of the death of his Lieutenant, immediately chooses AULUS
DIDIUS to succeed him, giving him Orders to hasten to his Command, the Affairs
of Britain being in that tottering condition that they wanted a speedy
Governor. He came not so soon hither, but that before his Arrival, a Legion
under Manlius Valens met with an unlucky and disasterous Fight. The losses on
the Roman side, though great enough, yet were higher reported by the Silures,
partly to hearten their new Allies, and partly to discourage the new Governor.
But he made better use of it, and in his Letters to Rome raising the Defeat
much higher, thinking thereby, that if he should quell the Britains, the Honor
would be greater, and the Disgrace less if he failed.

THE LIFE OF CLAUDIUS.
ABOUT this time died CLAUDIUS, the first Emperor that subdued this Island,
and reduced it into the nature of a Province, much Suet. vits Claud.
celebrated for his British Conquests, the only honor of his Reign, but far
happier in the choice of worthy Commanders than his own Conduct.

The calamity of Britain was so much the more to be lamented, in that it
stooped to a Prince of very small Endowments, and yet worshipped him as a God,
whom Historians can scarce allow to be a Man. For, as he was desirous of Glory,
which in him could rather be called Instinct than Virtue: so was he withal so
dull and stupid, that in his Childhood he was the grief of all his Parents,
and, in his riper years, the Laughing Stock of Galigula, and the sport of the
whole Court. After his Inauguration, which was attended with odd circumstances
of folly, although Majesty covered his face, yet through all, even then, were
his defects visible. They adored him most whose approaches were at greater
distance, and though he awed the World, yet was he made a Property to his Wives
and Domestics. After thirteen years swaying, rather holding the Scepter, he
was poisoned by his Wife Agrippina, and whilst the Romans were employed in his
(...), or making him a God, there were others no less busy in his Seneca.
(...) or conversion into a Mushrome, her beloved, but fatal Diet.

But one Action of his is not to be omitted, He abolished the Religion of the
Druids throughout all Gallia, the exercise whereof, for its bloody Rites and
Ceremonies, had been only banished the City by Augustus; And, no doubt he would
have done the same through Britain, had the success of his Arms been as great
here toward the end of his Reign as the beginning.

In the time of this Emperor there served in Britain three Legions, viz. the
second Legion, Augusta; the ninth Legion, Hispaniensis; and the fourteenth,
named Gemina Martia Victrix.

NERO.
NERO succeeded in the Empire, a Prince idle and dissolute, he continued Didius
in his employment, but afterward was minded Anno Dom. 56.
to withdraw all his Forces from Britain, and to dismantle the Country, but
shame deterred him, and a fear, least by that means he should seem to dislike
the Counsels of Claudius, which at that time were very popular.

Didius was well stricken in years, and therefore better fitted for the present
Affairs, which required rather a Cautious than an Active Commander, and so we
find him, for having in some measure put a stop to the Incursions of the
Silures, and cooped them up within their bounds, he set himself altogether to
secure what his Predecessors, Plautius and Ostorius, had gained. But least it
might be said he did nothing in the Island, he built here and there a few
Garrisons, higher in the Country. And now there brake out a dissension among
the Britains, which continued for many years, for it seems by Tacitus, who
relates it entirely, in two distinct places, that it began under this Didius,
and lasted to the days of Vespasian, and was the occasion of much vexation to
the Romans, during their Civil Wars with Galba, Otho, and Vitellius. The
occasion and progress of it I will set down together (although it was the
business of many years following) with the same Reasons for so doing, that
Tacitus gives, for fear, least if told in parcels, it would not be so well
fitted for memory.

Tacitus, An. lib. 12. Hist. lib. 3.
After Caratacus had been taken, there was none in the whole Island that was
thought equal in Arms to VENUTIUS, a Prince of the Brigantes; He was by nature
fierce, and by inclination a most mortal hater even of the name of a Roman. But
this his Austereness to them was something allayed by his marriage with
Cartismandua, a Queen of great power and authority, and a constant Favouress of
the Roman Interest, not only to oblige her the more, he dissembled his hatred
to the Romans, totally closed with them, and so submitted to their Protection.
But nothing could engage the heart of treacherous Cartismandua, but she who had
betrayed her Country, proved false to her Lord and Husband, forsaking him, and
descending to the embraces of of Vellocatus his Groom, whom afterward she made
Partner of her Bed and Kingdom.

Venutius deeply touched with this open Injury, raised Forces against her, and
her Paramour, and first the War continued between them only; the Good will of
the Country being on Venutius his side, and on hers, Lust, treachery and
deceit. This one would have thought was a very unequal match, and yet it held
up long on both sides, for Cartismandua, by usual arts and practices, had
trained and got into her possession the Brother and near Relations of Venutius,
which for some time strengthened her Party, having so many of the Royal Family
at her disposal. But the People fearing the cruelty of her nature, that in time
she might do Violence to them, and jealous to be brought under the uncomely
subjection of a Woman, the Male Issue being extinct, unanimously declared in
favor of Venutius, and for the liberty of his Brother and Relations. And now
there seemed nothing could hinder the punishment of her Adulteries, but the
Interposition of the Romans; And Venutius perceiving them to draw together, and
knowing well the Obligations that Queen had done them, in betraying Caratacus,
and adorning the Triumph of Claudius, kept a jealous eye over them, and found
that they held secret Intelligence with her, and seemed to defer the owning of
her Cause, only, till greater strength should arrive.

This he resolves to prevent in time, and therefore, with what Forces he had,
he set furiously on those Cohorts who were already assembled, and at the first
charge made great slaughter of them, and so presently, with some losses,
retired. There was a Legion coming to join with them under the Conduct of
Caesius Nasica, for Didius was old and did all by Deputies. Venutius advised of
this, resolves to be before hand with him, meets them in their Journey, sets
upon them, and with the like success retreated.

Cartismandua now reduced to the greatest extremities, thought of nothing but
securing her Person by escape, to that end she sent to the Romans for a Guard,
which being granted to her, through many Skirmishes, and great difficulties,
got up to her, and with much ado rescued her, but the Kingdom was left to
Venutius, and the War to the Romans to manage.

Cartismandua (as appears by Tacitus) sheltered her self for a long time
under the Tacit. ibid.
protection of the Romans, bereaft of her Kingdom, and in vain expecting
assistance from them, who either could not, or were unwilling to engage too
deeply in her Quarrel, for it may be more than conjectured out of the same
Author, that the Romans did yield to Venutius the quiet possession of the
Kingdom, and would never have molested him, could he have but have forgotten
that sensible Injury of theirs in interposing their Authority in his domestic
Affairs, the maintaining the Rebellion of an Adulteress, and the open
protecting of her. Such little favor found she with those persons, whom she
thought she had so infinitely engaged, so that we may leave her like a Strumpet
following of the Camp, hated by the Britains, and without question, derided and
despised by the generous Romans. And no doubt, she proved the burden and clog
of their Affairs, for in their difficulties, during the Civil Wars of Rome
under the three succeeding Emperors, she was the hated cause that drew the
Arms of Venutius upon them.

VERANIUS, a Propetor, succeeded Didius, a rigid and strict Commander, nd
perhaps the loose discipline of the Romans under his Aged Predecessor, required
in him more than ordinary Severity. He found at his arrival things in no good
posture, great slaughter had been made of the Romans, which he endeavored to
revenge on the Silures, but having made a few inroads into their Country, he
was prevented by death from proceeding any further, leaving this behind him
either out of flattery to his Master Nero, or insight into the Country, that in
two years, had he lived, he would have conquered it all.

PAULINUS SUETONIUS next obtained the Province, who was esteemed a Soldier
inferior to none of his time, for two years together he reigned prosperously,
subduing many Nations, and fortifying what he had got with new Garrisons.
Encouraged with this success, and having no small thoughts within him (for he
was emulous of the glory of Corbalo, a Soldier of great reputation in that
Age) he began to think of new Islands to Conquer. Mona, or Anglesey, at that
time, was very populous from the concourse of people that fled thither for
security, and a place of no small annoyance to the Romans, for it administered
great assistance to the Britains upon all their occasions, in their Revolts.

To Invade this, he first built flat-bottomed Boats to carry over his Foot, the
Horse followed either upon the flats and shallows, or else, where it was
deeper, swam it.

Upon the Shore slood ready to receive them a strange medly of an Army,
supposed of Men, Women and Priests, the Men were well Armed and stood thick,
the Women and Priests ran up and down after the manner of Furies, the former
with their Hair ruffled about their ears, and in black Garments, and the Druids
carried Torches before them, and with their hands lifted up to heavan, poured
forth direful Execrations.

The Romans astonished at the novelty of the sight, stood still, as Stocks, not
being able to stir a foot, though receiving many wounds. At last a wakened and
encouraged by their General, and animating one another not to fear a rout of
Mad-women and Lunaticks, they bore on the Standards, trampled down all before
them, and ran Men and Torches on a heap together; Then he placed Garrisons on
the Conquered, cutting down the Groves consecrated to their bloody
Superstition, for they held it lawful to sacrifice Captives, and to consult
their Gods by prying into the Entrails of men.

But whilst he was busy in this Island, his absenoe gave occasion to a general
Revolt of the Britains, many sore grievances were complained of, among which
these were reckoned as the chief.

Prasutagus, King of the lceni, having for many years hoorded up great store of
Wealth, to secure it to his two Daughters, at his death made Caesar Coheir
with Tacitus, Ann. lib. 14.
them, not doubting but by that signal Testimony of his good will to the
Emperor, he should preserve his Family from Oppression, and his Daughters from
dishonor. It fell out quite contrary, for under pretense of taking possession
of the Emperors share, his Kingdom was laid waste and robbed by the
Centurions, and his House ransackt throughout by the ravenous Collectors, who
behaved themselves with all the licentiousness of Conquerors, his Wife Boadicia
they whipped, her two Daughters ravished, etc. as if the whole Kingdom, by
Testament, had been left to them. The Chiefest of the lceni were dispossessed of
their ancient Inheritances, and the Royal Family turned out and used as Slaves.

As these unsufferable Insolences were the cause of the Revolt of the Iceni,
so the Trinobantes wanted not matter of complaint, especially against the
Veterans, whom they hated with a mortal hatred; For they being made a new
Colony at Camalodunum, now Malden in Essex, they violently thrust out the
Inhabitants from their Houses, seized their Lands and Estates, insulting over
them as Captives and Slaves, anddomineering like Lords in their lawful
Possessions. The other Soldiers likewise complied with the Veterans and
encouraged them in their Licentious proceedings, being of the fame Gang, and
out of hopes hereafter to enjoy the same Liberty.

The Temple dedicated to Claudius was cause also of great heart-burnings, they
looked upon it as the monument and badge of their eternal Servitude, and the
Priests therein officiating under the pretense of Religious offerings and dues,
grievously extorted Dion. Cass.
from the People, and Catus Decianus the Procurator or Receiver of Tribute,
renewed the consiscation of their Goods, and though they pleaded the remitment
thereof by Claudius, and a Temple for that purpose erected to his Clemency, yet
with great Injustice he overruled them; And, which was a more general
Oppression, Seneca, whom one would think a Saint in his Writings, having drawn
in the Britains, to take of him vast sums of money, to the value of 1000000 l.
sterling upon promise of easy Loan, and to take their own time for the
payment, on a sudden called it all in at once, and that with great violence and
extortion.

The Britains therefore meeting together discoursed their Grievances after this
manner;

That Patience availed them nothing, but that by their sufferance they got the
opinion Tacitus vit. Agric.
of easy fools, and their burdens accordingly were daily increased. Formerly
they had but one King or Peer to Lord it over them, now there were two thrust
upon them; The Lieutenant to suck their blood, and the Procurator or Collector
to drain their Estates. That the variance of these Rulers, or their agreement,
was equally pernicious to them, the one tormenting them with his Armies, the
other with Wrongs and Extortions: all things were liable without exception
either to their Avarice or Lust, and he was esteemed the bravest Soldier who
could rob and plunder most. Nay, they were come to that tame submission, as to
suffer their Houses to be broken open and ransackt by the most cowardly and
pitiful Rascals, and their Children to be taken from them, and listed by their
Adversaries, as if they were fitted to die any death but what should be for
their own Country. What a small number would remain in the Roman Army, should
they have left out the Britains from their Masters, the Germans had shaken off
the yoke, although defended by a River only, not the Ocean, and why might not
they do the like, considering their Cause was far the Nobler, the delivery of
their Country, their Wives and Parents, and on the other side, nothing could be
pretended but Lust and Ambition. Had they but imitated the Valor of their
Ancestors, they might have chased these Intruders from the Island, as their
Forefathers had done Caesar, and could they but have endured the brunt of one
or two Battles, no doubt but the Courage of the miserable and despairing would
be found greater than the Confidence of the proud. That the Gods themselves now
showed their pity to the Britains, and held the Roman captain and his Armies
safe employed in another Island, and gave them one opportunity more, which was
the greatest favor, to consult and deliberate of their Condition together,
which occasion, if they did not make use of, it would be found more dangerous
to have discoursed the calamities of their Affairs, than to strive to relieve
them.

With these and the like Speeches they encouraged each other, and first the
Iceni took Arms to reveng the wrongs done to their Queen, and the dishonor of
his Daughters, next the Trinobantes declared, and after them all who had any
sense of Liberty, and were not born to be Slaves. And it seemed no hard matter
to the Britains to raze and destroy the whole Colony of Malden, being fortified
neither with Trench nor Rampire, and, by the careless security of the Roman
Officers, made for pleasure rather than defense.

This general and dangerous Insurrection was headed by the insensed Boadicia,
and the fatal consequences of it were ushered in with no less wonderful signs
and portents. Among the rest, the Statue of Victory at Malden fell down of its
own accord, with its back turned as if it would pass to the Enemy, and Women in
a holy rage and ecstasy, Prophetically sung, That destruction was a coming, and
dismal noises were heard in the Councel-House, and howlings and screechings in
the Theater, strange Specter walked in the neighboring Frith, the Oceans
looked of a Camb. Brit. The Frith of Famesa; Tacitus calls it Tamesa.
Bloody-hew, and, at low Tide, the shapes of dead Bodies lay imprinted on the
Sands, all which Prodigies raised hopeful expectations in the Britains, but in
the Veterane Soldiers, terror and despair. For by this time Boadicia (leading
after her infinite multitudes) had destroyed some scattered Garrisons of the
Romans, and was now prepared to attack them at their chief Quarters, at Malden.

The Colony understanding of her approach, sent to Catus Decianus, to send them
speedy supply (for Suetonius had but lately heard of their Revolt, and could
not come up time enough for their relief) but he spared them but two hundred
men, and those ill Armed, for the Hatred the Province bore him, for his
Exactions, made him look to his own security. Neither were there wanting in the
Roman Garrison, them, who secretly and underhand, favored the Revolters;
These advised the Soldiers, that they were too few to maintain any Outworks,
and, that fortifying and entrenching the Town would but divide and scatter the
Forces, that in all probability the Enemy durst not attack them, or if they
did, that the present Bulwarks were sufficient, and, in case they failed, the
Temple was a place of great strength, and teneable by a few.

Thus, by intermixing with all their Councels, they betrayed them into
security, and so lulled them asleep, that as if it had been high Peace, they
thought not of any thing necessary for a Siege, no not so much as to send away
those that bore not Arms, who would but be so many Mouths to devour their
Provisions.

In this disorder they were beleagured round with the British Army, the
Outworks held not out the first Storm, but left the City naked and open to be
sacked, and burnt by the enraged Enemy. The Soldiers crowded themselves into
the Temple, and there stood hudled together under the defense of the Walls, but
in two days were taken, the sumptuous building made a heap of Rubbish, and all
destroyed. The Britains managing this Victory in the most cruel-manner, put the
Romans to all the exquisite torments that Anger, Revenge or Malice, could
invent.

In the current of their success, and while the heat lasted, they met with
Petilius Crealis, the Lieutenant of the ninth Legion, marching to the succor
of the Garrison, who set upon him, routed his Legion, killed all the Foot, and
forced him, with the residue of his Horse, to take sanctuary in his Trenches;
And now Catus Decianus, finding himself the cause of all this, and sensible of
the Hatred of the Provinces, and the guilt of his Extortion, like a tall man
betook himself to his Heels, and so fled over into Gallia. But Suetonius, with
a wonderful constancy and resolution marches clearly through the Enemies
quarters to London, a Town, though not in name, yet in effect, a Colony full of
Roman Inhabitants and Traders, and of great renown for its plenty of all
necessary Provisions.

Having fitted himself here for a while, he considered whether he should make
this the seat of his War, but finding the numbers of his Soldiers not much
increased, and taking example by the Rashness of Petilius, which was
sufficiently punished, he resolved to March out, and, by the loss of one Town
hoped to save the rest; Neither could he be diverted from his Resolution,
either by the cries or tears of the Inhabitants, but taking all with him who
were willing to make part of his Army, he left the rest, whose Age, Sex, or
love to the place, would not suffer to follow, who were all, afterward,
miserably slain by the Enemy, and their City sacked and destroyed.

The same slaughter attended the Inhabitants of Verulam, for the Britains
slighting the Forts and Garrisons of Soldiers, flew only at prey and booty,
and attackt those places which were weakest defended, thus they grew daily
lazier in their business, rejoicing more in taking Plunder than strong Holds.

All this while the losses of the Romans were great, seventy thousand of them
and their Allies are reckoned by Tacitus to be slain, and Suetonius numbreth
them among the greatest Plagues and Misfortunes attending the evil Government
of Nero, for Suetonius de vita Neronis.
what in other Wars, is usually in this way utterly excluded, no change of
Prisoners allowed, no Ransomes or giving of Quarter, the slaughter was the same
in cool Blood as in hot, and with Gibbet, Fire and Cross, the Britains
proceeded against them rather as Malefactors than Enemies, the Women, as well
Matrons as Virgins, they stripped stark naked, hung them up, and cutting off
their Breasts, Dion. Cassies.
sowed them to their mouths, that in the Agony of death they might seem to
devour their own flesh, the Britains all the while feasting and making merry in
the Temple of Andate, their Goddess of Victory.

Suetonius by this time had got together about 10000 Men, well appointed, made
up of the fourteenth Legion, the chief of the Twentieth, and some of the
Auxiliary Forces from the neighbor Garrisons. With these he resolves no longer
to delay, but to give speedy Battle to the Britains, this he signified to his
Chief Commanders, and withal gives them the Reasons enforcing him to so sudden
an Engagement; Provisions were grown short, the Soldiers eager to revenge the
sad Calamities of their Friends, and Allies, that were fresh in their memories;
and although but a few in comparison of their Enemies, yet were they steady and
resolved. On the other hand, the Britains although swarming in numbers, wanting
Order and Discipline, were grown heady, rash, and inconsiderate, and puffed up
with their late success, were over confident and forward, measuring falsely the
reasons of their Victories, by their Numbers rather than Courage; That now
therefore was the time, whilst they were glutted in Blood, in the midst of
their Guilt and vain Confidence, and under the Conduct of a Woman, to set upon
them, and in one manful Attempt, to regain what in several parcels they had
lost.

This Counsel was followed by all, but Poenius Posthumus, an Ancient Soldier,
and now Camp-Master. It seemed to him to have more in it of heat than true
consideration, and proceeding from a rash Bravery rather than Roman Conduct. He
knew Suetonius to be of a haughty and proud Courage, and feared, that to
vindicate his Honor and Reputation he would hazard and endanger all, and be
carried beyond the bounds of a sober and just Resolution. He advised him
therefore not to think as yet of regaining his losses, but saving his stake, to
fortify and encamp warily, and to expect new supplies, he showed that this was
always the method of the Roman discipline, and that it was never more
necessary than in this conjuncture of Affairs, that the Britains newly flusht
with Victories, were grown resolute and undaunted, and the Roman Soldiers,
with their Losses, fearful and dead-hearted, that it was convenient to give
them time to recover their spirits, that their Enemies no doubt by delay would
grow cooler, and their great Numbers would scatter and disperse.

And it was concluded, that it was absolutely necessary to wait for a more
hopeful opportunity of Revenge.

Suetonius notwithstanding, persisting in his resolution, and although
Posthumus utterly refused to join with him, and, contrary to his positive
Command, withdrew his Legions and encamped, yet with the rest of his Forces he
went out to seek the Enemy, and chose a convenient place to embattle his Army.

It was an open Plain, with a narrow passage into it, so that he could not be
overwinged by the Enemy, on his back was a Wood, whose passages being blockt up
with huge Trees laid across, secured him in the Rear, so that the Enemy could
not attack him but on the Front, the wings of his Army lay to the open Country,
where he was certain no Ambush could be laid. His Legionaries made up the body
of his Army, and stood thick and well compacted, they were lined on all sides
with light armed Soldiers, and the Horse was placed in the Wings.

The Britains were drawn up before the mouth of the narrow passage that led
into the Plain, in such multitudes, and nevertheless were extended all abroad
in Troops and Companies, and with Exaltations and Noises, as if they were going
to a Triumph rather than a Battle, nay, so confident were they of Victory, that
they brought their Wives and Children to be Spectators of that days work, who
sat in Charriots upon the skirts of the Plain to behold the sport, and to glut
their eyes, as they made sure account of the slaughter of the Romans.

Eoadicia her self carrying her Daughters in a Chariot before her, as she came
to every Nation, declared, That it was usual for the Britains, in times past,
to make War under the Conduct of a Woman, but for her part, she desired them
not for the present to look upon her Dignities, but their Common liberty, that
though she was their Queen, and might justly call upon them to revenge the loss
of her Crown and Estate, yet she could wave those smaller Considerations, and
lay before them, as matter of just Resentment, those horrid Indignities she had
received, the Violence to her Person, and the Rapes of her Daughters.

She told them, That the Insolence of the Romans, and their Lust, was grown to
that height, that neither the reverence of Age, or the innocence of Virginity,
could preserve them from dishonor. The Gods would be present and assist them
in their just Revenge, and, that one Legion which adventured to fight was cut
off, the rest that remained, either hid themselves in the Camp, or were
thinking already of an escape. That they would not be able to endure the Shouts
of so many thousand, much less their force and impression, and if they, with
her, considered their advantage of Numbers, and their Cause, they should strive
to overcome, or die; This (she a Woman) was fixed upon, the Men, if they
pleased, might live and be Slaves.

Dio Cassius places her upon a heap of Turfs, with a Spear in her hand, and an
Dion. (...)
Hare in her bosom, which after a long Oration, having before hand said
something to introduce it, she let loose, as a signification of good Omen to
her Army.

Neither was Suetonius in so great an extremity, silent, and, although he
relied much upon the Courage of his Soldiers, yet he thought it not
unnecessary in a business wherein would be decided the whole Controversy of
Britain, to descend even to Prayers and Entreaties; He desired them therefore,
to despise the vain and empty Noises of the Enemy, and to consider, that in
their Camp were more Women to be seen than Men, that weak and unarmed they
would soon yield, when they came to Contest with Roman Valor, which had often
overcome them. That in great Armies, and where there are many Legions, the
stress of the Battle always lay upon a few, and that it would be to their
greater Honor, if with a small Power they should win the fame of a whole Army;
withal, he ordered them that they should keep close, and first, with their
heavy Darts, gall the Britains, afterward press upon them, with their Swords
and Pikes in their Shields, and follow the slaughter in a Body well wedged
together. That they should not scatter and disperse for Plunder, but that after
the Victory every thing would be their own.

The Soldiers received these Exhortations of their General with such alacrity,
that the Legionaries began already to try their Arms, and sit themselves for
the engagement, and they showed such great handiness in it, having been
experienced thereto in many Battles, that Suetonius perceiving their Joy and
Readiness, was even certain of the event, and so gave the signal for the Onset.

And first of all, the Legion which for some time had kept its ground, and been
defended by the narrowness of the place, as a sure Fortification, at last,
watching its opportunity, when the Britains had spent their Darts at random,
and were advancing to a nearer engagement, they pressed in upon them in a close
Body, after the nature of a Wedge, and so worked themselves into the Enemies
Battle, that they soon broke and dispersed it.

And now the same resolution was found in the Auxiliary Forces, and the Horse,
with their long Spears flung down all that came near them, and brake in pieces
some Parties who stood yet united.

Now the Britains began to betake themselves to flight, but were hindered by the
multitude of their own Charriots, which had blockt up the passage for their
Retreat, so that they yielded their necks to the slaughter, which was so great,
that it is reported, fourscore thousand died upon that small spot of ground.

Neither did the Romans in their Rage spare any, for even the Women and Cattle
served to make up the heap of dead Carcasses; And all this was performed on the
Roman side with the loss only of four hundred, and as many more wounded.

Boadicia after the fatal Defeat of so great an Army, which is reckoned no less
than two hundred and thirty thousand, ended her days with Poison, or, as
others say, Dion. Cass.
sickned out of Grief, and died.



To war, this QVEEN does with her Daughters move,
She for her Wisdom, followed, They for Love;
What Roman force, Such joined powers could quell;
Before so murdering Charms whole Legions fell.
Thrice happy Princess, had she rescued So,
Her Daughters honor, and her Countries too;
But they being ravished, made her understand
It Is harder, Beauty to secure, then Land.
Yet her Example teaching them to dye,
Virtue, the room of Honor did Supply.
SHE is described by the Greek Historian, of stature bigg and tall, of a Grim
and BOADICIA, described in Person by the Greeks.
sternvisage, but withal modest and cheerful, a rough and hoarse voice, her
Hair of a bright Yellow, hanging in Tresses to her very skirts, about her Neck
she had a Chain of Gold, and was apparelled in a loose Garment of changable
Colors, wearing a Kirtle there under very thick plated, in her hand she
carried a Spear, she was highly devoted to ANDATE, the Goddess of Victory, and
seemed much to triumph in her self, for in her address to that Female Deity,
she used these expressions; I being a Woman, adore thee O ANDATE a Woman.

The same Historian likewise delivers the manner of the Fight otherwise, and
that the Victory was not obtained with so little difficulty, but that the
Britains would have renewed the Battle had not the death of their Queen
discouraged them, but I rather follow the report of Tacitus, who wrote next to
these times, and who may be Tacitus.
supposed to have truer intelligence, in that some Circumstances of her life,
relating to the British Affairs, engaged him to more particular Enquiries after
them.

The death of Boadicia was attended on the Roman side with that of Paenius
Posthumus, Camp-Master of the second Legion, who having expected to have heard
of the ruin of Suetonius, and the defeat of his two Legions, being informed on
the contrary of their great success, fell upon his Sword, and so, by a Roman
death, in some measure attoned for the breach of Roman discipline, in not
obeying his general Pardon, and by this means he escaped the punishment that
might have followed, and delivered himself from the Clamours of his Legion,
whom by his cautious Counsels he had defrauded of part of his glory.

Thus was the Island by one Battle restored again to the Romans, which, by the
Tacitus, vit. Agric.
absence of Suetonius in the Isle of Anglesey, had been well nigh lost, but
neither yet could the Britains think of totally submitting, but many of them
who were principally involved in the guilt of this Revolt, and who feared the
vindicative nature of the Roman General, which begun already to appear, stood
out in a posture of defense.

Suetonius, to make an end of this War, kept the Field, and by removing his
Tents as he saw occasion, continually awed the Britains. And now Nero sent unto
him new Supplies out of Germany, two thousand Legionary Soldiers and Auxiliary
Cohorts, and one thousand Horse, by whose coming they of the ninth Legion had
their Companies made up and completed with heavy Armed Soldiers. The Cohorts
and other Troops were lodged in new Winter Quarters, and those Nations who
continued in open Hostility, or in doubtful Allegiance, were prosecuted with
Fire and Sword.

But nothing so much afflicted the Britains as Famine, having generally
neglected the tilling of the Ground, and employed all hands in carrying on the
War, hoping, by the Defeat of the Romans, to have served themselves of their
Provisions. Nevertheless many Warlike Nations could not be brought to any
Compliance, but were encouraged to stand out, for that they had heard of great
Clashings between Suetonius and the new Procurator, Julius Classicianus, who
was sent to succeed Catus in that employment.

This Classicianus had entertained some grudges against the General, and
preferred his private Resentments before the Public good. He gave out, That a
New Governor was to be expected, who should be void of Rancour, and not
hurried on with the pride and insolence of a Conqueror, one that should with
more Clemency, and less Partiality, consult the condition of the Conquered. And
it is certain, that Suetonius (though other ways a Worthy person) carried
himself too Imperiously over the Britains, and revenging the Injuries which he
thought done to himself, by their Revolt, oftentimes went beyond the bounds of
Justice or Moderation. He writ Letters also to Rome, in which he signified,
That no end of the War was to be expected, unless Suetonius was removed, and
ascribed all the Losses received to his ill Conduct, and his good success, not
his well management, but the Fortune of the Commonwealth.

To compose these Differences between the Lieutenant and Procurator, and to
view the State of Britain, Nero sent Polycletus his Freeman, hoping by his
Authority, not only to put an end to the Dissension, but to compose the minds
of the Britains, who yet continued in their Rebellion.

Polycletus with a mighty Host past through Italy and Gallia, a heavy burden
to both Nations, and at his arrival at Britain was received with different
apprehensions, for the Roman Army was awed with his presence, but to the
Britains he was matter of laughter and scorn, for they had not so far lost the
sense of Liberty, that they were ignorant of the power of a Freed Man, and
wondered that so great a Captain and Army that had ended such a considerable a
War, should be at the beck and disposal of a Slave.

For the present, all things were represented to the Emperor in favor of
Suetonius, who went on still in prosecuting his Affairs, but having lost upon
the shore some Galleys, with the Slaves that rowed them, as if the War
continued still, he was commanded to deliver up the Army to Petronius
Turpilianus, who was newly out of his Consulship.

This Lieutenant was more exorable than Suetonius, being a stranger to the
faults Ann. Dom. 60.
of the Britains, and easier of pardon, as never provoked by the Britains, or
particularly incensed by a Revolt. He gave himself wholly to the quieting the
Province, not attempting any new Conquests, imposing the specious name of
PEACE, from which proceeded Sloth and Idleness.

TREBELLIUS MAXIMUS succeeded him, not inferior in the laziness of his Temper,
a Man utterly unexperienced in Martial Affairs, and who was fit only to be
employed by such a Masters as Nero. Nevertheless he continued the Government to
the days of Vitellius, and held the Province in Obedience by a kind of
Complaisant behavior.

By his remiss Carriage he suffered his Army to grow idle and loose, by which
means, he enslaved Britain more by the Roman Vices, than all his Predecessors
had done by their Arms; but I shall leave some of his character to the days of
Otho, and proceed to that of Nero.

THE LIFE OF NERO.
IN the days of this Governor died NERO, a Prince whose Virtues and Vices
might equally be esteemed great, had not the former seemed to proceed An. Dom.
70.
from Constraint, the latter from the Inclination of his Nature; for five years
he continued an excellent Prince, but the remainder of his days was spent in
all Riot and Debaucheries, and they who give a particular Catalogue of his
Vices, seem rather to reckon up the depravities of Human Nature, than the
Actions of one Man; There is little in his Life that relates to Britain, but
what does is full of Cruelty, and Extortion.

He slew Aulus Plantus, the first Lieutenant under his Father Claudius, by
whose Valor Britain was subdued to the Romans, and ordered his Execution to be
performed so suddenly, that he had not time to take leave of his Children, or
to give them his last Blessing and Farewell. There was but one hour between his
Sentence and his Death, when immediately hurried out of the Esquiline Gate into
a place set apart for such bloody offices, he was slain by the hand of Tacius
the Tribune, and died so full of Constancy, that he upbraided not the
Executioner with the ignominy of his Guilt, or the Emperor with the
remembrance of his Services. The Cause of his Death was never known, but the
after-Actions of this Emperor made it appear, that nothing but the exceeding
Merit of Plautius was the cause of his destruction, and his Victories in
Britain His death at Rome. Thus died the first Lieutenant of Britain.

With the same Cruelty Nero proceeded against Marcus Ostorius, the Son of
Publicus the second Lieutenant. The Father had the happiness to end his
Victories and his days at once, but his Son, who under his Father had
performed great things in Britain, and had obtained a civical Coronet in the
Fight against the Iceni, going to Rome was suspected by Nero, who by his
Tyranny was now grown fearful, and exceeding suspicious of all Virtuous men,
having of late discovered a dangerous Conspiracy. He therefore suborns one
Antistius Socianus to accuse Ostorius, That he consulted with Parmanes an
Astrologer, and enquired after the life of the Emperor, and that he was ill
affected to the present Government; For these feigned Crimes, though absent at
his Country House, he is convicted and condemned, and a Centurion sent to
dispatch him.

The Centurion found him walking in his Grounds, where having shut up all
passages of escape, he delivered unto him his Message. Ostorius moved with
Indignation, that his Services should receive so ill a reward, and disdaining
to die by the hands of so mean an Executioner, fell upon his own Sword.

These Cruelties of Nero, although inferior to his many Parricides, I have
more particularly taken notice of, in that they relate to Persons eminently
concerned in the enslaving of this Island, whose fate, though undeservedly
given by him who was obliged for such Services, yet may seem to be justly
called for by the blood and sufferings of Innocent Britains.

The great destruction of the Romans and their Colonies in Britain, under the
Conduct of Boadicia, is ascribed (by Suetonius) as the certain consequence of
the Suet. vit. Ner.
ill Government of this Prince, and his Vices. But Nero made better use of it,
he had been often foretold, That the time would come when he should be deserted
and forsaken, and forced to take up with the Government of the East, or the
Kingdom of Jerusalem. Yet with these hopes, That he should be afterward
restored to the Empire, when Britain was well near lost together with Armenia,
he saw himself in a very fair way toward the fulfilling of the Prophecy.

But these Provinces being again recovered, he thought the danger was past, and
so comforted himself up with the thoughts, That the desertion spoken of Wars,
the foresaid Revolts, and that his restoring to the Empire, was the regaining
of those Countries.

Confirmed in this opinion was he by one who bade him have a care of the
Seventy third year, which he falsely interpreted to the days of his own life,
and not to Galba, who deposed him.

Pufft up theresore with assurances of Long life and Dominion, that little
Religion he had he utterly cast off, and the Syrian Goddess, to whom he had
been especially devoted (many of whose Altars are found in Britain, and who was
a peculiar Deity of this Island and Gallia, as has been formerly shown) he so
much slighted, that in contempt of her he made her a Pissing-Block, and took to
a little Baby, whom he gave out, discovered all Conspiracies against him. But
at last he was deposed by Galba, and after he had reigned about thirteen years
and a half, he slew himself in the prime of his Age, and with him ended the
Line of the Caesar's.

This NERO sent the twentieth Legion, which although called back, and again
sent by Vitellius, after the Civil Wars between him and Otho, yet was it
recalled again by Vespatian against Vitellius, and after the settlement of the
Empire under Vespatian, in all probability sent into this Island again, for
Josephus writes, that in his days four Legions were in Britain. Britain (says
he) is encompassed about with Josephus.
the Ocean, and almost as big as our World, the Romans there inhabiting have
brought it under their Dominion, and four Legions do keep in subjection an
Island Peopled with so great a multitude.

To preserve all their Provinces the Romans had but twenty nine Legions, out of
which Britain had four, by which we may see what a great proportion this Island
bore to the whole World, and how considerable a part thereof it was esteemed in
those days.

GALBA.
GALBA was chosen by the Soldiers Emperor, he was nothing related to the
Family of the Gaesars, but undoubtedly of Suet. vit. Galbae.
Noble Blood; The name of Galba, how given to his Ancestors, is variously
conjectured by Suetonius. Among other Opinions, he puts this down as probable,
that it was derived from the Gaulish word, GALBA, signifying Fatness, which Mr.
Cambden proves was also British, and besides his Name we shall find very little
of this Emperor relating to Britain. This we read, that he slew Petronius
Turpilianus, Lieutenant of this Island under Nero, having no other Crimes to
lay to his charge, but that he continued faithful to his Master, when other
Governors of Provinces were engaged in Conspiracies.

He held the Empire but seven Months, and then was slain by Otho's
Conspiracies. He was old and Covetous, by which means he lost the love of his
Soldiers, he was generally esteemed a greater Man, when private, than a
Prince, and would always have been accounted worthy of the Empire, had he
never been advanced to it. He continued Trebellius Maximus in his Government of
Britain, whose actions shall be related under the next Emperor.

OTHO.
OTHO, by the death of Galba, assumed the Empire, a Prince Suet. vit. Otho.
soft and effeminate, Trebellius Maximus continued still Lieutenant of Britain,
a Man, as was said before, given to Ease and Sloth, having no experience in
War, no Conduct, but holding the Province at first by a kind of Court-like and
affable Behavior.

And now the Britains began to suck in the pleasures of Vice, and to entertain
the Luxuries of Rome, so that Trebellius gave himself to Ease, finding no great
cause to molest the Britains, who were so ready to comply with him in a lazy
Cessation. But the Roman Soldiers, who had been always kept in exercise, or
busied in some Expedition or other, now being left to an Idle life (as it
always happens) fell to Civil Dissensions.

Trebellius by them was grown hated and despised, as it seems, for his
niggardly and covetous Temper, and this aversion they had entertained against
their General was heightened by Roscius Gaelius, Legate of the twentieth
Legion, an ancient Enemy of his, insomuch that oftentimes by flight, and hiding
himself, he escaped the fury of his Army, afterward, debasing himself in a low
and creeping manner, he held a precarious Authority, as if he and his Army had
agreed that they should enjoy the Licentiousness of their living, and he his
safety. But when the Civil Wars brake out between Otho and Vitellius, then
began Trebellius and Gaelius to fly into greater and more open Discords.

Trebellius laid to Gaelius his charge the spreading of Sedition, and drawing
the Soldiers from Discipline and Obedience, on the other side, Caelius
upbraided him of defrauding and pillaging the Legions, amidst these shameful
Contentions, the modesty of the Army was so corrupted, and their Confidence
grown to that height, that the Auxiliary Forces stuck not publicly to give Ill
language to their General, and most of the Cohorts and bands of Soldiers
openly withdrew unto Caelius, Trebellius plainly perceived they fled unto
Vitellius, who by this time was Emperor, for Otho governed but 95 days.

VITELLIUS.
AFTER the flight of Trebellius the Province continued in quiet, Ann. Dom. 71.
notwithstanding the Consular Lieutenant General was removed, the two Legates
of the Legions in his absence governed Affairs with equal and joint Authority,
but Calius bore the chief sway, as being the man of greatest Spirit.

Trebellius being come to the Emperor, was received with little Honor, as one
that had run away from his Soldiers, that Vectius Bolanus was placed in his
stead. After him was sent (by the Emperor) the fourteenth Legion, who by Nero,
upon some occasions, had been drawn out of Britain.

This Legion had stuck faithful to Otho against Vitellius, and notwithstanding
the death of Otho, and the advancement of Vitellius, yet continued they their
Love to their former Prince, insomuch that oftentimes flying out into Mutinies,
and not acknowledging themselves as a conquered Legion, they were hardly
quieted, and with much difficulty removed into Britain. And it appears out of
Tacitus, that during the Tacitus.
Contention between Otho and Vitellius, for the Empire, many Forces were
transported from Britain, to serve in those bloody Wars, so that the minds of
the Soldiers, as well in this Island as in other Provinces, stood divided in
their Affections. And now hardly was Bolanus warm in his Government, but
Vespasian began to appear for the Empire, and new Wars were beginning, so that
no doubt the fourteenth Legion discontented with Vitellius, secretly favored
the cause of Vespatian.

Bolanus, during these Commotions, was not able to preserve Discipline, much
less to attempt any thing upon the Britains. The Divisions continued the same
in the Army as in the time of Trebellius, only this difference, that Bolanus
was innocent and not hated for any Vices, and carried himself so equally, that
though he had not the Authority of a General, yet he ruled by the Affections of
the Soldiery.

And now Vitellius fearing the Power of Vespatian, whose Forces began daily to
increase, wrote unto Bolanus for Aids, but he was not able to send him any,
partly because the Britains were not sufficiently quieted, but taking the
advantage of these Diffensions among the Romans, raised continually new
Commotions, and partly because the Soldiers of the fourth Legion, incensed
against Vitellius, were sent for over by Letters from Mutianus, in favor of
Vespatian.

In this condition was Britain, during the Government of Bolanus, when
Vitellius was deposed, about the tenth Month of his reign. He was a great
Glutton, and so inordinately given to the satisfying of his Appetite, that it
was the great employment of his Captains from all Provinces, to provide him the
most delicate Fares; he is reported at one Supper to have been served with two
thousand dishes of the choicest Tacitus.
Fish, seven thousand of Fowl, and in the short time of his Reign, Tacitus
says, he had wasted nine hundred millions of Sestercies, which amounts to
about seven millions sterling. He was by nature bloody, insolent and haughty,
during his Prosperity, and as base and dejected in Adversity. He had not
courage after his Defeat to die like a Roman, much less an Emperor, but lived
to the reproaches of an Ignominious death. With his hands bound behind him, and
a Rope about his neck, he was led through the Market place, the People all
along reviling him unto the place of Execution, where, by piece-meals he was
tore asunder, his miserable death moving Compassion only in some, and such who
had been the greatest haters of his life and memory.

VESPATIANUS.
IN all the Civil War between VITELLIUS and VESPATIAN, Ann. Dom. 72.
no Quarrels or Mutinies arose in the British Army. And in the Wars of Otho and
Vitellius, although through the negligence of Trebellius, and Faction of
Caelius, some differences happeend, yet came it never to Blood shed, and
generally no Legions behaved themselves more harmless: possibly because they
were so far off and separated by the Ocean, or for that they had learnt, by
continual Service and Warfaring, to hate all Hostility.

When Vespatian declared for the Empire, his great favor and reputation in
Arms easily won the Island to him. He had served from a youth in the British
Wars, and being Lieutenant of the second Legion, under Claudius, had fought
many Battles, and won many Towns from the Britains, so that the fourteenth
Legion, called the Subduer of Britain, went actually into his Service, and
although in the other Legions there were some Centurions and Soldiers who had
been advanced by Vitellius,, and were loath to change the Prince they had
proved, yet were they also at last brought to his Party, for when Mutianus (
Vespatian then governing the City of Rome) had made Agricola (a man of great
Integrity, and faithful to their Party) Lieutenant of the twentieth Legion in
Britain, this Legion was slowest in swearing Allegiance to Vespatian, through
the sedition of their former Legate, by which means it was grown stubborn, and
hard to be ruled even by the Consular Lieutenants, being chosen into his
Command to succeed, and Revenge. He showed an example of most rare Moderation,
in choosing to be thought rather to have found them, than to have made them,
dutiful Soldiers.

And, although Vectius Bolanus, Lieutenant General of Britain, for the time
being, governed in a more remiss and mild manner than was expedient for so
Fierce a Province, yet Agricola being placed under him, wisely conformed
himself to that humor, having learnt to discern what was convenient, as well
as knowing what should be done, by which means he tempered the heat of his
Spirit, which otherwise might have grown too violent upon him.

But when Vespatian had absolutely in his possession the Government of the
World, and with it Britain also, Now it is we hear of great Captains, brave
Soldiers, and Tacit vit. Agr.
the hopes of the Enemy but small, for speedily Petilius Crealis being sent in
the room of Bolanus, struck a Terror into them.

He Invaded the State of the Brigantes, a Nation esteemed most populous of all
the Province, fighting many Battles with them, and some not without great
Bloodshed; For Venutius, Prince of the Brigantes, who, as he heard before, was
incensed with the Romans, for their protection of Cartismandua, watching his
opportunity of Revenge, when the Civil Wars brake out, made use of that
advantage, and fell upon them. Sometimes the Victory was on one side, sometimes
on the other, but he held them tack to the last, remaining to the end
unvanquisht. Neither could Crealis touch some parts of his Dominion, and
although he had a few little Victories, yet he had always enough of War.

To him succeeded Julius Frontinus, who following so great a man as Crealis,
had enough to do to keep up his Reputation. But the Fame of his Predecessor
could not cloud the worth of his Actions, by sorce of Arms he subdued the stout
and Warlike Nation of the Silures, which was more honorable to him in that he
had to struggle with the difficulty of Ground, as well as the Courage of the
Enemy.

In this condition were Affairs in Britain, at the Arrival of Julius Agricola,
sent hither in the last year of Vespatian. He was trained up from his youth in
the British Wars, and with his Victories extended the Roman Pale, beyond all
his Predecessors. His coming was in the midst of Summer, when the Soldiers, as
if that years work had been over, began to be negligent and remiss, and the
Britains on the other hand, too watchful for Advantages.

The Ordovices already, to welcome the new General, had lately cut in pieces a
squadron of Horse quartered in their Country, few escaping, and they who were
eager for War, approved the Example, and looked upon it as a leading Card,
whilst others thought it safer to expect and try first the temper of the new
Lieutenant. Then Agricola, although the Summer was spent, the Soldiers
dispersed in their quarters, and all presumed upon ease and rest for that year,
though he knew there would be much difficulty in drawing them out to a Winters
Expedition, and his Officers dissuading him from it, yet notwithstanding he
resolves to meet the danger, and gathering together some of the chief Legionary
Soldiers, and with a small handful of Auxiliaries marching to seek out the
Ordovices, he found them drawn up in a place of advantage, resolving not to
quit their Ground, which perceiving, he advanced to the head of his Army, and
himself led them on; The Soldiers perceiving their General in equal danger,
followed, and by degrees ascended to the Enemy, where they made such slaughter,
that almost the whole Nation of the Ordovtces perished at once.

Agricola followed this success vigorously, and suffered not the fame of this
Action to cool by after remissness, well knowing, that his first Atchievments
would be the measure of all his future Successes. He resolves therefore to
subdue the Isle of Mona, from the possession whereof Paulinus was recalled by
the Revolt of the Britains. Wanting Ships, which upon so sudden a Resolution
could not be got ready, he used Policy in transporting his Men, and he
commanded them to lay down their Luggage, and the chief of the Auxiliaries, who
were acquainted with the Passage, and whose Country use had taught them at once
to swim, govern their Horses, and fight. He ordered them to take the water, and
assault the Enemy, the Britains, who never dreamt of so near a danger, but
expected Fleets and Shipping to attack them, perceiving the Romans got over,
cried out for Peace, and delivered up the Island, esteeming nothing impossible
to be done by them who could fight in the midst of the Waters.

This sudden success got great Fame to Agricola, especially in that he employed
the time of his Entrance in Labor and War, which by other Governors was spent
of course, in Complements and Congratulations for their Arrivals. Neither was
he pufft up with vain Conceits, by the happiness of the Success, he called it
not a Victory, or Expedition, but was content only to say, That he had reduced
those to their obedience who before had been Conquered; Neither did he bedeck
with Laurels his Letters of Advicement to Rome, which moderation of his in
dissembling his Victories increased his Honor, all people admiring upon what
hopes of future Atchievments he could be silent of such great things he had
already performed.

Having thus tried the strength of the Britains, the next thing he gave himself
to, was to understand the minds and inclinations of the People, and like a
prudent Person, experienced in such Affairs, he had learnt, That Force and Arms
were unable to keep a Nation in obedience, unless Injustice and Oppression were
removed. Whereupon, to make sure of Peace, he resolved to take away the Causes
of War, and because the Branches would continually grow unless the Root was cut
up, and nothing was so powerful as Example, he began the Reformation in his own
Family, reducing it to a convenient Number, and good Orders, and bridling the
Licentious behavior of his Domestics, a work of as much difficulty, and no
less honor, than the subduing of a Province.

He suffered the management of no Public Affairs to pass through the hands of
his Attendants, or Servitours, nor gave any Commands for favor or affection;
No Soldier was advanced by bribing his Officer, nor could any by underhand
means, beg an Employment. He was accounted fittest for Trust, who behaved
himself as the best Soldier, and although he was not able to execute all
things himself, yet was nothing done without his privity and consent. Small
faults he would either wink at, or pardon, great ones he corrected with
severity, yet oftener pleased with the repentance of the Criminal, than his
punishment, advancing such as he thought would be careful not to offend; by
which means he was provoked by the fewer Offenses.

He truly stated the proportion of Corn, and Tribute to be paid, by which
proceeding he cut off the Exactions of his Officers, and their unnecessary
Fees, and other Grievances, that were more burdensome than the Tribute it
self. For the poor People were forced to attend at the public Granaries,
which, in mockery, were fast locked against them, and when opened, the
Publicans obliged them to take greater quantities of Corn than their need
required, and at a racking price, which they were often constrained to sell
again at a low rate, to make money for other Necessaries, or the payment of
their Tribute.

They proclaimed the Mercates at their distances from the People, and lying
through bad Roads, which Inconvenience could not be bought off without a round
sum, which if not presently paid, the Carts and Wagons of the Inhabitants were
pressed to remove the Grain, which before lay convenient to be delivered out, to
the great oppression of the Britains, and the lucre of the Roman Officers.

By redressing of these Grievances, in his first year, he brought Peace into
some credit and reputation, which before, by the negligence or connivance of
men in Command, had as ill a name as War.

About this time died VESPATIAN, whose Actions in Britain were as great as
those in his Empire; he was made Legate of a Legion by Claudius, and in this
Ann. Dom. 80.
Island fought thirty times with the Enemy, conquered two potent Nations, and
above twenty strong Towns.

He was a moderate Prince, if not given too inordinately to the love of Riches,
and in a Triumph which was given him by the Senate, he professed himself rather
wearied with the Pomp, and long Solemnity, than touched with the Honor of it.

Being about to give up the Ghost, he said in a jesting manner to the Standers
by, I think I am making a God, by which saying he secretly reproved them, who
would be esteemed Gods, after they had given the surest Testimonies of their
being Men.

THE British History.
IN the same year died Arviragus, of whom, in the Roman Histories, not one word
in these Times, unless we may take Mr. Hollinsheads word, that he was the same
with Prasutagus, mentioned by Tacitus. I know generally the British Histories
make him die ten years before, but I rather follow Count Count Palate.
Palatine, as coming nighest to truth, who continues his Reign to this time,
so that be governed in all thirty five years, even to the days of Titus, for
had he lived only in the days of Claudius and Nero, how came Javenal to make
mention of him in the time of Domitian, in these words,

-- Omen habes magni clarique triumphi,
(...).
Regem aliquem capies, aut de temone Britanno,
Excidet Arviragus -- --.
This sure a glorious Triumph does foretell,
Some King you will take, or from his British Throne,
Arviragus will headlong tumble down.
He died and was buried in Claudiocestria, now Gloucester, a City he had built
in the honor of Claudius, and left the Kingdom to his Son Marius.

MARIUS, otherwise Meurig, or Maw.
MARIUS succeeded his Father Arviragus, as there is difference in his Name, so
is there also variance concerning the Person. The Count Palatine will Count
Palate.
have him the same with Cogidunus, others with Arviragus, and some make him a
Roman.

The Controversy is not worth the deciding, only this may be said, That if the
British Kings were to be displaced upon the account of Time, as Polidore Virgil
has done some of them, there was never greater necessity than now, seeing we
are got into an uncertain Chronology, and so Marius, the supposed Cogidunus,
should be placed before Arviragus, who undoubtedly, by Roman Authority, lived
in the days of Domitian, as before has been shown.

In the Reign of this Marius, the Picts infested this Island, which story, for
the credit of the British History, I shall defer to the end of his Reign, and
so proceed to the Romans.

THE CONTINUATION OF THE Roman History.
TITUS VESPATIAN.
WHen TITUS entered upon the Empire, it was the second year of Agricola's
Government in Britain, who having in his first Entrance reformed Abuses, and
taken away the encroachments of his Officers and Collectors, when Summer was
once come, he drew together his Army, and breathed them a little with short and
quick Marches, praising such as kept up to their Ensigns, and punishing the
straglers, and himself always chose the places to encamp in, and beforehand
searched the Woods, and sounded the Waters they were to pass, by which means he
suffered not the Enemy to take any rest, but continually allarumed them with
fresh Excursions.

Having thus pretty well amazed them, he began with kind and gentle Behavior
to show them the allurements of Peace, by which (...), many Cities that before
stood upon Terms of equality, now laid down their Anger, gave Hostages, and
received Garrisons, which were all placed with such care and foresight, and in
such places of advantage, that never any of them were attempted, whereas before
no new fortified place in all Britain escaped unattacked.

The following Winter was spent in wholesome and profitable Devices, for to the
end that the Britains who lived rude and scattered, and so apter for War, might
be brought to the sense of Pleasures, and to live in ease and quiet, and in the
Institutes and Customs of a Civil life, he privately encouraged, and in
public promoted the building of Houses, Temples, and places of general Resort,
commending the readiness of some, and quickening the slowness of others, making
that which was Necessity to become Emulation.

And now the Noble-mens Sons he caused to be instructed in the liberal
Sciences, and by commending the Wits of Britain before the Students of Gallia,
he brought them, who hated the Roman Language, to be in love with the Latin
Eloquence. Now came the Roman garb to be in fashion, and the Gown no stranger
among them, and by degrees the materials of Vice and Voluptuous life, proud
Portico's, Bathes, and the elegance of Banqueting was by the ignorant called
Civility, when indeed it was but a badge of their Slavery and Bondage.

In the third years Expedition he discovered new Nations, wasting the Country
Anna Dom. 81.
as far as the Frith to Tweed, as some think.
Taus, and by the terror of his Marches heawed the Enemy, that they durst
never interrupt his building of Forts, and laying yoaks upon their Necks, even
then when they might have taken the advantage (as once it fell out) of his
Forces, scattered and detained by Tempest.

In the building of these Garrisons, the skilful took notice, that never any
Captain with greater Judgment and foresight, chose out his places to fortify.
No Sconce or Fortress of his raising was ever taken by force, or surrender, or
quitted by flight, but of these he made continual eruptions into the Country,
laying in Provisions for a whole year, that if at any time his Men were
besieged, they might patiently wait the convenience of Relief. By this means
his Soldiers lived fearless in Winter, every Garrison being a guard to its
Neighbor, and the hopes of the Enemy were frustrated, who always reckoning in
the Winter season, to make up the loss received in Summer, found, that both
times were equally disadvantagious to them.

In all these Actions Agricola never ascribed ambitiously to himself what was
well done by others. If an Officer or Soldier deserved Commendation, he would
be sure to be the first that gave it, and that without any reservations to
himself. If toward some he was Passionate, to others he was as Affable, and
kind to the good, but to lewd and bad Persons sour and uneasy. His Choler was
vented in his words, and none ever needed ever to fear his secret Thoughts, or
close Reservments, for he chose rather to offend any man than hate him.

And now died TITUS, who for these great Atchievments of Agricola was fifteen
times saluted Imperator. The Honor he got by the Actions of so great a
General, he rewarded with triumphal Ornaments, a good Prince, who died to the
great grief of the whole World, not without suspicion of Poison from his
Brother and Successor Domitian; And this is sufficiently to be said in his
Character, that for his goodness he was generally called the Joy and delight of
Mankind.

DOMITIAN.
THE first year of Domitian, and the fourth of Agricolas's Government in
Britain, was spent in securing what the Summer Ann. Dom. 82
before had been newly gotten in the Island; and had the Courage of his
Soldiers been answerable to the Conduct of the General, and the Fortune of the
Commonwealth, by the loss of Titus, not seemed at a stand, the utmost Bounds
of Britain might at this time been laid open to the Romans, for Glota and
Bodoteia, now Dun Britton, and Edinburrough Fryths, running from both Seas far
into the Continent, and disjoined only by a neck of Land, together with all the
Creeks and Havens on this side, were held by Roman Garrisons, and the Enemies
as it were driven and penned up in another Island.

In the fifth year of his Expedition, as soon as ever the Seas were open, he
took Shipping, and passed to Nations till then unknown, supposed to be the
North parts Ann. Dom. 83.
of Scotland, the Orcades, and other Islands adjacent.

These in many prosperous Battles he subdued, and in those Parts which lay next
unto them, he placed Garrisons and Soldiers, not out of fear to hold, but
hopes of gaining further. Ireland he understood lay between Britain and Spain,
and very opportunely for the Gallick, and although not so great as Britain, yet
under the same Climate, the Nature and Customs of the People not much
different, but the Ports and Harbors better known, as lying opener to the
World, and more frequented by Traders.

This Island, if he could bring to Obedience, he thought would be of great
importance to the Commonwealth, and by joining Commerce, would unite and link
together the strongest Members of the Empire; But as it stood separate from the
rest it was of dangerous consequence, and might be prejudicial to the Britains
if once the Roman Arms were removed, and the name of Liberty lost among them.
He used often to say, That with one Legion, and some Auxiliary Forces, it might
be obtained, and that he had such a purpose is manifest, for that he
entertained a Prince of that Nation from his Country, by Civil Commotions, and
under the color of Courtesy and Kindness kept him with him for a fit occasion.

But the next year he was called away by nearer Concerns, he feared a general
Rising of the Nations beyond Bodotria, understanding that the Britains had
Waylaid An. Dom. 84.
all the passages by Land, to amaze and divert them he commanded his Fleet to
coast it along the Shoars, and himself with eaven marches kept close to it;
This policy of Agricola's succeeded well, and the show of his Navy was as
helpful to him as its force, for the Britains at once beholding the Fleet and
Army were utterly disheartened, and, as afterward was learnt from Fugitives,
complained, that the Sea as well as the Land conspired to their ruin, and,
that now the Ocean it self, their last refuge was taken from them.

But on the other hand, the Romans were mutually encouraged at the sight of
each other, and the Mariners and Soldiers often meeting in the same Camp,
with Military vaunts extolled their own Atchievments, the Land-men bragging of
the Woods and Mountains they had passed, and the Enemies they had overcome, the
Seamen on the other side not a little magnifying their dangers in Storms and
Tempest, and the glory in having subdued the Ocean.

The Calidonians were now generally in Arms, and the noise of it was as great
as the preparations. It was spread abroad, that of their own accords, without
provocation, they had begun the War and attacked many Castles, which opinion of
being The Challengers struck great Terror into the Romans. There were them who
under the name of Cautious Counsel endeavored to conceal their Fears, and
advised, that it was safest to withdraw beyond Bodotria, and more honorable to
retreat from the Country than be driven out of it.

Agricola took other Resolutions, understanding that the Enemy was advancing in
three Bodies, and lest he might be over-powr'd in Numbers, and over-match'd in
the knowledge of Places, he likewise marched in three Divisions; The Enemy
learning his changed Counsels, joining Forces in the night time, set upon the
ninth Legion in their Camp, and killing their Sentinels, brake in upon the
rest, who were surprised between sleep and fear. And now some Execution was
begun, when Agricola having by Scouts learnt out the March of the Enemy, he
followed them at their heels, and commanded the swiftest of his Horse, and his
lightest Foot to play on their backs, and the whole Army anon to second them
with a shout.

The Britains hearing the Enemy in the Rear were disheartened, especially when
the day appearing discovered their glittering Ensigns, and the Romans took
courage and began to fight, now, not as men doubtful of Victory, but ambitious
of Honor. Now might be seen the Roman Soldiers, of their own accord breaking
into the Camp, and others fighting to get out, both Parties contending which
should have the most Glory, the one in bringing assistance, the other in not
seeming to have wanted it.

In this Fight the Britains were vanquished, and had they not betook themselves
to their old Refuge, the Woods and Boggs, that day had made a total end of the
War.

After this success the Soldiers were full of life and spirit, nothing now
seemed hard unto them, they generally cried all out to be led into Caledonia,
and to the utmost bounds of British Earth; Nay, they who before were for wary
and saving Counsel, now looked as big, and talked as boasting as any. Such is
the hard condition of War, all challenging a part in what succeeds, but the
miscarriages were laid upon one.

The Britains acknowledged themselves beaten not by the Courage of the
Soldiers, but the cunning and Conduct of the General, and therefore they had
no less thoughts of themselves than before, but made new Levies in order to
prosecute the War, and before hand carried their Wives and Children into places
of security, and sent about through the Cities to enter into a Union, which was
afterward ratisied with solemn Rights and Sacrifices.

In the mean time a Cohort of Usipians, raised in Germany, and sent into
Britain, having slain a Centurion, and other Soldiers, that were appointed to
exercise them in their Arms, took to Sea in three Pinnaces, and having killed
some of the Mariners whom they suspected, the rest they constrained to do
their Office.

Thus having escaped, and none knowing what was become of them, having no
Pilate, they were carried at random, as the Tide and Wind drove them, to and
fro the Island, using Piracy where they landed. But at length, as they were
reduced to extremity, they drew Lots to eat one another, and through wonderful
difficulties, having been driven round the North of the Island, they were taken
first by the Suevians, and afterward by the Freisians, and then sold into
Britain, where they were discovered.

These were the first which discovered to the Romans, that BRITAIN was an
Island.

The beginning of the next Summer, Agricola having sent out his Fleet to scour
Anne Dom. 85.
along the Coast, and strike Terror into the Enemy, himself with a flying
Army, consisting chiefly of Britains, whose Courage and Faith he had long
experienced, came as far as the Mountain Grampius, upon which the Enemy was
embattled; For the Britains not daunted with the ill success of the last Fight,
and looking for nothing but Revenge or Slavery, were got thirty thousand
together, and more daily expected to come up. The Aged themselves would not be
exempted from this days service, but as they had been Famous in their time, so
every one carried before him some Badge or Trophy of his youthful Archievments.
Amongst the rest, Galgacus, chief in Authority and Birth, when the Army cried
out for the signal of Battle to be vgien, is said to have spoken to this
purpose.

GALCACUS, his SPEECH to his Soldiers before Battle.
AS often as I consider the cause of the War, and our present necessity, I am
strongly persuaded that this day, and this cheerful Consent of yours, will give
beginning and life to the Liberty of all Britain. We have every one been made
sensible of Slavery, no part of the Earth has protected us from Injury, nay
the Sea it self is not secure whilst the Roman Fleet there so dreadfully
appears to us. Arms and Battle, which to the Valiant are Honorable, prove now
the safest refuge of Cowards.

Hitherto, in all the Battles fought against the Romans, with various success,
we have always been esteemed hitherto as a forlorn Hope, and upon occasions a
powerful Reserve, because we the noblest of the Island, and seated in the most
bidden retirements of it, have never so much as seen the Shoars of a truckling
Nation, or polluted our Eyes with any contagion of Slavery. Placed in the
extremes of the Earth, and Liberty, we have lived in the inmost Chambers of
Honor, beyond which there is no more Earth, and besides which there is no
Freedom.

Now the end of Britain is discovered, and things known carry less show and
appearance, there are no Nations behind to amuse the Enemy, Rocks and Waves are
on that side, and on this, Romans, whose Pride in vain Ye may seek to satisfy
with Service and Submisdemeancur, Robbers of the World, that having now left no
Land to plunder, ransack the Sea it self.

If the Enemy be rich, they are greedy of his Wealth, if poor, they covet
Glory, whom not the East or West could ever satisfy; The only Men in the
World, that with equal appetite seek out the Rich, and the Needy. To rob, kill,
and plunder, they call Empire, and when they have brought desolation to a
Country, they call it Peace.

Nature, by nearest ties, has linkt our Children and Relations to us, yet these
are taken away, and pressed into other Service. Our Wives and Sisters, if they
escape violent Force, yet suffer dishonor when they come as Guests, or
Friends. Our Goods and Fortunes they exhaust in Tributes, our Corn must supply
their Granaries, and they wear out our Bodies in cleansing of Woods and Boggs,
amidst a thousand Stripes and Indignities.

Slaves, which are born to Bondage, are sold once for all, and afterward kept
at their Masters charges, but Britain daily buys its Bondage, and daily
maintains it. And as in a private Family the last Comer is the sport and
scorn of his fellow Servants: so we who shall newly come to slavery, shall be
laughed at by the old Drudges of the World. It is not to be doubted but our
destruction is sought for, we have no Fields to Till, no Mines to dig in, nor
no Havens to be cleansed, to what purpose therefore should they reserve us a
Line.

The Courage and fierceness of the Subject pleases not the jealous Sovereign,
and our Distance and Secrecy the more safety it yields to us, the more to
them it is suspected, so that laying aside all hopes of Pardon, at last take
courage, as well they who have any respect to their safety, as such whose
Honor is nearest to them. The Trinobantes rather,
Brigantes, under the Conduct of a Woman, fired a whole Colony, and forced the
Castles, and had not the happiness of the success led them into a Sloth and
Security, they might totally have shaken off the yoke from their gauled Necks.

We, as yet, in our full strength, and never tamed by any, born, and not
redeemed into Liberty, must urge for an Encounter, if ever we will show what
manner of Men Calidonia has reserved in store. Do you think the Romans are as
valiant in War, as they are wanton in Peace? They are grown great by our
Divisions, and vainly ascribe to the glory of their own Arms, what proceeds
from their Enemies Dissensions. Composed they are of different Nations, which
Union, as Success only holds together, so Adversity will quickly dissolve,
unless ye suppose the Gauls and Germans (and which is a shame to be spoken) the
Britains, who at the present serve to uphold Foreign Usurpation, can possibly
have any faith or affection for them, who have been longer their Enemies than
Masters. No, it is Terror and Fear, those weak procurers of Affection, that
keep them as yet in Obedience, which if once removed, you will find that whom
they feared they will hate. All the Incitements to Victory are on our side, the
Romans have no Wives to encourage them to fight, no Parent to upbraid them, if
they fly. Most have either no Country at all, or some other a few fearful
Persons, trembling and gazing at the strangness of the Haven it self, the Sea,
and Woods.

The Gods have delivered them, as it were, mewed up and fettered into our
hands, let not the vain show and glittering of Gold and Silver dazzle you, a
thing which neither defends in it self, or annoyeth.

In their very Battle, we shall find of our side, the Britains will own their
Friends, the Gauls will remember their former Liberty, and the Germans will
generally forsake them, as not long since did the Usipians.

We have nothing afterward to fear, the Castles are empty, the Colonies are
made up of nothing but Aged and Impotent persons. Between unjust Governors and
stubborn Subjects, the free Cities are generally discontented and factious.

Here is a General, here an Army, these be the Tributes, there be the Mines,
with the train of Slaveries, that unseparably attend upon bondage, all which
must for ever be undergone, or in this one Battle revenged. Wherefore going to
Battle, bear in your minds the freedom of your Ancestors, and the danger of
your Posterity.

The Britains received this Oration with great testimonies of Joy, as Songs,
confused Noises, after the Custom of their Country, and a dissonant sort of
Howling, which showed their Approbation.

And now the Battle began to glitter, and every one to put himself into array.
When Agricola scarce able to repress the heat of his Soldiers, yet thinking it
convenient to say something, he thus delivered himself in this Speech.

AGRICOLA, his SPEECH to his Army before Battle.
THIS is the Eighth year, Fellow Soldiers, wherein your faithful Service and
diligence, under the virtue and Fortune of the Roman Empire, has subdued
Britain in so many Expeditions, so many Battles, either by Courage against the
Enemy, or Patience and Labors. We have ran through the greatest Difficulties,
and conquered even Nature it self, neither had you reason to be weary of your
General, or I of my Soldiers, insomuch as we have exceeded the Limits, I, of
my Predecessors, and You, of former Armies.

The utmost bounds of BRITAIN we now hold, not by Fame and Report, but with our
Arms and Pavilions, and we have the honor both to Discover and to Subdue.

In your wearisome Marches, when the passing of Boggs, Rivers, and Mountains,
has tired you, how often have I heard the valiant Soldier say, When shall we
meet the Enemy? When shall we fight? Behold they show themselves from their
secret lurking places; now you have your desires, now is there room for your
Valor to be shown, every thing is as you could wish, if you Conquer, but if
you lose the day, all is against you. For, as to have gone so much ground,
escaped the Woods, passed the Friths, were things, in Our coming, great and
honorable: so, if we fly before the Enemy, the very same will be our hindrance
and destruction. For neither have we the same knowledge of Places as they, or
if we had, yet want we Provisions, but Hands we have and Weapons, and in them
all things.

For my part, I have been long since resolved, that to Retreat is neither safe
for Soldier nor General, and that a commendable death is to be preferred
before the reproaches of an Ignominious life, and that Safety and Honor are
now inseparably conjoined, and let the worst happen, yet how glorious will it
be to die in the uttermost end of the World, and Nature.

If new Nations and unknown Enemies were before us, I should exhort you by the
Examples of other Armies, but now I shall only lay before you your own
victorious Exploits. Ask your own Eyes, are not these the very same who last
year stole upon the Camp by night, whom with shouts only you overcame. These of
all the Britains have been the nimblest in running away, and therefore are the
last remaining. Just as in Woods and Forests the strongest Beasts must be
chased away by main force, whilst the timorous and fearful are driven on by
the noise only of the Hunter: so the hardy part of the British Nation is
already dispatched, the rest is but a herd of Rascally Cattle, whom that at last
you have found proceeds not from their Resisting, but being discovered, no
further can they run, but stand now like Stocks, fixed to the ground they
treadon, and afford to you an occasion of a worthy and memorable Victory.

Make an end now of your Warfare, and to fifty years Labors add a great and
concluding Day, by this means you will approve to your Country, that it could
never be justly laid to your charge that you protracted the War, in not pulling
up the last Root of Rebellion.

Whilst Agricola was yet speaking, the eagerness of the Soldiers evidently
appeared, but the end of his Oration was received with loud and joyful
Acclamations, every one stood to his Arms, and showed his alacrity by
impatience to follow on.

Agricola ordered the Battle after this manner; His Body was made up of eight
thousand Auxiliary foot, three thousand Horse were placed in the Wings, the
Legions The Order of the Battles on both sides.
were set in the Rear, before the Camp; To the greater glory of the Victory, if
it could be won without loss of Roman Blood, otherwise for assistance and
succor, if the Auxiliaries should be repelled.

The British Army, for show and terror, was drawn up upon a Rising ground, the
first Battalion stood on the Plain, the next higher behind, as the Hill
ascended, the middle of the Plain was filled with the clattering noises of
Charriots and Horsemen, ranging up and down.

Agricola perceiving the Enemy exceeded him in number, and fearing that at once
they might attack him in the Front and Flanks, displayed his Army in length,
and although by that means his Fore-battle was something of the thinnest, and
many counseled to take in the Legions, yet he stood firm to his Resolution,
and allighting from his Horse, placed himself before the Standards.

The Fight began at distance, with missive Weapons, wherein the Britains showed
wondrous skill and dexterity, with short Swords or broad Targets they either
avoided the Darts, or shoke them off, and in return liberally bestowed whole
showers of their own.

Agricola perceiving the disadvantage exhorted three Batavian Cohorts, and two
of the Tungrians, that they would bring the Battle to dint of Sword, and
handstroaks, which they easily performed, being fitted thereto by long exercise.

The Britains on the other side having little Targets, and huge unweildy Swords
without points, were not so well prepared for the thrust and close, and could
not endure this sort of grapling, so that when the Batavians came to exchange
blows with them, and to make at their Faces with their pointed Targets, and
pointed Tucks, they easily bore them down, and in prosecuting their Victory
advanced to the side of the Hill. The rest of the Cohorts mixing emulation with
force, and striking at all that were near them, run on in the same course of
Victory, leaving for haste many behind them half-dead, and some untoucht; In
the mean while the Horsemen fled, and the Charriots brake into the Foot, but
they who had lately terrified others, were now distressed themselves, being
toiled with the thick Ranks of the Enemy, or bogled in the uneavenness of the
ground.

Neither was the form of this Fight like a loose skirmishing of Horsemen, but
each maintaining his ground, endeavored by the weight of their Beasts to bear
down the Enemy. Now might be seen Charriots without Guiders, and the affrighted
Horses running too and fro, and over-bearing all that met them, or thwarted
their way.

When those Britains who had not yet engaged, but kept the tops of the Hills,
as despising the fewness of the Enemy, began to draw down by degrees, and by
taking a compass, to fall upon the Romans in their Rear, Agricola having
suspected their intention, with four Squadron of Horse, which he had reserved
for such a purpose, opposed their descent, and drove them back with as great
violence as they had come on, pursuing them to their main Body.

And now the Counsel of the Britains was turned upon their own heads, for
Agricola commanded some Troops to be taken from the Front of the Battle, and
ordered them to second the Horse, and fall upon the back of the Enemy; Then
might have been seen, in the open fields, a great and dismal spectacle,
pursuing, wounding, taking, killing those that were taken, when others were
offered. Now whole Regiments of the Britains, according to their several
dispositions, some though Armed, and in more number, yet turned their backs to
the sewer, others unarmed ran desperately upon the Weapons of the Enemy. Every
where lay scattered Arms, Bodies, and mangled Limbs, the ground was covered
with Blood, and many wallowed in their own Gore, yet, left not off to give some
proofs of their last Anger and Revenge.

And now a Party of the Britains had secretly possessed themselves of some
passages in the Woods, through which, as the Romans advanced, and with more
heat than discretion pursued the Chase, set upon them, and unawares dispatched
many, which had not Agricola perceived, and timely prevented, the Romans
through their overconfidence in the midst of Victory, had received a notable
Overthrow; For he sent some of his best and readiest Cohorts to scour the
Woods, and guard the Passages, and some Troops of Horse were ordered to ride up
and down, and observe the Coasts, and others, where the entrances of the
Forests were thicker, to allight from their Horses, and stand to their Posts,
which the Britains observing, and finding now that the Romans followed the
Pursuit close and regularly, they all fled not as before, in whole Troops and
Companies, but scattered and dispersed, every one, for his own security, taking
into Bypath, and, out of fear, avoiding Friends as well as Enemies, until
Night and fullness of Blood put an end to their Chase.

Of the Britains ten thousand were slain, of the Romans three hundred and
forty, amongst which Aulus Atticus, Commander in chief of a Cohort, through
Youthful heat, and the fierceness of his Horse, was carried on into the midst
of his Enemies.

The night was spent with joy by the Romans, who were full of Victory and
Spoil, but the poor Britains wandering up and down, and Men and Women howling
together, lugg'd on the wounded, and cried help to those that were not hurt.
Some forsake their Houses, others of their own accord, out of despite, fire
their own Houses themselves, choosing out Holes to lurk in, which they as soon
left, to find out others.

Sometimes they communicated Counsels together, and then they had some
glimmerings of hope, other whiles nothing but despair seizes them, and then
they raged at the sight of their dearest Pledges; And it is certain, that many
with a cruel Compassion laid violent hands on their Wives and Children, to
secure them from the greater violence of the Romans.

The day appearing gave an opener Testimony and prospect of the Victory; every
where desolation and silence, the Hills forsaken, the Cottages smoking afar
off, the Scouts sent abroad brought word that nothing appeared, no footsteps
of a general Flight could be discovered, nor any Britains drawn in Companies
together.

Hereupon Agricola, because the Summer was spent, and no fit Season to divide
his Forces, brings them entire into the Borders of the Horesti, supposed the
Inhabitants of Eske-Dale in Scotland, where receiving Hostages, he commanded
the Admiral of his Fleet to sail round Britain, sending him Forces for that
purpose, but the Terror of the Navy was gone before himself with slow and
easy Marches, to the end he might awe the new Conquered Nations with the
delays of his passage, and so by degrees placed his Men in their Winter
quarters.

The Navy with prosperous Winds, and good success, safely arrived at the Port
Trutulensis, supposed Richborough, near Sandwich, from whence it departed, and
coasting along the nearest side of Britain returned thither again. And now most
probably, if not in the fifth year of Agricola, as has been mentioned, the
Romans, might subdue the Isles of Orkney, which others, with less reason
following Orosius, ascribe unto Claudius. And this discovery of Britain (by the
Romans) to be an Island, was in Anno post Christum 86.
the eighty sixth year after Christ, and the fourth of Domitians Reign.

Agricola, without any amplifying Terms, signified the state of Affairs in
Britain, by Letters, to Domitian, who (after his usual Custom) received them
with a joyful Countenance, yet within was he sad at heart. And certainly the
Courage of this Prince cannot be better described, than in his carriage to this
worthy General; For being inwardly pricked to think, that by his own
counterfeit Triumph over the Germans (to fill out which, for want of true
Captives, he was forced to buy such as by their Hair and Attire might Personate
them) he would now become the scorn and derision of the World, when they should
hear of the great and true Victories of Agricola, so many thousand slain, and
the Fame of such Atchievments spread quite abroad; and fearing withal, that the
name of a Private man might be advanced above that of the Prince: he secretly
designed his ruin, thinking in vain that he had suppressed the study of
Oratory, and other worthy politic Arts, thereby to keep down other men's
Reputations, if he should suffer himself to be surpassed in Military glory,
which he esteemed the peculiar Honor of an Emperor, and the Jealousies
thereof not so easily to be dissembled.

Daily tormented with the said Cares, and musing much in his Closet alone,
which was a sign of some Cruelty intended, he thought it best for the present
to hide his Resentments until the heat of Agricola's Glory, and the love of the
Army toward him, was somewhat abated. He continued him therefore in his
Command, and with all show of Acknowledgment for so great Services, commands
that in Senate Triumphal Ornaments be decreed to him with the honor of a
Statue, and what else was necessary of making up of a just Triumph, adding
himself words highly advantageous in favor of him.

But he wanted not long an opportunity of removing him, a thing he so much
desired, for the Province of Syria being void by the death of Atilius Rufus, a
Consular Lieutenant, and reserved for men of great Quality, he caused to be
given out, was designed for Agricola, and so naming a Successor for Britain,
called him home, but fearing (it seems) not to be obeyed, unless with the new
Governor the Commission for Syria was also dispatched, he employs one of his
secret and trusty Servants to carry it, but with this Command, not to deliver
it unto Agricola if he had already resigned his Province, which (as was
thought) was accordingly performed, and the Servant meeting him at Sea, never
so much as saluted him, but returned to the Emperor with the Patent.

Agricola arriving at Rome, received secret Instructions to make his Entry in
private, which he did accordingly, and by night came into the City, and by
night into the Palace, where he was received by Domitian with a short
Complement, and then placed amongst the rest of the Waiters.

But such was the Behavior of this great General, that although Domitian
sought all occasion to destroy him, yet found he none, his Carriage was so
affable and free from pride, his Garb so modest, and his Retinue so small, that
his greatest Enemies saw no side lie open to assault him. And, although he was
often accused by some, during his Country retirement, yet so frivolous were the
Crimes charged upon him, that Domitian was constrained (though otherwise
inclined) to acquit him; Nay, he avoided for a while those worst sort of
Adversaries, namely, such as daily praised his Virtues, and extolled his Glory,
a piece of Malice most of all dangerous, if instilled into the ears of a
Vicious and Self-condemning Prince.

He resigned his Command, as Mr. Hollinshead writes, to Cn. Trebellius, but I
find no reason for his Opinion. We read of Salustius Lucullus, Legate of
Britain in the Hol. Hist. of Brit.
days of this Emperor, but no more can be found of any others, and of him
only, than that he was slain by Domitian for giving his own Name to a sort of
Spears which he invented. So small an affectation of Honor could not be
forgiven to Salustius Lucullus, Suet. vit. Domitian.,
under a jealous Sovereign, which Lucius Lucullus enjoyed in safer times, who
called a sort of black Marble, in which he delighted, by the name of Lucullean
Marble, and yet went quietly to his Grave.

Agricola delivered his Province to his Successor safe and quiet, but it seems
it continued not in a peaceable condition long after his Removal, for, as may
be gathered by a Preface in Tacitus, to a Book of his Histories, it was either
through the Envy of Domitian, or the Ill Conduct of his Captains, lost again
from the Romans, Tacitus:
and Juvenal the Poet writes of Arviragus (in these days, and not before) King
of Juvenal.
Britain, who so well behaved himself against them, that he was not only grown
Famous at Rome, but accounted matter of great Triumph, if he could be taken
Captive, or overcome.

And now, besides the loss of Britain, upon the neck of one another followed
the Revolts of Maesia, Dacia, Germany and Pannonia, and the Romans on all
sides, were through the neglect or rashness of their Generals, grievously
distressed, insomuch that Agricola, by the common voice of the Multitude, was
demanded for Leader, and, by the wisest, looked upon as the fittest person to
put a stop to these growing Calamities, but what was intended for his honor
proved his destruction, for although he refused the Employment, as knowing not
safe to take it, and albeit at present Domitian seemed graciously to admit his
Exercise, yet was he not long after poisoned by him, as a Person of too
dangerous a Virtue, and too much beloved, to be suffered to live.

Agricola, poisoned by Domitian, in reward of his good Service and Virtues.
Thus died this famous Agricola, who carried the Roman Standards to the
uttermost bounds of Britain, and the Isles of Orkney, subduing more Nations
than all his Predecessors before had done, and Ireland he had certainly
attempted, had not the Jealousies of Domitian too soon recalled him.

But what he performed in War, was not comparable to his actions in Peace, his
reforming the Abuses and Exactions of his Officers, by which he reduced the
Britains not only to the use of Civil life, but the love of it. He trained the
Nobility up in Liberal Arts and Sciences, by sending them into Gaul, where they
might learn perfectly the Laws of the Romans, insomuch as Juvenal, in these
times, writes, Gallia causidicos docuit facunda Britannos. Juvenal.
Moreover he furnished them with goodly Houses, and stately Buildings, proud
Portico's, and sumptuous Baths; he taught them the neat use of Diet and
Apparel, insomuch that they were not Inferior to any other Province; He
changed their cumbersome Charriots into the Coaches and delicate Litters of
Rome, and for the convenience of Travel, he was the beginner of those Roads,
and Causies, which were afterward more universally paved by the Romans through
the Island.

Thus about the Year of Grace 86, all on the south part of Glota, and Bodotria,
Ann. Dom. 86.
that is, the Friths of Dunbritton and Edinborough, was reduced whole and
entire into the form of a Province, which was not governed by any Consular, or
Proconsular Deputy, but was esteemed Praesidialius, that is, under the
immediate protection and eye of the Emperor, and held by his Garrisons, for it
being annexed to the Empire after the division of Provinces made by Augustus,
it was not subject to their Laws and Customs, but had Protectours of its own,
which were sent and recalled again at the will and pleasure of the Emperor
alone, all Usuages, Prescriptions of other Provincial Governments to the
contrary not withstanding.

And in this the Privilege of Britain was somewhat advanced above that of
other Nations, besides, that they had Kings of their own, even in the Roman
Pale, which carried in it a show of Liberty, though but for a time, and was
indeed, nothing but the usual method of that Commonwealth, to make Princes
Instruments of their deeper Slavery; so that what Kings of Britain, for the
future we shall find under the Emperors, they were either Tributaries to the
Romans, if they lived in the Southern parts, such as Lucius and Coelius, or
else they resided beyond Glota and Bodotria, those Northern Regions, the
absolute Conquest whereof Agricola had not time to accomplish.

In the days of this Domitian lived at Rome Claudia Rufina, the Daughter of a
Britain, and Wife of Pudence a Senator, famous in the Verses of Martial for
her Beauty, Wit, and Learning.

Claudia coeruleis cum sit Rufina Britannis Martial.

Edita, cur Latiae Pectora Plebis habet.
Quale decus formae? Romanam credere matres
Italides possunt, Atthides esse suam.
Though Claudia does descend of British Race,
Yet her Behaviour's full of Roman Grace;
Her Beauty does the Italian Dames surpass,
And for her wit, she may for Attick pass.
But more famous was she for her profession in Christianity, in the writings of
St. Paul, being the very same Woman (as John Bale and Matthew Parker, first
Protestant Joh. Bale. Matt. Parker.
Archbishop of Canterbury, have written) of whom he makes mention in his
later Epistle to Timothy; neither is the computation of Time repugnant,
although others are of a different Opinion.

And now we come to the death of Domitian, there being nothing more upon Record
memorable in his Reign that relates to our British Affairs. He was slain in a
Conspiracy, wherein his Wife was partaker, the chief in the Action was Stephen
a Procurator, and Steward to Domicilla the Empress, who feigning himself Lame
of one Arm, and carrying it in a Scarf, secretly withal bore a Dagger therein,
and approaching to the Emperor, under pretense of delivering him a Scrowl of
the Names of diverse Conspirators, struck him with a Poniard into the Belly.
Domitian, although sorely wounded, yet was not wanting to himself upon so
sudden an occasion, for struggling with this Assassinate, he had certainly
wrested the Dagger from him, had not the rest of the Confederates broke in, and
with seven Wounds put an end to his life.

It was upon the eighteenth day of September (the name of which Month he had
changed into that of Germanicus, a Title vainly assumed to himself) in the
fifteenth year of his Reign, and of his life 45, in the year of Grace 98. An.
Dom. 98.


The chief Virtues of this Prince (for his Vices were innumerable) were, that
he favored Learning, and was the Patron of greatest Bounty, and easiest Access
of any in his time. He was desirous of a lasting Name, but took the wrong way
in attaining it; for being pleased with the Flatteries of some Writers, who
would make him an excellent Prince, he neglected to be so, and always sought
after the shadow of Virtue rather than the substance of it.

But these Parasites who were kept warm by his Bounty, whilst living, basely
deserted him at his death, and followed his Memory with all the Scorns and
Reproaches of the succeeding Age. None thought of his Apotheosis, or
Deification, after his Departure, insomuch that it may be counted a Prophetic
Spirit in him as well as Pride, That in his life time he commanded himself to
be called God and Lord.

NERVA.
COGGEIUS NERVA succeeded Domitian, he was chosen by Ann. Dom. 96.
the Senate, with the assistance of Petronius Secundus, Captain of the
Praetorian Bands, and Parthenius, High-Chamberlain, one of the Murderers of
Domitian. His Birth was Noble, and of Italy, in the City Narnia, of the
Province of Umbria; He was a prudent and Aged Prince, but the shortness of his
Reign, which was only one year, four months, and odd days, has given little
matter for Writers to speak of British Affairs.

Mr. Hollinshead makes Cneius Trebellius Lieutenant of Britain in his days,
and the days of Trajan, and that under his Government, during both Emperors,
there were troublesome times in this Island, which last Circumstance may be
certainly gathered out of good History, in the time of Trajan, his Successor,
and may perhaps be true under Nerva, seeing that in his life time he accepted
Trajan, and made him Partner with him in the Empire, and so his Reign alone was
but of small continuance, so that the little Remembrances of this Island in
these Times, shall be reserved to the next Emperor.

TRAJAN.
ULPIUS TRAJANUS was a Spaniard born, of a Noble Family Anno Dom. 98.
in the Province of Biscay, he extended the Roman Empire beyond the bounds of
all his Predecessors. He subdued Dacia, Armenia, Parthia, Mesopotamia, and
passing Tigris, he carried his Arms to the remotest Indies, making them feel
the Roman Force, who before had never heard of their Name.

And, as he gained in the East, so lost he nothing in the Western Provinces,
for although the Britains Revolted, yet were they soon again reduced to
Obedience by him, as is evident out of Spartianus.

The time of their Revolting may be supposed to have begun after the removal of
Agricola by Domitian, as is gathered out of Tacitus, and through the Idleness
of that Prince, and the short Reign of Nerva, it might be neglected till the
dates of this Emperor. And, no wonder if the Britains watched all opportunity
of freeing themselves from the Roman yoke, and the insufferable Grievances
which accrued, and besides the constant Tribute and Imposts, through the
Insolence of Garrisons, the Exactions of Officers, they were constrained to
receive Publicans, that is to say, greedy Cormorants and Horse-leeches, who
sucked their very Blood, confiscated their Goods, and exacted Toll, not only
for the Living, but in the name of the Dead.

The Ancient Laws of their Country began to grow out of use, and instead
thereof the Civil Law of Rome, and the arbitrary Sentence of Judges was
introduced. Magistrates were sent from that City, with absolute Power and
Commission, even in Capital matters, and besides, Praetors, Propraetors, and
Presidents, every City and State had their Municipal Lord over them.

At the solemn Sessions and Assizes, the Praetor sitting alost upon an high
Tribunal, proudly executed his Jurisdiction, showing Terrible amidst his Guards
and Lictors, where Rods and Axes, upon slight occasions, were often presented
to the backs and necks of the Common People; Through the often changing of
Governors, there ensued great Confusion, one destroying what another had
established, and the Successor often, of course, abolishing the Acts and
Constitutions of his Predecessor.

Neither was this sufficient, they kept on foot continually Discords and
Dissensions, favoring some above the rest, that they might make them
Instruments of their own Slavery. As many of these Abuses had been sormerly
rectified, under the last Lieutenant Agricola, so again were they redressed by
this Worthy Emperor, whose care, in other matters, is left upon Record,
namely, his carrying of Roads and broad-Causies through the whole Island, begun
by Agricola, a work of prodigious greatness, and infinite Charge, what with the
drayning of Fens and Marshes, through which they were continued, and what with
casting up of Banks through the low Valleys, besides, they were paved with
Stone, and of that breadth that Wagons might go a breast in them, supposed
forty foot. They are described particularly by Galen.

The Ways (says he) TRAJAN repaired by paving with Stone, or raising Banks,
Gal. l. 9. c. 8. Method. Med.
cast up such pieces of them as were moist and miery, by stocking up and
clearing such as were rough and overgrown with Bushes and Briars, by making
Bridges over Rivers, and fordable where the way seemed longer than needed, by
cutting out a shorter course; If any where, through some steep Hill, the
passage was hard and uneasy, by turning it aside through more level Places, if
it ran through Forests, Wastes, and Deserts, by drawing it from thence,
through places inhabited, and generally by smoothing all uneaven and rugged
Grounds.

The tract of these Ways remain even to this day, and though they cannot be
traced in a continued Line, by reason in many places the Country people digging
Gravel out of them, they are broken off, yet through Pastures and By-grounds
they may be discovered, where the Banks are so high, that evidently they show
what formerly they have been.

Concerning Four great Roads leading through the Island, I have spoken in the
Reign of Molmutius, who, in the British History, is made the builder of them,
namely, Watling-street, otherwise called Werlam-street, for that it went
through Verulamium, and is elsewhere named by the People dwelling on it, high
dike, high-ridge, Forty foot Way, and Ridge-way.

The second, Ikemild-street, because, as Mr. Cambden says, it went through the
Country of the Iceni.

The third, The Fosse, for that as men think it was fenced on both sides with a
Ditch.

The fourth, Ermin-street, from the German name of Mercury, as Mr. Cambden
thinks, or rather from the Greek (...).

These Roads, as likewise other Magnificent structures in Britain, Mr. Cambden
(as his custom is) attributes wholly to the Romans, and is of opinion, that
there were more than four in this Island.

As concerning their Number, I believe it may be uncertainly guessed, although
in the Laws of St. Edward there is mention made, De pace quatuor Cheminorum,
viz. Viarum, concerning the Peace of the four Road-waies. But I see not why
they should be absolutely ascribed to the Romans, my Reasons are these,
gathered out of the former words of Galen. 1. Because Trajan is said to repair
the Ways, not build them, which cannot be meant of those Ways Agricola begun
in the days of Domitian, which were the first we hear of of the Romans
building, which is so little time since, that it would be hard to imagine they
should be so soon decayed, especially where Galen says, They were overgrown
with Thorns and Thistles. 2. The Conveniences of the Roads could not be so
suddenly altered from Agricola's time, as that Trajan should need, as he did,
to turn them from Forests and Waste places, and bring them through Towns and
Cities, as likewise to cut them shorter in several places. Certainly Agricola
could not but consider the damage of carrying Public Ways through Forests
and Deserts, and therefore these words, thus rectified by Trajan, seem to be
the ancient Roads of the Britains, whose chief abode was in Woods and Forests,
and therefore made their ways through those places in which they chiefly
resided.


And, indeed, there are many parts and pieces of great Ways now discovered in
this Island, which for many Reasons cannot well be imagined convenient, for any
Nation not in the same circumstances, as the Ancient Britains then lived in.
And whether Molmutius, or some other before or after him, did cause these Ways
to be built, it mattereth not, but it certainly appears that some of them
were the works of the Britains, long before the entrance of the Romans.

The Common People (as Mr. Cambden alleges) do plainly say these works were
done by Giants, whom in the North parts they call Eatons (as he supposes) for
Heathens, which is not improbable, but see immediately how he frames these
Giants to the meridian of his own Antiquities, for where he would make these to
be meant of the Romans, how stands it with Reason? Is not this to bring down
the Fabulous Age below the times of their Caesar's, when these works were
performed? Must Britain of all other Nations in the World, be so unfortunate as
to be dreaming of Giants and Monsters in those days, when the Race of them for
so many hundreds of years had been utterly extinguished, and the eyes of the
World clearly opened, as to those points?

There are to be seen in Spain the Causies called Salamantica and Argentea, the
works of the Romans, in France, the Viae militares paved by the same Nation,
and in Italy, the Way Appia, Pompeia, Valeria, and others, and yet when those
Kingdoms were overthrown by barbarous Nations, Spain by the Saracens, Gallia by
the Franks, Italy by the Goths and Vandals, yet never were those Nations so
Barbarous, as to take the old Romans for Giants, or to think those Works any
other than the useful Atchievments of a great and powerful People; Why then
should Britain be looked upon as more Ignorant and Barbarous, if there were not
something of greater Antiquity in these Ways, than in those of other Nations?
Certainly, the Britains, as much as any People, had experience, that the Romans
were but Men, as they made it appear in many great Victories against them; And
could the memory of a Nation so often baffled by them, haunt their Posterity in
after-Ages to that degree, as to raise up the Idea's of such huge Giants and
Goblins? in my Judgment it seems improbable.

Besides, these Roads were not repaired and paved by the Roman Soldiers, but
by the great labor and toil of the Britains themselves, whom the Romans forced
to work as Slaves, and stood over them with Whips and Rods, as severe
Taskmasters, Tacitusi
for which usage, in Tacitus, they complain, That the Romans wore out and
consumed their Bodies and Hands, in clearing of Woods, and paving of Fens, with
a thousand stripes and reproachful Indignities. How is it likely therefore, had
there been no other Roads of greater Antiquity than these, that the Britains
should ever take them for the Works of Giants, in which was preserved the
hateful memory of their own Slavery.

As for the Romans, it seems rather that they repaired the Ancient Ways of
the Britains, paved them with Stone, and where they lay not convenient for
their Garrisons, they changed their course, and brought them to serve for their
own Convenience rather than the Britains. And this appears out of Tacitus
(where he says) That whilst Agricola governed Britain, several Ways were
enjoined, and for distant places (by the Surveyors Orders) that the Country
should carry from the nearest standing Camps, or Wintering places, to those
that were far off, and out of the way, that is, lying out of the Roads already
made. And what was thus begun by Agricola was continued by Trajan, who is said
to Repair and Pave the Ways, not those of Agricola's making, for they were
already Paved, and could not (as has been said) be so soon decayed; but the
British Roads, which by long continuance of War in many places were worn out,
and in others, overgrown with Thorns and Thistles.

In the days of Honorius and Arcadius (as is sound in Ancient Records) there
were made other certain beaten Highways from Sea to Sea, no wonder therefore
if these additions of new Ways made by the Romans, together with the Repairing
of the Old ones, bath given them (as it often happens in such cases) the glory
of the whole work, and Beda, as a testimony that the Romans lived South of
Severus his Beda.
Wall, in that part of Britain now called ENGLAND, brings in, among other
things, the Street-waies as a testimony thereof.

The Romans called these Causies, or Street-waies, Vias Consulares, Regias,
Praetorias, Militares, Publicas, Cursus Publicos, and Actus; so Ammianus
Marcellinus terms them; Sidonius Apollinaris, Aggeres, and tellures
inaggeratas. Beda, and the Am. Marcel. Beda.
later Writers, Stratas, that is, Streets.

Along these ways were placed at first Young men, as Posts, within small
distances one from another, afterward swift Wagons to carry Intelligence;
Upon these Ways were seated Cities and Hamlets, which had in them Inns
furnished with all necessary provisions for Travels, as also Mutations, for so
they called in that Age the places where Wayfaring Persons and Strangers, as
they Journied, changed their Post Horses, Draught Beasts, and Wagons.

Along the sides of these Ways, at every Miles end were erected, by the
Emperors, certain Pillars or Columns, with the name of the particular Prince
that set them up, engraven upon them, and numerable Characters cut in them, to
signify how many Miles from place to place.

These excellent advantages for Travelers, as they are to be solely attributed
to the Romans, and much in particular to this worthy Emperor Trajan: so were
they the cause that many Ancient places of the Britains came to decay. For the
Romans either building altogether upon these Roads, or else bringing the Old
Roads to serve most opportunely for their Garrisons, which at first were built
in strong Passes, more for convenience of Fortification than Travel; It came to
pass that the others grew out of use, and unfrequented, and so the Cities
standing upon them necessarily decayed, and therefore those places mentioned in
the Itinerary of Antoninus (as Mr. Gambden observes) must be sought out about
these Road-waies of the Romans, whose Garrisons and standing-Camps, were
oftentimes the Seminaries and seed-Plots of great Cities and populous Towns.

These are the only Actions of Trajan, left upon Record, relating to Britain.
He departed this life in the year of Grace 118, after he had reigned nineteen
years, six months, and fifteen days, in the year of his Age, 64. So much was
he beloved, that his Effigies after his death was born in Triumph, in a
glorious and pompous manner, and his Ashes sent to Rome (for he died at
Seleucia, in Asia the Less) and were enclosed within the Crown of a goodly
Pillar, of one hundred and forty foot in height.

HADRIAN.
AELIUS HADRIANUS, succeeded his Uncle Trajan in the Empire, he was of the City
Italica, near unto Sivill, his Father An. Them. 118.
Noble, and his Mother descended of an Honorable Family in Cales, equal to his
Race were the high endowments of his mind.

He dissented from Trajan in his policy of bounding the Empire, and held to
Augustus his Rule in placing the Limits thereof, not so wide, but surer,
insomuch that he excluded on the East all India, Armenia, Media, Persia,
Assyria, and Mesopotamia, the Acquests of Trajan, but excepted from the
removal, as to Rule Britain only, which province by no means he would part
with, although he somewhat straightened it, as shall be shown immediately.

Under him Julius Severus (says Dion Cassius) governed the Island, an
excellent Soldier, and upon that account called away to suppress the Jews,
then in Tumult. After his departure the Britains could scarce be held in
Allegiance, which caused Hadrian to make a Journey hither in Person, in the
sixth year of his Empire, being thrice Consul, where he reformed many things,
and seemed, by force of Arms, to have reduced the Britains to Obedience; for,
as Mr. Cambden observes upon a piece of Money of his Coining, there is the
stamp of an Emperor, with three Soldiers, Cambden
whom he judges to represent the three Legions, of which the Roman Army then
consisted, and under them this Inscription, EXER. BRITANNICUS, and another of
the same Prince with this Motto, RESTITUTOR BRITANNI, The Restorer of the
Britains.

But the greatest Work done by him in this Island, was, the building of a Wall
fourscore miles in length, cross the Island, from Solway-Frith, upon the Irish
Seas, to Spartianus in vit. Hadriani,
the mouth of Tine by New-caestle, on the German Ocean, laying the toundation
thereof with huge Piles, or Stakes, driven in deep, and fastened together in
manner of a strong Rampire or Mound. This he did to keep out the Caledonians
from infesting the Roman Province, who could never (it seems) be contained
within those Fortifications, raised by Agricola between Glota and Bodotria, the
Friths of Edinborough and Dun-britton. Thus he gave more room to the Northern
and barbarous Britains to inhabit, and quitting those barren and cold Soils,
enclosed only the most delicate part of the Island, by which means the Bounds
of the Empire, as well in Britain, as the East, were reduced to a more
convenient compass.

Of this Wall I shall speak more fully in the Life of Severus the Emperor, who
much strengthened it, and repaired it.

In the Reign of this Emperor, Priscus Licinius was also Propraetor, or
Lieutenant in this Island, as appears by this Ancient Inscription in a broken
Marble, found in Adrian's Wall,

M. F. CL. PRISCO ICINIO ITALICO LEGATO
AUGUSTORUM PR. PR. PROVE. CAPPADOCIAE
PR. PR. PROVE. BRITANNIAE LEG. IIII. GALLICIAE
PRAEF. COH. IIII. LINGONUM VEXILLO MIL.
ORNATO A DIVO HADRIANO IN EXPE-
DITIONE JUDAIC.
Q. CASSIV. DOMITIUS PALUMBUS.
As for Cne. Trebellius, being Propraetor in the beginning of the Reign of
Hadrian, there is no Authority for it in Roman History, yet Mr. Speed, who so
religiously avoideth Speed Chron.
the British Fables (as he calls them) has nevertheless made use of them in
recording this Lieutenant, relating withal the Tumults in the Northern parts of
this Island, under his Government, and the difficulty he had to reduce to
Obedience, which Error he frequently commits in other places, and which I
here mention, as a prologue to the ensuing British History, to show that the
greatest Enemies of it, nay Mr. Cambden himself, does oftentimes make use of it.

THE CONTINUATION OF THE British History, From the Days of VESPATIAN, To the
fourteenth Year of HADRIAN.
ABOUT the fourteenth year of HADRIAN, according to the best Computations, died
MARIUS, who, in the British History, ruled King of Britain, in some part of it,
from the days of Vespatian, in the year of our Lord 80, to this present
Emperor. Ann. Dom. 80.


His Reign is filled up with his Atchievments against the Picts, who are called
in the British and Scotch Tongue, Phightiaid, a Warlike and fierce Nation, and
to make up their terrible Character, they were Scythians by descent, and near
Kinsmen at least to the Goths, and (as some think) the Offspring of the
Nation of the Agathyrses, a Race of painted Cannibals, setting forth from their
Native Country, or, as some write, from Sweden, or Norway.

With these most excellent endowments, as Pirates and Rovers, they arrived on
the Coast of Ireland, where they met with their Brethren the Scots, who then
inhabited that Island, who easily understood their Language, as being
themselves of Scythian extraction.

Having scarce landed their Forces, they required Places to inhabit, but the
Scots who well understood the stomach of their Countrymen, and had but just
now given over themselves to eat one another, so diverted and shifted themoff,
with telling them the pleasures of Britain, and the plenty thereof; I wonder
they should omit their Painting also; The Picts, hoysting up Sail, made for
this blessed Island, little dreaming of the warm entertainment they were to
receive, for the Scots had laid the sairest side outward, and concealed the
Courage and Numbers of the Britains. When they had arrived upon the North of
this Island, finding there but few Inhabitants, they began to waste wide, and
forage all those Tracts which Nature it self had sufficiently laid desolate.

King Marius informed of the insolent Behavior of these Strangers, levies
Forces, and with speedy Marches hastened into the North, and there gave them
Battle. The success was so great on the Britains side, that the Picts were
totally discomfited, many slain, among whom was their Leader Rodorick, and the
rest all taken Prisoners, to whom King Marius gave license to inhabit the
Northern part of Scotland, called Cattness, a cold and Mountainous Country.

They had not long lived there, but they began to think of warm Bed-fellows,
and to that purpose sent unto the Britains for Wives, but their Suit being
there entertained with scorn, they applied themselves to the Scots, who granted
them their Daughters upon this condition, That if the Male Issue of the King
should fail, then the next Heir on the Woman's side should succeed in the
Kingdom, which Ordinance ever after was observed among them, and this was the
cause of the great Union of both these Nations.

This Victory of King Marius, against the Picts, was obtained at Stanes-moor in
Westmoreland, and from his name was the Country called Westmaria; But that
which seems to give some credit to this Relation, was, this Inscription found
in Bishop Usher.
Carlisle, MARII VICTORIAE, of which the Reverend Bishop Usher writes thus;
Although the British History in many things is found faulty, yet the testimony
of the Inscription of Marius his Victory is not altogether to be slighted. For
before Jeofferies Translation, an Author much Graver, William of Malmsbury,
writes of it in this manner; In the City Luguballia, commonly called Carlisle,
there is seen a Dining William of Malmsbury.
Room built of Stone, and arched with Vaults, which neither the force of
Weather, nor Fire on purpose set to it, could scatter or destroy. And on the
Forefront of it was this Inscription, MARII VICTORIAE, that is, To the Victory
of Marius.

Mr. Cambden, who draws all Antiquities to the Romans, says, That another
making mention of this Stone (who that other is he tells us not) says, It was
not inscribed, Marii Victoriae, but Marti Victori, and this, he says, may
better content some, and seems to come nearer to Truth.

But however it may please some, vet it is absolutely against the meaning of
Malmsbury, who immediately adds; What this Inscription should mean, I know not,
unless part of the Cimbri should inhabit these Places, after they were driven
out of Italy by Marius the Consul, of whom Ranulphus makes mention in his
Polycronicon.

This is Malmsbury's guess, as being certain it was Marii Victoriae, not Marti
Victori, and having never seen the British History, he gave it to that Consul
rather than no body, little thinking how improbable it was, that a Nation
driven from its Country, should raise Trophies to their Conqueror.

But if it must be Marii Victoriae, Mr. Cambden has a Roman of that name to
fix it upon, namely, MARIUS, who was proclaimed Emperor against Gallienus, a
Man of wonderful strength, insomuch that it was written of him, That he had no
Veins in his Fingers, but all Sinews, says Mr. Cambden (but who they are he
again names not) and attributes this Inscription to him, and so let it be, for
what Victory could ever slip from the hands of so nervous a Person?

King Marius died in the year of Grace 132, and was Interred at Carlisle, he
left the An. Dom. 132.
Kingdom to his Son Coyll.

COYLL in his youth had been educated at Rome, where he employed his time in
learning the Sciences, and the discipline of War. He loved the Romans, and was
by them highly esteemed and honored, so that paying his Tribute, and receiving
their Protection, he filled out a long, just and peaceable Reign, governing
Britain 54 years, to the fifth year of Commodus the Emperor, when we shall
hear of his Son LUCIUS, the first Christian Prince of the British Line, till
whose days the British Histories are silent, there being nothing else
memorable in the life of this Coyll, save that some ascribe to him the building
of Colchester in Essex, which work others give to a later Coyll, which reigned
next after Asclepeodotuis

THE Roman History.
HADRIAN having called away Julius Severus, as likewise Priscus Licinius, both
Governors in Britain, to subdue the Jews, who were then in Rebellion; it will
not be amiss to fill out the remainder of this Emperors Reign with a short
account of his Atchievments against that Nation, seeing they were performed by
Men, whose experience in War was gained in our British Island.

The Jews, a stubborn People, and sick of the Roman yoke, as who daily expected
a glorious Messiah, and were impatient of his coming, at last, of themselves,
took Arms, in the Eighteenth year of Hadrian, and began a dangerous Rebellion;
But Hadrian raising great Forces, and electing his choicest Generals to Command
them, soon put a stop to their Fury, who, in the heat of the Revolt, spared
neither Roman nor Christian.

And to revenge their Insolence, besides an infinite number of them slain and
tortured, their City, Jerusalem, was razed to the ground, themselves utterly
banished, and made unlawful for them to look toward that City, or their Native
Soil.

Besides, where Jerusalem had stood, although not upon the same Foundations, he
built a new City, calling it after his own name, AELIA, upon the Gate whereof
that leads to Bethlehem, that the Jews, even in disguise, might be kept as
much as might be from visiting it, he caused a Swine to be engraven, a Beast
which he had learnt, by their Law, was accounted the most unclean, and of all
others most abominable.

He was favorable to the Christians, forbidding, by Public Edict, the
Persecution against them, moved (as some think) thereto by Quatratus, a
Disciple of the Apostles, and Aristides, a Philosopher of Athens, who wrote an
Apology for them.

He died in the year of our Lord one hundred thirty nine, and of his Age sixty
two, in his life time he had designed Caesar, Lucius AElius, a man exceedingly
dear to him, but he dying, Antoninus Pius received the Empire.

Antoninus Pius.
ANTONINUS (for his Princely Virtues) Surnamed PIUS, Ann. Dom. 139.
and by the Senate called the Father of his Country, was a Lombard born, Son of
Aurelius Fulvius, and Nephew to Titus Aurelius Fulvius, who had been Consul,
and held other Offices of great Authority and State.

At his first entrance into the Empire, by an Ordinance of his, as many as were
of the Roman World were made Citizens of Rome, by which Edict the Southern
Britains, within Hadrians Wall, as well as other Provinces, enjoyed that high
Dignity and Privilege, but the Northern Inhabitants, not content with their
Liberty, and the Bounds assigned them, brake into the Roman Pale, and began to
waste wide, but by the Conduct of Lollius Urbicus, then Lieutenant, they were
not only driven back, but confined to a narrower compass, namely, the Friths of
Edinborough and Dunbritton, where Lollius repaired the Ancient Fortification,
first begun by Agricola.

That this Wall built by Lollius was in Scotland, Mr. Cambden learnedly proves,
and not where Hadrian built his, to wit, between Carlisle and New Castle. He,
says Capitolinus (cited by Mr. Cambden) vanquished the Britains, and having
driven out the Barbarians, made another Wall of Turffs beyond that of Hadrians,
which makes me wonder at Speed, who proves the same Author to say that it was
Hadrian's Wall: The same Errors he commits in writing, That for these
Atchievments Lollius obtained the name of Britannicus, when indeed it was
Antoninus himself, to whom Fronto, as the Panegyrical Orator says, ascribed
the Honor of this War, and has testified, that He, Although sitting still at
home, in the Palace of Rome, had given charge and Commission to another General
for the War, yet like the Pilot of a Gally, sitting at the Stern, and guiding
the Helm, deserved the Honor of the whole Voyage and Expedition.

In the time of this Emperor, the Brigantes also, a Nation of all others most
impatient of Foreign Servitude, brake in upon Genounia, which Mr. Cambden
guesses to be Ginnethia, or North Wales, within the Jurisdiction of the Romans,
but were soon driven back, and fined with the loss of one part of their
Territory.

This is all upon Record, touching Britain, in the days of Antoninus Pius,
saving Digest. lib. 36.
that Sejus Saturrinus (as is collected from the Digests) had charge here of
the Roman Navy.

He Reigned twenty three years, or, as others say, twenty two years, seven
months, and twenty six days, and died of a Feavour at Lorium the seventh day
of March, in the year of his life 75, and of Christ 162. Among many of his
Virtues, which fill out a worthy Character, it is most especially Recorded of
him, In his Youth he did nothing, Rashly, nor any thing in his Age, Negligently.

Marcus Aurelius.
MArcus Aurelius, Antoninus, Verus, Philosophus, for by so many names he was
called, was the Son of Elius Verus, who died Praetor, An. Dom. 162.
and whose Family was derived from Numa Pompilius, second King of Rome, his
Mother was Domitia Gamilla, Daughter of Claudius Tullus. He was the adopted Son
of Antoninus Pius, and ingrafted into his Family by the marriage of Faustina
his Daughter; having taken upon him the Title of Emperor, he chose Lucius
Verus, the Son of Lucius Ceionius Commodus, for his associate in the Empire.

It is observable, that this Verus was born the same day as Nero, and indeed he
imitated him in all the Vices and Cruelties of his nature, so that whilst
these two Capitolinur.
Princes sat together upon the Throne, then might Mankind be judge and
spectatour, at the same time, of a Just and equal Government, and a Proud and
insolent Tyranny. Aurelius was nothing but Glemency, moderation and goodness,
on the other hand Verus gave himself to Pride, carelessness, haughtiness and
cruelty, and as the Virtues of the one secured him from the attempts and
mixtures of the others Vices, so were the Exorbitances of this Verus nothing
allayed by the sweetness of Aurelius his deportment, so that what is a rare
Example, and perhaps not to be equalled in all precedent and future Ages, from
the same height of Power, at the same time, streamed forth the most different
Extremes of unlimited Greatness; But Goodness was the longest survivor, for
Verus dying of an Apoplexy after nine years Reign, Aarelius was left in
possession of the whole Empire.

And, now the Britains impatient always of Foreign Subjection, raised new
Commotions, for the appeasing whereof Galphurnius Agricola was sent Lieutenant.
The Surname of Agricola, no doubt, was terrible to the Britains, who could not
but remember the great Overthrows they had received formerly under a General of
that name, and indeed the Commotions lasted not long after his Arrival, but
seemed to be ended with fortunate success, for which there was raised an Altar,
in gratitude to the Syrian Goddess, a peculiar Deity of this Island, as
appears by this Inscription found in a Stone taken out of the Picts Walls:

DEAE SURI
AE SUB CALP
URNIO AGR
ICOLA LEG. AUG.
PR. PR. A. LICINIUS
CLEMENS PRAEF. C.
O. H. I. HAMMIOR.
The glory of having dispatched this War so soon, Fronto, for Roman Eloquence
inferior to none, ascribes wholly to the Emperor Aurelius; for although the
State still as residing in Person in the Court of Rome, gave out only the
Commission for the War, yet he protests, That like a Pilot at the Helm, who
steers and directs the Ship, he deserved the Honor of the whole course.

Nothing else is recorded of Britain during Antoninus his Reign, saving, that
Helvius Pertinax, afterward Emperor, was employed in these Wars, being
translated hither from his Service against the Parthians, and here for some
time afterward remained.

Antoninus Reigned nineteen years and eleven days, and died on the seventeenth
day of April, in the year of our Lord 181, having by his Virtue kept up to the
Renown of his Predecessor, and so endeared the Name of the (...), that it was
held by the Romans afterward in equal veneration with there of the Gods, and
Capitolinus vit. Macrin.
in nothing was he unhappy (says Capitolinus) save that he left behind him a
Son.

Comm. Antoninus.
COMMODUS ANTONINUS, the Son of Aurelius, degenerated from the Virtues of his
Father, and may be said the Ann. Dom. 181.
successor of Verus rather than of Antonine. The known Adulteries of his
Mother Faustina, and himself being a Twin, together with the Wickedness of his
life, gave liberty to some to please AElius Lamp.
themselves in thinking he was not the true Son of so worthy a Father.

At nineteen years of Age he was invested in the Empire, when the violence of
his Temper, which under the Authority of a Father, and the discipline of worthy
Tutors, could not be kept under, meeting now with unlimited Power, brake out
into all manner of Riot and Debaucheries. Ambitious of Glory he was, but sought
for it the wrong way; He would have called Rome, Commodiana, the names of
Months he changed to Titles which he had arrogantly usurped, or which related
tohis dearest Concubines. August he called Commodus; September, Hercules;
October, Invictus; November, Exsuperator; December, Amazonius, and his
Flatterers gave him the name of Britannicus.

THE British History OUT OF BID.
IN the beginning of his Reign (according to the best Computations) lived
Lucius, Surnamed Lever, Daut, signifying, Great Brightness, a supposed King of
Britain, or some part of the Island, and the first King in Europe that received
the Christian Faith, and by public Authority established it. It is reported of
him, that being moved with many Miracles, which he had both heard of, and seen
done by the Christians (for, as I have shown, that Christian Religion was
taught and professed long before in this Island) he sent to Eleutherius, then
Bishop of Rome, Letters, by Eleuanus and Meduinus, Men of great wisdom and
experience in Divine Matters, the answer to which Letter I shall set down word
for word, as it was found in a most Ancient Manuscript, among the Authentic
Records and Constitutions of the City of London, and was made use of by Dr.
Jewel Bishop of Salisbury, against Mr. Harding. The Original Epistle is as
follows. Fol. 1119;


Anno 169 a Passione Christi, Dominus Eleutherius Papa, Lucio Regi Britanniae
it a scripsit ad petitionem Regis, and procerum Regni Britanniae.
PEtistis a Nobis Leges Romanas, and Caesaris vobis transmitti, quibus in Regno
Britanniae Anno a Passione Christi 169a al. 156, ex Leg. St. Edv. Reg. and
Confesita inscribitur. M S. Guil. Land.
uti voluistis. Leges Romanas, and Caesaris semper reprobare possumus, Legem
Dei nequaquam. Suscepistis enim nuper (miseratione divina) in Regno Britanniae,
legem and fidem Christi habetis penes vos in Regno utramque Paginam: ex illis
(Dei gratia) per Consilium Regni vestri sum Legem, and per illam Dei potentia
vestrum Rege. dimicabunt.
reges Britanniae regnum. Vicarius veru Dei estis in regno juxta Prophetam
Regem; Domini est terra, and plenitudo ejus; Orbis terrarum, and universi qui
inhabitant in co. Et rursum, juxta Prophetam Regem; Dilexisti justitiam, and
odisti iniquitatem, propterea unxit te Deus tuus oleo laetitiae prae
consortibus tuis. Et rursum, juxta Prophetam regem; Deus judicium tuum, etc.
Non enim dixit Judicium, neque justitiam Caesaris. Filii enim Regis, gentes
Christianae, and Populi regni sunt, qui sub vestra Protectione and Pace and
regno degunt and consistunt.
degant and consistant, juxta MS. ibid.
Evangelium; Quemadmodum Gallina congregat Pullos sub alis, etc. Gentes vero
regni Britanniae and Populi vestri sunt, quos divisos, debetis in unum, ad
Concordiam, and Pacem, and ad Fidem, and legem Christi, ad sanctam Ecclesiam
congregare, revocare, fovere, manu-tenere, protegere, regere, and ab
injuriosis, and malitiosis, and ab inimicis semper defendere. Vae regno, cujas
Rex puer est, and cujus Principes mane comedunt; non voco Regem propter parvam
and nimiam aetatem, sed propter stultitiam, and iniquitatem, and insanitatem;
juxta Prophetam regem; Viri sanguinum and dolosi non Rege. dimicabunt.
dimidicabant MS. ibid.
dies suos, etc. Per comestionem, intelligimus gulam, per gulam, luxuriam, per
luxuriam, omnia turpia, perversa, and mala; juxta Salomonem regem, In malevolam
animam non introibit Sapientia, nec habitabit in corpore subdito peccatis. Rex
dicitur a Regendo, non a Regno; Rex eris, dum been Regis, quod nisi seceris,
nomen Regis non in te constabit, and nomen Regis perdes, quod absit. Det vobis
Omnipotens Deus, regnum Britanniae sic Regere, ut possitis cum illo regnare in
aeternum, cujus Vicarius estis in Regno praedicto.


Thus rendered into English.

In the Year 169 from the Passion of Christ, Lord Eleutherius, Pope, wrote thus
to LUCIUS King of Britain, in answer to the Petition of the King, and the
Nobility of the Kingdom of Britain.
YOu earnestly desire of us, that we would send you the Roman Laws and
Constitutions of the Emperor, that you might use the same in the Kingdom of
Britain. The Roman Laws and the Emperor we can always reprove, but the Law of
God is unblameable; you have lately received (through the infinite mercy of
God) into your Kingdom, not only the Law, but the Christian Faith also, you
have at your command both Testaments, from them therefore, by the assistance of
God and your Council, extract Laws, by which, under God, you may govern your
Kingdom. You are Gods sole Vicegerent in your own Kingdom, according to that of
the Prophet, The Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, and all the
Inhabitants that dwell therein. And again, Psalm the 44th. verse the 7th. Thou
love Righteousness, and hate Wickedness, therefore God, thy good God, has
anointed thee with the oil of Gladness above thy Fellows. And again, in the
same Prophet, God is thy Righteousness; Not the Righteousness and Justice of
Caesar. All Christian People, especially those of your own Kingdom, which live
under your protection and peace, ought to be accounted and looks upon as your
own Children, according to that of the Gospel, As the Hen gathers together
her Chickens under her wings: The People of Britain are your People, which if
at any time divided, you ought with your utmost care to reduce them to Concord,
and endeavor their Peace and Unity, furthermore, to cherish, maintain, defend
and govern them, and in fine, protect them from injurious and malicious
Persons, and take their part against their Enemies. Woe to that Kingdom, that
has a Child to their King, and whose Princes eat in a morning. I do not call
him a Childish King in respect of Minority, but in regard of his Foolishness,
wickedness and madness, according to that of the Kingly Prophet, Bloody and
deceitful Men shall not live out half their days. By eating I mean,
Greediness, by greediness, Luxury, by luxury, all filthy, eyil, and unseemly
things, according to that of King Solomon, Wisdom shall not descend into a
wicked Soul, neither shall it remain in a Body subject to sin. The name of
Governor is not derived from his Government, but from well Governing. You
shall be a King so long as you Rule well, which unless you do, the name of KING
shall fail, and remain no longer in you, which, God forbid. God grant you so to
govern the Kingdom of Britain, that you may at last reign with him for ever,
whose Vicar you are in the aforesaid Kingdom.


Observations upon this EPISTLE of Pope Eleutherius, to King Lucius.
THis Epistle, however magnified, and look upon by some Authors as a worthy
piece of Antiquity, yet there are several Reasons that induce us to believe
that this is not the true and genuine Epistle of Eleutherius. And the first is,
the Date it bears, which in the Text is dated 169, in the Margin 156, yet
neither agree with the time of Eleutherius his Popedom, if we will follow the
most approved Authors. For although Bid says, he was made Bishop of Rome in
the year of our Lord 167, yet Eusebius, in his Chronicle, places the beginning
of his Popedom in the sixteenth year of the Emperor Antoninus, that is, in the
year of our Lord 179; But in his History, and indeed, truer to the following
year of Antonium, which is of our Lord 180. Baronius is of the same Opinion
also, and confirms it by the Letters of the Martyrs at Lions, which were
presented to Eleutherius himself. 2. Besides, if this Epistle be true, it makes
King Lucius to take a very preposterous course in sending so far as Rome, to
Eleutherius, for the Roman Laws, when he might sooner, and with less trouble,
have procured them at home from the Roman Governor, for, from the time of the
Emperor Claudius (who subdued most part of Britain) the Roman Laws were in
force here, nay, very well known to the further parts of Yorkshire. And Tacitus
says, he had erected here Roman Courts and Tribunals, which was about an
hundred years before Lucius came to the Government. But we shall pursue this
discourse no further, it being plain and obvious to any that are but meanly
acquainted with those Histories. 3. This Epistle makes no mention, of any Power
or Authority the Romans had in these parts, but makes Lucius an absolute
Monarch, as in nothing subject to the Roman Governor: You are Gods Vicegerent
in your own Kingdom, not Claudius Caesar's, or any other Emperor; Contrary to
the Customs of those times. Among the Jews, King Herod was under Pilate, and
King Agrippa under Faelix and Festus, and so it was likewise usual in other
Provinces; but without doubt, Lucius was a British King, as he is rightly so
styled in the Life of Eleutherius, but it was but of some part of it, not of
the whole Island, or that part which separated from Scotland by a Wall, which
was under the Romans, yet it is not to be doubted but that in some part of it
he had a Power under the Romans, neither is it any hard matter to describe the
Places of his Government, for he being the Son and Successor of King Coile,
and Coile the Son of Marius, and Marius of Arviragus, which some report to be
Togenus, others, the same with Tacitus his Prasutagus King of the Iceni; The
Iceni inhabited that part of Britain which the East Angles did under the
Saxons, it comprehended Norfolk, Suffolk, and at some time Cambridge. Their
Royal City was Venta of the Iceni, now called Castor in Norfolk, near to the
City of Norwich, but this place is too far distant from Glastonia, a little
Village of the Belgae in the Kingdom of the West Saxons, which Arviragus (as
they say) gave to Joseph of Arimathea, and his Companions that came with him.
But this seems to intimate, that Arviragus was rather King of the Belga and
Dobuni, that is, of the West Saxons than of the Iceni, and that which promotes
this Opinion, is, his being most usually in those parts, and his entertainment
in Claudiocestria, if we will credit Gaufridus, but that which takes away the
doubt (unless we will suspect the Author himself) is the testimony of Hector
Boethius Scotus, who shows, that Arviragus was, by Birth, an Icene, and was
substituted (by Claudius Caesar) King of Britain: furthermore, the Iceni first
received the Christian Faith in Britain. 4. This word Manutenere (which we
translate Maintain) was not in use in Eleutherius his time, but smells rather
of the Norman Latin, from which it crept into our Country Laws. 5. Those places
which are quoted out of the Holy Scripture, are taken out of the Translation of
St. Hierom, who lived two hundred years after Eleutherius. 6. This Epistle
never came out in the World till almost a thousand years after the death of
Eleutherius, but out of what Monks Cell it came is uncertain, but that which
ought to be most observed, is, that it is no where to be found in Gaufridus
Monumuthentis, contemporary with Hovedenus, who was always diligent in the
Collection of the British Antiquities.


This Answer of the Pope, by Letter, to Lucius, was sent by Fugatius and
Damianus, Men of sound doctrine and holy life, by whose hands, the King, with
all his Nobles, received Baptism, and shortly after, by their industry, and
the earnest desire and endeavors of King Lucius, the Doctrine was so far
propagated, that the Temples and Altars of the Heathen Gods were in most places
flung down and demolished, the Christian worship set up in their places, and
the Church established under Form and Government.

In the Seats of twenty eight Flamens, and three Arch Flamens, which presided
The first Bishops in Britain.
over the whole Nation, being all of them either converted, or expulied, were
constituted twenty eight Bishops, and three Archbishops, whose Chairs, for the
greater convenience of Government, were continued in the same places the
Archi-Flamens resided in.

The first and Metropolitan Seat was at London, and the Cathedral St. Peter's,
in the memory of that Saint, from whose Successor, Eleutherius, they had
received the Faith. The second was at York. The third at Carlisle; but of the
particular extent of these places, I shall treat more fully anon.

The Succession of Bishops in the Sea of London.
THe first, to the Times of the Saxons, is thus; Theanus, who was in the days
of Lucius consecrated the Church of St. Peter's Cornhill, and by the assistance
of Ciranus the Kings Cup Bearer, performed all the Rites thereunto belonging.
Some report he built the Church. The second, Ante adventum Augustini;
Eluanus, he added a Liberary to it. The third, was Cadar; the fourth, Obinus;
the fifth, Conanus; the sixth, Palladius; the seventh, Stephanus; the eighth,
Iltutus, or Iltutius; the ninth, Deduinus; the tenth, Theodredus; the eleventh,
Hilarious; the twelfth, Vitelinus; the thirteenth, Vodinus, Mr. Cambden calls
him Theonus.

But before we proceed any further, it will be necessary to say, who, and what
these Flamens were, and of their being changed into Bishops and Archbishops.

What these Flamens and Arch-flamens were, and their being changed into Bishops
and Archbishops.
I Wish we had seen the Book of Gildas, for it can hardly be found in ancient
Authority, that there was ever any distribution of Flamens, and Arch flamens,
into their particular Provinces, or that the words Arch-flamens, and
Archbishops, were in use in the time of Lucius, or that Metropolitical
Jurisdiction, and the Ceremony of the Pall, had any being in those days. For
Flamens among the Romans, were no other than their Priests, so called from a
Thread or String (as Varro says) with which they bound their Head, as Flamines,
some Pileamines, from a Cap they wore, and from Sacrificing, commonly called
Priests, and every one of these looked after the proper Offices and Duties of
their particular Gods, at first there were but three only, that of Jupiter,
Flamen Dialis; of Mars, Flamen Martialis; of Romulus, Flamen Quirinalis, but
afterward every God had his Flamen.

Neither had any of these ever any Sacerdotal Power and Jurisdiction over any
particular Province, or that officiated alone in one Parish only, for there
being in the time of Numa thirty Parishes in the City of Rome, and afterward
thirty six; over every Parish, or such division, was set two Flamens, neither
were they subject to any superior Flamen, who was dignified and distinguished
by the Title of Arch-flamen. I acknowledge, that some were called the greater
Flamens, others the lesser, but this was not from their Power, but the
Antiquity of their Order, for the first three were instituted by Numa and the
Nobility, the rest by the Commonalty.

Concerning the Flamens and Arch-flamens of the Gentiles, and the Limits of
their Jurisdiction, after they were changed into Bishops, and Archbishops.
GAlfridus Arturius says, That the Blessed Teachers (after they had almost
rooted Gal-Arturius.
out Paganism from the British Nation, purging the Temples which were founded
in honor of many of their Gods) consecrated them to one God, and delivered
them to Religious men to be looked after; There were then constituted twenty
eight Flamens, and three Arch flamens, as we have said before, who according to
the Custom of the Gentiles, burnt Incense to their Gods, and offered up
Sacrifices unto them, delivering therefore these (by virtue of the Apostolic
Doctrine) from their Idolatry, they consecrated Bishops in the place of
Flamens, and Archbishops instead of Arch-flamens. The principal Seats of the
Arch-flamens were in our most eminent Cities, viz. London, York, and Caer-leon
upon the River Uske in Glamorganshire.

Superstition therefore being driven out of the aforesaid places, three
Archbishops were forthwith made, in other places they ordained Bishops, and
over several Parishes assigned to every one his Power and Office. To the
Province of the Metropolitan of York, fell Deira and Albania, which are divided
from Leogria by the River Humber. To the Archbishop of London, submitted
Loegria and Cornubia, which Provinces Severn separates from Wales, which was
subject to the Archbishops See at Caerleon.

Affairs being thus ordered, the aforesaid Holy Teachers returned to Rome, and
desired that all things they had done might be confirmed by the Pope, they were
therefore honored by the Roman Church with the Pall, and all other Ceremonies
usual in their kind, they returned again into Britain, being accompanied by
diverse Religious persons, by whose Doctrine and Preaching the British Nation
was very much confirmed, established and strengthened in the Faith of Christ.
Their Acts are to be found in the Books of Gildas, the Historiographer, so that
now we shall proceed to that of Vodinus, or Theonus, as Mr. Cambden calls him.

This Vodinus, or Theonus, for his constancy in the Christian Faith, was
Martyred by the Saxons at their first arrival in Britain. After Fugacius and
Damianus had Vodinus Mart.
settled every thing in order, and established the Religion of Christ, the holy
Rites and Ceremonies thereof, the Government and Discipline of the Church, they
returned to Rome, and having obtained their Constitutions, to be confirmed and
ratified by Eleutherius, still sitting in that Chair, they came again into
Britain, by whose incessant Preaching and Sanctity of life, the Britains sucked
in that Religion, the seeds whereof remained even unto the days of Dioclesian,
who, after Nero and Trajan, raised the greatest Persecution the Church ever
underwent.

And this is the first establishment of Christian Religion by public
Authority, which, for the Honor of our Nation, is very early, an hundred
eighty and one years after the death of CHRIST, and the reason why it got
footing so soon in Christian Religion established in Britain 181 years after the
death of our Savior Christ.
Britain, above other Nations (among many Causes) this especially is given by
Historians, namely, The Learning, Piety, and Devotion of the Druids, who were
so eminent in this Island, as that they Decided and Judged not only in
Spiritual, but Civil Affairs, and were resorted unto like Oracles for their
profound Judgment and skill in Questions of the highest concern; And many of
their Tenants, of which the Immortality of the Soul was chief, were great
inlets to that Religion, which, besides the great Virtue and Holiness it
carried with it, it taught Rewards of Virtue, and Punishments of Vice, upon
surer grounds than the Heathens had ever built for their Imaginary virtue,
namely, evident Miracles, and certain Demonstrations, that there was an
Almighty Power that strictly examined the Actions of every Man.

I know that many Objections are made to destroy the Authority of this History,
which, well examined, will not prove to have so great force as at first sight
they appear to carry.

First, it is said, That it is very improbable there should at this time be any
King of Britain, considering, that this Island for many years since remained a
Roman Province? To which is Answered, That it was the Custom of the Romans, in
their Provinces, to continue Princes in their Governments, and to make them
Instruments of their Bondage, giving them the show of Power, though they were
in effect but Vassals, and what hinders, but Lucius might hold his Kingdom in
fee of them.

Besides, in the days of this Emperor, as is gathered from Authentic
Histories, the Britains refused to obey Commodus, and it is certain, that they
held and possessed freely all those parts of the Island that lay beyond the Wall,
which was built between Tinmouth and Solway-Frith, and that those Northern
Britains had Princes of their own; but especially, Let us consider, how that
Antoninus Pius, not many years before, having ended War, permitted Kingdoms to
be ruled by their own Kings, and Provinces by their own Comites.

Capitolinus, Beda.
Others there are, who curiously searching into the time of this supposed
Lucius, find great difference in Authors. Bid, who is the Ancientest Reporter
of this History, yet lived five hundred years after, places him under M.
Aurelius Antoninus, and Verus, Emperors; But this, since, is not found to
agree with truth, for the Date of the Letter sent back by Pope.
Eleutherius, through the hands of Fugacius and Damianus (which by many is not
thought to be forged but authentic) is thus;

LUCIUS AURELIUS COMMODUS, Second time Consul with Vespronius, which was the
year that M. Aurelius died in, and in this agrees both foreign and domestic
Writers: as for others who refer it to an hundred seventy nine years after
Christ's Passion, it is manifest that it is the fault of Transcribers, who
should have writ, an hundred seventy nine years after his Birth. The British
Histories make it five years after, but, in this, it is not much to be regarded.

This Princeps magna gloriae: Ninnius.
LUCIUS, Surnamed by Ninnius, Leuer-Maur, by a Table remaining in the Church of
St. Peter's in Cornhill, is supposed to be the Founder of that Church, and the
Church it self thought to have been the Cathedral of the Metropolitan See of
London.

There are who ascribe the Foundation of St. Peter's at Westminster to him, but
in all probability the Places may be confounded; and some write that he built a
Church at Dover, and endowed it with the Toll of that Haven.

Not content in having performed so many excellent Works, he is said at length,
to have resigned his Kingdom, and Traveled into Germany, out of desire to
propagate the Christian Faith, to have converted Bavaria, and afterward going
into Rhetia, there to have lived in a Cell, under a Rock, which was afterward
called the Rock of Lucius, then to have proceeded into that Country wherein the
City Curia stood, where, living in a Cave, and preaching to the Infidels, he
was at last betrayed and brought before the Governor, who put him to death in
a Tower called Marula.

His Body was brought into Britain, and buried in Gloucester, so that it will
not be improper to relate, what Matthew of Westminster says in confirmation of
this matter:

Anno Gratiae CCI, Inclytus Britannorum Rex LUCIUS, in bonis actibus assumptus,
Claudiocestriae ab hac vita migravit ad CHRISTUM, and in Ecclesia primae sedis
Honoriftce sepultus est. He Reigned twelve years, and dying without Issue, left
the Kingdom divided among many of the Royal Blood, who all, setting up their
Titles, miserably involved the whole Nation in Civil Wars and Combustions.

Upon this, the Picts took advantage of the Public Distractions, and brake
into the Southern parts, flinging down the Wall that was built as a Rampire to
defend the Frontiers, and for a long time finding no resistance, wasted the
Country far and wide, so that, if it be true what is reported of King Lucius,
That out of zeal for Religion, He went into Bavaria to preach the Gospel,
leaving his Kingdom to be managed by the chiefest of his Nobility, without
declaring a Successor, how much better had it been, if he had employed his
time and labors in his own Dominions, which surely in so short a time could
not be so entirely instructed in the Faith of Christ, but that there was room
left for the employing of so great a Talent given him, for the use and comfort
properly belonging first to his own Country. Neither could a Prophet want
Honor in his own Country, who had Royal Authority to back his Priestly
Function.

However therefore, the story of King Lucius, or Lever-Maur, as to the main of
it may betrue, namely, That there was such a Person that Ruled in this Island,
and embraced the Christian Religion, yet that he should have so great
Authority, as absolutely to establish it, casting down the Flames and
Arch-flamens, the Religion of the Romans, whose Province it was, and to set up
in their room Bishops and Archbishops, seems not only improbable but
impossible also. If he was a King beyond Hadrians Wall, what had he to do with
London and Carlisle? and, if on this side, he was but a Tributary and Vassal to
the Romans, and so could not so easily abolish their Worship, as indeed it
manifestly appears out of Inscriptions of the Romans in this Island, who, after
his time, continued their Altars to the Heathen Deities.

But, that he should forsake his Kingdom, and out of an over-fond opinion of
Chastity, neglect the duty of a Prince, in not providing a Successor to his
Crown, that he should leave his Kingdom at sixes and sevens, that he should
think himself more useful in a Cell than a Throne, for the propagating Religion
in another Country, and not in his own, and imagine, that absconding in Holes
and Deserts, would show a greater light to the World than being placed upon a
Hill, manifestly shows, from what Forge those Inventions proceeded, and that
they were the idle Talks of our crafty Ancestors, whose business it was to gain
Honor to their own Constitutions, by persuading the World, that no
Obligations, Civil or Moral, although of the highest nature and concern, but
must be cancelled, in order to his attaining perfection, which they placed in
that lofty Poverty of a Monastic life.

And thus much is sufficient to be said of King Lucius.

The Troubles that arose after his decease, continued (as Fabian thinks)
fifteen Fabianus. Harding.
years, the English Chronicle says fifty, Harding four, which difference
proceeds from the various Calculations of the time of his Reign, and upon the
same Subject Matthew of Westminster thus delivers himself;

Quo defuncto (speaking a little before of the death of King LUCIUS, he
proceeds to say) dissidium inter Britones surrexit, quia absque Haerede
decessit, and Romana Potestas infirma est. Manfit itaque Britannia in dissidio
usque ad adventum SEVERI, qui eam postea Romanae restituit Dignitati. Some make
his Decease in the days of the Emperor Hadrian, whom the English Chronicles
follow; others continue his Reign but to the days of Aurelius, and Verus,
Emperors.

The first cannot be true, by reason it agrees not with the time of
Eleutherius, who, according to the most diligent Chronographers, began to
govern the Sea of Rome in the year 169, which is thirty years after the death
of Hadrian, and sat in the Chair fifteen years, namely, to the year of our
Lord one hundred eighty four.

The latter is equally false, considering that the Letter from Eleutherius to
King Lucius, the Date whereof Mr. Cambden follows in contradiction to Bid,
was sent when Lucius Aurelius Commodus was second time Consul with Vespronius,
which was in the year one hundred seventy nine, or one hundred and eighty Anno
currente, and ten years after the death of Verus the Emperor.

Count Palate.
Basing stokius makes LUCIUS to begin his Reign in the year of our Lord one
hundred eighty three, in the second year of Commodus; the Conversion of this
Prince (according to that Account) must be in the first year of his Reign, and
the last of Eleutherius his Popedom, circumstances very improbable, for
supposing that this Godly Prince should begin his Reign with the establishment
of Christian Religion, yet what becomes of Fugacius and Damianus returns to
Eleutherius, after they had been a year in Britain, and the Ratifications of
their proceedings the year after obtained at Rome, if in the last year of
Eleutherius the Kingdom was first Converted, as manifestly appears if this
Calculation were true.

The British Histories generally make Septimius Severus the Roman Emperor, to
succeed Lucius in the Kingdom of Britain, and after him many other Emperors,
so that for the future we shall see the same Persons, though with different
circumstances, in the Records of both Nations, made Actours in the sovereign
Authority.

Many have found fault with the British History upon this account, but whether
it was, that the Royal Blood of the Native Britains was utterly extinct, or
that the Compiler of these Stories was weary of inventing Names, sure I am,
that the following Emperors had no more right to the Island than the
preceding; And there is no where found that, Severus, either by Marriage,
Adoption, or Donation, received the Kingdom, so that for many years we may bid
farewell to the British History, and seeing they make the same Persons Monarchs
of this Island, as the Romans do, I cannot be blamed, if, in setting down the
Actions of Foreign Princes, I give precedence to the Roman Records, and it is
a sufficient warrant, why, hitherto, I have made the Roman Emperors Kings of
this Island, but to return to Commodus.

THE CONTINUATION OF THE Roman History, Under the EMPEROR COMMODUS, As it
relates to This ISLAND.
WE read, that under this Emperor Britain was full of Wars and An. Dom. 183.
seditious Troubles, for the Nations Northward, breaking down the Wall which
was raised to keep them out, wasted the Roman Pale, and cut in pieces and
destroyed the Romans that came against them, both Captain and Soldier.

To repress these Tumults, and reduce the Province, Commodus, in all haste,
sends Ulpius Marcellus, a prime Commander of those times, who with so much
Conduct and Fortune drives them back, and repays their Insolence, that in a
short time it appears he had done too much, for he not only gained the envy of
Commodus, but by his worthy Actions forfeits his Commission, and was recalled.

The Vigilance of this Captain is thus described; Although by nature he was not
given to sleep, yet that he might improve that Faculty, he used Art also by
inuring himself to fasting and abstinence, for the bread of his Table was
brought from Xiphilinus out of Dio. Cass.
Rome, lest being new it might too much swell him, when on the other hand the
staleness of it, coming so far, would be sure to tempt him no farther than to
what was convenient and necessary. And being desirous that all about him might
be as watchful, every Evening he wrought twelve Tables, which were usually made
of the Tilia, and in Gr. (...) a Tree bearing fruit as great as a Bean, round,
within seeds like Antiseeds.
Linden-tree wood, and gives order to one of his Servants, that, hour by hour,
he should give out one of them to the Soldiers till they were all delivered,
that they might not think it grievous to keep watchful, whilst they saw their
General himself so vigilant.

Britain being brought to Obedience by so worthy a Commander, after he was
Recalled, began to fall into more dangerous Commotions, which proceeded not
from the Britains, but the Dissensions of the Roman Camp, for the Reins of
Discipline being let loose, all licentious Wantonness brake in. First, they
began to be stubborn and unruly, next, openly, they refused the Command and
Government of Commodus. And, although he was styled Britannicus by his
Flatterers, yet the Legions in Britain attempted to set up another Emperor.

They complained of Evil Counselors, the chief whereof was Perennis, the
Emperors principal Favorite, him they accused, that in the British War he had
removed Senators from Command, and placed over the Soldiers Men only of the
Equestral Degree; that he had conspired against the life of the Emperor, for
which they declared him Traitor, and an Enemy to the Army, and so fifteen
hundred, in the name of the rest, went to Rome, carrying their Grievances on
the point of their Swords, and were so terrible to Commodus, that to satisfy
them he was AElius Lamp. in vit. Comm.
constrained to give up Perennis and his Son to their fury, who, after many
Indignities, as Whipping, etc. publicly beheaded Them.

After the death of this great Favorite and his Son, Commodus disowns all
their proceedings, as done without his Approbation, by which means he appeases
the Soldiers, but immediately upon their removal, grew worse and worse, doing
far greater Injuries (by his new Minion Cleander) than he had done by his
Favorite Perennis, so that the Soldiers in Britain continued still in their
Resolutions of choosing a new Emperor, which made Commodus send his Letters
unto Helvius Pertinax (who was then in Liguria, and was afterward Emperor) to
hasten into Hell. Pertinax Propraetor.
Britain.

At his Arrival he found all things in disorder, the Soldiers upon a new
Election, and himself (none having yet resolved upon the Person) in a fair way
to be chosen, but presently after the good will of the Army withdrew from him,
for they were Jul. Capitol. in vit. Pertin.
given to understand that he had impeached Antistius Burrus, and Arrius
Antoninus, of high Treason against Commodus, so that finding (as may be
gathered) that himself was not likely to be gainer by these Seditious
proceedings, he gave himself totally to the suppressing of them, which in some
measure he performed, but not without great danger to himself, being almost
slain (by the mutiny of one Legion) as left for dead upon the place, which
thing he afterward severely revenged, but at the present sought a dismission
from his Charge, so that Clodius Albinus succeeded Clo. Albinus.
him, a Man of great Birth, and fortunate. Him (after many worthy Exploits in
Britain) Commodus created Caesar, giving him power (in a Letter he wrote to
him) to assume the Scarlet Robe, and to wear it even in his presence, saving
without golden Fringes.

This he did partly to strengthen himself by the Adoption of so worthy a Man,
and partly to gain the strength of the British Army, for about this time
Avidius Cassius began to usurp the Empire, and Septimius Severus was making of
a Party.

Albinus, upon the receipt of this Letter, understanding the drift of Commodus,
refuses the Honor, yet afterward, hearing of his death (which, by some
mistake, was reported about) he ascended the Tribunal, and before the British
Army made this Oration.

The Oration of CLODIUS ALBINUS, Lieutenant of Britain.
IF the Senate of Rome had its Ancient Power, and so great Authority had not
been Jul. Capitolinus.
invested in a single Person, the public management of Affairs bad never come
into the hands of such as Nero, Vitellius and Domitian; Under the Government of
Consuls were our Ancestors, the Ceioni, Albini, and Posthumi, of whom your
Fathers, who themselves had it from their Progenitors, have learned many
things. And truly the Senate it was that annexed Africa to the Roman Empire,
Gaul and Spain were subdued by the Senate; The Senate gave Laws to the Eastern
Nations. The Senate invaded the Parthians, and had conquered them, had not the
fortune of the Commonwealth, at that time, placed over the Roman Army a
covetous Crassus.
Lord. Caesar invaded Britain himself, a Senator, being then not so much as a
Dictator, and this Commodus, how much better had it been if he had stood in awe
of the Senate. To the days of Nero the Senate held up their Authority, and
passed Sentence on that worthless and debauched Prince, condemning him to
death, who had the power of Life and Death.

Wherefore fellow Soldiers, the name of CAESAR, which Commodus proffered me, I
ntterly renounce, Let the Senate command and dispose of Provinces; Let the
Senate make us Consuls, and, why do I say the Senate? You your selves, and your
Fathers, for even you shall all be Senators.

And yet this Great Commonwealths Man, when time served, did not afterward
stick to assume the Titles and Honor which now for private Reasons he refused,
and against which he so much declaimed, and died in asserting to himself the
Imperial Dignity against Severus, the wearing whereof he so much reproves in
another.

This Oration was brought to Rome, and as it pleased the Senate, so it incensed
Julius Severus Propraetorl
the Emperor; who immediately casheir'd him, and sent Julius Severus in
post-haste to take charge of the Army, and so Albinus retired from all public
Affairs until the death of Commodus, who being now grown odious to all Mankind,
for his excessive Cruelties and Oppressions, was at length slain by a
conspiracy of Martia, his own Concubine; it happened thus:

The Emperor having designed certain Persons for death, amongst whom Martia
Commodus requited for designing Martia's death.
was one, and having set their names in a Scrowl for that purpose, it fell out
that she lighting upon the Paper, and finding her self concerned, discovered it
to the rest that stood in the same List. To prevent their own danger, they
resolved suddenly to dispatch him; first by Poison, but fearing that would not
do so suddenly, with stabbs and strangling they made him away, when he had
reigned thirteen years, eight months, and fifteen days.

A Statue of his was lately dug up in England, amongst other Roman Antiquities,
Camb. Brit.
set up no doubt, in Britain about that time, when he assumed to himself the
Title of Hercules, for the Statue is made in the habit of that God, holding in
his Right hand a Club, with this lame Inscription under it.

CAESARI AUGUSTO MARCI AURELII FILIO SENIS JOVIS AMPLISSIMI. To such a height
of Pride was he arrived, that he wrote to the Senate Letters bearing this Title:

Imperator, Caesar, Lucius, AElius, Aurelius, Commodus, Augustus, Pius, Foelix,
Sarmaticus, Germanicus, Maximus, Britannicus, Pacator Orbis terrarum, Invictus,
Romanus, Hercules, Pontifex Maximus, Tribunitiae Potestatis XVIII, Imperator
VIII, Consul VII, Pater Patriae, Consulibus, Praetoribus, Tribunis Plebis
Senatuique Commodiano felici, Salutem. But although he called the Senate by his
own name, yet how much they were his, we may understand by their often repeated
Acclamations of Joy at the news of his death, which will not be much
unpleasant, or impertinent, to set down out of Lampridius, seeing that herein
will be showed much of the Customs of those Times, Lampridius vit. Commod.
wherein, under other Emperors, and upon other occasions, the like were used;
They were performed in the Temple of Concord, in a solemn and serious manner,
the whole Assembly of the Senate assisting.

And, seeing the frequent Repetitions contained in them, are set down after an
ample and large manner by Historians, otherwise professing brevity in their
Relations, and in other cases no ways guilty of tautology, it is reasonably to
be supposed, that the words of the whole office might be penned before hand,
and one going before and pronouncing them distinctly, the Senate to every
Clause made a formal and loud Responsal; For otherwise, had not there been this
order and method observed, but at the same time some were Execrating the past
Emperor, others Blessing the present, such a medly as this would have proved a
Rout rather than a serious Exercise, and had never been so particularly
recorded by Historians of their own, as a thing much unbecoming the Gravity of
so wise an Assembly.

But as it is set down, though in the frequent repetitions of the same thing,
yet, if performed distinctly, it shows much of Nature, whose passions of Joy
and Desire, are not easily bridled, but the higher they are, the oftener they
run out into the same Expressions. And this very dictate of Nature backed by the
Example and Authority of no less than the Roman Senate, may easily be supposed
great motives to, if not the original of the same Custom, then begun, and to
this day used in matters of high concern.

They were thus; Hosti Patriae, Parricidae,
Honores detrabantur. Parricida, Trahatur. Hostis Patriae, Parricida, Gladiator,
In spoliario lanietur. Hostis Deorum, Carnifex Senatus, Hostis Deorum,
Parricida Senatus, Hostis Deorum, Hostis Senatus,
resp. Gladiatorem in spoliario. Qui Senatum occidit, in spoliario ponatur. Qui
Senatum occidit, unco trahatur. Qui Innocents occidit, unco trahatur. Hostis,
Parricida,
vere Severe. Qui sanguini suo non pepercit, Qui Te occisurus fuit,
Unco trahatur.

Then in another strain;

Ut Salvi sumus, Jupiter, Optime, Maxim, Serva nobis PERTINACEM. This is said
to PERTINAX the following Emperor.
Fidei Praetorianorum, Praetoriis Cohortibus, Exercitibus Romany, Pictati
Senatus,
Feliciter.

Then again; Paricida trahatur, Rogamus Auguste. Parricida trahatur, Hoc
Rogamus. Paricida trahatur, Exaudi Caesar. Delatores ad Leonem, Exaudi Caesar.
Speratum ad Leonem.

Then again the former Repetition. Victoriae Populi Romani, Fidei Militum,
Fidei Proetoriaenorum, Cohortibus Praetoriis,
Feliciter. Hostis, Parricide, Gladiatoris,
Statuas undique. Gladiatoris and Parricidae Statuae detrahantur. Nccator
Civium trahatur. Parricida Civium trahatur. Gladiatoris Statuae detrahantur.

Then follows the Salutation to CAESAR.

Te salvo salvi and securi sumus, vere, vere modo vere, modo digne, modo vere,
modo libere. Nunc securi sumus, Ut securi sumus,
Delatoribus metum. Securi sumus, Delatores de Senatu. Delatoribus Fustem.
Te salvo, Delatores ad Leonem. Te Imperante, Delatoribus Fustem. Parricidae
Gladiatoris memoria aboleatur. Parricidae Gladiatoris statuae detrahantur.
Impuri Gladiatoris memoria aboleatur. Gladiatorem in Spoliario. Exaudi CAESAR.
Carnifex unco trahatur. Carnifex Senatus more Majorum unco trahatur. Saevtor
Domitiano, Impurior Nerone, sicut fecit, sic patiatur. Memoriae innocentium
serventur. Honores innocentium restituas. Rogamus. Parricidae cadaver,
Gladiatoris cadaver,
Unco trahatur. Gladiatoris cadaver, In spoliario ponatur. Per roga, Per roga,
omnes censemus, Unco trahendum.

Then again; Qui omnes occidit, Qui omnem aetatem occidit, Qui utrumque sexum
occidit,
Unco trahatur. Qui sanguini suo non pepercit, Qui Templa spoliavit, Qui
Testamenta delevit, Qui vivos spoliavit,
Unco trahatur. Servis, Servivlmus. Qui pretia vita excepit, Unco trahatur. Qui
pretia vitae exegit, and Fidem non servavit,
Unco trahatur. Qui Senatum vendidit, Unco trahatur. Qui filiis abstulit
haereditatem, Unco trahatur. Indices de Senatu, Delatores de Senatu, Servorum
subornatores de Senatu.

Then follows the second Salutation to CAESAR.

Et Tu nobis cum timuisti, omnia scis, bonos and maelos nosti, omniae scis,
omniae emendae, Pro te timuimus, O nos felices! te viro Imperante de Parricidae
refer, refer, per roga.

Praesentiam tuam Rogamus.

Innocents sepulti non sunt.

And then it ends.

Parricidae cadaver trahatur.

Parricidae sepultos eruit.

Parricidae cadaver trahatur.

Notwithstanding these Acclamations of the Senate (being partly in hatred to
Commodus, partly in base flattery to Pertinax his Successor, a Man of pitiful
birth and extraction) Severus, not long after arriving to the Empire in
detestation of them, commanded, that Commodus his Birth day should be
universally observed, making him moreover a God, and instituting a Flamen sor
the Worship, the same whom Commodus in his life time had appointed, named
Herculaneus Commodianus, and thus much of Commodus, and his Transactions in
Britain, his life and death.

Helvius Pertinax.
AFTER Commodus was slain, PERTINAX was in the An. Dom. 1941
Night, by Laetus, saluted Emperor, an Aged Commander, and who, partly by
living long, and partly by worthy Actions in the Wars, amongst which the
British were the chief, had worn out the memory of his mean and servile Birth.

After his admission to the Empire, the Senate made Addresses to him that he
would admit of Albinus to be his Associate in the Empire. This Albinus (as has
been shown before) had infinitely obliged the States when he was Lieutenant in
Britain, by making an Oration Jul. Capitol.
against Monarchy, which was the cause of their so exceeding affection toward
him at this time.

But Pertinax, who in his youth had learned, that two of a Trade could never
agree, and who inwardly knew the disposition of Albinus, that he who was so
humble and servile to the Senate, when a Private man, would be but a proud and
troublesome Companion in the Throne, utterly rejected the motion; But that he
might Clo. Albinus again Propraetor.
not altogether seem to slight the Senate, sent him into Britain again with a
new Commission, to be his Lieutenant.

Albinus thus removed, Pertinax kept a watchful eye over him, and sought all
means to bring him into disgrace and hatred with the Soldiers, to which end he
published a Letter of Commodus written to his Praefects, wherein the Ambitious
nature of Albinus seemed to be set forth. It was thus;

Anrelius Commodus Severus, To the Praefects Greeting.
I Suppose you have heard how it was given out, that I was slain by a
conspiracy of my Domestics, as likewise the Oration of Albinus to my Soldiers
that followed thereon, wherein he ingratiates himself with the Senate, and that
not without reason; for in that he says, there ought to be a single Person in
the Commonwealth, and asserts, that the whole management of Affairs should of
right be in the dispose of the Senate, what does he but by the name of the
Senate seek Empire to himself? Take heed therefore diligently, for you know the
Man, how he is to be avoided both by Soldiers and People.


This Letter Pertinax divulged as a mark upon Albinus, which so incensed him,
that he was one of the chief Conspiratours in his death, exhorting Julianus,
who had been fellow Consul with Pertinax to assassine him, so that this good
Old Emperor was slain by the Praetorian Bands, whom in vain he had endeavored
to reduce to Discipline, which was the cause of their hatred to him; Laetus who
had brought him to accept of the Empire, either out of Treachery or Fear, dared
not to interpose in his rescue. He reigned, according to Eutropius three
months, Julius Capitolinus and Aurelius Victor write eighty five days. Dio.
Herodian and Spartianus two months and twenty eight days.

Didius Julianus.
AFTER the death of Pertinax, the Praetorian Bands by a Ann. Dom. 194.
Common-Cryer set the Empire to sale, and Julianus who bad most was admitted;
He was scarce warm in his seat, when News was brought, that Syria had set up
their own General Pescennius Niger, and Germany, Septimius Severus, the latter
of whom he never suspected, and so was less prepared against; He obtained of
the Senate, that he should be declared an Enemy to the Commonwealth, and a day
praefixt wherein his Soldiers (upon pain of high Treason) should come in, and
Valerius Catulinus was sent to succeed him, and Aquilius a Centurion (in case
of a Refusal, to resign his Command) had private Orders to kill him. All this
prevailed not, for Severus diligent in his business, by quick marches hastened
to Rome, which so amazed Julianus that he sent Ambassadors to him at Ravenna,
desiring him to accept of half the Empire, but Severus disdaining his Profers,
and still marching, Julianus was flain by the same Soldiers that had advanced
him, who, by that action, sought to ingratiate themselves with Severus; so that
he enjoyed his Eutrop. Spart, Dio.
Bargain, as Eutropius says, seven months, but Spartianus, two months only and
five days, Dio. says sixty six days, Albinus being still Lieutenant in
Britain.

Septimius Severus.
SEVERUS, by the death of Julianus, having possession of Rome, and the Ann.
Dom. 194.
Senate, the principal strength of the Empire, began now to turn his thoughts
toward the subduing of Pescennius Niger, who all this while contented himself
with the name of an Emperor, and carefully spent his time at Antioch, in the
sports and jollities of his Inauguration, but before he could safely undertake
his Expedition, two obstacles were to be removed. First the Praetorian Bands,
and then Albinus who had the possession of the Army in Britain, a Party no less
stubborn and dangerous; To remove the first, he commanded them to appear
unarmed before him, when upbraiding them with their Treachery to Pertinax, he
casheir'd and banished them an hundred miles from Rome, whereby, he not only
brake the knot of these Janisaries, but infinitely obliged the People.

This great work being performed, the next difficulty is Albinus, but he was
not so easily to be removed, wherefore he craftily ordains him his Caesar and
Successor, and to create in him a firmer belief of his sincerity, he wrote
Letters to him, wherein he declared, how himself being an Old man and Gouty,
his Sons but Children, the Commonwealth stood in need of such a one as he, of
so full Age and so great Experience.

These Jacoals took with Albinus, so that Severus being now eased of the fear
of the British Army, marched into Syria, in a pitched Battle overcame Niger, and
slew him. He took the City Constantinople
Bizantium, subdued the Adiabenes and Arabians, and being full of Honor and
Victory, returned to Rome.

All this while Albinus, in Britain, was dreaming of his Succession, but
Severus being impatient of an arrival in Power, and now desirous of
establishing his Posterity in the Empire, began to think of making him away; To
that purpose he sent Murderers, underhand to dispatch him, who being
discovered by Albinus, too late began to take upon him the Empire, which during
the absence of Severus, Britain Herodian.
being so nigh to Rome, he might easily have seized.

Severus finding his Practices discovered, disowned them, and sent Heraclitus
to take possession of Britain. Albinus refused to Resign, declares for the
Empire, erects his own Statues, and stamped his picture on his Coyns, and, to
justify himself, with Onuphrius.
the choice of all Britain entered France, and, near unto Lions, took the Field
against Severus. He, on the contrary, declared Albinus Traitor, and enemy to
the States, and assembling all his Forces, meets him on the said place, and
gives him Battle.

The Army of Albinus (as says Herodian) by the Judgment of such of those times
who reported more for truth than favors sake, far exceeded in Courage that of
Herodian.
Severus, and was equal to the best of his Illyrian Soldiers, the Prime men of
the other Party.

At the first Onset the dispute was hot between them, and the Victory for a
long time inclined to neither side, till the Albinians, fighting most
valiantly, repulsed the others, and Severus himself flying from the Battle,
flung off his Purple Robe, and falling from his Horse, hid himself.

Now the British Forces, thinking the Victory had been their own, began
carelessly to pursue, displaying their Ranks in thinner arraies, and without
Order, fell on the backs of their Enemies; when Laetus, one of Severus his
Captains (who all this while stood aloof, expecting the issue of the Fight)
came upon them with his fresh and unfoiled Troops, with a purpose and
resolution now to take the Empire upon himself (for he heard that Severus was
slain) and charging fiercely upon them, who little expected a new Enemy, he
totally routed and put them to flight. Severus perceiving the Battle returned,
reassumes his Purple Robe, recovers his Horse, and rallying those that were
scattered, came in, at the end of the day, pursuing what remained, and having
slain Albinus, with a number of others, obtained a most fortunate Victory.

And now, having alone the Sovereignty of the whole World, and finding by
experience, that Britain was a Province too great and powerful to be trusted in
the hands An. Dom. 198.
of one Man, he divided it into two Governments, committing the North part
thereof to Virius Lupus, as Propraetor and Lieutenant (whom Ulpian the Civil
Lawyer Digest. lib. 28. tit. 6.
names President) and to Heraclytus the South.

Mr. Speed gathers, by a Coin of Severus, minted in his second Consulship,
which fell in the year of our Savior 198, about the death of Albinus, that the
Britains gave not at first their Obedience and Servitude to Severus, until he
had made the purchase of it with his Sword, the brand of which he has left to
Posterity, in Speed Chron.
figuring the Goddess Victory seated upon Spoils, and writing upon a Shield,
VICTORIA BRITANNIAE.

Virius Lupus, who had the Government of the North, had to do with two sorts of
People, the Meatae and Caledonians, the former whereof lived upon the Wall that
divided the South of the Island from the North, the Caledonians inhabited
higher, both of them a sierce and barbarous Nation.

To suppress these he raised many Castles, and entered at last into League with
the Caledonians, upon promise that they would be assistant to him in keeping
under the Meatae, but the Caledonians not performing the Articles, and Lupus,
upon hopes of their Aid, adventuring too far, was constrained in the end to
redeem his own Peace, and a few Prisoners, with a great sum of Money. And being
not able, after many Losses and Calamities sustained, to repress the sudden
inroads and assaults of the Enemy, he wrote unto Severus, in plain terms, the
state of Affairs, and that the Island wanted his presence.

The memory of this Virius Lupus, among other great works done by him here in
Britain, is preserved in an Altar dug up, dedicated to the Goddess FORTUNE,
upon the occasion of his repairing a Bath, or Hot-house, at a Town called the
Lavatrae, now Bows upon Stanmoor, in Richmondshire.

It was done for the sake of the Thracian Cohort, who lay there Ingarrisoned
for the Romans.

DEAE. i. FORTUNAE
VIRIUS LUPUS
LEG. AUG. PR. PR.
BALINEUM VI.
IGNIS EXUST-
UM COH. I. THR-
ACUM REST-
ITUIT CURANTE
VAL. FRON-
TONE PRAEF-
EQ. ALAE VETTO.
Severus, though well stricken in years, and withal exceeding Gouty, yet
desirous (among the rest of his Titles) to add that of BRITANNICUS, but
especially to withdraw his Sons, given to licentious Rioting, from the delights
and pleasures of Rome, and the bewitching Vanities of the Theaters, full
gladly, and thankfully, takes hold of this good occasion.

The Britains hearing of his coming, send Ambassadors for Peace, whom, after
An. Dom. 208.
he had on purpose detained, to gain time till his Forces were ready, he
dismisses them without effect, and leaving his younger Son Geta (whom he
created Augustus at his first arrival into Britain) to govern the Southern
parts of the Island which were in obedience, assisted by AEmilius Papinianus,
the famous Lawyer, whose Tribunal Seat was held at York, himself, with his
eldest Son Antonine, the debauchest of the two, marched into the North, where
being busied in cutting down Woods, making Bridges, and cleansing Fenns and
Marshes, he fought no Battle; howbeit, what with the Ambuscado's of his
Enemies, and what with sickness, he lost fifty thousand of his Men, for the
Britains sometimes trayling them on with a few Cattle turned out, enclosed them
in the midst of Sloughs and Quagmires, where they chose rather themselves to
kill such as were faint, and could not shift away, than leave them there a prey
to the Caledonians; thus writes Dio. But Herodian has recorded, That in Dio.
Cass. Herodian.
certain light Skirmages, although the barbarous Britains kept the fenny Boggs,
and most thick Woods, out of which they might more safely break upon the
Romans, yet he had the better of them, and enforced them to a League, wherein
they were constrained to yield to him a considerable part of their Country.

These difficulties in Person Severus underwent, and desisted not, although
through Spartianus.
weakness carried in a Litter, till he had marched through with his Army, to
the utmost Northern point of the Isle. But that which is accounted the most
Magnificent of all his other Deeds, on the Frontiers of what he had firmly
conquered, he built a Wall cross the Island, from Sea to Sea Orofius adds it,
fortified with a deep Orofius.
Trench and, at certain distances, many Towers or Battlemen's. Some are of
opinion, that it was the same with Agricola's Fence, between Dunbritton and
Edinborough-Friths, and that which Lollius Urbicus afterward repaired. But
others, with more reason, place it upon Hadrian's Wall, or nigh unto it.

I shall not undertake to decide the Controversy, but shall give some Reasons
why the latter opinion seems more probable, and shall endeavor to wipe away
some difficulties which hitherto have puzzled the minds of many, concerning the
number of Miles it is said to extend in length.

SEVERUS his WALL.
FIrst, that WALL which runs through the high part of Cumberland, from the
Bay of Itun, otherwise Solway-Frith on the Irish Seas, to Tinmouth near
New Castle, and commonly called the Picts Wall, is, by the Britains, called,
Gual-Sever, Gal-Sever, and, by the Scots, Mur Sever, all which denominations do
manifestly carry in them the very Name of this Emperor SEVERUS, and is a
strong Argument, that here was the place that he built the Wall we are now
treating of. For between Dunbritton and Edinborough-Friths, although there be
many Ruins of continued Fortifications, yet they are not so visible as these,
nor do they ever seem to have been of that strength, and solid make, as this of
Severus is reported in all Authors. Certainly, they have not in them any Name
(as ever I could hear of) whereby Severus may so plainly be gathered to be
their Builder.

But, besides the Name and Contexture of this Wall (which shall be proved, was
of more solid and durable substance than the other, between Edinborough and
Dunbritton-Frith) there are other Arguments to prove it was the same with
Hadrians.

First, the number of Miles, which Spartianus has truly reckoned to be eighty.
Spart.
Now between Edinborough and Dunbritton there is not half that distance, but if
they shall object and say, How that Eutropius has reckoned the Length but
thirty five Miles, and Victor thirty two, yet never the more does this agree
with the distance Eutrop. Victor.
between the Friths of Edinborough and Dunbritton. Let them consider therefore
that the mistake might arise from hence:

Suppose the true number of Miles, which are eighty two, be written thus
(according to the Custom of the Romans) LXXXII, how easy is it to be supposed
that the L being blotted, or worn out, it might be read, according to Victor,
XXXII, and Eutropius XXXV, the last [1] having something remaining, though
defaced; And that which fully persuades me, that such an Error has been
committed by the Transcribers in this case, is, that other Authors read it one
hundred thirty two Miles, the first numeral, L, being confused, they took it
for a C, so instead of reading LXXXII, viz. Eighty two miles, they read thus
CXXXII, viz. One hundred thirty two miles; And this seems not only easy, but
also necessary to be supposed, how else can the contradictions of eighty,
thirty two, and one hundred thirty two, be otherwise reconciled.

The next Argument, is, the Authority cited by Mr. Cambden for this opinion, to
which he annexeth his own.

First, Hector Boethius; Severus (says he) commanded Hadrian's Wall to be
repaired with Bulwarks of Stone, and Turrets placed at such convenient
distance, as that the sound Hect. Boet.
of a Trumpet, though against the Wind, might be heard one against another. And
in another place, our Chronicles report, That the Wall begun by Hadrian, was
finished by Severus; Also Hierom Surita, a most Learned Spaniard, writes, That
the Fence of Hadrian was extended farther by Septimius Severus; Guidus
Pautirolus affirms. Hier. Surita. Guide. Pauc.
That Severus did but re-edifie and repair the Wall of Hadrian, being fallen
down.

But the Authority of Bid puts the Question beyond dispute, where he writes of
the Romans, a little before their quitting the Island, his words are these,
Bid.
Moreover the Romans, because they thought this also might serve their Allies
in some stead, whom they were forced to leave, placed a Wall of strong Stone
from Sea to Sea, directly between the Cities which had been built there for
fear of the Enemy, where Severus also in times past had made a Rampire. Where
is that Wall of Stone, but between Solway-Frith and Tinmouth? and, where else
could Severus his Wall be?

The Inhabitants upon this Wall (to make a small digression) talk much of a
Brazen Cambd. Brit.
Trunck (whereof they found Pieces now and then) artificially set in the Wall,
ran between every Tower and Fortress, and served to convey Intelligence, the
Noise being carried through the hollow Pipe from Tower to Tower, according as
they found themselves in different places assaulted. The like miraculous device
of the Towers in Bizantium, Xiphiline relates out of Dion, in the Life of
Severus.

But since the Wall now lies along, and no Pipe remains there, many Tenants
Xiphiline ex Dion.
hold Farms thereabouts of the King in Cornage, that is, that they should give
Intelligence to the Neighbors, of the Enemies approaching, by winding of a
Horn, which some think had the first original from an Ancient Custom of the
Romans.

Mr. Speed will needs have this Wall built by Severus of Stone and Mortar,
although Speed Chron.
Bid proves to the contrary. He groundeth his opinion upon an Inscription
found in the Ruins of one of his Works near unto the River Ure in the County
of Richmond.

IMP. CAES. L. SEPTIMIO
PIO PERTINACI AUGU-
IMP. CAESARI M. AURELIO
A PIO FELICI AUGUSTO
BRACCHIO CAEMEN-
TICIUM VI NERVIO-
RUM SUB. CURALA SE-
NECI NON AMPLISSI-
MIO PERIL VISPIUS
PRAELEGIO.
But this I think is not sufficient to prove his Assertion, Cement, and things
Cemented being not of the signification always, as Lime and Mortar. But thus
much for the present, of SEVERUS his WALL; I shall take further notice of it,
as it was altered and repaired by succeeding Emperors.

Whilst these things were doing, and the Peace lasted, it happened that the
Empress Julia (discoursing with the Wife of Argento, a Caledonian) cast out a
Scoff against the looseness of the British Women, who promiscuously consorted
with diverse Men, whom the British Lady thus confidently answered; Much honester
do we Britains fulfill the work of Nature than you Romans; we with the
Gallantest men accustom openly, you with the Basest in Corners.

And now it was, about the year of Grace 211, that Severus took upon him the
Name of BRITANNICUS MAXIMUS, causing that Inscription to be An. Dom. (...).
stamped on his own, and his Sons Coyns, and to record to Posterity the Glory
of these Atchievments, sometimes (as appears by his Coyns) was formed a
Trophy, erected upon Spoils, with two Captives, the Motto under, VICT. BRIT.
sometimes a winged Victory, graving a Shield hung upon that Tree, which is the
Meed of Conquerours, and the words, Victoriae Britannicae. Spartianus says,
that he assumed these Titles not so much for his other Atchievments in Britain,
as the Spartianus.
Wall he had built, which great work being now accomplished, and himself
returned Victor into the Province, having, as he thought, established a lasting
Peace, began to ponder in his mind, according to the Superstitions of those
times, what Omen would next occur to him.

It happened that an Ethiopian (that followed the Camp) of a great repute for
his scurrile Wit, among the Soldiers, and whose Jests were much celebrated by
them, ran to him with a Crown of Cypress, whom the Emperor, in great rage,
commanded to be taken away, touched with such dismal presages as his black
Visage, and Cypress Crown, yet the Fellow undaunted, and still pursuing his
fawning Jest, cried out; Thou have been All, and have conquered All, Now thou
art a Conqueror, be a God.

Afterward going to York, and desirous to perform Divine Service, by the
error of a Country Priest he was carried into the Temple of Bellona, where the
Sacrifices proved black and sooty, which he refusing to offer, and hastening
home, by the negligence of the Sacrificers the Beasts got loose, and followed
the Emperor even unto his Palace.

These Prodigies were looked on as the presages of his death, which, in a while
after ensued, for he had not long been in the Province, but the Northern
Nations taking advantage of his absence and sickness, and the negligent
proceedings of his Son Antonine, who had the Command of his Army, brake the
Peace, and rose up in Arms to defend their Liberties, which so incensed the
testy Old man, wearied out with Labors and Infirmity, that he sent his Son
against him, strictly commanding him to spare neither Age nor Sex, using to
that purpose these Verses taken out of Homer,

Nemo manus fugiat vestras, caedemque cruentam: Homer.

Non foetus, gravida Matter quem gestat in alvo,
Horrendam effugiat caedem --.
Let none escape your hands, but let all die,
To th'unborn Child, that in the Womb does lie.
But Antoninus had his thoughts more taken up with contriving his Fathers
death, than the destruction of his Enemies, having once or twice attempted to
kill him with his own hands, and to gain the affection of the Soldiers, he
indulged them in all sorts of liberty and looseness, so that Severus perceiving
the unreclaimable nature of his Son, more overcome with Grief than any other
malady, died at York. His last words were these; A troubled Commonwealth I
found as my entrance, every where, but now I leave it in peace and quietness,
even among the Britains. An Old Spartianus.
man, and infirm in my Feet, I leave to mine Antonines an Empire, if they prove
good, strong and stable, but if bad, weak and unsteady.

When Severus and his Son Bassianus were at York, that famous Law was made,
Touching the Interest and right that Masters have to the Goods and Possessions
of their Cod. lib. 3. Tit. de Ret vindicatione, lig. 1.
Servants, Signed by Severus and Antoninus.

His Body was conveyed to Rome in great pomp, and attendance of the Governors
of Provinces through which it passed, although others report, it was burnt here
in Britain, and the Ashes only carried in a Golden Urne, and laid up in the
Sepulcher of the Antonines.

He Reigned seventeen years, eight months, and odd days, and was made a God by
the Romans.

By reason, to some, The way of Deifying their Emperors may be unknown, I have
thought it convenient to give a summary account of it here, but first by way of
Instruction.

The Romans were in general a sort of rude and ignorant People, made up of the
Live. Dicad. 1. lib. 1.
conflux of the worst of the Neighbor People of that State, who either out of
Guilt, having committed some notorious Crimes in their own Cities, that
deserved death by their Laws, or Discontent, for want of preferment or
promotion among Flor. Val. Max.
their own People, fled (out of Revenge) to that Asylum, or place of Resuge,
which Romulus had set up for the same purpose, to draw People to his new-built
City; so that they had no Gods in common, but every one had his peculiar Deity
(if such People had any) as he received, and learnt in his own Country,
insomuch that the Worship of the City was various and uncertain, which, with
those Gods AEnaeas Varro de Ceremontis.
brought from Troy, made up a promiscuous sort of Idolatry, but of these Romans
we shall speak more fully in the Chapter relating to their Antiquities.

Thus it continued all Romulus his Reign, the People being rather given to War
than any Civil exercise of Religion, all of them enquiring into the success of
their Battles, by various and different Auguries, which every man had properly
to himself.

Numa succeeding Romulus, and being a superstitious Prince, much addicted to
the Ceremonies of Religion, perceived it necessary for the supporting of his
Kingdom, to introduce some sort of Uniformity in Religion. Now this he could
not do, without pretending to some extraordinary Divine Revelations, every man
judging that Religion and God to be the best, in which he was born, and to
which he was naturally most devoted, to accomplish his private ends and desire.
Numa feigns himself to have an intimate Communication and interest with the
Goddess EGERIA, and, by the wonderful sanctity of his life, fully persuades and
possesses the People with the truth of his divine Intercourse with her,
insomuch that he established a set Form of Worship, which he had learnt from the
Etruscans, a People infinitely given to Rites and Ceremonies, which took their
name from Care, a City of Etruria.

After these proceedings, he accomplishes the certain number and order of the
Gods, built Temples, offered and instituted particular sacrifices to them,
taught them the Lines of Heaven and Earth, how to exercise their Augury, and
having established all things in a firm and steady method, dies, who, by the
prosperity and felicity of his Reign, fixes the People in an absolute belief of
the Truth of those things he had before (through his great pains and industry)
taught them.

Upon the division of these Romans, they had a respect to the distinct and
different dignities of Gods, by Title and Place, the better to advance the
perpetual remembrance of their own promotions, and so claimed a right to
particular Gods, that others might not own. From this they successfully
preserved the memory thereof by Images, like the Parents and Sons, as the most
Honorable memorial of their descent from such Mighty and Noble Progenitors.
For those that were the first Authors of Images to themselves, without being
promoted to it by Merit, were esteemed Upstarts, and all such as had no Images
were accounted Ignobly born.

Thus we see, how by this strait of difficulty they despaired, and some quite
pined away for want of Honor, amongst whom it often happens, whose pride and
ambition will not admit of content, to be born from the loins of Men, but of
Gods. None therefore could obtain the privilege of being Dignified after this
manner, but such as were promoted by the Senate to ride publicly in the Curule
Chair, which was the primary Dignity appertaining to such lofty Promotions.

By this it is evident, that the Right of Nobility went by favor of the Senate,
as well as Merit, from whence we may gather, how early, and from what Root, the
honor of Antiquity took its first Rice and Original, which must be occasioned
out of the sense of Gratitude, for some worthy Exploit done to the credit of
the State, or particular respect to such Persons, and the benefit of
Successors, whose zeal to Religion, and the eminency of whose Spirit, had so
fortunately raised them above the ordinary level of Mankind.

For this very cause Janus, Saturn, and others (who, by their several Projects,
Inventions, and Labors, had contributed to the improving and augmenting the
Comforts of this Life, in their perpetual Remembrance after they departed
hence) were translated under the sublime notion and title of GODS, having no
other way in those days, of gratifying the Deserts of the deceased, or
supporting of the honor of their otherwise fading Memories, than by Heaven and
Immortality.

But many, in successive Ages (although they had not so good a Title) took upon
them the same pretenses, for as their Merits were less, so their Pride and
Ambition was greater, Flattery making (doubtless) amends in a considerable
manner, for the former.

This made Alexander the Great, who was rather destructive and injurious, than
beneficial to Mankind (taking the measure of his Worth from the vain applause
of his Followers, and the esteem of his own Actions, from their greatness, not
goodness) write to the Cities of Greece, that they would admit him into the
Society of their Gods. What entertainment his Follies found, may be seen from
the scoff of Anaxarchus Eudamonicus, who did ((...)) deride Alexander for
Deifying himself, and from the Reply of the Lacedaemonians, replied (...), If
Alexander will be a God, let him be a God.

Yet notwithstanding this, many Cities, for fear of Injury, or hope of Gain,
decreed that he should be Deified.

Now one would have thought, that the Follies of this Macedon, and the
reception they had, might have been a sufficient cause for Augustus to have
advised him to the contrary, especially that memorable sentence of Calisthenes,
might have forewarned Note. No Emperor was capable of this Honor, in being
Deified, but such as left Children and near Relations behind them, according to
the Customs at first instituted by Augustus, and afterward reinforced by
Tiberius.
him from accepting such Honors while he was alive. Mortalitatem interdum
sequitur Divinitas, nunquam Comitatur; Divinity is a work of Posterity, not of
the present Age. That which we call and know to be Self-love, looks ever
forwards and upwards, never backwards or downwards.

Few or none were the Rites and Ceremonies used at the Immortalizing of
Alexander, but those that Augustus decreed should be performed at the
Consecration of Father Julius, were so magnificent and stately, that nothing
but Immortality can exceed the glory of them.

The Manner of the Romans Deifying their Princes, was performed after this
method.
AFter the decease of a Prince, his Body was first nobly and honorably
Interred, Herodotus vit. Severi.
after the manner of other Men, but suitable, and as most becoming his Princely
birth and quality. And before an Emperor was Deified, a general Lamentation
and Mourning was held through the whole City, yet intermixed with some Feast and
Entertainment, but performed in a solemn manner.

After the performance of wonted Ceremonies, a stately Image of Wax, resembling
the Face of the deceased, but pale and wan of Countenance, as representing a
sick and dying Man, was laid upon a most sumptuous Bed of Ivory, exalted on
high, openly, before the Palace Gate, covered with a Pall of Gold.

The most part of the day, about this Bed of State, sat in Mourning on the
Right hand, the whole The Senate mourning in Black.
Senate, on the Left, Ladies, who were esteemed for the sake of their
Progenitors, or Noble Husbands, Honorable, and these were dressed up in white
close Garments (wearing no Jewels about them, although the usual Ornaments and
splendor to that Sex) for in that Habit they represent Mourners.

For the space of seven days this Solemnity continued, during which time the
Waxen Image was daily attended by Physicians, as their Patient, feeling his
Pulse, examining and consulting his present distemper, after so doing, they
pronounced That he was To declining in health, as uncurable.

At the expiration of the seventh Night, when it seemed meet to them to think
he was departed, this Image, with the Bed of State, was taken up, by the
choicest Youth of the Nobility and Gentry of each Order, carrying it through
the Via Sacra, into Via Sacra.
the Old* FORUM.
Market; and first for Via Sacra.

1. VIA SACRA, was, the Great way that led to the Roman Market, so called from
the Sacrifices which were offered up at the concluding of the League, between
Romulus and Tacitus, King of the Sabines.

2. DE FORO ROMANO. The Roman Marketplace is described diverse ways, and in
speaking particularly to every one of them, we may the better know to what
place to refer the Magnificence of this Solemnity.

In some parts of it, it may be taken for a place of Negotiation or
Merchandise, so that some viz. FORUM, Eoarium, Piscarium, Olitorium.
Adjective must be joined to it, more fully to express its several uses, viz. a
place for sale of Flesh, Fish and Herbs, but this cannot be that, surely, as is
meant of the Old Market, but I will not deny but that it may be some of the
Outskirts of it.

Some take the word FORUM, to be a place where a Magistrate of a Province calls
his People together, to give Sentence (according to the Law) in punishing an
Offendour, and to decide differences in point of Right and Inheritance, and in
which also were Speeches made unto the People.

Relating to these matters originally there were only three; Romanum Forum,
Julium, and Augustum; from this foundation the Roman Senators constituted no
less than six; Forum Julianum, as Julius Caesar was the Founder, Forum Augusti,
from Octavius Augustus, Forum Domitiani, from Domitian the Emperor, but
completed by Nerva, by reason of the sudden death of Domitian, who left it
unfinished.

Others will have it Forum transitorium, as there was a Public passage through
it; leading to three several Market places.

Lipsius, in his third Book, and seventh Chapter, treating of the Roman
Greatness, Lipsius, lib. 3. cap. 7.
calls it Palladium Forum, Because (says he) in the middle thereof was built a
stately Temple to the Honor of Minerva.

Another was founded by the Emperout Trajan, called Trajani Forum, in which was
built a sumptuous Pillar, in height an hundred and forty Cubits, expressing the
noble Exploits done by him.

Salustii Forum, was a Noble place bought by Salust, with several delicate and
delightful Gardens adjoining, which since bares the name of Horti Salustini.

The last (which indeed was first built) was called Forum Vetus, and this
excelled all the rest, and contained the Orators Pulpit, called Rostra, etc.
unto this Forum many distinct places belonged, convenient for their uses, and
suitable in Magnificence, so that it must reasonably be concluded, that this
being the place Anciently called Forum Vetus, and Forum Vetus being the place
they past through, where Magistrates delivered up their Power, must be the
place meant for the entertaining of so great a Solemnity.

In this place was built a Wooden Tribunal of the color of Stone, on which was
erected an Edifice, sustained on every side with certain Pillars, variously
adorned and set out with Ivory and Gold, thither was brought another Bed like
the former (graced with the Heads of several Creatures, both of Sea and Land)
covered over with Purple Cloth, embroydered with Gold, where was laid the Waxen
Image of the Prince, brought from the Palace in his Triumphal Ornaments, from
which (as if the Emperor slept) a handsome Boy, with a Fann made of Peacock
Feathers, winged away the Flies.

On each side of this Marketplace Scaffolds were erected, where, on one side
was planted a Chorus of Noble men's Sons, another of Ladies on the other,
singing Songs in honor of the Deceased, which being ended, the Funeral
solemnity marched out of the City, toward the Campus Martius.

Now this Campus Martius, by reason it lay near the River Tiber, was otherwise
called Tiberinus, and was given to the Roman People by a Vestal Virgin, named
Caja Tarratia. This was accounted a Holy place, insomuch that the Corn which
Tarq. Superb. deposed.
Tarquinius Superbus sowed there, after he seized the Ground from the People,
was violently plucked up by the Roots, by an order of the Senate, and thrown
into Tiber, thinking it unfit to make any such use of so Sacred a place, given
them.

Besides the pleasantness of this Field, according to its own nature, it was
adorned with many Curiosities (sent from the Capitol) and several Images of
many eminent Men.

Here Horse Races, Foot Races, Fencing, casting the Bowl, the Dart, the Sledge,
Wrestling, bending the Bow, Slinging, Vaulting, etc. was exercised, and all
this permitted before (forsooth) growing of Corn, by reason of the Holiness of
the place, and upon these occasions it was dedicated to Mars, therefore called
Campus Martius.

Men of the highest Repute were here burnt, meaning their Effigies, for we have
already shown, that before the Deifying of an Emperor by buining his Waxen
Image, his real Body was Honorably buried after the manner of other men.

Here were Kings and Magistrates at first created, and to the place called
Ovilia, or Septa, erected in this Field, the People assembled to present their
Suffrages, toward the Election of new Magistrates.

Before the Princes Image, that was intended for this Campus Martius, were
carried in State the several Images of Ancient Romans, who had been any ways
famous, from the time of Romulus to the time of this Consecration, next
followed representations, in Brass, of the Provinces of the Empire, known and
distinguished by Habits and Ornaments peculiar to each Nation, then came several
sorts and Orders of Citizens, as Lictors, Scribes, and Criers, next marched
Horsemen and Footmen in Armor, War-Horses led, and all those things which
were presented by the Nobility, Gentry and Commonalty, for the increasing the
greatness and splendor of this Funeral solemnity.

Lastly appeared a Golden Altar, enriched with Jewels and Ivory, and after all
those things were past that made up the Magnificence of this Show, the
succeeding Emperor ascended the Oratory or Pulpit, where, in an elegant
Speech, he set forth the Praises of the late Emperor.

In the middle of his Oration, the Senators that stood close to the Oratory
began to make several Exclamations (the method of which I have shown in another
place) some, immoderate and excessive in his Commendations, others, in
bemoaning the loss they sustained by the fate of his decease, and did it much
more violently when the Speech was finished.

But when this Bed of State was to be removed from the place wherein it stood,
the whole Senate lamented and wept; These Ceremonies being concluded, the Bed
was removed from the Tribunal, not only by the Priest and Magistrates, for the
present year, but by the help of those that were designed for the succeeding
also, and delivered to certain Knights to be carried forward.

Part of the Senate went before it, by dismal tunes set to the Pipe, and by
pretended Groans, they expressed rarely their counterfeit Sorrows.

Last of all followed the Emperors, and after they had left the City, and
approacht that place of the Campus Martius, where the Field is at the widest,
was erected a Pile or Turret, quadrangular and equilateral, in the form of a
Tabernacle, consisting of great Timber only. Its inside was well stored with
all kind of dry and combustible matter, the outside was beautified and set
forth with Ivory-Images curiously wrought, and hung with stately Hangings
interwoven with Gold.

On this was raised another Turret, or story, with Doors and Casements open,
differing in bigness not in glory from the former, next a third, and a fourth,
the higher Lost being always less in compass that than beneath, and so by
degrees till you come to the highest, which is least of all.

Upon the top of this was placed the gilded Chariot of the Emperor, in which
he took most delight when he was alive.

The form of this Tabernacle can be compared to nothing so well as those
Watch-Towers, which by their Nocturnal Lights, guide and direct Ships into safe
Harbor.

The Bed being laid into the second Tabernacle, they brought Persumes,
Aromatic Spices, all kind of sweet Fruits, fragrant Herbs, odoriferous Juyces,
and distillations of Trees, in such vast quantities, that one would have
thought the East Indies had been invited to the Consecration.

There was no Nation, City, or Persons of worth and quality, that did not
emulously strive to outvie each other in the greatness of their Presents,
giving the last signal Tokens to the World of their respectful Acknowledgments
to their deceased Prince.

When the Room was filled with these Spices, and all other things requisite to
the celebrating of the Consecration, the succeeding Emperor, and the Kindred
of the dead Emperor, took their leave and last farewell by saluting his Statue,
which being ended, the Prince ascends the Tribunal, the Senators are placed on
Scaffolds, provided on purpose for them, where they might best see the
Ceremonies performed, in honor of their Prince, the Magistrates and others
sitting in their order, according to their Qualities and Office.

Then the Knights of Rome ride forwards and backwards about the Building,
imitating the Pyrrichian Dance, according to rule and measure, the Foot
Soldiers ran Races about it, and lastly, several Charriots were driven swift
round it, managed by Persons of Honor, lively representing to the Spectatours,
in Vizards, the Effigies of their Illustrious Emperors, and bravest Captains.

These Formalities performed, he that was to succeed in the Empire, took a
Torch, and fired the Tabernacle, next the Consuls, after them other
Magistrates, according to their Degree and Order.

All places being filled with Spices, and other combustible matter, the whole
Fabric flamed on a sudden.

From the highest Tabernacle an Eagle was let fly, which was pretended to
attend to carry the Emperors Soul up to Heaven, and from that time forward was
he reckoned among the Gods.

This Consecration at last was allowed (by the baseness and flattery of the
Senate) to the Emperors Wives, Sisters, and Daughters, in as ample a manner as
to the Emperors themselves.

The names of those that were Deified were afterward changed, as Io, was
afterward called Isis; Melicerta, Portumnus; and AEneas, after his Apotheosis,
by the ancient Latins was called Jovem indigitem, as Titus Livius, in his first
Decad. and first Book witnesses; And Romulus (as is well known) was afterward
called Quirinus, and from this Custom likewise came it, that Princes were
called DEOS, and DIVOS, and their Letters and Rescripts, ORACLES, and thus I
conclude the manner of the Romans Deifying their Emperors, according to the
best information of their own Authors.

THE British Account OF THE WARS OF SEVERUS, IN THIS ISLAND.
THE Northern Nations, with whom Severus had to deal, who are called by the
Romans, Caledonii and Meatae, by the British Histories are named Picts, and
their Country Deira and Albania, their Leader, Fulgentius the Brother of
Martia, the first Wife of Severus, and Mother of Bassianus Antoninus.

This FULGENTIUS, doubtful of his strength any longer to resist, makes a Voyage
into Scythia (for yet the British Histories leave not off their far-fetches)
where, gathering together a Body of the choicest Youth, called PICTS, he
returns into Britain, and at his Arrival, many forsook Severus, and joined
themselves with him.

Flusht with this success, he besieges the Emperor in York, who keeping close
for a while till his Men were in readiness, at last breaks out, and forces him
to a Battle, the event whereof, was, that both Severus and Fulgentius received
their mortal wounds therein. The Picts retired to their Fast-holds, and Severus
to York, where he soon after died.

Jeoffery of Monmouth, in writing of this story (as in many other places he is
guilty of the same Error) by ill timing of Actions, and confounding the Names
of Persons, has made it so intricate, that it is impossible to find out what
he means, for he makes Septimius Severus, the Emperor, the same as Junius
Severus, who was sent, by Commodus, into Britain, to succeed Albinus, as
manifestly appears, where he says, That Severus a Senator, after the death
of Lucius, was sent into Britain, by the Senate, with two Legions, to compose
there the differences arising, and restore the Kingdom to the Romans, which, by
Dissentions, was much drawn from them. This must needs be meant of Junius
Severus, for Septimius Severus was not Senator but Emperor, when he entered
Britain, and it was many years after the death of Lucius, and yet presently
after, relating the same man's Actions, he adds, That he made a Wall between
Deira and Albania, which can be meant of none but Severus the Emperor.

I wonder that the British History, in making Severus a King of Britain, and
Successor of Lucius, does not give some Reason for it. If he had the Kingdom
in Right of his first Wife Martia, Sister to Fulgentius, how comes it to pass
that Fulgentius is not reckoned a British Prince, and a Rightful Inheritour of
the Crown, which, if he had been created, it follows, dying in the Battle
fought against Severus, the Kingdom would devolve on Severus by the Woman's
side, according to the Old Compact the British Histories makes mention of,
between these Northern Picts and their Brethren, the Scots of Ireland, when
they gave them Wives; That in case the Male Issue failed, the Heir of the Woman
should inherit in the Kingdom of the Picts. So that Severus, holding by Right
of his Wife, his Son Bassianus was lawful Inheritour, and the British
Succession should have run thus, Lucius, Fulgentius, Severus, in Right of
Martia, Bassianus, etc. but of this more than enough.

Bass. Caracalla Anto. And His BROTHER Septimius Geta.
AFter the death of Old Severus, his eldest Son CARACALLA, An. Dom. 212.
for a while, pursued the Relics of the War by his Captains, when, weary of so
troublesome an employment, he hudled up a Peace, and taking Hostages returned
to Rome.

And now grown impatient of a Partner in Power, he slew his Brother GETA, after
he had Reigned with him a year and twenty two days. He caused likewise his
Name to be raced out of all Monuments, which was accordingly observed even in
Britain as appears by an Inscription dug out of the Earth in Monmouthshire,
wherein the name of [GETA] by the tract of Letters, may be discovered to have
once been, although afterward raced out.

PRO SALUTE
AUG. G. N. N.
SEVERI ET ANTON-
NI ET GET AE CAES.
P. SALTIENUS P. F. MAE-
CIA THALAMUS HADRI.
PRAEF. LEG. II. AUG.
C. VAMPEIANO, ET
LUCILIAN.
And, that which made more to the horridness of the Murder, was, that he slew
him in the Arms of his Mother Julia; But it seems her Sorrows quickly blew
over, for not long after she consented a Marriage with her Son in Law
Bassianus, the Murderer of her own Son; for Bassianus was the Son of Martia, a
former Wife of Severus.

Thus we see this Julia, who twitted the British Ladies with their Crimes,
committed a greater of her own, nay, such an One, as St. Paul says, Is not to
be named among the Gentiles.

After his Murder and Incest he was slain by one of his own Soldiers,
Macrinus, who succeeded him, being the contriver of it.

He Governed but six years and two months, and left no Issue by his Incestuous
Mother, or Grantilla his Wise, whom he banished into Sicily, but by Julia
Simiamira, his cousin German and Mistress, he had Heliogabalus, who afterward
came to be Emperor.

THE British History.
THE Count Palatine makes Bassianus King of Britain in Right of his Mother
Martia, who, by the British Histories is said to be a Native of this Island,
but Sabellicus takes her to have been an African by Birth, but allowing her a
Britain, how comes it to pass that Fulgentius, her Brother, is not accounted a
King of this Island? For she could have no right to the Kingdom till his death,
so that, if Fulgentius be excluded, his Sister Martia could create no Title
either to Severus her Husband, or our present Bassianus, her Son.

He likewise says, That Bassinus sent into Britain, Virius Lupus, to quell the
Picts, who had entered the Island under Fulgentius, but what Authority he has
for it, I know not; The Roman Authors say, he was sent by Severus, and the
British Histories Aurel. Victor. Sabellicus. Bid. Eutropius.
are silent of him, as to the days of this Emperor.

Jeoffery of Moumouth with the like absurdity makes Carausius to be chosen King
of Britain in the year 218, which is the last of this Emperors Reign, whereas
his appearance in Britain was not till the year 284, as by true History is
collected; Nevertheless the British Writers generally tell the story thus:

Carausius being chosen King of Britain, and made Commander of the Picts, who,
after the death of Fulgentius, wanted a Leader, presently makes Head against
Bassianus, An. Dom. 284.
and gives him Battle; Bassianus had many Picts in his Army, but Carausius, a
Man of a subtle Wit, by fair Promises had so won their affections that in the
Fight they betrayed him, so that deserted by so great a part of his Forces, the
rest were totally routed, and himself slain. Carausius, to gratify the Picts,
gave them the Countries in the South parts of Scotland, which joins to England
on the East Marches, as Mers, Louthean, and others.

Thus Bassianus, by the report of the British Writers, died in Britain.

CARAGALLA slain, MACRINUS, the contriver of his An. Dom. 218.
death, was chosen, by the Army, Emperor, in whose days, as likewise many of
his Successors, we find no mention made in this our Island; whether it were,
that the Empire declining apace, or, that good Authors grew scarce, or were
lost, or, which is more probable, the former Princes being advanced by the
heady Affection of the Soldiers, and as soon cast down again, had no time to
atchieve great Matters so far off.

Certain it is, that for some years we are left in the dark, having a few
fragments only lying scattered, here and there, which give just light enough to
show that Britain still continued a Roman Province, and had its Proproetors and
Presidents. The British Histories themselves, as if they were only ill Comments
on the Roman Records, and wanted breath where the other ceased, do now fall in
pieces, leaving wide gaps, and Inter-regnums, for many years together, so that
if we would, we could not piece up these Times with their Rags and Fables. And,
were it not undecent to leave so great a breach in the midst of this History,
many of the following Emperors might be spared. And indeed, I might easily
have been induced to have omitted them, had not these Reasons moved me to the
contrary.

First, By virtue of their being Emperors they were undoubted possessours of
this Island, and so have a right to have their Names, at least Recorded, though
some of them through their short continuance in Power, had no time to exercise
it so far off; And this is all I intend to do, for I mean not to write of their
Actions in Rome, Syria or Africa, or to make a History of the World (save only
what I shall speak of their Original and Antiquity) when I intend only one of
Britain. Nothing shall be Recorded but what has some relation to our Island,
and where no Circumstances tend to it, it shall be sufficient the Emperor is
named, and the time of his Reign.

Secondly, Another Motive which swayeth me to proceed in the aforesaid method,
is, the weight of Presidents that have written after this manner, and yet it is
not absolutely necessary I should name them. Nay the British Histories
themselves have all along, hitherto, made the presence of a King in Britain,
and his being born here, a necessary qualification to his being King. Now we
must take up with Kings in Right, and admit of Heliogabulus, Gordianus,
Maximine, etc. who never saw this Island to be their natural or rightful
Inheritance.

And what can be said more for these Emperors which cannot be alleged, for
all the rest; for allowing Martia to have created a Title to Severus and his
Sons, must Heliogabulus, the Bastard of Caracalla, be hookt in upon the same
score, and must Alexander Severus be created another of his Bastards, or else
have no Right to the Kingdom? most excellent! But, by what Right is his
Murderer Maximine admitted King? Because, says Basingstoke, BELIN, a British
God undertook the Count Palate.
Revenge. Was ever Title so plainly demonstrated? Then follows Gordian, who is
lawful King of Britain, because he was Father of Claudius, from whom proceeded
Constantine, who had Right by his Wife Helena; so that we see the Grandson
gives Title to the Grandfather, a Tenure able to puzzle the ablest Lawyers we
have now in England.

If this were sufficient to make a lawful King of Eritain, we need not fear,
even in their sense, to hook-in the most obstinate and perversest Emperor
imaginable, so that the maintainers of that History, have no reason to find
fault with the Method designed.

And as for those who are only for the Romans, I hope they will not account it
impertinent, and besides the purpose, to give a short account, if it were no
more, of the Emperors of Rome.

Macrinus Reigned one year, one month, and twenty eight days.

Anton. Heliogabulus.
HE is supposed the Bastard Son of Bassianus, by his Concubine An. Dom. 219.
Simiamira, his Name, HELIOGABULUS, he took from being a Priest to that God in
Phoenicia, for Heliogabulus in the Phoenician Tongue, signifies the Sun, or
Jupiter, as Lampridius witnesses. But it seems rather to have been the Sun,
for from Clioun, in the Phoenician Tongue signifying, Lord or God, the Greeks
had their (...), or the Sun, which shows that the Sun, in a peculiar manner,
was the God of the Phoenicians. Lamprid.


When he came to Rome, he introduced that barbarous Custom (in the honor of
this God) of sacrificing of Infants, and Children, looking into their Intrails
to foretell future Events, a Custom for which the Britains in former time were
so much accused, and, which I mention, to show, That the Phoenician Worship, by
such horrid Sacrifices, was yet continued in the World, and, in all
probability, might be the Original of the same Custom in Britain, brought
hither when the Phoenicians were most conversant in the Island, as I have shown
in the Antiquities of this Nation.

He was the most vicious Prince of all, that either went before him, or came
after him, and in his days were acted over the Vices of the whole Empire for
many Ages.

By Herodians Computation he Reigned six years, and died in the twentieth year
of his Age. Herodian.


Aurelius Victor says, he Ruled but three years, and was slain at seventeen
years of Age. Aurel. Vict.


Eusebius, whom I follow, assigns him four years, which agrees with
Onuphrius, Eusebius. Onuph.
who makes him to live but eighteen years.

And by all it is agreed, that he came to the Empire at fourteen, and, for the
Honor of our Nation, is allowed King of this Island, by our British Histories.

Alexander Severus.
ALEXANDER was the Son of Varius and Mammea, Sister An. Dom. 223.
to Simiamira, others make him the Son of Bassianus, and that the two Sisters,
Simiamira and Mammea, waiting on their Aunt Julia, the Empress had the
misfortune to be both Lampridius. Sabellicus.
gotten with Child by him.

But whether he were the Brother and Cousin German of Heliogabulus, certain it
is, he had no Alliance with him in his Vicious inclinations, being a Learned,
Warlike, and Fortunate Prince.

We find that the Senate, met together in the Temple of Concord, and used many
of those Acclamations to him and the Gods, which I have taken notice of in the
Life of Commodus, and are too tedious here to be repeated.

It is thought that he made an Expedition into Britain, and Lampridius says,
he was slain in a Town called Sicila, but whether it were in Britain, or Gaul,
he leaves us uncertain; Howbeit, thus much we find in the same Author of his
Actions in this Island;

When he had given unto the Captains and Soldiers of the Marches, those
Grounds and Lands which were won from the Enemies, so that they should be their
Propriety, if their Heirs served as Soldiers, and that they should not revert
to any private Men, supposing they would go to the Wars more willingly, and
take the better care, if they could, to defend their own peculiar Possessions.

Note these words well says Mr. Cambden, from hence may be deduced either a
kind of Feudum, or Fee, or the beginning of Fewds.

Before his death a Druid Woman cried out to him in the Gaulish Tongue; Go on,
Lampridius.
but hope not for Victory, and trust not thy Soldiers. He was slain by some of
his own Army, at the instigation of Maximine, who succeeded him, and the cause
of his death was, That the Soldiers grown loose under Heliogabulus, could not
endure the severity of Discipline.

He Reigned, according to Lampridius, thirteen years and nine days, Aged
twenty nine years, three months and seven days, in the year of our Lord 236.

Basing stoke endeavors to prove Sicila was a Town in Britain, so called
from the An. Dom. 236. Basinstoke, Not. 18. ad lib. 5. and Not. 15. ad lib. 3.
British Prince Sicilius, who built it, but his Arguments are not worth
reputing.

This Alexander Severus is also numbered among the British Kings.

Julius Maximinus.
MAXIMINE, a Man of mean Birth, but of prodigious strength and greatness,
proved an unweildy, insolent and untractable An. Dom. 236.
Tyrant, insomuch that Old Gordianus, and his Son, were set up by the Senate
against him; their Reigns were but short, for Capelianus, Governor of Numidia
and Mauritania, more out of private hatred to Gordian than kindness to
Maximine, gave them Eattle, the success whereof was, That young Gordian being
slain, his Father out of grief hanged himself.

This Gordian had been Quaestor of Rome, and amongst many of his Magnificent
Shows exhibited to the People, one especially was a Wood, wherein were painted
two hundred Deer covered with Palms, and Britains mixed among them, which
shows that the Britains were still matter of novelty and delight to the
Romans. Capitolinus.


The Gordians, Father and Son, thus happily removed, Maximine who had been all
this while in Germany, hastened to Rome, breathing nothing but Revenge to the
Senate and People, but endeavoring, first, to reduce the City of Aquilea, who
shut its Gates upon him in his passage, he was slain at the Siege thereof by
his own Soldiers.

It is reported by Capitolinus, that the City was yielding to admit him, had
not one Menophilus a Senator, persuaded them, that BELINUS (a God peculiar to
the Britains and Gauls, and who had a Temple at Aquilea) declared by his
Oracle, that Maximine should be overcome. This the Priests gave out, and
therefore after his death the Soldiers bragged about, That APOLLO fought
against them, and that they were not overcome by the Senate and Maximus, who
succeeded Maximinus, but by the power of the Gods.

From the circumstances of this story is collected, that the British God
BELENUS was the same with APOLLO, or the SUN, and was the Bell or Baal of the
Phanicians, from whence the latter part of Eligabal, the Emperors name is
derived.

With Maximine died his Son and Caesar, Maximine, in the year of our Lord 238,
after they had sat in the Empire three years.

The British Histories allow him King of this Island, after whom follows an
Interregnum, but I shall proceed with the Roman Emperors.

Pupienus Maximus, And Clodius Balbinus, EMPERORS.
PUPIENUS MAXIMUS, and CLODIUS BALBINUS, chosen by the Senate Emperors against
Maximine, were not An. Dom. 238.
so linked together in Affection, as they were nearly joined in Authority.

Balbinus was of greater Birth and Nobility, but Pupienus exceeded him in
Wisdom and Conduct, insomuch that both of them over-valuing themselves, the one
upon the gifts of Fortune, the other the endowments of his Mind, were both
slain by the Praetorian Soldiers, having jointly Reigned little more than a
year, during whose short continuance in Power we find not the least remembrance
of them in our Island.

M. Anton. Gordianus.
AT the Age of fourteen Gordianus was elected Emperor by the Praetorian Bands,
he was the Son of a Daughter of Old Gordianus, being so young he Ruled by the
Advice of Misitheus, a prudent Counselor, whose Daughter he took in Marriage.

And now some glimmering light appears concerning the Government of this
Island, out of an Altar-stone found in Cumberland, at a place then called Old
Carlisle.
Castra Exploratorum, with an Inscription for the health of this Emperor, his
Wife, and the whole Family, set up by AEmilius Crispinus, who was Captain of
Horse under Nonnius Philippus, Lieutenant General of Britain, as appears by
the An. Dom. 243.
Stone it self.

IOM.
PRO SALUTE IMPERATORIS M. ANTONI GOR-
DIANI P. F. INVICTI AUG. ET SABI-
NIAE TURIAE TRANQUILE CONJUGIRIUS
TOTAQUE DOMU. DIVIN. EORUM ALA AUG.
GORDIA OB VIRTUTEM APPELLATA POSUIT CUI
PRAEEST AEMILIUS CRISPINUS PRAEF. EQ. Q.
NATUS IN PRO AFRICA DE TUIDRO SUB. CUR.
NONNII PH -- LIPPI LEG. AUG. PROPRETO --
-- ATTICO ET PRAETEXTATO COSS.
After Gordianus had governed the State for the space of six years, he was
deposed by Julius Philippus, who, to make way for himself, first poisoned
Misitheus, and then insinuating himself into favor, was the destruction of his
Master; for Gordianus, by the Power of Philip, being cast out of the Throne,
was soon afterward, by the jealousy of the Usurper slain in the year of Grace
245, and of his Age 22.

Gordian is accounted in the British History, King of this Island, upon the
account British Hist. Basing stoke.
of his being Father to Claudius, whose Title we shall examine hereafter.

M. Julius Philippus.
PHILIP, by treachery and disloyalty to his Sovereign, having ascended the
Throne, proved a better Prince than Subject. By An. Dom. 245;
embracing the Christian Religion, he strived to wipe away the stains of his
former life, much to be approved of if Sincerity were joined with his
Profession, but nothing worth, if to daub over a guilty Conscience, he applied
himself to Pardon and Penance only.

Eusebius, to prove his Sincerity, writes, That he submitted Eusebius.
to be placed in the room of Common Penitents, because, in many things he had
been faulty. This was a piece of humility not to be slighted, if with that self
denial he had resigned his ill-gotten Power, or employed that Authority in the
open owning and propagating the truth. But such was the earnest desire, even in
those Primitive times, of gaining mighty Prelates to the Church, that the
comfortable part of the Gospel, Forgiveness of Sins, was used as a Bait only to
draw them in, being dressed up in fashion and formality, light and trivial
Ceremonies, which had a show of submission, whilst the weightier parts of the
Law, without which the other avails nothing, were either neglected or
dissembled.

Against this Philip, first Marinus set himself up Emperor, but he failing,
Decius was advanced by the Soldiers, whom, whilst Philip sought to reduce,
was himself slain by his own Army, and his Head cut off by the Teeth. The
memory of him is preserved in Britain, upon a Pyramid or long Stone dug out of
the ground not far from Old Carlisle, with this Inscription: Camb. Brit.


IMP. CAES.
M. JUL.
PHILIPPO
PIO FELI-
CI
AUG.
ETM. JUL. PHI-
LIPPO NOBILIS
SIMO CAES.
TR. P. COS --
Eusebius says, he Reigned seven years, but Eutropius and Victor, whom I
follow, Eusebius. Eutrop. Vicior.
give him but five.

Upon the news of his death, the Praetorian Soldiers killed his Son PHILIP,
whom he had created his Caesar, so that we see his disloyalty to his natural
Sovereign Gordianus, was returned double fold upon him, and the Christian
Religion, which might save him in the World to come, did not exempt him from
the Punishments of this life, attending Treason and Usurpation.

Gn. Messius Quinctus Trajan Decius.
DECIUS (elected Emperor by the Persinn Legions, proclaimed in Verona by the
Roman Soldiers, and confirmed at Rome An. Dom. 250.
by the voice of the Senate) was a wise and valiant Prince, but Reigned but two
years, being in his Wars (against the Goths) betrayed by his own Captain
Trebonianus Gallus, where having the misfortune to see his two Sons, Decius and
Hostilianus, whom he had made his Associates in the Empire, slain before his
face, he threw himself into a Whirl-pool, which soon swallowed up both him and
his Sorrows; He was a great enemy of the Christians, and raised the seventh
Persecution.

Trebonianus Gallus.
TREBONIANUS GALLUS having betrayed Decius, was, upon An. Dom. 252.
his death, admitted Emperor. He created his Son Volusianus, a Child, his
Caesar, but he enjoyed not long the Imperial Crown, for giving himself up to
Pleasures at Rome, he neglected the preservation of the Empire, insomuch that
the Goths breaking in on the Frontiers, made great havoc, till AEmilian his
General put a stop to them, and, giving them Battle, overthrew them with a
wonderful slaughter, for which great Action the Soldiers proclaimed him
Emperor, and Trebonianus, with his Son, to revenge themselves, were both slain
in fight against him, after they had sat in the Empire not quite two years,
but AEmilian was in four months afterward deposed and slain, by the same
Soldiers that advanced him.

P. Licinius Valerianus.
VALERIANUS was advanced to the Empire by the Praetorian An. Dom. 254.
Soldiers, a Man of so great Repute, and so infinitely beloved, that he soon
eclipsed the glory of AEmilian; He began the Eighth Persecution, but after he
had Reigned seven years, in a Battle against Sapor, King of Persia, he was
taken Prisoner, and for seven years more lived in a miserable Captivity, being
made the Footstool of that Tyrant, suffering all manner of Indignities that an
Insolent and Barbarous Conqueror could invent for him.

Publius Licinius Galienus.
GALIENUS, the Son of Valerian, succeeded his Father in the Empire. He is
described a proud and unfortunate Prince, and yet not An. Dom. 261.
ill beloved by the People, because his Vices were agreeing with the times; He
was prodigal and luxurious, wasting the Public Treasury in vain and fruitless
Experiments, all tending to Lust, Gluttony and Riot, careless of the Common
danger, and through a haughty Ignorance unapprehensive of his own.

In his days the Empire was on all sides strongly Invaded, the Germans
infested Italy, the Goths, Greece, Pontus and Asia, the Sarmatians seized
Austrick and Hungary, the Persians spoiled Syria, the Saxons brake into Gallia,
the Francks into Spain, so that the Empire had been utterly ruined through the
careless neglect of Galienus, had not several Commanders, in several places,
undertaken the defense of it.

They were Thirty together, and all assumed the Imperial Robe, and are called
by Historians the Thirty Tyrants. Six of them, namely, Lollianus, Victorinus,
Posthumus, the two Tetrici, Father and Son, and Marius, are conjectured to have
risen, or born sway in this Island, as appears by many of their Coyns found
in England, but especially at Colchester.

The memory of Marius, as Mr. Cambden conjectureth, is preserved in that
Inscription, MARII VICTORIAE, of which I have spoken before, and some think
that a Stone found in Hampshire, bearing this Inscription:

MEMORIAE
FL. VICTORI-
NAE T. TAM
VICTOR CONJUX
POSUIT.
It was erected to the honor of Victorina, or Victoria, the Mother of
Victorinus, the second Tyrant, afterward slain by his Soldiers.

This Victorina was called Master Castrorum, or the Mother of the Camp, and did
not only set up her Son and Grandson, both of them Victorini against Galienus,
but, after their deaths, Marius also, and both the Tetrici. Hence it is that
Porphyrius, Porphyrius.
a Philosopher then living, says, That BRITAIN was a soil fruitful of Tyrants.

Marius enjoyed his new Sovereignty but three days, as for Tetricus and his
Son, they held it out till the time of Aurelianus, when we shall hear more of
them.

Galienus Reigned eight years after the Captivity of his Father, and was then
slain at the Siege of Milan, by three of his own Captains, Martian, Heraclian,
and Ceronius, who agreed among themselves to divide the Empire, but their
Treason was so ill resented, that they never durst put in their Pretentions.

M. Aurelius Flavius Claudius.
HE was a most worthy Prince, wise of Counsel, and experienced An. Dom. 269.
in Wars. The Public Invaders of the Empire, the Goths, he drove back with the
slaughter of three hundred thousand fighting Men, and two thousand Ships, the
Germans he utterly subdued, and established again their Subjection to the Roman
Power.

Having performed these great Actions, and minding now to reduce the Empire to
its Unity in Government, he died of a Feavour, as he was preparing against
Tetricus, who held the Western Provinces.

He Ruled two years, and then his Brother QUINTILIUS was chosen by the Italian
Soldiers, but he enjoyed his Election but seventeen days, for the Victorious
Army of Claudius, thinking they had better right to create an Emperor, set up
AURELIUS, in so much that Quintilius finding it in vain to contend, ended his
life by opening his own Veins, or as other say, was slain by his Army, for his
too great severity in Discipline.

THE British Writers CONCERNING CLAUDIUS.
CLAUDIUS, by our Writers, is allowed a lawful King of this Island, for from
the days of Gordian, which are twenty four years, our homespun Histories make
an Inter-regnum.

GORDIAN was allowed King as being the Father of this Claudius, for (as I said
before) by the Law of the British Histories, the Right of Inheritance ascends,
and even Grandfathers hold their Kingdoms by the title of their Grandchildren.
Let us see therefore, by what Right Claudius is accounted King; We have heard
before, that one of his Titles to the Crown, was, that from his Line descended
Constantius, who held it in right of his Wife Helena, a British Woman, and so
sent the Title up to his Ancestour, the present Claudius. The Genealogy runs
thus; Claudius had two Brothers, Quinctilius and Crispus. Claudius and
Quinctilius dying without Issue, Crispus had a Daughter named Claudia, who
marrying Eutropius was the Mother of Constantius.

But now I shall show his other Title by which he claims, gathered out of the
Roman Histories. Pollio, a Roman Writer, in the Life of Claudius has these
words: He seems to draw his Original from Dalmatia, although others say he
was a Dardanian Pollio. Not. 22. adl. 5.
by Birth, descended of the Trojans in Ilium, and of the Blood of Dardanus
himself; thus far Pollio.

And can we think that the British Writers will slip so fair an occasion of
making another Trojan Prince in this Island? No certainly; hear therefore I
pray Basingstoke: There is a wonderful and secret power of Nature (says he)
whereby the Trojan Original of the Britains, despised by so many, and slighted
by Julius Caesar, is still brought to the Empire, as is manifest in Severus his
marriage with Martia, and Constantius taking Helena to Wife, which Constantius
descended of Claudius, who was of Trojan Race.

Thus we see the Kingdom of Brute, by the wonderful working of Nature, restored
again to the Trojans, and that it may not be done without an Oracle, take this
story out of Pollio, which for the worthiness of it, I set down among the
British Histories.

Claudius being well settled in the Empire, required of the Gods how long he
(...) enjoy it; The Answer was given,

Tu qui nunc Patrias gubernas or as,
Et mundum Regis arbiter Deorum
-- in veteres tuis novelliis:
Regnabunt etenim ter minores,
Et Reges facient suos minores.
Thou who thy FATHERS; That is, according to the British Hist. the Trojans.
Fathers Kingdom now do Rule,
And do the World, and Gods Command.
-- The next is imperfect, but then follows:
Thy Offspring after thee shall bear the sway,
And Kings shall their Inferiors stand.
By his Offspring is meant, Constantius and his Son Constantine, but it seems
Claudius not yet satisfied, enquires further of his own life. The Oracle
answered:

Tertia dum Latio regnantem viderit aestas.
Three Summers thou in Italy shall reign.
When finding the Gods more favorable to his Offspring than himself, he
desired to know the time of their continuance. The Oracle returned:

His ego nee metas rerum nec tempora pono,
To these I set no bounds of Time or Place.
Much after the rate of Brutus his Oracle:

Hic de prole tua Reges nascentur, and ipsis
Totius terrae subditus orbis erit.
Here from thy Loins shall Kings arise, and they
Over all Nations shall their Scepters sway.
Thus much concerning Claudius, and his supposed Trojan Original and Progeny; I
shall only add one story more out of Basing stoke concerning him, and then
conclude, it is this: When he lived a private Man under Gallenus, and often
sharply reproved that Prince for his vicious Life, the Emperor one day to
bribe and appease him, sent Basingstoke;
him a Dardanian Coat, and a British Hood, called BARDOCUCULLUS; Two great
Gifts, But to what end you may say are they recorded? no doubt there is a great
mystery in the bottom; for the former Present was given him as an
acknowledgment of his Trijan descent, and the other to signify his Right to
the Kingdom of Britain.

L. Domitius Aurel. Valor. Aurelianus.
AURELIANUS, being chosen Emperor by the Soldiers, and confirmed by the
Senate, set himself immediately to the An. Dom. 271.
establishing the Peace and Unity of the Empire, a work wherein Claudius his
Predecessor had been prevented by death, and which was worthily performed by
Aurelian. Tetricus, who Ruled in Gaul and Britain by the terror only of his
Arms, was reduced to obedience, and submitting himself was led in triumph
through Rome, but afterward came into favor, and was made Governor of
Campania, and the south Provinces of Italy, and was often styled, by Aurelian,
Emperor.

He ruled five years, and then was killed by his own Servants, through the
Treachery of Mnestheus his Secretary; He raised the ninth Persecution,
enquiring once Vopiscus.
of the Druids, whether his Family should long possess the Empire; They
answered, That no name should be so great as that of Claudius.

M. Claudius Tacitus.
TACITUS, after the death of Aurelian, was constrained by the Senate and
Soldiers, to accept of the Empire, much unwilling he was as An. Dom. 276.
one who foresaw it would be the ruin of himself and Family, and therefore
what he took with Regret he never executed cheerfully, so that reigning six
months only, he died of Grief, says Vopiscus (who wrote his life) having been
continually plagued with Factions and Parties.

Eutropius thinks him slain by his rebellious Soldiers, and Victor says he
died of a Fever.

He was no sooner dead but his Brother Florianus, without expecting the voice
of the Senate or Soldier, as rashly assumed the Imperial Authority, but
hearing that Probus was set up by the Eastern Army, he cut his own Veins and so
died, having pleased himself for some days in dreaming he was an Emperor.

M. Aurelius Valor. Probus.
UNDER the Emperor PROBUS, Bonosus, by descent a An. Dom. 277.
Britain, bred up a Spaniard, and his Mother a Gaulish Woman, together with
Proculus, usurped the Empire, claiming to himself all Britain, Spain, and
Gallia-Bracchata. Through many Military employments, from a low beginning, by
degrees, he ascended to high Command.

He was an exceeding great Drinker, insomuch that Aurelian would often say of
him, That he was born, Non ut vivat, sed ut bibat, not to live, but bib. But
the same Vmperour found means to employ him, and held him up in some quality,
as a very considerable and useful person, for when the Goths and Germans, those
drinking Nations, sent their Ambassadors, Who was so fit to undertake them as
Bonosus? For besides that he had vast stowage for his Liquor, and so well
hoopt, as Vopiscus says, the Wine lost nothing in running through him. He had
another most excellent qualification, in being Vopiscus vit. Benosi.
wisest still in his Cups, by which means he would pump out the secrets of
Ambassadors, and faithfully retein them, being one of those whom Martial calls
(...), an Observing Drinker, holding his Reason sound and secure, though
besieged round with Glasses, so that seeming to be disquieted, when (indeed) he
was not, he proved the more dangerous, by how much the less he was suspected in
effect. He was used as a Spy by Aurelian, by whose procurement also he married
a Gothish Lady of Royal Blood, that by so near alliance with that Nation, he
might be better able to sift out Intelligence.

Being for these great endowments advanced to Command over the German Shipping
in the Rhine, through Treachery (as was thought) he willingly suffered them to
be burnt, or, if through his Negligence they miscarried, not daring to stand
his Trial, but relying on his power with the Western Army, he joined himself
with Proculus, and seizing the Provinces of Spain, Britain and part of Gallia,
bore himself up a while for Emperor; The Germans, at the news of Probus's
advancing against him (looking it seems on Bonosus as a better Companion than a
Prince) deserted him, who after a long and bloody Fight at Cullen, being at
last vanquished, hanged himself, and so gave occasion of a ready Jest, Here
hangs a Tankard, not a Man.

After this, another Commotion arose in Britain, through the practices of one
whom Probus himself, by the entreaty of Victorinus a Moore, had placed here in
office Camb. Brit.
and trust, his name is not recorded, but he is supposed to be that Cornelius
Lelianus, whose Coyns are found in this Island, and no where else.

These Tumults were suddenly appeased, for Victorinus being upbraided by
Probus, for commending a man to him so treacherous and disloyal, obtained leave
for Britain, where, at his Arrival, feigning he had escaped from the Emperor,
he was kindly received, and not long after, procured means by night to dispatch
the Governor, by which the Province was quieted, and the Moore returned to
Probus, having in the same Action given testimony of a severe Loyalty, and a
persidious Friendship.

About this time, Probus (having subdued the Burgundians and Vandals in a great
Battle) sent many of them into Britain, where they afterward did great service
to the Romans, as often as any new Commotions or Insurrections happened in the
Island, and the Britains themselves, for some good Services, were, by him,
permitted to plant Vines and make Wine.

This Emperor well deserved the name of PROBUS, but avoided not the Fate of
his Predecessors, being slain by his own Army, the occasion whereof, was that
Vopiscus.
most Princely and worthy saying of his, That in a short time he would bring it
to pass, that the State should want no more Soldiers. He Reigned five years,
four months, some say, six years, etc.

M. Aurelius Carus.
Carinus, His Sons and CAESAR'S. Numerianus,

PROBUS thus made away, CARUS was advanced to the Empire; An. Dom. 282:
He created his two Sons CARINUS and NUMERIANUS his Caesar's.

To Carinus he gave the charge of Britain, with the rest of the Western
Provinces, and taking Numerianus with him into the East, he invaded the
Persians, but he died suddenly, as some say struck with Lightning. Vopiscus
says, he died a Natural death, and that the Soldiers, for sorrow, firing his
Tent, gave occasion Vopiscus.
to the former Report.

His pious Son Numerianus was flain by Aper, and he by Dioclesian, who in a set
Battle also not long after slew the wicked Carinus, who by his Riot had wasted
Britain and the other Provinces, these Actions happened within the space of two
years.

C. Aurel. Valor. Dioclesianus, Jovius, AND M. Aurel. Valor. Maximianus.
DIOCLESIAN being advanced to the Empire, chose MAXIMIAN for his Associate,
Dioclesian took Galerius, and Maximinus An. Dom. 285.
elected Constantius Clorus, constraining them to divorce their Wives, and to
take their Daughters in Marriage.

About this time lived Carausius, a Menapian born, but whether of those Menapii
that inhabited Germany, about Juliers and Trevers, or of the Menapii in
Ireland, about Wexford, is uncertain, but it may best seem of the latter
rather, for Aurelius Victor calls him a Citizen of Menapia, and the City
Menapia is placed, by Geographers, not in those Low Countries of Germany, but
in Ireland. Certain it Aur. Vict.
is, as Bede and Eutropius witness, that he was but of low Parentage, but
withal of an Bid. Eutrop.
Inventive and Active nature, a good Seaman, and who in many Engagements had
gained such Reputation, that he was made at length, Admiral of the Belgic and
Armorick Seas, much then infested with the Piracies of the Franks and Saxons.
But he used his Commission rather to the enrichment of himself than securing
the Coasts. Oftentimes he would suffer these Rovers to seize the Goods and
Ships of Merchants, and in their return, laden with spoil and booty, would set
upon them and retake them, but neither restoring the Goods to the Owner, nor
accounting to the Public, he proved the grievance of the two.

But it happened that this Trade failing, the Pirates dreading his Power, and
the Merchants not trusting to his protection, now no longer used Dissimulation,
but seized the Merchants himself, and suffered the Pirates to pass under
Compositions.

Maximian hearing of it, sends privily to slay him, and in the mean time seizes
many of his Principal men in Piccardy, about Bullen.

Carausius having intelligence of these things, and finding himself too great a
Criminal to be less than an Emperor, took upon him immediately the Imperial
Robe, seizes Britain, withdraws his Fleet from the defense of the Belgic and
Gaulish Shoars, builds other Ships after the Roman fashion, and secures to
himself the Roman Legion, here lying in Garrison, keeping out the Companies of
Foreign Soldiers. The Merchants and Factors of Gallia he listed, and put a
Garrison into Bullen, the public Revenues of Britain and Belgium he converted
to his own use, and by the Spoils of whole Provinces allured many barbarous
Nations, the Franks especially, to side with them. These he trained to
Sea-service, and was now grown so powerful that all Coasts were dangerous, and
no passage left safe for the Romans to assail him.

Maximian, by this time was set forward with a mighty Army, but when he came to
the Seaside, partly discouraged for want of Seamen, and partly affrighted
with the British Fleet that covered the Ocean, he made a stop, and sending to
Carausius concluded a Peace with him, yielding to him the Government and Rule
of the Island, as one who was best able to defend it from the Invasions and
inroads of the Northern Nations; Hence it is, that in the silver Coyns of
Carausius this League and Amity is signified on the stamp, being Portraitures
of two Emperors joining hands, with this Inscription,

CONCORDIA AUGG. This Peace made by constraint, not choice, Maximian revenges
upon the Franks, who had secretly, and underhand sent assistance to Carausius,
insomuch that coming upon them suddenly, he makes great slaughter of them, and
brings them to a total subjection. But Carausius obtaining the Kingdom thus by
force, and governing it with incorrupt and unstained Reputation, nothing was
wanting to the substance and magnificence of a peaceful Reign.

To stop the Inroads of barbarous Nations, he rebuilds the Wall between the
mouths of Cluda and Carunus (supposed in the same place where Severus had built
his) and fortified the same with seven Castles; Upon the River Carun he erected
a round House of polished Stone, which River (as Minutius writes) took name of
Ninius.
him, and withal, a Triumphal Arch, in remembrance of some Victory there
obtained.

And now it was that Dioclesian and Maximian, as well to preserve what they had
won, as to regain what was lost, chose to themselves two Casars, Constantius
Clorus and Galerius.

CONSTANTIUS having got together an Army, with speedy Marches went upon Bullen
unawares, where Carausius had put a strong Garrison, and beleagured it round
about; The mouth of the Haven he blockt up, by driving in huge Piles of Wood
into the bottom, and ramming in great Stones between, one upon another in
nature of a Mould, which was so strongly wrought, that the Sea for many days
beating upon it, could not break or beat it down, and as no Relief could be
sent in by Carausius, the Town was taken. But what is most observable, the very
next Tide after the Surrender, made such a breach into the Rampire, that it was
wholly disjoined and broken asunder.

In the mean time Carausius was treacherously slain by Alectus, one who was in
special favor and trust under him, after he had Reigned seven years, as some
say, with great Justice and Moderation; as others report, with Tyranny and
Oppression.

And now Constantius was wholly taken up in his Preparations (for the recovery
of Britain) Rigging, and setting out his Fleet, and storing his Ships with Men
and Arms, which done, he divides his Navy into several Squadrons, and at one
time sets out from diverse Ports.

This so amazed Alectus, who knew not where to find him, that void of Counsel,
and not knowing which way to turn himself, he at last perceived, and never
before, that he was enclosed by the Ocean rather than defended by it.

The Weather was foul, and the Sea so overcast with Clouds and Mists, that
Constantius with his Navy passed undiscerned of the British Fleet, which lay
scouting near the Isle of Wight, to intercept his passage. Being got a shore,
the first thing he did, was, the burning his own Ships, that his Soldiers
might have no confidence in any refuge but Victory.

Alectus (receiving Intelligence of his Landing) sorsook the Sea, and in great
haste marched into the Province, but before he could gather his strength
together, he was met by a Party of the Romans, Commanded by Asclepiodotus,
Captain of the Pratorian Bands; Grown desperate now, and impatient of delay,
not heeding the ordering of his Men, or bringing them all to fight, he first
flung off his Purple Robe that he might not be known, and then rushing
suriously into the Battle (attended only with the Accessories of his Treason,
and his Outlandish Hirelings) was slain in a Tumultuary skirmish, and his body
at last, by the discovery of a particular Soldier, was sound among the rest of
the dead Carcasses.

They who escaped the Battle hastened to London, intending with the Pillage of
that City to escape by Sea, but it so happened, that another Party of
Constantius his Army, by the thick Mist at Sea, severed from the rest of their
body, took their way directly to that City, and arrived just in the nick of
time to relieve it. And now great slaughter was made of the Franks through all
the Streets, and the Citizens not only received safety by the overthrow of
their Enemies, but had the pleasure in beholding their deliverance.

At that time it was, as our Chronicles record, that Lucius Gallus was slain,
by a little Brook which ran almost from the middle of the City, and of him was
called Cambd. Trinobantes.
in the British, Nant-Gall, in English, Walbrooke, which name is preserved in
that Street, wherein runs a Common-shoar, in the place, as is supposed, of
that River.

All this seems by Eumenius, who then lived (and was of Constantius's
Household) Eumenius. Sigonius.
to have been done in one continued course of Action, and so Sigonius, a
Learned Writer, takes it, but others allow three years to the Tyranny of
Alectus.

The Recovery of the Province by these great Successes, gave occasion to that.
Panegyric entitled to Maximian only, but penned to the honor of both
Emperors, in which are many things that show the state of the Island in those
days, and relate particularly to the Inhabitants, the strength and grandeur of
the Nation. By our Historians it is cited by piece-meals, as their occasions
served to make use of it, but I have thought fit to set it down entire, with
some Remarks upon diverse occurrences therein mentioned.

THE Panegyric Oration, ASCRIBED TO MAMERTINUS, In Praise of the EMPERORS
DIOCLESIAN and MAXIMIAN; Entitled only to MAXIMIAN.
WHEN the compass of the whole World (Most Victorious Emperor) by your
Princely Conduct was recovered, not the Roman World only (that is) the Ancient
bounds and limits of the Empire, but new Nations subdued, and the Borders
brought into Obedience; when Germany had been so often vanquished, and Sarmatia
discomfited, when the Vitungi, Quadi and Carpi, were driven to flight, and the
Goth himself submitted, when the King of Persia, by Gifts and Presents, sought
his peace, there was one thing still left behind, and wanting to the
completing of the whole, which we will not stick to confess, sorely grieved
us, and seemed the more reproachful and intolerable, for that, as it were in
despite of so mighty an Empire and Government, it still held out, and suffered
not the full accomplishment of your perfect Renown and Glory. For as the name
of BRITAIN is but one, so the loss of it, to the Commonwealth, ought not to be
esteemed small and inconsiderable, a Land so plentiful of Corn, and rich in
Pasture, so full of Mines and veins of Metal, so gainful in Tributes and
Revenues, so accommodated with Havens, and of Circuit so large and spacious,
insomuch that CAESAR, the beginner of your Royal Dignity, and the first
discoverer of that Island, thought he had found a NEW WORLD, supposing it of so
vast an extent, that it could not be environed by the Sea, but rather that it
encompassed the Ocean it self.

Now Britain, at that time, was not furnished with Ships of War, nor the Romans
themselves at first, but soon after the Wars of Carthage and Asia, and through
their frequent Engagements with the Pirates, and Mithridates, they were grown
as skilful at Sea as Land.

The British Nation even in those days was accustomed only to the Picts and
Irish, Fnemies like themselves, half naked, and not acquainted with Armor, so
that for the want of knowledge therein, they were not able to withstand the
Roman force, and the only Glory Caesar gained in his Expeditions, was, that he
had passed the Ocean.

But in this dangerous and base Revolt, the Fleet which formerly guarded the
Coasts of Gallia, was seized by the Caraucius, or Alectus. Caraucius. This
seems to be spoken to Constantiuque
Pirate at his flight, and a great number of other Ships, new built, after the
form and fashion of the Romans; Besides, the Roman Legion was surprised, and
constrained to take part with the Enemy, and diverse Companies of Strangers that
were Soldiers also, were sent aboard and shut up, and then forced to serve
against us. The Merchants and Factours of Gallia were Listed in abundance, and
no small number of barbarous Nations, invited by the Spoil of the Provinces,
were procured to their assistance, all trained to Sea-service, by the diligent
instructions of the Rebels, the first attempters of this mischievous practice.
And, though our Armies in Strength and Courage were invincible, yet, as to Sea
Affairs, they were raw and unexperienced, insomuch that this War was noised
about, as likely to continue long and troublesome, and although we hoped well
of the Success, yet the fame of the Rebels Advantages sounded in the ears of
all.

And what added Courage to their side, was, the long impunity they had enjoyed
in their wicked practices, their minds were puffed up, with Presumption, and
their former despair heartened into Boldness and Insolence. They haughtily gave
out, Our stay was the Fear we had conceived of them, whereas (indeed) the
disadvantages by Sea, by a fatal necessity, deferred our Victory, only, till a
more convenient opportunity offered it self.

But they would not believe, that the War was put off for a time, by sober
advice and counsel, but rather that it was totally omitted, through despair of
doing any good against them, insomuch that grown secure and fearless of Common
punishment, one of the Alectus.
Captains slew the Caraucius, or Alectus. Caraucius. This seems to be spoken
to Constantiuque
Arch-Pirate, or Captain-Rover (as I may call him) hoping in reward of so great
an Enterprise to gain the whole Government to himself.

This War then being both so necessary in the undertaking, so difficult in
performance, and on the Enemies part grown to such a stubborn and stiff
management, by the pride of their great Provisions, you (most Noble Emperor)
did so take in hand, that so soon as you bent the terrible Force of your
Imperial Majesty against them, it presently was the Judgment of all, that the
Enterprise was already performed.

For first of all, by intercession made to your Majesty, it was provided before
hand, that the barbarous Nations (a thing chiefly to be foreseen) by the
absence of your divine Power, should not take advantage to raise new Troubles,
for You your self in Person, You (I say) Mighty Lord, Maximian, Eternal
Emperor, vouchsafed to advance the coming of Your divine Excellence by the
speediest way that might be, which to your wisdom was not unknown.

You therefore suddenly came to the Rhine, and not with an Army of Horse and
Foot, but with the terror of your Presence did preserve and defend that
Fronteir; For Maximian being once upon the River, countervailed the greatest
Army that could be produced, for you (most Invincible Emperor) furnishing and
arming diverse Fleets, made the Enemy so uncertain of his own proceedings, and
void of Counsel, that then at length he might perceive that he was not
defended, but rather kept Prisoner by the Ocean.

And here I must call to mind, how delightful and easy was the good fortune of
former Princes, who ruled the Commonwealth with Praise, who although sitting
at Rome themselves, yet had the Triumphs and Sir-names of such Nations given
them, as their Captains subdued. Fronto therefore, not second to any, but in
the first rank of Roman Eloquence, yielded to Antoninus the Emperor the Glory
of finishing the British Wars, although he sitting at home in his Palace in the
City of Rome, had committed the Conduct and success of that Affair to the
management of his Captains, for he confesses, That the Emperor guiding, as it
were, the Helm of the Ship, deserved the Honor of the whole course.

But You Caraucius, or Alectus. Caraucius. This seems to be spoken to
Constantiuque
(most Invincible Emperor) though your Imperial Dignity required no more, have
not been only Director of this War, both by Sea and Land, but a present Actor
and Engager therein, and by Your Personal Example and Resolution, the Victory
was wholly achieved; For so soon as you embarked at Sluice, you immediately
infused Life and Spirit into their hearts, who as yet had not ventured to sail
out of the River Saine, insomuch that those Captains who lay lingering in
expectation of Calmer Seas, and fair Weather, now cried to have the Sails
hoised up, the Anchors weighed, and were impatient in prosecuting their Voyage,
despising all tokens that seemed to fore-bode their Ruin, and so in a Rainy
and tempestuous day, with a cross Wind, they set out.

But what was he that feared to commit himself to Sea, were the same never so
unquiet? when you were once under sail and set forward, one voice and
exhortation was among them all (as is reported) when they heard you launched
forth; What do we doubt? Why do we stay? He is now loosed from Land, He is
forward in his way, and perhaps is already got over; All hands to work, we will
thorough, and venture the dangers at Sea, yet, what Dangers are to be feared
since we follow the Emperor?

Neither did the opinion of your good Fortune deceive them, for as by their
Report we understand, at that very time there fell such a thick Mist and Fogg
upon the Seas, that the Enemies Navy scouting about the Isle of Wight, lost
their expectations, and your Ships passed unseen; Neither did the Rebels keep
the Seas, although not able to resist you at Land.

But now, that the same invincible Army, fighting under your Ensigns and Name,
immediately on its landing, set fire to its own Ships, what induced them to it
but only the persuasion of your Divine assistance? or, what other Reason
prevailed with them to leave no Refuge (if need were) for flight, nor to fear
the doubtful chance of War, seeing that in Battle, good and ill successes have
their Common lots, but that by contemplation of your former Fortune, they
certainly concluded what would follow, and were fully assured of Victory to be
obtained. There were no sufficient Forces at that present with them, no mighty
or puissant strength of the Romans, but they had only the consideration of that
unspeakable Fortune and Success, which was derived to You from the Heavens
above. For whenever Battle is offered, to make full account of Victory
beforehand, depends not on the Courage and assurance of the Soldiers, but
the extraordinary felicity of the General.

But, what meant the Ringleader of that lawless Faction to quit the shoars
which he possessed? Why did he forsake both his Fleet and the Haven? But that
(Most Invincible Emperor) he stood in fear of your coming, whose Sails he
beheld advancing to wards him, and therefore whatever happened, he chose rather
to try his Fortune with your Captains, than endure the force of your Highness
presence. Ah mad man! That understood not, that whithersoever he fled, the
power of your Divine Majesty was present, and in all places where your
Countenance and Banner are had in reverence. He fled indeed from your presence,
and fell into the hands of your People, of You was he overcome, of your Armies
was he oppressed.

To be short, he was brought into such Terror, that continually looking behind
him, as it were fearing you at his back, like one out of his wits, and amazed,
he knew not which way to turn him, he was hurried to his destruction, neither
ordering his Men to battle, nor Marshalling such power as he had about him, of
the Old Abettors only of that Conspiracy, and the barbarous Hirelings, like one
forgetful of those great Preparations he had made, he ran headlong to his ruin.

And in your felicity (most Noble Emperor) the Commonwealth had this good
fortune included, that though the Victory was gained in behalf of the Roman
Empire, yet scarce a Roman perished in the obtaining it; For, as I hear, those
Hills and Valleys were covered with none but the Carcasses of Rebels, all that
were found, were either of the barbarous Nations, or dressed up in their
counterfeit shapes and Apparel, glistering with their long yellow Hairs, but
now with wounds, gashes and blood, deformed, lying in sundry postures, as the
pangs of death surprised them, and as they drew in their maimed limbs and
mangled parts.

Among these, the chief Ringleader of the Thieves was found, who had cast off
those Robes which in his life time he had usurped and dishonored, being
scarcely covered with one piece of Apparel whereby he might be known, so near
were his words likely to prove true which he uttered before his death, That he
would not have it known how he died.

Thus ( Most Invincible Emperor) so great a Victory was appointed to You (by
the consent of the immortal Gods) over all the Enemies you assailed, but
especially the Franks, for those your Soldiers also which as before I have
said, held not their right Course by reason of the Mist at Sea, were now come
to the City of London, where they made great slaughter (through all the
Streets) of those Outlandish Hirelings, who having escaped the Battle,
intended, with the Pillage of that City, to secure themselves by flight; But
now, being thus slain by your Soldiers, the Subjects of your Province were
rescued from further danger, and took pleasure in the execution of their
Enemies. O, what a manifest Victory was this, worthy of innumerable Triumphs!
by which Victory Britain is restored to the Empire, by which Victory the Nation
of the Franks is utterly destroyed, and by which many other Nations, found
Accessories in that impious Conspiracy, are reduced to Obedience; To conclude,
the Seas are cleared, and brought to perpetual quiet and security. Glory You
therefore ( Most Invincible Emperor) for that you have as it were got another
WORLD, and in restoring to the Roman Greatness the glory of the SEA Conquest,
have added to the Empire an Element greater than the Earth, to wit, the Main
Ocean.

You have put an end to that War ( Invincible Emperor) that seemed to threaten
all Provinces, and might have spread abroad, and burst out in a flame as wide
as the Ocean extends, or the Mediterranean Gulf does reach. Neither are we
ignorant, although through fear of You that Infection spread through the bowels
of Britain only, and proceeded no farther, with what rage it might have
advanced it self elsewhere, if it could have been assured of means to have
ranged abroad so far as it desired; for it was bounded in by no border of
Mountain or River, which by Garrisons appointed, may be guarded and defended,
but was as free as the Ships themselves, and might (notwithstanding we have
your Valor and Fortune to relieve us) be continually at our elbows to affright
us, so far as either Sea reaches or Wind blows.

For that incredible boldness, and undeserved success of a few silly Captive
Franks, in the days of PROBUS the Emperor came to our remembrance, who,
conveying away certain Vessels from the Coast of Pontus, wasted both Greece and
Asia, and not without great hurt and damage coasting upon Lybia, at length took
the City Saragose in Sicily (a Port-Town, in times past, highly renowned for
Victories at Sea) and afterward passing the Streights of Gibraltar came into
the Ocean, and so with the Fortunate success of many rash and presumptuous
Attempts, plainly showed, that nothing can be safe from the desperate boldness
of Pirates, wherever Ships can touch and have success.

So therefore, by this Your Victory, not Britain alone is delivered from
Bondage, but to all Nations safety is restored, which might, by the use of the
Seas, come to as great Perils in time of War, as to gain of Commodities in time
of Peace.

Now Spain (to pass over the Coast of Gallia) with her shoars almost in sight,
is in security; Now Italy, now Africa, now all Nations, even to the Fens of
Maeotis, are void of perpetual Cares; neither are they less joyful, the fear of
Danger being taken away, which to feel, as yet, necessity had not brought them,
but they rejoice so much the more for this, that by the direction of Your
providence, and the powerful concurrence of Your fortune, so great a
combination of Seamen is broken, their quarters beat up, and Britain it self,
which had given harbor and protection to so long a Conspiracy, was made
sensible at last of your Victory, by her restitution to peace and quietness.

Not without good cause therefore, immediately when You her long wished
Revenger and Deliverer was arrived, Your Majesty was met with great Triumph,
and the Britains, full of unspeakable Joy, ran forth and presented themselves
before you, with their Wives and Children, adoring not only your self, whom
they esteemed as one descended from Heaven, but even the sails and tacklings of
that Ship which had brought your Divine Presence on their Shoars; And, as soon
as You had set foot on Land, they were ready to prostrate themselves before
you, that you might, as it were, walk over the Necks of them, who desired you
above all things to do it.

Nor was it a wonder they were so Joyful, seeing, after their miserable
Captivity, so many years continued, after so long abusing their Wives, and the
enslaving of their Children, at length were they reitored to Liberty, at length
made Romans, at length refreshed with the true light of the Imperial Rule and
Government. For besides the same of your Clemency and Goodness, which was
sounded forth by all Nations, in Your Countenance ( Caesar) they visibly read
the Characters of all Virtues, in your Face Gravity, in your Eyes Mildness, in
your Ruddy complexion Bashfulness, in your words Justice; all which things, as
by Regard they acknowledged, so with shouts of Joy they signified aloud; To You
they bound themselves by Vow, to You they bound their Children, yea, and to
your Children they devoted all the posterity of their Race and Offspring.

We truly (O perpetual Parents, and Lords of Mankind!) implore this of the
Immortal Gods, with most earnest supplication, and hearty prayer, That our
Children, The acknowledgment of perpetual Obedience.
and their Children, and such as shall spring from their Loins for ever, may be
dedicated unto You, and to those whom you now bring up, or shall bring up
bereafter. For what greater happiness can we wish to them that shall succeed
us, than to be made partakers of that Felicity, which at present we our selves
enjoy.

The Roman Commonwealth does now entirely possess, in Peace and Union,
whatever formerly, at sundry times, and in scattered parcels belonged to it,
and that huge and vast Power, which with its own burden was sunk and riven
asunder, is now again closely compacted and joined together, by the sure
ligaments of the Imperial Government. For there is no part of the Earth, or
Region under Heaven, but is either quieted by Fear, subdued by Force, or else
won by Clemency; Is there any thing else remaining behind, to which the power
and ambition of Man can extend, beyond the Ocean, what is there more than
Britain? which is so recovered by You, that those Nations also adjoining to it
are subject to your Commands. There is no occasion to invite you further,
except the ends of the Ocean, which Nature forbids, should be sought for.

All is Yours ( Most Invincible Princes) that is accounted worthy of you, hence
it proceeds that you may equally provide for all, since all is in your
Majesty's possession. And therefore, as heretofore ( Most Excellent Emperor
DIOCLESIAN) by Your appointment Asia supplied the Desert places of Thracia,
with Inhabitants transplanted thither, as afterward ( Most Excellent Emperor
MAXIMIAN) by Your orders, the Franks at length brought to a pleasant
subjection, and reduced to Laws, have Peopled and manured the empty possessions
of the Nervians, and the Neighborhood of Trier, so now by your Victories (
Invincible Constantius Caesar) whatsoever lay vacant about Amiens, Beavois,
Trois, and Langres, begins to flourish with Inhabitants of sundry Nations;
Moreover Your most loyal City of Autun, for whose sake I have a peculiar cause
to rejoice, by means of this glorious Victory in Britain, has received many
and diverse Artificers, of whom these Provinces abounded, and now, by their
Workmanship, the same City rises up, by repairing her ancient Houses, and
restoring her public Buildings and Temples, so that now she accounts her
Ancient and friendly Incorporation with Rome renewed with advantage, and that
she has, You, for her Founder.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Out of the foregoing PANEGYRIC.
THis is the sum and substance of that Panegyric inticuled to MAXIMIAN, out of
which the History of the Wars against Carausius and Alectus is gathered. I need
not repeat those several Expressions therein, which evidently set forth the
considerable Power of this Nation united together, though under Usurpers, their
dreadful Preparations by Sea, which not only gave Alarums to Spain, Gallia, and
Africa, but even to Italy it self, and as far as the Mediterranean extended.

The subduing of these Rebels was esteemed a Victory, in which the power and
strength of the whole Empire was engaged, and that action of Constantius, in
firing of his Ships at his landing, plainly showed, that he reckoned himself
fighting for the last stake.

So much Masters of the Seas were the British Fleets in those days, that the
Orator ascribes to the Emperors in having reduced this Island, no less than
the glory of having added the whole Ocean to the Empire, and by the Example of
the Franks, a few inconsiderable Pirates at first, who from Pontus, within the
Bosphor, went on in pillaging and sacking of Towns and Cities, till they passed
the Streights of Gibraltar, and entered the main Ocean; He evidently shows, that
to command the Element is of greater extent than to be Lord of all Nations
besides, and that Land-Territory is but a slug in comparison of the quick and
active Power of Sea Dominion.

But that which more nearly relates to our present purpose, is, that we find in
this Panegyric the first mention of the Picts, a Nation of whose Original
there is great dispute. The Orator here, seems to make them Inhabitants of
the North of this Island, even in the days of Julius Caesar, where he says,
That at the arrival of Caesar in Britain, the Britains were only acquainted
with their Neighbors the Irish and Picts.

Hence it may be supposed, the Authors of the British History took occasion
ever since his days to make use of that Nation in all their Relations of the
North, and to fetch them from Scythia, or Scandia, but this cannot be gathered
out of the Panegyric; For the Orator (by a usual Figure in such cases) by the
Picts, means no more than the Northern Britains, who, about his days, were
named Picts, in distinction to those Britains who were civilized, and lived
within the Roman Pale; for after the Romans had conquered this Island, those
Natives who could not be brought to subjection, but strugled continually for
their Liberty, at last, by the growing Power of the Romans, were constrained to
take into the North, as a place of better security, full of rough and rugged
Passages, desended by barren and craggy Mountains, and hemmed in with Washes
and standing Mires, for the same Reasons, and upon the same occasions, that the
more civilized Britains upon the Invasion of the Saxons, possessed that part of
the Island now called Wales. And with this agrees the Testimony of Tacitus,
when he says, That Enemies of the Romans were, by Agricola, driven into the
North, as it were, into another Island, that is, within the Tacitus.
Friths of Edinborough and Dunbritton, and none doubts but they were Britains
that inhabited those remotest parts of the Island. For can we imagine that all
those Britains, Enemies to the Romans, which brought out thirty thousand Armed
Men into the field against Agricola, who gave unto Severus such great
Overthrows that he lost seventy thousand in one Expedition, were pulled up
every Mothers Son, and none left for seed and procreation, that they might make
room only for Foreigners out of Scythia and Thrace?

But that the Picts were nothing but the remnant of the Britains, and of the
same Nation, Mr. Cambden proves by their Demeanor, Name, and Language.

First, Both Nations, the Picts and Britains, made no distinction of Sex in
Government, Camb. Brit.
they were both alike painted; the whole Island in Caesar's days, and in these
latter Emperors, that part only which were uncivilized, retained that
barbarous Custom; besides, we have the Authority of all Roman Writers for this
Opinion.

For, those Barbarous People, that from the Forest of Caledonia, and furthest
Tracts in the North, made Incursions on the Romans, are (by Tacitus) called by
no Tacitus. Dio Cass. Herod. Vopisc. and al.
other name than Britains; and After-writers, as Dio. Cassius, Herodian,
Vopiscus, and others, name them Britains, and Britains of Caledonia. Certainly,
had these Authors known of such a Nation as Picts, they would not have been
silent therein, especially if they had done such wonders as are ascribed to
Them by our late Historians. Neither would those Roman Emperors, who warred
fortunately against them, to wit, Commodus, Severus, with Bassianus and Geta
his Sons, have assumed the Title of BRITANNICUS, unless those they had
conquered had been Britains. Surely the Romans, whose chief Magnificence
consisted in subduing strange and unknown Nations, if they had conquered any
such People as these, would undoubtedly have assumed the Surname of Pictus, and
used it in their Coyns and Inscriptions.

Besides, the very Name of PICTS proves what Nation they were of, and by whom
so called; For when the Roman Language had obtained in the Southern parts of
this Island, they called those Britains that lived North, and retained the
Custom of Painting, PICTI, a Painted-People.

Neither is it material what Basingstoak writes of them out of Humph. Lloyd,
namely, that they were called Picthi, not Picti, seeing that it is usual in the
British Basingstoak, Not. 14. ad. 1. 5.
Language, as well as other Northern Dialects, to abound in the Letter H,
neither is the change from Picti in the Latin, to Picthi, or Picths in the
British, so great a deviation, as from Picths, to call them Pehits and Peohtas,
and their Language Phitiade, as other Dialects do; as for what the same Writer
produces, that in the Ancient Panegyric they were called Pictones, not Picti,
is a mistake, for by the negligence of the Coppyer, Pictonum was foisted
instead of Pictorum.

As for the concordance of the Language of the Picts with that of the Britains,
they that desire to be satisfied, may read Mr. Cambden on that subject, neither
does the Authority of venerable Bede, in any wise, make against this Opinion,
where he says, That the Nation of the Picts came in Long Ships, and those not
many, out of Bid.
Scythia ( as the Report goes) into Ireland; for this might be many years
after the death of Julius Caesar, and was most probable in the time of these
Emperors, when the northern Nations of Scandia swarmed in these Seas, but that
they brought the name of Picts with them, for the aforesaid Reasons, is
improbable, but it rather seems, that Landing in the north of Scotland and
Ireland, and mixing with those Barbarous Nations there inhabiting, called
Picts, they received their Name, whose Customs, Laws, Language, and Interest,
they had espoused; So that whether they were (as Hector Boctius says) derived
from the Agathersi, or as Pomponius, Hect. Boet. Pompo. Latus, and Avent.
Laetus, and Aventinus, and others, will have it from the Germans, or from the
Pictones in France, as some would bring them, or out of Scythia, according to
Bid, it mattereth not, seeing what all of them call the Nation of the Picts,
is in reason to be understood of some Rovers only which landed in the North,
and united with that People about the days of these Emperors, or some time
before, but that ever there was the name of Picts, in Caesar's days, in this
Island, or in later Emperors, such a Nation distinct from the Britains, Roman
Authors, which could not have omitted such a considerable circumstance, never
so much as mention. But thus much concerning the Picts, let us proceed to the
History.

In the days of these Emperors Britain was full of Excellent Workmen, and
Builders, as out of the Panegyric is gathered, whom, upon the settling of
Affairs in the Island, the AEduans in Burgundy entertained to build their
Temples and Public Edifices.

Peace thus established in Britain, and the State quieted, Dioclesian, who had
hitherto employed his Valor with success against his Enemies, now used his
Rage in a bloody Persecution against his Innocent and Obedient Subjects, the
Christians.

This is the tenth Persecution, and of all the foregoing the most Bloody, and
of longest continuance, the fatal Bill of their Martyrdom was, seventeen
thousand a Month, besides infinite numbers that suffered by Confiscation,
Banishment, Prisons, etc.

The Christian Churches were every where demolisht, their Bibles sought out and
burnt, and death for any to conceal them, and all means practiced, not only to
extinguish the Professors; but to root out the very Name of their Religion.

The most remarkable that had their shares in Britain, were, first, ALBAN of
Verulam, beheaded at Holmhurst, since called Derswould, where now the Town of
St. Albans (bearing his name) is built, of whom Fortunatus Priscus, in his Book
of the praise of Virginity, writes, Albanum Egregium faecunda Britannia
profert. Fort. Prisc. in Laud. Virg.
Next his Instructour Amphibolus, then Julius and Aaron of Caerleon, upon Uske
in Monmouthshire, Bid says of Leicestershire; and in Litchfield so many, that
the place became another Golgotha, and so the name imports, as John Ross of
Warwick Bid.
reports, namely, the Field of Dead Bodies. For this cause the City, even
unto this day (says Mr. Speed) does bear for their Seal of Arms, an
Eschochean, or Speed Chron. Aurel. Vict. Eusebius.
Field, charged with many Martyrs.

Dioclesian and Maximian reigned twenty years, and resigned the Empire to their
two Caesar's, Constantius and Galerius.

Dioclesian retired into Dalmatia, and lived a private life in the City
Solonia, where, afterward, he poisoned himself, says Aurelius Victor,
Eusebius reports he died mad.

Maximian again attempting to resume the Empire, was slain for contriving the
murder of Constantius, Eusebius avoucheth, he hanged himself in the City
Marseittes, thus ended these two Tyrants.

THE British History, In the Days of DIOCLESIAN AND MAXIMIAN.
AFter BONOSUS, succeeded CARAUSIUS in the Kingdom An. Dom. 289.
of Britain, in the year 289, the fourth of these Emperors; He made the Picts
his Confederates, and entertaining all who flockt to him under the hopes of
Pillage and Plunder, He constrained the Britains to make him their King, who,
not knowing, now, who was their Friend or Foe, partly for fear, and partly for
want of a lawful Inheritour, elected him to the Crown.

Having thus gained the Power, first, he rewards the Picts with the vast
Territories in Albania, and not content with Invading the property of his
Subjects, and dispossessing the Ancient Britains, like a proud Tyrant, he
infringed all their Rights and Privileges.

The Romans hearing thereof, sent Alectus with three Legions to kill him, and
to restore Britain to the Empire; Carausius accordingly was slain, after he had
reigned seven years, but instead of giving the Kingdom to the Romans, Alectus
himself usurped it, and assumed the Crown in the year 269. An. Dom. 269.


He punished with great slaughter those Britains, who, forsaking the
Commonwealth, had adhered to the society of Carausius, and been partakers in
his Robberies, which they sorely resenting, chose Asclepiodotus to revenge,
exhorting him to set upon him in London, whilst he was celebrating a Feast to
his Country Gods, at whose Arrival, Alectus forsaking his Sacrifice, and
marching out with the choice of his Soldiers, entered Battle with him, but was
slain after he had reigned three years.

Livius Gallus, a Captain of Alectus, still held London, to the reducing
whereof An. Dom. 299.
Asclepiodotus, now King, summoned the Demeta, or the Inhabitants of that part
of the Island now called South Wales, the Venedoti, and those of Deira and
Albania. With these Forces he beleagures the City, and with his Warlike
Engines batters down great part of the Wall. Gallus perceiving himself able to
hold out no longer, comes to Parley, and surrenders the Town upon Condition to
march out Armed, which being agreed to, Asclepiodotus enters, but the Venedoti,
contrary to Articles, fell upon Gallus and slew him, at a Brooks-side within
the City, called after his Name, Walbrooke or Gal-brooke.

Thus Asclepiodotus got the full possession of the Kingdom, but being not able,
or skilful to defend his Subjects from the cruelty of the Roman Emperors, who
in his days raised the Persecution in Britain, he was slain by Coilus Duke of
Colchester, after he had reigned about one year.

COIL, the third of that name, after the death of Asclepiodotus assumed the
Crown, and now Constantius having heard of the Troubles in Britain, under the
several Usurpers, lands upon the Coast, Coil informed thereof sends
Ambassadors to crave Peace, and promises Subjection and Homage, upon condition
that he should enjoy the Kingdom of Britain, paying the accustomed Tributes and
Tolls to the Romans.

To this Constantius agrees, and receives Hostages, and not long after marries
Helena his Daughter, than whom a fairer Virgin never lived, and who, besides
that, she was an excellent Musician, and generally instructed in all Liberal
Arts and Sciences.

Coil, after one years Reign, died, and left the Kingdom to Constantius, who
Governed in the Right of his Wife Helena, so that again the British Succession
returned An. Dom. 300.
to that of the Romans.

Fl. Val. Constantius Chlorus.
AFTER the Resignation of Dioclesian and Maximian, the Empire which hitherto
was held entire, though often under An. Dom. 305.
many Heads, was now divided into two several Estates, independent of each
other, and ameanable only to their particular Princes, which (as Eusebius
notes) proved the fatal end of the Imperial Glory. The Western Provinces (the
Eusebius.
Government whereof alone relates to our present History) fell to CONSTANTIUS,
the Son of a Daughter to Crispus, Brother to Claudius, the second of that name,
Emperor of Rome. A Prince wise and valiant, and so free from Ambition, that he
chose rather to Govern well, than much, resigning to Galerius the Provinces of
Italy and Africa, as lying too remote from the Seat of his Residence, which he
held in Britain.

He favored and encouraged the Christians, and abhorred the Superstitious
worship of diverse Gods, acknowledging but One only, the Maker and Ruler of all
things; and to try the Faith of his Courtiers, he proclaimed a public
Sacrifice, at the solemnity whereof, whosoever should be absent, and refuse to
offer, were immediately (as he pretended) to be discarded, and those only that
conformed should be retained.

Such were always sure to be of the Religion of their Prince, who had held the
Faith only as a Court-fashion, presently crept and cringed to the Gods (as they
thought) of their Sovereign; But the Complement took not, that they were all
turned out of their Services, with this Rebuke, That he who is difloyal to his
God, can never be true and faithful to his Prince.

Many other worthy Actions are reported of this Constantius in favor to the
Christians, but the full establishing their Religion, and the public
Authorizing thereof, was reserved to Constantine, his Son and Successor. For
having reigned two years, he died at York, in his last Expedition against the
Caledonians and Picts.

CONSTANTINE his Son, hearing of his Fathers sickness, escaped from Galerius,
with whom he was left Hostage, and riding Post from Rome, on the way lamed and
maimed all the Posthorses, to the end he might not be overtaken or pursued,
and so arriving at York, was with great joy received by his Father, who sitting
up-right in his Bed, in the presence of his Counselors, spoke as follows; I
have here a large Epitaph and Monument, to wit mine own Son, whom I leave on
Earth to succeed me in the Empire, who (by Gods assistance) shall wipe away the
Tears of the Christians, and revenge the Tyranny used against them, and in
this, above all things, I have placed my felicity; which said, Constantine
received his Fathers last breath, whereupon an Ancient Orator spoke thus unto
him; Thou entredst this Sacred place, not as a Competitour of the Empire, but
as Heir apparent and ordained already, and forthwith that Fathers house of
thine saw Thee the lawful Successor; For there was no doubt, but the
Inheritance, in right, belonged unto him whom the Destinies had ordained the
first begotten Son to the Emperor.

Helena was the Wife of Constantius, and Mother of Constantine, by birth a
Britain, the Daughter of Coilus a British Prince, as Eutropius mentions, but
Nicephorus is of Eutrop. Niceph.
Opinion that she was of Bithynia, and others, of her Parentage declare
themselves doubtful.

This HELENA in an Ancient Inscription, for purging Jerusalem from Idols,
building a Temple upon the same ground CHRIST suffered, finding his Cross, and
so holily preserving it, building on the same place (after diligent search for
Christ's Cribb or Manger, wherein he was born) a stately Church dedicated to
Christian Devotion, and lastly, as she was the only cause of her Husbands
Conversion to the Christian Faith, so likewise many distressed Christians, for
her sake, that had been hid in Caves and dark holes of the Earth, to escape the
bloody persecution of their Enemies, were now freed from that danger and dismal
slavery; They enjoyed public liberty in their Devotion, and for the better
propagating the Christian Faith, they had free leave, not only to reedifie and
repair decayed and demolisht Temples, but to build new, is called, VENERABILIS
ET (...) i. e. Religious, devout, godly, merciful, honest, just, and bountiful.
In Essex.
PIISSIMA AUGUSTA, a Title (no whit unbecoming such eminent Virtues) as a
venerable and most pious Princess.

Maximianus, perhaps, not so much envying her Virtues, as desirous to advance
his Daughter, compelled Constantius, without just cause, to desert and put her
away, and to marry his Daughter Theodora. The Jews, who are Enemies to all such
as own any thing Sacred in memory of our Savior, called this pious Helena, the
deserted Queen of Constantius, Stabularia, as much as to say, an Hostess,
because she sought out the Manger where Christ was born. Bid calls her a
Concubine, from thence inferring, Hist. Bid Angl. l. 1. c. 8.
That an Inholdress is usually kind to her Guest, all which (in matter of
truth) were reproachful Titles given her by way of derision, for her Zeal and
Sanctity in the due worship and honor of her Heavenly Father, our Savior, for
she was a truly Virtuous Queen, and worthy of great renown in that Age; and
this rude and impious way of scoffing her, the Gentiles, also as unworthily
imitated.

The Funeral Oration, made (by Ambrosius) upon Theodosius, rightly Comments
upon the desert of her, in which he takes occasion to speak as follows, They
say that this Lady was at first an Inholder or Hostess, etc. Well (says
Ambrose) did not this Ex Orat. Ambrosii in laud. HELENAE Reg.
good Hostess, Helena, hasten to Jerusalem, and find out the place of our Lords
Passion, and made diligent search for the Lords Crib. This good Hostess was not
ignorant of that good Guest which cured the Wayfaring-mans heart that was
wounded by Thieves. This good Hostess chose to be reputed a Stable-sweeper,
that she might thereby gain Christ.

It appears out of the Panegyric spoken to Constantine, the Son of
Constantius, that this Constantius obtained some notable Victory at a Town of
the Segontiaci, called Vindo, now Silcester in Hampshire, where in Person he
received a wound, but against what Enemy is not recorded, but it seems to
have been done about his first Arrival into the Island.

Basingstoak, out of Adolphus Mekurchus writes, that the City Brett in Germany
Basingstoak cut of Mekurchus.
took its name from some Britains, who attended Constantius and his Queen
Helena out of Britain, as likewise the City Speizs, from a Garrison or
Seed-plot of Britains there left by the same Emperor, but with what truth I
leave to others to judge; aslikewise he reports, that Prince Coilus, the
Father of Helen, was Master of the Horse to the Emperor, and upon that very
account the Enemies of Queen Helen took occasion to call her Stabularia. She is
reported to have been born at (...) i. e. Religious, devout, godly, merciful,
honest, just, and bountiful. In Essex.
Colchester, and to have built the Walls thereof, and it is said that the Arms
which that City gives, is a Cross enragled between four Crowns, in memory of
our Saviors Cross which was found by her.

CONSTANTINE the Great.
CONSTANTIUS dying at York, his Son CONSTANTINE, by the last Will and Testament
of his Father, was designed Emperor, An. Dom. 306.
but he at first (out of modesty) refusing so great and weighty an Employment,
or out of design to sift out the Inclinations of the People, for forbearing a
while to undertake it, was at last constrained by the Soldiers, whose
affections to him overswayed the fears and jealousies which he had conceived of
those powerful Competitors, who had already possession of the Empire, and of
Maximian, who although the Empire resigned, yet carried on private practices in
the State, and could not choose but have great Interest therein, being not long
before Master of the whole Power, which by the occasion of Dioclesian, and much
against his own inclinations he had laid down; But the greatest encouragement
he received, was from Erocus King of the Almanes, a powerful Nation, which
Erocus had attended his Father in Britain, as some write, as others say, was
Constantines Companion in his flight from Rome. However, it seems he was a
great lover of that Family, and a close and constant adherer to their Interest,
yet the Panegyric Oration to our Constantine, wholly attributes his
unwillingness to accept of the Empire, to his Modesty, and the deep
apprehensions of the weight and care of Government, which prove most commonly
(if not here also) the certain signs of more than ordinary desire of Rule, and
are oftentimes but appearances only attended with most exorbitant Passions, and
the forerunner of an arbitrary and bloody Reign.

But however they write, that the Soldiers respecting rather the Public good,
Panegyric Oration to Constantine the Great.
than yielding to his private affections, forcibly invested him in the Purple
Robe; he weeping, set spurs to his Horse, because he would avoid the endeavor
and importunity of the Army that called so instantly upon him; The felicity of
the Commonwealth overruled his Modesty, and therefore the Panegyric cries
out in these words; O fortunate Britain, and more happy now than all other
Lands, that have the first sight of Constantine Caesar! But whether his
carriage in the Empire, was equal to the moderation of his mind in refusing,
it, I leave to others to judge, who read his History, intending to relate such
passages only as concern the History of our Nation.

At his first entrance, having pursued the relics of the War begun by his
Father, against the Caledonians and other Picts, and carried it on further to
the Invading of the more Northern Nations, and the Inhabitants of those
Islands, that are conscious (says he) of the Suns setting, partly by Force,
and partly by Treaty (for he had Eusebius. vit. Constant.
greater Affairs called him to Rome) he gained all to himself, not sparing to
allure, with large Fees and stipends, all such whom neither fair words nor
force of Arms could oblige to his Party. By such like Arts, his open and
prosessed Enemies he drew to his Friendship, and his old Adversaries to be his
especial Familiars. This done, he sailed into Batavia, and there vanquished the
Franckners, afterward the Gelasius Ciz. lib. (...) Act. (...) Nicen. cap. 3.
German and French Nations, then levying Soldiers to the number of 90000 Foot,
and 8000 Horse, many of which were raised in Britain, he passed into Italy,
overthrew the Tyrant Maxentius, who, at Rome, had challenged the Empire, and
about the fourth year returned again into Britain.

Some make his return into Britain before his engagement with Maxentius, and
that out of the words of Eusebius (which nevertheless may relate to his after
An. Dom. 310. Camb. Euscbius.
Troubles) the words are these. Constantine passed over to the Britains,
enclosed on every side with the Ocean, whom, when he had overcome, he began to
compass in his mind other parts of the World, to the end he might come in time
to succor those that wanted assistance; And in another place, After he had
furnished his Army with mild and modest Instructions of Piety, he invaded
Britain, that he might likewise instruct those who dwelt environed round about
with the Waves of the Ocean, bounding the Suns setting, as it were, with those
Coasts.

The memory of this happy Expedition is preserved to posterity in a Coin of his
the Reverse whereof bears a Man on Horseback, with this Inscription round
it, ADVENTUS AUGUSTI, and by these Letters Pecunia Londini notata.
P. L. N. at the bottom, the place of the Mint is signified to have been at
London.

But his Policy was wanting in this point, that he was the first who made way
for Barbarous People to break into Britain, Germany and Gaul; For when he had
overcome the Northern Nations, growing over-secure on that side, he translated
those Legions that lay in defense of the Marches, partly into the East, where
he had built his new City Constantinople, and in their stead built Forts and
Holds, and partly into Cities more remote from the said Marches, so that soon
after his death, the Barbarians, forcing the Towns and Fortresses, brake into
the Provinces, in which respect he is blamed by Zosimus, as the main and
principal subverter of a most flourishing Empire; From hence Malmsbury writes,
That he brought from this Island a great power of British Zosimus. Malmsbury.
Soldiers, by whose Industry, and good Service, having obtained Triumphal
Victories to his hearts desire, and attained to the Empire, such of them as
were past Service, and had performed the painful part of Soldiers their full
time, he planted in a certain part of Gaul, westward, upon the very shore of
the Ocean, where at this day their Posterity remaining, are wonderfully grown
even to a mighty People, in Manners and Language much degenerating from our
Britains. But I fear he has too boldly collected out of the words of Zosimus,
forasmuch as there is no particular place recorded by him, where those Cities
which he calls, More remote from the Marches were situate, and the Britains
in Gaul are supposed (more probably) to be of an earlier Plantation in those
parts.

About this time, as plainly appears by the Code of Theodosius, PACATIANUS
was the Vicegerent in Britain, for by this time the Province had no more An.
Dom. 319.
Propraetors or Lieutenants, but instead thereof, was a Vicar substituted. And
seeing that by this Emperor the form of the Roman Government was altered in
this Island, it will not be amiss in this place to note summarily out of Mr.
Cambden, in what sort Britain was Ruled under him, and afterward in the next
succeeding Ages.

He ordained four Prefects of the Praetorium, to wit, of the East of Illyricum,
of Italy, and of Gaul. Two Leaders or Commanders of the Forces, the one of
Footmen, the other of Horsemen, in the West, whom they termed Praesentales.
For Civil Government, there Ruled Britain the Prefect of the Praetorium, or
Grand Seneschal in Gaul, and under him the Vicar General of Britain, who was
his Vicegerent, and honored with the Title of Spectabilis, as much as to say
Notable or Remarkable. Him obeyed respectively, to the number of the Provinces,
two Consular Deputies, and three Presidents, who had the hearing of Civil and
Criminal Causes. For Military Affairs, there Ruled the Leader or Commander of
the Footmen, in the West, at whose disposition were the Comes, that is, the
Count or Lieutenant of Britain, the Count or Lieutenant of the Saxon-Coasts
along Britain, and the Duke of Britain, styled every one Spectabiles, that is,
Remarkable.

The Comes of Britain seems to have Ruled the Inland-parts of the Island, who
had with him seven Companies of Foot, and nine Cornets or Troops of Horsemen.

The Count or Lieutenant of the Saxon-Coasts, namely, who defended the Maritime
parts against the Saxons, and is named by Ammianus, Comes maritimi tractus, as
Ammianus.
much as to say, Lieutenant of the Maritime tract, for defense of the Seacoast
had seven Companies of Footmen, two Guidons of Horsemen, the second Legion,
and one Cohort.

The General of Britain, that is, Duke of Britain, who defended the Marches or
Fronteirs against the Barbarians, had the Command of thirty eight
Garrison-Forts, wherein kept their stations 14000 Foot, and 900 Horsemen; so
that in those days if Pancirolus has kept just computation) Britain
maintained 19200 Footmen, and 1700 Horsemen, ormuch thereabout, in Ordinary.
Pancirolus.


Besides all these, Comes Sacrarum largitionum, to wit, the Receiver of the
Emperors Finances, or Public Revenues, had under him in Britain the Rational
or Auditor of the Sums and Revenues of Britain. The Provost of the Augustian,
that is, the Emperors Treasures in Britain, and the Procurator of the Gynegium
or Drapery in Britain, in which the Clothes of the Prince and Soldiers were
woven.

The Comes Rerum privatarum, had his Rational or Auditor of private State in
Britain: To say nothing of the Sword, Fence-School, Procurator in Britain
(whereof an old Inscription makes mention) and of other Officers of an
Inferior degree.

Thus much of the Civil Government administered by Constantine in this Island,
as for the change of Religion introduced by him, I must refer you to the
Ecclesiastical History of Britain, taking notice only in this place of the
words of our Gildas, as follows; No sooner was the heat of the Persecution
quenched, but the Christians appeared with comfort and courage in Public,
rebuilt the Churches so despicably laid low, they Gildan
founded the Temples of the holy Martyrs, they built and completed the Banners
of the Victory in all places, kept Festival-daies, and, with undefiled words
and hearts, performed the Rights and Ceremonies belonging to the true Church,
and this they could not do till they had been enabled, by a freedom to leave
their Woods, Deserts, and secret Caves, which had before so long bound them up
to such Slavery and Bondage, for self-preservation.

This kindness of the Emperor to the Christians gained him a great Name, nay
many Names, to advance his Dignity as high as might be;

IMPERATOR FORTISSIMUS A C BEATISSIMUS, PIISSIMUS, FELIX, URBIS LIBERATOR,
QUIETIS FUNDATOR, REIPUBLICAE INSTAURATOR, PUBLICAE LIBERTATIS AUCTOR,
RESTITUTOR URBIS ROMAE, AT QUE ORBIS, MAGNUS, MAXIMUS, INVICTUS, INVICTISSIMUS,
PERPETUUS, SEMPER AUGUSTUS, RERUM HUMANARUM OPTIMUS PRINCEPS, VIRTUTE
FORTISSIMUS, ET PIETATE CLEMENTISSIMUS, And in the Laws.
QUI VENERANDA CHRISTIANORUM FIDE ROMANUM MUNIVIT IMPERIUM, DIVUS, DIVAE
MEMORIAE, DIVINAE MEMORIAE, etc.

Most Valiant and Blessed Emperor, most Pious, Happy, Redeemer of Rome City,
Founder of Peace, Restorer of Rome City and the whole World, Great, most Great,
Invincible, most Invincible, Perpetual, Ever AUGUSTUS; The best Prince of the
World, For Virtue most Valiant, and for Piety most Merciful, who also fortified
the Roman Empire with the Reverend Faith of the Christians, Sacred, of Sacred
memory, of Divine memory, etc.

He translated the Seat of the Empire from Rome to Bizantium, now
Constantinople, and having Reigned thirty one years to the great commendation
of all, but especially the Christians, he fell sick, and counseled by his
Physicians to go to the hot-Baths of Nicomedia, a City of Bithinia, he died on
his Journey, leaving his Empire divided among his three Sons.

To his eldest, CONSTANTINUS, he gave Britain, France, Spain, and part of
Germany.

To his second Son, CONSTANS, Italy, Africa, Slavonia, Dalmatia, and Greece.

To CONSTANTIUS, the youngest, Thracia, Syria, Mesopotamia, and Egypt. Of
which Emperors, I shall write in their orders, not as they held together the
Roman Empire, but as they successively Ruled this Island, and first of
Constantine.

THE British History, In the Days of CONSTANTINE THE GREAT.
SEEING that CONSTANTINE changed the form of Government in this Island, it is
no wonder that the British Histories Basiggstoak, lib. 6.
will not suffer so memorable an Action to pass over in silence, without
fastening some remarkable story upon it. We must understand therefore, what was
said before, that Constantine having made a Prefect of the Praetorium of Gall,
under whom the Vicar of Britain was substituted, the Britains who had hitherto
Gaufrid. 1. 2. c. 3, 4.
lived in equal esteem with the Gauls, taking it ill to be under the
Jurisdiction of a foreign Commander, rose up in Arms and began to defend their
privileges.

Octavius, Duke of the Gewisses (whom Jeffery of Monmouth calls a British
Lord) the first (as says Basing stoak) who held the employment of Prefect of
the Praetorium, taking occasion of the Revolt of the Britains, enters the
Island, and having punished the Revolters, and secured his own Power, at length
taking the advantage of the Emperors absence and occupation in Foreign Wars,
seized the Kingdom of Britain to himself.

Constantine hearing of his Usurpation, sends Trahernus, his Uncle by his
Mothers side (whom he had made Senator of Rome) to reduce him to Obedience,
Traherne with three Legions arrived at Britain, and at his landing took a City
named Caerperis, at which place Octavius meeting him with a great Army, not far
from Winchester, in a set Battle overthrew and put him to flight; Traherne
escaping into Albania, or Scotland (by Sea, says Basing stoak) was pursued by
Octavius, but not with like success, for meeting him in a place called
Vestenavalia (the Manuscript has it Westmarlandia) he was by him overcome and
constrained to fly into Norway, leaving his quarrel to be revenged by the
Count of Westmorland.

Whilst he is soliciting the Norwegians for help, Traherne is slain in an
Ambush laid for him in a Valley, as he came from the City London, of whose
death Octavius having notice, returns into Britain and again assumes the
Kingdom. This happened (says Fabian) about the year 329, in the 22 or 23d. of
Constantine, and about two Fabian.
years after the said Octavius had usurped.

Being again established, he Ruled the Island (as the British Chronicle
affirms) with great Justice and Moderation, even to the days of Gratian and
Valentinian, which (says Fabian) was fifty four years.

But in this he erreth, in not considering that Gratian was admitted by his
Father Valentinian to the Empire in the fourth year of his Reign, which was An.
Dom. 368. and according to Fabian, whose account differs three years, in the
year 371, so that from the first usurping of Octavius, in the year 327, to 368,
in the days of Valentinian and Gratian, are but forty one years, and adding
three more, for Fabians account, are but forty four at most.

Octavius now grown Old, began to think of a Successor, he had one only
Daughter, whom he had thoughts to give in marriage unto Conan Meridoc, the Duke
of Cornwals Nephew, but the Nobles not consenting, he was advised to send to
Rome for a Noble Man named Maximian, Cousin to the Emperor Constantine by his
Mother Helena's side, to invite him to take his Daughter, and with her the
Kingdom.

Maurice the Son of Conan (though the Historian might have chosen a fitter
Person) was sent on this Embassage, and performed it in such effectual manner,
that Maximian readily embraced the motion, arrived in Britain, and
notwithstanding the opposition made by Conan Meridoc to the contrary, obtained
the Daughter, and with great solemnity performed the Nuptials.

This Maximian, in the Roman History, is called Maximus, of whom we shall hear
more hereafter.

Basing stoak writes, that Octavius was reduced by Constantine in Person, and
that after his Victory, by the entreaty of his Mother Helona he encompassed
London with a Wall of three miles in circuit, having six Gates, and where the
River Thames begins and ends the City, at those two Corners he built a Tower
and Castle; Hence he says this City was called AUGUSTA, and the Provost of the
Augustian Treasury mentioned in the Roman History, and first instituted by this
Emperor in Britain, had his name not from the Emperors who were called
Augusti, but being Treasurers of Augusta, or London.

Constantinus Junior.
WHEN Constantine was dead, Britain, together with France, Spain, and part of
Germany fell to the portion of his eldest Son, the An. Dom. 337.
present CONSTANTINE, but he not content with his share in the Empire, though
most considerable, invaded the Right and Possession of his Brother Constans,
and was by him slain, after he had Reigned the term of three years.

He is reported to have been killed by a Captain of his Brother Constans, near
to the Socrates, lib. 2, cap. 31
City Aquileia in Italy.

CONSTANS.
CONSTANS, the second Son of Constantine the Great, after An. Dom. 340.
the death of his Brother, puffed up with the Victory, seized Britain, and the
rest of the Provinces, into his own hands, and with his younger Brother
Constantius, came into the Island in the dead of Winter.

Hereupon Julius Firmicus, (not that Pagan Astrologer, but the Jul. Firmicus.
Christian) speaks in this wise to them; Ye have in the Winter time, a thing
that never was done before, nor shall be again, subdued under your Oars the
swelling and raging Billows of the British Ocean. The Waves now of the Sea,
unto this time well near unknown to us, have trembled, and the Britains were
sore afraid to see the unexpected face of the Emperor. What would ye more? The
very Elements as vanquished, have given place to your Virtues.

This Constans was he who called a Counsel to Sardica against the Arrians, at
which were assembled three hundred Bishops, and among them the Bishops of
Britain, who having condemned the Heretics, and established the Nicene Creed by
their Voices and Judgment, approved the Innocence of Athanasius. But this
Prince being youthful, and casting away all care of the Empire, and drowned in
Pleasures, became grievous to the Provincials, and nothing acceptable to his
Soldiers, insomuch that Maxentius, Captain of the Jovi and Herculii, beset him
in a Town called St. Helens, as he was hunting, and there slew him, whereby the
Prophecy was fulfilled, That he should end his days in his Grandmothers lap,
of whom that Town indeed took its name.

This Castle of St. Helens (says Mr. Speed) was situated among the Taporis, a
Speed Chron.
Spanish People under the Pyrenean Mountains, and from this murder of his
Sovereign, Maxentius was therefore called Taporus, as his name is found in an
old Antiquity of Stone dug up long since at Rome. He had a Britain to his
Father, although born among the Lati, a People in France, and after the death
of Constans usurped the Kingdom, of whose fall we shall read in the following
Emperor.

Basingstoak gives a particular account of the life and death of Constans,
after this Basingstoak, lib. 6.
manner; He was at first a good Prince, and Ruled well, but afterward, either
through the weakness of Nature, or corruptions of his Flatterers (of whom I
add, that all good and well-meaning Princes ought to take care to beware) he
gave himself over to all Pleasures and Luxury, which drawing the Gout upon him,
made him uneasy, morose, and peevish, by which means he lost the affections of
his Soldiers, and the love of his Provincials.

Maxentius was then in the Army a Count of a City in Germany, called Augusta
Vindelicorum, he by the incitement of one Chrestus and Marcellinus, when the
day was appointed, makes a feast to the Soldiers; Marcellinus seigning that
his Sons Birthday was to be solemnized, when the Company was warm with Wine,
Maxentius withdraws, and putting on the Purple Robe returned again to the
Company. They who were not privy to this design, were nevertheless, by the
suddenness of the Stratagem, forced to comply, insomuch that having a good
Party about him, as he was Robed he hastened to the Palace. The Emperor wearied
by Hunting, his usual diversion, was laid upon the Bed, but not asleep as they
expected, so that hearing them enter, he escaped to the Temple, but in vain,
for Gaison, one of the chief Conspiratours, haling him from the Altar, slew him.

The Ingratitude of this Maxentius to his Master is more remarkable, in that he
was not only his bountiful Prince, but had been once his Deliverer; For in a
Mutiny in Illyricum, wherein the Soldiers would have killed him, he fled into
Constans his arms for refuge, and was protected under his Royal Vesture.

This Maxentius, by the British History, is made King of this Island, and by
Basingstoak the successor of Constans, although Constantius the younger
Brother of Constans succeeded in the West, and outlived this Maxentius.

Flav. Val. Constantius.
CONSTANS thus treacherously made away by Maxentius, the Western Empire by
Right fell unto CONSTANTIUS An. Dom. 344.
his younger Brother, but Maxentius had possessed himself of France, and drawn
the Britains to side with him, and so for three years bore up stiffly against
Constantius. The success at first was various on both sides, but at last the
heat of the Revolt being qualified, and the Spirit spent, and Constantius still
growing faster upon him, was no longer able to hold up his head, that he slew
himself at Lions, so that the peacable possession of the Province was left to
CONSTANTIUS.

At this time the General of all the War-Forces throughout Britain was
Gratianus, Surnamed FUNARIUS (so called either from his Trade formerly
exercised, being a Rope-seller, or, as others say, from his exceeding strength,
five Soldiers being not able, with all their force, to wrench a Rope from him)
he being out of favor with the Emperor, because reported to have given
entertainment to Maxentius, was not only constrained to return home, being
cashiered of his Military employment, but was also fined, by Constantius, in
the confiscation and loss of his Goods.

And now a severe Inquisition fell upon Britain, to detect those who had
adhered to the Party of Maxentius, and the Inquisitor sent by Constantius was
Paulus, a Am. Marcel. lib. 15. cap. 2.
Spaniard, Surnamed CATENA, for his severe inflicting of Chains and Manacles
upon the accused, or, as Basingstoak reports, for his cunning linking his
Plots Basingstoak, lib. 6.
and Devices together.

Martinus, an Aged and worthy Commander, was then Vicar of Britain, who was
much concerned and grieved at the rigid way of his proceedings, but whilst he
endeavored to protect others (by the cunning of Paulus) was himself taken in
the snare.

For this PAULUS (having a crafty and subtle head) was sent hither to search
out such Persons who had sided in the Conspiracy with Maxentius, insomuch for
the desire of gain, after he had patched and pieced many faults of some
together, (whether the Persons were guilty or not, he regarded not) he seized
all their Estates and Fortunes, and so vigorously proceeded to spoil and undo
many, imprisoning the Freeborn, and tormenting them with Chains and Fetters;
such base and unworthy Acts being committed by him, in the days of
Constantius, as these, branded the whole Emperors Reign with disgrace and
scandal.

Paulus perceiving his trade decayed by means of the Vicar, MARTINUS,
endeavored to carry him away Prisoner, with diverse others, before the
Emperors Counsel, for which cause Martinus endeavored to stab him, but
missing his pass, immediately with the same weapon became his own Executioner,
which loss, by many, was much commiserated, for as he was a Man honest he
deserved great Reputation.

Paulus, after he had sufficiently stained himself with Innocent blood,
returned to the Princes Court, against whose coming with Prisoners, Racks,
Drags, Tortures, and Executioners were prepared, so that many of them were
proscribed and outlawed, some banished, and others died by the Sword; Did not
the judgment of God justly reward him for his Cruelties, when under JULIAN he
was burnt alive?

Upon the neck of these proceedings, other Calamities followed in Britain, for
the Scots and Picts, barbarous Nations, brake down the Fronteirs, and taking
advantage of the Troubles and destruction of the Province, wasted far and near.

JULIAN, lately chosen Caesar, and afterward Emperor, was then wintering at
Paris, who having notice of their Incursions, yet because the Germans were but
in a doubtful condition of Allegiance (for it was dangerous to leave Gaul
without a Governor) durst not adventure to go in person into Britain, but sent
Lupicinus, at that time Colonel of the Infantry and Master of the Armory, to
quell the Rebels, and compose the Affairs in the Province.

He was an excellent Soldier, well skilled in all Military Affairs, but withal
of a haughty and boasting nature, a big Speaker, and in his gesture savouring
much of the Buskin in Tragedies, and it was a question whether he were more
Covetous or Cruel.

Having raised an Army of light appointed Men, to wit, the Herulians,
Batavians, and many Companies of the Maesians, now Bulgarians, he sets out from
Bullen with a Fleet well manned, with a good fore-wind, in the dead of Winter,
and landing at the Haven Rutupiae, over against Bullen, he marched directly to
London, in hopes the sooner to give the Enemy Battle, but what his successes
were is not left to Posterity; Certain it is, he was recalled by Julian the
succeeding Emperor.

And now the Arrian Heresy, whereof Constantius was a great favourer, having
spread over the whole World, crept also into Britain, a Nation desirous of
change, and steadfast in nothing, concerning which, hear our ancient Gildas
complaining: Gildas.
From the first year of CONSTANTINE the Great, a sweet consent and harmony of
Christ the head, and his Members, had still continued, were it not for that
persidious Arrianisme, that so much poisoning and corrupting us, caused so
great a Separation, as frequently so subjects us to be drawn away with
Novelties, and sticking close to nothing either firmly or seriously.

To nourish the deadly Opinions of these Arrians, Constantius called (of the
Western Church four hundred Bishops) to Ariminum, contributing to their better
maintenance necessary Provisions, which (by the Aquitanes, French and Britains)
was accounted a very unseemly thing, and so refused the acceptance thereof,
although it was an Express of the Emperors good will. Three only out of
Britain, being more necessitous than the rest, received that maintenance, but
esteemed it more void of corruption, and safe, to charge the Common-Treasury,
than the estate of a private Man.

After this, Constantius died, when he had Reigned seventeen years, without a
Competitour seven years in the life of his Brethren, and thirteen a Caesar in
the days of his Father Constantine the Great, according to Socrates, and
Zosimus, which computation Socrates. Zosimus.
I follow, though others speak as if he Ruled twenty four years after his death.

THE British History, In the Days of CONSTANTIUS.
THE quarrel between Magnentius and Constantius being the chief matter of this
Princes reign, Basingstoak reports after this manner:

When Magnentius had slain Constans, he sent Letters to his Basingstoak, lib. 6.
Brother Constantius with Ambassadors to this purpose; That he would be
content with Thrace, and the Eastern Empire, and suffer him to enjoy Britain
and Gaul, now in his possession, to which receiving no Answer, and hearing that
Constantius was advanced toward Italy to revenge his Brothers death, he
resolves by force of Arms to maintain his Suit.

Constantius hearing of his Preparations, and fearing to engage too deeply the
Roman State in Civil combustions, yields to him Gallia, upon condition he would
quit his other pretenses, which, Magnentius now grown high, and not accepting,
they both prepared for a War. The place where they met was at Mursa, before the
Fight, Magnentius taking Counsel of a Sorceress, was advised to sacrifice a
Virgin, and to give her Blood, mixed with Wine, to the Soldiers to drink,
whilst in the mean time she performed her Charms, which done, and the impious
Ceremonies being over, the Battle began, in which Constantius was Victor.

Magnentius leaving his Horse and Imperial Robes at random (that he might be
thought slain) fled disguised, and gathering together as many of his scattered
Forces as he could rally, sent to Constantius first by a Grave Senator, who
was refused, and afterward by Bishops, to desire only the Government of Gallia
to be held of him under the Title of Duke only.

The Soldiers hearing of this base Submission, and doubting his Fortune was
but low, fled to Constantius daily, so that Magnentius finding it high time to
give Battle whilst he had any left with him, met Constantius in the Field, but
was again overthrown, when flying to Lions, and perceiving his own Followers
ready to betray him to gain favor with the Conqueror, having first feigned
himself Mad, he murdered himself after he had reigned three years. Thus
Basingstoak; but I fear in some circumstances he confounds Magnentius with that
Maxentius who was overcome by Constantine.

Flav. Claudius Julianus Apostata.
JULIAN succeeding Constantius, has left no memory behind An. Dom. 361.
him of his Affairs in Britain. Whilst he was Gaesar at Paris, instead of
coming himself into Britain, to compose Differences arising, he sent (as has
been said) Lupicinus in his stead, now being Emperor, again recalled him, in
whose room (as may be guessed) Alipius of Antioch was made Deputy, but soon
after employed upon another occasion. For Julian, in spite to the Christians,
and that he might frustrate the Prophecy of our Savior, sends for him out of
Britain to re-edifie Jerusalem, but fire breaking out of the Foundation so
terrified the Workmen, that they immediately desisted from the enterprise. And
now Paulus the Notary, a Spaniard, who carried on the bloody Inquisition in
Britain in the last Emperors days, falling into the displeasure of Julian (as
I said before) was burnt alive.

This is all that relates to our Island in the days of Julian, saving that
from hence he exported every year great store of Corn to maintain the Roman
Garrisons in Germany. He Reigned about three years, and was slain by a Dart in
the Persian Wars.

Basingstoak writes, that one Gumoarius succeeded Lupicinus in Britain, but I
guess he means Fraomarius King of the Almanes, who in Valentinians days, not
long following, was sent with Commission into Britain to suppress the Scots,
Picts, Saxons, and Attacotts, which then infested it.

FLAVIUS JOVIANUS.
JOVIANUS, the Son of Varonianus, a Captain of good note, was chosen An. Dom.
364.
Emperor by the Soldiers upon the death of Julian, but refusing to command a
Heathen-Nation (as is reported) the Soldiers cried out they were Christians,
upon which he accepted of the Empire. His Reign was but short, seven months
only, and that in the East; so that we can expect nothing of our Island in his
days. He died (as is said) by the damp of a new Mortered Chamber, or of Coals
set therein to dry it, leaving behind him in Ecclesiastical History the name of
a good Catholic, and free from the Arrian Heresy.

Flav. Valentinianus.
VALENTINIANUS, upon the death of Jovian, was chosen Emperor; He was the Son
of that Gratian, Surnamed FUNARIUS, An. Dom: 365.
who had been chief Commander of all the Landforces in Britain.

In his Reign, the Picts, Saxons, Scots, and Called otherwise Attigotti,
Catalotti, and Cattiti. Erasmus gives them the name of Azoti. They were
Cannibals as st. Hierom writes, lib. 2. cont. Jov.
Attacots, infested, the Britains, to the repressing of whose Incursions was
sent FRAOMARIUS, King of the Almains, the successor of King EROCUS, who
assisted Constantine the Great.

The Almains in these days were of great repute for their hardiness and skill
in War, and their Princes highly esteemed for their faithful Service and
constant adherence to the Romans. But it seems that Fraomarius, as likewise
Erocus, who took Commissions under the Romans, were expelled their Kingdom by
some Rebellion or Insurrection of their People, for the Nation of the Almains,
we read, in these days mightily infested the Romans, and invaded their
Province of Gall and Rhetia, so that they who followed Fraomarius into Britain,
seem to be a Party of the Almains who attended their Prince in his banishment,
Men of Spirit and Nobility, and therefore most likely to do considerable
Service for the honor of their Prince, and the quieting of the British Nation.

The Expedition of Fraomarius with his Almains into this Island, appears to
be in the fifth year of this Emperors Reign, An. Dom. 370. An. Dom. 370.


By the general Plots and Contrivances of those Barbarous People Britain was
sorely distressed and afflicted, Nectaridius, who at that time was Lieutenant
to manage Amm Marcel. lib. 27, and 28.
Maritime Affairs, lost his life, and Bulchobaudes, a General, by the crafty
contrivance of the Enemy was prevented in his designs.

The Emperor, after he had received Information of these sad disasters, sent
Severus, then Lord Steward of his Household, to rectify and set in order
miscarriages; but being in a short time after called back, was not able to
effect what he so much desired; After that Jovinus went to the same parts, and
in great haste sent Proventusides to request a potent Force (but this place in
the Text Mr. Cambden apprehends, was corrupted) as the necessity of the cause
required.

So many dreadful Afflictions and Calamities being daily spread abroad of the
Island, Theodosius was chosen, and hastened with all expedition thither, because
he was esteemed a Person so fit for that employment. Having collected to
himself a sufficient number of stout and valiant Men, the better to strengthen
Legions, as Cohorts, led the way with much Courage and Resolution.

About that time the Picts were severed into two Nations, that is,
Dicaledonians and l'icturiones, the Attucots, a fierce and resolute People,
with the Scots, in diverse parts where they roved, did great mischief. In like
manner the Gaulish Cohorts Frankners, and Saxons, being next Neighbors to
them, made great spoil and havoc both by Land and Sea, and what with
murdering Captives, firing Towns, and plundering, represented all places
deplorable, and much to be pitied.

To put a stop to the current of these Grievances (if Fortune would have so
consented) this zealous and vigorous Captain intended a voyage to the utmost
bounds of Earth, for when he arrived to the Seaside of Bullen, which is
separated from an opposite piece of Land by a narrow street, called the Sleeve,
ebbing and flowing, where the Waves are wont to mount up with swelling Tides,
and of a sudden to humble themselves by a low and submissive level, the better
to favor the Passenger, from whence having, by slow and chary sailing, passed
the Ocean, he gained the shore of Rhutapia; called Ribchester, or Richborow by
Sandwich, over against it, a place more freed from Rage and disturbance, from
whence, after that the Batavians, Heruli, Jovii, and Victores, who followed,
were come. Upon this he departed, and reaching that Old Town, AUGUSTA, (now the
famous City of LONDON) divided his Army into several parts, he charged upon
these robbing Adversaries so briskly, thinking it a time most proper as they
were laden with the Spoils and destruction of his Friends, discomfiting those
that were haling forward their Captives, and such as also drove away Cattle,
that they were forced to leave their Prey, and think of nothing more for the
present, than how to make, safely, their escapes.

Having made restitution of the Goods so taken to the Owners, save only some
small encouragement reserved for the Soldiers, he hastened into the City, now
pretty well cleared from Calamities. And moreover, having been advised by the
information of revolting Fugitives, and confession of Captives, that so great a
multitude of sundry Nations, so resolute and perverse in their Natures, were
not to be vanquished but by sudden Excursions, and private Contrivances,
therefore did not by this first success, puff himself up either with an
absolute security, or adventure greater exploits, resting in himself doubtful
of the future event.

After he had proclaimed promises of Impunity, he summoned as well the
Traiterous Runagates, as diverse others that went different Journies without
control, to offer themselves for his employment. As soon as most of these
summoned were returned, he, loaded with Cares, curbed his former motion,
insomuch that he called for Civilis by name, intending him a Deputy Governor
of Britain, a precise keeper of Justice and observer of Right, although
something touched in his Nature with a haughty disposition. He likewise sent
for Dulcitius, a Captain very knowing in Warlike employments.

Now gaining courage to a willing heart, he left Augusta, and with faithful and
courageous Soldiers, brought great comfort to the ruinated estate of the
Britains, by fore-laying an Ambush in all places against the Barbarians, where
was thought to be the greatest advantage, and encouraged the Common. Soldiers
much by engaging them in no hot Service, but would take to himself the first
essay thereof, thereby evidencing the part of a stirring and hardy Soldier, as
the charge and courage of a noble General, putting to flight diverse Nations,
who thinking themselves secure, through Pride, or vain boasting, were stirred
up to invade the Roman Government.

For a long space of time, the foundation of Peace being thus laid by him,
Castles and Cities were restored to their former security and freedom, which
before had suffered under many troubles and dangers.

In the time of these his Atchievments, there had like to have happened a
horrible Act, which might have been a cause of raising new Troubles, had it not
been destroyed in its infancy. Valentinus of Valeria Pannonia, one of a proud
Spirit, Brother to the Wife of that pestilent Maximinus, first Deputy
Lieutenant; afterward President, for some remarkable fault of his was banished
Britain; Through impatience till he could act his Villainy, rose up in Arms
against Theodosius, contriving all imaginable Plots to raise disturbance,
occasioned by some private and inward Pride and Malice. And although he
perceived him, alone, able to encounter with his Designs, yet attempted to
solicit as well the Banished persons, as Soldiers, promising a Reward, the
more easily to draw them to perform for him some public Attempts.

When the time drew near these projects should take effect, the General being
forewarned thereof, committed Valentinus (with some of his picked Confederates)
into the hands of Captain Dulcitius to see them executed, but took care withal,
not to make any farther enquiry after other Conspiratours, because he was a Man
excelling in Military knowledge all others in that Age, and moreover
fore-casting, the future events might prove noxious in too much disturbing the
minds of the factious Provinces, whereby it might raise new Commotions. Waving
that, and applying himself to reform many Enormities, most necessary, as
fortune prospered him in his undertakings, peace and quiet was restored, those
Garrison-Forts and ruined Cities he rebuilt, Fronteirs with standing-Watches he
fortified, the Province which had so much subjected themselves to the Enemies
he recovered, and so strengthened it in its former estate, and, according to his
own will, it was Ruled by a lawful Governor, and was called VALENTIA, from the
Princes will and pleasure.

The Areans, a sort of People instituted by those of Ancient times, falling by
slow degrees into corrupt Vlces, were driven from the places where they most
resorted, as convicted publicly how they received Bribes, and promises of
large Rewards, to discover to the Barbarians whatever we designed to be acted
for us. It being their charge to hasten sometimes to one place, sometimes to
another, to acquaint our Captains of all disturbances, the People near
adjoining being at any time in a readiness to rise.

Having completed all these his Noble Acts, was ordered to attend at the
Princes Court, and leaving the Provinces safely rejoicing, was had in as great
esteem as either Furius Camillus, or Papirius Cursor, and receiving the
honorable and affectionate Complements of all men toward him, even as far as
the Narrow Seas, he safely arrived (with a prosperous Wind) to the Princes
Camp, where hew as embraced with all the joy and applaud imaginable.

Simmachus writes of the Rewards of this Noble Simmachus. Speaking to his Son
THEODOSIUS the Emperor.
General, thus; The Author of Your stock Captain General, in Africa and
Britain, was, amongst other ancient Titles, consecrated by the most Honorable
Order with Images of Knighthood, which Statue resembled a Man on Horseback, in
Armor.

Besides, Claudian, in his Poetical-fancy, streins thus in his Commendations:

Ille Caledoniis posuit qui Castra pruinis,
Quimedio Libyae sub oasside pertulit astus;
Terribilis Mauro, debellatorque Britanni
Littoris, ac pariter Boreae vastator and Austri.
Quid rigor aternus? Coeli quid Sydera prosunt?
Ignotumque fretum? maduerunt Saxone fuso
Orcades, incaluit Pictorum Sanguine Thule,
Scotorum cumulos flevit glacialis Hiberne.
In Caledonian Frosts his Tents he pight,
And Lybia's scorching heat endured in field;
The Cole-black Moors, and Britains fair, in flight
He quelled, and forced both South and North to yield.
What then availed cold Clime? strange Seas and Stars?
When Orkney Isles he died with Saxon gore,
The branded Picts now suffered mortal scars,
And Ireland did huge heaps of Scots deplore.
-- ^
(...) Lybiz, (...) (...) Thule,
Ille leves Mauros, (...) (...) Pictos
(...), Scotumque vago (...) (...);
Fregit Hyperboreas remis audacibus undas:
Etgeminis fulgens utroque sab axe trophais
Tethyos alternas refluas calcavit arenas.
Lybia, whose scorching heat secures her shoars,
And Thale senced in with walls of Ice;
Both dread his Name, the light and nimble Moors,
And Picts who Painting above Garments prize.
The wandering Scot through Northern Isles he chased,
And on their gloomy Seas Triumphant rode:
His Trophies thus under both Poles he placed,
Where e're the Ocean either ebbed or flowed.
These are the Actions happening in Britain in the days of Valentinian, he was
an excellent Prince, and highly commended for the endowments both of mind and
body, as being a great Soldier, yet Chaste and Merciful, qualities rarely found
in Swordmen. Yet among his many Virtues, he is taxed by Ammianus for his over
severity in punishing the Common Soldiers for small and trivial offenses, and
his strange remisness toward the crimes and oppressions of their Officers,
which ( says he) was a main cause of the Troubles ensuing in Britain. He
Reigned eleven years, eight months, and two days, and died of an Apoplexy, or
(as others write) of the Plague.

He is not admitted a King of this Island by our Histories, as being not allied
to Constantine, or any of the British Blood; But in these days OCTAVIUS was
King (if he were still living, for the British account is very lame and
imperfect in this point) or if dead, MAXIMIAN, whom the Roman Records call
Maximus, who married the Daughter of Octavius, and was himself descended of
Constantine the Great, of which Maximus we shall have a farther account in the
following Emperor, in whose days it appears he assumed the Purple Robe,
although some of the British Writers make him King in the year 348, which is 28
years before the days of Gratian, and I am afraid mistake him for Magnentius.

Flavius Gratianus, EMPERORS. AND Flavius Valentinianus,

GRATIAN, with his half-Brother VALENTINIAN, both the Sons of Valentinian the
Elder, succeeded their Father An. Dom. 376.
in the Empire. The East, vacant by the death of Valens, he bestowed on
Theodosius, the Son of that Theodosius who was so famous for his British Wars,
and reserved the Government of the Western Provinces to himself.

Maximus, a Spaniard born, and one who had equally served MAXIMUS the Tyrant.
in the British Wars with the younger Theodosius (for he also, either with his
Father, or not long after him, seems to have done something in this Island) and
now General of the Roman Armies, either discontented that Theodosius was
preferred before him to the Empire, or (as Orosius reports) constrained by the
Soldiers, who despised Orosius;
Gratian, or hated him, assumed the Purple Robe, a valiant Man, virtuous, and
worthy of the Title of AUGUSTUS, had he not against his Allegiance, and by way
of Tyranny and Usurpation, attained it. And indeed, the first assaies of his
Power were well employed to the good and preservation of his Country; The Scots
and Picts, who with their Inroads continually wasted the Province, he utterly
subdued and drove back, when pussed up with his success, and not content with
his Dominion in Britain, with the flower and strength well near of the British
Youth he passed the Seas, and arriving at the mouth of the Rhine, drew to him
the whole puissance of the German Army.

His Royal Seat he made at Triers, whence he is called by Gregorius Turonensis,
Trevericus Imperator, and spreading his wings (says Gildas) the one as far as
to Gregor. Turonensis. Gildas.
Spain, the other into Italy, with the terror only of his Name he brought in
Contribution from the most fell and savage Germans.

Against him Gratianus made his Power, but after five days skirmishing was
forsaken by his own Soudiers, put to flight, and forced to beg his peace. St.
Ambrose was sent Ambassador, who in outward show obtained it, but the event
proved that Treachery only, and Treason, iwere intended; For Maximus wholly
intent how he might make away Trajan, at last compast it by this wile; He
caused Rumors to spread abroad, and Letters given to Gratian, how that his Wife
was coming in person to visit him, which Gratian believing, and hastening to
meet her, opening the Litter wherein he thought she was, was barbarously
murdered by Androgathius, taking in his bosom his deaths wound, where he hoped
to have received his Empress. St. Ambrose was the second time sent to demand
his Body, but not accepted, because he refused to communicate with those
Bishops which had sided with Maximus.

All things thus succeeding to the desire of Maximus, having settled the State
of France, and casheir'd those Officers who had sided with Gratian, he created
Victor his Son, Caesar, committing his Infancy to Nannius and Quintinus,
Masters in Military skill, whom he appointed to be his Tutors. And now he sends
his Ambassadors to Theodosius, who governed in the East, to require, or rather
to demand to be admitted sharer in Power, which was for the present consented
unto by Theodosius, and he saluted Emperor by him, and his Image exhibited to
the Alexandrines, and set up in the public Marketplace.

Having thus by Violence and Extortion graspt all into his possession, and
filled his own Cosfers with the spoil of the Commonwealth, he made the defense
of Catholic Religion a cloak to cover his oppression and Tyranny. Priscillian,
and other Heretics, convicted in the Council of Bourdeaux, and appealing (as
their manner is) to his usurped Tribunal, he condemned to death, although
dissuaded by Martin that good Bishop of Towrs, alleging, It was sufficient
they were Excommunicated by the Church, to which in matters of Faith they were
only ameanable; These were the first that (being Executed by the Civil Power
for matters of Religion) left a foul and dangerous president to posterity.

After this, he entered with his whole Army into Italy, which struck such
terror into Valentinian, that flying to Theodosius, he earnestly besought him
to undertake his Quarrel, and to redress the Violence of Maximus. Theodosius,
after much entreaty (for he upbraided Valentinian, because an Arrian) consented
to his Suit, and with all his Forces marehed against the Tyrant, who then lay
secure at Aquileia, and in two Battles overthrew him, whom afterward betrayed
by his own Soldiers, he delivered to the Executioner; His Son Victor was
vanquished and slain in Gallia, and Andragathius who had assassinated Gratian
threw himself headlong into the Sea. The British Soldiers who had assisted
Maximus, invaded (as says Bid) that part Bid.
of France called Armorica, from whence the Britains first arrived into this
Island, but in this Bid is infinitely mistaken, or else we are altogether
ignorant of his meaning.

This was the end of Maximus and his Empire, who is reasonably supposed to be
that Clemens Maximus, who had under his Command the second Legion Augusta,
which was removed from Germany by Claudius the Emperor, and lying long in
Garrisonat Isca, Silurum, or Caerleon in Wales, was afterward translated to
Rhutupia, or Richborow, for he is called by Arsonus the Rhutupine Robber, and
that his name was Clemens, that Inscription of the Bononians, set up to his
Honor, does sufficiently witness:

DD. N. N. MAG. C. MAXIMO
ET FL. VICTORI PIIS FE-
LICIBUS SEMPER AUGUSTIS
Bono Reipublicae.
B. R. NATIS.
But whether or no that part of the Inscription, MAG. does sufficiently
authorize Basingstoak to say this is meant of Magnentius who slew Constans the
Emperor, and was afterward slain by Constantius, I will not determine, but
leave to others to judge.

THE British Account OF MAXIMUS, And the state of AFFAIRS IN HIS DAYS.
MAXIMUS, whom we must now call Maximian, took to Wife (as has been said
before) the Daughter of Octavian a British Lord, but sore against the will of
Conan Meridoc Duke of Cornwall, who hoped (by matching himself with that Lady)
to obtain the Crown, wherefore after the Marriage concluded, spurred on with the
loss of a Kingdom, and the disgrace to see a Rival preferred before him, he
passes into Scotland, raises Forces, and entering the Country on this side the
Humber, wasted far and wide; On the other hand, Maximian arms, and encountering
him in several Battles, the success was so equal, and the loss on both sides so
great, that they were both content, upon the mediation of Friends, to come to
an agreement. A Peace concluded, Maximian passed into France and invaded the
Country Armorica, and in a Battle overcame and slew Imball the King of it, and
then granted it to Conan Meridoc, to be held of him and the Kings of Britain
for ever, changing the Ancient name Armorica into that of Little Britain.

Conan possessed of the Country, expels the Ancient Inhabitants, plants
Britains (...), now Little-Britain.
in their stead, who, it seems, grown exceeding squeemish, and disdaining to
take the Women of Gaul to their Wives, Conan thought it necessary to supply
them out of Britain; A Messenger therefore was dispatched to Dionethus, another
Duke of Cornwall (for Meridoc must be supposed to have Resigned) and Governor
of Britain under Maximian, to enjoin him forthwith to send over into Little
Britain eleven thousand Virgins (a hard task) that is, eight thousand for the
Commons, and three thousand for the Nobility; yet others, who thought not the
raising so many a sufficient employment, make the number fifty one thousand,
that is, eleven thousand of the better sort, and forty thousand of the Vulgar.
The Count Palatine says, eleven thousand of the one, and sixty thousand of the
other. But however it is, Dionethus sent his Daughter Ursula, a Lady of
excellent Beauty, whom Conan had desired in marriage.

These Virgins taking Shipping together (a number never heard of besore, or
shall ever after in one Fleet) were not far from shore, when the ill manner'd
Winds blowing rudely upon them, drowned many, and the rest dispersed, they who
escaped the Tempest fell into the hands of Guanius King of the Hunns, and Melga
King of the Picts, upon the Coast of Germany, set there by Gratian to watch the
motions of Maximian.

These Princes either surpised with the exceeding Beauty of these Damsels, or
disdaining to see so much Ugliness together (for different Passions often
produce the same effect) slew them all, Ursula self not escaping, and (as if
they intended to destroy the Country whence they proceeded) they invaded the
Island on the North, and proceeded on with great slaughter of the Inhabitants.

Maximian advertised thereof, sent Gratianus with three Legions to withstand
them, who entering the Island, drove them back, and constrained them to refuge
in Ireland.

This Gratianus is supposed, by Mr. Hollinshead, to be the same who afterward
usurped in the days of Honorius.

Flav. Theodosius.
THEODOSIUS, after the death of Maximus, was in full An. Dom. 379.
possession of the whole Empire (for Valentinian was treacherously strangled in
Vienna by Eugenius, first a Grammarian, then a Soldier, and Arbogastes, a base
Commander) but he lived not long after, for having brought the Murderers of
Valentinian to condign punishment, and settled the Empire on his Sons, he died,
to the grief of all men, the Union of the whole Empire in the Person of so
worthy a Prince, raising no small expectations of a great and glorious Reign.

In his days Chrysan was Vicar of Britain, of whom more in the following
Emperor. CHRYSAN ^.


HONORIUS.
HONORIUS, by the will of his Father Theodosius, succeeded in the Western
Empire. During his Minority Stilico was appointed An. Dom. 395.
his Governor, a man for a long time famous, having been an inward Companion
of Theodosius, and emp'oyed in the British Wars against the in roads of the
Scots, Vandals, Picts, and Saxons, and therein he behaved himself with great
conduct and success, which Claudian implies, where he introduces Britain,
thus speaking.

Me quoque vicinis pereuntem gentibus, inquit, Claudian.

Munivit Stilico, totam quam Scotus Hibernem
Movit, and infesto spumavit remige Thetis.
Illius effectum curis, ne bella timerem
Scotica, nec Pictum tremerem, ne littore toto
Prospicerem dubiis venientem Saxona ventis.
Me to ill Neighbors long a Prey exposed,
With safety now has Stilico enclosed.
Whilst the false Scot the Irish shore alarums,
And with those Vermin all the Ocean swarms.
It Is through his care no longer Wars I fear;
The Scots and Picts alike now dreadless are.
No longer on the Coasts, I quivering stand,
Nor fear a Fleet of Saxons on the Strand.
But his great Atchievments were attended with no less Ambition, for not
content with the management of the whole Empire in the Minority of Honorius,
nor satisfied with the honor of having his Daughter an Empress, by matching
her with his Ward, be flew up to so high a pitch, that in the end he ruined not
only himself but the whole Empire; For by sowing the seeds of Sedition amongst
the Lieutenants of Provinces, and raising factions at Court, he made so evil a
fermentation through all the Government, which of it self was decaying, that
the public Enemy taking the advantage, grew daily upon it, and on all sides
assaulted its now tottering Fabric; That which in this nick of time most
unluckily promoted its ruin, was, a Party of the Goths, who having served the
Romans faithfully for twenty years, and now fallen into the displeasure of this
great Favorite, being disgraced and casheir'd, to revenge their wrongs
publicly Revolted, choosing Alaricus for their Captain, who not long after
proved the Scourge of Rome.

In these days Chrysanthus, the Son of Marian a Bishop, who had been made
Vicar of Britain by Theodosius, deserved so much honor for the prudent
management of the Commonwealth, that considering his Birth, the Son of a
Churchman, and his great Integrity, he was thought the fitter man to oppose
the Schisine of the Cathari, who stiffly maintained, That men of Baptism,
relapsing into mortal sin, could not renew their state of Salvation. To
withstand these, he was chosen, and installed at Constantinople (much against
his will) Bishop of the Novatians, and is the same Person whom we find in
Ecclesiastical Histories so much commended for his great Temperance and
Mortification.

Contemporary with him flourished Fastidius a British Bishop, and wrote Books
of Divinity; yet not withstanding that Britain was so well furnished with
eminent Divines, Pelagius, a Native of this Island, brought up in the Monastery
of Bangor in Wales, about this time found opportunity to introduce new Heresies
into the Church. He having traveled Italy and Egypt, and insinuated himself
into the company first of Paulinus Bishop of Nola, and afterward of St.
Augustine; finding that preferment came not so fast as he expected, and
thinking his great Travels and Study not sufficiently, or not time enough
rewarded, set up for new Opinions, and returning into Britain, with his
Disciples, Coelestius a Scot, and Agricola, spread them wide, poisoning the
minds of the Britains, a Nation (says Gildas) greedy of any Novelty.

By this time ALARICUS, King of the Goths laid siege unto Rome it self, and now
that glorious Empire, like a Body departing, not able to defend its more noble
parts, began to contract and draw in its succors from all sides, and such
Forces which lay scattered for the defense of the outward Provinces, were
summoned to relieve the very heart and Seat of its Empire: amongst the rest the
British Legion, which in the Marches kept station against the Barbarians, was
called away, which Claudian witnesses in these words;

Venit and extremis Legio praetenta Britannis,
Claudian.
Quae Scoto dat fraena truci, serroque not at as
Perlegit exanimes Picto moriente figuras.
Hither the Legion too from Britain came,
Which curbs the Scots, and does fierce Nations tame.
Who, whilst the painted Picts expiring lie,
Beholds the breathless Figures how they die.
And now the Britains finding themselves deserted by the Romans, and the
Barbarous Nations continually assaulting them, the Scots from the Irish Seas,
the Saxons from the German, and the Picts from the North, beholding withal the
desolations of the Continent, through the weakness of the Roman Empire and the
power of its Enemies, the Vandals who had wasted Belgia even to those places
whence is nearest passage into Britain, and learing lest the heating-flame of
their Neighbors fire might fly over to them also, thought it expedient to
choose some General or Sovereign Commander to lead them. First they elected
Marcus, who (it may seem) then MARCUS, chosen Emperor by the Britains. GRATIAN
Emperor.
was Deputy of the Island, but his carriage not agreeing with their giddy
Courses, him they as suddenly slew, and in his stead set up Gratian, a
Countryman of their own, whom they Crowned and arrayed in the Purple Robe, and
adored as their Prince, but the favor of a heady Rout is as fatal as its fury,
for upon some slight mislike taken to him after four Months end, they deprived
him not only of life, but Empire also.

There was among them a Common Soldier whose name was Constantine, with him on
a sudden so taken, they are upon the conceit of a luckiness in his name, as
without any other visible Merit to create him Emperor.

CONSTANTINE making use of the opportunity, and gathering his Forces
CONSTANTINE a Soldier chosen Emperor.
together whilst the heat lasted, putting to Sea from Britain, landed at
Bullen in France, and what with the terror of his Name, and the numbers of his
Followers, he easily brought over to his Party all the Roman Forces on this
side the Alps. Valentia in France he manfully defended against the puissance
of Honorius, the Rhine which long time before had been neglected, he fortified
with Garrisons. Upon the Alps as well Cottiae and Penninae, as those toward
the Maritime Coasts where ever the passages lay open, he placed Garrisons,
built Forts and Castles, and in Spain under the Conduct of his Constant.
Son, whom (of a Monk) he had made his Caesar, he warred with the like fortune
and success.

And now grown high and proud by the constant current of so many Felicities,
not content that Honorius had freely yielded to him a share in the Empire, and
kindly accepted his excuse (wherein he alleged the force of the Soldiers in
advancing him to that Authority) in hostile manner he passed the Alps, and
intended to march directly against Rome; But having information that Alaricus
King of the Goths (whom lately he had made his Ally) was dead, he returned to
Arles, where he planted his Imperial Seat, and commanded the City to be called
CONSTANTINA, in imitation perhaps of Constantine the Great, who had done the
like in the East, and whose Name he had found so lucky to him in all his
concerns. Here he ordained, that the Assemblies of Assizes for seven Provinces
should be held.

And now well seated in the Empire, he sent into Spain for his Son Constans, to
the end that meeting together they might consult further concerning the
establishment of the Empire. Constans receiving his Fathers Message, without
any delay sets forward on his Journey to him, leaving his Wife, and the
furniture of his Court at Caesar Augusta, or Caragosa, and trusting the
management of all Affairs, during his absence, to the care and conduct of
Gerontius a Britain, whom a little while after, upon slight occasion he again
displaced.

Constans being now come to his Father, seemed rather to be sent for to partake
with him in his Vices than Counsels, for by this time grown heedless of any
danger from Italy, he gave himself up to all Riot and Luxury, so that advising
his Son to return into Spain, he was mindful of nothing more than the pleasing
his Appetite alone, and providing of delicate Meats to satisfy his Gluttony.

Constans taking his leave of his Father, having sent his Forces and Retinue
before, receives unwelcome News, that Gerontius having revolted from his
Obedience, had set up Maximus, one of his Vassals and Followers, for Emperor,
and having gathered together great Forces of Barbarians was upon his march
against him and his Father.

Constans allarum'd with these Tidings, dispatched immediately Edo-beccus unto
the German Nations, himself attended with Decimius Rusticus, who of the Master
of the Offices was advanced to be Prefect, and accompanied with his Army of
Franks and Almanes, and other Military Forces, passes into France, intending
with all speed to return again to his Father Constantine, but intercepted by
Gerontius in his way, at Vienna in France in a Combat lost his life.

Gerontius marching to meet Constantine found him at Arles, against which City
he laid close siege, calling the Vandals to his assistance, who encouraged by
him, as before by him they had been represt, breaking into France, overrun most
part of the Province.

By this time Honorius had sent an Army out of Italy, under the Command of
Constantius Comes his General, at the arrival whereof in those parts,
Gerontius, deserted Sosom. lib. 9. Olympiador. apud Photium.
by his own Forces, retired into Spain, where also growing into contempt and
hatred with his Soldiers, his House in the night was beset by them, with a few
of his Servants he manfully defended himself, slew above three hundred of them,
and when his Darts and Weapons were spent, though he might have escaped at a
back Door, as all his Servants had done, yet, out of kindness to Alanus and his
Wife, he refused to do it. And first having cut off the head of his Friend
Alanus, as was agreed, in the next place he dispatches, though with great
reluctance, his Wife also, being much entreated and importuned by her, refusing
to outlive her Husband, and desiring to be freed from the Violence of an
enraged Crew, for which her resolution, Sozomenus, an Ecclesiastical Writer
gives her high praise and commendation; This done, he turns his Sword against
himself, but that missing to perform the work, with his Poniard he finisheth
his resolution and dies.

Constantius now straightened on all hands, and discouraged with some ill
success of Edobeccus, after he had been besteged with his other Son Julian four
Months, and Reigned four years, flings off his Purple Robe and turns Priest,
and hoping under that shelter to secure himself, not long after surrenders the
Town, but his habit proving no sanctuary to him, he was carried into Italy, and
there beheaded together with his Son, to whom he had given the Title of NO
BILISSIMUS, and a Brother named Sebastian.

Whilst these things were doing, the Barbarians taking advantage of the
negligent Government of Constantine, who at Arles minded nothing but his
Pleasures, brake into the Provinces, the Scots and Picts into Britain, and the
Vandals into Gaul.

The Britains now destitute of aid, yet held under by them who had not power to
protect them, forthwith took Arms, and resolving to stand on their own defense,
freed their Cities and States. In like manner their Neighbors, the Britains of
Armorica, and the rest of the Gaulish Provinces by their example did the same,
casting out the Roman Presidents, and setting up for Liberty, ordained
Commonwealths of their own.

But the Roman Power which had been called into Italy, when once the fear of
Alarick was over, and Constantine dead, made return into the several Provinces;
And it seems that Victorinus of Tholosa might be sent Prefect of this
Island, if it were not he whom Stilico sent hither. Buchanan and Cambden, whom
I follow, assign the time of his being here after Gratianus Municeps, and
Constantine the Tyrant, though others say it was before, however certain it is,
that during his residence here he was very active against the Scots and Picts,
and Buchanan writes, that endeavoring to reduce the Picts into a Province, he
gave occasion of their calling back Furgutius, and the Scots, whom Maximus by
their help had quite driven out of the Island.

He is highly commended by Rutilius Clandius the Poet, out of whose Verses his
History is gathered; they are these,

Rutil. Claud.
Conscius Oceanus virtutum, conscia Thule,
Et quaecunque ferox arva Britannus erat.
Quae Praefectorum vicibus fraenata potestas,
Perpetuum magni foenus amoris habet.
Extremum pars illa quidem discessit in orbem,
Sed tanquam medio rector in orb fuit.
Plus palmae est illos inter voluisse placere,
Inter quos minor est displicuisse pudor.
The Seas, and Thule, with his Praise resound,
And wheresoever fierce Britains till their ground.
That Power which others in their turns possessed,
Him with increase of love, entirely blessed.
Though from the World his Province too did stand,
Yet as by all over seen he did command.
It Is more renown good Actions to express,
There, where to govern ill, the shame is less.
Seeing that this Victorinus (by most Authors) is placed after Constantine the
Tyrant, I suppose he might be sent with that Legion whom Honorius, upon the
second request of the Britains, granted to their assistance, or if it were
before that he governed here, and was recalled against Alaricus then besieging
Rome, certain it is, that the Britains exhausted of their Youth by Maximus
first, who transplanted them into Gallia on the Coast of Armorica; and
afterward by Constantine, not having Power sufficient of their own to defend
themselves from the Northern Incursions, and wanting the assistance of the
Romans, first having tried what they could do by freeing themselves from
Foreign Yoke, grown as weary of their Liberty as they had been formerly of
Bondage, sent unto Honorius, humbly craving his Protection, to which Message
they received no other answer, but in Words, by which he exhorted them to stand
upon their own Guard, and so quitted them of the Roman Jurisdiction.

Thus ended this famous Empire of the Romans, first in Britain, and not long
after in Italy it self, having born chief sway in this Island, though never
wholly conquered, nor at one time entirely possessed, for the space of four
hundred sixty two years, if we account from the first arrival of Julius Caesar
to the taking of Rome by Alarick, in which year Honorius wrote those Letters of
Discharge.

Britain thus deserted by the Romans, was left unable to defend it self, having
all the flower and choice of her Youth drawn out to serve in the Roman
Garrisons abroad, whilst others had forsaken their Country to follow the
Ambition of such Tyrants whom they had headily advanced to the Purple Robe, and
having Possessions given them in Gaul never returned, so that before I proceed
to set down the Calamities of the Britains, when left to themselves and their
own Counsels, it will not be amiss to show, how from time to time the Romans
drew out their Youth, and what numbers attended the Tyrants, which were so
frequently advanced in the latter days of the Empire, when there was no end of
their Levies out of Britain.

To begin with the Romans first, Trebellius Maximus transported into Germany a
great number of British Soldiers to make good the Faction of Vitellius against
Otho; Honorius Flaccus in the same cause sent out eight thousand chosen
Soldiers, Albinus in the bloody Battle at Lions, against Severus the Emperor,
lost fifty thousand Men, most of which were of the British Cavalry.

This loss laid the Province naked, and left it open to the Insolence and
Violence of Foreign Invaders, and Constantine the Great (as Malmsbury
reports) carried Malmsbury.
out such numbers with him, that to their Assistance especially he owed his
Victories, and the Empire of the whole World. Afterward he planted them on the
Westcoast of France, called Armorica, next drawing out those Soldiers who lay
for the defense of the Marshes and Fronteirs, he seated them in other parts of
the Continent, carried some into the East, and instead of those
Living-strengths, he built Castles and Forts, which seized by the Enemy, proved
continual annoyances to the Britains.

Maximus the Tyrant, who slew Gratian the Emperor, levied vast numbers of
Britains, and transported them into Gaul, and Ninnius writes, that he would
not send them home again, but gave unto them many Countries even from the Pool,
or Ninnius.
Mere, which lies above Mount Jovis, unto the City that is called Cantguic,
and unto Curcocchidient.

And he that annexed brief Notes unto Ninnius reports, how truly I cannot
tell, the Armorican Britains which are beyond Sea attending Maximus in his
Expedition, when they could not return, wasted the Western-coasts of Gaul, and
when they had married their Wives and Daughters, cut out all their Tongues, for
fear lest the succeeding Progeny should learn their Mother Language, whereupon
we call them in our Tongue Lhet vydion, that is, Half-silent, or Tongue-ty'd,
because they speak confusedly.

Constantius who was elected only for his Name transported most of the flower
and strength of the Britains into Gallia and Spain, where, in his Quarrel, many
of them perished, and the rest never returned, having Seats allotted them in
the West of Gaul, or else followed the Emperor in his Wars.

Hence it is that Prosper Aquitanus wrote thus; At this instant of time, in
respect of the decay of the Roman Forces, the power and strength also of the
Britains was brought Prosp. Aquit.
low, and unable to make resistance. For which cause, and occasion, our
Historiographer of Malmsbury speaks thus; When the Tyrants had rid the Country
of all, save half Barbarians, none were there, either in Towns or Cities, but
who gave themselves upto Epicurism.

Britain now forgetting the use and practice of good Arts, and wanting
assistance of vigorous Youth, for a long time lay open to the Mercy of Ravening
mouths that confined upon her, which was evidenced by the Incursions of the
Picts and Scots, many lost their lives, Cities were subverted, Villages fired,
insomuch as all lay naked and low, to express the Rage and Fury of merciless
Invaders.

The Islanders in this straight, after they had buried their Wealth, much of
which has been since found, chose rather to fly unto the Mountain-Country,
than to stand the hazard of a set Battle, purposing after that to go to Rome to
request assistance. But to little purpose, for Valentinian the Third, as he was
not able to recover either Spain, France or Asrick, Provinces rent by violence
from him, so could he not be Nicepharus. Gildas.
able to answer their expectation. And Gildas, for this very cause, much pities
the dejected case of the Britains. For (says he) Britain was despoyled of all
their Armed-men, her Military Forces, Governors (although cruel they were) and
of a mighty number of her stout hard-hearted Youths.

For besides those whom the Tyrant and Usurper Maximus, and the last
Constantine carried with them, it appears by ancient inscriptions, and the
Book called Notitia Provinciarum, that these Companies here-under written were
employed by the Romans in War, dispersed in Parties over their Provinces, which
exhausted very much the principal fighting men in Britain it self.

Ala Britannica Milliaria.
Ala quarta Britonum in AEgypto.
Cohors prima AElia Britonum.
Cohors tertia Britonum.
Cohors septima Britonum.
Cohors 26 Britonum in Armenia.
Britanniciani sub Magistro peditum. Invicti juniores Britanniciani, inter
Auxilia Palatina. Exculcatores Jun. Britan.
Britones cum Magistro Equitum Galliarum.
Invicti Juniores Britones intra Hispanias.
Britones Seniores in Illyrico.
So that it will be no wonder, when we shall read the following Calamities and
downfall of the Britains, that being reduced to so small a number, and worn out
with the continual Incursions of their Enemies, the Picts and Scots, deserted
by their Ancient Protectours the Romans, they were constrained to call in
another Nation to their assistance, who quickly imposed a Yoke upon them, so
much the more heavy and grievous than the former, inasmuch as the Roman
Civility exceeded the Rudeness of the Primitive Saxons; But before we proceed
to these Relations, let us see the British History in the days of this
Honorius.

THE British History, In the Days of HONORIUS, UNTO VORTIGERN Who brought in
the SAXONS.
THE Britains upon dislike to Honorius for that he had slain Stilico, who, by
the report of our Histories, did great Service for them, chose Marcus for their
King, but him (not found agreeable to their humor) they slew, and set up
Gratianus Municeps in his stead, a Britain born but a great Tyrant, so that not
enduring him above four months, they killed him likewise, in which
circumstances our stories agree with the Romans, but in the election of
Constantine they vary; For he whom the Romans call a Common Soldier, and had
the Empire for his Name only, by them is derived of Noble lineage, and made the
Brother of Aldroenus King of Armorica, and the fourth from Conan Meridoc, Duke
of Cornwall, and first King of Armorica.

Upon the earnest request of Vitelinus Bishop of London, he was sent by his
Brother Aldroenus into Britain, and landed at the same Port that Brute had
formerly done, namely, Totness. Having subdued the Enemies of the Britains, and
Reigned to the commendation of all People the space of ten years, he was slain
by a Pict, his especial Confident.

He left Issue by his Wife (a Woman of Noble extraction, and bred up by
Vitelinus) three Sons, Constantius (whom the Roman Histories call Constans)
Aurelius Ambrosius, and Uther, Surnamed Pen-Dragon.

Constantius being a Man of weak parts in his Fathers time, had been made a
Monk, and placed in the Abbey of Amphibalus in Winchester, and now, after his
death, by the cunning of Vortigern a powerful Britain, who desired to draw the
management of Affairs to himself, was taken out of the Abbey and made King, and
not long after slain by his Guards of Picts and Scots, who for that intent were
placed about him, and suborned by Vortigern upon hopes of Reward, but the Deed
done, Vortigern caused them all immediately to be strangled, by which means he
not only prevented their discovering him, but gained such reputation for
Justice and Integrity that he was chosen King.

The other Sons of Constantine fled into Armorica, where they continued until
the alteration of Affairs called them back.

The Count Palatine, better to bring the British History to the Roman, writes,
That Constantine left behind him four Sons, whereof Julian, mentioned in the
Roman History, was one, but the Relations of the British and Roman Records have
been all along so different in circumstances, and so disagreeing in setting
down even matter of Fact it self, that the hopes of reconciling them would be
fruitless. All therefore that is left in this place, is, to bemoan, that at the
fall of the Roman Empire in these parts, that which was truly Roman decayed
also, namely, Learning, Eloquence, and History, so that for the future we must
steer our course by other Guides, and in many places shall often want such
clear and impartial Authors, by whom hitherto we have been directed.

THE AFFAIRS OF BRITAIN, From the decay of the ROMAN State, To the Entrance of
the SAXONS.
THE Britains, as we heard, being acquitted of the Roman Jurisdiction by
Honorius, in the year of Christ 410, An. Dom. 4104
and of the coming of Julius Caesar 462, the Right of Government falling into
their own hands, began to bestir themselves at first in their new Freedom,
living after their own Laws, and standing on their own Defense; But as People
more fond of the name of Liberty, than apprehensive of the weight of Governing
well, they grew heady and violent in their new Affairs, and eager in what they
understood nor. None more stout and daring in Counsels, but in Action none so
fearful and and relenting, all pretending to know what ought to be done, yet
all drawing back in the performance.

Thus in a short time, when the heat of Liberty was once spent, and the Enemy
daily increased, they quickly found their old temper returning upon them, a
slavishness of Mind, and slothfulness of Body, then they perceived it was not
stomach, or a hot and sudden love of License could protect them, but that
diligence, wisdom, and labor was wanting, so that their Spirits drooping
continually, they shrunk by degrees into their former tameness of mind, and
grew as weary of their new tried Liberty, as they had been of their old
Subjection. For being no longer able to support themselves against the
continual Incursions of the Picts and Scots, they again sent Letters to
Honorius, humbly begging his protection, and vowing Obedience to Rome, if their
Enemies were once removed.

Honorius out of compassion to their Miseries, rather than desire of Rule, sent
them a Legion, who coming over made great slaughter of the Picts, soon drove
them beyond the Marches, and having cleared the Fronteirs, caused a Wall or
Rampire to be built cross the Island, from Sea to Sea, where Agricola had
formerly built one, namely, between the Friths of Edinborough to the City
Alcluith on Dunbritton, but it being cast up with Turf only, and that slightly,
as soon as the Romans were departed to the defense of France, the Barbarous
Nations soon broke down and overrun it, and pouring into the Province like a
Torrent, made great devastations, killing, burning, and destroying wheresoever
they came.

The Scots, on the other hand, out of their Carroughs, or Leather-Vessels,
wherein Gildas.
they used to pass the Scitick Vale, land in whole swarms, and with no less
fury, outrage and cruelty, carry, harry, and make havoc of all; thus bandied
between two merciless and insolent Enemies, both striving which should outdo
the other in Spoil and Rapine.

The Britains once again send their Ambassadors to Rome, in mournful manner,
An. Dom. 418.
with their Garments rent, and sand on their heads, humbly imploring that they
would not permit so Ancient a Province, and so serviceable to the Romans, to
become a prey and scorn to Barbarians.

Valentinian the Third, then Emperor, pitying their Complaints, sends certain
Regiments to their assistance, who coming upon these greedy Spoilers, who were
intent only on Plunder, made great slaughter of them, rescued the Britains, and
cleared the whole Province. Then, partly at the public Charges of the State,
and partly at the Contributions of private Men, they built another Wall, not of
Turf as the former, but of Stone, twelve foot high and eight broad, traversing
the Island in a direct line from East to West, where Severus had walled before,
namely, from Newcastle on Tine to Solway-Frith on the Irish Sea, between
certain Cities placed as Fronteirs to stave-off the Enemy. On the South-coast
also, being an open Shore, and not free from their Inroads, they built Towers,
cast-up Forts and Block-houses at convenient distances, and on certain heights.

Having thus secured the Island on both sides, they exhorted the Britains now
to An. Dom. 423.
stand in their own defense, and manfully to maintain their Country against
rude and barbarous People, not stronger than themselves, if their own Fears had
not made them so, to which end they instructed them in the Art of War, and left
patterns of their Arms and Weapons behind them, and with many encouraging
words, and lectures of Valor to a Hen-hearted Auditory, gave them a final
farewell, without intention to return again.

This last friendly Expedition of the Romans, was under the Conduct of Gallio
of Ravenna, Buchanan names him Maximianus, and writes, That Firgus, first King
of Buehanan.
the Scots, after their second coming into Scotland, and Dursius King of the
Picts, were both slain in fight against him, and that Dioneth, a supposed King
of Britain, or Duke of Cornwall, who assisted them, hardly escaped the Battle.
But of any such person as Dioneth ruling in this Island our Histories make no
mention, and very unlikely it is, that they who but just now sued so earnestly
to Rome for succor against the Common Enemy, the Picts and Scots, should now
enter into League with them, and oppose their Friends, who came so far and
kindly to relieve them.

As for Dursius and Firgus, Kings of the Scots and Picts, the supposed Leaders
of all these Incursions into Britain, as it is not my business to gainsay
their History, so neither will I relate their Actions in particular, although
set down in the Scottish Histories with exactness of Circumstances, namely,
their order of Battle, and manner of Fight, their different Entrenchings,
Marches, Sieges, Numbers of slain, and Articles of Peace, things whereof Gildas
and Bid make not the least mention, Authors of far greater Credit and
Antiquity than any produced by the Scottish Writers.

But thus much may be noted in this place, that it seems not to accord with
the truth of History, that those Nations that at this time infested the Island,
rather with wild and licentious Inroads, than a just and regular War, and are
described (by Gildas) like ravenous Wolves, or Tories, issuing from their
hollow Caves, Dens, Gildas.
and lurking Holes, and always taking advantage of the Romans absence, should
be supposed to be under Order and Discipline, in a steady course of Invasion,
especially if we consider with what ease they were repulsed at the appearance
of one Legion only, and how, without the least molestation, they suffered the
Wall to be built, a thing they would never have permitted, had they been as
well linked together in great Bodies, and under good Government, as their minds
were unanimous in Plunder and Rapine. No more therefore are the Scottish
Writers to be heeded in such Relations, than Jeoffery of Monmouth, when he
varies most from Authentic story.

As soon as the Romans were finally departed, and their Resolution of not
returning Gildas: An. Dom. 430.
known, the Scots and Picts differing in Manners, yet agreeing in the desires
of Spoil and Bloodshed, with more considence than ever, like dusky Vermin, in
the heat of day and full Noon, in whole swarms issued out of their narrow Holes
and Caves, and all the Country north, even unto the Wall, immediately seize,
and, as Natural Inhabitants, not fearing any more to be dispossessed, plant and
manure it. In the mean time, they who kept Garrison on the Wall like idle
Spectatours, and more dreading to be assaulted, than daring to oppose the
growing Enemy, stood trembling and quaking upon the Battlements, like Men
placed rather to view their Losses than to revenge them; whilst day and night
they kept ward in their Stations, by continual beholding their Foe, they
conceived the more dreadful apprehensions of them, and by doing nothing spent
their Spirits and grew idle.

Thus standing with Weapons in their hands, and esteeming it Manhood sufficient
if they did but face the Invader, they tamely suffered the half-naked Picts to
come under the Battlements, and with their Engines and Hooks to pull them down
headlong, the rest, quitting the Wall, betook themselves to flight, and left
the Enemy in possession of the Fronteir-Cities, who having with such ease broke
into the Province, followed their fuccess with like vigor, pursuing the
Britains into the Inland-Countries, and making havoc and destruction
wheresoever they came.

To the heap of these Calamities without were added no less from within, for
the Britains employed in the Guard of the Fronteirs had neglected the Tylling
Ground, upon which so great dearth and scarcity ensued, that they were
constrained, for want of Provisions, to rob and pillage each other. They who
came from the North, as may probably be supposed, and had fled from the! Enemy,
being not able to buy when they came to the Southern parts, seized what they
could find, upon which rose Discords and Animosities, Civil dissensions and
Wars. For this Nation (as Gildas observes) though feeble in repressing an
Enemy, yet in homebred-quarrels was always Gildas.
obstinate and hardy.

And now whilst they wore themselves out with continual acts of Hostility, the
Famine grew general upon all, the whole Country was exhaust of Bread, the staff
and strength of life, and those miserable People that remained were forced to
maintain their lives by Hunting, and such like Prey as the wild Forest would
afford. Notwithstanding these great calamities and troubles in the State, there
happened new divisions in the Church, for Heresy grows fastest in distracted
times.

Agricola the Son of Severianus, a Disciple of Pelagius, had spread his
Doctrine wide among the Britains, but the sounder part disliking his Opinions,
but not able to confute them, begged assistance from the Churches in France, who
sent them Germanus Bishop of Auxere, and Lupus of Troys; These coming into
Britain, by assiduous preaching in Churches, Fields and Streets, and, as some
write, by doing Miracles, confirmed many in the Faith, regained others, and in
a public Disputation at Verulam confuted the chief of the Heretics.

The time of Germanus his Arrival is uncertainly guessed at, most probably in
the year 430. Matthew of Westminster places him under the year 446, not long
before the entrance of the Saxons, and indeed, certain it is that he had to do
Mat. Westminster:
with that Nation here, as shall be shown in the sequel; But that it was after
they were called into this Island under the Leading of Hengist and Horsus, and
not before, cannot be collected. For the Incursions of the Saxons into Britain
were no new thing before their public Arrival, wherefore I shall follow on the
course of Germanus his Actions in these troubled times, not breaking them into
parts and parcels, according to the confused computations of this Age; take
them out of Constantius, the Writer of his Life, who lived in the next Age.
Constantius vit. Germ. Gildas.


The Picts and Saxons, with joint Force, making daily inroads from the North,
those Britains who for fear or hunger had not yielded themselves to the Enemy,
but stood daily upon their defense, gathering into a Body from out of
Mountains, Caves and thick Woods, full of bushes, Briars and Brambles, began to
march with all their strength against the Enemy, but jealous of their own
Power, and it may be now, as Gildas writes, trusting more on the assistance of
God than Man, they sent for Germanus, and his Colleague, in the strength of
whose prayers they had more considence than in the numbers of their Men; Being
come, their presence in the Camp was no less than if a whole Army were joined
to their assistance. It was in the time of Lent, when the People, instructed by
the daily Sermons of these Pastors, came flocking to receive Baptism. There was
a place in the Camp set apart for Divine Service, and dressed up with Boughs on
Easter Day.

The Enemy having intelligence of this, and thinking that the Britains were
more intent upon Religion than the War, advance, after the Paschal Feast, as to
a certain Victory.

German, who had notice of their approach, undertakes the conduct of that day,
and riding out with some selected Troops to discover a place fit for Ambush,
finds a Valley, encompassed with many risings, through which the Enemy was to
pass. Here he places his Men, and orders them that what word they heard him
pronounce, the same they should repeat with an universal Shout.

The Enemy goes on secretly, and German thrice aloud cries Hallelujah, which
answered by the Soldiers, with a sudden noise and clamor is doubly ecchoed
from the Hills and Valleys. The Saxons and Picts startled hereat, and supposing
it the noise of a huge Host, flung down their Arms and fled, and for have many
of them were drowned in the River which newly they had passed.

The Victory thus obtained without hands, gave to the Britains plenty of Spoil,
and proeured to the Person and Preaching of German greater Authority and
Reputation than before.

The place of this Victory is reported to have been in Flintshire, by a Town
called Guid-eruc, and the River is supposed Allen, where a Field retains the
name of Maes German unto this day.

Some have called into question that part of the Relation which makes mention
of the People flocking to be Baptized by German, seeing that Pelagianism was
never Rebaptized, and the Heathenish Religion, for a long time before, is not
so much as heard of in Britain? But, I think, this cannot take away from the
truth of this story, seeing it is writ by a Man living so near the times, for it
is not to be meant of the whole Army of Britains, but of some part only, and
those perhaps Friends and Allies to them; For in a mixture of Nations which in
War, either the taking of Prisoners, or the Revolt of disaffected persons,
naturally causes, what wonder is it if there might be Scots, Picts or Saxons
in Germans Camp, especially if we consider what intelligence he had of the
approach of the Enemy, and the exact time of their coming, which could be given
him by none but such who fled over to them, and that many of the Scots and
Picts were desirous to embrace the Christian Faith, and wanted only opportunity
to do it, may be gathered, in that Palladius a Deacon, about this time was
ordained, and sent by Celestine the Pope to be Bishop over them. No marvel
therefore, if many of the Picts entering into Britain, and beholding the Lives
and Conversations of the Christians here, might be converted from their savage
Customs and Religions, and desire to be Baptized by that Man, of whose
miraculous Life and Doctrine they had heard such wondrous Relations.

These Astions happened about the year 430, when German departing the Land, the
Scots and Picts taking advantage of his absence, prepared again for a new
Invasion. The Britains wearied out with continual Wars, and not expecting any
more Miracles for their deliverance, send to Rome for assistance about the
39th. year of Theodosius, and of our Lord 446. Their Letters were directed to
AEtius, or Agitius, then President of Gallia, with this Inscription: An Dom.
446.


TO AETIUS, THRICE CONSUL, THE GROANS OF THE BRITAINS. The Barbarians drive us
to the Sea, and the Sea drives us back to the Barbarians, thus between two
kinds of death we are either slaughtered or drowned. Bid.


And the more to express their Miseries, and to move Compassion, thus they
surther urge;

We the poor Remnant of the Britains, and your Vassals, besides the Enemy, are
afflicted by Famine and Mortality, which at this time extremely rages in our
Land. Withal they beg him to consider, how nearly it concerned the Honor of
the Roman Empire to protect and succor a Province, which for five hundred
years almost, had constantly adhered to their Interest, that if they were now
weakened, and in a condition rather to take than give assistance, they desire
him to call to mind, that it was Their occasions, not their own, that had
reduced them to those necessities; the strength of the British Youth were
exhausted in the Roman Service, and the Land lest naked to uphold the grandeur
of the Empire. And, besides the loss of their Youth, their wealth had been
wasted and consumed in maintaining so many Legions in foreign Service, and
their stores of Corn spent in supplying the Roman Provinces abroad.

To these their urgent Requests they receive no Answer at all, for the Empire
sorely infested and overspread with Huns and Vandals, was not in any condition
to give them assistance; insomuch that wearied out with continual Complaining
in vain, and the Famine daily increasing upon them, like Men in a desperate
condition, their comfort lying only between the choice of two Evils, some
merely to get sustenance, yield themselves to the disposal of the Enemy,
whilst others, more hardy and resolute, maintain their lives with what the
Woods and Forests afford them, oftentimes, as their Necessities urged, or
Advantage invited them, would Gildas.
they make sallies upon the Enemy, and that with good success, led on (as may
be guessed) by some worthy Commander, who advised them not to trust in their
own Power but the Divine assistance; And perhaps, if computation would permit,
which in these times is very much confused, by the Divine assistance nothing
more is here meant, than the foresaid miraculous Victory obtained by German,
near the River Allen; But however I shall follow the series of Gildas in
setting down the History of these Times.

The Scots, or Irish Robbers (for so are they indifferently called) finding
such stout resistance where they least suspected it, for the present depart
home with intention to return upon the next fair occasion inviting them.

The Picts also, who not long before, as has been mentioned, had seated
themselves in the utmost part of the Island, even unto the Wall, now retired to
their new Habitations, and, saving a few Inroads, which now and then they made
upon the Borderers, lived without any great molestation, so that the Britains
eased from their Enemies began anew to till the Ground, which after long
discontinuance yielded her fruit in such abundance, as the like in no Age
before had ever been remembered.

But the Sore of Famine being healed and skinned, others more virulent broke
out, Riot, Luxury and Wantonness, the usual attendants of Fullness and Plenty,
and with them all Vices incident to Humane nature. For, besides Fornication,
Adultery, Uncleanness, Rapes, Incest, the necessary Companions of Intemperance,
Contentions, Strifes, Civil discords arose among them, and they who had been
feeble and weak in repressing a foreign Enemy, in vindicating their private
Animosities were eager and obstinate.

But that which Gildas faith most especially conduced to the corrupting of
Affairs, and the overturning the state of all goodness in the Land, and so
continued in his days, was, the hatred of Truth, and the Maintainers of it,
the love of Lies, with the Forgers thereof. Evil they called good, and good
evil. To be wicked and lewd was honorable, but to be virtuous poor and
disgraceful; blind themselves they became haters of the Light, and the measures
of their Actions was what was most pleasing to themselves. No other differences
of good or evil were admitted, all weighed alike, saving that the worst was
most an end the weightier. All things were done directly contrary to the
Public welfare and safety, not by the Laity only, but the Clergy also, and
they who should have been Examples of Virtue often proved the Ringleaders to
Vice. Many of them lovers of Wine and Drunkenness, wallowing in that sin grew
benumbed and senseless, others swollen with Pride and Wilfulness became
contentious, envious, indisereet in their Judgments, incapable to distinguish
what was good, what evil, what lawful, or unlawful.

Thus qualified, both Priests and People, they resolve (says Gildas) to choose
Gildas.
several Kings of their own (for that they had not all one Monarch, appears not
by the custom of the past Ages only, but the succeeding also) the particular
time of their election, as by the confused computations of those troublesome
days, may be most probably guessed was in the year 446, or 447, which was the
year of AEtius An. Dom. 446, or 447.
his Consulship, as appears out of the Calendar of the Consuls, when having
sued to Rome for Assistance they were absolutely rejected, and so forced to
stand upon their own safeguard.

And who would not think but that a People thus left to themselves, and bereaft
of so potent Allies as the Romans, would have behaved themselves cautiously and
warily in so great a concern. But hear what Gildas says of their heady and
rash proceedings in this weighty Affair: Kings (says he) were Anointed not
according to Divine approbation, but the Voices and Suffrages of such as were
more Cruel than others, and again as suddenly deposed and murdered by their
Advancers, without examining the truth, to make room for others more Insolent
and Cruel. If any of their Princes seemed more mild, and inclinable to good
Counsel, upon him, as the Subverter of Britain, without respect to his Person,
the open hatred and malice of all was levelled.

Thus Affairs proceeded in the State, and in the Church no less Commotions
ensued, for Pelagianisme again getting head, through the means of a sew, the
British Clergy not able to withstand it, entreat the second time German to
their assistance; He with Severus a Disciple of Lupus, his former Associate,
coming into the Island, stand not now to dispute as formerly (for the
generality were not infected with the Heresy) but discovering the Heads and
teachers of the new Doctrine, adjudge them to Exile, who being by the Secular
Power delivered to him, were by him conveyed beyond Sea, where he disposed of
them in such places as they could neither infect others, and were themselves
under cure, by better Instruction; Germanus the same year died in Italy.

After his departure the Britains receive News, that their old Enemies, the
Scots and Picts, were returning with greater preparations than ever, that they
threatened the destruction of the whole Land, and intended no less than to plant
themselves from one end thereof to the other. But before their Arrival, as if
the Instruments of Divine Vengeance were at strife, which should first destroy
a wicked Nation, the residue that the Sword and Famine left alive, were now
swept away with a sore Pestilence, insomuch that the living scarce sufficed to
bury the dead.

But for the present, as one Evil drives off another, the destroying Plague
preserved the Land from the more Barbarous spoylers, which, for fear of the
Contagion durst not engage too far in the Inland Countries; But as soon as the
Infection ceased the Enemy began to advance, and were entered as far as Stamford
on the River Welland.

VORTIGERN, then King of the Britains, newly elected to the Crown, hearing of
their approach, was then meditating how best he might secure himself, and had
resolved to fly into those parts of the Island now called Wales (of the
Original of this Vortigern, and his advancement to the Crown, I have spoken
before in the British History, under the Emperor Honorius) he is described by
the truest Historians, an insolent and haughty Tyrant, neither wise in Counsel,
nor experienced in War, yet doted on by the People for his Vices so well
suiting with their own, heedless of the Common danger, and esteeming the
Public Treasure as a Fund only, to satisfy his Lusts and Extravagance.
Nevertheless, awakened with the Clamours of the People, he summons a General
Council to provide some better means than hitherto had been found, to put an
end to these Incursions from the North, where it was concluded, that the Saxons
should be called into Britain, and Ambassadors sent with great Presents to
invite them. Witichindus, a Saxon Writer, reports, Witichindus.
that the Ambassadors at their Audience spoke as follows;

Most Worthy Saxons, The distressed BRETS.
Britains, tired out with the continual Incursions of their Enemies, hearing
the fame of their Valor, have sent us to implore your Assistance, the Land
they possess large and spacious and abounding with all things, they wholly
leave to your devotion and disposal: Hitherto we have lived with freedom under
the Protection of the Romans, next to them we know none worthier than your
selves, and therefore to your Valor we fly for refuge. Leave us not below our
present Enemies, and we shall be ready to perform whatsoever by you shall be
imposed.

Thus writes an Author of their own, yet Ethelwerd says, that they promised no
Subjection, but League and Amity only.

The Saxons thus invited to what they willingly would have sued for, made no
delay, but returned this short and speedy Answer: Be assured that the Saxons
will be true Friends to the Britains, and not only stick close by them in their
Adversity, but be at all times ready to procure their wealth and prosperity.

The Ambassadors return joyful with these Tidings, but how the Saxons
performed their Promise you may read in Gildas, and shall be declared in their
following History.

At what time these things happened in Britain, according to the diversity of
Computations, in this most confused Age, can be but uncertainly guessed at. For
by the several accounts of Authors there are at least twenty years difference,
whilst some measure the time from the Era, others from another, amidst so
great variety I have thought fittest to follow the most received Opinion, which
makes the Entrance of the Saxons to be about the year of our Lord 448, or 449,
and the Actions of German in this Island, in the year 431 to 447, in which time
both his Expeditions are Saxons, An. Dom. 448, or 449. German, An. 431, to 447.
included. Neither let any wonder, that being the Saxons came not before the
year 448, and German is reported to have defeated that Nation before the year
447, how this can possibly be reconciled, since I have said before, that it was
no new thing for the Saxons to make Incursions into this Island long before
they were invited hither by public Authority. Yet that the Reader may not be
ignorant of the diversity of Actions, which (as I said) proceeded from
diversities of AEra's, I will set them down distinctly according to the most
Authentic Historians.

Bid and his Followers reckon the years thus: In the thirty first year of
Theodosius the Younger, and of Christ 430, the Britains craved assistance, but
in vain, of AEtius the third time Consul. Thus Bid.

But here may be enquired which is the principal Era by which this account is
made. If it be the year of Christ 430, then the difference will be whether
Theodosius began his Reign in the year 399, or 407, which are eight years
difference; The Era therefore must be brought from Theodosius his Reign, forbid supposes him to have begun his Reign in the year 399, and in some Copies
of Ninnius there is a note of Computation adjoined, which Mr. Cambden says
takes away all scruples, and clears all doubts, which makes the beginning of
his Reign to have been Anno 407.

Again, if you make the chief Era of this Computation to be AEtius third time
Consul, the difference is greater, and we must now seek out the time from the
Kalendars of the Councels, and we shall find that the third Consulship of
AEtius fell out to be in the thirty ninth year of the said Theodosius, which
should be (according to Bid) in the year 439, and yet in that account is made
after the Birth of Christ 446, and supposes Theodosius to begin his Reign
(according to the Computation in Ninnius) in the year 407, whereas, according
to Bid, it should be in the year 399.

Thus much as to Bedes first Account, next he says, Under Valentinian the
Third, German once or twice came into Britain, and led an Army of Britains
against the Picts and Scots.

Here the Computations must be made of Valentinian the Emperor, and German.
The time of Valentinian after Theodosius is uncertain, yet of necessity must be
after the year 446, according to Bid, and yet German by approved Authors (as
Mr. Cambden relates) died in the year of Grace 435.

Ninnius writes, that German returned into his own Country after the death of
Vortigern. Now considering that Vortigern called in the Saxons, and Bid says,
That in the first year of Martianus, and the year of our Lord 449, the Nation
of the English Saxons arrived in Britain; how is it possible, that German dying
in the year 435, could return into his Country after the death of Vortigern,
who called in the Saxons in the year 449, and lived many years after.

In the year of Christ 433, Prosper Tyro, who then lived, writes, That
Britain, Prosp. Tyro.
after sundry overthrows, was brought in subjection to the Saxons.

Thus we see one Computation draws us back whilst another sets us
forward, whilst some reckon from Christ, some from Theodosius, some from
AEtius, some from Valentinian and Martianus, and others from German. But it
will not be here amiss, among the rest of the Computations, to set down that
which is adjoined in some Copies in Ninnius.

From the Consulship of the two Gemini, Rusus in the copy. First Duke of the
Guisses, and Earl of Cornwall, then King of Britain.
Fusius and Rubellius, unto Stilico the Consul, are reckoned 373 years.

From Stilico unto Valentinian the Son of Placidia, and to the Reign of
Vortigern, 28 years.

From the Reign of Vortigern to the discord of Gintoline and Ambrose are 12
years, which Battle is Guoloppum, that is, Cathquoloph.

Vortigern held the Kingdom when Theodosius and Valentinian were Consuls, and
in the fourth year of his Reign the Saxons came into Britain, and were
entertained by Vortigern when Felix and Taurus were Consuls.

From the year wherein the Saxons came into Britain, and were received by
Vortigern, unto Elsewhere Decius Paulinus. A Pagan Prince.
Decius Valerianus, are 69 years.

By this Account, the coming of the Saxons into Britain was in the twenty first
year of Theodosius the Younger, in the year of our Lord 428, and this (says
Mr. Cambden) comes nearest to the Computation of Bid. But I have rather
followed the received Opinion, calculated from the Consulship of AEtius, who
(in Gildas) is called AEgitius, and in another Copy AEquitius, than by so far
setting back the time, upon too much nicety, to differ from all other
Historians.

Having shown the manner, occasion, and time how the Saxons first entered this
Nation, it will now be necessary to relate, by what craft and policy Elsewhere
Decius Paulinus. A Pagan Prince.
HENGIST their General at last attained to be King, and Governor of Kent,
which place at first was (intentionally) assigned him in Trust, and for his
more honorable Reception, or at least better encouragement in using his utmost
endeavor to carry on the War against Vortigern's Enemies.

But during the time, his Soldiers had so Courageously acted in his absence as
to deserve Reputation, he secretly managed his Interest at home, providing them
greater supplies as occasion should offer, and gathering a greater Body
together upon notice given him, speedily embarked with his Brother Horsus, and
observe the luck of it, that no sooner they appeared in BRITAIN, but were
received with great joy by King Rusus in the copy. First Duke of the Guisses,
and Earl of Cornwall, then King of Britain.
Vortigern, who at that time was much infested with the Inroads of the Picts
and Scots.

After his Reception, the King gave him little or no rest (for the present) in
his new Territories, till he had received further proofs of his Valor and
Conduct, in quelling the rage and fury of his inveterate Enemies.

The Battles with these Picts the Saxons maintained to their great honor and
reputation, yet some Historians will not believe that ever King Vortigern was a
Man of so weak a Judgment, so earnestly to urge so crafty and powerful a
Nation, as the Saxons then were, to his assistance, but that at first they came
by chance into the Island, according to an ancient Custom among the English
Saxons, a People in Germany, as it was also at first among other Nations, that
when in multitudes a People so increased that their own Country was not able to
contain them, by an especial Edict of their Prince a set number was chosen out
to cast Lots, how many for that year were to depart the Land, and seek out new
employments in the Wars of other Nations, For so has it been conjectured of
these, that they came out of their own Country into Britain, to offer
themselves to serve in their Wars for mere want of employment and sufficient
maintenance at home, which was the first occasion given for their Arrival into
this Land.

Hengist, by this time, having gained a considerable Interest among the
Britains, and more especially perceiving, that the King wholly depended upon
his Valor and Conduct, takes his advantage in considering the best and surest
means how he might speedily advance his greater Promotion, not only during his
own life, but his Heirs and Successors after him, in order to which Polidore
Virgil says, That he fenced a Country round about, with which he was only
entrusted, afterward planted Garrisons in such Polider. Virg.
places as seemed best to him for his advantage.

The King not yet perceiving the shower of Misfortune with black Clouds
threatening him, takes Hengists further Advice in hastening speedy Orders for a
greater supply of German Forces, in pretense of securing the Land more firmly
from the rage and power of his Enemies, which, in truth, at last proved but to
promote and strengthen his own Greatness, which so long he had forecast in his
head to accomplish, esteeming it also to be a great Honor to his Name and
Family, that he should approve himself to be the only Man that first laid the
foundation of a Saxon Monarchy in so Great and Renowned a Kingdom as BRITAIN,
which was not only so esteemed in those days, but by the Phoenicians, Greeks,
and Romans, their Predecessors. And we have just cause to believe his Affairs
were managed with more than ordinary prudence and policy, when in one of his
Armies was conveyed hither the comely and most beautiful The Daughter of
Hengist.
Rowena, on purpose to entice and steal away the Kings heart, that her Father
might take the better advantage in completing his Emperial designs.

The King no sooner saw this Beautiful Virgin at a Banquet, unto which he was
invited by Hengist, but so infinitely admired her Person, Beauty, and Noble
Behavior, that nothing would divert his resolution, or quench the heat of so
sudden a passion, but the deserting his own Queen to obtain Rowena in Marriage,
but Hengist craftily managing his designs, modestly complements the King with
humble and submissive Excuses, much after this manner; That neither his
Daughters degree, Person, or Fortune was suitable to Majesty, or the Greatness
of his Dominions and Empire; yet at last, through the earuestness of the Kings
Importunities, he gave his consent for his speedy Marriage.

By this Hengist was not only honored in being Related to a British Prince,
but firmly received a confirmation of the Kings Gratitude, the Kingdom of Kent
for his Recompense, which formerly had been governed by one Guorongus, a
Viceroy to manage State Affairs in that Province.

This German Alliance with King Vortigern, in a short time made the Saxon
Confederates more burdensome to the State than their late Enemies, which at
first a little startled the King, nevertheless the crafty and fortunate
inventions of Hengist, strengthened by the power of that beloved Rowena, so
eclipsed the Kings sight, yea so weakened his Power, that he gained further
leave to send into Germany for his Brother Occa, and his Son Ebusa. The
pretense was, that the Enemy grew too heady and strong for him, and that by
such aids and assistance he could better undertake the defense of the South
parts, when at the same time, They, if here, might preserve the North. Some
report, although not without contradiction to others, that this Occa was the
Son of Hengist, and Ebusa his Uncles Son, but the difference in Opinions in
this point is not much material: sufficient that the story is true that such
Persons by name, were called hither by the advice and procurement of Hengist,
to promote the power of a Saxon Interest.

The Nobility of the British Nation now sensible of their destruction, knew it
was too late to reclaim a Luxurious and careless Prince, and as to little
purpose to endeavor the recalling of a neglected opportunity, wherein once
they might have stopped the current of such dangerous Events and Accidents; For
their Consultations, now, with the King, how to prevent Occa and Ebusa from
entering the British shoars were wholly rejected, through the inseparable
affection he bore to the content and happiness of his new Associate. The manner
of Occa and Ebusa's behavior after their Arrival, is briefly thus:

After the King had given his consent for the landing of a powerful Army of
Germans, there came with them, as their Generals, Occa and Ebusa, and coasting
toward Britain, they struck Sail for the Orkney Isles, after whose arrival the
Inhabitants received great and unspeakable damages, and not long after the
Scots and Picts bore an equal share in affliction, for after they had
sufficiently executed their Tyranny upon the Britains, they proceeded to
Northumberland, where, for some time at their first entrance intended only to
make a short stay, but in process of time, too well approving the accommodation
of that Country, they esteemed it a place worthy of longer residence, yet not
so fully and absolutely possessing it as to govern it under the title of KINGS,
but Subjects of Kent, till ninety nine years after their first possession.

Now it is that again we hear, how infinitely afflicted and moved the Subjects
of King Vortigern were at the increasing Power of the Saxons, and because (as I
said before) they could not persuade him into the belief of such great dangers
likely to happen, they universally agreed in Counsel among themselves to
bereave him of his Regal Deposed after six years Government.
Power and Dignity, and in whose stead they placed his Son Vortimer, which, for
the present, put the Nation into no small confusion and hubbub, besides gave
new occasions to the Saxons to revive Insurrections, and commit upon the
distressed Inhabitants most deplorable spoil and havoc.

Bid, and others, are silent of Vortimers taking possession of the Crown about
this time, and consequently that there happened no such fewd and heart-burning
between King Vortigern and his Nobility, upon the account of the Saxons Arrival
into this Land. For they say, that when the Saxons came into the Land, they
were received as Friends, Aiders, and Assisters of the disturbed Britains,
against their Enemies. But I conceive, Bid, and others, might mistake the true
Timing of Transactions in that State, forgetting the time of the breach of
Covenant between them, and so might easily mistake one time for another, as I
find the British History in several other cases, are worthy of too great blame
and reprehension.

What Courage the Britains took after all these discouragements, in the days
of Aurelius Ambrosius, shall be shown in a following Treatise relating to the
transactions in that Princes Reign.

Hengist, by Birth, however he dissembled his Quality in that modest behavior
of his, in behalf of his Daughter, to King Vortigern, was of the Princely Blood
of the Saxon Race, born in Angria in Westphalia, the Son of Wiht-Gisil, of the
Line of Prince Wooden. The Kingdom of Kent he obtained by his power and policy,
not Right, which in the days of Julius Casar was never known to be an entire
Province, as it was always governed by four Petty Kings of the British Race.
And although he obtained not the Kingdom by right of Inheritance, yet was he to
be commended for his Policy, Valor, and Conduct, He possessed not the Kingdom
above seven years, but laid the foundation of the Saxon Government, and
approved himself an Example, yea the first Rule and direction to Egbert,
afterward a K. of the West Saxons, how to reduce the whole Kingdom into one
happy and entire state of Monarchy; So that before we proceed to the History
and Chronicle of his Successors, who, after their Arrival, bore the greatest
sway in this Kingdom, and by success of Arms, and vast supplies received from
the Continent, easily overcame and mastered the distressed Natives, a People at
that time reduced to a small number, laden with Distresses, yea worn out with
continual Calamities, it will not be amiss first to set down their Original and
progress through most parts of the World ere they arrived into this Island,
their Religion, some Customs, annexing other memorable things relating to
their Arts and Polity, that having at once before our eyes the Virtues and
Vices of our Ancestors, we may know the better what to follow, what to avoid,
and may the better be enabled how to discern the methods and means whereby to
preserve that Empire entire and inviolable, the Foundations whereof have been
by them laid so firm, solid, and lasting.

But before we proceed to the Antiquity and History of the Saxons, it will be
necessary to treat briefly of the Original and Antiquity of the Romans, a
People so renowned for their ancient Conquests, and so well esteemed for their
good Government in this Nation.

THE ANTIQUITY AND ORIGINAL OF THE ROMANS,
THEIR Religion, government in State Affairs, discipline in War, with several
of their Rules and Methods relating to their Polity; Unto which is added Some
Observations upon what relates more particularly to the Greek Idolatry, omitted
in a former Treatise.

PLUTARCH reckons up many supposed Founders of ROME, Herodotus, Marsylus, and
some others, will have them descended from the Graecians, and Coecilius a Roman
Historiographer, in Strabo, proves that Rome was built by the Graecians,
because the Romans, after Strabo, lib. 5, p. 159.
the manner of the Greeks, by ancient Institution and Custom did sacrifice to
Hercules, and that the Romans also worshipped the Mother of Evander; Yet the most
vulgar received Opinion, is, that Rome was the work of ROMULUS from the
Foundation, and that the Romans were a Body aggregate, and compounded of
Sabines and Latins, and others are of Opinion, which I have shown in another
place, that they were a conflux of the worst of the Neighboring People of that
State; For Romulus, after the deposing and murdering his Uncle Amulius, and
re-instating his Grandfather Numitor in the Albane Throne (having got together
Shepherds and some Malefactors, that had fled for of Justice from their
natural Princes) soon left Aiba to the quiet enjoyment of his Grandfather, he
himself not being willing to live under any other Laws than his own, or else
the nobleness of his Ambition dehorting him from injuring one, whom lately he
had so generously restored, resolves to contrive the model and platform of his
future Government, yea lay himself the foundation of his own Greatness; For
being made KING by the general consent of his ragged Associates, and that
consent confirmed, ratified, and established by lucky signs and tokens from the
Gods; after several contrivances and designs pitches upon Mount Palatine, where
he himself, and his Brother, had been exposed by their Uncle Amulius, as a
fortunate place for their erecting a New City, hoping that as the Gods (from a
poor, miserable, and abandoned Infant) had made him a glorious King, so by the
same power they might, in time, of this little Village make a considerable
Kingdom.

Moreover he looked upon this Mountain as the fittest place for defense, if any
Enemy should dare to oppose him, and a place very inconvenient for the
approaches and assaults of all Besiegers, nevertheless secured it with a Ditch
and Wall. But lest the three adjoining Mountains, viz. Capitoline, Coelian, and
Quirinal, might rather serve (as they lay then) for Forts and Bulwarks, from
whence the Enemy might storm and molest his New City, he fortified them with a
Ditch and a Wall also, and placing therein Garrisons, they served instead of
Castles for the security of the City; But after he had subdued T. Tatius King
of the Sabines, he gave to him and his People the Tarpeian, or Capitoline
Mountain to inhabit, bringing it also within the Walls and compass of the City.
L. Tarquinius Priscus mended and repaired the Walls with Stone, which before
were cast up with Mud and ordinary Rubbish, but Servius Tullius was the first
that encompast Rome with a Stone-wall, adding to the City three other Hills
also, both Kings and People being as ambitious in augmenting their City, as
they were in propagating and increasing the largeness of their Dominion and
Empire.

Lastly, It was so enlarged and admirably beautified with the Spoils and
Ornaments of the Chiefest places of EUROPE, that Rome (which was first scarce a
Mile in compass) was afterward esteemed as one of the Wonders of the Earth.
And without question 'twas a pleasing spectacle, which could make St. Augustine
(otherwise a Person of great gravity and self-denial) to his other two pious
wishes, annexed this, Of seeing ROME in its full Glory.

Of the distinction and division of the People.
WHEN Romulus had secured his City, he began to think on convenient ways of
Policy whereby he might the better attain to a certain method of Government,
that might be best suitable to the genius of his rude and disorderly Subjects,
who therefore ranged them into three National Tribes or Wards.

1. The first Ward was of the SABINES, called Tatienses. 2. The second of the
ALBANS, viz. Ramnenses. 3. The third was of the LUCERES, named so from the
Grove where the Asylum or Sanctuary stood, whither the People of all conditions
daily repaired for defense and protection, and every Ward was divided into ten
Parishes.
Then he distinguished them according to their Degrees and Offices, calling the
Oldest, best, and ablest of his Citizens (if they had Children) Patricii, and
the Mean sort Plebeii, enacting Laws containing the duty, negotiation, and
obligation of both.

The Patricii were to superintend Religion, bear City Offices, administer
Justice to the Common people. The Commons were to look to their Cattle, till
the Ground, exercise all Handicrafts.

Out of all those Seniours he chose an hundred, whom he called Senators from
their Age, who for distinctions sake wore a Half Moon upon their Shoes after
this manner,, the letter standing for one hundred.

With these he consulted in things more particularly concerning the
Commonwealth; but lest puffed up with Pride, these Patricii should contemn and
trample upon the Commonalty, and the Meaner sort envy the happiness of the
Great ones, which in time might prove the seeds of Sedition, to prevent such
Inconveniences he so effected the matter, that each should be mutually obliged,
and absolutely depend one upon another, making it lawful for any of the Commons
to choose (according to an old Custom of the Thessali and Athenians) whom he
pleased out of the Patricii for his Patron.

The Patron was bound, by Office, to appear and answer for his Client in all
Lawsuits, to manage his business to the best advantage, whether absent or
present. In a word, to endeavor as much as he could his ease and quiet.

The Client was to pay all due respects to his Patron, assist him with his
Purse in raising Portions for his Daughters, to redeem him and his Sons (if
taken Prisoners by the Enemy) into Liberty, to contribute largely, when their
Patron sued for any honorable Office of State, to pay all pecuniary Mulcts
arising from private Quarrels, never expecting again eithe Use or Principal,
and to present, on the Kalends of January, their Patrons with New-years-gifts.

It was not lawful for them to give their Votes for any of the contrary Party,
if they did, they were guilty of the breach of Statute made against Traitors,
and fell under the Curse of their Decemviral-Law, viz. Patronus si Clienti,
Cliensve Patrono fraudem faxit, sacer esto. By virtue of which Law, they were
mutually obliged to be faithful one to another.

The Roman Gentry took great pride in vying with one another, who had in his
Retinue most of these Clients, nay, many Provinces and Nations too, had one of
the Great ones at Rome for their Patron, to plead for them in their absence,
the Senate many times referring their Causes to be decided by the Patron they
had chosen, resting satisfied in his determination.

This Custom kept them so entirely united, that it preserved the City free
from slaughter, and those inhuman Civil Wars, which (through neglect)
afterward followed (though there were several Quarrels between the Commons and
Gentry but soon composed) for the space of 630 years.

After the Expulsion of Tarquin they were divided into Senators, Knights, and
People.

A Senator was he which at first was chosen by the Kings, next by the Consuls,
afterward by the Censors into that great Council of State called the Senate,
whether Nobleman, Knight, or Plebeian. The value of a Senators Estate, until
the time of Augustus, was Octingenta Sestertia, 60001.

A Knight (a Name of great esteem and honor among the Romans) was an Order
betwixt the Senator and Commonalty, they were chosen into that Society by the
Censors, who at the time of their Election delivered them a Ring for
distinction, to the Commonalty a Horse, to be maintained in Peace and War at
the Public charge, so that the Commonalty were not allowed the use of Rings.
The estimation of a Knights Estate was, Quadringenta Sestertia, viz. 30001.
which sum, if any ways imbezelled, or they had committed any notorious Crime,
those Ornaments were taken from them, and themselves degraded from the
reputation of that Order. Their Robes were little different from the Senators,
only the purple Studs, or Tufts of the Senators Garment were somewhat larger.
They degraded for unseemly Gestures, and irreverent Responsals, or for having
lean and poor Horses, which seems to prove that their Horses were kept at their
own charges, and not at the public expense of the State.

The Commonalty, whom Livy calls Ignota Capita, Men of little or no account,
were Livy.
the same there as in other Countries, yet if any of them had attained to a
Knights Estate, and Procured from the Censors a Horse and Ring, he was
accounted a Knight, and might be capable of being chosen into the Senate, yet
those Senators that were chosen from among the Plebeians, were, for any
notorious fault, liable to be degraded, and have their Names enrowled in the
Caerites Tabulae, or Censors Tables, whereby they were deprived of giving their
Votes, as did other Citizens.

The next division of the People, was, into Nobiles, Novi, and Ignobiles.

Their Noblemen were those that could produce the Images of their Ancestors,
which were equivalent to our Coats of Arms; Their Novi were those that had only
their own, and were beholding more to their Virtues, than their Ancestors, for
their Nobility. Ignobiles were those that had none of their own, or of their
Predecessors.

Now an Image was the Effigies or representation of any Person of their Family,
whose glorious Actions had formerly preferred him to any of the great Offices
of State, which Images were used carefully to be kept in Wooden Presses, in the
best part of their Houses; For, to none but those who had born the Curule
Magistracy was the use of Images lawful, but after the Commons, by an Act of
Senate, were made capable of obtaining those places as well as the Gentry
(without doubt) they also might have the privileges of using Images also.

These Images were sometimes placed over the Gates of their Houses, with
Inscriptions, UT EORUM VIRTUTES POSTERI NON SOLUM LEGERENT, SED ETIAM
IMITARENTUR. Upon days of Feasting and Rejoicing these Figures were spruck't
up with Garlands and Flowers, but on days of Mourning they were deprived of
all their Jovial Ornaments, seeming to sympathize and partake with their
sorrow. They were represented commonly but from the shoulders upwards, the
matter whereof they were made being Wax; But when any of the Household died they
were carried before the Corpse (as I have shown more fully in the Ceremonies of
Deifying their Emperors) with a Body or Trunck annexed to them, Addito ut
magnitudine quam simillima apparerent reliquo corporis trunco, that they might
seem proportionable in length to the Person deceased, they were dressed up in
the Robes peculiar to the quality of the Person, the Ensigns of his Office
being always carried before him.

The Citizens of Rome were distinguished by the difference of Freedoms in the
City of Rome, and were termed either Liberti, Libertini, aut Ingenui.

Libertus was he that had been formerly a Slave or Servant, and afterward was
made free. The Son of any Person thus made free was called Libertinus, and the
Son of two that were born free, or of two Libertines, was termed Ingenuus.
These were capable of the Order of Knighthood, but not of being elected into
the Senate, which we may gather from Suetonius his own words, who says, That,
anciently, the dignity Suetonius.
and honor of being a Senator, was conferred not upon the Pronepotes Civium
Romanorum, but upon the Abnepotes, viz. such as were removed four degrees from
a Libertus.

The usual way of their making them Free was after this manner, The Ceremony of
the Roman Freedom.
The Master bringing his Servant, whom he desired should be made free, took the
Servant by the Head, or any other part, saying to the Praetor, I will that this
Man be made Free, and then he let him go. Some say, They used to take the
Servant a box on the Ear, turn him round, and then let him go out of their
hands. Then the Praetor laying a certain Rod, called Vindicta, upon the head of
the Servant, said, I pronounce this Man free after the manner of the Romans,
his Head at the same time being shaved, received of the Praetor a Cap in token
of his Liberty.

Of their Civil Government.
AFTER Romulus his death, his Successors, till the Reign of Tarquin, Surnamed
the Proud, thought it not only their greatest security to govern their People
with great Justice and Moderation, but the highest point of Glory also, to
admit them into a share and participation of the Government, that it might be
said, They Ruled over Princes rather than Slaves. And although most Writers
agree, that the Polity of Rome was Monarchical, it seems rather to have been a
mixture of Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, therefore they were divided,
accordingly, under the Government of a King, Senate, and Commonalty, the power
and prerogative of their KING, was,

First, Jus rerum Sacrarum, a Right over all Ecclesiastical Affairs, to
constitute what Religious Orders he pleased, and to see that all Sacrifices and
their Ceremonies were rightly performed, and to offer up in his own Person, as
being their Pontifex Maximus, in case their Wars did not call him aside, all
Propitiatory Oblations for the appeasing and averting the Anger of the Gods.

Secondly, Legum morumque Patriarum custodiam, the preservation and
interpretation of all Laws and Customs whatsoever, the determining of all
Controversies of weight, referring all business of smaller consequence to the
decision of the Senate; yet in case of wrong Judgment, reserved to himself a
power of otherwise adjudging the Matter as the cause required.

Thirdly, Jus Senatus and Comitiorum, a power of assembling Senate and People,
propounding what he thought convenient, but first giving his Opinion of it
again, yet that constantly took place, and prevailed most, which was confirmed
by the Suffrages of the greatest number.

In the dispose of the Senate, or Great Council of the City, was the Public
Treasury, and consequently the ordering of the Revenues and Expenses of the
State, the Treasurers themselves having no power (unless for the use of the
Kings, and that of the Consuls afterward) to expend upon any Public account
whatsoever, without an especial Order and Decree of Senate; Under their
cognizance also fell enormous and heinous Crimes, committed within the Confines
of Italy, likewise of protecting and taking into favor any private Person, or
City of Italy, that implored the favor of their assistance.

Fourthly, That Great and Royal Prerogative of sending Ambassadors, and giving
Audience to those of Foreign Princes, was solely in the Power of the Senate.

These Senators (at the sacking of Rome by the Gauls) were singly taken for
Gods, and together, by Pyrrhus his Ambassadors, for so many Kings at an
interview. Tarquin, Surnamed the Elder, was so tender of displeasing them, that
being presented by the Hetrurians with a Golden Crown, and an Ivory Scepter
with an Eagle on the top, he refused to appear in public with those Ensigns of
Majesty, till Dion, lib. 3. Livy, lib. 9.
he had leave from the Senate and People, which Custom the succeeding Kings
afterward retained.

The Election of their Kings, and afterward of the chief Ministers of State,
the making of Laws, concluding on War or Peace, was altogether in the
Jurisdiction of the People.

By such Polity these Kings secured themselves from danger of the suspicion of
Tyranny, and consequently assured and confirmed themselves in the love of their
Subjects. Neither could the People reasonably desire innovation or change,
where they were governed by no other Magistrates than of their own choosing,
where they were obliged to live under no other Laws than of their own making,
or forced to be engaged to any other Wars than of their own concluding.

By this kind of Equilibrium of Power was Rome peaceably and happily governed
by its first Kings, the Royal Prerogative seldom interfering with the Peoples
privilege. But Tarquin, Surnamed the Proud, overstraining his Prerogative,
spoiled the harmony and concord of the whole Government, the King and People
being before like a fifth and eighth that are Unisons, strike one and the other
shakes, that is, they were highly concerned in the honor of their King, and
the King in the loss and sufferings of his people; But Tarquin, who had seized
on the Throne by Violence and Usurpation, was resolved to defend it by Rapine
and Murder, and justify them too by Insolence, though as insupportable as
both; At his receiving the Title of MAJESTY he seemed to have laid down all his
Humanity, for after the murdering his Father-in-law (over whose dead Corpse
Tarquinius his Wife commanded her Coachman to drive, at her return from
proclaiming her Husband KING) he trampled on both Privileges and People; Some
he banished by his Cruelty, others through the insupportableness of his
Behavior, he committed continual Mafsacres and Butcheries on the Senate and
People. So that while this Fever lasted, Rome was like the Torrid Zone
(supposed by the Ancients) too hot to be inhabited.

But the People, by the disposition and virtue of their Primitive Laws, being
too well acquainted with Majesty to be made any longer Slaves, finding the
Kings resolutenets and violent Nature not at all to be moved by their
Complaints, which were constantly blasted with the odious Name of Rebellion and
Treason, upon the ravishing the beautiful Lucretia by Tarquin's Son, Sextus,
being animated and headed by Brutus and Collatinus, were enraged to that degree
of Courage, that they began to expostulate their Liberty with their Swords in
their hands, driving the Tyrant (taught by his own Example) from the Throne
into perpetual banishment, teaching Governors what it is to outlive the
Affections of their well-meaning Subjects.

After this they stood up so stiffly for Liberty, that though Porsenna King of
Hetruria (commiserating Tarquin's condition) came with a puissant Army to
reinstate him in the Roman Throne, yet they maintained their cause so
gallantly, and gave so many signal Testimonies, nay miracles of their Valor,
witness the Actions of Horatius Cocles, Mutius Scaevola, that Porsenna of a
terrible Enemy became a generous Friend, and chose rather to make Peace with
them (although the Victory was well nigh assuredly his own) than unjustly
oppress so much an injured Virtue.

That they might the better hereafter stop the Precipice of their future ruin,
and free themselves from the like Jealousies and Fears, they first made it
their business to render the word KING as detestable and odious as the power of
a Tyrant; And the People taking a solemn Oath never to admit Monarchy among
them for the future, they erected a Government consisting of two Officers
chosen out of the Patrioii, whom they called CONSULS, named so from their Duty,
not their Power. They were two, that one might be a stop and check to the
Ambition of the other; Their Government was Annual, that through shortness of
time, and multiplicity of business, they might not have leisure enough to fall
in love with the Majesty and Grandeur of their Office, supposing they would
govern the better, when they knew, that afterward they were to live private
Men under the Commands of others.

But Brutus and Collatinus, who had been the chief Authors and sticklers in
expelling Tarquin, were chosen Consuls by the People, yet they fearing Tyranny
might run in a Blood, deposed Collatinus in a short time after, for being a kin
to Tarquinius Superbus, though he was Husband to Lucretia who had been so
lately ravished, substituting Valerius Publicola in his place, who (to oblige
and secure the Fears of the People) caused his own House to be pulled down,
because it looked so like a Castle and place of Defense; Brute on the other
side, hearing that there was a plot on foot, among the young Gentry of Rome, of
restoring the Tarquin's, and that his own Sons had a hand in it, he brought
them to the Marketplace, where they were publicly whipped, and asterwards to
the Block, where they lost their Heads.

It was not lawful for any Person to sue for the Consulship till he had first
past through, successively, the Offices of Quaestor, Aedile, and Praetor, and
arrived to the forty third year of his Age, that is, past the extravagances of
Youth, and free from the infirmities of Old Age, the greatest concerns of Peace
and War depending solely on their management.

The Romans had always so great a respect and honor for this place of
Dignity, by virtue of which their Empire was enlarged, their Liberties strongly
upheld, that to increase the Majesty of it, changed the Ancient date of things
which before was ab Urbe condit a (in favor of them) into L. AE. T. V.
Consulibus, viz. John Anoaks, and John Astiles being Consuls.

The Ensigns of their Office was the Sella Eburnea, the Ivory Chair, which was
carried about in a Chariot, where the Consul sat administering justice. The
great Gown of State called Trabea, was worn, first by their Kings, asterwards
by the Consuls. Lastly, twelve Lictors or Sergeants, which went before one
Consul one Month, the second another, with bundles of Rods in their hands, and
Axes bound up in the middle, the one gently to correct small offenders, the
other to lop off (from Humane society) those that were otherwise incurable.

These Consuls had power of stopping any proceedings in the Senate, as may be
seen by Ambitious Lentulus, who passionately desired Africa, then the seat of
the War and of Glory, for his Province, threatening the Senate, that unless he
had his will he would have nothing to pass in the House.

In the time of Sedition, or any sudden danger from abroad, they chose a
Dictator, to whom was committed an Arbitrary Power, and different in nothing
from a KING, but in Name, and the continuance of six months in the Office. From
him lay no appeal to the People, twenty four Lictors went before him, as if
they intended (by the greatness and Majesty of his Authority) he should
affright the Seditious into their wonted Obedience, and having no equal to
dispute his Commands, (the consequence of equality in Arms may be learnt from
the fate of Paulus AEmitius and Ter. Varro, at the Battle of Cannae) might, by
the suddenness of his directions, prevent the Storm before it grew too
blustering and violent, or, if it did, he might be in a better capacity of
opposing it, the strength of an Army consisting in the Union of their Forces
under one Commander; Besides, the opinions of a Senate, or an Assembly,
commonly are very inconstant, great diversity and mutability arising from such
numbers, or from the wranglings of two adverse Factions, we seldom finding any
such irresolutions in a single Person.

From hence, and from their sending single Persons as Governors of their
Provinces (however the Senate, and wiser sort of the People, dissembled) we may
conclude on their approbation of Monarchy, as the fittest form of Government to
expel danger, and enlarge their Dominions, although their Judgments were
perverted and blinded by Ambition (Passion being most commonly stronger than
Reason) for in Aristocratical and Democratical Commonwealths, most Men are
capable of a share in the Government, which under Monarchy was impossible for
them to attain to; And we may easily see how much they esteemed Monarchy in the
latter Ages, Viz. their Government of Great Britain by Viceroy's, not in the
Name of the Senate, but Emperors in possession.

From the root of the Consulship sprung those two great branches of the
Censorship, and Praetorship, the Consuls, in whose Power they were formerly
included, being for the most part employed in the Wars, were forced to confer
them on other persons, for the regulation of Manners, and distribution of
Justice at home.

The Censors took cognizance of all Ill-manners, they had power to degrade both
Senator and Roman-Knight from the Honor of their constituted Order, and
remove the People, in case they deserved it, from a more honorable Tribe to a
less, from whence they were called the Masters of Manners.

Besides these things, they also took care of all Publick-works, as, mending
Highwaies, Bridges, and Watercourse, the reparations of Temples, and several
other Buildings. If any man encroached upon the Streets, Highways, or other
places that were in use for the Public good, the Censors compelled him to make
satisfaction for the injury committed.

They had also the letting out of Lands, Customs, and other Public Revenues
to Farm, so that most of the Citizens of Rome were beholding to this Office, as
maintaining themselves by some of the Trades thereunto belonging; and this was
no small help to preserve the Dignity of the Senate, the Commonalty being
obnoxious to the Censors, which were always of that Order, and careful to
uphold the Reputation thereof.

They also took notice of those that mis behaved themselves in the Wars, or
went about to discourage any of the Soldiers, after any notable defeat. Thus
we see Marcus Attilius Regulus, and P. Furius Philus, called L. Caecilius
Metellus to an account, for that, after the Battle of Cannae, he held discourse
with some of his Companions about flying beyond the Seas, as if Rome and all
Italy had been no better than lost.

They also pronounced Infamous, those, that having brought to Rome the Message
of their Fellows made Prisoners at Cannae, returned not back to Hannibal; as
they were bound by Oath, but thought themselves thereof sufficiently discharged
in that they had stepped back once into his Camp, with pretense of taking
better notice of the Captives Names, as also, all those that had not served in
the Wars after the term the Law appoints.

In their keeping was the Censual-Roll, or Doomsday-Book, wherein was the true
Estate and value of what every Man was worth, that the People might be the
better Governed, and the easier distinguished.

They continued in their Office five years, and yet if one of them died, his
place was looked upon as ominous, yea dangerous to the Commonwealth, one of the
Censors dying that very year that Rome was sacked, and almost destroyed by the
fury of the Gauls.

There were two Praetors, or Lord Chief Justices, the one for judging and
examining matters between Citizen and Citizen, whom they called Praetor
Urbanus, the other for adjusting the Controversies of Strangers, and was termed
Praetor Peregrinus, and Praetor Minor, but afterward, Lawsuits increasing,
there were many more added to the former, who were to sit in the Court of Life
and Death.

The two Chief Praetors took notice of all matters concerning Equity and Wrong,
between Man and Man, and under them the Centum Viri, but especially all Crimes
Capital, as Treason, Murder, buying of Voices for the obtaining of Magistracy,
etc. which were at first heard by the Kings and Consuls, and afterward by
certain Persons appointed by the People for that purpose, who were called
Quaesitores Parricidii; But in time, the hearing of these Public, or Capital
Causes, was confirmed and transferred unto certain Magistrates, who continued
in their Office a whole year. Others had their Office no longer than they sat
in Judgment, which were, for distinctions sake, called Praetores Quaesitores,
and their Causes Quaestiones perpetuae, because in their Causes there was one
set form of giving Judgment constantly used, whereas, in Private and Civil
causes, the Praetor yearly changed the form, by hanging up new Fdicts and Laws,
by which he intended to administer Justice, that year, to the People; for as
the Causes were different, so were the signs and distinctions of their Courts,
a Spear erected denoting the Nisi Prius Court, and a Sword hung out in token of
that which related to the sentence of Life and Death.

The Praetor Urbanus was wont, at the entrance into his Office, to collect a
set form of Administration of Justice, out of the former Laws and Edicts of
other Praetors, according to which he would distribute Justice all the year
following; And lest the People might be ignorant of the contents thereof, he
caused it to be hung up in public view. This form of Justice was termed
Edictum, because he did thereby forbid, or command something to be done.

This Edict being delivered out, the administration of Justice consisted in the
use of one of these three words, Do, Dico, Addico, he is said Dare actionem,
when he grants an Action or Writ against any man, Dicere jus, when he passes
Judgment on him, Addicere res aut personas, as when he in the Court does see
and allow the delivery of the thing, or the Person, on which Judgment is
passed. The form of Addiction was thus; After Judgment had been pronounced in
Court, the Party which prevailed, laid his hand on the thing or person against
which Sentence was pronounced, using this form of words: Hunc ego hominem, five
hanc rem ex jure Quiritium meum esse dico, then did the Lord Chief Justice
Addicere, i. e. approve the challenge, and grant a present possession.

But these forms and ways of proceeding being uncertain, and the Law it self
unknown to most of the Roman Commonalty, as lying for the most part in the
Breast of the Praetor, to avoid this incontroulable power, and the infinite
disadvantages that daily ensued, Three men were deputed by the Senate to go to
Athens, and other Greek Cities, to make a collection of what Laws they thought
convenient, by which they were resolved the City should be governed.

At their return the Consuls were deposed, and the Government of the
Commonwealth put into the hands of Ten Men, all of Consular dignity, to whose
wisdom and Integrity was referred the new modelling of the Laws contained in
the Ten Tables, having power of curtailing what was superfluous and
unnecessary, and of interpreting any thing that was dark or obscure, and of
adding any thing where they found a necessity or occasion; From the addition of
two Tables, they were called the Laws of the twelve Tables, the Fountain from
whence the Civil Law proceeded.

These Men were allowed the same Ensigns of Majesty, and the same power and
Authority as the Consuls formerly had, as of calling together the Senate,
ratifying and confirming their Decrees, and managing the chief business of
State; Nevertheless but one at a time took this Power upon him, the others in
the mean while differing little from private Men.

The People at first were so in love with this Decem-Viral way of Governing,
that they willingly diminished and abated their own Privileges, to advance the
Credit and Honor of their new laid Greatness; These Ten abrogated the Statute
of Appeal, made by Valerius Publicola, to the Judgment of the People, and they
not much grumbling at it, expected that the Greatness they allowed them in
Majesty, would be sufficiently recompensed by the happiness and infinite
advantages they should receive from the Justice and Moderation of their
Government; But they, now they had gotten the Reins in their hands, began to
contrive how to make that Government perpetual, which before was but Annual;
They agreed among themselves, that every one should take upon him the grandeur
and Authority of a Consul, intending, by Cruelty and Oppression, to force the
People into a certain fear and dread of their Authority, rather than by Mild
usage, to let them fall (gently, and by degrees) in love with their own
Slavery, and bondage.

It Is strange, that they having all formerly proved good Consuls, should, when
they came to be good Lawyers, prove such ill Governors; For they instead of
Instructing the People by their Laws, by their insolent Oppression and
Incontinency, gave occasion daily of their Complaint and Murmur, making the Law
rather a share, than a help or ease to the People (as has often appeared to
the grief of other Nations in successive Ages) punishing the faults of the
Commonalty (which, for the most part, proceeded from Necessity) by the same
Laws they desended the extravagances of their own Passions.

These Oppressions and Injuries were patiently endured by the People, but
Appius Claudius, a Man of a bolder and wickeder Nature than the rest, lusting
after the fair, but virtuous Verginia, whom (according to the Law) 'twas below
him to marry, and purposing to leave no kind of means unattempted for the
enjoyment of his Love, and the more speedier easing of his tormented mind,
resolved (not reflecting upon Tarquinus his fate) to have recourse to strength
and Authority, where the interposition of Love was ineffectual, hoping by the
Law to justify his Rape, as well as his other Brethren had sormerly their
Oppressions and Wrongs. This his project proved very unsuccessful, for the
Father of the Lady, though of a low Degree, yet of a great and generous Spirit,
killed his Daughter in an open assembly to secure her Honor.

This last fault of Appius was so unparalled an Indiginity, that 'twas like a
great spot of Oil upon Cloth, which seems to have diffused and spread it self
abroad to that degree of inhumanity and ugliness, that they looked upon the
Ravisher rather, as a Monster, then a Man; Appius was forced, through shame and
fear of the fury and anger of the Multitude, to be his own Executioner in
Person, his Companions in the Government, on the same account, quitting their
Offices also.

This was the second time, that, in the Honor of the Female Sex, they changed
the form and manner of their Polity.

The Consuls, after this, were restored to Sovereignty again, and although the
storm seemed to have ceased, yet the Waters kept on rolling still, for not
withstanding the People had fully satisfied themselves for the asfront put upon
Verginia, and the deposing the rest, yet now as their Courage was elevated, and
their Party strong, they were resolved to petition the Fathers to lay aside all
distinctions of Marriage, making it lawful for the Nobility and Commonalty to
marry with one another, if the Parties could agree about the Bargain, alleging
that the impossibility of Appius his marrying with Verginia (the one a Peer,
the other a Plebeian) was the chiefest Cause, that put him upon so horrid a
piece of Villainy.

The Senate graciously condescended to a grant of their requests, but the
People finding, that the Nobles scarce would match themselves with the
Plebeians, and no great probability of the Plebeians mixing their Blood with
the Nobles, unless by a Decree of Senate, they were in as great a possibility
of obtaining the great Offices of State, as the Nobles, thought it convenient,
now their hand was in, to prefer a Bill of being made capable of the Consulship
also. The Senate at first looked upon the Demands, as too saucy and confident;
yet found the Denial to be altogether as dangerous (fearing lest they would
have recourse to their old refuge, of forsaking the City, leaving the Senate to
be Princes without Subjects) by the advice of Claudius, took a middle course,
enacting, that there should be six persons appointed to steer the Commonwealth;
three to be chosen out of the Nobility, and three out of the Commonalty, whom
they termed Tribuni militum Consularis Potestatis, allowing them the power of
Consuls; but at the same time, checking their Insolence, by denying them the
Majesty and Greatness of the Title.

This form of Government lasted not above seventy eight years, the Senate at
last decreeing, that one Consul should be chosen out of the Nobility, another
out of the People; nay, a Citizen, whose Virtues could entitle him to it,
should obtein the Dictatourship, making Merits equal with Nobility.

The People thus sharing, with the Nobility, in the Government, now was the
time for busy Heads to lay their ambitious designs, and show the utmost of
their Note, Titles of Honor originally were conferred for the sake of virtue,
not estate; witness Sir Walter Rawleighs Hist. of the World.
skill in feeding the humors of the People: Now the Tribunes (who at first
were chosen as Protectours of the People, to preserve their Liberties free from
Encroachments and Insolences of the Nobility) did not only justify their
Affronts and Indignities toward the Senate, under the notion of upholding the
Privileges of the People, but turned the Government quite into a perfect
Democracy.

The affections of the Common People were swayed now more by flattery and
corruption than desert, and the Commonwealth lay like a Vessel, driven too and
fro by the wind of Ambition; all good men fearing, and the bad wishing, when it
would split it self on the Rock of a Civil War, having nothing to loose,
expecting to be gainers by the wreck.

In this juncture, up-start Marius and Sylla contending sor the management; non
aliud discordantis Patriae remedium est quam ut ab uno regeretur, there was no
other way of saving a male-contented and seditious Commonwealth, than by the
committing the Government of it to the unlimited Power of one Person; But these
men, as they were extraordinary valiant, so were they beyond all measure cruel,
delighting rather in blood than in War; yet neither (it seems) thought fit to
be Rulers of so large an Empire, who took more pleasure in the slaughter and
banishment of their fellow-Citizens, than in their security, unity and welfare
at home.

Marius soon after submitted himself to the forces of Sylla, and Fate, leaving
the world in as great obscurity as he came into it; for although afterward
Sylla by decree of Senate was made perpetual Dictator, yet of his own accord,
mildly and weakly resigned it, which was the occasion of Caesar's expression,
Sylla dictare nesciit -- That Sylla did not understand, what it was to be a
Dictator.

The two next that appeared on the Stage, were the two greatest Captains in the
world, i. e. POMPEY and CAESAR, who, as they had formerly been of the abovesaid
Factions, so they now began to take up the same Pretenses. The ground of their
Quarrel (as is reported) was, that POMPEY would endure no equal, nor CAESAR
allow of any superior: ( i. e.) The one would brook no Copartner in the
Government, the other none to leap into the Saddle before himself.

Pompey, was the Favorite of the Nobility, Caesar the peoples Darling, the one
valued himself by the number of his Conquests, the other by the difficulties of
his Victories. In fine, they were Men whom Courage never failed, or Fortune
frowned on or deserted; They began now to be jealous of one another Actions,
endeavoring the suppression of the contrary Faction, as an increase and
accomplishment of their happiness.

Pompey, and his Faction, made it their business (whilst Caesar was employed
in the conquest of Transalpine, Gaul, and Britain) to cross all his designs and
projects at Rome, reflecting on the Counsel given by his Kinsman Sulla. He
began now vigorously to oppose and obviate the daily increasing Greatness of
Caesar, who proved too great a Politician, and of too resolute a nature to let
pass Opportunities, which of themselves were apt enough to slip away; therefore
marching with his Army into Italy, he resolved to set his own Forces against
Pompey's Power, where, by his old Success and good Conduct, confirming his
Reputation, Pompey was forced to leave Italy, and pass over with his Army into
Greece.

Caesar, after he had settled his Affairs in Italy, soon after followed him,
thinking that the shortness of time he allowed him to reinforce his Army would
be the surest way of facilitating his Conquest; But had Pompey continued his
first Resolution of playing the Fabius Cunctator, and forbore longer engaging
with him, Caesar's good Fortune could scarce have preserved him and his Army
from an absolute Overthrow.

But Pompey being persuaded more by the importunities and rash Counsels of some
of his Followers, than by his own Judgment, to a resolution of fighting, not at
all becoming the Age and Wisdom of so great a Captain, was totally routed at
the Battle of Pharsalia in Thessaly, from thence Pompey escaped into Egypt, to
his old Friend Ptolomy, who instead of repairing his Fortune (for some private
Reasons of State) struck off his Head, preferring the favor of the Conqueror
before either Generosity or Friendship.

Caesar, as a reward of his Valor, seized on the Empire, being made by Decree
of Senate, perpetual Dictator, yet at last he was paid home for his bold
Attempt, receiving in the Senate House no less than twenty three wounds, as a
reward of his five years Usurpation. For it seems, the Romans had enjoyed their
Liberty over long, and lost it too late to forget it so soon.

It Is to be admired that Great Men, although they are sometimes foretold of
their destruction, by previous signs, yet think it a great weakness to credit
it, and a signal injury to be put in mind of their own Mortality.

Alexander was forbidden entering Babylon, and Caesar forewarned of coming to
the Senate, yet the Admonishers, by both, thought frivolous and vain; for
having been so long above Fortune, in the frequent successes in their Wars,
they verily thought themselves beyond the reach and malice of Fate. But Fortune
who had been his good Friend in his life time, made him sufficient amends for
the unkindness she had shown him at his death;

First, By fixing the Empire afterward in his Family.

Secondly, Leaving his Name to his Successors, as the greatest title of Honor
Majesty it self was capable of.

Thirdly and lastly, By the appearance of a Star after his death, which the
Common people thought to be his Soul, placed there by the especial favor of
the Gods, to upbraid the Senate of Ingratitude, and Inhumane actions.

After the death of Julius, young Octavius, whom Caesar made his Heir, came to
Rome, to demand of Antony his Inheritance left him by his Father Julius, but
finding by Antonies Delays that there was little good to be done, he told the
People, He intended it not for himself, but as a Donative to be distributed
amongst Them, which procured Him the Love, and Antony the Curses and Hatred of
the People.

Antony, after the defeat given him by Hirtius and Pausa, repaired to Lepidus,
persuading the good natured General to march with his Army into Italy,
proposing to him the Empire as the ends of his labor, but Octavius
understanding their intentions, thought it his best way to bring himself into
the League also, meaning, under this pretended Friendship, only to stay till
time should present him with a fitter opportunity of ruining both, which very
soon happened, for Antony, after he had overthrown Brutus and Cassius, makes
over with what haste he could into Egypt, to assure his dearest Cleopatra of
the truth and constancy of both his Love and good Fortunes; Octavius soon
caught hold of the opportunity this their separation offered him, for having
lately found by experience what advantages Antony had over him by joining with
Lepidus, was resolved for the future to allow them no such odds over him,
wherefore for some private Reasons, best known to himself, suddenly seizes
Lepidus in his Camp, deposes him from a share in the Government, and confines
him to Rome as a single Person.

Once again the Empire was laid at stake, but Antony proved the unfortunate
Gamster, for consulting more his Love (than his Reason) Cleopatra, than his old
Captains, determined to venture All in a Sea-battle, wherein he was overthrown
by the good Fortune and Conduct of Octavius.

Thus being acquitted of all Competitors, he enters Rome in a Triumphant
manner, where, by his Vigilance, Wisdom and Gentleness, he firmly established
(though against the grain and humor of the Roman People) the greatest Empire
that ever was.

Of their Religion, some of their GODS, and manner of Worship
WHAT GODS were worshipped in Rome, or what public forms of Adoration were
used there before the death of Romulus, few or no Authors have delivered unto
us, most referring the establishment of Religion, and its Ceremonies, to Numa
Pompilius, who is called by Arnobius, In Religionibus comminiscendis Artifex,
ingenious in coining or devising Religions.

But suppose we should grant, that the Romans, as a Savage multitude of Thieves
and Outlaws, had but few or no notions of a Deity before the death of Romulus,
yet that then Religion took root amongst them, which was something before
NUMA's coming to the Crown, may be gathered from the words of Plutarch in
Remulo, to this purpose:

When the People began to Mutiny, and cry out that the Fathers had murdered
Plutarch in Romulo.
Romulus, and seemed resolved to take Revenge upon them for so Inhumane an
action, Julius Proculus, a man eminent amongst the Fathers, Kinsman, and of
unsuspected Loyalty to Romulus, coming out into the Marketplace, the Multitude
there present, swore solemnly, That in his Journey he met Romulus, whose
Countenance seemed more divine and glorious than ever, and his Armor more
glittering than formerly; Whereupon he began thus to Reason the case with him.
What Injury, O King! or what was it in your mind, that first moved you to
expose us to the sury, clamor, and accusations of our Adversaries, and leave
your poor Orphans City in a General mourning and confusion; To which the King
answered, O Proculus! It Is the pleasure of the GODS that I am sent from Heaven
(understanding the prosperous Fate of my City) and their will that I return
thither again, therefore be of good cheer and comfort, and charge the Romans
that they worship Valor and Prudence, and by so doing they shall propagate
their Dominion, and become a potent People, and I, QUIRINUS, will be their
Indulgent and propitious God; Moved by these words, and the Authority of the
person, the People were suddenly appeased, and from that time forward called
upon ROMULUS as their God, in which words are comprehended the very definition
and nature of Religion it self, viz. First, The Duty of the People. Secondly,
The benefit resulting from it. Thirdly, The promise of being their God.
Fourthly, The general belief of the People, with their Obedience to the Civil
Magistrate immediately ensuing the same.


Thus at first was the foundation of Politic Theolopy laid at Rome, on which
NUMA (who succeeded next in the Government) built so large and happy a
superstructure; For he, more out of a deep reflection on the death of Romulus,
than any inbred or natural inclination to Peace or Religion, made it his
business to instruct the People rather in Sacred Matters, than encourage them
to enlarge their Territories, by Warring on their Neighbors, for having
arrived to the same height of Glory, was exposed to the like Envy, and
consequently to the same Fate also, unless he could lay greater Ties and
Obligations on the Consciences of his boisterous Subjects than his Royal
Prerogative; For finding, by late experience, that no Earthly power was so
sacred or secure, but Ambition (when opportunity presented) would strike at,
nor any Government permanent or successful without some established Religion,
which makes deeper impressions in men's minds than the Civil Power can, by
proposing, after death, such large Rewards, and such severe Punishments, he
made it his business to alienate their minds from their Wars, and accustom
them (a thing easily done, considering it was new and strange unto them) to
Religious exercise, giving out withal to the People (understanding the easiness
of their Nature by the reception of Proculus his story) That the Laws which he
delivered them, were made by the Nymph AEgeria, moreover telling them, That all
success imaginable should attend them, if they religiously observed those
Institutions, and, Losses, and strange Calamities, ensue upon violation and
neglect of the same.

De Leg. 6. fol. 759.
Plato, it seems, approves of such pretentions as mighty necessary for all
Legislators, and therefore lays it down as a Rule, (...) That all Laws (about
Divine Matters) must be setcht from the Delphick Oracle, which Opinion being
thoroughly confirmed in them, by the continual success they had in the Wars
under their succeeding Kings, they grew at last not only Religious, but
extremely Superstitious, which may be seen from the tedious Catalogue of the
Gods they worshipped, exceeding (as Varro reports) in number thirty thousand.
Varro Ant.


With what zeal did they Deifie the extravagant Passions and phrenzies of their
own minds, with what care did they make Gods of Diseases and Corruptions, and
how diligently did they feign (out of their own brains) particular Gods to
preside over particular Matters. When they sat down before a City with their
Army, they first, by Enchantments and Spells, conjured the Gods of the place to
desert their Enemies, and the Roman Priest (in the face of the whole Army)
invited them to Rome, promising them better accommodations, and statelier
Temples than their Native Countries could afford them; And lest other Nations
should serve them the same trick, they constantly concealed the true name of
their City, that the name of their Tutelar Gods might not be discovered.

The Athenians had Altars erected to the Unknown Gods, lest by leaving any out
of the Catalogue they might incur their displeasure. The Athenians (but
especially the Romans) had such an opinion of the certainty and infallibility
of Soothsaying, that the last are said scarce ever to have undertaken any
Action of importance, either within their City or without, before they had
first consulted their Augures, and if at any time they had been beaten by their
Enemies, they commonly attributed their Mischance to the omission of some Rite
or Ceremony or other, when the defeat plainly proceeded from the ill management
of their Affairs by their Commanders.

Of SOOTH-SAYING there are fonr kinds.
FIrst, AUSPICIUM, in Greek (...), is a way of Sooth-saying or divining by
Birds, when such or such Birds fly before or behind, on the right or the left,
to show what it does prognosticate, sometimes from the number of them, whence
Romulus had promised to him the Empire before his Brother, because he had seen
a double number of Vultures, and lastly from the nature of them.

Secondly, ARUSPICIUM (under which is comprehended what by the Greeks is termed
(...) and (...) was an observing, whether the Beast to be sacrificed came to
the Altar willingly, or no, or whether he died without struggling or bellowing;
In the next place they made an Note, This Custom was much in use among the
Britains.
inspection into his Bowels, to see whether they were of a natural Color,
whether they were corrrpted or exulcerated, whether any parts were wanting,
this is that part of it which is called (...), by the Latins Extispicium.

The next thing presented to their consideration at these Sacrifices was the
Flame, observing whether it presently consumed the Sacrifice, whether it were
of a pure bright and lively color, whether thick or smoaky, whether it burnt
without crackling, noise, or ejaculation of its sparkles; This the Greeks call
(...), the signs by which they foretold events are termed by AEschylus (...),
the Latins learnt this Art from the Hetrurians, and they were instructed in it
by one Tages, who appearing Cicero de Divin, (...) Ovid. (...). lib. 15.
to certain Plough-men out of a furrow, gave them many good and wholesome
instructions concerning this kind of Sooth-saying.

Thirdly, TRIPUDIUM, was a conjecture of Future success by the dancing or
rebounding of Crumbs cast unto Chickens, which was performed after this manner;
Silence being commanded, and to the Coop, where the Fowls were opened, they
cast down crumbs of Bread, if the Chicken came slowly, or not at all, or walked
up and down carelessly without minding the Bread, then should the business fall
out unsuccessful, but if they hastily leapt out of the Coop, and fed greedily,
as if some crumbs should fall out of their mouths again, it betokened happiness
and good success.

Fourthly, AUGURIUM, was a foretelling things from the chattering of Birds, or
from any sudden or surprising sounds or voices, of which we can give no cause
or reason.

After the destruction and sacking of Rome by the Ganls, it was disputed by the
Fathers, whether they should remove to Veii, then a noise of a Centurion being
heard, told them, 'Twas best tarrying where they were, that immediately they
gave over all thoughts of a Removal. And the death of CAESAR was divined from
the clattering of Armor in his house.

The Athenians and Romans very much agreed in superstitiously observing good
days and bad, making several conjectures from the Weather, from the crossing
of the way by a Hare, or Cat, from a Hens crowing, from the entering of a black
Dog into their Houses, etc.

That which was first adored in the World instead of its Creator, is supposed,
by some, to be the Sun, which was occasioned by some broken Traditions,
conveyed by the Patriarchs to their Children, touching the dominion of the Sun
by day, and by the constant wondering of the Heathens themselves, at the
glorious constitution and admirable course of that Celestial body, with the
infinite advantages it daily bestowed on Mankind; Upon the same account, soon
after', came the Moon to be worshipped, the chief place from whence this poison
dispersed it self over the East, is thought, by Meade, to have been Babylon,
from Revelations 17. 15. where Rev. 17. 15.
Babylon is called the Mother-Harlot, that is (says he) the First parent of
Idols, for as Babel was the first seat of Temporal Monarchy, so is it of
Idolatry, which is more probable than the Opinion of Diodorus Siculus, which
makes the Egyptians the first Inventers of this Superstitious worship.

This kind of Idolatry was very early brought into Greece, if we will give any
credit to Plaeto, who in his Cratylus speaks thus; (...) Plat. in Crat,
(...). It seems to me, that the Ancient Inhabitants of Greece had the same
Gods the Barbarians have now, viz. the Sun and Moon; And Plutarch affirms, in
the Life of Pericles, That they worshipped the Sun, punishing the neglect thereof
with death, and that this kind Plutarch in the Life of Pericles, Ter. Varro:
Dio. Halicar.
of Sun-worship was known to the Romans also in its very Infancy, may be proved
from the Testimonies of Ter. Varro, and Dio Halicarnassaeus, who affirm, That
Tatins, King of the Sabines, was the first at Rome that consecrated Houses to
the Honor of the Sun and Moon.

Now this, as it was the most ancient Theology of the Heathens, so was it in it
self more reasonable and natural than that which was taught the People by the
Poets, called Poetic, or fabulous Theology; For they lighting on some
imperfect Relations concerning the Creation, and some broken Traditions
touching GOD, and the Wonders he wrought in the behalf of his People, have so
strangly inveloped the Truth, by delivering it in a dark and mystical sense,
and by mixing it with diverse trumperies and figments of their own brains, that
the luster of Moses's Writings could scarce be discovered; For they made their
Verses and Songs, more to please and wheedle the weak Multitude into an opinion
of their Wisdom, and veneration of their Persons, than (by any solid reason) to
satisfy the minds of their Auditors concerning those newfangled Deities.

What an infinite number of Gods, and strange Legends concerning them, did they
invent and hammer out from the Attributes and Miracles of the Great and True
GOD, and from the confused stories of Adam, Cain, Noah, and his Sons, Joseph,
and others, etc. so that at last they were forced, for distinctions sake, to
divide them into Degrees and Orders, namely, Dii Consentes seu Majorum Gentium,
Selecti, Patricii, Insigniores, Dii Medii, Dii Infimi; At last, not only every
Nation, but every City, nay private Families had their peculiar Tutelar Gods,
and every Wood and Fountain had certain Nymphs assigned unto it.

The truth of which may plainly be seen from the Oath and Covenants between
Hannibal, General of the Carthaginians, and Xenophanes, Ambassador of Philip
King of Macedon. This the League ratified by Oath with Hannibal the General,
and with him Mago Myrcal and Barmocal, as also the Senators of Carthage that
are present, and all the Carthaginians that are in his Army, have made with
Xenophanes Son of Cleomachus the Athenian, whom King Philip, Son of Demetrius,
has sent unto us for himself, and the Macedonians, and his Associates, before
Jupiter, Juno, and Apollo, before the God of the Carthaginians, Hercules, and
Tolaus, before Mars, Triton, Neptune, before the Gods accompanying Arms, the
Sun, the Moon, and the Earth, before Rivers, Meadows, and Waters, before all
the Gods that have power over Carthage, before all the Gods that Rule over
Macedon, and the rest of Greece, before all the Gods that are Presidents of
War, and present at making this League.

Out of this vast multitude, the Athenians had twelve Gods, for whom they had a
more particular honor and veneration. For this reason was erected in Athens,
(...), and in their Common discourse they were wont to swear, (...), these,
Herodotus says, they received from the Egyptians, Duodecim Deorum nomina,
primos AEgyptios in usu habuisse, atque Graecos ab illis caepisse mutuatos,
eosque prius Aras, and Imagines, and Templa Diis sibi erexisse; The Egyptians
first invented the Names of the twelve Gods, which the Greeks borrowed or
received from them, for they first erected to themselves Altars, Images, and
Temples for their Gods; For the Graecians worshipped their Gods a long time
without any distinct Names or Titles, only under the common name of (...), as
the same Author assures us.

As the Graecians had twelve (...), or principal Gods, so the Romans had twelve
Dii Consentes, who were supposed to be of Jupiter's Privy-Councel, and as the
Greek Gods had their Pictures drawn out in a Gallery in Ceramicus, so these had
erected in the Market place twelve guilt Images, their Names are comprehended
in this distick of Ennius:

Juno, Vesta, Minerva, Ceres, Diana, Venus, Mars,
Mercurius, Jovis, Neptunus, Vulcanus, Apollo.
But for the convenience of a speedier dispatch of this matter, we will treat
only of two of these, as also of Pan and Janus, who more particularly belonged
to the Romans, and may serve to type out the nature and manner of the rest, and
first of

JANUS.
WHo this JANUS was, Authors extreainly disagree among themselves, some The God
JANUS.
affirming him to be the Sun, others the World, the Year, Noah, Japhet, and
others, Javan; That the Ancients, by Janus, designed the last of these is
probable, first from the nearness of their Names, secondly from the Fable of
Janus it self; JANUS is made to be the first King of Italy, and JAVAN supposed
to be the first person that brought Colonies into Italy.

The Image of JANUS had two Faces looking East and West, as Greece and Italy
lay, and was stamped on Coyns with a Ship on the reverse, all which may be
referred to Javan Father of the Greeks and Latins, who sailing over the Ionian
Sea, that lies between AEtolia, and the Western parts of Greece and Italy,
planted Colonies in both; Others make him the same with Noah, drawing their
Argument from the similitude of his Name with the Hebrew (...) Jain, Wine,
whereof Noah was the first Inventer, but although it is uncertain who, really,
he was, yet without question, he was honored by the Age he lived in as a great
Benefactour to Mankind, and afterward, for the usefulness of his Inventions,
was looked upon, by fond Posterity, as a God.

He is said first of all to have taught the Italians, That Bread and Wine was
fitter for Religious Asses, than eating and drinking; He also introduced Altars
among them, and taught several Rites and Ceremonies used in Sacrifices. Upon
this account, at all their Oblations, their first Applications and Invocations
were made to JANUS by way of Introduction and Preface, the Wine and Bread being
offered up to him, as the First Fruits due to him; He found out Shipping, the
Invention of Coining, Keys and Locks for the security of Houses.

He was called more particularly Father, though that appellation grew
afterward common to most of the Gods, his Effigies in the Capitol of Rome was
very much admired, for the artificial placing of the Fingers. His Right Hand
represented three hundred days, and his Lest sixty five, which makes up the
days of the year, signifying thereby that he was God of Time.

He had at Rome three Temples sacred unto him, but I shall only speak of that
which was built by Romulus, upon the Peace made between him and Tatius, in
which was the Image of Janus looking two ways, an Emblem of the Romans and
Sabines, who upon this Peace became one People.

This is that Temple (so much talked of in Authors) that was always shut in the
time of Peace, and open in times of War, from whence Janus is called, Patulcius
and Clusius.

This Temple, from the time of Numa to Augustus, was never shut but thrice,
first by Numa, secondly, after the first Punick War, by T. Manlius Torquatus,
and lastly by Augustus, after the Battle of Actium.

JUPITER.
JUPITER was the Son of Saturn and Rhea, or Ops, but how he came afterward to
be Deified, we must learn from Diodorus Siculus. The God JUPITER.


Some are of Opinion ( says he) that after Saturn took his place among the
Gods, that Jupiter, justly and lawfully (and not by force) succeeded in the
Kingdom, although others say, Saturn being foretold by an Oracle, at the Birth
of his Son, that he should be expelled the Kingdom by Jupiter, was moved by
Interest of State, for his own security, to destroy all his Sons, hoping by
that means to prevent and nip Rebellion in the bud; But Ops resenting this his
Inhumanity, and seeing no hopes of appeasing her incensed Husband, privately
sent him to be brought up by the Curetes that lived about Mount Ida, these
recommended the bringing up of the Infant to the care of certain Nymphs that
inhabited a Den thereabouts, who fed him with Goats-milk and Honey. After he
came to man's estate he built a City on Ida, the relics of whose Ruins remain
to this day.

This God exceeded all men in Valor, and all other Virtues whatever; for
possessing himself of the Kingdom after Saturn, he contributed very much to the
ease and comfort of Man's life.

He first taught that Justice was to be observed, and Force and Injury to be
avoided, all Strife and Controversies he determined by the acuteness of his
Judgment, making the peace and Happiness of Mankind his great business. The
Good, by persuasions, he invited to proceed in Virtue, and the Insolences of
the Wicked he restrained by fear of punishment.

He Traveled through most parts of the World, publicly denouncing War against
all Robbers and Irreligious Persons, commending and introducing Equity and
Laws; About the same time is reported his Victory over the Giants, who
depending upon their strength, unjustly oppressed and brought into slavery the
rest of their Neighbors; In few words, for all these benefits he was accounted
a God, and set Sacrifices appointed for him, but as he grew up to this height
of Glory, so we have good reason to believe (if good Authors, but especially
the Poets, have not belyed him) that he soon fell from his wonted Virtue; nay,
by their relations, he was so far from a Divinity, that he is made altogether a
Monster in humanity. What Woman, but of ordinary Beauty, near him, could escape
the fury and violence of this lecherous, hot-backt Deity. The Oblations he most
delighted in were Maiden-heads of his own sacrificing, wherefore he translated
more Whores to Heaven, for their kindness and Beauty, than Religious Persons
for their Piety and Virtue, many of the Stars being supposed to have been
either his Concubines or Bastards, and that he might be wicked and debauched
enough for a Heathen-God, he is reported to have married his own Sister, and to
have offended in the sin of Sodom with his little Ganimedes, but perhaps many
of those stories were put upon him by some Heathens, who thought the Essence of
a Deity consisted rather in the largeness of its Power, than in the
universality of its Goodness.

He was painted (according to Albricus) sitting in his Majesty in an Ivory
Throne, having in his Left hand a Royal Scepter, with the other casting
Thunderbolts to Hell, and trampling under his feet the Giants overthrown with
the same, near him was an Eagle, which flying between his legs, carried away by
force a beautiful Boy named Ganimedes, having in his hand a Bolt, or
Beaker-Cup, ready as it were to present it to Jupiter.

CERES.
CERES was the Daughter of Saturn and Ops, and had in great estimation both The
Goddess CERES.
by the Greeks and Latins, She was respected as the Goddess of Husbandry, and
supposed to have been the first that taught Men the Art of Sowing, She is also
reported to have given out good Laws, to make the life of Man more easy and
pleasant.

The Ceremonies and Sacrifices which were performed to her, were brought (into
Rome) out of Greece, by Evander.

She was painted in a Matrons habit, adorned with a Garland of Corn, sometimes
sad with a Torch in her hand, as if she were seeking out her Daughter
Proserpina, ravished by Pluto the God of Hell, at other times with an handful of
Corn and Poppey, as may be seen in Ancient Coyns.

PAN.
PAN was the Son of Mercury, and superintendent both of Sheep and Shepherds,
The God PAN.
He was an ancient Deity of the Arcadians, and translated by them from Arcadia
into Italy, where, according to the command of Themis they built him a Temple
in the place where Romulus was nursed by a Wolf, called by the Romans Lupercal,
afterward was much respected at Rome, several Games and Sacrifices being set
up and instituted in his Honor. The Ceremonies used were these;

Two Goats being sacrificed, two Noble men's Sons stood by, whose foreheads some
stained with their bloody Knives, and others presently dried it up with Wool
dipped in Milk, it being necessary for the young Men to turn round about, and
whilst their foreheads were drying to laugh. After this the Goat skins being
cut into Thongs, they run about almost naked, having only their private parts
covered, striking with those Thongs whomsoever they met; neither would the
younger sort of Women endeavor the avoiding those strokes, because they
thought they very much furthered Conception, and facilitated their Delivery.

At the same time was sacrificed a Dog, as an irreconcilable enemy to a Wolf.

He was pictured Naked, having Horns in likeness to the Sunbeams, a long
Beard, his Face red, his Breast shining with Stars, the nether part of his Body
rough, his Feet like a Goat, having in one hand a Pipe, in the other a
Shepheards-Crook, and was always imagined to laugh.

But we should very much injure the wisdom of the Ancients, if we should
suppose that the Learneder sort also believed in such senseless Deities, and
ridiculous stories concerning them, or that they could really entertain any
good opinion of such odd and antic forms of Worships as were used at their
Sacrifices. Many of their Writings assure us sufficiently to the contrary, and
many of the Philosophers understood GOD to be, the first, Eternal, Infinite,
and most Unchangable Being.

Plato, in his Metaphysics, stoutly asserted the Unity, Simplicity, and
Immutability of GOD, he also demonstrated his All Sufficiency,
Incomprehensibility, and Omnipresence also.

Socrates asserted the spiritual, infinite and eternal Nature of God, and his
unity, which was the great Reason, why he suffered death, and dyed a Martyr for
the true God; He affirmed likewise, that virtue was the effect of neither
Naturenor Art, but the product of Divine Inspiration.

Antisthenes, Socrates his Scholar taught, That Virtue was the chiefest Good,
and that God cannot be resembled to any thing upon Earth, and not elsewhere
known, but only in that everlasting Country, of which we have no Idea or Image
at all.

Plato terms his own divine Philosophy (...), the knowledge of the first Being,
and proves, that it is most conversant about God, thus. (...), that which
always is, is always most to be known.

St. Augustine says, that this Plato merifice iis delectatus est, quae de uno
Dco tradita fuerant, that he was strangely taken with those things, which were
delivered concerning one God, and although they were forced (sometimes to
please the Civil Magistrate) to intermix their own Grecian Trumperies and
Fooleries with serious truths, and for fear (of the superstitious humor of the
rabble) to deliver many of their notions concerning God under those common and
more conceived Appellations of Jupiter, and Apollo, yet the Sentiments and
Apprehensions, they really had of the Deity, were far more noble and refined
than those of the Vulgar, though they were many times shrouded in cryptick and
aenigmatical Expressions.

Justin Martyr bouldly affirms, that Plato never spoke any thing of Moses for
Justin Mart.
fear of the times, his words are these; Plato Mosis mentionem facere obid,
quod unum solumque Deum docueraet, sibi apud Athenienses tutum non putavit,
veritus Areopagum. Plato for fear of the Judgment and inquisition of the
Areopagites thought it not safe to make any mention of Moses to the Athenians
in that he affirmed there is but one God.

And Pythagoras condemned Homer and Hesiod to Hell, to be there stung and
bitten by Serpents for delivering such impertinent, senceless and improper
stuff concerning the Gods, by which we may guess what opinion the wiser sort of
Greeks entertained of the Deity.

The Romans likewise at first had far modester conceptions, and more
proportionable to the nature of God than those in the time of Tarquinius
Priscus, who was the first that introduced Images and Pictures of their Gods
into their Temples, a thing absolutely forbidden the Romans by Numa, who taught
them to believe, that God had neither form or likeness of Man or Beast; which
was very consonant to the doctrine of the Pythagoreans, who taught the Gods
were invisible, incorruptible, and only intelligible.

St. Augustine (out of Varro) affirms, that the Romans for above 170 years
worshipped the Gods without Images, which custom (said Varro) if it had still
continued, the Gods had been more purely worshipped.

The Persians could allow of no Temple, deeming it a piece of Impiety and
Irreligion, to pen up and circumscribe with walls the Majesty of their God, the
Sun, who filled the World with its Glory; And Tully says in his second Book De
Legibus. Non esse parietibus includendos Deos quibus omnia deberent esse
patentia, ac libera, Tully, lib. 2. de Legibus.
quorumque hic mundus omnis Templum esset, ac Domus.

Numa (as it appeared afterward) by his Books that were found at the digging
up of his Grave, condemned the Superstition that he had established, as
altogether vain and delusive. It seems that he (says Sr. Walter Rawleigh) did
intend to acquit himself to wiser Ages, which he thought would follow, as one
that had not been so foolish as to believe the Doctrine wherein he instructed
his own barbarons times; And now, we have good reason to believe, that he looked
upon what he laid down to the Romans concerning Religion, rather as a fit way
of Policy whereby he might reduce a savage Multitude of Thieves and Outlaws to
Civility, and direct them into a better course of life, than as the true and
proper sentiments he had of the Deity.

Nevertheless the Proetor of the City (though Numa cried out of the Grave, and
gave testimony against himself, that the Religion he had instructed them in was
false and erroneous) was so far satisfied in the truth and reasonableness of
it, that though he strongly credited Numa in one point, yet strangly
distributed him in the other, therefore with a great deal of zeal and vehemence
of Spirit acquainting the Senate whither this Opinion tended; The Books
immediately were commanded immediately to be burnt, as contrary to the Religion
then in use among them. The truth is, they had good reason of State for it,
having prospered better under this than any Nation did before or after them,
for although their Religion in it self was but a mere Politick-cheat, yet the
constant Belief, and strong Opinion they had of their readiness of their Gods
in assisting them (if their Sacrifices were rightly performed) was the chief
thing that rendered them incapable of irresolution and despair.

This boy'd up their spirits in the unhappiest storms of ill accidents, and
made the Roman Valor be so highly extolled and talked of beyond that of any
other Nation, and had not too much prosperity (the effect of their valor which
brings along with it a Triumvirate of pride, luxury, and licentiousness, satal
and destructive to all kind of Government) infected the innocence and ingenuity
of their natures, and unmanned and dispirited their wonted Courage, had not
Justice been banished the Commonwealth, by which for so many years, it had been
preserved, had not the Introduction of so many Gods, which at last justled out
of men's minds both Religion, and themselves (the Commonwealth not having Faith,
either public or private to suffice so many) made the Commonalty headstrong
and saucy, and the Governors more intent upon their own pleasure than the good
of the Republique; this well and stately erected Empire might not only endured
far longer than it did, but might have been capable of greater enlargements and
accessions also.

Their Order of Sacrificing was after this manner.
WHEN the Priest had brought the Sacrifice to the Altar, he standing laid his
hands upon it and prayed: In the beginning of his prayers, he made his first
addresses to Janus and Vesta, believing them to be the chiefest Deities at all
Sacrifices, and that the first applications of their Vows ought to be made to
them, if they intended thereby to receive favorable Access to any of their
other Gods: their Prayer being ended, the Priest laid the Corn, Meal and Salt,
with some Frankincense, on the head of the Sacrifice. This was called
Immolation, then he poured upon it Wine, but before that was performed, he took
a little earthen Chalice or Ewer, out of which he tasted of the Liquor, then
giving it to the People that stood about him to do the like. This Ceremony was
called Libation, this being effected, the Priest plucked off the Hair that grew
between the Horns of the Sacrifice, and committed it to the slames as his first
Offering, then turning toward the East, he drew a crooked Knife along the
Beasts back, from his forehead to his tail, commanding his Attendants to cut
the throat of the Sacrifice so presented and dedicated to the Gods, called by
some Cultrarii, and Victimarii, by others, Popae, or Agones, some made haste to
catch the Blood in Vessels, others, to skin the Beast and wash it, others, to
kindle the fire, then the South-sayer or Priest, with an Iron-knife made
diligent inquiry, by turning the Entrails, whether the Gods were pleased with
the Sacrifice, not daring to touch them with his hands, fearing that if the
Sacrifice was polluted, his hands would presently rot off.

After they had made a sufficient inspection, those Sub Officers cut from every
bowel and part certain pieces, which they wrapped up in Meal, presenting them
in Baskets to the Priest, who immediately laid them on the Altar, and burnt
them, which they called litare, or reddere, that is, to please, or satisfy, by
Sacrifice.

It was not lawful to light this fire with any of the Olive or Laurel Tree, nor
with the thick or gross Bark or rotten Root of an Oak, being things esteemed to
carry mischief and ill Omens in them.

When that part of the Sacrifice which belonged to the Gods was consumed by the
fire, then did the People return to their Feastings and Junkettings, singing,
whilst they were at meat, songs in praise of their Gods, Revelling, and
dancing to Cymbals about the Altars of their Gods, intending that every part of
their bodies should be serviceable, in its kind, to their Religion, etc.

Of their Religious places for Worship.
THE chiefest of which they called a TEMPLE, which word, though it has other
significations, shall be considered by us only as it imports a Church, or
Building consecrated to the Honor of some God. And this differed from the
AEdes sacra, or Religious house, not only as it was sacred to some God, but
because it was consecrated by the Augures, for without their Consecration it
had been no Temple, therefore it was, they were called Sancta and Augusta, i.
e. Augurio consecrata; yet many Nations have thought it not fit to honor their
Gods, but it was more to their glory to build them none.

The Sicyonians erected neither Temple nor Statue to their Goddess CORONIS, and
the Athenians following their example, suffered no effigies or representation
to be made of their Goddess Clementia.

Nulla autem Esfigies, nulli commissa metallo Stat. lib. 12: Thebaidos.

Forma Deae, mentes habitare ac pectora gaudet.
Neither had the Persians any Fanes or Temples, lest they should profanely
seem to limit and pen up the Majesty of the SUN within the narrow limits of a
Temple, or, as Cicero speaks in his second Book De Legibus, Non esse parietibus
includendos Deos, quibus omnia deberent esse patentia ac libera; quorumque hic
mundus omnis Cicero, lib. 2. de Legib.
Templum esset ac Domus (as I have shown in another place) and this is
consonant to the Doctrine of their Magi.

Neither were there among the Romans themselves, for the space of the first one
hundred and seventy years, any Temples or Images of their Gods, if we may
believe Varro, cited by St. Augustine, in his fourth Book De Civitate Dei, but
the usual August, lib. 4. de Civ. Dei, cap. 36.
places of Devotion were, Groves, Woods, or Mountains, and the Rites or (...)
of Bacchus are derived (...), from the Mountains on which they were performed.

But although these Temples were so sacred, yet, by the right of War, they were
liable to the same Violence, and in the power of the Conqueror, though many
persons out of respect and reverence to Religion have spared them, as Alexander
at the taking of Thebes, and Agesilaus, when his Enemies secured themselves in
the Temple of Minerva Itonia, he is said by Xenophon, in his fourth Book of the
History of Greece, (...). Who, though he had many Xenoph. lib. 4. hist. Graec.
wounds then upon him, yet forgot not his respect to the Deity. But Tacitus
says, Romanorum primus Cneius Pompeins Judae domuit, templumque jure victoriae
ingressus Tacit. lib. 5. Hister.
est, That Pompey was the first Roman that subdued the Jews, and entered their
Temple, not as a Suppliant but Conqueror; Cum loca capta sunt ab hostibus
omnia desinunt religiosa, vel sacra esse.

To these Temples they had also adjoining their Area's, which as one has
learnedly observed, was, Spatium illud ante Deorum AEdes, quod in privatorum
edificiit vestibulum vocatur, in Templis Area solet nuncupari. Now in this
Area, or Vestibulum, was a Pentzo consisting of four Called Tetrastylum.
Pillars, under which any body might walk that pleased, likewise they had
certain Walks on each side of the body of the Church, which they called
Porticus, and in these places it was lawful for them to Merchandise, make
Bargains, or confer about any Worldly business, as likewise in the Basilica, or
Body it self.

Their Chorus or Quire, was, an holy place set apart for their Divine Service,
the other part was called Adytum, because it was only lawful for the Priests to
come into it. An Old Grammarian says, that Adytum est quod adiri non potest,
expressing the meaning, though not the true derivation, which must be fetched
from the Greek.

Penetrale was also a part of the Temple, which Servius Manlius expounds, Serve.
Manl. lib. 2. and 6. AEn.
Secreta Templorum, here were the Bodies of Great Persons and Princes buried,
here were the preciousest things of the Temple hid, on purpose to deter
Sacriledgers from stealing for fear of the present Deity; For here were placed
the Images and Statues of their Gods, so that if that derivation be true, Sicut
locum in quo figerent candelam, candelabrum, appellatum, ita in quo Deum
ponerent, nominatum delubrum, then are Penetrale and Delubrum in this respect
the same, as Adytum and Penetrale also, for Claudian likewise does write,

-- -- Penetralibus amens
Exilit and Adytis gavisa Cybelle prosilit,
Although this last, by some, is interpreted otherwise, and in this Delubrum
which some interpret, a place, where before they Sacrificed they used to wash
and cleanse themselves, they used to lay themselves down upon the skins of the
Sacrifices to take a nap, expecting to have a full account in their Dreams,
from their Deities, of what should happen hereafter.

This has been an Ancient way of Divining, and Pliny imputes it to Amphyction,
Pliny Not. hist. Pausan. Auic.
the Son of Deucalion, Pausanias in his Atticks to Amphiarus, Philo, to
Abraham, but most to Joseph, especially the Epitomator of Trogus Pompeius, who
speaking how Joseph came to be sold, and of the excellency of his parts, adds,
Et somniorum primus intelligentiam condidit.

The causes of these Dreams are excellently described by Petronius in his
Fragments, or some body else for him,

-- nam cum prostrata sopore
Urget membra quies, and men's sine pondere ludit,
Quicquid luce facit tenebris agit, etc.
And so goes on, imputing the cause of Dreams to the nature of every man's
business, yet it is made more plain and satisfactory by Mr. Hobbs in his
Leviathan. Hobb: Livia. cap. 2.


As Hope and Fear made many of the Roman Gods, so likewise they caused the
erecting many of their Temples for diverse of them, either desiring their Hopes
might succeed, or their Fears cleared, promised their Gods, if it happened as
they wished, a Temple, on the same account was it that their Temples were so
well stored with all kinds of Riches and Ornaments, which they called Donaria,
the Greeks (...), so that these Donaries were Arguments and signs of past
dangers.

The Old Soldier dedicated his Arms for the Battles he had escaped, and the
Shipwreck, a Picture, or wherein were painted his Rags he got to shore with,
others for thanks of Victory, as Livy relates, namely, Jovis Feretri, inquit,
haec tibi victor Romulus, Rex regia arma fero, others, if they returned from a
dangerous Expedition, Live. 1. Dec: lib. 1.
as we may read in Ovids Epistles, Et sua dat reduci vir meus arma Jovi. Epist.
13.
And Hector vows if he could but kill Ajax;

(...)
(...)
And this Phrase, (...), is used when the War is done, and Peace concluded.

They did not make choice of any place indifferently to build the Temples of
their Gods, but some were within the City, some without, some upon the
Mountains, some in the Marketplace, etc. Neither had they all the same form,
some round, some square, some open a top.

The Temples of the Heavenly Gods were commonly something from ground, those of
the Infernal were under ground, and these of the Terrestrial on the ground.
Also according to the degrees of their Gods, they had three kinds of different
Altars.

The first was Altar, which was proper to the Celestial Gods, and called so,
being built higher from the ground than the rest, or, from holding up their
hands when they offered Sacrifice.

The next was Ara, not very high from the ground, and this was for the
Terrestrial Gods, and Celestial also, the Altar only to the Celestial, and
these were commonly placed near the Tombs and Sepulchers of the deceased: --
stant manibus Arae. Virg. lib. 32 Aeneid.
When they acted their Comedies, they also erected two Ara's, that on the right
hand being sacred to Apollo, that on the left to some Hero, or one God or other
in whose honor the Play was celebrated; in a Tragedy, that on the right was
consecrated to Bacchus; They used when they Sacrificed, or solemnly Swore to
any thing, to hold by those Altars, whosoever also, on what account soever made
his escape hither, could not without great impiety be dragged thence, but if it
was any great Villainy, it was lawful to apply fire, and so to make him
voluntarily to depart, or else by shutting the Doors starve him to death, and
this privilege was allowed to the Statues of their Princes also.

Scrobiculus, was, a furrow or ditch containing an Altar sacred to the Infernal
Gods, in which they poured the blood of the Beast, together with Milk, Honey,
and Wine.

Of their Military Discipline.
THE Romans were ever backward (or else would fain seem so) in bringing an
unjust War upon any of their Neighbors, many of their Writers affirming, all
Wars whatsoever, if not justly and upon good grounds undertaken, to be
unlawful; By Numa Pompilius therefore were certain Priests constituted, whom
they called Feciales, whose duty it was, to put the Senate in mind (before they
made War with any Confederate Nation) seriously to consider, Ambition and
Interest being laid aside, whether the cause of their Quarrel was founded upon
Justice and Reason; Neither would the Romans, although the Injuries they
suffered were great, and the affronts insupportable, do, as the French lately
in Flanders, appear in an hostile manner in the Enemies Country, before they
had given out some Reason concerning the grounds and occasion of the War, they
esteeming it neither Honorable, nor Just, to bring a War with all its sad
consequences on a sudden into an Enemies Country, before they had tried milder
ways for obtaining satisfaction; Therefore upon any wrong done them, they sent
their Feciales, or Spiritual Ambassadors, to the Country of their Oppressors,
who, when they arrived, invoked Jupiter, and all the Gods, to be witness of the
Justice of their Cause, cursing both themselves and the People of Rome, if they
came to desire any thing but their Right, Whomsoever they met in the Fields, or
at the Gate of the City, they called them as witnesses of the justness of their
Complaints, then going to the Marketplace, they declared to the Magistrates
the Cause of their Embassy, demanding, in the name of the Senate and People,
restitution for Wrongs and Injuries offered to the People of Rome, or else a
delivery of the Persons that had been the cause of them, showing the
unwillingness of the Roman People, though for regaining their own, to enter
into a War with any Nation, allowing them thirty three days to consider the
Proposals, to which, if they received no satisfactory Answer, they returned to
the Senate, telling how they had duly performed their office, and their
Adversaries obstinately refuseing to deliver up their Right, then, if they
pleased, they might lawfully engage themselves in a War against a People that
were detested by Mankind for their Insolence, and odious for their Perjury to
the Gods.

If the Senate consented to it, they returned with a Dart to the borders of
their Enemies, where, in the presence of Three at the least, naming the name of
the People they were sent against, declared in what manner they had exasperated
and offended the Romans, and therefore the Senate and People of Rome had
commanded them to proclaim War against them, which here they did: having so
said, they flung a Dart into their Territories, which was a sign that War was
denounced. Peace always was proclaimed by the usual form and Ceremony that
follows;

One of the Ambassadors, commissionated by the Senate (both sides having
concluded on Peace) took up a Stone, using this form of words, If uprightly,
and without any Mental reservation and deceit I enter into this League, let all
things prove prosperous and successful to me, but if I do, or think otherwise,
I wish I may, wheresoever I am (all other being safe) fall down dead as this
Stone falls out of my band, and thereupon he cast out of his hand the Stone.
This manner of Swearing was termed Jurare Jovem lapidem.

War being proclaimed, they generally appointed a set day, place, and time for
a Muster, whither all the Romans (that were by reason of their Age fit to bear
Arms) punctually repaired, all above seventeen, and under forty six, being
liable to an Impress.

The General, the better to secure himself of the sidelity, Allegiance, and
love of his Soldiers, obliged them singly to an Oath, whereby they solemnly
swore, That in the greatest dangers they would never for sake their Captain, or
in time of distress desert their Country. They swore likewise, That they would
readily obey and put in execution the Command of their General, if the
performance of it was not impossible. This Oath was termed Sacramentum Militare.

This public Muster of the Roman Citizens was yearly appointed, and the
Soldiers were elected by the Military Tribunes, under the Consuls.

If any Soldier for fear had withdrawn himself, and did not appear at the day
appointed by the Consul, they either imprisoned him, or confiscated his Goods,
or sold him for a Slave, intending to deprive him of the Name and privileges
of a Roman, for as he had not Courage, so was he not accounted worthy to be
owned of the Roman Blood.

If any sudden Uproar or Confusion happened in Italy or Gaul, the chief Leader
of the Army went to the Capitol, bringing from thence two Banners, one Red, to
which the Footmen repaired, the other Sea-colour, which the Horsemen followed;
and that the remedy might be as sudden as the disease, the Expedition at the
uprising, one of the eminentest Soldiers in a whole Legion, took the Oath as
large, the rest crying out in order, one by one, (...), that he swore the same
with the first; These were called Milites Subitarii, or per conjurationem, yet
if the Tribune suspected the Fidelity of his Soldiers, he swore them
severally, notwithstanding the nearness of the danger and hazard was like to
besal them.

Their Army consisted of Legionary Soldiers, and Auxiliaries. It was lawful
for none to fight in these Legions unless they were Roman Citizens born, free
by Father and Mother, and was enrolled in one of their five Classes. Slaves,
Libertines, Old men, Boys, and Stage Players, etc. were never suffered to
fight, unless some urgent necessity required, as for want of number, and more
speedy expedition.

At first they received no pay, but every one at his own Charges, moved
thereunto by the love of his Country served the Commonwealth. Anno 347, at the
sacking of Anxur, a Town of the Volsci, the Footmen entered into pay, and three
years after the Horsemen, a Footmans pay being but three Asses, the least piece
of Money current amongst them, an Horsemans pay was about seven pence, being to
find themselves necessary Raiment and Provisions out of it; Julius Caesar
raised it to six or seven of these Asses a day, Augustus (after the settlement
of the Commonwealth) settled the Soldiers pay, allowing them ten Asses a day,
so that this pay, Monthly, amounted to the value of a Roman Crown, which was
the double value of the French Crown.

Thus was the Art Military, which at first was an honorable Calling, by the
Ambition of some Princes, and the necessity of others, made a Mercenary trade,
and way of livelihood, and which afterward proved one of the causes of the
ruin of the Empire.

What number a Legion consisted of is uncertain, the difference arising from
the diversity of times. At first it consisted of 3000 Foot, and 300 Horse, but
afterward increased to four or five thousand, and Caius Marius made it up of
his own accord (without any Decree of Senate) to 6200 which number it seldom
exceeded.

Now, as of what Number a Legion consisted was uncertain, so was the number of
Legions afterward themselves. At first they were but four, each Consul had two
under his command, afterward, according as the necessity and circumstance of
time required, they came to be X, XIV, XIIX, XX, and in process of time more.

Every Legion had a peculiar Name by which it was distinguished from the rest,
which it commonly took either from the order of the Muster or Inrollment, as
first, second, third, and ninth Legion, or from the place of the Warfare, as
Macedonica, Britannica, or from their General, as Augusta, Vitelliana, or from
some Accident, as Victrix Fulminatrix.

A Legion consisted of ten Companies, or Cohorts, and every Cohort consisted of
three small Companies or Maniples, viz. a Maniple of the Hastati, a Maniple of
the Principes, and another of the Triarii. These three sorts of Soldiers were
separated by distance of place from front to back, so was every Battle divided
into his Maniples, and these were divided by little allies and ways one from
another, that the Hastati (who ever in front began the Battle) if they found
themselves unable to sustain the shock of the Enemy, might retreat, and
withdraw themselves through those Allies, into the distances which were between
the Principes and Triarii, where they rested themselves, while the Principes
charged the Enemy; But if the Officers thought it convenient, they clapped them
both into one Body, and so charged the Enemy in gross, and in case this did not
take effect to their minds, they retired again into the distances between the
Triarii, and so they gave the last onset, all three Bodies being united
together. This way of fighting was commonly used by Caesar, who never was known
to have used the former, but only in a case of great necessity in his Wars
against the Britains.

These three several sorts of Soldiers, made three several sorts of Battles.
The Hastati, who were always placed in the Front, were called Acies prima,
behind these in convenient distance stood the Principes, termed Acies secunda,
and behind them in like manner the Triarii, and made Aciem tertiam. The Velites
are omitted, as being no part of their standing Battles, and the other three
sorts of Soldiers to be distinguished from these, were termed Milites
subsignani, for these Velites being not divided into Bands, had consequently no
Ensigns of their own, but were distributed amongst other Companies, so that
every Maniple had forty Velites attending upon it.

When the Consuls had pitched upon the number of Soldiers, they gave the Oath,
the Tribunes picked out the poorest and weakest sort, and called them Velites,
who sustained the same place as our forlorn hope, but those that promised in
the aspect better Valor, and besides Persons of more considerable Fortunes,
were termed Hastati, the strongest and lustiest body'd Men, from the prime of
their Age, were termed Principes, and the eldest and best experienced, Triarii.

As a Maniple contained two Centuries or Orders, so a Century consisted of an
hundred Men, and was the least Company in a Legion, but when a Legion was ready
to join Battle with the Enemy, the least Body it contained was a Maniple. The
two Orders being joined together, in every Order was a Centurion or Captain,
and a Lieutenant also, whom they termed Optio, or Turgiductor. Those that had
Command over a thousand Footmen, were called Tribuni militum, he that was
Generalissimo, and had the Command of the whole Army, was called Imperator, and
his Lord Lieutenant, Legatus.

The chiefest Weapon used by them was the Pile, which is described thus by
Polybius; To be a casting-Dart, the staff whereof is almost three Cubits long,
and had an hands breadth in thickness, the Staves were armed with an head of
Iron, equal in length to the Staff it self, but in that sort half the head was
fastened up to the middle of the Staff, with plates of Iron, like the head of an
Halbert, and the other half stuck out of the end of the Staff like a Pike,
containing about one fingers breadth in thickness, and so decreasing less and
less unto the point which was barbed. This Head was so slender, that the weight
of the Staff would bend it as it stuck. Lipsius says an hands breadth, for the
Staff in thickness was too unweildy to be managed by any man's hand, therefore
he interprets it to be four Inches in circuit, if the Staff were either round
or square. But Patricius, in his Parallel, makes the Staff to have an hands
breadth in the Butt end, but the rest of the Staff he makes to decrease
Taper-wise unto the head of the Iron, where it has the thickness of a man's
singer, and so it answers both in form and weight to a Pestle, from whence it
had its name (as Varro notes) Quod hosts feriret ut Pilum.

The Legionary Soldiers had no other offensive Weapon than one or two Piles at
most, and their Swords, by which it may be gathered, all their Victories came
by buckling at hand-blows, for they came always so near before they cast their
Pile, that they left themselves no more time than might conveniently serve to
draw their Swords. Neither would their Arms of defense, which were complete,
besides a large Target which they carried on their left Arm, suffer them to
make any long pursuit, or continued chase, whenever a light armed Enemy did
make any speedy Retreat.

This Target (according to Polybius) contained two foot and a half in breadth,
and four foot in length, of what form or fashion soever they were of.

There were two sort of Targets in use amongst the Legionaries, the one oval,
the other of equal latitude, and resembled the fashion of a Gutter-tyle, and
was called Scutum imbricatum. The substance of this Target was a double Board,
one fastened upon another with Lint and Bulls-glew, and was covered with an
Oxes-Hide, or other stiff Leather, the upper and lower part of it was bound
about with a plate of Iron or Brass, which they called Umbo; Romulus brought
them up first among the Romans, taking the use of them from the Sabines.

The Auxiliaries were such Forces as were sent to the Romans by the Praefects
of the Neighbor and Confederate Countries, at the command of Consul or
General. Their Horsemen were divided into Troops, called Turmae, containing
thirty Horsemen, every Turmae was again divided into three less Companies,
called Decuriae, containing ten Horsemen, whence their Captain was called
Decurio; But those to whom the several wings of Horsemen were committed, were
styled Equitum praefecti.

The Roman Horsemen (says Polybius) at the first carried but a weak, limber
Pole or Staff, and a little round Buckler, but afterward they used the
furniture of the Graecians, which Josephus affirms to be a strong Lance or
Staff, and three or four Darts in a Quiver with a Buckler, and a long Sword by
the Right side. Upon any sudden Expedition, out of the whole Army were taken
the choicest Young Men, both for strength and agility, to them were given
little round Bucklers, and seven Darts apiece. These Soldiers practiced to
ride behind the Horsemen, and speedily to alight from their backs at a
Watchword given, and so to charge the Enemy on foot. This custom was first
used at the Siege of Capua, and first brought into practice by one Q. Navius a
Centurion, and he was honorably rewarded for it by Q. Hulvius the Consul, and
from hence (says Livy) grew the institution of the Velites.

The Romans had four forms of the front of a Battle, the first was called Acies
recta, when neither the Wings, nor the Battle advanced one before another, but
were all carried in a right line, and made a strait Front.

The second form was called Obliqua, when one of the Wings was advanced nearer
the Enemy than the rest, to begin the Battle, and this was commonly called (as
Vegetius notes) the Right wing, as having great advantage against the Left of
the Enemy.

The third form was called Sinuata, when both the Wings were advanced forward,
and the Battle stood backwards off from the Enemy, after the fashion of a half
Moon.

The last form was Gibbosa, or Gibbera acies, when the Battle is advanced, and
the two Wings lagg behind.

Caesar's custom in Marching, was, to send his Cavalry and light armed Footmen
before the body of his Army, both to discover and impeach the Enemy. For these
Troops were nimble in motion, and fit for such services, but if the danger were
greater in the Rear than Front, they marched in the tail of the Army, giving
security where was most cause of fear; But if they were found unfit to make
good that Service in that place, as it often fell out in Africa against the
Numidians, he then removed them as he found it most convenient, and brought his
Legionary Soldiers (which were the strength of the War) to march at the back
of the Army, to make good that which the Horsemen were not able to perform.

The manner of their Encamping.
THE Centurion that went before to choose a convenient place, and having found
a fit situation for their Camp, first assigned a station for the Generals
pavilion, which was commonly in the most eminent place of the Camp, from whence
he might easily overview all the other parts, or any Alarm or sign of Battle
from thence might be discovered from all parts; This Pavilion was known by the
name of Praetorium, the General of the Army being formerly called Praetor.

In this place they stuck up a white Flag, from which they measured every way
an hundred foot. The Area or content thereof was almost an Acre, the form of
the Praetorium was round and high, in this Praetorium was the Tribunal, or
Chair of State, and the place of Divination, which they called Augurale, with
other appendices of Majesty and Authority.

The Generals Tent being thus placed, they considered which side of the
Pavilion lay most convenient for Water and Forage, and on that side they
lodged the Legions, they being divided one from another by a Street or Lane
fifty foot in breadth, according to the degree of Honor that every Legion had
in the Army. So were they lodged in the Camp, either in the midst, which was
accounted most honorable, or toward the sides, a place of meaner reputation.

Between the Tents of the first Maniples in every Legion, and the Praetorium,
there went a Way of one hundred foot in breadth throughout the whole Camp,
which was called Principia. In this place the Tribunes sat to hear matters of
Justice, the Soldiers exercised themselves, and the Leaders and chief
Commanders frequented it as a place of Public meeting, on either side the
Emperors Pavilion, in a direct line, to make eaven and straight the upper side
of the Principia.

The Tribunes had their Tents, every Tribune confronting the head of his
Legion. Above them, toward the head of the Camp, were the Legates and
Treasures, the upper part of the Camp was strengthened with some select Cohorts
and Troops of Horse, according to the number of Legions that were in the Army.
Polybius describing the Camping used in his time, when they most commonly had
but two Legions in the Army, with as many Associates, places the Ablecti and
Extraordinarii, which were select Bands and Companies, in the upper part of the
Camp, and the Associates on the outside of the Legions.

The Ditch and Rampire that encompassed the whole Camp about, was two hundred
foot distant from any Tent, whereof Polybius gives these Reasons;

First, That the Soldiers marching into the Camp in Battle array, might
dissolve themselves into Maniples, Centuries, and Decuries, without tumult and
confusion, and again, if occasion, were offered to sally out upon the Enemy,
they might very conveniently (in that place) put themselves into Companies and
Troops, and if they were assaulted by night, that the Darts and Fireworks
(which the Enemy might cast) should do them no harm.

This Ditch and Rampire was made by the Legions, every Maniple having his part
measured out, and every Centurion overseeing his Century; The approbation of
the whole work belonged to the Tribunes, and their manner of Intrenching was
thus.

The Soldiers being girt with their Swords and Daggers, dug the Ditch about
their Camp, which was always eight foot in breadth at the least, and as much
in depth, casting the Earth thereof inwards. But if the Enemy were not far off,
the Ditch was eleven, fifteen, or eighteen, in latitude and altitude, according
to the discretion of the General, the Ditch being as broad at bottom as at top.
The Rampire from the brim of the Ditch was three foot high, and sometimes four,
made after the manner of a Wall with green Turfs cut all to one measure, half a
foot in thickness, a foot in breadth, and a foot and a half in length, but if
the place wherein they were encamped would afford no such Turf, then they
strengthened the loose earth with Boughs and Faggots.

The Rampire they properly called Agger, the outside whereof that hung over the
Ditch, they used to stick with thick and sharp Stakes, fastened deep in the
Mound for their better security.

The Camp had four Gates, the first was called Porta praetoria, which was
always behind the Emperors Tent, and this Gate did usually look toward the
East, or to the Enemy, or that way the Army was to march. The Gate opposite to
this was called Porta decumana, a decimis Cohortibus, for the tenth or last
Cohort in every Legion was lodged to confront this Gate. By this Gate the
Soldiers went out to fetch their Wood, Water and Forage, and this way their
Offenders were carried to Execution. The two other Gates were called Portae
principales, for as much as they stood opposite to both ends of that so much
respected place which they called Principia, on'y distinguished by these Titles
of, Laeva principalis and dextra, the lest, and right hand principal Gate.

All these Gates were shut with Doors, and in standing Camps, fortified with
Turrets, upon which were planted Engines of defense. Their Tents were made of
Skins and Hides, held up with props, and fastened with Ropes, eleven Soldiers
being contained in a Tent, which society was called Contubernium, the chiefest
of whose company was named Caput Contubernii.

The Romans never suffered their Soldiers to lodge one night without the Camp,
where they were enclosed with Ditch and Rampire, and for the greater security
of every Member, every one, both Free and Servile, were sworn by the Tribunes,
not only, not to take away any thing by stealth, but also if they found any
thing, to bring it to the Tribunes.

The Romans divided the whole night into four Watches, every Watch containing
three hours; The first began at six of the Clock at night, and ended at six in
the Morning, and these Watches were distinguished by several notes, and sounds
of Cornets or Trumpets, that by distinction and diversity it might easily be
known what Watch was sounded.

The Charge and Office of sounding Watches belonged to the chief Centurion of a
Legion, whom they called primus Pilus, or primus Centurio, at whose Pavilion
the Trumpeters attended, to be directed by his Hourglass.

We must take notice, that the chief Ensigns (of the Romans) of every Legion,
was an Eagle, which always attended upon the principal or chief Centurion of
the said Legion. The Ensign of a Maniple was either an Hand, Dragon, Wolf, or
Sphinx, as it appears (beside the testimony of History) by the Column of
Trajan at Rome, where in the Ensigns are sigured with such portraitures, so
that these resembling the proportions of living Creatures, bad their fore-parts
always carried that way which the Legions were to march, or where they were to
fight.

When the General had determined to sight, he hung upon the top of his Tent a
scarlet Coat or Flag, that thereby the Soldiers might be warned to prepare for
Batde.

The second warning was, the proclaiming Battle by sound of Trumpet, and this
was a noise of many Trumpets at once, which they termed by the name of
Classicum a Calando, which signisieth Calling.

The third was the encouraging of Soldiers with an Oration, and confirming
their Valor by the strong motives of Reason.

The Roman way of Victualling was far more advantageous than ours, which was
performed by Sutlers, for it is impossible that they should follow an Army, upon
Service in the Enemies Country, twenty or thirty days together, with
sufficient provision for such a multitude of Men, whereby a General is often
forced to hazard the whole upon unequal terms, or to sound an unwilling
Retreat; But the Roman Camp was either furnished with Corn from the Provinces
and next Confederate Nations, or when they were in an Enemies Country in the
time of Harvest, by the Soldiers themselves, who reaped and gathered Corn, and
delivered it threshed and cleansed to the Treasurer, that it might be kept till
the day of payment, upon which was delivered out so much Corn to every
Soldier, for a certain time (which the nature of our Victuals will not admit)
by which measure they very well knew the next day of payment. Every Footman
received after the rate of a bushel a Week, which was thought sufficient for
him and his Man, for if they had paid them in Money, it might have been wasted
in unnecessary expenses. This Corn they ground with Hand. Mills, which they
always carried with them for that purpose, making it into hasty Cakes for
themselves and their Servants; To sell or exchange this Corn for Bread was
accounted a great Crime, insomuch that Salust reckons it up amongst other
dishonours of the Discipline corrupted.

In their assaulting or taking Towns they used several defensive Engines, after
they had encompast the Town with a broad and deep Ditch, they raised a Rampire
or Mount called Agger, made of Earth and other substance, which by little and
little was raised forward, until it approacht near the place against which it
was built, that upon it they might erect Fortresses and Turrets, and so fight
with advantage of height.

The sides of this Mount were of Timber, to keep in the loose matter, the
foreparts which were toward the place of Service, were open, without any
Timberwork, for on that part they still raised it, and brought it nearer the
Walls.

The Romans often raised these Mounts in the mouth of an Haven, to overtop the
Town.

They used also moveable Turrets with wheels, driving them to the Walls of a
Town, these were of two sorts, great and little, the lesser sort are described
by Vitruvius to be sixty Cubits high, and the square side seventeen Cubits, the
breadth at the top, was a fifth part of the breadth at the Base, and so they
stood sure without danger of falling.

There were commonly ten stories in these little Turrets, and Windows in every
story, in every one of these stories were Soldiers, Engines, Ladders,
Casting-Bridges, by which they got upon the Walls, and so entered the Town. The
forepart of these Turrets were covered with Iron and Welt-coverings, to save
themselves from fire.

They had another Engine termed Vinea, which was a little House or Hovel, made
of light Wood, that it might be removed with greater ease, the roof was
supported by diverse Pillats of a foot square, whereof the foremost was eight
foot high, and the hindmost six, and between every one of these Pillars was
sive soot in distance; It was always made with a double Roof, the first or
lower Roof was of thick Planks, the upper of Hurdles to break the force of any
weight cast upon it, without destroying the building; The sides were of Hurdles
to defend the Soldiers, the upper Roof commonly covered with raw Hides to keep
it from burning.

Many of these Hovels were joined together in rank and order, when they went to
undermine a Wall, the higher end was put next the Wall, that all the weights
that were thrown upon it might tumble down without much damage to the Engine.
It was driven (from place to place) upon four wheels as occasion required.

Another was the Testudo, of which I have treated and described in another
place.

Their offensive Weapons were Balista, or the Sling, which is thus described by
Marcellinus, translated by Godwyn; Between two Planks there is set a frame, and
fast joined a strong and big Iron, reaching out in length after the manner of a
good great Rule; Out of the round body whereof, which is artificially wrought,
there lies forth farther out a apiece Beam, made hollow, with a direct
passage in manner of a narrow Trough, tied fast with many Cords, or Sinews
twisted one within the other, and thereunto are joined two wooden Screws, near
unto one of which stands the cunning Balister, or Engineer, and subtly
puts into the hollow passage of the Beam a Wooden-shaft, with a big head
glewed fast unto it, this done, on both sides, two lusty young men do bend the
Engine, by turning about certain Wheels, when the top of the head is drawn to
the uttermost end of the Cords, the shaft being carried forth by the Balista,
by the inward force thereof, flies out of sight.

The Battering Ram was a great Tree or Beam like unto the Mast of a Ship,
having a piece of Iron in manner of a Rams head fastened at the end thereof,
with which they did demolish the Walls of a City, it was hung unto a Beam which
lay cross over a couple of Pillars, and hanging thus equally balanced, it was
by force of Men pulled backward, and then recoyled upon the Walls.

Malleoli (says the same Author) were certain Darts fashioned in this manner;
There was an Arrow made of a Cane, betwixt the head and the neck whereof was
fastened an Iron full of clifts, which Arrow, like unto a Woman's distaff, was
finely made hollow within the belly, yet open in many places; In the belly it
received fire, with suel to feed on, and thus being gently discharged out of a
weak Bow (for with an over strong shooting, the fire was extinguished) if it
took fast hold on any place, it burned the same, and water being cast thereon
the fire increased, neither was there any means to quench it, but by casting
Dust upon it.

They had other Engines for under-mining the Walls of a City, but the Relation
being too tedious, we shall make no further mention of them at this time.

The Romans, after a Victory, are observed to have been less Cruel and Insolent
than any other People whatsoever, yet they had punishments among them, but such
as were suitable to the obstinacy and malice of the Enemy. Some they punished
with death, some they exposed to sale in the Market place, some they enforced
to pay them Tribute, others they banished their own Country, giving those
forsaken Territories as a reward to their Old Soldiers, which place ever after
was accounted a Roman Colony, to others, sometimes, they were content to allow
them a peacable possession of their Country, upon condition they would tender
due respect and allegiance to whatsoever Government the Senate should think fit
to place over them, who was commonly called Proconsul, and his Power, in his
own Province, was little less than absolute; For he did not only rule and
dispose of all things as he thought best, and most advantageous to the safety
of his Province, but also without leave from the Senate, or People, might
undertake a War with any Neighboring Nation.

The absolute disposition of the whole course of it, whether it were to Treat,
Capitulate, Compound, or what else they thought convenient, for the advancement
of the Commonwealth, did also wholly rest upon his direction.

Touching the security (which the Romans required) of the Loyalty of such
People as they had conquered, their manner was to take Hostages, a sufficient
number of Male-children of the chiefest Men of that Nation, whose lives
depended upon their Parents fidelity, and ended with the first suspicion of
Rebellion, which Custom, besides the present good, promised the like, or
better Security, to the next Age, when as those Children, by Conversation and
Acquaintance, should be so affected to the Roman Empire, that returning to
their own Country, their Actions might tend to the advancement, rather than any
way to the prejudice of the same.

And lest the love of Liberty and Freedom should prevail more with them, than
that affectionate Nature had enjoined to bear to their Children, they did what
they could to take away the Instruments of Rebellion, by causing them to
deliver up such Arms and Weapons as were there present, and so became suitable
to that Petition of Peace which they had presented to them.

Of their Habits.
THE GOWN was the particular Habit of the Ancient Romans in time of Peace, they
being as easily distinguished from all other Nations by that expression of Gens
Togata, as they were by that of Populus Romanus; This Gown, according to some,
was open before, according to others, sowed down to the bottom, and close, it
came down to the Ankles, and was made without Sleeves, so that it was to be
taken up and cast behind their backs, before they could make use of their Arms.
But this liberty of casting back their Gowns, for the use of their Arms, was
not allowed the first year to those that wore the Toga Virilis, as favoring
too much of sauciness and immodesty, according to that of Cicero, in Orat. Pro
Calio nobis annus erat unus ad cohibendum brachium, Toga constitutus. The
matter of which it was commonly made, was Wool, more for use than ornament, the
wearing of Silks not being in use among the Romans till good Manners were out
of fashion.

The just measure or quantity of Cloth a true Roman Gown took up, was six Else,
yet it was made sometimes larger or straighter, of courser Wool or finer,
according to the estate of the Person that was to wear it.

That this Gown was to be girded or tuckt up, Sigonius affirms out of Macrobius
Sigonius ex lib. (...). (...)
his second Book, and says, that this Cincture or Girding was threefold.

The first was the loose kind of cincture, notwithstanding which the tail or
guard of the Gown swept the ground.

The close kind of girding, was, when the bosom of the Gown was so tucked up
before that it could not reach the feet.

The last was called Cinctus Gabinus, which was a Warlike-girding, not so that
the whole Gown should be tucked up about the middle, but that it being cast
quite backwards, the Person should gird himself with one skirt thereof.

This manner of Girding the Consul used, when he was going to proclaim War,
which Custom he received from a City of Campania, called Gabii, for the
Citizens of this place being suddenly set upon by their Enemies, as they were
at Sacrifice, girded one skirt of their Gowns about them, and so went to the
Wars, where they obtained a memorable Victory, but Aldus Manutius stoutly
opposes this Opinion, and proves it out of Suetonius, that they girded their
Tunicks, not their Gowns, Aldus Manut. ex Suet.
suspecting that place of Macrobius (which Sigonius quoted as advantageous to
his own purpose) of error and corruption, for Suetonius speaking of the same
thing, says, That Caesar's Tunick, not his Gown, was loosly and effeminately
girded.

There were several sorts of Gowns used by the Romans.

First, Toga praetexta, so called, because 'twas edged about with Purple, the
Greeks termed it (...); This Gown was worn at first only by the Roman Priests,
and chief Magistrates, next it was allowed to Noblemen and their Children, but
afterward it grew the habit of all the Roman Children, both Male and Female,
in general.

The Boys used this Gown till they came to be seventeen years of Age, and
Maidens till they were married, so that this word Praetextati signified both
young Children, and Magistrates.

Secondly, Toga pura, so called from the whiteness of its Color, in Greek
(...), and (...), because it was free from all admixtures of Purple. It was
termed also Virilis, as being the general wear of all private Men, at the going
out of the sixteenth year of their Age, and also of all new married Women.

It was called also Libera, because at that time they were free from the
overseeings and chidings of their Tutors, and capable of all Freedom as other
Citizens were.

And the day of laying down the Praetexta, and taking up this, was called in
their Calendar, Liberia, at which time, they, or their Relations, put into the
Treasury (which was in the Temple of Youth) a Roman Penny, whereby they knew
the true number of those that came to Man's estate that year.

Thirdly, Toga Candida, which was worn by those that sued for public Offices,
called Candida, because, besides the natural Whiteness of its color, it was
artificially made more intensively white and conspicuous with Chalk, from hence
those that stood for such Offices were termed, Candidati.

Fourthly, Toga pulla, this Gown (whilst the Common weal flourisht) was only
used by Mourners, but under the Emperors, when the Toga alba, or Virilis, grew
out of fashion, these black Gowns were the ordinary wear of the Common people.

Hence grew that distinction, unknown to former Ages, of Pullati, which
signified the Commonalty, and Candidati, the better sort of Citizens, and not
those (as formerly it signified) which sued for Magistracies. With such Gowns,
in most parts of Italy, they wrapped up their dead, from whence Juvenal takes
occasion to write thus,

Pars magna Italiae (si verum admittimus) in qua
Nemo togam sumit nifi mortuus --. Juvenal.

Such Gowns in Italy (if truth we will hear)
The dead instead of Winding-sheets did wear.
The Sordida Toga, which was also the wear of the Poorer sort, was not of a
Coleblack color, as Sigonius falsely imagined, but was a Gown which at first
was White, but afterward, by long usage and constant wearing, became durty and
sullied, for the Richer and neater sort of People always went abroad in White
garments, and if by walking they had contracted any filth, there were Fullers
at Rome on purpose, who would take out those spots with Sulphur and Chalk, and
restore them to their pristine color.

But on the days of public and private Rejoicing, they appeared in fresh
Gowns more particularly, the Meaner sort also, who could not change so often,
were wont, on days of Public Games (that they might seem finer, and gentiler
than ordinary) to Chalk their Gowns all over, but the Nobility, who always
appeared in White, if they were supposed Guilty, during the time of their
Arraignment, both they, and their Relations, wore this Toga Sordida, their
Hair, and their Beards, long, neglecting on purpose all kind of Ornaments, that
they might the easier incline the People to pity and favor.

Not only the Romans, but the Jewish Nobility also affected this color of
White, thereby distinguishing in like manner their People from their Noblemen,
and those of the better Rank they termed (...), Chorim, Albatos, Men in White,
and on the contrary, the ordinary sort (...), Chaschucim, Sordidatos, Men clad
in foul Garments.

Toga Picta was an Hetrurian Garment, of a Purple color, embroidered and
richly wrought with Gold, worn generally by those that had the liberty of a
Triumph allowed them, therefore 'twas some times called Toga Triumphalis,
brought to Rome by Tarquinius Priscus, after the conquest of Hetruria,
sometimes Toga Palmata, from the Palm-branches which were wrought in it,
betokening Victory.

Toga Purpurea was not wrought or flowered, but plain, differing in that
respect from the Toga picta, and from the Praetexta, in regard that was all
white, except the Border or Edging, which was purple, this all purple, having
no such guard or edging at all.

There were three sorts of Gowns termed Trabeae, the first consisted of Purple
only, termed Trabea consecrata, sacred to the Gods, the second was of Purple
woven upon White, called Trabea Regia, worn by their Kings, the third was
Scarlet woven upon Purple, called Trabea Auguralis, which the Augures, or Sooth
sayers only did wear.

After the deposing of their Kings, the Trabea Regia was worn by the Consuls
also.

Under their Gown they wore a Garment streighter and shorter, called Tunica, at
first 'twas made without Sleeves, afterward with them, on those that had not
the privilege of wearing the larger Studs, it was so girded, that the forepart
came down something below the Knee, the hinder part to the middle of the Ham,
it being peculiar to the Women only to wear them lower, and to Centurions
higher. It was accounted unseemly and scandalous if they reached down to the
Ankles, or if the Sleeves covered the hands.

This Garment, in continuance of time, grew the general wear of the Romans, and
the Citizens were distinguished by it.

The Senators Coats were embroidered with large studs of Purple, like broad
Nail-heads, whence they were termed Lati-clavia, those on the Roman Knights
were somewhat less, and these Coats were called Angusti clavia, the Tribunes of
the Soldiers were distinguished (from one another) in quality and worth, by the
largeness and narrowness of these Studs in like manner, also the Commonalty
wore them plain, and these were called Tunicaerectae.

Upon these Coats they commonly wore Campaigne Coats, or long Cloaks, to defend
them from the Weather, called Lacernae, and Penulae, which covered their hands
also, being buttoned or clasped under the Chin.

The Lacerna was in frequent use in the Camp among the Soldiers, so that as
Togatus signified Citizen, so Lacernatus was used for a Soldier, but when the
Civil Wars broke out, the Toga was laid aside, and these Penulae Lacernae, but
especially the Tunicae, became all in fashion, so that this distinction grew
useless and unnecessary in the conclusion.

The Lord Generals Coat was called Paludamentum, and the Soldiers usual Coat
Sagum.

Of the Women's Garments.
THE Matrons and honester sort of Women, wore a long Robe or Vestment called
Stola, which came down to their heels, bordered about at the bottom, but the
Roman Courtizans were known by their wearing Gowns, a proper attire for those
that were more in love with Men's Breeches than their own Petticoats.

They wore also a Pallium, or Mantle, which, on occasion, they put over their
Stola's and Tunicks, something differing from those which were worn by Men and
Boys.

They secured and defended their stomachs against Cold with a Capitium, or
Stomacher, their Shoulders and Breasts they straightly bound with
Swadling-bands, left the shoulders should grow too broad, or start out and
prove unequal, or lest their Breasts should swell into too large a round: they
had their Tire-women, and many of the ways of dressing their Heads, and
setting off their Faces, as ours have now adays.

This full account have I given you of the Romans, not only to show you the
manner of the People, but the nature of their Government, if not all, part of
which, doubtless, they used, during so many hundred years time they had (by
their Conquest) reduced this Island in subjection to their Empire and
Government.

The Old ROMANS (as I said before) were nothing but a Company of Thieves and
Outlaws, which Juvenal very plainly and ingeniously affirms in these following
Verses, checking a Roman Citizen overvaluing himself upon the account of his
Nobility.

Attamen ut long repetas longeque revolvas,
Majorum quisquis primus fuit ille tuorum,
Aut Pastor fuit, aut illud, quid, dicere nolo.
Boast not, proud Roman, thy Nobility,
Should thou but search into thy Family,
Who ever of it was the first and Chief,
Was Shepherd, or (I Am loath to name't) a Thief.
They appeared to their Neighbors, but especially the Sabines, so
contemptible, that they esteemed it a scandal to their Families to give them
their Daughters in Marriage, and had not the Romans by a subtle Wile suddenly
surprised them, they had been cut off for ever bearing the name of a People.

Afterward they proved a very Just, Grave, and sober sort of Men, but above
all things extremely Ambitious, Semper appetentes gloriae praeter caeteras
Nationes sunt Romani, says Tully; The ROMANS were ever (beyond all Nations)
desirous of Glory. Tully.
And that they were Valiant and strangly Resolute in as great a measure, is
evident from History, for in the lowest ebb of Fortune, and greatest distress
of the Commonwealth, when no Human wisdom could perceive any way of escaping
infallible Ruin, then were they proudest, their Demands almost insolent, and
their Hopes outwardly greatest.

What Answer did they send to Pyrrhus, a Captain (among Historians) of no mean
Reputation, just before the Battle near the River Siris, under Laevenus their
Consul, That they had neither chosen him their Judge, nor feared him their
Enemy, and though he (after this Battle in which they were utterly defeated,
and in all probability likely to be beaten again and again) by his Ambassador
Cyneas, underhand sued, nay would have bribed them to appease, yet they sent
word, that before that could be done he must first depart out of Italy, neither
in the height of Hannibals good Fortune, did they ever wrong the Roman Courage
with the least thought of Irresolution and Despair.

What happy Constellation was predominant at the founding of the City of Rome,
I cannot certainly tell, but that it was led and directed by the especial care
and providence of the Gods, whose favor it had merited, and to whom it was
most dear above all other places, may be reasonably presumed on from the
inconsiderableness of its beginning, and the continuance and long-life of its
Empire.

Thus much we have discoursed purposely on the Romans, for the benefit of those
that understand not Latin, that they may, in some measure, be acquainted with
some few of their Customs, and the forms of Government used by those Ancient
Hero's, thereby to know how much we owe to their Memories; for certainly, we
ought to be obliged rather to them for their Victories, than any ways
concerned at their Conquests, who were to us, and most Nations elsewhere,
rather civil Tutors than domineering Tyrants; Wheresoever they came, unless
highly provoked, they built and beautified more than they destroyed, and
treated the Inhabitants as Friends and Allies rather than bitter Enemies.

What infinite pains did they take in mending the Roads of many Counties, and
making their rough and boggy places passable, for producing commerce and
acquaintance amongst the Natives themselves.

At what vast expenses did they maintain their Legionary Soldiers, and erect
Courts of Judicature, for quelling the private Animosities of the Inhabitants,
when the Revenues they exacted would scarce quit Charges, or the place it self
prove worth the keeping, excepting that of Great Britain. So that all their
Cruelties we can complain of, is the reducing of the Savage Nations, by force
of Arms, to a compliance with their reasonable Laws, when milder usage could
not effect it. Neither have we reason to think much at the loss of our Liberty,
when it was exchanged for such a glorious Subjection, under which slavery we
lived more happy than under our own mild Extravagances, which hurried us
headlong into a thousand Inconveniences.

The Romans relinquished BRITAIN, suffering the Government to relapse into the
Natives hands, upon those Letters of Discharge sent hither by Honorius, then
with the Empire (to use Mr. Miltons own words) fell also what before in this
Western WORLD was chiefly Roman, namely, Learning, Valor, Eloquence, History,
Civility, and even Language it self, the particulars of which have been more
largely shown in a former Treatise.

A CATALOGUE OF THE British KINGS, In the Time of the SAXONS.
KING Vortigern, entered upon the Government An. Chr. 481, and Reigned 37 years.
Vortimer his Son, 06 Vortigern's Restoration completed his 37 years
Government. -- Ambrosius Aurelianus, 10 Uter Pendragon, 16 Arthur, 51
Constantine the Fourth, 04 Aurelius Conanus, 03 Vortipor Sinduallus, 04 Malgo,
05 Cathericus, 03 Gaduanus, 22 Gadwallo, 48



THE HISTORY OF THE British KINGS In the Days of the SAXONS, WITH Some
necessary Observations upon the Monument of Stone-Henge, Part whereof still
remains upon Salisbury-Plain, in the County of Wilts.
THIS Catalogue of the British Kings, is the sacred Relick of that memorable
and scattered State, only remaining at the entrance of the Saxons into this
Kingdom, who for several years, after their Invasion, evidenced not only their
affection to their Country (in maintaining considerable oppositions against
their Enemies) but justified also their Tempers and Spirits, to be not
inferior to the undertakings of their Predecessors.

CONSTANTINE, at the Request of the Archbishop of London, made in the name of
the whole Kingdom of BRITAIN, after his Banishment, entered the Isle (upon
certain Terms and Conditions, beforehand concluded and confirmed) with an
Army, by whose power and assistance was given to the Enemy a considerable
overthrow, but the Scotch Writers, seeming to grasp all to their own Honors,
make themselves sole Masters of that days enterprise, and yet confess, that
they lost DONGARD their King in the same Battle. But as the story goes, for the
general part, after the Britains had obtained the Victory, they conveyed their
General Constantine to Chichester, and there (according to their promise)
Crowned him King.

This establishment spirited not a little the King, to rule his People nobly
and justly, using his utmost endeavor to defend them from the assaults of
their Enemies.

This Constantine (as some think) was slain by the treachery of Vortigern, of
whom I have spoken particularly in this place, to show by what ways and devices
Ambition advanced Vortigern to the Imperial Government. For, before Constantine
was to be made a Sacrifice, in his own House, to the treachery of the
Conspirator, he privately procures a censiderable Party, of the Nobility and
Commons, to Vote with him, that Constantius, King Constantines eldest Son, in
case the King should die, might be sent for out of the Abbey of Winchester to
succeed in his Fathers Government, who, during the Kings life, continued there
a Monk, the People then believing his parts incapable of a better employment.

Now observe, I pray, Vortigern's policy, Some called him Constans.
for because he thought he would afterward continue as simple and indiscreet
for Government, was preferred to his Fathers Dignity, and so not being able to
govern himself, the trust of State Affairs, Vortigern hoped, in a short time
might be committed to his care, Which, thinks he, is a very good preparation
for me (more insensibly to the World) to invest my self not only with the
Robes, but Authority, of my Sovereign; And at last, indeed, so it proved, for
abusing the mild Nature and good Disposition of the King, in a short time
graspt both Power and Sovereignty into his own possession.

The Guardians of his two Brothers, Aurellus Ambrosius, and Uter Surnamed
Called Pendragon from his fierceness of spirit.
Pendragon, being too sensible of Vortigern's fraudulent deportment, hurried
them away into Britany in France to Aldrogius, although the Britains, at that
time, perceived not his delusions, thinking verily, that what he acted was out
of an honest and sincere principle, more to protect the King and his People,
than any advance of his own power or Interest. But the conclusion proved to the
contrary, for after by a new plot, he had procured also Constantius to be made
away, the better to gild over his own Innocence, prosecutes several of the
innocent Scots with death, as I have already shown, in suspicion only of being
concerned in murdering the King.

This so infinitely pleased the People, that when they met to choose a new King
(by reason Constantius's two Brothers were in France, and besides, too green in
years to Govern) he Complemented some of the chiefest of the Nobility to join
with the Commonalty, especially such as he knew had a good opinion of him, to
elect him for their Sovereign, saying, It would conduce much to the
satisfaction of the People, and consequently preserve Peace in that disturbed
Age, inferring moreover, that they had no just cause to be in the least jealous
of him, who had given them such frequent testimonies of his honest deportment,
care, and loyalty; so that managing his business so crastily, it was impossible
that so rude and credulous an Age should pry, and dive into his so sudden
designs, but must be answered in their desire in completing him their absolute
Monarch, who, after receiving the Kingdom into his protection, the better to
secure to himself the continuance of his ill-gotten Power, strengthened the
Tower of London with a considerable Garrison.

After that, he Records (the better to ingratiate himself with the People) in a
List all his especial Favorites, that had promised him to assist the severe
prosecution of Constantine, and his Sons Adherents: But the Scots and Picts,
hearing how unjustly the new British King had dealt with their Countrymen,
rose up in Arms against him, who reduced the Britains to that extremity and
sorrow, that (for that instant of time) they knew no certain expedient to
prevent their attending distractions.

After the deposing of Vortigern, entered his Son VORTIMER upon the Government,
but after a few years Reign his Father again was restored. Vortimer's
Salutation, soon after his reception, by the People, was with a new raised War
against the Saxons, which happened in several Battles, of which I shall only
treat in brief.

The first Encounter was near the River Derwent, where he gave the Saxons a
great overthrow; the second at Or Aglisthorp. Eldol made his escape after he
had killed 17. of the Enemy with a Hedge-stake.
Episford, in which Battle Catigern, Vortimer's Brother, and Horsus the Brother
of Hengist, flew each other, but this Victory, as the British Histories will
have it, must be allowed then also. The third was, when the Britains fought
them by the Seaside, and drove them to the Isle of Tenet; Also at Colemore,
where, after a sharp contest, the Britains again had the better of them.
Besides these, Vortimer fought them in Upon a Plain near Aylsford and at
Crasord. Not named who she was.
Kent, at Thetford in Norfolk; also not far from Colchester in Fssex, but the
place where, and time when, I have not seen Recorded.

ROWENA, the Wife of Vortigern, perceiving that the fortunate Successes of her
Sons undertakings would wholly destroy her Husbands Interests, by contriving
his death, puts a stop to the current of his atchieving Greatness, which proved
a means too, to conclude the Troubles of a six years Government, for being
destroyed by Rowena (to preserve her own Interest) Vortigern was again
restored, during the time of whose Banishment he made his abode in Wales, where
he built a Castle upon the Mountain Cloaricus, called Seneron or Guanercu,
because it stood not far from the River Guana, but whether built at his first
or second entrance into Wales Authors differ.

The time of this his Restoration seems (according to some Relaters) to be
in the days of Hengist; For it is said, that so soon as Hengist was advised of
Vortigern's Reception, he collected together a great Army, but hearing the
Britains at that time, in all probability, were likely to overpower him, he
sent for Vortigern to meet him upon Salisbury-Plain with the chiefest of his
Nobility, unarmed, on purpose (as he pretended) to treat for Peace, but Hengist
intending Treachery, that what he could not obtain by force, he would compel by
policy, secretly advised his Associates, to put under their long Coats crooked
Knives, that as soon as the Watchword was given, they were to execute their But
chery upon the British Nobility, and their Attendants, which, as the story is
related, was executed upon all save Vortigern ( Or Aglisthorp. Eldol made his
escape after he had killed 17. of the Enemy with a Hedge-stake.
Eldol Earl of Gloucester made his escape) who only was concluded should be
taken Prisoner, the better to qualify the rage and fury of the Britains
against him.

The King, to redeem himself out of the Saxon Captivity, delivered to them the
sole Government of three Provinces. William of Malmsbury seems to believe this
Massacre of the Britains to be acted at a Banquet, unto which Hengist had
invited the King and his Nobility, which seems to me very improbable, having
before shown, that the occasion of that invitation was solely grounded upon the
Politic intentions of causing the King to fall in love with his Daughter,
merely to gain the Crown.

This Vortigern was Duke of the Guises, a Prince of a Noble extract, Vortimer
and Pascentius were his Issue by his first Upon a Plain near Aylsford and at
Crasord. Not named who she was.
Wife. By Rowena, the Daughter of Hengist, he had a Daughter, whom afterward
he incestuously married, of whom he begat a Son named Faustus, who, after
mature judgment, knowing himself to be the Offspring of such impious Parents,
hoping thereby to divert those heavy Judgments, which by reason thereof might
otherwise fall upon him, spent his time in continual Prayers, and solitary
Meditations.

The Nobility and Clergy, being much disturbed at the sordid and inhumane
Actions of this Prince, endeavored, what in them lay, to reclaim and reprehend
his Insolences, and more especially, to show their dislike to his incestuous
Marriage with his own Daughter, and the spreading of the poisoning Doctrine of
Pelagianisme, which was again about to revive by the promotion of his Saxon
kindred, as appears by their second meeting in Council, which was as follows.
Concilium aliud Britannicum a Sancto Germano, Altisiodorensi Episc. magnoque
Clericorum and Laicorum numero, contra renascentia (ut videtur) Pelagianae
Haeresis virgulta; and contra incestuosas Regis Vortigerni cum filia sua
nuptias, celebratum.

EOdem anno, viz. 449, nunciatum est in Britannia Pelagianam perversitatem
iterato, paucis Authoribus de novo pullulasse, rursusque ad Beatissimum Virum
Germanum Bid, lib. 1. (...) 21. Mat. Westminster. in Aauc 449.
preces Saccrdotum omnium deseruntur, ut causam DEI, quam prius obtinucrat,
tuerctur. Quornm petitioni festinus obtemperat. Nam adjuncto sibi Severo totius
Sanctitatis viro (qui erat Discipulus Beatissimi Patris Lupi Trecassenorum
Episcopi, and tunc Treveris ordinatus Episcopus, gentibus primae Germaniae
verbum Dci praedicabat) mare conscendit, and consentientibus elementis
tranquillo navigio Britannias petiit. Praedicationis igitur antidoto vulnera
sanat incredulitatis, and apostema Blasphemiae doctrinae curat medicina,
omniumque sententia pravitatum (perversitas) cum suis authoribus condemnatur,
factumque est ut in illis locis, multo, ex eo tempore sides intemerata
perduraret. It a compositis omnibus, beati Sacerdotes ea qua venerant
prosperitate redierunt.

Et super haec omnia mala, adjiciens Guorthigirnus accepit filiam suam proximam
in uxorem sibi, quae peperit ei filium, hoc autem cum compertum est a Sancto
Germano, Codice M. S. Nenniu, c137.
venit corripere Regem cum omni Clero Britonum, and dum conventa esset Magna
Synodus Clericorum and Laicorum in uno Concilio, ipse Rex praemonuit filiam
suamut exiret ad Conventum, and ut daret filium suum in sinum Germani,
diceretque, quod ipse erat pater cjus and ipsa secit sicut edocta erat. Sanctus
Germanus eum benign accepit, and dicere coepit; Tibi Pater ero, necte
permittam, nisi mihi novacula cum forcipe pectineque, and ad Patrem tuum
carnalem tibi dare liceat. Mox ut audivit puer, obedivit verbo Senioris Sancti,
and ad Avum suum carnalem patremque carnalem, Guorthigirnum pertexit and dixit
illi, Pater meus, Tu caput meum tonde, and comam capitis mei pecte; Ille autem
siluit and puero respondere noluit, sed surrexit iratusque est vehementer, and
ut a facie Sancti Germani sugeret, quaerebat and maledictus est, and damnatur a
Beato Germanno, and omni Concilio Britonum.

Thus translated,

A second British Council, held by St. German Bishop of Auxerre, and a great
number of the Clergy and Laity, against the arriving of the Pelagian Heresy,
and against the Incestuous marriage of King Vortigern with his Daughter.

THe same year (viz. 449.) 'twas reported, that the Pelagian Heresy in
BRITAIN, by the means of some few Abettours and Authors, began to revive and
bud out again An Dom. 449.
afresh, whereupon the prayers and earnest desires of the Clergy were forthwith
sent to that Holy Man St. German, beseeching him once more to take upon him the
Cause of GOD, in which, but a little before he had been so victorious. The Good
Man very readily condescended to a compliance with their desires; For joining
with himself, in this Affair Severus, a Man of eminent Sanctity (who had been
the Disciple of St. Loup, Bishop of Troy's, and then ordained Bishop of Triers,
and who had preached the Word of God to the People of the I'rov nce of Germania
prima) took Shipping (and happily the Elements consenting) arrived in Britain,
where, by the antidote of Preaching, he perfectly healed the wounds of
Incredulity, and by the medicine of his Doctrine cured the Imposthume of
Blasphemy. This Perversity or Heresy, with its Authors, in the Judgment of all
men being condemned, for a long time after the Faith remained pure, and
undefilable in these places; All things being thus composed, these Blessed
Priests returned with the same happiness they arrived.

Besides all these Evils Vortigern took his own Daughter to Wife, which bore
him a Faustus:
Son, but when this was fully known to St. German, he came to reprehend the
King, with all the British Clergy, but whilst a great Senate of Clergy and
Laity were consulting, the King praeinstructed his Daughter, that she should go
to the Assembly and deliver up her Son into St. German's Arms, and say, that he
was the Father of it, and so she did as she had been taught. St. German
received the Child with a great deal of Courtesy, and began to say, I will be
to thee a Father, but I will not suffer thee unless I have a Razor, with a pair
of Scissors and Comb, which shall be lawful for thee to present to thy Carnal
Father. The Child, as soon as he heard it, very readily obeyed the good Old
Man, and going toward his carnal Grandfather, and carnal Father Vortigern,
said, My Father, clip and comb the Hair of my head, at which the King was
silent, and would return no Answer again to the Child, but rose up exceeding
angry, seeking how he might conveniently fly from the face of St. German, so
that he was censured and condemned not only by St. German, but all the British
Clergy.

For some time many of Vortigern's Subjects (as we have shown) at first
applauded his Virtues, but by the proofs of his succeeding Actions, were sound
to be veiled over only with the appearance of a dissembling Sanctity. How long
did he commit that Incestuous Marriage with his own Daughter (yea, the
Offspring of a Pelagian) before it was discovered to the Council! How
unworthily did he discard his first Wife, who was a Christian, to obtain,
through the dictates of his untamable Lusts and Concupiscence, the Pagan
Daughter of Hengist! How politic was he, in endeavoring to acquit himself of
the blame and reproof of a whole Senate, for begetting a Son of his own
Daughter! How many Innocent persons suffered (as I may say) Martyrdom by his
unjust contrivances, to promote his own Interest and Greatness; and the better
also to uphold himself excused, in the name of Innocence, how did he seduce the
Ignorant people into a full persuasion of his honesty and good meaning toward
them!

By this his dissimulation and subtilty he out-stript his Predecessors in
Power, meaning all those Kings since the Roman Conquest, as they were more like
Generals than Kings of Provinces, many of them being permitted by the Romans to
Rule, not after the manner of Sovereignty, but as Instruments to commemorate to
after-Ages, how they lived under them in slavery and bondage, but Vortigern
(although he had the ill fortune once to be deposed) was happy in having no
Copartner or sharer afterward in his Provinces, save what he carelessly threw
away at one cast to the Romans, upon his last releasment out of their Captivity.

Was there great blame to be laid to his Vortimer.
Sons charge, for accepting the Crown in his life time, or his own miscarriage
in disobliging the People to enforce him out of possession? In what a
discontented condition did he remain during his Sons Government, although
always treated by Mildness and Courtesy, but after his Sons decease, through
the Treacherous contrivance of Rowena, the People, being straightened for want
of a Governor in such distracted times, and crediting his Penitence, but
chiefly depending on his Valor and Conduct, reinstated him in the British
Throne, by whose fierce and resolute opposing their Enemies, he occasioned the
loss not only of many a man's life, but the destruction also of the considerable
part of many a Noble Province.

AMBROSIUS AURELIANUS, only in hopes of his fortunate success, was chosen King
by the Britains; A Man of a mild and sweet nature, and the last branch of the
Roman Root, who (through providence) gained many Victories in the behalf of his
distressed People; Notwithstanding, in the heat of their Distresses, doubtless,
would have been willing to have received a more Valiant spirit, that could but
have given them but at lest the hopes of a more secure freedom from the Saxon
Tyranny.

Passing the River Humber, the first Expedition he undertook was the routing
the Saxons at the Fight of Macsbel, Occa the Son of Hengist escaped to York,
but by reason of a quick pursuit was forced to surrender himself to Ambrosius,
who (out of his Favor and Courtesy) released him freely and nobly without any
Ransom, as it appears by some Writers, that he gave to him Galloway, near the
Scots Country, to inhabit, but took sufficient Hostages, that neither himself
nor his Consederates should take up Arms against him, taking into his
possession all places where the Saxons were most conversant, and had almost
ruined to obtain them, repairing Temples, Cities, and Towns, as had been by
them so miserably demolished, and there empowered Priests, capable of preaching
the Word of GOD to the People.

At the time when Ambrosius lay very sick of a doubtful distemper, Pascentius,
Vortigerns youngest Son, appeared at the head of an Insurrection, laid siege to
Now called St. David's.
Mencvia in Wales, he took it, and did much mischief in all places that lay
within the reach and limits of his Malice and Envy.

The Cause of Ambrosius was managed with good success, by Uter Pendragon, but
in the interim one Copa (privately procured by Pascentius) who feigning himself
to be a British Monk and Physician, offered his advice to Ambrosius. The good
Man lying sick and weak, meaning honestly himself, and thought verily that the
Monk did so, took his dose of Poison, instead of an healthful Antidote to expel
his distemper, which in a very short time put an end to his days at
Winchester. Yet others (to salve that notable piece of Treachery) report, that
he died of a Wound (in a fierce and terrible Battle against the Saxons) in the
West part of Britain; And other Historians, in contradiction to Bid and
Gildas, although as credible Authors as some others make him the Branch of a
Noble Britain, whose sudden death, for a time, put a stop to the Wars between
them and the Saxons.

Unto this Ambrosius is ascribed the building of STONE-HENGE upon
Salisbury-Plain, in remembrance of the Britains Massacred by the Treachery of
Hengist, and which gives an occasion to some to believe it, as by digging very
near the place where the Monument now stands, have been found pieces of Old
fashioned Armor, with Bones of Men of a large size, which could be no other
but the Phoenicians buried by that Temple, and in all probability built by
them, of which I shall speak more at large anon.

Others report, how the Britains erected this Monument for the sake only of
Ambrosius (in which place he is said to be there slain and buried) in memory of
his great service done to them in the behalf of their Country, which Paulus
Diaconus seems to testify, but how far that Author is to be credited, I must
(with submission) leave it to better Judgments to examine.

But that the Materials of this Sepulcher (according to the prodigious fancy
and dreams of some British Writers should be fetched out of Ireland, there being
Stones of the like nature, and equal magnitude, by industry and labor, to be
found not far off that place) by the help of fifteen thousand Men, under the
Conduct of Uter Pendragon, seems not only improbable but impossible also,
nevertheless it shows the Zeal of the Britains, in promoting the Honor of
their Prince, rather than clearing a true evidence or cause of that matter, or
the original Founders thereof, occasioned partly, I say, out of their entire
affection to their King, rather than to give an occasion for after Ages too
much to puzzle their brains, in enquiring out a more Ancient and more
Honorable Original.

Again, Others have been deluded into a belief (through the strangness and
magnitude thereof) that it was erected by the Magic Art of Merlyn; This has
occasioned a Traditional talk to pass through the inouths of several succeeding
Generations, that the Stones, being so set, cannot be told exactly; but to wipe
away that Imaginary cheat out of men's minds, and that they may clearly see that
there is no Magic, either to blind their sight, or to stupisie their Judgment,
if they will exactly tell them, let them sollow this ensuing direction; Observe
the orders of the Circles as they now appear, and not rashly pass from one to
another confusedly, taking especial care that they observe where they first
begin to number, and the just number of every Stone will be found exactly, and
proceeding after that order and method they may be always told over without
missing.

And for the better information of all persons who have not had leisure to
search into the different Opinions of Authors, touching the occasion of the
erecting that stately Monument of STONE-HENGE, and that I may have the better
opportunity to deliver my own Opinion thereof, I will present to the Reader a
brief Relation concerning the same, in these following Observations.

A TREATISE OF THE Ancient Monument CALLED STONE-HENGE.
UPON the Plains, about six miles from Salisbury, toward the North, in the
County of Wilts, stands, and for many Ages has stood, a structure, the
Architraves whereof are so strangly and artificially set upon the heads of the
upright Stones, that they hang, as it were, in the Air, from whence not
improperly termed STONE-HENGE. When it was in its primitive Glory, without
doubt, it did show it self a more admirable piece of curiosity, and now, if
looked upon by a Judicious Architect, will appear to retain the Idea of its
pristine Workmanship, but having suffered so much through the injury of Time,
and violence of the Weather, it seems to others, at this present (as Mr.
Cambden says) no otherwise than an huge and monstrous piece of Work, such as
Cicero calls, Insanam substructionem.

As it appears now, it is thus described by him; Within the circuit of a Ditch
(says he) there are erected, in manner of a Crown, in three ranks or courses
one within Camb Brit.
another, certain mighty and unwrought Stones, whereof some are twenty eight
foot high, and seven foot broad, upon the heads of which, others (like
overthwart pieces) do bear and rest cross-wise with small Tenons and Mortises,
so as the whole frame seems to hang.

But Mr. Stone-henge Restored.
Inigo Jones, Architect to King James, upon diligent survey, and further
enquiry, found it to be a Roman Temple, consisting of the Tuscan Order (which
is, a plain, grave, and humble manner of Building) round, and open or Roofless
at top. Of the whole Fabric he gives this account; The whole work in general
(says he) being of a Circular form, is one hundred and ten foot Diameter,
double winged about, without a Roof, Anciently environed with a deep Trench,
still appearing, about thirty foot broad, so that betwixt it and the work it
self, a large and void space of ground is left; It had, from the Plain, three
open Entrances, the most conspicuous thereof lying North-east, at each of which
was raised, on the out side of the Trench aforesaid, two huge Stones Gate-wise,
parallel whereunto, on the inside, two others of less proportion. The Inner
part of the Work consisting of an Hexagonal figure, was raised by due sometry
upon the Bases of four equilateral Triangles (which formed the whole Structure)
the Inner part likewise was double, having within it another Hexagon raised,
and all that part within the Trench scited upon a Commanding ground, eminent,
and higher by much, than any of the Plain lying without, and in the midst
thereof, upon a foundation of hard Chalk, the Work it self was placed,
insomuch, that from what part soever they came unto it, they arose by an easy
ascending Hill.

The Arguments by which he proves it a Roman Edifice (for the further
satisfaction of the Reader) in short, are these.

First, That the Tuscan Order is purely an Italian Invention.

Secondly, That the Scheam (consisting of four equilateral Triangles, inscribed
within the circumference of a Circle) by which this Work, Stone-henge, is
formed, was an Architectonical Scheam used by the Romans.

Thirdly, That the Portico at Stone-henge is made double, as in structures of
great Magnificence the Ancient Romans used, witness the Temple dedicated to
JOVE the Thunderer, built by Augustus Caesar at the foot of the Capitol.

Fourthly, That there is a Portito within the Cell, or greater Hexagon, reduced
likewise into the same figure.

Now, that the Romans used to make Portico's on the inside of their Buildings,
as well Sacred as Secular, manifestly appears by the Ruins of their
Basilica's, or Courts of Judicature, and by that Temple without a Roof,
anciently dedicated to JOVE in Mount Quirinalis, now the Horse-Mount in Rome.
But these Portico's were more particularly used by the Romans in their Temples
uncovered, and Roofless, which may be gathered from Lib. 3. cap. 1. Lib. 3.
Vitruvins; Hypaethros in interiore part habet column as remot as a parietibus
ad circuitionem, at Porticus, peristiliorum. Temples open to the Air, and
without Roofs, have Columns on the inside, distant from the Walls, as Courts,
Portico's about them.

Fifthly, That the Roman Architects, in distinguishing the manner of their
Temples, always observed (as Lib. 3.
Vitruvius tells us) the greater the Columns were, the closer they set them
together: so in this piece of Antiquity, the Stones being great, the spaces
betwixt them are likewise narrow.

Sixthly, That the Architraves in this Work, were all of them set without
Mortar, and fixed upon the upright Stones by Tenons, in the very same manner as
in great Structures, where the Stones are solid, and of more than ordinary
bigness, the Romans were wont to do. They laid them without any unctious or
incorporating matter; Nullo salta glutino, faith Lib. 3. cap. 1. Lib. 3.
Leo Baptista Albertus, and concludes it to have been erected to the God
COELUS, from the order, form, and aspect of this Antiquity; a further
confirmation of which the Reader may find at large in Stone-henge Restored.

But though the make and fashion of which Stone-henge consists, is very proper
for the God COELUS, yet considering that the Romans seldom erected Temples to
this God in any of their Provinces, and that no substantial Reason can be given
why they should do it here, we may with more probability (but with submission
to better Judgments) conclude it consecrated to their God TERMINUS, it being
probable that upon these Plains, as upon others in England, namely,
Newmarket-Heath, Kettering, and many more, as likewise in other natures where
vast Heaths are found which cannot be terminated with Hills and Rivers, such
Monuments were set up, or Ditches dug, Moulds raised, were, by different
precincts, distinguished.

And to make these Bounds more Sacred, that he might be cursed whoever leaped
over, or removed the Landmark of his Neighbor, they consecrated these Moulds
or Monuments to the honor of this their God, whom, for that particular office
of guarding and distinguishing the Fronteirs of Precincts or Provinces, they
called by the name of Terminus, or Bounder, and the situation, form, aspect,
and order of Stone-henge; seems very agreeable to the nature of that Deity.

And that which the more confirms the Opinion, is, that there is a Structure in
Scotland almost the same with Stone henge, sacred to the God TERMINUS, and
(according to the conjecture of Mr. Cambden) built about the same time that
Stone-henge is supposed to have been. The description of it you may read in the
same Author, in Scot. p. 28.

Hard by this Wall of Turf (says he) what way as the River Carron crosses the
Sheriffdom of Sterling, toward the left hand; are seen two Mounts cast up by
Man's hands, which they call Duni pacis, i. e. Knoits of Peace, and almost two
miles lower there is an ancient Round building, twenty four Cubits high, and
thirteen broad, open in the top, framed of Rough stone without Lime, having the
upper part of every Stone so tenonted into the nether, as that the whole work
rising still narrow, by a mutual interlacing and clasping upholdeth it self;
Some call this the Temple of the God TERMINUS, and that the Limits of the Roman
Empire was near Carron, is affirmed by Buchanan in these Verses;

Roma securigeris praetendit Moenia Scotis,
Hic spe progressus positd, Carronis ad undam
Terminus Ausonii signat divertia Regni.
Rome raised a Wall against the Pole ax'd Scot,
Despairing any further to promote
Its weary Eagles, for near Carron's sands
The utmost Limit of her Empire stands.
Now according to this description, who does not see a great analogy and
similitude between Stone-henge and this Building, they being both round, open,
and without a Roof, and the Stones in either unwrought, and tenonted without
Mortar; or other conglutinous matter. Had this, in time, been surveyed by a
judicious and learned Architect, it might probably have been found altogether
of the like fashion; and built for the same purpose. As for those signal
differences that are now between them, we must attribute them to the length of
Time, and the more injurious rage of those barbarous and savage People that
made frequent inroads into this Tract, irreconcilable Enemies, both to the
Romans and Civility, looking upon their Buildings; rather as Monuments of their
Slavery, than Ornaments to their Country, it having fared otherwise with
Stone-henge, as situated amongst a more civilized sort of People.

Besides these, the Caledonian Britains, not very long after, drove the Romans
back as far as the River Tine, and although Hadrian came himself in Person into
Britain, about the fortieth year after Agricola's Expedition, and reformed many
things in it, yet he went no farther forwards, but contented himself with the
loss of that part of the Province, which he found always subject to
Incursions, and the least defensible. So that we may suppose, after the
Britains had thus far regained upon their Enemies, that they made spoil and
havoc of whatever was Roman. Or perhaps, this Structure was not designed so
stately and Magnificent, at first, as Stone-henge, it being a vain thing to
erect Public buildings, with exquisite skill and vast expense, in a Country,
where the Natives would neither admire the one, or gratefully look upon and
acknowledge the other. But whether it was formerly a Building of the like
nature with Stone-henge, or (according to Ninnius) a Triumphal Arch erected by
Carausius, I shall leave to the Readers Judgment to determine.

Several Arguments I have produced to prove Stone-henge a Roman structure, and
a Temple dedicated either to Goelius or Terminus, Pan, Diana, or whomsoever
different Opinions has fastened it upon; But there are many things which, in my
Judgment (but with submission to better Reason when alleged) that seem to
argue this great Pile to be of far higher date than the times of the Romans.
Neither think I it altogether to be neglected, what name the British Writers
(living in succeeding Ages) call it by, namely, Corea Gigantum, and they
further add (as Giraldus Cambrensis witnesses, though fabulously) that it was
brought from the farthermost parts Girald. Comb. de adm. Hib. cap. 18.
of Africa.

Now to separate Truth from a Fable, and to find out an Ancient Tradition,
wrapped up in ignorant and idle Tales; Why may not these Giants, so often
mentioned, upon this, and other occasions, be the Phoenicians, as we have
proved upon other occasions, and the Art of erecting these Stones, instead of
the STONES themselves, brought from the farthermost parts of Africa, the known
habitations of the Phoenicians?

I could never imagine (as I have shown in another place) that the Romans, in
so few years, could be taken for Giants in Britain, as Mr. Cambden supposes,
especially considering, that even in those Ages the notion of Giants began to
be exploded; and the more acquainted the Britains had been with that Nation,
the more were they taught to cast off such monstrous imaginations.

If any object, That the Structure seems of Tuscan order, and so purely
Italian, let them consider, that the Tuscans were (as Grotius, and others
prove) of Tyrian Grotius.
Original, and in all probability brought with them (from Phoenicia into Italy)
that order of building; So that what one Colony of the Phoenicians carried into
Italy, another, with the same reason, might bring into Britain.

Moreover, it is to be observed, what the Restorer of Stone-henge confesses,
namely, That in all his Travels, through Italy and other Countries, he found no
Structure of like Order exactly with this, insomuch that he admires it for its
Rarity, and especial difference from all others, it being properly a mixture of
the Tuscan and lonick Order.

Now, that the lonians were immediately derived from a Colony of the
Phoenicians, Herodotus especially, and all Authors with him agree, so that
seeing this Stonehenge Herodotus.
is esteemed in this Age a mixed Building of Tuscan and lonic Order, both
Phoenician Nations, why may not it be accounted a Work of the Ancient
Phoenicians? In, or about that time the Tuscans used one sort of Building, the
lonians another, why might not the Phoenicians use both ways in Britain, as
being the People from whom both ways were originally derived?

In the time of King Henry the Eight, not far from this Antiquity was found a
Table of Metal, made up of Tynn and Lead, inscribed with many Letters, but of
so strange a Character, that neither the Antiquaries of that Age, nor Mr.
Lilly, Schoolmaster of Paul's, could make any thing of them.

The Metals, Tynn and Lead, seem to show the Table of Phoenician composure,
and had it been preserved to this day, we might possibly have found the Letters
to have been of the same stamp also; for had they been Roman Characters, they
could not have been ignorant of them, or if Gothic, which, at first sight look
like Phoenician Letters, they also were sufficiently understood in that Age.
And herein I accuse not any (of those times) of the want of knowledge in the
Phoenician Tongue; they might easily know the Character, and yet overlook it,
as not expecting it in Britain, as men oftentimes in looking for things lost,
miss of the place where they are by too much poring on that spot of ground,
where in more reason they think they should be found.

These are Motives that induce me to believe this Monument ancienter than the
Romans, seeing that neither the Romans, who have Recorded things of less moment
to their advantage, nor succeeding Authors after them, have made any mention of
so famous a Work, but contrary what we find of it is involved in Fables of
Giants, which, in my Judgment, more properly belongs to the Phoenicians than
Romans. And as the Author of Stone-henge Restored, without any Authority, but
the openess of the Roof, judges the Structure to be consecrated to COELUS, who
was worshipped in such Temples, why may it not be lawful for me to guess, to
what God the Phoenicians (if it were their building) dedicated this Magnificent
pile.

We have read, that the Phoenician HERCULES first discovered this Nation, and
to him, every where, the Phoenicians in following Ages, built Altars, and
erected Temples, as their Tutelar Deity.

Now, if we consider the great Pillars he is said to erect in the Streights of
Cades, called The Pillars of Hercules, and how the Phoenicians represented him
always leaning upon Pillars; why may it not be probable, that this Pile,
consisting of different Pillars, and not a continued Wall, being vast Stones
standing distinct from one another, contrary to the nature of other Temples,
why might it not, I say, be dedicated to HERCULES, especially if we consider
that they adored Hercules as the Sun, who is represented, by the Heathen
Hierographers, looking through Chinks and Crevises, with this Motto,

OMNIA VIDENS.
ALL-SEEING.
Since, in speaking of the foregoing place, I intimated that the Character
inscribed on it might not impossibly be Gothic, which is the same with the Old
Saxon, it will not be altogether tedious to insert their Opinions, who bring
the Date of this Structure to the time of the Saxons arrival into Britain.

Some have been of Opinion, that STONE-HENGE was erected as a Monument in
honor of some of the Saxon Nobility, and they allege, the Custom of that
Nation was, in reering great Monuments for the Tombs of their Gentry.

Joannes Magnus, in his first Book and seventh Chapter, speaking how the Gothi
had Letters before Carmenta's coming into Italy, adds, Cujus rei indicium
praestant Joan. Magnus, lib. 1. cap. 7.
eximiae magnitudinis Saxa veterum bustis, ac Specubus apud Gothos affixa, quae
literarum formis insculpta persuadere possunt, quod ante Universale Diluvium,
vel paulo pust, Gigantea virtute ibi erecta fuissent. Of the truth of which
thing, Stones of a vast magnitude, fixed at the Sepulchers of the Ancient
Worthies among the Goths, are sufficient testimonies, which, by the strange
shape of the Letters inscribed on them, may persuade us that they were erected
there, by a Giantick strength, before the Flood, or at least, not long after.

And it was one of Wooden's Laws, Ut supra Regum, and primatum Sepulchra,
magnos terrae tumulos in aeternam memoriam congererent, atque ut altos Lapides
literis Runicis inscriptos erigerent supra eorum sepulchra, qui rem praeclare
gesserant; That they should cast up huge heaps of Earth, as an eternal
Monument, over the Sepulchers of their Kings and Nobility, and erect great
Stones, inscribed with Runick Characters, over the Graves of those that had
acquitted themselves bravely.

Besides, these Great Stones were the only Libraries, or places of preserving
that little Learning they had. Archiepiscopus Upsalentis, de Getis in
Gothlandia, in praefatione, cap. 8. Fuerat enim ab Origin Regni Gothorum
magnus in ejus incolis gloria and laudis appetitus, proinde praeclara majorum
gesta in carmina and versus quodam Poetico more sed patrio Sermon redigere
curaverunt, eaque in conviviis, ut juventutem ad virtutem excitarent,
frequenter concinebant, quae tandem ne aevi longaeva vetustate aboleri possent
Rupibus and Saxis insculpserunt; There was ever from the very beginning of the
Gothic Empire, a strange thirst and desire in that People after Praise and
Glory, wherefore they carefully reduced into Rithm the famous Enterprises of
their Ancestors after a Poetic fashion, but in their Native Language, which
they were often to sing at their Feasts, that they might incite their Youth to
an imitation of their Ancestors Virtues, which they inscribed on great Rocks
and Stones, lest they should, through length of time, perish and be forgotten.

This Custom of erecting Stones on the Graves of the deceased, they used very
frequently here also.

In Cornwall there are to be seen Nineteen Stones set in a round Circle, distant
every one about twelve foot from the other, and in the very Center there is one
pitched far higher and greater than the rest. This was some Monument erected to
the memory of those Noble Saxons that fell in a Battle by Athelstane, when he
had subdued the Cornish Men.

Roll-Richstones in Oxfordshire, was also erected after some memorable Victory
by Rollo the Dane, who afterward conquered Normandy. And although anciently,
in many places they reared these Stones after a rude confused manner, and
without any Art, for the aforesaid uses, yet without question, through length
of time and continuance of Custom from the Flood, they placed them afterward
with greater elegancy, and exactness of figure and order, than their
Forefathers had done, presuming that Zeal and Superstition wrought the same
effects in them, as in other People.

The next that falls under our consideration is, Merlyn, on whom some
Historians have fathered STONE-HENGE, where we shall examine what means and
abilities he had in that ignorant Age for the accomplishing so curious a piece
of Work, which will be the easier done if we can but find out who he was.

MERLYN, by some, is said to be the Son of King Demetius his Daughter, who
finding her self with Child, gave it out, either to excuse her folly in a weak
and credulous Age, or by concealing her Gallants Name to save his life, a
policy often used by that Sex to save their Credits; that she had been
compressed by a fantastical Spirit, or Incubus; So Oenone confessed to Paris,
that she had been ravished by Apollo, and Rhea likewise by Mars, and Merovee's
Mother, that she was got with Child by a Sea Monster; from which preposterous
congression, Merlyn, as the report is, came, who growing up to Riper years was
gifted with the Spirit of Prophecy, and said to have been very exquisite in the
hidden mysteries of Magic, by which he very often diverted the Melancholy
thoughts of the miserable Vortigern.

Mr., Cambden calls him, in one place, the British Apollo, in another, the
British Tages. In this City Carmardin (says he) was born the Tages of the
Britains, I mean Merlyn, for like as Tages being the Son of an evil Angel
taught his Countrymen the Tuscans the art of Sooth-saying, so this MERLYN, the
Son of an Incubus Spirit, devised for our Britains Prophestes, nay, rather mere
fantastical Dreams.

Now, to believe that Merlyn, by the Art Magic, and by the instigation of
Ambrosius Aurelianus, easily brought these Stones from Ireland, and with the
same facility set them up in Salisbury-Plain, as a Monument of the massacred
British Nobility, with many other stories that fabulous. Writers have delivered
of him, were, no doubt, an unpardonable folly in both Writer and Reader. Upon
which occasion, pray observe how the Old Poet Alexander Necham speaks in these
Verses;

Nobilis est Lapidum structura Chorea Gigantum,
Ars experta suum posse peregit opus.
Quod ne prodiret in lucem segnius artem,
Se viresque suas consuluisse reor.
Hoc opus adscribit Merlino garrula fama,
Filia figmenti, fabula vana refert.
There is a Structure called the Giants dance,
Which Art its utmost trying, did advance;
For lest it should too late appear, sure Art
It self consulted, how to adorn each part.
This Fame says, Merlyn to perfection brought;
But Fame said more than ever Merlyn wrought.
And yet to look upon all things as fabulous and ridiculous concerning him,
were perhaps, too inconsiderately to wrong the Virtues of so eminent a Person;
For I cannot choose but look upon him as a Man of excellent parts, far beyond
any of his Age, however rendered by Fables suspected, for considering how the
British Chronicles, and Fame, unanimously conspire in setting forth his
Actions, we may safely believe that his admirable skill, especially in
Mathematics, was the occasion and ground of those fictitious and impertinent
things they make him perform in the behalf of Vortigern, and other Princes; So
that although we allow him not to be so great, or rather monstrous, as some out
of their love would have him, yet we may reasonably suppose him wiser, and far
above those sort of men that lived in his time, there being always something
of Truth to be found at the bottom of a Fable.

The greatest disadvantage and unhappiness that can befall a great and generous
Spirit is to be born in a dark, base, and ignorant Age, who looking on the
Actions of the Brave, through the Magnifying-glass of their own fears and
simplicities, make them swell, through a too forward but injurious Zeal, to
that monstrosity and bulk, that their very greatness makes them suspected by
Posterity, so that the infinite disadvantages that Fame suffers by the
suspicion of after Ages, can never be recompensed by the overplus allowed in
the Age they lived in, or in the next succeeding.

Mr. Milton conjectures that this Merlyn and Ambrosius Aurclianus (who is by
some supposed to have erected Stone-Henge) to be one and the same person, his
words, comparing both together, are these, Common opinion, but grounded chiefly
on the British Fables, makes this Ambrosius to be a younger Son of that
Constantine, whose eldest, as we heard, was In some Hist. Constantius.
Constans the Monk, who both lost their Lives abroad, usurping the Empire, as
some will have it: But the express words of both Gildas and Bid assure us,
that the Parents of this Ambrosius, having here born equal dignity, were slain
in these Pictish Wars and Commotions in the Island; and that the fear of
Ambrosius induced Vortigerne to call in the Saxons, it seems Vortigerne usurped
his Right.

I perceive not, that Ninnius makes any difference between him and Merlyn, for
that Child without a Father that Prophesied to Vortigerne, he names not Merlyn,
but Ambrose makes him the Son of a Roman Consul, but concealed by his Mother,
as fearing that the King therefore sought his Life. If so, then without
question, he is likely enough to have raised Stone-henge; for being not only of
the Roman Race, but also living among them, it is undisputable, but he soon
became acquainted with most of their Customs and Sciences of which they were
Masters.

For although in his time, through the Invasion of the Goths, Barbarism had so
overrun Italy, that not only the liberal Sciences and Architecture, but the
Art Military was so far lost among the Romans, that they were ignorant of the
very rudiments of War; yet this must not be understood universally, but of the
generality of the People at that time, and that there were no public
Professors of those Arts among them, and not that all the Gentry, or every
individual, were so ignorant, that Ambrosius could learn nothing from their
Conversation: For if that were true, we might by the same Argument prove him no
Soldier.

For in those times, Barbarism had so bereaft them of their skill (says
Procopius) even in what manner to sound a Retreat; But his frequent Successes
in his Wars against the Saxons contradict the one, and his often repairing
Forts, Cittadels, and Temples evidently show not only his willingness, but his
skill and ability also to have done greater things, had his Wars allowed him
sufficient leisure and opportunity.

Besides, if there were no skilful Architect in Britain, at this time, who was
it that built Vortigerne's Castle, which was made so strange, that he thought
it was sufficient to entertain the assaults of his enemies, if any should dare
to oppose him.

Now though we have supposed him to have skill and ability enough for the
accomplishing such a piece of Work, yet it will scarce be proved
notwithstanding, that he was the Author of it; for Stone-henge being two miles
distant from Ambresbury, where the massacred Britains are said to be interred,
it would be against Reason and Custom to imagine, That he should set up a
Monument so far from the Graves of those he intended to honor; unless we
should say, that these British Historians (taking some things upon report)
might a little mistake the place, as well as good Geographers have done
formerly, or that more out of Love and Zeal than any relation to truth, they
delivered to Posterity they were buried in the Churchyard in the Monastery of
Ambresbury hard by, rather than any vast and wide Plain, preferring decent and
religious Burying before the magnificentest Interment, and consecrated ground
more than all the Monuments and Marks of Honor in the World.

Besides Geff of Monmouth in his Fifth Book says, Jussit Vortigernus and Cives
and Saxones Maiis Kalendis quae jam instare incipiebant juxta Ambrii Caenobium
convenire. G. of Mon. 1. 5.


Vortigerne commanded both his own People, and the Saxons on the Kalends of May
then approaching to appear near to to the Monastery of Ambresbury, which
expression may very well agree with the Place, where Stone-henge stands,
Ambresbury being the nearest place unto it; and although the same Author says
in his Sixth Book, Convenerunt omnes intra nominatam urbem, and de pace habenda
colloquium inceperunt, and Matthew of Westminster to confirm it says, that they
did in pago Ambri convenire; yet since they have been suspected in many things;
I hope it will not be taken ill, if, with some Reason, we here dissent from
them also: For with what Reason can we suppose Hengist, who (to our fatal
experience) we found politic enough in laying the design, on a sudden to prove
so ill a Statesman, as to allow of a Conference at Ambresbury, a Town wholly at
Vortigern's devotion, and of indifferent Concourse, as being the usual place of
Interrment for the British KINGS, rather than two Miles from it on
Salisbury-Plain, which afforded him greater security for his own Person, and
the rest of his Company, and was more suitable to his own Son he had then in
being, unless he trusted so much to their Seaxes, as to dispatch the business
before those of Ambresbury could come up to the relief of their Countrymen,
which cannot reasonably be imagined.

And though the same Author, Geoffery of Monmouth says, that these Massacred
Britains were buried, in Coemiterio quod est juxta Coenobium, yet I question
whether he did not speak more after the phrase of those times he wrote in, than
those that he wrote of. For I very much doubt whether Monasteries, so early,
and so near, had Churchyards laid out to them, Churches I am sure had not for
a long time after, but the only Argument to prove this a British Monument is
Catigern's Tomb, who fell in a Battle against Horsa, where the Tomb only
differs from this in bigness, and as being fixed without Mortises and Tenons,
as we have it expressed by Mr. Cambden, in his description of Kent, wherein he
sets down several other things (worthy of observation) relating to that Country.

THE CONTINUATION OF THE British KINGS In the Days of the SAXONS.
TO Aurelius Ambrosius succeeded his Brother UTER PENDRAGON, a Prince nothing
inferior to him, either in Valor or Fortune, he is reported a Roman, but the
greatest demonstration we have of his being so, was, that whilst he lived, he
not only buoyed up the sinking genius of Britain by his own Virtues, but had
also freed this ISLE from a troublesome Intruder, as the Saxon in all
probability was like to prove, had not Divine providence preordained to the
contrary.

-- si Pergama dextra
Defendi potuisse, etiam hac defensa fuisset.
Before he came to the Crown, he was sent by Aurelius (who then lay sick) to
oppose Pascentius, Vortigern's second Son, a Man likely to prove a dangerous
Enemy, as pretending to the Crown, and at that time in conjunction with another
malevolent Planet, GILLAMARE, King of Ireland.

Against these Uter prudently made all the haste he could (with resolution,
upon the first opportunity) to give them Battle, lest this new Pretender,
through length of time, might steal away the Affections of the unstable
Britains, and he himself bring his own Credit in question, by delaying the
Engagement, insomuch that the one being actuated by his own natural fierceness,
from whence termed UTER, the other spurred on by Ambition, the Fight for a long
time stood doubtful, but in the end Pascentius, and his Irish Associates were
slain, ill defending their claim to that, which their Fathers before them held
by as bad a Title.

Aurelius being dead, and himself freed from all Competitors in the Kingdom, he
began to have an eye upon the proceedings of the Saxons; For understanding how
Esk and Occa, Hengist's Sons, had harrassed and spoiled the Country as far as
the City of York, with all the speed therefore imaginable he wade after these
Free-Booters, and as suddenly defeated them, taking the two Brethren prisoners;
A good natured Prince (without doubt) that spared the Lives of those that were,
by piecemeal, stealing his Kingdom, and whose Father, but a little before, had
sacrificed 300 of his Nobility.

In this Prince his time landed Kerdic the Saxon, a new Enemy sierce and hardy,
who notwithstanding all opposition Pendragon could make, daily discomsited the
Britains, and gained Territories large enough for himself and his Followers.

Now, whether this happened whilst he was doting on the fair Duchess of
Cornwall, and so could not spare time to attend their Motions, sure it is we
read that the Britains, to recover what they had lost, set upon the Saxons,
under the Conduct of Natanleod or Nazeleod, a certain King of Britain, but were
sufficiently routed by Kerdic and his Saxons, from whence the place in
Hantshire, as far as Kerdicsford, now Chardford, was called of old, Nazaleod.

Now, some (and not improbably) suppose this Nazeleod to be the right name of
Uter Pendragon, who for the terror of his eagerness in fight, became more
known by the Sir name of Uter, signifying in the Welsh Tongue dreadful, as
Edward was termed the Black Prince for the same Reason. We shall speak nothing
here of his lying with Igren Duchess of Cornwall, nor how by the art of
Merlyn, he was made so like the Duke of Cornwall, that neither the Duchess nor
Servants could perceive the cheat; contenting our selves (since it cannot be
helped) that from that adulterous Bed the virtuous Prince Arthur sprang.

ARTHUR after the death of Pendragon, his Son Arthur by the Duchess of
Cornwall, was advanced to the Throne, being then not above fifteen years old;
early he came by his honor, and as early troubles (the usual Concomitants of
it) overtook him, but on purpose, as it seems, to make him more glorious; For
Lotho King of the Picts, and Gouran King of the Scots, having married Anna and
Alda, the Sisters of Uter, laid claim to the Crown in right of their Wives.
These had Justice on their side, and Arthur eleven points of the Law,
Possession, and a good Sword to make it good, they often backed their Pretenses
with a good Army, and were as often defeated by this young Prince; yet not so
thoroughly, but that they held him in Plea all his lifetime, upon occasions,
assisting the Saxon against him, and at Cambula in Cornwall (says Leland) this
British Hector encountering Mordred Lotho's Son, slew him outright, and
received of him his own deaths wound.

Ninnius reports, that he over-threw the Saxons in twelve great Battles, but
with what credit, I know not; Kerdic the Saxon, during all the time of Arthurs
Reign, continually gained ground of him, and possessed himself of Somerset and
Hantshire, in defyance of all the opposition he could make against him; but
after the fight at Mount Badon, the Saxons are said to have sat down quietly
for a good while, after which those restless Spirits would scarce have done,
had they not stood in fear of an Army more powerful than their own: Therefore
we may with some Reason believe, he gave the Saxons some considerable defeat,
and might, with all probability, have eased the Kingdom of that troublesome
Enemy, had not his generous Spirit been almost consumed and over-wearied by
their continual Supplys.

Fame has done no Prince more Injury than this, for by representing him so far
beyond all proportion, she has made him Monstrous, and by her over-fond
talking, has made Posterity suspect (with some reason), whether there ever was
any such Person. The Bards styled him IMPERATOR BRITANNIAE, GALLIAE, GERMANIAE,
DACIAE, now who can believe, that he should ramble so far to purchase new
Countries, especially with the blood of his own People, that could not defend
his own against the Enemy at home.

Caradoc relates, that Melvas, King of that Country, which is now called
Somerset, detained from him (his wife Guenever) in the Town of Glaston, for the
space of a whole year, and afterward restored her, at the desire of Gildas,
not by any compulsion or force, that Arthur could make against him: If this be
true, then Arthur seems to be a very unlikely Man to run-over Germany, that
could not chastise the affront of a little Prince of Somerset, that had so much
defiled his Bed.

Now the greatest Argument we have to prove, there was ever such a Man as
ARTHUR, is this; King HENRY the Second, whilst he was at Pembroke, Girald.
Cambrensis.
diligently harkening to a Welsh Bard that was singing the notable Exploits of
King ARTHUR, and taking particular notice of the place of his Burial (the Song
designing it to be in the Churchyard of Glastonbury, and that betwixt two
Pyramids) commanded, for his further satisfaction, that they should dig
thereabouts. When they came some seven foot deep, they found an huge broad
Stone with a Leaden-Cross fastened to it, and on that side that lay downward,
in rude Letters was written this Inscription,

HIC JACET
SEPULTUS INCLYTUS
REX ARTURIUS
IN INSULA
AVALONIA.
And digging nine foot deeper, his Body was found in the Trunk of a Tree, the
Bones of a great bigness, and in his Skull were perceived ten wounds, the last
very great and plainly seen.

By him also lay GUINEVER his Queen, seeming perfect and whole till it was
touched, then appearing to be nothing but Dust, but the Restorer of Stonehenge
(with more probability) has found her Tomb at Ambresbury. Among other
Sepulchers (says he) found at the said Monastery, it is worthy Memory, that
about the beginning of this Century, one of them hewn out of a firm Stone, and
placed in the middle of a Wall, was opened, having upon its coverture rude
Letters of massy Gold, to this purpose; R. G. A. C. 600.

Thus Interpreted,

Regina Guinevera Arturi Conjux.

The Bones within which Scpulchre were all firm, fair yellow colored Hair
about the Skull, a supposed piece of the Liver near upon the bigness of a
Wall-nut, very dry and hard, and together therewith were found several Royal
habiliments, as Jewels, Veils, Scarfs, etc. retaining even till then their
proper Colors. All which were afterward very choicely kept in the Collection
of the Right Honorable EDWARD, then Earl of Hertford; and of the aforesaid
Gold diverse Rings were made, and worn by his Lordships principal Officers.

Concerning which Tomb, is supposed, by the same Author, to be the Sepulcher of
Queen GUINEVER, Wife of King ARTHUR, especially the letters R. G. etc. viz.
Regina Guinevera, etc. and the date, Anno Christi 600, if rightly Copied,
agreeing with the time of her death.

Besides, Leyland affirms, that several Writers make mention, she took upon her
a Nuns Veil at Ambresbury, died, and was there buried, unto which he gives so
much credit, that (whatever Giraldus Cambrensis delivers to the contrary) he
will by no means allow, either her Body to be afterward translated from
Ambresbury, or at any time buried, by her Husband King ARTHUR, at Glastonbury.

Unto Leyland's Reasons for her Interrment at Ambresbury, Mr. Cambden, it
seems, inclines also, because wholly silent of her Sepulcher discovered any
where else, though at large sets down the Circumstances of her Husbands Body,
it being found at Glastonbury, for had Mr. Cambden found any thing inducing him
to believe her Body had been, together with his there found, he would never,
certainly, have concealed it from Posterity.

Constantine the IV.
THis CONSTANTINE (according to some Writers) after the death of Prince Arthur,
Reigned as a Tyrant over Cornwall and Devonshire, at the same time with Aurelius
Conanus, Vortipor, and Malgo, but, according to others, by the appointment of
Arthur a little before his death, he succeeded him alone in the Kingdom, the
Britains unanimously ratifiing the choice, as expecting mighty things from the
Person their admired Champion had pitched upon for their Governor. But, as
many private Persons, who were before good Subjects, have proved but bad Kings
after they came to the Crown; So it fared with this Constantine, who being more
conceited of his Power, than knowing in the ways of Governing, grew on a
sudden so intollerably proud, that he slighted his Enemies, contemned his
Friends, and measured Justice by the length and strength of his own Sword.

Possibly he had found the inconvenience of it sooner, had not the Pictish War
broke out, which diverted the minds of his incensed Britains another way. For
the Picts hearing that after the death of Arthur, Constantine was made King,
appeared with an Army in favor of the Sons of Mordred, Arthur's Nephews, to
settle them in their Right. But these he happily routed, chasing his two Rivals
with their Governors, taking Sanctuary, the one in Winchester, the other in
London, to the very Altar, but the sacred Reverence of the place stopped not his
fury, for he slew them there, with their two Governors, without any
consideration of the tenderness of their years, or holiness of the place.

Gildas sharply inveighs against this Prince for his Adultery, forsaking his
lawful Wife, and for his Perjury, etc. lastly, for murdering these two
Children. Yet these being the Sons of the false Mordred, who had created his
predecessor Arthur so much trouble all his life time, by his frequent
Rebellions, and, at last, gave him his deaths wound, seems a little to take
away from the Cruelty of the Action.

After he had Reigned about four years, he was slain by his Kinsman Aurelius
Conanus, and Interred at Stone-henge, by his Ancestour Uter Pendragon.

After the death of Constantine, there appeared three Pretenders to the Crown
at once, AURELIUS CONANUS, Lord of North Wales, VORTIPOR, Lord of South Wales,
and MALGO CONANUS (as Gildas styles him) Dragon of the Isles. Every one of
these usurping the Title of KING of BRITAIN, though too weak to defend
themselves, and it, from the swelling Greatness of the Victorious Saxons.

Most Historians make them to have reigned successively, but they seem to me to
have been petty Kings at one and the same time; for by the reprehensions of
Gildas it is plain, that those Princes lived all at one and the same time, unto
whom he spoke personally, which could not be had such successions of years past
as is laid down by those Historians; Besides, it is said that Aurelius Conanus
was a Prince of a Noble heart, free, and liberal, but given much to the
maintenance of strife and discord among his People, which in my mind, will best
be understood of his difference with his two Competitours, Vortipor and Malgo,
and their Subjects, which indeed were his also, as taking upon him the style of
KING of BRITAIN, especially if we consider he had watchful Neighbors about
him, who were willing to take the greatest advantage over him they could.

Gildas, in his Invectives, terms Vortipor the unworthy Son of a good King, as
Manasses was to Ezechias. Now this good King cannot be Aurelius Conanus, who is
reprehended for his Vicious life by him as much as any, and consequently
Vortipor was none of his Son, so that how he came to succeed him in the
Kingdom, as their Historians pretend, can scarce be made out.

What great Actions these three Kings did, during their Reign, or what good
qualities they were endued with, is not hitherto known, there is but a very
slender account of them in the Rolls of Fame, which may make us suspect they
were guilty of very few, and those scarce worth the committing to posterity. In
Gildas, and other Histories, we may find a large Catalogue of their bad ones.

CARETICUS.
BY this time the SAXONS had fixed themselves secure enough in Britain, none of
the British KINGS being able utterly to dispossess them, through the continual
Supplies (they received out of Germany) of their new Acquisitions, yet this
Prince something revived the decaying Spirit of the Britains by his own
Example, behaving himself briskly, and proving fortunate against them in
several Battles, whereupon the Saxons (to rid themselves of so dangerous an
Enemy) called to their assistance Gurmundus, a Norwegian Captain (but, as some
say, sent for from Ireland) who surrounding the Britains, dismayed at so great
an Army, secured themselves in the Town of Chichester, but the Besiegers,
though they were not excellent at taking Towns by Assault, thought upon an
Invention that did their business as well, for fastening fire to the feet of
several Sparrows they had taken for that purpose, being let loose they flew
into the Town, and lighting upon the Thatched-houses, and other combustible
matter, set all on fire. Upon this, the Britains rather burnt out than carried
on by Courage, made a short sally, but being over-powred by numbers, were at
last discomfited, leaving many of their Nobility dead upon the place; In the
mean time, whilst the Britains maintained this Fight, Careticus stole out of
the Battle, securing himself among the Mountains in Wales, where he found more
security, though less plenty.

Now were the Saxons Lords of all Britain, this being the last British King
that had any thing to do in the Eastern parts of this Kingdom, being confined
thence forward, in the West, by the Rivers Severne and Dee.

Gurmundus, after he had destroyed a great part of the Country, he delivered it
up into the possession of the Saxons, who willingly and thankfully received it
at his hands.

CADWAN.
THe BRITAINS, ever since the Battle of Badon hill, had been at variance
amongst themselves, and now, since the Fight of Careticus, they could not agree
who should be their Governor, twenty four years together they were led by
sundry Rulers against the Enemy, but finding by experience, into what
precipices and disadvantages their stubborness and rash Counsels had brought
them, with joint consent chose CADWAN, Ruler of North Wales, King over them.

This Prince, though his Dominions were lesser than those his Ancestors
formerly possessed, yet he gave early proofs to the World, that the greatness of
his Mind was nothing diminished. For presently, after his Election, he raised a
large Army, resolving to enforce satisfaction from the Saxons, for shedding the
Innocent blood of 1200 Monks of Bangor.

EDELFERD, King of Northumberland, who had caused this Massacre, understanding
his design, thought not to be behind hand with him, wherefore associating
himself with most of the Saxon Princes, brought a good Army into the Field to
meet his Opposer; Both Armies were now in sight, and every one expected when
the Storm that was over their Heads would break, but on a sudden it blew over,
and fair Weather immediately appeared to both Parties; For partly by mediation
of Friends, and partly from a serious consideration of what sad consequence
Victory it self must needs be to either Party, a Peace was concluded, and these
two irreconcilable Enemies became, for a long time after, loving Friends.

He Reigned over the Britains, with great Honor, twenty two years,

CADWALLO.
THis PRINCE was nothing inferior, if not superior to many of his
Predecessors, in Conduct and Valor, always behaving himself victoriously
(too severely and rigorously according to the Saxon Writers, how true I know
not) against his old Enemy the Saxons.

PENDA, King of Mercia, whether by Agreement or Conquest, is doubtful, promised
to espouse his Quarrels against the Saxons, who joining their Forces together,
fell so vigorously upon the Northumbrians, that they not only discomsited their
whole Army, but left King EDWIN dead upon the place.

Vengeance, though late, overtook these Northumbrians for Inhumanly butchering
the Monks of Bangor, pursuing afterward the Saxons with that vehemence, that
nothing could satisfy his fury but the extirpation of both their Race and
Name. Besides, he not only slew many of their Princes, and most commonly routed
their Armies, but dispossessed them of their Kingdoms at his pleasure, two
years after Penda's death, making a Grant of the Kingdom of Mercia to his Son
Ulfridus.

He Reigned forty eight years, his Body being embalmed, was enclosed in a
Brazen Image, and set upon a Brazen Horse of excellent beauty. This the
Britains set up aloft upon the West Gate of London, called Ludgate, in token of
his Conquests, and for a terror to the Saxons.

Bid very much detracts from the Honor of this Prince, but being a Saxon,
with what credit, or upon what grounds he has done it, my time will not permit
me to examine.

According to the British Historians, Cadwallader succeeded Cadwalls, but if we
consider the Eminent Saxons he is said to have slain, his going to Rome to be
Baptized by Pope Seigius, his dying shortly afterward, and his being buried in
the Church of St. Peter's at Rome, he will appear to have been one and the same
with Cadwallader the Saxon, for which cause we omit a particular discourse of
him in this place, and this observation Mr. Speed, and some others, have not
made concerning the same, as they have set him down positively, a succeeding
King in the British Government.

FOR the better reading the English Saxon words, as likewise the more Ancient
Runick or Gothic Alphabet, which in the following Treatise do often
necessarily occur, and may serve to explain what Monuments Mr. Cambden has set
down in the Character, confessing he knew not the meaning of them; I have
thought fit to prefix their distinct Alphabets in this place.

The English Saxon Alphabet.

A. B. (...), C. D. E. F. G. h. I. K. L. M. N. O. P. Q. R. S. T. V. r. X. Y. Z.

a. b. c. d. e. (...). (...). h. i. k. l. m. n. o. p. q. n. r. (...). v. p. x.
y. z.

(...)

An imperfect Sentence the English Saxons marked with a single point; a full
period with three, placed thus (v)

The Old Gothic Alphabet.

A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. K. L. M. N. O. P. Q. R. S. T. V. X. Y. Z. and

(...)

(...)

The Gothic Alphabet of Vuphilas.

A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. K. L. M. N. O. P. Q. R. S. T. Th. V. W. Chapter X. Z.

(...)

The Goths marked an imperfect Sentence with a single point, a full Period with
two, and a W among them is sometimes pronounced as a V.

It is to be observed, that the Gothic or Runick Character, was the Character
of our Saxon Ancestors, and generally of all the Northern Nations, as
Swedeland, Denmark, etc. and is found in many Monuments in Britain, now
England, cited by Mr. Cambden, although without any Interpretation annexed to
them.

THE ANTIQUITY AND ORIGINAL OF THE SAXONS.
BEING to write of the SAXONS, a Nation who, next to the Romans, possessed this
ISLAND, and so well established their Laws and Language therein, as to this day
they remain in force to their Posterity, being not as yet wholly rooted out,
though often subject to alterations and revolutions: It will not be amiss
therefore to trace their Originals and progress to the first Ages of the World,
but unnecessary to fill up their Antiquities with forged stories out of
Berosus, concerning Cuisco the Grandchild of Noah, and the supposed Father of
the whole German Nation. It shall suffice to obtain leave to go no higher than
Wooden, from whom the Saxon Princes in general claimed their Original, and from
whom (Deified for his great Deeds) HENGIST and HORSUS, who first arrived in
BRITAIN, are said to descend in the fourth degree.

But before we write of the particular Actions of this Prince, his leading the
Saxons and Getes, from Scythia and Cimmeria, into the Northern parts of
Germany, whence they spread themselves all along upon the Coasts of the
Baltic, and so round to Belgium and Batavia, it will be necessary first to
show, what manner of People they were, and by what names called at their
Arrival into BRITAIN, which known, we may the easier go back to the discovery
of their true Originals.

Those therefore that possessed themselves of this ISLAND, were generally known
by the names of SAXONS, ANGLES, and JUTES, all branches of the same Stock,
though called differently, agreeing exactly in Language, Customs, and
Religions.

First therefore of the SAXONS.
THE Name of the SAXONS, for a time, before their public Arrival, and a good
while after, was more universally known than that of the JUTES or ANGLES,
though this latter in succeeding Ages prevailed more, and the name of the Jutes
seems to have been the Ancienter.

Isidore deriveth the Saxons from the Latin word SAXUM, a Stone or Rock.
Isidor. l. 9. c. 2.
The Nation of the SAXONS (says he) possesses the shoars of the Ocean, and
unapproachable Marches, from whence they received their Name, being a hardy and
strong People, and more famous than others for Piracy.

Indeed we know what terrible apprehensions the Romans had of them, who
maintained here a Military Force against them, under a Commander whose Title
was, Count of the Saxon shore in BRITAIN; about the days of Dioclesian, when
Carausius was employed against them, they became famous under the name of
SAXONS, and, I think, were not known to the Romans till Ptolomy, whatever some
suppose of Axones in Lucan; but I fear this derivation from SAXUM, a Stone,
will not be allowed, though they who go about to make it appear ridiculous and
impossible, bring no other Arguments than what are fetched from the Northern
Records, which say (but how truly I will not here examine) that the Name of the
Saxons was in the World a thousand years before our Savior Christ, long before
the building of Rome, or the Latin Tongue prevailed.

As for them who derive their Name from Askenas, or from Saxo the Brother of
Vandal, it is easy to be guessed from whence they forged such Fables, and so
little deserve an Answer, that they are not worthy so much as to be mentioned
in this place.

Geropius, whom Cisnerus and other Learned men follow, and amongst the rest Mr.
Gerop. Cambr.
Cambden, brings them from the SACAE, a kind of Scythian People about Cimmeria,
from whom they were called the Sons of the Sacae, or Sacasons, and by
contraction Saxons. These, they say (out of Strabo) leaving their Ancient
seats, conquered Bactriana, and the best part of Armenia, and called it after
their Name Sacasena, and so on by continued success passed to Cappadocia, that
part especially which lies on the Euxine Sea, afterward to the Hircinian
Wood, and having conquered Germany, to have named a part of it Sacasena, or
Saxonia; thus Geropius. And Mr. Cambden observes how Ptolomy places the
Sassones in that part of Scythia, and the truth is, there is but little quarrel
as touching the Circumstances of their habitation. For that the Saxons came
from these parts, I think on all hands is agreed, but whether through the
Hircinian Wood, or Sarmatick Sea, into Germany, variously is disputed upon the
credit of different Authors, though not much material to this point.

Mr. Sheringham, and Verstegan, Men exactly skilled in the Saxon Tongue,
destroy Shering, de Orig, Angl, Versteg.
this derivation of the Saxons from Sassones, Sacasons, or such like words, by
telling us that raex, in the singular number signifies a Saxon, and that
Seaxen, Seaxna, Seaxena, as likewise Saxen, Sachsen, Sassen, and the like, are
Plurals, and signify many Saxons.

Now SEAX being the Original name of a Saxon in their own Language, and Seaxen
the Plural of it, it is manifest that adding of son to Seax to make Saxon, is
but a fiction, seeing there was never heard in the World any such word as
Saexson, or the like, to signify a singular Saxon; But the mistake arises
from the Plural number, which, in the Teutonick Dialect, often terminates in n,
as Children, Oxen, Housen, etc. Now if any say that Seax may come from the
Sacae, the contrary, for ought can be known, mav be as true.

The Opinion which comes nearest to truth, is, that they are called from a
particular Weapon they wore different from other Germans, and peculiar only to
their own Nations, It was made crooked in the nature of a Sickle or Scyth, the
edge being on the contrary side, after the manner (though more bent) of our
ordinary Hangers. This Weapon was named in their Tongue a SEAX, and we read,
that, in that treac' erous Party upon Salisbury-Plain, appointed between
Hengist (the first Saxon that landed in this Island) and King Vortigern, it was
agreed that both Parties should meet unarmed, but the Saxons either fearing the
worst; or intending Treason and Treachery, carried privately under their
Garments short Knives, or Cutlets, which upon the Watchword given, Them cout
Seaxes, that is, Take your Seaxes, they immediately drew out so suddenly, and
slew of the Eritish Nobility no less than three hundred.

This Seax which they wore was sharp on one side, but the back was either
blunt, or made after the manner of a Saw, according to the curiosity of the
Workmanship, these Weapons being called Seaxen, it will not be amiss to show
from whence the word is derived which gave Name to our Ancestors.

(...). SAGS, says Wormius, in his Runick or Gothic Lexicon (which Worm: Lex.
was the Dialect of the Saxons, as shall be more fully shown) signifies a kind
of Sword, or Dagger, whose blade and hand was almost equal, it was sharp on one
side, and not unlike to a crooked Knife. The Saxons had two sorts of Weapons, a
greater and a lesser, the long Seax they wore by their sides, the other, called
the less Seax, or hand Seax, was either wore in the Scabbard, or else in a
Sheath distinct by it self. Now as the lesser Weapon, or Knise, is derived from
the Gothic Sags, and in the Plural Sagsags, so the greater also has the same
Original, for as that made in the nature of a Sickle is called Saex, so this is
termed (according to Megeser) a Saison, Megeser.
or Sesson, which signifies a Sithe, and at this day in the Netherlands they
name a Sithe a Sassen, and a Saxon they call Dle Sassen; and that this kind of
Weapon was generally used by the Getes, from whom the Saxons are derived, shall
be proved, Statius testifying the same in these Verses,

Quo Macetae sua gesta citent quo turbine contum Stat. 11 A. hill.

Sauromates, falcemque Getae --.
Pontanus, to prove more evidently that the Saxons had their Name from this
sort of Sword, records, That Saxony, in its ancient Arms, bears two SEAXES,
or Pontanus.
HANGERS, Cross-wise, which (says he) is an undoubted proof of their
denomination. And ERKENWYN, King of the East Saxons, gave for his Arms three
hand SEAXES Argent in a field Gules, and that this was not unusual for Nations
to be named after their particular Weapons, Verstegan proves at large upon
this Subject, and the same I have shown in another place, wherein are treated
the Causes and Reasons of the names of most Countries in the Ancient World.

Mr. Cambden, in his description of Cornwall, tells us, That in Wales there was
Camb. p. 118.
sound in the Earth, in digging for Tynn, Spear-heads, Axes, and Swords of
Brass (meaning, I suppose, these SEAXES) wrapped up in Linen, the like was
found in other places beyond Sea, this may testify of what Metal their
Weapons were made, but not of their fashion, but of that I have sufficiently
spoke already; And he further says, That it is evident the Greeks and
Cimbrians, and consequently the Ancient Britains ( by the Monuments and
Testimonies of ancient Writers) used Brass Weapons, although less prejudicial
in the wounding the Body than that of other Metals, in respect of its healing
quality which he attributes to their harmless nature, in the choice of it more
than any other, whose Opinion I absolutely contradict, apprehending it rather
from the plenty of the Metal, or else for the estimable value they had for it
above any other, and not from a healing quality, for they being a People
ambitious of Conquest, they desired (doubtless) all opportunity of usurpation
and mischief, to bring about their ends and desires.

Thus much for the name of the SAXONS.

The next People are the ANGLES.
THEY are of the same Original with the former, and the reason of their Name is
diversely given. Saxo Grammaticus fetches it from Angulus the Brother of Dan,
and Son of Humblus, whom others call Humilus; Others, Saxo Gram. Gerop. Beca.
from Queen Angela, but these Fables need no refutation.

Geropius Becanus deriveth it from Angelen, or Anglen, a Fish-hook, and says,
that the Saxons arrogated this Name to themselves, because, living on the
Seacoasts, nothing passed on the Waters, but was drawn and hookt in by them;
But this Erymology, as it savoureth of fancy more than truth, so does it carry
in it self its own confutation, for the Angli or Angili were so called long
before they came to the Seacoasts, even when they were an Inland-people, as
shall be shown more fully in the sequel.

The next Opinion which seems to carry more right, and has hitherto been
most generally received, is, that they took name from ANGULUS, that is, an
Angle or Corner, their ancient Country, about Sleswick, being a narrow Isthmus
lying upon the Baltic Sea. Of this mind is Mr. Sheringham, though afterward
he contradicts himself; and Verstegan writes thus, The word Eng, in the ancient
Teutonick, signifies Shering. de Orig. Angl. Versteg.
Narrow or Straight, and sometimes a Nook, and if any ask a Dutchman how he
calls a narrow Country, he would answer Engeland, or England, such a Country,
says he, is Old England in Denmark, from whence our English Ancestors
proceeded, being a Neck of Land, and such also is our present ENGLAND, running
out in length, and growing narrower at both ends.

To prove this Opinion Bid is quoted, who writes, That the ANGLES came out of
that Country which is called Angulus, and is reported, from that time, to lie
waste between the Provinces of the Saxons and So reads the Manuscript and not
Vites.
Juites; and Mr. Cambden shows, That between Juitland and Holsatia, the
Ancient Country of the Saxons, there is a little Province in the Kingdom of
Dania termed at this day Angle, beneath the City Flemsburg upon the River Sly,
upon which Sleswick is situated, which Lindebergius, in his Epistles, calls
Little Anglia, and Ethelwardus, an ancient Saxon Writer, has this Lind. Epist.
Ethelward.
description of it; Old Anglia lies between the Saxons and The same with Getes
and Jutes.
Giots, they have a Capital Town, which in the Saxon Tongue is called Sleswick,
by the Danes Haithby. From this Country (says Mr. Cambden) they passed into
the Inland-parts of Germany, even as far as Italy, and left their Name to
several places, as Engleheim, the native Country of Charles the Great,
Ingolstad, Engleburg, Englerute in Germany, and Angleria in Italy.

Thus we see the the progress of the ANGLES set down from Angulus, or Anglia in
Denmark, into Germany Southward, by Mr. Cambden and others, the contrary
whereof is true, as shall manifestly be shown. For as it is not to be denied,
but that our English Ancestors came from this Province into Britain, yet that
they received their Name originally from it, call it Angulus, or Angle, or Old
England, which you please, and so carried it into Germany, cannot in reason be
supposed upon the following account.

First, because the name of Angli, or Angili, was known in the World long
before they had possession of this Country, when they were an Inland-People,
living far within the Continent, which being true, makes it evident that the
ANGLI gave name to this Province, and not the Province to them.

To put this out of dispute, it is to be observed that Tacitus, and after him
Ptolomy, who first wrote of the Angli or Angili, make them an Inland-People,
and part of the Suevians.

Ptolomy divides the Suevians into three Nations, the Longobardi, Semnones,
and Angili; Now the Suevians were a Nation who never continued above a year in
one place, but, as Caesar, Strabo, and other Authors witness, continually
ranged up and down, still seeking out new Habitations, roving therefore through
Germany; Caesar. Strabo.
that part of them called English Suevians, gave names to the forementioned
Places, Ingolstad, Engleburg, etc. and at length, after the days of Ptolomy,
passed into the Cimbrick Chersoness, a Province whereof they accordingly gave
the denomination of Angulus, or Angel; For, in the days of Ptolomy, in that
part of Denmark wherein Bid and Ethelward place the Angli, we read of no such
People there, and Ptolomy himself, in those very Provinces, reckoned the
Inhabitants by these Names, the Chali, Cobandi, Sabalingii, and Sigulones, and
sets down the Angli far enough from hence, among the Suevians in the
Mediterranean parts of Germany.

Add to this, that most Authors bring their Original from Westphalia, where
Engern stands, and others have thought it probable they might primitively
proceed from Pomerania; where the Town Angloen flourishes.

These considerations moved Cisner to think, that the Angli Suevi mentioned in
Ptolomy, and the Angli Saxones, so called by Bid and Ethelwerd, were not the
Cisner. Bid.
same People, because the former were certainly an Inland-Nation, and a branch
of the Suevians, the latter a Seafaring People, and of the Race of the Saxons;
But they who shall consider, that the Saxons and Suevians were of the same
Original, and Anciently of the Common Name and Stock of the Cimbri, by which
general appellation they were promiscuously called by the Ancients, as also how
the German Nations were always shifting Habitations, by which means they got
new Names often, and often scattered the same Name on diverse Nations, will have
no reason to doubt, but that our ancient English Ancestors descended from those
English Suevians mentioned in Ptolomy, who having long wandered in Germany,
afterward possessed that Province in Denmark, which from their Name of Angili,
was called Angulus, or Angel, and from which Country they afterward passed
into Britain.

Seeing therefore that our English Ancestors did not receive their Name from
that narrow Isthmus in Denmark, but on the contrary it received its name from
them, it remains to be shown from whence they might probably have taken it.

Mr. Cambden, who disalloweth of the derivation from Angulus, a Corner, says,
Camb. Brit.
that the Original fo the Angli, or English, may in all likelihood be seen in
the etymology of Englebett and Englehard, and such like Teutonick names, but he
himself does not attempt at it. Neither have I read of any yet, who have
adventured to give their Opinions in this matter. Amidst so great silence of
Writers, my Judgment cannot be offensive to any, seeing it contracticteth none.

The Name therefore of the ancient Angili or Angli, so called by Tacitus and
Ptolomy, from which our English proceeds, is not to be fetched from the Latin
Angulus, a Corner, because Tacitus and Ptolomy gave not that name to the People
so Tacit. Ptolomy.
called, but set it down as they received it from the German Nations. The
Original therefore of the Name seems, as in reason it should, to be derived
from the Teutonick.

Now, as it is vanity to think that our present England received its name from
lying in a Corner of the World, or that Old England in Denmark was so styled
from its Narrowness, and upon that account gave name to the Angli, who were
called Angli long before they ever set foot on that Province, so on the other
hand, it is reasonable to suppose that the Teutonick Ang, and in finer
pronunciation Eng, signifying a Corner, was nevertheless the true Root and
Original of the name of the Angli, or English, not because they lived in a
Corner of the World, or in that Nook of Denmark, but because that part of the
Suevians called Angli, might possess themselves of narrow and straight Passages
in the Mountainous parts of Germany, which upon that account might be called
Angland, and in finer speech England, and the Inhabitants themselves Anglants
or Englants, that is, in the Teutonick, as much as the possessour of narrow or
straight Countries, and for better found are called Angili by Ptolomy, and
truer Angli by Tacitus.

And that which further induces me to believe that Eng or Ang, a narrow or
straight place in the Teutonick, in this sense is the true Original of the
Angli, is, that Engern in Westphalia, as also Angloen in Pomerania, are both
situated upon such narrow Passages, as I have been credibly informed, either
of which places may reasonably be supposed the ancient Seats of the Angli, and
in the Geographical Charts of Ptolomy, we find part of the Suevians called
Angli, seated in a narrow Passage, under the Mountain Melibocus.

The Angli therefore having received their Name from Aug or Eng, a Nook or
Corner, gave the same name (but whether out of design, or by chance, is
uncertain) to Anglia or Angel in Denmark, from whence it proceeded into
Britain, and grew in time to such credit and reputation, that the name of
Saxons and Jutes wearing away by degrees, this only prevailed, especially when
King EGBERT, about the year 800, Toe time when the Name of BRITAIN was first
changrd into ENGLAND.
by solemn Edict proclaimed that the whole ISLAND should be called Engelonth,
that is, ENGLAND, and the Inhabitants Englishmen, a Title it seems so much
affected, that our Ancestors used no other to vaunt themselves with, whilst
our Enemies only, the Scotch, Welsh, and Irish, call us Sassous.

The Reason why the name of English prevailed above those of Saxon and Jute,
seems to be the conceit men had of something extraordinary signified by it.
Engel, in all Teutonick Dialects, is as much as an Angel, and E in Englishman,
as it is pronounced Engelisce, or Engelsche, as it is written, signifies word
for word an Angel-like-man. Upon this account perhaps our Ancestors were fond
of this Title, which is not extraordinary to be supposed, considering that the
like has happened in other Nations. The French, when they would express some
Action done by any of their Nation, usually say, It was done like a Frenchman,
which with him sounds the same as a Gentleman, and this from the Teutonick
Franck, signifying Free and Noble, so that their ancient name of Gauls is worn
out, although the Francks, a German Nation, whose Name has universally
prevailed, were but a handful in comparison of the native Gauls, and were not
able to give their Language to that People, who nevertheless received Name from
them. In the like manner we read the name of Quirites given to a Roman Army,
was so great a Charm as to stop a Mutiny in its height. The Towns Maleventum
and Epidamnus, were for some ill signification changed by the Romans into
Epidaurus and Beneventum, not to instance in other matters of the like nature,
why may not therefore the more rugged Saxon and Jute, give place in the
opinions of the Inhabitants, to that of English, or Angelick-men.

This Conceit of our Ancestors was furthered by Gregory the Great, upon this
occasion, It happened, during the time of the Heptarchy, ELLA then Reigning in
Deira, a Province belonging to the Crown of Northumberland, that certain Youths
named Angles in Britain, transported to Rome, and there exposed to Sale,
attracted the eyes of all by their exceeding comeliness, and among the rest
Gregory, not yet Pope. He enquired of them, what Nation they were, to which
they answered Angles, the similitude of name with Angels, easily drew a natural
reflection from the good Old man, who presently replied, That not without
reason were they so called, having Faces more resembling Angels than Men.

The Conversion of the Saxons in Britain, ensuing upon this happy interview,
gave Reputation to the name of English or Angles, which (without question)
daily grew into great credit, and increased with that Christianity it had so
luckily occasioned, insomuch that whereas before, by our own Writers, this
Island was called still by the name Britain, and by Foreigners, Saxonia Nova,
and Saxonia Trasmarina, that is, New Saxony, and Foreign Saxony; King Egbert,
who first brought the Heptarchy into one entire Kingdom, by public Edict (as I
have already cited) ordained that it should be styled ENGLAND, and the
Inhabitants ENGLISH, if not in memory of its Conversion, yet certainly for some
opinion the Inhabitants had conceived of that Name above the rest, which could
probably arise from no other motives than these recited; for otherwise why
should the Angles, who in the Heptarchy possessed only Suffolk, Norfolk,
Cambridgsbire, with the Isle of Ely (upon the Union of the VII. Kingdoms) give
name alone to all the rest, especially considering that the Union proceeded not
from them, but the West Saxons. This is the reason that in writing the Affairs
of this Nation, until King Egbert, who first by public Authority changed the
name of it, I conclude all things under the name of Britain, it being properly,
and not till then, called Anglia or England, when the Heptarchy was reduced
into one entire Kingdom.

The other Nation of the Saxons are the JUTES.
The Original of the Saxons, Angles, and Jutes, and the Reasons for their being
so called. That the Jutes and Getes are one and the same People, and that the
reading of Vites for Jutes is a novel mistake, proved out of Ancient
Manuscripts and Records. The Reason why the name of Angles or English,
prevailed above that of Saxon or Jute.

THis name of Saxon is very ancient if we find out the true Original of it,
which once discovered, will give great light into the antiquity of our
Ancestors. They proceeded from Jutis, or Juteland in Denmark, and by the
Danish Writers are called Jutae, and Juitae; But before I proceed any further,
it will be necessary to wipe away those Mistakes made by Verstegan upon this
Subject, a Man otherwise Learned in the Saxon Tongue, yet, who by an over-fond
opinion of his skill therein, and through ignorance of true Antiquity, has
fixed many novel and false Originals upon Places and People in Britain.

Thus he writes, Now as touching the third sort of Saxon People, which were
called the Vites, some will have them called Juites and not Vites, and others
will have them called Geates, or rather Goths, but with these latter I mean
not to meddle, for that they overshoot the Mark too far, and so will never hit
it. Venerable Bede calls them plain Vites, and notes the Isle of Wight,
which yet retains that Name of them, to have been (besides other places of
the Continent) their Habitation.

The occasion of this error in Verstegan, upon which he groundeth on his own
head a false derivation of the Isle of Wight, proceeded from the printed Copies
of Bid, where instead of Jutes or Getes, was foisted in Vites. The Saxon
Version has it Getes, not Vites; Common hi of thrim folcan tham gestran gestan
germany of seaxum and of Angle and of geatum; They derived their Original from
three of the Valiantest Nations of Germany, the Saxons, Angles, and Getes; And
again, of that land the Angulus is nemned getyn geatum and seaxum; That Land
which is called Angulus, is between the Getes and Saxons.

Ethelwerd, a Saxon Writer, calls them Giots, and Chronologia Saxonica has
Iotes, tha com tha men of thrim megthum germany of called seaxum of Anglum of
Iotum; Ethelwerd, Chron. Sax.
Those Men come from three sorts of Germans, Saxons, Angles, and Iotes.

In the Laws of Edward the Confessor they are called Gutes, and in the
Peterburrough Records, Geatuni, by others Jotuni and Jetae, for Cetae, Jetae,
Jutae, Juitae, Gutae, Giotae, Jotae, Geotuni, and Jotuni, are all the same
Names, differing only in termination, and writ after various Orthography.

The Book which Mr. Cambden used, he affirmed had Getun, and Kranzius citing
Bid, calls them Jutes, not Vites, and Malmsbury, Huntington, with the rest
of the ancient Saxon Writers, who (without question) used Bedes Manuscript,
have always one of the forementioned words, but never Vites. Neither before
the printing of Bid was ever such a Nation as the Vites heard of in the World,
and how it came to get into the printed Copy of Bid shall be guessed at
hereafter.

Fabritius Chemnicensis, following the opinion of Beatus Rhenanus, and treading
in the same Error, writes, that the Vites, whom the Saxons in their Dialects
call Fab. Chemn.
Wites, had this Name in Germany, and that the Helvetii, who at this day are
called Suitzers, derive themselves from them. The Wites (says he) at several
times left their Country, some passed into Britain, others crossing the Rhine
seized part of Helvetia, and were afterward called Suiti, or Sulceri, which
Place and Name they yet hold.

This, although it be said without any Authority, and so not much to be
regarded, yet because it affords employment for the Teutonick Dialect,
Verstegan' endeavors to back it with pretty Etymologies. The Helvetii (says
he) are as much as to say, the Hil-vites, for Sebastian Munster reports, that
some of the Vites inhabited among Sebast. Munst.
the Mountains that divide Germany from Italy; But how came Sebastian by this
intelligence, the Name of the Helvetii is very Ancient, even in Julius Caesar's
days we read they were then a People, and so numerous, that with 200000
fighting Men, leaving their Country, and seeking new Habitations, in what Age
did this Colony of Vites plant themselves there, and who preserved the Records.
Caesar writes that they kept Registers of their People as the rest of the
Gauls, in Greek Letters, but of their descent from the Vites was never heard
till Bede's impression.

But this might pass for an handsome Invention, that which follows of the
Suitsers taking their Name from these supposed Vites is too unconscionably
gross, the derivation runs thus, Vites, Vitses, Vitsers, and prefixing S,
which in the Teutonick is as much as the S'uitsers, so that S'uitsers is as
much as the Vitsers, just as S'winter is the Winter.

Now which is most reasonable, to bring the Name of the Suitsers from a novel
corruption of Dialect in the West of England, where S' is used for The, which
Verstegan calls the Teutonick, or from the ancient People of the Suevi, who
in all probability there planted themselves, let the Reader judge.

Suffridus, to complete the mistake, will needs have the name of Vites to be
Ancienter Suffridus.
than the Jutes, and that the latter word is made by transposition of the first
Letters of the former, and to knock it home, he tells us a gallant story of a
Prince called WIIT, who married Cumera the Daughter of Bocchus, King of the
Cimbri, and had with her in Dower that Port of Denmark, called afterward by
his name Wiitland, and by corruption Juteland, all the mischief of this
Invention is, that Suffridus unfortunately took Vite to be ancienter than Jute,
otherwise he could as easily have made his Prince so good natured as to go by
the latter Name as well as the former.

Jute therefore, Juite, and Get, with such like, for they are all one, is the
Ancient name of that People who came with the Saxons out of Denmark into
Britain. How comes it to pass therefore, that the printed Coppies of Bid have
Vitae and not Jutae? Some guess, and not improbably, that Vitae might be so
made by transporting the first letters of Jutae, or by taking away the first I
from Juitae, but I rather think with the worthy Mr. Sheringham, who has writ
copiously of this Subject, That it proceeded from the Learned ignorance of some
Transcriber, who being not so deeply read in the foreign Jutes as he was in
Wihts, that is, the Inhabitants of the Isle of Wight, who in Latin were called
Vitae, presently thought that these were the People intended by Bid, and so
instead of the Jutae fairly put in his Neighbors the Vitae.

Neither is this a marvel, seeing Verstegan mounteth the same Steed; The Isle
of Wight (says he) retains that Name from the Vites, just with as much truth
as London was so called by the Saxons, from the similitude it had with Londen
in Sconieland. For who knows not that the name of Vectis taken from the
British Guith, whence comes With and Wight, was known by that name to the
Romans, hundreds of years before the Saxons Arrival.

Hear what Mr. Speed says of this matter in his Geographick Tables on the Isle
of Speed Chron.
Wight. Wight Island was in time past named by the Romans, Vecta, Vectis and
Vectesis, by the Britains Guyth, by the English Saxons Wuitland, and Wicthland,
and Wicthaea ( for an Island they termed AEa) and in these days usually called
by us the Isle of Wight; It is encompassed round with the British Seas, and
severed from the main Land, that it might seem to have been joined to it, and
therefore it is thought the British name Guyth has been given to it, which
betokens Separation. Now changing of Guyth into With, which was the custom
of the Saxon Dialect, just as the French Guerre, Guard, Gued by them is turned
into War, Ward, and Wadd, and we have a truer Original of the Isle of Wight,
and the Vitae, than any that is fetched out of Germany, to this multitude of
Reasons and Testimonies.

For a total conclusion of this dispute take the testimony of Ethelwerd, an
Ancient Hist. Ethel. lib. 1.
Saxon Writer, who in plain terms shows, that the Wihtii, that is, those
Islanders took name from the Island, and not the Island from them. The Kentisb,
says he, drew their Original from the Giots, as likewise did the Whitians, who
from the Isle of Wight, lying upon Britain received their name. Thus we see the
Wihtians were descended of the Giots or Jutes, and were called Vitae from the
Island, but of any such name as the Vites in Germany no authentic History
makes mention.

That the Saxons were the same with the Getes, and a branch of the Cimbri,
proved by the Language, Customs, etc. of both Nations.
HAVING thus far proceeded in deriving the Names of our Ancestors, the SAXONS,
ANGLES, and JUTES, People of different Appellations, yet agreeing in Customs,
Language, and Original, it remains to be shown from whence their Antiquities
are to be fetched, and by what thread we are to trace them, until we come to
some general Stock, out of which, like so many several Branches, they are
derived. The name of SAXON and ANGLE, affords no light into their Original,
the former being given them, or taken up, upon a particular account of a Weapon
they wore different from other Nations, the latter from the situation of their
Country, so that these being circumstances of a newer date, and pointing no
higher than the knowledge of such names in the World, it remains to be shown,
that out of JUTE, as their Ancient title, the true Antiquities of the whole
Nation are to be derived.

JUTE therefore, as I have proved in the former Treatise, is the same Name with
GET, as is manifest out of ancient Manuscripts and Records, there mentioned.
Now if they were the same People, as they bear the same Name, we have then an
undoubted Line which cannot fail us, from whence to bring down our Ancestors.

It remains therefore to be proved by other Reasons, as well as coherence in
Name, that the GETES and SAXONS were one and the same Nation, which done, we
shall find the Original and Progress of the Getes under Wooden, to be the same
with the Saxons, and we need seek no higher for their Original.

First therefore, the Language of the Saxons and Getes is the very same,
excepting only the difference of Dialect, by the Getick Language I mean the
Gothic, for that the Goths and Getes were one and the self-same Nation, is
Learnedly proved by Mr. Sheringham from the authority of Greek and Latin
Writers, the place from whence the Goths proceeded, from the agreement of both
Nations in Manners and Language.

Now that the Saxon Language and that of the Getes is one, is proved from the
derivation of many words in the Gothic Tongue, which have the like
signification in the Saxon.

And first Grotius proves that the Scythians, who spoke the Getick Tongue,
derived their Name from Schieten, which is as much in their Language as to
shoot, because they were excellent Archers. Now who knows not that scyttan,
in the Saxon Tongue, signifies to shoot.

Again, Pliny writes that Moeotis in the same Language is called Temerinda,
which, he says, signifies with the Gates as much as the Mother of the Sea.
Now who sees not that Temerinda is nothing else but the Saxon, that Meren Dam,
i. e. the Mother of the Sea.

Maeotis seems to be derived from the Gothic Moat, signifying a Marsh, or
Ditch of Water, according to Mr. Sheringham, in the latter signification the
Saxon Tongue vet preserves the name of Motes.

The River Tanais the Getes called Sylin, according to the same Pliny, because
it divides Asia from Europe. Now sylan, in the Saxon Tongue, is to divide or
separate.

The Saxons are derived from saex, a crooked Sword or Hanger which they used;
now Sags (as I have shown) in the Gothic Tongue, signifies the same.

The Gothic Iett, and Saxon (...), both signify a Giant, from whence comes
Iotum heimar, i. e. the habitation of Giants, and Iotum-land, now Jut-land.

The Massagetes were called the greater Getes, now the Saxons at this day use
Massy in the same signification.

The Catti, Neighbors to the Massagetes, Hadrianus Junius deriveth from Catts,
because of their quickness in seizing their prey, others from Catz or Cacs in
the Gothic Tongue, signifying Hunting, because they were great Hunters, hence
the Italian, Caccia, taken from the Goths, and to Catch in the Saxon yet
remains.

The Syndi, a People of the Getes, so called by the Goths because they lived
upon the Sea, Sund in the Gothic is the Sea, and part of the Baltic, to this
day, in the Saxon is called the Sownd.

The Country of the Syndi is called by Strabo, Syndica, from the Gothic Syndic
or Syndike, because that living Low they cast up Trenches to keep out the Sea,
called in their Tongue Sund. Now Dike, which with us is a Ditch, in the Dutch
Tongue signifies a Rampire.

Graukenii, another Getick or Gothic Nation was so called from their Tawney
Vestures, as other Getes were called Moelanchaeni by the Greeks from their
Black habits, Grauken in the Saxon Tongue is Tawney.

Sigunni, another Nation of the Getes was so named, according to the Scholiast
upon Apollonius, from a kind of Weapon they wore; Now sazen in the Saxon,
signifies a Warlike weapon or Sword.

The Mossunaei, another People of the Getes, called their Houses Mossuns, as
witness Apollonius in his Argonauts, and from thence were they called
Mossunaeci.

(...) Apol. Arg. l. 2.

(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
Near these were placed at the foot of a large Hill
Enclosed with Woods, the Mossynaeci dwell.
Of lofty Trees they Wooden-houses make,
Which they call Mossuns, whence their Name they take.
Now Metsen in the Saxon Tongue is to build a House, and Maison in the French,
which has many Saxon words in it, is a House, and Masson, which comes nigh to
our Mossuni, is a builder of a House, which we in the Saxon call a Mason.

Herodotus, in Melpomene, mentions a certain God of the Getes called (...),
Hero. in Melp.
Gebeleisin, supposed by the Learned, to be the God to whom the Souls of Men
departed were wont to repair; for the Getes, taught by Zamolxis, as likewise
all the Heathen Saxons, believed the immortality of the Soul. This Gebeleisin
the worthy Mr. Sheringham deriveth from the Gothic Giswa liiza, that is, to
give Ease. Now the Saxon Dialect comes nigher to the word Gebeleisin, being no
more than give all Easen, in our Tongue.

Stiernhielmius would have the Name in Herodotus to import as much as Geblitz,
or Geblietzen, which, if admitted, shows the same coherence of the Getick and
Saxon Tongue, for what was the Getes Geblitz, is with us at this day, Give
bliss.

BOROISTA, in Jornandes, was a King of the Getes, he is called by Strabo more
truly, BUROBISTAS, and he noreth that his name imports, a free Prince with
his Citizens. Now Bur, or Bure, with the Ancient Getes signified a Citizen, and
Wista, to be conversant with; from the Getick But comes the Saxon Borough, and
what the Getes called Burobist, we call Borough guest, by contraction Burgess;
For, for Wista, to write gucsta is a modern Saxonism, so that we see Burobist
or Burowist, is nothing but Burgess, that is, the Guess of his Borough, the
Dutch for Burgess write Burger, by another Teutonick derivation.

Suetonius in the life of Augustus mentions one COTISON, or Gotison, a King
of the Getes, now, who sees not that the Saxon Tongue gives an easy
derivation of his Name, whether you suppose him so called as the Son of a God,
or the Son of a Goth, or a Good Son, it is all one.

Again, Dio Cassius tells us of one ROLA, a King of the Getes, in the Gothic
Tongue at this day he is called ROLL, the original of our Name Ralph in the
Saxon, as Ola and Oli of the Ancients, is changed into Olf and Oloff, frequent
terminations in Saxon Names, as Randolph, that is, pure-Olf, Godolphin, that is
good-Olf, with another termination adjoined to it, so Radulf comes from Rad and
Olf, and not from Rad and Help, as Verstegan vainly supposes.

But that which puts the question beyond dispute, is the testimony of
Busbequius, Ambassador in Turkey from Frederick the Emperor, who during his
residence at the Port, had opportunity to speak with two Messengers that were
sent from the People of the Cimbrick Chersonesse, to complain of some
grievances to the Grand Seignior.

This Cimbrick Chersonesse was the Ancient habitation of the Getes, and by the
Language those Messengers spoke, it appeared that the Language of the Getes yet
there remaining, as to the main, is the same, though something corrupted with
the Turkish Idiom, as the Saxon at this present day; take the Relation from
Busbequius his own words. It would not be unnecessary, says he, in this place
a little to insist on Busbequius.
those things I have heard concerning that People who at this day inhabit
Taurica Chersonesus, whose Speech, Manners, Habits and Features, are (as it is
reported) very much agreeing with those of the Ancient Germans. Therefore on
this account, my Curiosity increasing, I left nothing unattempted for the
getting an opportunity of meeting any of this Country, that I might make (if
possible) a Discovery of something written in that Language, but all to no
purpose: Yet at last fortune befriended me, and prevailed where diligence and
long inquiry could not, for my Interpreters accidentally falling into the
Company of two of them that were appointed in the name of the whole Nation to
present their Grievances to the Prince, being mindful of the Charge I had
lately given them, invited them to my Lodgings to Dinner. One of them was
extraordinary tall, but he seemed to carry in his countenance visible Tokens of
an Innocent and harmless disposition, very much resembling the simplicity of
the Flemmings; The other was shorter, but better set, of a brownish Complexion,
by Birth and Language a Grecian, but through long Commerce and Acquaintance
with that Nation, had attained to a competent knowledge of their Language; but
the former through too nigh a Neighborhood and Familiarity of Conversation
with the Grecians, had so accustomed himself to their Tongue, that he had
altogether forgotten his own. Therefore I shall here set down as a taste, some
of those words he rendered into High Dutch, for many of them were of another
Form, and very different from others; Whether this diversity arose from the
nature and Constitution of their Language, or from the weakness of his memory,
or from the mixture of foreign words with their native Tongue I am not able to
determine; To all their words they prefix the Article Tho, or The, as we do, or
not much differing from us. The Words are these.
Aple, Apple. Alt, Old. Bruder, Brother. Schubesser, Sister. Fisct, Fish.
Commen, to Come. Gcen. to Go or Gang. Breen. to Burn or Bren. Dus, a House.
Danda, a Hand. Silvir, Silver. Goliz, Gold. Lachen, to Laugh. Stul, a Stool.
Sune, the Sun. Deghene, Eyne. Stern, Star. Plut, Blood. Winich, Wind. Salt,
Salt. Singhen, to Sing. Waghen, Wagon. Schlipen, to Sleep. Ringo, a Ring. Kor,
Corn. Mine, the Moon. Reghen, Rain.

Being desired to Number, thus he reckoned;
Ita, One. Tua, Two. Tria, Three. Fyder, Four. Fyuf, Five. Seis, Six. Seune,
Seven. Athe, Eight. Nine, Nine. Thiine, Ten. Thynita, Eleven. Thunitua, Twelve.
Thunitrua, Thirteen, etc. Stega, Twenty. Theithyen, Thirty. Furdeithyen, Forty.
Sada, an Hundred. Hazer, a Thousand.

Whether they sprung from the Getes, or Goths, who spoke this Language, or
whether they were the Remainders of some Saxons carried thither by Carolus
Magnus, Busbequius will not determine. But others who have looked more narrowly
into the matter, define them to be the Goths who Anciently inhabited about the
Marshes of Maeotis, for thus writes Grotius in his Preface to Procopius. And
that Grotius ad Precop.
which you would wonder at, is, that to this very day the same Goths live upon
the Maeotis, and as they had the Manners and Language, so they retain yet their
Ancient Name. For though Busbequius, who was not in those places, doubts
whether they were Goths, or Saxons, yet Josaphat Barbaro, a Noble man of
Venice, who lived in those Parts, assures us, that they yet call themselves
Goths, and their Country Gothland. And Scaliger affirms, that the Goths live in
those Countries under the Government of Scaliger.
the Praecopian Tartars, and that they have both Testaments in the Gothic
Character, invented by Wuphilas, and interpreted in the same Tongue, which was
in use at the banishment of Ovid; thus Scaliger.

By these Arguments it is manifest, besides the coherence of the Names of Jutes
and Getes, that our Saxon Ancestors were descended of that Ancient People, for
nothing proves so much the affinity of Nations as the agreement in Language.
Now whereas Mr. Cambden derives the Germans from the Germani mentioned by
Herodotus in Persia, and in some sort to prove it, says, that what the
Persians call, Fader, Mother, Brader, Iutcher and Baud, are in the German,
Father, Mother, Brother, Daughter and Bawd, yet this proves not the Original
of the Germans from the Persian, but rather that these words were taken from
the Getes who inhabited upon the Lake Maeotis, and who brought these words with
the rest of their Language into Germany.

Verstegan, who will not suffer that any of the German Nations were otherwise
than Aborigines from their first arrival under TUISCO, to wipe away this
consent in the Persian and German Language, says, that it is not sufficient to
prove an affinity in Language, to produce only two or three, or half a dozen
words, for by this means any two Languages in the World might seem to have an
alliance, when indeed there is none. This would be true if the words alleged
were far fetched, and we were forced to run through a whole Dictionary to find
only a few, and those as distant in signification as the Heaven and Earth is
from each other, but where so nigh Relations, as Father, Mother, Brother and
Daughter, which are always in Peoples mouths, are called by the same names in
two Languages, it seems not to happen by chance, nor is it so lightly to be
regarded as Verstegan would have it; And whereas he goes laboriously to prove,
that the German and Persian Tongues have no relation to one another, he needed
not to have taken so much pains, for the Persian Tongue as it is now spoken
consists chiefly of the Arabic. It suffices, that if by the consent and
harmony of these and other words occurring in both Languages, that there yet
remains even among the Persians some relics of the Getick Tongue, which was
the Original of our Saxon, and brought in by them into Germany.

Having thus shown the agreement of the Saxon Tongue with the Ancient Getick,
it remains, that in the next place the Progress of the Getes under WODEN, and
other Princes be set down, where, by the way, we may see the Customs of the
Ancient Getes, and compare them with those of our Ancestors; But before hand,
it will not be altogether unneedful to know, that the Getes, from whom we
derive the Saxons, were a branch of the Ancient Cimbri, as their very name
shows, for it is remarkable that Geac and Kimpper, in the Teutonick, are
sometimes taken in the same signification.

Now, as touching the Original of the Cimbri, I have treated before in the
Antiquities of the Britains, where I showed, that the Britains were a branch of
that Nation, who Anciently possessed those very places where afterward their
Brethren the Saxons inhabited, namely, from Denmark to the Low Countries, and
afterward in part of Gaul. Now, if any should ask, why, considering the
Ancient Britains, and our more Modern Saxons, were derived from the same stock,
namely, the Cimbri, and yet understood nothing of each others Language at the
entrance of the Saxons, an Argument used by Verstegan to disprove it, I answer,
That continuance of time and the mixture of the Britains with the Phoenicians,
Graecians, Gauls and Romans, in several Ages was the occasion, yet I doubt not,
were it material to prove, that there are many words in the British tongue
which agree with the Saxons, and which in probability they had in use long
before the Arrival of the Saxons themselves.

Of TUISCO, that he is vainly supposed the Founder of the German Nation, and
Conductor of our Ancestors. Of the Progress of the Getes under diverse Princes,
ERICUS, WODEN, and others.
HAVING proved the Saxons to be the same People with the Getes, both by their
Name and Language, it remains that we show by what methods, and under what
Leaders they proceeded into these parts of Europe; But before we begin
distinctly to declare their Progress, and to set down the true Conductors of
them, it will be necessary to destroy those Imaginary Leaders, who being but
Airy substances, as the product of Man's brain, have by a strange slight
nevertheless usurpt the Honor of these true Leaders and Commanders.

The most eminent amongst them, and who bears highest for the Prize, is
TUISCO; he is supposed the Leader of a distinct Colony from Babel, and taking
his way North-west, to have Peopled all that tract of Land called Germany, the
Inhabitants whereof to this day are supposed after his name to call themselves
Cuytsh, and their Country Cuytshland, and by changing T into D, Duytsh, and
Duytshland. Of this opinion is Verstegan, and he says, he learned it from
sundry very Learned and Judicious Authors, but names none. I suppose he feared
that Motto, SPECTATUM ADMISSI RISUM TENEATIS AMICI; Nay, Friends take heed you
do not split with laughter, for never was a Fable writ with more confidence,
bore more appearance, and withal had less truth in it. Ab uno disce omnes, the
laying open this cheat will discover the rest, and I shall take the liberty of
insisting longer upon it than I intended, because I find the generality of our
Country infected with the venom of this (...) Fiction, but when the Mask is
once taken off, they will not be able to discern under the painted Vizards,
inscribed with the names of Tuisco, Saxo, Danus, and such like Imaginary
Hero's, any thing more than empty shadows, and flying Ghosts of Lies and
Inventions.

To the unveyling of this Cheat, it is necessary to know from whence, first, it
had its source and Original. Now the Author upon whose credit the whole mummery
depends, is Berosus, as he is set out by Annius Viterbiensis. The true Berosus
was an Ancient Historian, and lived in the days of Alexander the Great, as
Georgius Syncellus, an Author of good Credit, and chief among the Writers of
the Bysantine History witnesses.

This Berosus his Works being for many Ages lost, and his Memory only preserved
in other men's Works, who upon some slight occasions have quoted him, it
happened that Annius of Viterbium being about to broach some Antiquities of his
Nation, and wanting an Ancient Writer to back them, pitched upon this Berosus as
the fittest Man to father his Conceits, as being a Caldean, and therefore
without doubt a great Conjurer, and knowing all things; for there was no Author
extant that reached half his Ambition of bringing down the German Nation as he
intended, evidently and plainly, from Noah himself, in a right Line, and had he
taken a Man less than a Caldaean, how was it possible that at the same time,
any, but such an One, could be supposed to know the Concerns of Noah, Japhet
and Askenas, in Asia, and those of Tuisco in Europe. Having therefore found out
a Man fit for his turn, it remained only, that he made him speak as himself
pleased, so that fathering his own Imaginations upon Berosus, and putting them
out under the color of so worthy a Name, he thought the whole business had
been done, and the World would never have the wit, or leisure, to discover the
cheat of his lying Oracles.

That this is true in the case of Tuisco, as well as other Imaginary Hero's,
will evidently appear, if we seriously weigh these following Considerations.

First, the true Berosus lived in the days of Alexander the Great, as the
aforementioned Syncellus witnesses, but Annius in his Preface tells the World,
that his Berosus lived long before that time, by which it is manifest he took
liberty to feign whatever pleased him.

In the next place, it is to be considered the same Syncellus reckons to us
the order, method, matter and subject of the true Berosus his Writings, namely,
that in his first Book he treated of the situation of Babylonia, the
fruitfulness of its Soil, what Trees and Plants it brought forth, and what
other Commodities it yielded afterward, how in the same Book he expounded the
Fables and Allegories in which the Theology of the Caldaeans, according to the
custom of those Times, was wrapped up. This was a work proper for a Caldaean,
to join Natural history with Divinity, and this the true Berosus performed.

Now Annius brings his Berosus into Germany, Spain, and Gaul, and makes him
more knowing in foreign Countries than his own, nay, the Berosus set out by
him makes not the least mention of any of the Babylonish writings.

In the second Book, Berosus (according to the same Syncellus) treats of Ten
Kings the Caldaeans had before the Flood, and this was the usual custom of
primitive Ages, in Egypt, Phoenicia, Greece, as well as Caldaea, for their
Authors to fetch high the Antiquities of their particular Countries, and by all
means (if it were possible) to equal the Jews therein, but no mention is here
made that Berosus writ any thing of the Germans, how came he to be so much
engaged for that Nation, of so foreign Concern, and to the knowledge whereof
he could not, in modesty, then pretend? If he feigned Ten Caldaean Kings before
the Flood, to advance the Honor of his own Country, must he therefore be
forced to speak for Germany also? and yet it seems very much more an unequal
proceeding in Annius, to make him give a Catalogue of German Princes, and yet
omit these Kings of his own Nation.

In the third Book (as Syncellus proceeds) Berosus treats of Nabuchodonosor and
his Actions, no mention at all of any Tuisco or Tuiscons, as the false Berosus
calls the Germans, so that we may undoubtedly conclude, that the story of
Tuisco, depending upon the Authority of Annius his Berosus, is a mere Fable.

The Learned Mr. Sheringham has collected, out of Athenaeu's and Hesychius,
certain Customs of the Babylonians, for which they cite Berosus, but in the
Berosus set out by Annius there is no such Customs found, by which it appears
that the Compiler of the New Berosus took not the pains to examine Greek
Authors, otherwise he might have made the Cheat not altogether so palpable.

Thus much of the Author upon whose Credit the evidence of this story depends,
we come now to the Name of Tuisco, and the Story it self.

TUISCO is supposed by some to be the Son of Noah, begotten of his Wife Araza
or Arezia (by others called Tythea) after the Flood. Others, with as much
likelihood, make him the Son of Askenas, the Grandchild of Noah.

This Tuisco, whom we must for Luck-sake suppose the same with Tacitus his
Tuisco, after the Confusion of Tongues, passed the River Tanais, and Peopled
all Sarmatia on Europe side, and all the tract of Land as far as the Rhine; But
because some might think so great a compass of Land too large for a single
Colony, Aventinus joins others with him; Ab orb, inquit Aventinus, restituto,
anno centesimo tricesimo primo Nymbrothus regnum Babyloniorum quod and
Assyriorum condidit; cujus primordio Tuisco gigas, pater Germanorum and
Sarmatarum, cum viginti ducibus Semi fratris sui nepotibus, ex Armenia venit in
Europam, amnem Tanaim que transgressus; ibidem orientem versus ejusdem frater
Scytha priscus tenuit; ab hoc Germani Scythae appellati sunt, quemadmodum
Plinius quoque in libro quarto Naturalis Historiae prodidit. Porro Tuisco
lustrato long lateque eo toto tractu qui est inter Rhenum and Pontum Euxinum,
and Tanaim, omnem ambitum in regua Toparchias and Tetrarchias divisit, Regulis
distribuit, Colonias ubique deduxit, regiones habitatvribus implevit, anno
Regui vicesimo quinte.

Thus translated, In the one hundred thirty first year after the Flood,
Nymbroth founded the Babylonian or Assyrian Empire, in the beginning of whose
Reign, Tuisco a Giant, the Father of the Germans and Sarmatians, accompanied
with twenty Captains, his Brother Sem's Nephews, from Armenia came into Europe,
having passed the River Tanais, his Brother Scytha sat down in the Eastermost
quarters, from whom the Germans were called Scythians, as Pliny in his fourth
Book of Natural History writes. Moreover, Tuisco having surveyed, far and near,
all the tract of Land which is between the Rhine and Euxine Sea, and Tanais,
divided the whole Circuit into Kingdoms and small Principalities, as Toparchies
and Tetrarchies, disposing of them to petty Governors, likewise to all places
he sent Colonies, filled the whole Countries about with Inhabitants in the
twenty fifth year of his Reign.

The exactness of time observed by the Compiler of this story, with the
punctual circumstances of Tuisco's setting forth, and proceedings, would betray
an unwary Reader (not conversant in such Forgeries) to the belief of part, at
least, of so complete an History. But as if it were true, it would be more
admirable that so distant time should admit so plain Calculation, and the
Actions of Tuisco be more perspicuous than those of the Conqueror; so, as it
is false, it appears more ridiculous, and deserves to be so much the more
openly exposed, by how much it has confidently pretended not only to truth,
but to the greatest exactness and faithfulness thereof.

Hear the same Aventinus in another place; Hand abs re suerit, inquit, Regulos
hujusce Tuisconis, qui and in penetralibus sacrae veritatis a Mose referuntur
ordine Commemorare. Primus dux fuit Sarmata, vir armorum studiosus, and peritus
rei been gerendae, amorisque popularium conciliandi; ab eo apud priscos
Sarmatae quoque nuncupantur. Princeps secundus Dacus, qui and Danus Danos
condidit, quorum Rex nominatissimus est in Germania, and Latin vocatur Rex
Dacorum, qui nobis Rex, Danorum est. Veteres Graeci and Latini, Cimbros
Cimmerios que appellarunt. Geta dux tertius, nostro sermon Getus est, a quo
Gotolandia Insula nomen retinet, in sinu l'encdieo e conspectu Vistulae amnis,
cujus ostia ad austrum spectant, ab illo prognati sunt Getae and Gothi.

Thus translated, It will not be besides my purpose to declare in order those
Princes established by Tuisco, all which are found in the hidden Mysteries of
Sacred truth, delivered by Moses; the first Captain was Sarmata, a great lover
of Arms, and skilful in the administration of Affairs, and in gaining the
affection of the People; from him, according to the Ancients, the Sarmatians
took Name. The second Prince was Dacus, called likewise Danus, the Father of
the Danes, whose King is famous in Germany, and is called in Latin, the King of
the Daci, by us, King of Danes. The Old Greeks and Latins called them Cimbri,
and Cimmerii. Geta was the third Leader, in our Language Getus, from him the
Island Gotolandia takes name, lying in the Bay called Sinus Venedicus at the
mouth of the River Vistula, which looks to the South; from him the Getes,
which are the Goths, proceed.

These two places of Aventinus contain the principal History of Tuisco, against
which Mr. Sheringham produces many Arguments, some of which are of great
moment; others, as it often happens in such cases, namely, that in
discovering of a falsehood, we often strain Truth and lash out on the other
side, have no weight, and reflect too much upon the Credit of Aventinus, who
himself confesses, a Learned Man and Tutor to two German Princes.

First then, he wonders at the Ignorance of Aventinus, and stands amazed at his
blindness in the Scriptures. His words are these, Quis non stupeat ad tantam
Sacrae Scripture ignorantiam atque caecitatem. And in another place, Quis virum
talem in Cap. 5. (...)
sacris ita caecutiisse attonitus non miretur, but it might have been
considered that Aventinus says no where, that the names of Tuisco, Sarmata,
Geta, and the rest, were found in Scripture. His words are these, In
penetralibus sacrae veritatis a Mose referuntur, which Penetralia to a candid
Reader, seem rather to refer to the hidden Cabbala of the Jews, supposed to be
delivered by Moses as he received it in the Mount, and preserved to Posterity
by tradition, than to the open Writings of Moses, where the Progeny of Noah is
not mystically, but plainly set down. Now that the Jews do pretend to a greater
knowledge in the Original of Nations than is set down in the Scriptures, and
ground their knowledge upon a mysterious Tradition, none can be ignorant of,
who are any thing conversant in their Writings; And indeed from them, and only
them, I believe the World learnt that confident way of forging Genealogies of
Ancient Princes, who must be supposed, forsooth, to give names to Nations, to
these Penetralia, and not to the Scriptures, we may, if not with some reason, I
am sure with most candor, suppose Aventinus referred.

But suppose that Aventinus did mean the Scriptures themselves, yet is he not
(allowing favorable construction to his words) to be supposed never to have
read them, as Mr. Sheringham intimates.

To manifest this, I will set down the Genealogy of Noah to King Henry the
Second out of the Saxon Writers, by which it will appear, in the beginning of
the Catalogue, as far as the Scripture goes, that the Saxon Writers use not
the Name as it is literally in Genesis, but give another out of the Saxon
Language, which has the same signification with the Hebrew, and this way of
proceeding might have been intimated by Aventinus, when he writes, that he
found Tuisco, and the rest of the Captains, in penetralibus sacrae veritatis
quae a Mose referuntur, in the hidden mysteries of Sacred truth revealed by
Moses. To evidence this, I will show both Catalogues, and their Coherence, as
they are set down by Saxon Writers, and by Moses, and how the significations
correspond each with other, as far as we can go in the Holy Scriptures, but in
the Saxon it proceeds to King Henry the Second, from whom it may easily be
carried to our present Sovereign CHARLES the Second, undoubted Heir of this
Crown by a lineal succession.

The Saxon Catalogue.
Noah, Sem, Beadwig, Wala, Hathra, Itermond, Heremod, Celdwa, Beu, Gearwa,
Geta. Fingondwelf. Frederewelf, -- Ine. Eppa. Dffa. Alchmund. Egbricht.
Adelwolph. Alured. Edward the Elder. Eadmund. Edgar the Peaceable. Edelred.
Edmund. Edward. Margaret. Maud. Maud. Henry the Second.

Freolf, Fredewald, Woden, Bealdag, Brand, Freodgat, Frewiu, Wig, Gewis, Edda.
Elesa, Ceordic, Creoda, Cheursc, Cheusic, Cuthwin, Cutha, Ceoldwald. Coented.
The Scripture Catalogue as far as it goes.
Noah. Sem. Aram, -- Arphaxad. Sala. Heber. Paleg. Reu. Serug. Nahor. Terah.

Hull,
This Catalogue or Genealogy, I found in a Manuscript in the Kings Library, the
Author inscribed Abbas Reivallensis, for the truth of it let the Heralds give
their Verdict. It is sufficient for the justification of Aventinus, if the name
of Tuisco, as well as Beadwig, Wala, be mystically found under the names of
Aram, Hull, Arphaxad, or the like, in Scripture Genealogy.

Beadwig, whom the Saxons make the Son of Sem, is supposed the same with Aram
in the account of Moses, for their names signify the same; Aram in the Hebrew
denotes an high and excellent Hero, so does Beadwig in the Saxon a great Hero
or Demy-God. The Son of Beadwig is Wala, the Son of Aram, Hall; Now Wala and
Hull are both one, Chul or Hull written (...) is one that delights in
slaughter. Wale is the same (sometimes written Puala and Guala) as we find in
the Edda, Wadeni Wal-hall, is, Wodens Hall of slaughter. Taking the Scripture
Line as in goes down by Arphachshad, we shall find it the same; (...), a
powerful Prince, so Aram, Sala, and Wala or Guala are much alike, so Heber in
Regiment, Habra and Hathra. Reu follows in Hebrew a Seer or Wise man, under his
name might be couched Aventinus his Cuisco, which in the Teutonick is derived
from Cuitsthen, to Interpret Sacred things. Aventinus in Nomenclat. Cuitsthen,
Cytsthen, Cuitzen, Cytzen, est interpretari, unde Cuitstho, Cuitzo, hoc est
Cuisco, conditor Germanorum and Sarmatarum, quem majores nostri uti nuncium and
interpretem Deoruns venerati sant. But if his name be truer written Cuisto
(according to Tacitus and Caesar) then it signifies Contentious, from Tuisten,
in the Teutonick to Contend, and he may be supposed to be the same with Hull;
and this seems most probable, for the Saxons delighted to give terrible names
to their Ancestors. Woden signifies surious, Gram, grim, and Grime, angry,
Grimbald, quickly angry, Buller, tumultuous, Thor, fierce, Thorismund,
quarrelsome.

Now whether the Composer of this, and other like Saxon Genealogies, had an eye
to that of Moses or no, I will not determine, but if they had, as many think,
and probably Aventinus among the rest, then what Aventinus writes concerning
Tuisco, that he is found in the hidden Mysteries of Moses, is not so great an
absurdity as Mr. Sheringham would have it.

Another Argument used by Mr. Sheringham against the story of Tuisco, is, that
if he were the Son of Noah, Noah must needs have spoke the Cimbrian Tongue, or
Teutonick, for, from thence must Tuisco be fetched, not from the Hebrew,
forasmuch as it cannot be so much as written in the Hebrew, because that
Language has no such dipthong as Ui; now whether ui in Tuisco be a diphthong
or no, I will not dispute, but I am sure it may be written equivolently in the
Hebrew, as thus, (...) or (...). And whether Noah spoke or writ that Language
which we now call Hebrew, or the Cimbrian, let those argue who love to dwell
altogether on the days of Noah. I am sure Scaliger, Vossius, Gratius, and the
common consent of the Critics make the Hebrew Character of no higher date than
the days of Esdra, and as for Noah's speaking of Teutonick, if we believe
Geropius Becanus, Physician to Mary Queen of Hungary, and Regent of the
Netherlands, not only he, but Adam himself before him spoke it, and he
supposes it the only Original Language. And if we give credit to Verstegan, he
was resolute and serious in this opinion, as likewise Abraham Ortelius his
Follower; So that to confute the story of Tuisco, by these and such like
Arguments, is nothing else but to destroy one fable by setting up another in
the room of it.

That there was such a Man by name Tuisco, or something like it, whom the
Germans had in special veneration, and adored as a God, none can deny who have
read Caesar and Tacitus; probably he was the same Tuet, or Mercury, of whom we
spoke in the Antiquity of the Britains, who was supposed the Interpreter of the
Gods, and from him the word Tuisten, signifying to Interpret, might proceed,
and Cuisto, an Interpreter, by a Teutonick termination, and he himself might be
called after the manner of the same dialect Tuisto, an Interpreter, instead of
Tuet, taking his name from his Office, for that he was called Tuet likewise the
name of Tuesday does import, but whether he were that God or no; or some of
Woden's Captains deified, is not much material, seeing he has left behind him
in authentic History, little or nothing to entitle him to the founding of so
great a Nation as the Germans. But that he was the Son of Noah, or his
Grandchild, and that he came into Germany an hundred thirty odd years after the
Flood, when it is manifest that the Confusion of Languages was not till the
year three hundred, moreover that in twenty five years he not only Peopled that
whole tract of ground, but established diverse Kingdoms and Principalities, is so
impossible, that were it the true Berosus that told us, and not Annius that
makes him speak it, we could not give credit to so vain a Report without
derogating from Sacred Authority, and denying Reason it self; so that leaving
Tuisco and his Followers to their Imaginary progress, I shall begin with those
Leaders of our Nation which are of more modern, and therefore a much truer
account whose Actions, Customs and Constitutions, are not yet fully antiquated
in their Posterity, and for which our Ancestors, according to the Customs of
those times, did worthily place them in the number of their Gods.

The first news we hear of our Ancestors, as far as may be gathered from any
tolerable Authority, was their progress under the Conduct of ERICK, King ERICK.
of the Getes or Jutes, who led them from Scanzia, first into the neighboring
Islands called by them Wettalaheyde, afterward into those Countries named
since Denmark and Swedeland. And in this, the general stream of Northern
Writers concur, Johannes Magnus the Archbishop of Upsall, Saxo Grammaticus,
Cranzius: An Ancient Chronicle written in the Gothic Tongue, and after the
Custom of that Age in Rithme, thus describes it.

ERICK.
Iagh war forste koning Gotland redh
Co bodde fugen Skane eller Wetalaheed
Iagh lat them forste byggia och uptagha
Cybor them Skatta Gothem alla dagha
Chesse Dyar hette Wettalaheyde alla
Some nu mau Sailand, Moon, Fiwn, Laland,
-- och Falster, Kalla.
First Lord of Gothland, I King ERICK was,
None then did Skane or Wettalaheed possess.
'Twas I, those Countries to my Empire, drew,
And made their Tribute to the Ooths a due.
And then the Composer goes on in his own Person,
This Prince held Wettalaheed, which Countries all,
We, Zeland, Moon, Fin, Laland, Falster, call.
In other Verses, much after the same strain, and according to the manner of
those times, he pretends to give the Chronology of this Kings Reign, and
places him as high as Sarug, Great-Grandfather to Abraham, but notwithstanding
the fabulousness of so high a Calculation, the Tradition it self has bore so
great weight in the Northern Countries, that upon the account of this very
Erick, the Kings of Swedeland have claimed Right to the Crown of Denmark, as
Successors to him, but whether their Claim under him is grounded on better
foundations than the Title of King Edward the first, under Brute, to the Crown
of Scotland, countenanced likewise by Act of Parliament, I will not venture to
determine; certain it is, that the pretensions of the Swede by this Title, as
well as of Edward by the other, have added much to the Authority of both
stories, and are sufficient to bear out an Historian, at least in the
mentioning of them. About the time of this Erick it is supposed, that the Getes
under his Command, from their roving and wandering condition, were called
Vandals, or Wandals, and the Country (afterward named Holsatia) Vandalin, or
the Country of the Vandals.

Wettalaheed, in the Getick Tongue, signifies a Land, or Lands watered all
about. Now in the Saxon Dialect, the signification of Wett is Plain, and Hide
is Land, which shows the concordance of both Languages, as likewise opposite
to Wettalaheed in Gothland, is another place called Bravallaheed ( Johannes
Magnus in Latin calls it Campus Bravelinus) which in Saxon and Getick, is as
much as a fair, or brave Country. Likewise Gothland in Ancient time was called
Gutegutland, that is, good Gothland, from its great fertility, but not as Mr.
Sheringham thinks, from Good good Land.

This Erick may be supposed to have been so called by the Ancient Jutes, from
Ear, which denotes in their Tongue Honor, and Ryc, a Country, as much as to
say, after their manner, the Honor of his Country, or from Ryc, Riches, so
that his Name imports Rich and Honorable, for the Saxons called Riches,
Rycdome or Rycness.

The second Progress of the Getes was under BERIG, if he be not the same with
BERIG.
Erick, as I shrewdly suspect, from the likeness of his Name and History, for
the Jutes do often put a W before names beginning with a vowel, which W the
Latins express by a B, so that Berig is no more than Erick or Werick.

His History is almost the same, though in some few circumstances he seems
after in time, for Johannes and Olaus Magnus, with other Northern Historians,
write of his coming into Gothland from Seanzia, so far it agrees with the story
of Erick, but then they go farther when they say, he went into the Country of
the Ulmerugii, now part of Pomerania, and having subdued the Vandals (who were
supposed to be so called in the days of the former Erick) to have joined them
to his other acquests; But whether these two be the same, or different Persons,
the account of both their Actions is so small and inconsiderable, that it is
not worth the while to be too serious in the weighing of it.

When the Getes had increased to great numbers in their new Seats in Germany,
FILEMAR.
and began to want room, many of them transplanted themselves into Scythia,
under the Conduct of FILEMAR their King, the fifth from Berig. This Filemar was
the Son of Gudarig, but of his Grandfather and Great-Grandfather not a word
upon Record. From thence they spread themselves even to the Bosphor, and all
over the Lake of Maeotis, by degrees possessing all Thracia, Dacia, and Maecia,
and stretching as far as the Pontick Sea.

About this time, next unto Filemar their King, they had in special veneration
one Xamolxis, who taught them Laws and Manners, and brought them to the orders
of Civil and well governed Commonwealths, then two great Families, the House
of the Amali, and that of the Balthi; the Ostrogoths were in subjection to the
Amali, and the Vesegoths to the Balthi, both which names seem to signify no
more to me than the Eastern Goths, and the West Goths, as the Massagetes are
derived, by many, from the Getick Massy, which with us signifies great or
heavy, from the vast proportion of their Bodies, and now the Getes being very
powerfulin all those parts, they took different Names from the different
Countries they possessed, being called Cimmerians, Sarmates, Scythians,
Thracians, Dacians, Maesians, Istrians, Ponticks, from Cimmeria, Sarmatia,
Scythia, Thracia, Dacia, Maesia, Istria and Pontus, as in our parts they were
called Saxons, Angles, Sueves, Germans, Celts, upon the same and other like
accounts. But we must carefully take heed, in reading the History of our
Ancestors, that we confound not their actions with the actions of those People
whose Names they afterward took, as for example; Because the Getes, from the
Conquest of Scythia were afterward called Scythians, and from dispossessing
the Celtae, part of them were called Celtae, therefore to think, as some have
done, that the ancient Scythians and Gauls were nothing but a Getick Nation,
were an opinion absurd and unreasonable.

The Getes being seated in these parts, by FILEMAR, and possessed of most
Countries about the Bosphor, the Pontick Sea, the Lake Maeotis, and the Euxine;
now it is that we hear so much of them in the Roman and Greek Historians, and
indeed, this seems the full Zenith of their luster and prosperity, whether we
measure them by the number of their Nations, the glory of their Actions, or the
Conduct, Might and Puissance of their Kings; but because these things are fully
treated of in Roman and Greek Historians, from whence they may be easily
fetched, and because they seem remote to our purpose, who intend only an
account of the Getes, as they returned again, by degrees, into these Western
parts of Europe, and at last into Britain it self, I shall not trouble the
Reader with the names of their several Kings, or their Actions in so foreign
parts, but begin with WODEN, from whom Hengist and Horsa (who first made a
public Invasion in Britain) derived themselves in the third degree; For what
has been briefly, yet fully delivered by faithful Collection from those who
have read the Gothic Annals, and out of the Northern Histories themselves,
together with what afterward may be said of the Saxon Customs and Language,
will be sufficient to convince the Judgment as to points requisite to be known
of so Ancient times and People, namely, that those very People who returned
into Germany under the Conduct of Woden, and they who afterward came into
Britain with Hengist and Horsa, were the Race of the Ancient Getes or Goths, so
famous in History, and from whom the Spaniards at this day, though they are
least able, yet account it the highest Honor to derive themselves.

Having treated of the Getes or Jutes, until their settlement in Scythia,
Cimmeria, and upon the Bosphor, I come now to speak of their return into
Germany, under the Conduct of WODEN, their much admired Commander. 'Twas he
that first brought them under the names of Saxons, Sueves (which Names they are
supposed about his time to have taken up) into Swedeland, Denmark, Rislandia,
and the Countries adjoining.

The Gothic Nations, according to the variety of Dialect, call him variously;
Sometimes Uoden, and Oden, and Othen, and Godan, and Guodan, the Saxons, (...),
and the Dutch by transposing a letter, Guoden. Sometimes in short Wode, and
Ode, and Oath, Good and Guode, like wise Woen and Goen; hence Wednesday the
Dutch call Woensdach, and Gorensdach. And as his Name is delivered variously,
so are his Actions like wise, some of them in Historical plainess, others
obscurely in hidden Mythology, Parables and Fables, which latter way of writing
being (I know not by what fate) the constant delight of Primitive Ages, and, as
I may say, the pride of those first times, ought not to detract from the truth
of those things which are evidently and upon good Tradition distinctly set
down; For as it would argue lightness of Judgment to give credit to Reports,
monstrous and impossible, though pretending to greatest Antiquity; so it too
much savours of novel Pride and Conceit, if upon reading the works of the
Ancients we immediately shut the Book, and cry out all is false and ridiculous,
when indeed, we only want the key to unlock those Mysteries, which they
purposely wrapped up in obscurity, to the end they may render the Theology,
Religions, Customs, and Manners of their Country, therein darkly couched, more
August and venerable. Not to mention how it was the Custom of the Ancient
Greeks and Romans, we shall find the very same method used in our Northern
Writers, when they set down the Life and Actions of WODEN, and other their
Princes, which sure may be pardonable in them, seeing it is so much admired in
the others, especially seeing the chief Mythologist of the Northern Writers, I
mean the Compiler of the Eada, which remains the most venerable Monument of
Antiquity amongst us, or rather the setter forth of it, gives this ingenious
account of the Work.

Edda et Ithret aff forndsctudum frodra manna Deemosogum og matgfundnum heitum
hlutaima keinnanda Norreenann Skaldskap fyrer Aithiidu myrck kvedium enn fyrer
Wytrum Monnum Lifthvedenn ad yrkia og Semia, huor Ithret sem ei throtnandi
Uants Brunner seerer fornar kienningar og feeder ee uyat till kvedskaparius
ollum merkiskalldum et hana Bilia med Idne grunda og giegnd tettrivid hafa huer
eff hunernen sit Naffn hloted hefer.

Edda, is an Art which out of the most ancient Mythology of ingenious Men and
Names, variously found out, teaches the use and exercise of the Norwegian
Poesy, which to the Vulgar is obscure, to the Wise pleasant to hear, and
artificial, which like a Fountain continually running suggests Old words, and
daily creates New, for the benefit of Rythmical writing to all good Poets who
can with judgment use it; And Saxo Grammaticus thus in brief describes it, Edda
est Mythologia Poetica veterum Islandorum. It was composed above six hundred
years ago, and as to the main is in much credit with the chiefest and most
authentic of our Historians.

To begin then with this EDDA, concerning the Expedition of WODEN out of Asia.

Oden haffde Spadem og so kona hauns og aff them Uisendum faun hann thad, ad
Naffn hauns munde uppe bera hellski Norduralfu heim stus og tygnad umm framm
Alla Konga. Fyrer tha sok fysest hanu ad Byria fetd sina aff Curckflande, og
hafde med sier myken fiolda Lids Buga menn oc Gamla karla og konur og hoffou
med seit marga Gersemelega hlute, en huet sem their for yfer land that bar
agyeete myked af them Sagt, so their thottu lykare Gudum enn Monnum, og their
gefa ei Stad ferd Sin fyrr cim their koma Nordue thad land et nuer Itallad
Sar land that dualde Odenn langa bryd og eignadest Byda thad laud. Sem Odenn
hafde Skipt thui land med Sonum sinum tha Birlade hann ferd Syna Nordur og kom
ithad land er their kalla Reidgotoland og esgnadest ithuilande alt thader hann
vild eog set that till Landradanda son finu et skioldur hiel hanns son var
fridleifur thaduun er su eettkommen er Skioidungar veita thad erudana Kongar oc
thad heiter nu Iotland er tha var kall ad Reidgotaland (...) thad for hann
Nordut that sem nu heitter Suythiod that var sa Kongur er Biliffe er Neffudur
enn er hann spyt till ferda theitta Asiae Manna er Efer voru kailader for hand
mote theinn og Baud ad Odenn stilde slyke valid hafa thans Ryke sem han vilde
sialfur sa Cyme filgde ferd theirra ad huar sem their duoldust i Londum tha var
thar ar og fridur og truda aller ad their veere thesz Radande thui thad Sau
Menn ad their voru Olyker odrum Monnum them er their (...) du sted ad (...) og
wite, thar chotte Odenn goder Landkofter ogkaug (...) that Borgar stad sem ut
heiter Sigtun. Chad vat aff-hanns Naffue og gaff sier Kongdom og kalladest
Sydanni Niordur og thui fiimst Striffad freede Bokum ad Niordur hafe heited
hiim first Saga Kongur er thad till these ad Odenn hefur (...) thar
Goffgastur, Oden Skipade that hoffdingium i tha lyking sem vered haffde i Croja
set Colff hofudmen i Stadnum ad deema Lomoslog (...) Skypade hann Riettum
ollum sem fyrr (...) vered i Croja og Cyrkyar voru vaner.

Thus rendered out of Rossenius his Translation.

This Oden was a Magician, as likewise his Wife, whereby he foreknew that his
Name should be celebrated above all Kings in the North. For which cause be
began his Journey from The Turcae are mentioned by Pliny and Mela, and were a
Gothic People, called Turcae, quasi Tauricae, because they lived at the foot
of Mount Taurus. By Troy is meant Asgardia, Woden's Country, as appears in the
seventh Fable of the same Edda.
Turkland, taking along vast Treasures of Silver and Gold, and Precious things.
Sheringham upon this place.
Through what Countries soever they passed they were highly cried up, as
seeming Gods rather than Men; thus they staid not till they came into the land
of the North, now called Saxony, where, for many years Odin lived, and
possessed the whole Country about, so that in the Division to his Sons, he gave
to Vegdeggus East Saxony, to Begdegus, (...), to Siggo, Francia, himself went
into another Country which was then called Reidgotoiand, where he did whatever
pleased him. Over this Country he set his Son Skiold, of whom was born
Fridleit, whose Posterity was named Skioli dungar, or the Off spring of Skiold,
from which Stem the Kings of Denmark descended. This Reidgotolandia is now
called Jutlandia. Farther, he removed his Seat to the place now called
Suithiod, where Gylfus was then King, who when he heard of the coming of these
Asiaticks, whom the Edda calls Asae, he went out and met them, profering Turces
igge, Torksey in Lincolnshire at this day.
Odin what part soever he would take of his Empire. For so great fortune
attended these Asians, that wheresoever they aboded, Peace and Prosperity
flourished, and every one was fully persuaded that these Blessings proceeded
from them, for this especially affected their minds, that for knowledge,
beauty, strength, and singular shape of Body, they never had seen the like.
Odin perceived this Land was pleasant and fertile, therefore he chose a place
to build a City on, which at this day (according to his, or rather his Sons
name) is called Sheringham, Sig a Surname of Woden, sige in the Saxon, Victory,
Tun, a Town.
Sigtunum, where exercising Kingly Authority he called himself Niord, wherefore
in the Annals of the Ancients it is found that the first King of the Suevi was
called Niord, because Odin was the most glorious, although others held the
Kingdom before him. In the City Sigtun he constituted Twelve of the Chief
Citizens in imitation of The Turcae are mentioned by Pliny and Mela, and were a
Gothic People, called Turcae, quasi (...), beca si they ived at the foot of
Munt Taurus. By Troy is meant Asgardia, Woden's Country, as appears in the
seventh Fable of the same Edda.
Troy, as Conservators of the Laws, and to execute Justice after the Customs
of Turkland.

From this Constitution of WODEN, says Mr. Sheringham, whereby he ordained
Twelve of the principal Citizens, as preservers of the Law, and to give their
Judgment or Verdict (for so the words import) proceeded perhaps that Custom
among us, never to be enough praised, whereby to Twelve good Freeholders,
called by us a Jury, is trusted the whole weight of Justice, and Determination
of all Causes both of Life and Estate; but this by way of digression.

Another narration of the Progress of WODEN, agreeing with that of the Edda, is
taken out of an Ancient Norway Chronicle, the Author of it (as Stephanius
thinks) was Sturlaeson, a Writer of good account and credit, the whole story is
too large to set down. I shall only mention what more particularly relates to
the present purpose. It is thus;

That part of Asia looking to the East, which is bounded by the River Tanais,
had formerly for its Metropolis a City named Asgard, wherein Ruled, with great
Authority, a mighty Hero named OTHIN, to twelve of the chief Senators who
excelled in Piety and Wisdom, and therefore were called (...), Diar, i. e.
Gods, or Divine Persons, and (...), Drotuar, i. e. Lords, he gave power to
order Religious affairs and Ceremonies, and to hear and determine Civil Causes
and Suits. This Othin had two Brothers, the Elder (...), Ue, the younger (...),
Uelir or Uuli. These two upon the absence of Othin at any time, managed the
whole State; Upon the increase of the Roman Empire many Cities in these parts
becoming Tributary to it; Othin foreknowing, by Magic Art, that the fortune of
him and his Posterity was to be made in the North, left his Government of
Asgardia to his Brothers VE, and VELIR, and went himself into Russia, and from
thence into Saxony, which having conquered he left to his Sons, Among the rest
he gave to his Son Skiold, Denmark, who made Lethra the Seat of his Empire.
Othin, after hearing that Gothland, the King whereof was Gylvo, was a delicious
and fruitful Land, and had room enough to receive him and his, thither he
repairs, and being kindly received by the King, he seated himself upon the
River Loger, and built Sigtun, afterward he went into the North of Swedeland,
where he ended his days. Thus Sturlaeson. Messaenius, in his Antiquities of
Sigtun, relates the like of this Woden.

Cher aff then forsiohtigha man Odhen nar han liika some aff it Wardethoru
foresagh at the folckriike Aff gudiske Provincier skalle medh tiidhen komma
under the Romards Ook, sa sick han them under fine brodhers Regemente, Och han
(...) medh en stoor hoop folck, some ock word i Summa Radhoga, och Tolf Domare
some word the fornamligaste Riiksens Nerreman och kallades Drotner i some ock
medh stin hustru frigga, och medh sine Barn, togh sigh fore till at upleera och
intaga sina Forfadhers Riike, some wari Norlanden nedhsat. Nwatfore drogh han
inn i Ryszland medh even stoor Macht, och nar han thet lycksamlighen hadhe
inkrachtar, sick han thet sinom son Bootill at regera; Not nu Oden i Ryszland
thetta framgang sick drogh han medh. Skep offwer Naaffwet och kom till even Lo i
Danmarke (Odensoo) some ock aff Odhens forra Boning sit nampn annu i bagh
behaller. Och nar Odhen'en liiten tiidh hadhe wistus i Schleszwiik uthi (...),
och hade aff even Trelkones klookheet, some heette Gesion grant forfarst Sweriges
landz fruchsam heet och de ye lig heet, satte han siw sine Sooner til at foresta
holsten och skyndade sigh hastight til Swerig, och satter sigh nedg til at voo
en God riidh i Sigtunn.

After that Woden, like a provident Man had foreseen, as through a Glass, that
the populous Countries about him were like to come under the Roman yoke, he
lest them to his Brothers, and himself, with a great number of People who
feared the same, and Twelve Judges thief of the Kingdom, called Drotnars,
attended with his Wife Frigga, and his Children, he departed to take possession
of the Kingdom of his Ancestors, which lay in the North. With a great Army he
came into Rysland, which having happily obtained, he gave to his Son Boo. After
Affairs happened so fortunately to Woden in Rysland, he passed the Sea in Ships
to the Island of Denmark, Odensoo, which to this day from the ancient
inhabitation of Woden holds its name, and also after he had tarried a while
in the Dukedom of Sleswick, and through the cunning of a Wise woman, named
Gesion, learnt, that Swedeland was a fair and fruitful Soil, leaving his Sons
to govern Holsatia, he hastened his Voyage thither, and lived long at Sigtune.

The very same account has Messenius given of this Progress of WODEN,
collected out of various Manuscripts, which would be too tedious to recite word
for word, as varying only in very small and inconsiderable circumstances. It is
sufficient that out of these forementioned Records and Authors (to all which
Wormius, Stephanius, Arngrimas Jonas, Messenius, Loccenius, and other Northern
Writers give great credit, as authentic for the most part) we learn the
Procession of our Ancestors from Asia, under Woden, and those quarters where
Busbequius of late years has found out our Language yet remaining.

If any one think that the story of WODEN, King of Asgardia, is fabulous,
because there is no such place to be found in any Ancient Geographers, as
Asgardia, let them consider that what the Greeks called Aspurg, the Goths might
call Asgard; For this was the way of the Goths to conform their Names of
places to the signification, not the sound of words, as the Saxons after them
have done to many places in England. Now we read in Greek Authors, namely,
Stephanus Byzantinus, and Strabo of Aspurgians, which, without doubt, are the
same with our Asgardians, as the name imports; For what (...) is in Greek,
that is guard in the Gothic or Saxon, namely, a Tower or Castle; Konings guard
was anciently the Castle in which the King of Goths held his Court. Besides
that the Name is all one, so likewise the place where our Northern Writers
place their Asgardia, and where Strabo and Stephanus their Aspurgians, is the
very same exactly, namely, upon the Lake Maeotic. Stephanus; (...), The
Aspurgians, a Nation upon the Lake Maeotis, the same is gathered out of Strabo,
Book the twelfth. But that which puts the question beyond dispute, is, that as
this Edda places Asgardia in Turkland, so does Mela make the Turcas and
Aspurgians all one, so that for the truth of the Edda in this particular there
cannot be required a greater Testimony.

Besides the concurrence of these Authors, there are other manifest Reasons to
prove many of the circumstances true, as they are related concerning Woden.

First, That he came out of Asia his very Surname of aas, so much celebrated,
does sufficiently witness; He is called sometimes Den almegiste aas, that is,
the Almighty Asian, and the old form of an Oath among the Norwegians was this,
Hialpf mier suo Friar Og Niordur Og hin matke aas; So help me Friar Niordur,
and that Omnipotent Asian.

Secondly, That Woden was in Rtisland seems not improbable, because there are
so many places which to this day bear his Name in it, to instance in a couple.
In a Province of that Country there is a place called at this day Oden po,
Mercator calls it Oden poa, signifying, upon Oden, by which dedication the
Inhabitants intimated that their whole trust and confidence was upon him.

About Nerva also, upon the same Country, lies a small Island named
Wodensholm, that is Wodens Island; By the Danes it is writ, En Odes-holm, and
Godesholm. fra Reffuel til Narfuen er iij. mile. fra Narffuen til Surpe er j.
mile fra Surpe til Roge er ij. mile, fra Roge til Wodes-holm er iij. store
mile, oc Godesholm et it lidet Lautland oc ligger balffanden mile fra laudet.
From Reffuel to Narsuen 3 miles, from Narfuen to Surpe one, from Surpe to Roge
two, from Roge to Wodens Island are three good miles, Woden's Island is
Low-Land, and lies half a mile from the Continent.

Thus much of the progress of the Getes from Asia into Saxony, and these parts,
under the Conduct of WODEN, it remains that we treat of his Person and
Followers, and by what means they came to be reckoned as Gods by the Saxons,
where also shall be shown the rest of their Deities, the Religion and Worship
of the Saxons, their Runick or Magical Writings, their Habits, Customs, Laws
and Constitutions, upon the time of their entrance into Britain, with some
Remarks all along, showing the exact Coherence of the Saxon with the Getick
Nation, in many weighty points and material circumstances, the relation
whereof, I hope, will not be unprofitable or unpleasant to the Reader.

WODEN.
WHAT strange and monstrous Opinions the Saxons conceived of WODEN, may be
gathered out of most of their Authors, who seldom mention his Name without some
excessive Encomium of his Person, or miraculous relation of his Magical
performances, whether it were that in those Ages the pretending to supernatural
assistances was indispensably necessary to the Conducting of People from their
own Countries, and establishing them in New ones, or whether Woden was no more
than an ordinary Leader, and his Actions made miraculous after his death,
certain it is, none of all the Saxon Nation ever attained to so great
Reputation, being worshipped in all places, and by all Sexes, and saluted with
the highest title of Divinity, Den almegiste aas, and hin almatke aas, that is,
the Omnipotent Asian, and the Asian maker of all things; By what degrees he
arrived to this Honor, I will relate as it falls to my hand out of the Saxon
Authors themselves. Snorro Sturlaeson writes thus of him.

WODEN was a happy and glorious Warrior, in all his Battles he always came
off Conqueror, and every one believed, that by a particular favor of the
Gods, Victory Sturlaefoi
was inseparably entayled upon his Person, and from thence derived to his
Followers; For this was his constant custom when ever he sent out any to War,
or entrusted them with matters of moment, to lay his hand on their Head, after
the manner of Consecration, which Ceremony performed they thought themselves
sufficiently blessed, and beyond the reach of any misfortune whatsoever. In
Dangers they invoked his Name, as a ready help in times of necessity, placing
in him their whole trust and confidence.

In the same Author this story is told of him: Being once at War with the
Scythians, called Uaner, it happened that both Parties tired out, agreed to
give each other Hostages. The Scythians sent Afterward Deified.
Niord, Surnamed the Rich, and his Son Froi. Woden, on the other side, sent
Heimer a good Commander, and Mimer a wise Counselor.

Heimer obtained the Kingdom of the Scythians, but did nothing without the
Advice of Mimer, but Mimer dying, the Scythians perceived, by change of
Affairs, that all had been managed by his Wisdom, insomuch that wanting some
prudent Counselor, they sent to Woden to redemand one Quasir, whom, with the
other Hostages they had sent, and to give him something in lieu of Quasir, they
cut off Mimers Head and sent it to Woden, who, no doubt, knew how to use it,
who embalming it, by Magic Incantation made it vocal, so that it would reveal
all hidden and secret Mysteries.

Besides this, he had a way to call up the Ghosts of deceased Persons, and at
his pleasure shut them up in Hills and Rocks, whence he was called (...) Dronga
Drotten, and (...) honga Drotten, Lord of the Hobgoblins.

Upon his death he commanded, that all his Limbs and Members should be marked
with nine Scars, which were called (...) Geirs Dode, and that they should
sacrifice to him such as were taken in War, as a most pleasant offering and
atonement to him.

After his death, he appeared to many, especially in Battle, wherein he
promised Victory; Others he invited to Ualhalden, that is, the Palace of Hell,
according to this the Goths sacrificed to him not only the Vulgar sort of
People, but Princes and Kings, nay, some of their lesser Gods, while living, as
will afterward appear. And they believed that after death they were to go into
Wodens Hall, and there drink Ale with him, and his Companions, in the Skulls of
their Enemies. To this end they imagined a certain Goddess called DYSER,
employed by Woden, to convey the Souls of the Valiant into his drunken
Paradise. And methinks I see the Danish King, LOATH BROCK, in his Fur-Leather
Breeches (for so his name imports) in as good Verses as Ale could inspire,
hugging himself with the hopes of Full-pots in the World to come.

(...). Wormius.

We have stood true to Snick and Snee,
And now I laugh to think,
In Wodens Hall there Benches be,
Where we may sit and drink.
There we shall Tope our bellies-full
Of Nappy-Ale in full-brim'd Skull.
And as if he were impatient till he arrived at this Immortal drinking, where
like a Good Fellow, he doubts not but to bear up for the first place, hear what
breathings and pantings he has after it, and how his bowels yearn to be at it.

(...). Regner.

Methinks I long to end,
I hear the Dyser call;
Which Woden here does send,
To bring me to his Hall.
With Asians there in highest Seat,
I merrily will quaff,
Past-hours I care not to repeat,
But when I die I Will laugh.
Having given you a taste of their Heaven, and the Joys thereof, you shall next
hear what their Hell was; we are like to find little good eating or drinking
there, a very uncomfortable place to the Saxons. Thus it is;

They supposed a Goddess Hell, which name we yet retain to signify the place of
Punishment, who by Woden received Dominion over the Infernal Regions. To her
were conveyed the Souls of such as were not designed for the Blessings of the
other Paradise. What they were, and what miserable attendance they had assigned
them by this Inhospitable Goddess, according to their Edda, is as follows.

Hell tastade hann i Niflheim og ollum Sottdaudum Monum med og Elledaudum hun a
thar mykia Bolstad og eru Garder hennar forhonar haffer og grindur storar Eliud
ver heitur salut hennar hungur diskur Sultur kniffur Ganglate heiter hennar
Chreell gunglott Awbatt. Fallande forrad Chrokulout kor Seeng Blikande bol
Arsale hennar hun er bia halff enn halff med horunds lit thui er hun andken
Helldur gnupleit og grimleit.

He (that is, WODEN) sent Hell into Nifleheim, and gave her power over nine
Worlds, that she should distribute places among them who were sent unto her,
namely, those that died of Diseases or Old age. There she has many high Towns
and great strong Cullices, her Palace is called Eliud, her Dishes Hunger, her
Knife, Sultur, Want. Her Serving-man Ganglate, that is, Slow-back, her
Waiting Woman Gaugiot, that is, Lazy, her Threshold Falland forrad, that is,
Steep destruction, her Bed Ror, that is, Pining-sickness, her Blankets Blicand
bol, that is, shining Curse. Hell her self on one side is Blew, on the other
the color of a Mans-skin, all over she looks fierce and dismal, so that she
may easily be known.

This was the place assigned for all who died not in Battle, but staid till
Sickness and Old age carried them away. And we see that their punishment is
much proportionable to the way of their idle living, hunger, lazy Servants, and
lingering sickness.

We read in the Danish History of one Harald Hildetand, who took great pains to
avoid coming to this place, for being blind, lame, and Bedridden, and fearing
that he might die either through his sickness or Age, he commanded himself to
be carried into Battle in his Chariot, where he died with these hopes, that
lifting but a finger might be construed fighting, and might bring him to Wodens
Hall. The Edda has these words.

Odinn heitur all Fader thui hanner fader alira guda, hann heiter og Walfader
thui hanns oska Syner eru aller their er I vall falla Cheim Skipar hann
wallholl og wingolff og heita their tha Einheriar.

Odin is called All fader, because he is Father of all the Gods, and Walfader,
that is, the Father of Slaughter, because they are his beloved Sons who fall in
Battle, whom he takes to himself into his Palace, called Walholl, and Wingolf,
where they are called Einheriar, that is, the only Hero's.

Thus we see, what we read of the Scythians in Roman and Greek Authors, is
found true of the Saxons who descended from them, who bred up in the same
Religion, could not but equal them in Valor, and let History speak never so
much in the praise of the Scythians, as to their contempt of Death, the same or
greater Honor is due to our Ancestors, who so much despised all other deaths,
besides dying in the Field, that they gave them the Nickname of Kerlina dond,
and established the honor of Fighting well with the rewards of another World.

Besides this place of Punishment, that I have spoken of, they had another for
perjured Persons, Robbers, Murderers, and such like Malefactors, who deserved
more active and pungent Tortures. These were sent to a place where one Nidhogg
Commanded, a most ingenious contriver of all sorts of Torments, who dressed them
up according to the qualities of their Offenses, boiling some, roasting others,
etc. with great exactness proportioning their punishments to the demerit of
their Offenses.

But to return to WODEN, He is said, as to his form and visage, to have been of
a cheerful and pleasant Countenance, to his Friends merry, jocund, and
facetious; of such admirable Eloquence and sweetness of discourse, that he
charmed the Hearers, and forced belief. To his Enemies he was fierce, and by a
certain kind of Magic, would take away their senses, and strike Panick-fears
into them. In his Conflicts with them, by certain charms he could blunt the
edges of their Swords, that his own Soldiers, without either Shield or Armor,
like ravening Wolves or Mad-dogs, would overrun, slay and make havoc of them,
without danger to themselves; And this sort of furious Onset was called
Berserker; besides, he had such an admirable way of deceiving the sight, that
he could transform himself into various shapes. Sometimes, as though he held
his breath, he would fling his Body on the ground, which there lying as dead
would turn into various figures, sometimes of a Bird, sometimes of a Fish,
sometimes a Serpent. When he awaked, he would constantly aver he had been in
foreign Countries, and had exact knowledge of what passed in them.

He could squench Fires, raise Tempests, stop Inundations, and with one word
call up Winds at his pleasure.

He had two Ravens whom he taught the use of Language, who flying into far
distant places, would bring back true intelligence of new Affairs. This Fable
the Edda thus interprets.

Hraffnat their sitia a Urlum hans og seigia t eitu honum oll tydende thang et
their heyra og sia their heita suo hugin og Munni. Cha sender hann umm daga ad
fiuga umm heim a lann og koma their astur ad dagver dat ma ale that aff verdut
hann margra Cydenda viis thuit kalla menn hann hraffnagud.

Two Ravens sitting on his shoulders, whisper in his ears all new Occurrences
they either hear or see. One is called Hugtnn, that is, the Mind, the other
Munni, that is, Memory. Odin sends forth these every day betimes, that they
should fly the World over, and at Dinnertime return. By these he receives
information, and therefore he is called Rafnagud, that is, the God of Ravens;
From hence the old Danish Kings bore in their Escutcheons two Ravens, and
Hungar, the first Dane that entered England, in his Royal Standard carried this
Bird, which Standard upon that account called Reafan, was thought impossible to
be taken, and drew much People after it no doubt, as consecrated to this
Rafnagud, or God of the Ravens.

WODEN (says the same Author) introduced the way of composing Verses in
numbers, and such Rythms as are now used in the Teutonick Dialect, differing in
this point from all other Languages in the World whatsoever, for that the last
words of the Verses answer to one another exactly in sound. And this he did
with such pleasing cadences, that mixing them in his common discourse, he
wonderfully allured the Hearers, and is reputed the Inventer of Poetry among
the Saxons, and the Founder of that Tribe called Scalders, which, like the
Bardi among the Britains, made it their business to set forth in Verses, and
sing to the People the noble Actions of their Progenitors.

Tacitus of the Germans says, They celebrate in old Verses, which among them
is the only way of Annals and Records, their God Tuisto, and his Son Mannus,
the beginners and Founders of their Nation. The same custom the Saxons and
Getes first used in Scandia, as Mr. Sheringham learnedly proves, who when any
Person had done some notable service for his Country, they composed his History
briefly in Verses, and ingraved them upon Rocks and massy Stones, in great and
legible Characters, such as the Gothic are.

This Custom of ingraving upon Stone they brought with them into Germany, as
appears from many Inscriptions, few whereof are now legible, in Denmark,
Swedeland and Saxony. I shall only instance in one, which time has not quite
defaced. About the City Visby, says Wormius, there is a stony Rock which
preserves Wormius.
the Memory of the Entrance of the Goths, in these Characters; (...).

In the Year two thousand five hundred, entered HELGO with his Goths.

Saxo Grammaticus writes thus of the Getes in Denmark;

The Atchievments of their Ancestors they composed in Verse in their Mother
Tongue, and took care to engrave them in Rocks and Stones.

And the Archbishop of Upsal, giving an account from what Authors he composed
the History of his Country, has these words; From the beginning of the Gothic
Kingdom, there was always found in the People a great ambition after Honor
and Glory, wherefore they composed Verses and Rithms in their own Tongue of the
worthy Deeds of their Ancestors, and frequently sung them upon great
Festivals, that they might invite their Youth to the emulation of their
Actions, and that these Verses by length of time might not perish, they took
care to engrave them upon Stones and Rocks, from whence I have taken much
matter in composing my History.

The Character wherewith they engraved were called Runick (the reason whereof
shall afterward be shown) and were made use of by Woden, not only for
Inscriptions, but Magical Charms and Imprecations. These were called (...),
Caldran, (...), Seid, (...), Liod, (...), Fiolkinga. By which Charms, says
Sturlaeson, the name of Othin and his Asians grew so famous, that his Enemies
dreaded his Power, and his Friends highly esteemed his Alliance.

Thus we see that those Characters which were before nothing but the usual
Letters of the Getes in Scandia, after their removal into the North-west parts
of Europe were made use of by Woden their Leader to wrap up his mysterious
Incantations in, because he observed in their make, something strange, and fit
for his purpose. And for this reason, after the Faith of CHRIST was received,
the Runick Character (because it was especially used in Charms and Enchantments
by the Saxons) began to grow so far out of Credit that many spurred on with too
much Zeal, not only destroyed such bewitching Fooleries where they found them,
but burnt, without distinction, all sorts of Books written in that Letter, and
defaced Monuments and old Inscriptions for no other reason, but because they
bore the Character, by which means the Gothic History has received much
injury, says Mr. Sheringham.

Yet nevertheless, the dotage of the Vulgar on these uncouth Letters, and the
opinion, they contained in them a certain power and energy (which apprehension
yet remains among the Simple in their Charms at this day) maintained its
ground so long after Christianity it self, that, as Loccenius witnesses,
Sigfrid an English Bishop thought it necessary to have them altered, which he
did by the assistance of the Pope, who utterly banished them Swedeland, in the
year ML, and substituted the Latin Character in their room. The same usage they
found in Spain under Alphonsus King of Castile and Navar, in the year MLXXXVI,
and were at last finally condemned in the Council of Tholoun, in the year MCXVI.

From the same abuse of them Vulphilas a Bishop of the Goths, rejecting the Old
Runick, invented a new Character, which he used in the translation of the
Bible, and Mr. Sheringham supposes, not without reason, that our Ancestors,
following his example, for the rendering the Scriptures, invented the English
Saxon Character. For hitherto (says he) could I find nothing writ in that
Character (meaning the English Saxon) before the Faith received, nor have I
learnt that those letters were ever in use in Germany; So that till it appears
to the contrary, I may very well think they were invented in England.

Certainly, the English Saxons in the Cimbrick Chersoness, whence they
proceeded, used altogether the Runick Character, because all the Inscriptions
there, produced by Wormius, not one is written in the English Saxon Character.
Nor is it improbable, that after the Faith received, the introducing of a new
way of Writing, making the Old one less intelligible, and consequently more
mysterious (as we always admire those things we least understand) a certain
sort of Impostures taking advantage of this change, and being acquainted with
the ancient Delusions, had a far greater opportunity of putting tricks upon the
People in those Characters, which now remained as a Secret only among the
Learned. Hence the Saxons, in this Age, (which witnesses the change was great)
never mention the word Runick without horror and veneration, and what before
was nothing but their plain Alphabet, is now become all Charm and Magic, and
the old way of writing their Mother Tongue termed casting a Figure. These
Impostures they called by the name of (...), that is, Runcrafly, and their
Incantations (...), that is, Runstaves, or Runverses.

It will not be unpleasant, particularly, to relate by what means, and from
what Original the so much admired Runick gained so great veneration among our
Ancestors, as also what especial virtues and effects they attributed to it;
how from small beginnings and the height of Paganism it was derived from Age
to Age, still increasing even under that light, by which other Superstitions
seemingly greater were utterly dispersed.

The word Runa is derived by Wormius from Ryn or Ren, both almost of the same
Wormius (...) Runic. cap. 1.
signification; Ren is as much as a Cut, or Channel of water, Ryn signifies a
Furrow in the Earth, drawn by a Plough. Now as the Greeks called their (...),
from their being drawn in Lines, and the Latins their Letters or liter as quasi
lineatur as, so the Ancient Getes or Saxons named their Characters Runes from
Ryn, a Furrow, because they were plowed-out, as it were, with the Pen, and
drawn into long Lines, and the figure of the Character it self, besides the
analogy of this derivation found in other Languages, highly favors this
opinion, so that at first Rune among the Getes signified no more than a bare
Letter or Character.

Sir Henry Spelman, in his Epistle to Wormius concerning this matter, derives
it Sir Henry Spelman.
from the Saxon pyne, which signifies a Mystery or hidden thing, and of this
opinion is Mr. Sheringham also, who endeavors with new Additions to strengthen
it, to which end he cites Johannes Magnus, who, in speaking of FILEMAR, has
these words; Making inquiry, says he, into the Customs of his Country, he
sound among his I'eople a certain sort of Cunning Women, called Adeltunae, for
in the Gothic Tongue Runa signifies an Art, sometimes particularly the Art
Magic, from whence at this day there are many Stones in Gothland in Gothic
Characters, called Runasten, hence we may see, says Mr. Sheringham, that the
Gothic Characters took name from the signification of the word, not the figure
of the letter.

But, by the leave of so Worthy a Person, I cannot receed from the former
derivation of Wormius, for Wormius was not ignorant of the word pine,
signifying a Mystery, and how the Saxons and Goths pretended to do miraculous
things by the operation of their Characters; But I believe the word pine,
signifying a Mystery, is not the primitive, but derived from Ryn, a Furrow, by
which words the Ancient Getes called their Letters, and because by the power of
those Letters their Priests and Wizzards pretended to do miraculous things,
therefore it came to pass that the Letters themselves, called Ryns, were used
to signify a Mystery, and Runa, Art Magic, so that Adeltuna is nothing
properly, but a Learned or literate Woman, Runasten, a Learned piece of work,
Runet, a Learned copy of Verses, all which words in succeeding time, from the
deceit of such who imposed upon the People, were taken in an ill sense, so that
Adelruna came to express a Witch, Runasten, a Charm or Talismanical figure,
Runet, an Incantation.

Neither does the Law, made by Woden, and cited by Mr. Sheringham, to confirm
Sr. Henry Spelman's Opinion, in the least destroy Wormius his derivation, it is
this; Oden hafwet thenna Lagh uthi Sweriges Riike stichtat at all dode skulle
sampt medh all Siine Agodelac och loosorer besinnerligha medh peningar
upbrande blifwa meenandes theras tilkomst these vehage lighare blifwa Gudhomen
effter some eelden meera aghodelar medh thecasdoda kroppar fortarde Men till even
ewigh aminuelse skulle the ofwan pa the Ronuhzligha och Forsteligha
begraffningar forsambla stoora Iordhoghar och hwilke myckitt got hafwa after
sigh latit them upreeste the hoga Runasteenar ofwer Siina begraffuingar.

Woden enacted a Law, that the Dead should be burnt with all their Movables,
especially their Money, deeming that they would be more welcome to the Gods,
with whose Messenius Gothicus ex Joh. Mart. de Antiq Up. fall. cap. 3.
Corpse the fire consumed most Goods. As likewise he ordained, that over the
Graves of Kings and Great Men, they should raise huge heaps of Earth for an
everlasting remembrance; and over the Sepulchers of such who had performed
great Atchievments, they should erect high Staves inscribed with Runick
Characters.

This was the only primitive use of the Runick Writing, as well as all others,
namely, to preserve the Memories of Great Persons, and so deliver their Deeds
to Posterity. But when the People were once persuaded, that such Stones set up
had power to keep off the Enemy, merely by the virtue and force of the
Characters engraven on them, as likewise the Songs composed in the Honor of
their Ancestors, and the praise of their Virtues, had not only force to stir
up Virtue in the Hearers, but by merely wearing them in Battle, would render a
Man fortunate in fight, and invulnerable. Then it was, the word Runa
(signifying before nothing but the Getick Character) came to imply Charm and
Incantation, and the words Runasten and Adelrunae, to have evil significations.

This change of the use of the Characters, from plainly writing the sense of
things to form mysterious Incantations, is, by some, attributed to WODEN,
wherefore they call him in this sense Runhotdi, that is, the Inventer of the
Run; But the Runick Character was long before his time, if we may believe the
Edda, cited by Wormius, which attributes the invention of it to the Gods, the
delivery to one Fimbul, and the manner of Ingraving, that is, the use of it in
Magic, to Woden. The ancient Verses in the Edda run thus:

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Thou know the Runs and loose Characters
RADNA STAFI.
The great Characters, the strong Characters
STILA STAFI,
Which the Gods DIASTRI made,
Old FIMBUL Illustrated,
And WODEN Ingraved.
Other places there are which attribute the first delivery of these Letters to
FIMBUL; what he was is scarce guessed at, and is beyond my purpose to examine,
it is sufficient to know that the word Runa in its proper sense, signifying
Letters, is of great Antiquity and higher than Woden, and is derived in all
probability from Ryn, a Furrow, but the abusive acceptance of it for Magic,
is more modern, begun in the time of Woden, or thereabouts, when the People
were persuaded by their Priests and Imposters, that the Characters themselves
had a secret power and operation in them to work Miracles.

Thus we read of the Ancient Danes, in Saxo Grammaticus, what strange belief
they had in the power of their Runes. Whosoever (says he) devoted himself to
the ruin of his Enemy, or would preserve his Fortunes from Hostile force, made
himself first a Pole or long Spear of Hazle, or other kind of Wood, on the top
of which he fixed the head of a Horse, which before, in solemn manner, he had
sacrificed to the Infernal Gods, placing it so upon the Spear, that with open
Jaws, and grinning Visage, it might terrify the Enemy; This done there were
Runick Characters engraven upon it, and then it was set up, with many direful
forms of Imprecation, in such places where the approach of the Enemy was
suspected.

These Runes our Ancestors set up against the Enemies, others they had
otherwise prepared, which had virtue to stop the course of Rivers and Tides, to
raise, and then allay Tempests, to give Winds, to cause Rain, to cure Diseases,
to charm Agues, Headache and Toothache, to force Love, and such like, the
invention of all Wormins.
which Delusions (too frequently yet used) is attributed to WODEN, who is said,
by these Arts, to have deprived one Rinda, a young Girl, of all her reason and
senses.

But the chief virtues of the Runa, take, as they are mustered up together in
the Edda, and there spoke in the person of one of Wodens Followers.

Liod eg thau kann et kannat Chiodans kona og Manskis megut.
I know those Verses which the Wife of Thiodan knows, and Manskis her Son.
Dialp heiter eitt eunn than their hialpa mun bin sokum og sottum og suttum
giorv-ollum.
The chief Help it is called, which will help thee in all cases of Griefs and
Adversities.
Chad kann eg annad ex thorfa Ita fyner their ed bilia lakner lisfa.
That 2, I know, which the Sons of men want who would live Physicians.
Chad kann eg 3. eff mier berdur thorff mykel (hapts) bid myna heiptmogu.
That 3, I know, if I have need to quell my Enemies.
Eggiar eg deyffe minna andstota byta them bopn nie biclar.
I dull the edges of my Adversaries, that neither their force or fraud can hurt
me.
Chad kann eg Siordn eff mier fyrdar bera bond ad boglimum.
That 4, I know if men lay me in Chains.
Suo eg gel at eg ganga masprettur mier aff fotunim fiotur en aff boudum hapt.
I so sing that I can walk, the Shackles fall from my feet, and Manacles from
my hand.
Chad'kann eg s. eff eg sie aff fare skoften fiein i folk bada flygur bann suo
stint at eg Stoddigah eff ek hann stonumm off sek.
That 5, I know if I perceive a Spear sent with Hostile force, flying in the
Battle, I can provide it shall not go with greater force than I please.
Chad kann eg 6. eff mig seerer thegn a Rotumm kashidat og chann hal er mig
heipta kuedut thann eta meinheidur enn mig.
That 6, I know if a man wound me with Incantations, or in anger Curse me, the
evil shall fall on him, not on me.
Chad kann eg hid 7, eff eg fie haffan Ioga sai um Sessmogum brennrat bann sua
breitt at eg honumm biargigah thann kann eg gali but ad gala.
That 7, I know if I see a House all on fire, the flame shall diffuse no
further than it is in my power to stop it, this Charm I know how to sing:
Chad kann eg Attunda et ollum n et nyt Samlegt ad nema huers hatur ber med
hildfings Sonum thad kann eg beeta bratt.
That 8, I know which is necessary for all to learn, who are looked on as
odious in the eyes of Men, them I can cure.
Chad kann eg 9. eff mig Nauder umm ffendur ad biarga fare mynn aff mynu bind
eg kyrre bage a og suesie allan See.
That 9, I know if I have occasion to save a Ship, I still the Winds on the
water, and calm the Sea.
Chad kann eg hid thunda eg eff fie tunrider I Ieika Iopte A eg suo bynk ad
their biller fara sinna heim hama sinna heim hugo.
That 10, I know if I see Witches flying in the Air, I provide they shall miss
their aim, and lose their designs.
Chad kann eg hid ellesta eff eg skall till orusfu Ieida Ianghine under rauder
eg giel enn their med Ryke fara heiler hill dat till he let hilde fra Koma
their heiler huadan.
That 11, I know if I send my old Acquaintance to War, I enchant their Armor,
they go safe to War, return safe, and go every where safe.
Chad kann eg hid 12. eff eg sie a tree uppe CClafa birgilna suo eg rist eg I
Runumm fae at la geingur Gume og meeler bidmig.
That 12, I know if I see on the top of Wood a Ghost walking, so I cut it out
and receive it in the Run, that, that Man shall come and speak with me.
Thad kann eg hit 13. eff thegnum ungumm berpa skol eg batne a munathet falla
thot et hann I folk kome hungrat sath fur fyrer hionum.
That 13, I know if I sprinkle a young Boy with water he shall not die in War,
although he goes to Battle that man shall not fall by the Sword.
Thad kann eg hid fiortanda effeg skal fyrda lide tella tyffa fyrer Asa og
Alffa eg kann allra skill far kann ofnetur suo.
That 14, if I am to tell the kinds of Families, I know all the distinctions of
the Asi and Fani, few of the Vulgar know so much.
Thad kann eg hid 15. et gol Thyodreyer Duergur fyrer Deliyngs Dyrumm Aff gol
hann Alurum eun Alfumm frama hyggio hropto ty.
That 15, I know what Thiodreyrer sung before the Doors of Delling he sung
strength to the Asi, promotion to the Fani, and wisdom to Woden.
Thad kann eg hid 16. eff eg bil hins Suinna man's hofa ged allt og gaman huge
eg huerss huytarmre konu og sny eg hennar ollumm seffa.
That 16, I know if I would enjoy the love and society of a fair Virgin, I
change the mind and alter the affection.
Thad kann eg hid 17. ad mig mun saint fyrrask eg man binga man Iioda theirra
muntu Lodfaffner banut bera tho sie their god eff thu getur nyt eff thu nemur
thorf eff thu thiggur.
That 17, I know (how he loves to dwell upon his comfortable knowledge) that
the Maid will not easily for sake me; These Verses Lodfaffher are perhaps known
to you, much good may they do you, they are useful if you learn them, and
necessary if you can get them.
Thad kann eg hid 18. et eg mefa kennig Men me mauns konu alit ex betra eirn et
umm kann thad fyiger Iioda lokumm nema theirre eirure ex mig arm ber eda Mine
sister sie.
That 18, I know I shall teach no Virgin (still on the same key) or Women
(every thing is best that but one knows, this is the close of the Verses) but
she that holds me in her Arms, or at least she must be my Sister.
These Runns may be called the delight and pleasure of our Ancestors with
which they were so much taken, that Wormius observes they gave themselves names
from them; Hence comes Guthrun or Gothic Runn, Sigtrun, victorious Runn,
Runulpher, helping Runn, Rungeir, warlike Run; So Women's names, Solruna,
Sigruna, Dfruna, Auruua, Frederuna, and such like, of different signification
according to the different opinions they had of the Runn.

WODEN, as I have intimated before, was the Inventer of Poetry, and the Father
of the Scaldri or Scaldi, what they were and how esteemed you may read in
Loccenius.

Although they (meaning the Northern Nations) were not so well polished as now
Antiqui Sueogoth, cap. 15.
adays in humane literature, yet at their leisure, and oftentimes in the Camp
it self, they spent no little time in writing the Actions of their Ancestors,
and singing of them in Verse, by which they gained great reputation to their
Mother Tongue. This was the business of the Scaldi, or as others call them
Scaldri, as the Poets of that Age in Verses now sung about, are expressly
called from the word Skal, as the Bards of the Gauls and Britains.

To this Custom Sedulius a Christian Poet had respect in the exordium of his
Verses,

-- Tragicoque boatu
Ridiculoque Getae seu qualibet art canendi.
Either in Tragic, or in Comic verse,
Or any other songs the Getes rehearse.
Hence among the ancient Scandians Skalving signifies a Poetic rapture, and
Scalda, a Book of the Art of Poetry, for it was the custom of those Poets not
only with their Pens but their Voices also to celebrate the Actions of their
Progenitors, to the end to stir up in their Youth and their Posterity an
honest emulation of their Virtues.

The Scaldi were commonly of the chief Blood of their Country, oftentimes of
the Kings Council and his attendance in War, that with their own eyes they
might be witnesses of great Actions, and not taking them upon trust, might be
better able with truth to deliver them to Posterity. Those things which in the
Verses of the Ancients we find wrapped up in Fables show only the genius of the
Authors, who accounted it a piece of Art to hide plain Truths under the shadow
of words, by which colors as a pleasant bait they thought to recommend their
works to the Reader.

Besides the famous Actions of Kings and Great Persons composed in Verse, these
Scaldi drew out Genealogies of their Forefathers, as it appears in the
Chronicle of Olaus, where there is mention made of one of them. Dc taldi han
longfeda til Semingh, He wrote their Progeny to Seming; and again, Itui
Kuediero Uptald xxx. langfedga Rognwals, In this Verse are reckoned up thirty
descents of Rognwall; upon this account these Poets were in great favor with
Princes, and were liberally provided for in their Courts.

This Art of Poetry Woden brought from Asia, as besides other Arguments the
very name of it sufficiently shows. The ancient Scaldi called it Asamal, that
is, the Language of the Asians.

Stephanius, in his Preface to Saxo Grammaticus, gives this account of it; The
Old Danish Tongue which was used in Rithms, the Ancients called (...), Asamal,
that is, Asian, or the Tongue of the Asians, because Woden brought it from Asia
into Denmark, Norway, Swedeland, and other Northern Countries. From its
sweetness of its running it was called (...). Odins Miod, that is, Odins Mead,
and from its copiousness (...), Odins AEge, that is Odins Sea.

And as Woden was the Father of Arts among the Saxons, so likewise was he their
God of War. When they went to Battle they offered their Vows and Sacrifices to
him, and represented him in Armor Cap-a-pe, with a Sword and Buckler, as the
Romans their Mars.

By the Ancient Scaldri a Headpiece is called Suotius hatte, that is, Wodens
hat, a Breast Plate, Skurtur Odin, Wodens doublet, a Sword Uidris vonder,
Wodens whip, and he himself is called Sigmunder, or the giver of Victory, Audun
the Destroyer, Drepsvarpur the fatal Slinger, Baleigur the Lord of Flames, from
his flaming Sword: For a Sword by the Scaldri is called Othin Edur, Wodens
fire. To him was consecrated the Fourth day of the Week, called by us
Wednesday, and because the same day by the Romans was named Mercuries day,
therefore some who would make an anology between the German and Roman Gods,
imagine Mercury and Woden to be all one, as likewise Jupiter and Thor, Venus
and Frigga, and this is the opinion of Pontanus and others. And it is a wonder
to see how they who have hitherto written of the German Gods, do miserably
puzzle and torment themselves in solving the difficulty, as if it were an
unheard of thing among the Heathens to confound the Names and Offices of their
Gods.

Paulus Diaconus, cited by Pontanus, bath these words; Uodan, who is also named
(...). 1. cap. 9. de Gest. Longob.
Suodan (from whence some think the word God came) is the same whom the Romans
call Mercury, and is worshipped by all the German Nations as a God. By which it
appears that it is not by chance, that the day called in English Wednesday is
in the same Idiom named Goensdach and Evodensdach, and by the Danes, Odensdag
or Oensdag, and he tells us of a Statue of Mercury worshipped in Friezland, and
pulled down by Willibrord who taught there the Gospel.

To this Mr. Sheringham opposes the Authority of Saxo Grammaticus; Those Gods
which our Nations worshipped were not the same with those of the Ancient
Romans, N. st. Dan. l. 6.
called Jupiter and Mercury, as appears plainly from the names of the
Week-daies. For those days which with us are named from Thor and Woden, by
them are called Jupiters day and Mercuries day. If therefore we take, according
to their acceptance Thor for Jupiter, and Woden for Mercury, then must Jupiter
be Mercuries Son, for among us Thor is accounted the Son of Woden. Since
therefore the Romans contrariwise made Mercury the Son of Jupiter, it remains,
allowing their way that Thor is a different God from Jupiter, and Woden from
Mercury; But I think this knot may eatier be untied by the Roman Authors.

Casar in his description of the Germans, writes, that they acknowledged no
other Gods but those by whose influence they were especially assisted, viz. the
Sun, Moon, and Fire, and as for other Gods they had not so much as the name.

Tacitus, who lived some years after, when the Romans and Germans were better
acquainted, reckons Mercury, Mars, Isis and Hertha in the number whom he
calls Terra Matter, the reconciling of which Authors, as it is easy, so will it
open the whole controversy.

Caesar when he says, the Germans had no other Gods but the Sun, Moon, and
Fire, is not to be understood as if he spoke in general; for, without doubt,
they received not their Goddess Hertha between his and Tacitus days, but he
meant they had no other Roman Gods, which he implies when he says, As for
other Gods, they had not so much as heard of their names, which hinteth at
foreign Gods, not Gods of their Country.

Likewise Tacitus mentions only those Gods which they had common with the
Romans, as appears when he names Hertha, he presently calls her Terra Matter, a
known Goddess worshipped at Rome.

Now, as in the days of Caesar it cannot be supposed that the Germans had much
knowledge of the Romans, so when they came to be acquainted with them, as
probably they might before the time Tacitus wrote, then it is reasonable to
think, that like other Nations they conformed themselves in great measure to
the Roman worship, ascribing the virtues and operations of Roman Deities to
their own, and by an obsequious analogy, fetching the offices and employments
of their Native Gods to comply better with those more glorious Idols they
received; so that it is no wonder if they sometimes saluted Woden with the name
of Mercury, Thor with Jupiter, their Frigga with Venus, Crodo with Saturn, but
that they were originally the same Gods, or that the Germans learnt their
Woden, Thor and Frigga in other names, from Mercury, Jupiter and Venus of the
Romans, is against all reason and History to be believed.

A notable Example of this their conforming to the Romans in their Names and
Offices of their Gods, after they had learned from them the pomp and splendor
of worship, and knew how to deck and adorn their Temples, will appear in one
memorable Instance as it is reported in Northern Histories.

They had a Temple, says my Author, all wrought with Gold, in which were
exposed Pontamus M. Adamus.
to view the Statues of three of their principal Gods, the chief of them was
Choar or Thor. He was placed on a Couch, with a Crown on his head and Scepter
in his hand, having the other two, Woden and Fricco, on each side of him, yet
at such distance, as it might appear it was he from whom the Couch was
especially intended. Him they worshipped as Jupiter, whose Dominion is in the
Air, ascribing to him the power of raising Thundrings and Lightnings, Wind and
Rain. To him they prayed for Fair weather, and increase of their Fruits. Woden
on the right hand was in Armor, and to him they addressed for success in War,
and Victory over their Enemies: To Fricco, on the other side, for Peace and
Tranquillity, Pleasure and Plenty, and this Idol was represented with a Bow and
Arrows, and a great Priapus.

Woden Shor Friga


In the order and placing these Gods, who sees not that the Saxons had more
respect to the Roman Customs than their own.

First, whereas before they represented their Idols standing, and set them upon
Pillars and Obelisks, now they lay them upon Couches and Beds, exactly after
the Roman posture.

Secondly, we see the chief Seat is given to Thor, who takes place of Woden,
according to the Saxon account, his Father. Yet because Thursday with the
Romans was Jupiters day their chief God, and comes between Wodensday and
Friday, therefore is Thor created Jupiter, and placed in the middle, and
represented with a Crown and Scepter like Jupiter, and the Attributes of
Jupiter given to him, whereas formerly Woden and not Thor was the same to the
Saxons, as Jupiter to the Romans; So that we see Woden is deposed by his Son
Thor in the new Saxon Theology, as Saturn was by his Son Jupiter in the Old
Roman.

Lastly, Fricco, who with the Ancient Saxons was taken for Wodens Wife, and
adored as a Goddess only, is now made with a great Priapus, and we know not of
what Sex to take her, having the Members of both. Sometimes they worshipped her
as a God, as she carried a Bow and Arrows, sometimes as a Goddess, as she wore
a Female Vesture.

This is perfectly the Armata Venus of the Romans, who took this Notion of her
from the Greeks, who, promiscuously, write her (...) as well as (...), making
her an Hermophrodite Venus; So that we must not wonder that the Saxons coming
acquainted with the Roman Theology, like other Nations in great measure
conformed to it. For the analogy between the Gods of both People, as it now
stands, appears nothing but a modern compliance of the Saxon Priests with the
Romans, and of no higher date than the mutual knowledge both Nations had of
each other. Neither ought it to confound the History of each others Theology,
as to the genuine original Offices and Names of their distinct Deities; And if
there appear any essential likeness between both Nations, as to the order,
number, and coincidence of some of their Idols, in some circumstances with one
another, we must not think the Saxon custom sprang from the Roman more than
the Roman from the Saxon; But it arose from some Third and ancienter People,
from whom both taking pattern in many things drew the same lines and figures.

The Northern Writers mention many of Wodens Companions, called (...), Diat,
that is, Gods, some whereof were Deified by Woden himself before his death,
others afterward, the names of which, because they are summarily delivered by
Arn-Jonas as he found them in ancient Writings and Monuments, and may possibly
serve to interpret several Names yet remaining among us, I shall not think
tedious to set down. They are in number fifteen.

Odin, otherwise Uggur, Thor, Uugue or Uuguar, Freger, Bedar, Balldur, Tyr,
Niordur, Bragie, Hoddur, Forsete, Look, Uale, Uullur, Haettir.

As also Asian Women that came along with him, called Asiniur, who attained
Divine Honor.

Frygg one of Wodens Wives, Freya the other, Fulla, Snotra, Gerdur, Gesson,
Gua, Loffu, Skade, Iorde, Idun, Ilmur, Bill, Niorun vel Iorun, Hlin, Hnoss,
Nanna, Rindur, Scofn, Sol, Saga, Sygin or Sygity, Uer, Uar, Thrudur, Ran,
Hildur, Gendul, Hlock, Mist or Niss, Skegul, Hrind or Rund, Hrist or Rik,
Should, Nipt, Dis or Disa.

The memory of these Women our Age still retains in their proper Names; As
Gerdut, likewise Thorgirdur, compounded of Thor and Gerdut, so Iduii, Ioruii,
Sygny, Thrudur, Hildur.

Besides these, many of Wodens Sons or Nephews; as Balldur, Meile, Uiidar,
Nephur, Uale, Ale, Thor, Hilldulfur, Hermodur, Sigge, Skiodur, in the Edda
Skioldur, Assabragur, Dlldner, Itrekur, Hemdallur, Semingur or Hemingar,
Hauddar, Brage, Cunilanghen, Cnidrid, Bierii, Hlodid, Hardveor, Sonnungur,
Uingthor, Rymur.

To which I may add out of the Edda, according to Rossenius his Translation,
his Sons Uegdeg and Begdeg; some of these Princes were renowned for particular
qualifications. Woden excelled in wisdom and the Art Magic; Thor is commended
for Spirit; Baldur for Beauty, from whose name a common Flower, but of
beautiful Colors, is called Balden-braa, that is, Balders-brow.

Suenonius, in his Notes to Saxo Grammaticus, supposes that there were three
different Wodens; The first and ancientest was called the Asian, and in
distinction Odin hin Gamble, that is, Woden the Elder, He was the Son of
Saturn. The second was Upsalensis, and among the Swedes had a splendid Temple,
shining with Gold, built to his Honor; He is also called an Asian, but was a
Scythian born, these two, Saenonius thinks, are confounded in History. The
third was called Mithoden, that is, the middle Odin, of whom Saxo Grammaticus
makes mention, he, whilst the other Woden was abroad in the World took occasion
to feign himself a God, but at the others return, trusting more to his Heels
than his Cheating tricks, he fled into Phaeonia, where hoping to hide himself
he was slain by the Rabble.

Whether there be any truth in this Conjecture we cannot determine, certainly
the History of Hengist and Horsa would require some such salvo, who (according
to Bid and Malmsbury) derived themselves in the third degree from Woden, which
if true, necessarily implies there was one WODEN at least, if not two, later in
time than him we have hitherto spoken of, to which opinion Verstegan inclines.

But when we consider, that it was the usual way of Heathen Poets not to make
their Hero's above three descents from Jupiter himself, Sic a Jove tertius
Ajax, says Ovid, why may not the same liberty be allowed to the Saxon Scaldi,
to flatter their Princes in placing their Names nigher their fountain of
Honor, the much admired Woden, who was the same to the Saxons as Jupiter to
the Greeks and Romans, and they gave him the like Titles. For as he was saluted
(...), Hominum pater atque Deorum, so Woden was styled by the Saxons, Fader
allra Gudanna og Mannguna, Father of Gods and Men.

I have given a larger Treatise of him, because he was, by far, the most
renowned of all their Idols; the words of the Edda are these.

Odinns er eedstur og ellstur Acanna hann radur ollumm hlutumm, og so sem onnur
Godinn eru Mattug tha thiona honum ell so sem born fodur.

WODEN is the highest and chief of the Asae, and governs all things, and
although the other Gods are powerful, yet they wait upon him as Children do on
their Fathers.

THOR, according to the Danish History, was the Son of Woden, and came with him
from Asia; hence he is called Asathor, that is, Thor the Asian, and from him
Thursday takes name. He was esteemed next in Honor to Woden, and to him they
sacrificed Men as the highest testimony of their devotion; he is written
sometimes Thaar, and has been thought by many to be the same with Taramis of
the Gauls, or Jupiter Tonans. Certain it is, whether from the similitude of
Name, or some other account, after the knowledge the Saxons had of the Romans,
he was generally taken in after Ages for Jupiter.

A memorable instance of this may be given out of an old Book of Saxon Homilies
in the public Library of Cambridge treating of the false Gods of the Gentiles.

An man thaes eardigende on tham iglande Creta Saturnus gehaten sydlic and
aelraeoth sua that he abat his sunus tha tha hi geborena thaeron and
unfaederlice macode heora flaesc him to mete he laefde sua theah aenne tolipe
theade he abit his brothre on aer the thaer Jovis gehaten hetol and thrymlic he
afligde his faeder of tham fore raede igland and old hine acthelle gif he him
come to. se Jovis thaes sua sthithe gal that he on his suster ge ifode seo aes
gehaten Juno suithe healic gyden heora dotra thaeron Minerva and Venus
thaforlag se faeder fullice buta and manega his magan manlice gethemde. thas
manfullan men aeron thata maerostan godas the tha haethenan orthothon ac se
sunu aes sua theah suithor ge ordod thon the faeder thaere on heora fulan
bigenge se Jovis is ar thorthost ealra thaera goda the tha haethenan haefdon on
heora geddylde. and he hatte thor bet thux summum. theodum thaton thata
deniscan leoda lufiath fithatost.

There was a Man in the Isle of Crete, named Saturn, of such a Cruel nature
that he devoured his own Sons as soon as they were born, and contrary to the
custom of other Fathers made their flesh his diet; But he suffered one to live
although he had devoured his Brothers, namely Jupiter, a Man of agreat and high
spirit. He drove his Father from the aforesaid Island, threatening to kill him
if he returned. He was so incontinent as to marry his own Sister Juno, who was
afterward esteemed a great Goddess; To these were born Minerva and Venus, both
of which, with many other Relations, their wicked Father incestuously polluted.
These wicked Men were the chiefest Gods to whom the Heathens gave Honor, but
the Son according to their filthy worship was had in greater veneration than
the Father. In their erroneous Religion he was especially the most honorable,
and by some Nations he is called Thor, and the Danes highly love him.

FRIGGA was the Wife of Woden, the Goddess of Love among the Saxons, her name
comes from (...), Frigon, signifying to love. Hence afterward she was worshipped
as Venus among the Romans. From her Friday takes name, what else concerns
her I have spoken before in Woden.

THISA, or DISA, the Wise of Thor, and Goddess of Justice, from her it is
probably thought that our Tuesday took name, as much as to say Thisday, the
Swedes and Danes call it Tiiszdag and Diiszgag, the Dutch Diissen-dach and
Dinghesdach, the Germans, Dinstag and Zinsztag, and according to these various
pronunciations many Originals are produced of the God or Goddess to which this
day was consecrated.

The English Saxon way of calling it Tuesday, as Pontanus says, seems to refer
to Teutates, the Germans name him Thaut, Dies, and Duth, and think him to be
Mercury; but then how comes his day to be before Wodens and Thors; Verstegan
will have him Tuisco, but without any authority or reason, as I have shown in
treating of Tuisco, it is gratis dictum and can never be proved, for allowing
that Tuisto, according to Caesar and Tacitus, was worshipped in especial manner
by the Germans as the Founder of their Nation, yet does it not follow he was
Verstegans Tuisco, or that he had a day set apart to him, the English Saxon
name of Tuesday as it is easily resolvable into Disdag, so where it agrees not
with the other Idioms it ought not to give rule to them. For this were fondness
to think that our way of pronunciation were only right, when we find all other
Saxon Nations differ from us, and agree in the main among themselves. The
Islanders name it Chiiszdag, and give this account of it;

TYR, the Son of Woden (the Genitive case of whose name is Tyrs or Tys by
contraction) for his Martial virtues and wisdom attained Divine Honors, to him
Sacrifices Wormius lib. 1. cap. 4.
were offered for Victory in battle or single combat, from him the Islanders
call the third day in the week Chiiszdag, and Arngrimus says he has found it
written Cyrzdag.

They who derive it from Disa or Thisa, the Goddess of Justice, write thus;
Among other Goddesses, Disa or Thisa the Wife of Thor was thought as fit to be
numbered as Wormius.
Frigga the Wife of Woden; From her some will have the third day of the Week
called Thiiszdag. At Upsall there were anniversary Rites called Tiiszating,
held in her Honor with great pomp and solemnity; from her a Town in Denmark,
called Thiseivelde took name, having adjoining to it a Spring and Fountain
dedicated to her.

The name Dinstag in High Dutch, and Dinghesdach in Low Dutch, Pontanus derives
from Dingen, signifying to determine Controversies, and adds that Thisday
Pontanus.
among the Danes comes by contraction from Ting, in their Tongue as much as a
Bench of Judicature, happily because the determination of Causes was referred
to this Goddess.

In like manner some derive Sunday, not from the Sun but the old German word
Sonen, to Judge, as it is found in an ancient Creed.

Thana chuinstie is it sonen nuekhe entitote.

From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

And Morner Versic. the fourth; Cs nahet gegender Suonotage, das got will
Suonen aile klage.

The Lords day draws nigh, wherein God will judge all things.

But to return to Tuesday, what was the Original name and derivation of it, or
whether it be rightly spelt Dinsdag, Tysdag or Tyrsdag, from Disa, Tyr or Ting,
is uncertain, but it seems to me that our way of writing it Tuesday is not so
ancient as any of the former, and appears of no longer date than the coming
of the Saxons into our parts, where the name of Teutates, or Theut, was much
celebrated.

They had also a Goddess named Eoster, whom I also suppose was of no higher
Antiquity, being the same as Astarte of the Gauls and Britains. Hence the
Saxons called April, Oester monat, and the Feast of the Resurrection Eoster,
though some bring it from the word Ost, or East; Verstegan, because the
East-winds blow in that Month, Mr. Cambden, because the Saxons called the
Rising of CHRIST by the name os East.

Hertha was another Goddess of the Saxons, she was worshipped as Matter Deum
among the Romans, or the Mother of the Gods, because from her all things were
supposed to take being. Hertha or Herthus was thought to preside in human
Affairs (says Tacitus speaking of the Germans) and to relieve the People,
says the English Translation of Mr. Cambden; The words of Tacitus are invehi
populis, which relates to a Custom the Romans used of bearing about her Image
in public Processions, the People following with loud Acclamations, together
with Fifes, Cymbals, and little gingling Bells. She was represented with Cities
and Towrs upon her head, because she was the supporter of them, and therefore
the Poet, writing of her Procession, says, -- incedit Turrita per Urbes. And,
perhaps out of the words of Tacitus, some such Custom might have been taken up
by the Saxons.

Rheda, another Goddess of the Saxons, from whom the Month of March was Beda de
tempore, cap. 13.
called Rhedmonath, because then they especially sacrificed to her. This Month
was also called Lenctmonat, as much as to say Length-Month says Verstegan,
because then the Days began to grow longer than the Nights.

Nocca was their Sea-God, Wormius Monument. Dan. lib. 1. cap. 4. I have found
in a Manuscript, that our Countrymen held a certain distinction of Terressrial
and Water-Gods, for the increase of Corn and Fruit, they addressed themselves
to one whose name is not expressed, but was the same as the Roman CERES. They
held that one Nocca, like Neptune, had the Government of the Sea, and they give
out when any was drowned, that he was snatched away by Nocca. Nocken tog
hannembort. In some places of Denmark they call him Nicken, and report that not
in the Sea only he has been seen, but in Rivers also and deep Brooks, in the
shape of a Seamonster with a Mans-head, especially to such miserable folks as
are just upon the brink of drowing. And they report that some being taken out
of the water dead, were found with their Noses red, just as if some body had
violently sucked blood from them, and hence it is a common saying, Nicken
haffuer sugit hannom, Nicken has sucked him.

Mara was their night-Hagg which used to torment them in their sleep, hence
they said Maren rider ham, the Mare rid him, and to this day some
superstitiously take the Disease called Ephialtes, or the oppression of the
Chest, for a Witch or Goblin, and call it the Nightmare. Hence came the word
Mar, to signify a Disease in general.

Taufana, whether a God or Goddess is uncertain. This Idol is mentioned by
Tacitus, whose Temple upon the confines of the Marsians was destroyed by the
Romans. Caesar (says he) to the end that the waste and spoil of the Country
might spread wider, divided his greedy Legions into four Bodies, for the
compass of fifty mile together with Fire and Sword he made havoc of all, not
sparing either Sex or Age. All things sacred and profane were levelled with
the Earth, and amongst them the most famous Temple of Tanfane. Lipsius upon
this place, i thinks the Etymology of the word may be fetched from Taenfunk,
signifying the beginning of all things. But this, as being too far fetched, is
generally rejected. Loccenius writes thus;

Tanfana seems to be derived from Tan or Than, signifying in the German
Tongue Antiq. Sueogoth. cap. 3.
a Firr-tree, and fahn or fan in the old Gothoteutonick, a Lord. In the Hymn of
the Blessed VIRGIN, written in old Language by Bonaventure Vulcanius, and
published at Leiden, it is found thus; Miki Leid sai waia menia fan, i. e. My
Soul does magnify the Lord, and in the Song of Simeon, Fra Leitai scalck
teinana fraugmond fan, Now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, Lord.
Martianus Capella lib. 11. de nuptiis Philologiae and Mercurii, says, They are
called Panes, Fauni and Fanes, etc. who inhabit Woods, Forests, Groves, Lakes,
Fountains and Rivers, upon which place Grotius ( ex Glossis Isiodori) thus
observes, Fones are Gods of Woods, the Goths would write them Fanes, or
Faanes. Therefore Tanfana mentioned by Tacitus, seems to have been nothing
else but the Patron or Lord of some Grove. The Romans would call him Sylvanus
or Mars, because he presided over Woods, and was thought to drive away Wolves
and secure Fences. And Lucius and Johan. Frensheinius will have it Diana. And
this Reason is further added, because the Temple of Tanfana stood in a Grove
between Amisia and Luppia in Westphalia, as its situation is described by
Cluverius. Now that the Grove was of Firr may very probably be gathered from
the importance of the word, which kind of Trees (without doubt) were anciently
more abounding in Germany than now adays, when the ground was not so well
cultivated. Nor was it an unusual thing in other. Nations to fetch the names of
their Gods from particular Trees, and especially Groves; So Jupiter of the
Romans was called Fagitalis, from a Grove of Beech-trees consecrated to him (
as Pliny writes.) Thus Loccenius.

But this derivation seems not satisfactory, upon the account that the
Ancients worshipped their Fawns and Satyrs, and such like Gods that presided in
Woods and Groves, not in that high manner as we may gather Tanfana was
worshipped. To such petty Deities they erected only Altars of Turf and such
like materials, and offered Fruits and Spices upon them; And when we read of
Jupiter Fagitalis or Viminalis, or the like, we must not understand by them was
meant the chief Thunderer, but take them for some Vejoves or little Jupiters,
who, for such small Offices they were employed in, were contented with a wooden
Statue, and once a year a Garland. Had Tanfana been such a God or Goddess only,
certainly Tacitus would not as he does so particularly make mention of him,
for, whereas he passes over all other Sacred places, he especially records
this Temple of Tanfana, giving it the title of CELEBERRIMUM TEMPLUM, the most
famous Temple, so that we may rather take him for some great Divinity, and so
indeed his name imports, for as Fan signifies Lord, so does Tan or Thane,
Great.

Mr. Sheringham gives another account of it. I had rather, says he, interpret
Sheringham, page 335.
Tanfan the God of Lots from the Saxon word Tan, signifying a Lot. And this
interpretation seems more congruous, because the Ancient Saxon's who
possessed Westphalia and the Countries adjoining, used especially to decide
their affairs by Lots, and he refers us to Somner's Saxon Dictionary upon the
word, and the Saxon History of Bid, concerning their election of Captains by
Lot. Bid Nist. Eccies. l. 5. c. 11. Tacitus de Germanis.


And that this was a very Ancient custom of the Germans in general, Tacitus
who writ of this very Tanfan takes notice. They used also casting and drawing
Lots very much, their way of proceeding was plain, they cut down a Branch from
some Tree that bare fruit, and then cleft the same into little slips, and after
they had distinguished them with different notches, they scattered them
helter-skelter upon a white Cloth. If it were a Public Consultation, the
Priest of the City; if a, Private, the Master of the Family first praying to
the Gods, and with eyes lift up to heaven, took each of them up three times,
and then interpreted them according to the mark set before upon them.

By this description it is scarce to be doubted but Tanfan was their God of
Lots, to whom they addressed themselves to interpret future Events, and perhaps
it was to him they paid their Vows (a Custom mentioned by* Sidonius) when
they Lib. 8. Epist. ad Numant.
drew out every tenth Captives by Lot, and hung them up upon a Tree; or if this
strangling of Captives was performed to the honor of Woden, according to his
own institution, yet the particular determining of the party most acceptable
might be the peculiar office and employment of Tanfan. Tan properly signifies a
twig or slip, and by a Metonimy a Lot made of a Twig, or as Tacitus has it,
the Branch of a Fruit-bearing tree.

In the Laws of Friesland (Tit. 14.) there is one yet extant concerning the
manner Hottomans disput. de feudis, lib. 5.
of Casting Lots, which it seems continued in use after Christianity it self,
some few circumstances only varied, but the name of Tan (whereby they called
their Lots) still exactly preserved. The Law runs thus;

The Lots ought to be after this manner, Two slips cut off from a Branch (which
slips are called Taenes, one signed with the sign of the Cross, the other
unmarked) being wrapped up in a clean Cloth are to be laid upon the Altar, or on
some Relics, and the Priest, if any be present, or for want of one, some young
Child may take one of those Lots from the Altar, in the mean time prayers are
to be made to God. If those seven who have sworn concerning Manslaughter
committed, have sworn true, that he should show it by some evident token. If he
takes up the Lot which has the sign of the Cross, they shall be innocent that
have sworn, but if he take up the other then every one of the seven shall make
his own Lot, that is a Taene made of a Twig, and shall sign it with his own
mark, so distinctly, that he and the rest that stand about may know it again to
be his. This done, they shall wrap them all up in a clean Cloth, and then lay
them on the Altar or Relics, then the Priest, if any be present, or if not, as
was said before, some innocent Child shall take them one by one from the Altar,
and as they come, demanding, at every one whose Lot it is, shall deliver it to
the true party that knows it to be his own, he whose Letter is last of all
drawn shall be forced to make composition for the Manslaughter, the rest whose
Lots came before shall go free.

Had not this custom by deciding Controversies by Lot been used in a Religious
way by the Heathen Saxons, the Christians had never brought it into the Church,
who though they thought it necessary to comply with some Customs, which the
headiness of those times would not be weaned from, yet they never thought fit
to advance them to a higher nature; so that what was here performed on the
Christian Altars, was no more than what had been done on the Heathen before,
the Object only of the worship being changed from Tanfana their God of Lots, to
the true GOD who knows all things.

Alfur, by this name they called their Elves inhabiting Rocks and Caves, and
the Sacrifices to them were called Alfblot, they were supposed not above a
cubit long; the Goths called them Dwergh, and the Saxons Dpeng and Dpeonh, from
hence we call a little Man a Durgin at this day. The chief of these Elves or
Fairy's was Mod Sognor, the second Durin, etc. their Nation was divided into
Guttels, or Trulls and Coballs, good and evil Spirits, but of this enough.

We read of another famous Idol among the Saxons named Irman-saul, the Original
of its name is variously guessed at, some would have it written Metmes. saul,
i. e. the Pillar of Hermes or Mercury, who appears was worshipped by the
Germans. Verstegan calls him Ermensewl, and as he thinks more rightly Ermesewl,
as much as to say, the Pillar or Stay of the Poor, from Saul or Sewl, a Pillar,
and Earm, with the Netherlands Arm, signifying Poor; but this is a more Novel
opinion and grounded upon no foundation, much like them who will needs have him
Mars, and Ermensaul to be nothing but Arms-Sawl or "(...) Saul, Mars his
Pillar, or the Pillar of Arms.

His Effigies represented a Man in Armor, in his right hand a Military Engine
or Schedius, Syntag. 3.
Standard, bearing a Rose, to signify, that as that flower was but of short
continuance, and no sooner blown than withered: so was the event of Battles. In
his left hand he held a pair of Scales, the emblem of War, to show that as one
side rises so the other falls. Upon his Breast he carried a Bear; to
intimate the inward Courage of mind, and on his Shield a Lion, to set forth how
Valor should be invincible in Onset; He was placed in a field of Flowers, to
intimate that nothing is sweeter to a Soldier than the field strowed with
Enemies.

His Statue was found at Mersburge with this Inscription;

DUX EGO Ditmar. lib. 3.

GENTIS SAXONUM
VICTORIAM
CER TAM POLLICEOR
M E
VENERANTIBUS.
The Inscription being Latin, it should seem that it was the Statue of some
Hero set up by the Saxons after their acquaintance with the Romans; And because
the proper name of it is Irmen Saul, not Hermes Saul (for how came the Germans
to be acquainted with the Greek name of Mercury) Schedius with great reason
guesseth it was the Effigles of Harminius Captain of the Cherusti, a Saxon
Nation in the days of Augustus Caesar, and that by corruption of time, for
Harmans Saul it came to be pronounced Irman Saul, which alteration is so small,
and the divise of the Statue agrees so exactly with the History of Harminius,
that his opinion seems more than probable; For never man deserved more to be
placed in the number of the Gods than this HARMINIUS, who, by Roman Writers
themselves, is styled The Deliverer of Germany; and is confessed to have given
the Roman Empire, then in its full strength, such a blow, as made the
foundation of it shake for a long time after.

His History therefore I shall not think impertinent or tedious to deliver,
because it condubeth to the Illustration of this Monument, and to the Honor of
our Ancestors, who at the first grapling with the Roman Eagles under the
Conduct of this Harminius gave them such sensible marks of their power and
policy, as their Emperor himself at that time, nor their Writers after could
never dissemble.

Quinctilius Varus, a man of a quiet disposition and easy parts, more
accustomed to the slow method of Camps than the quick motions of War, dull and
covetous, Velleius Paterculus.
was Commander of the German Army, who thinking the Germans had nothing of Man
in them, but voice and figure, began to cast with himself, that whom the Sword
could not tame, Laws and Jurisdiction might allure and temper.

With this design having entered the midst of Germany he set up his Courts and
Tribunals, and drew out the Summer in hearing and determining Causes. But they,
who in the midst of their fierceness had secret reserves of cunning and craft,
a Nation full of subtilty and deceit, now with feigned processes, and seeming
hot accusations of one another, then, when the Cause was decided, with high
prayers of the Roman Justice, which ended those Controversies by Hearing, which
used to be determined by the Sword, drew Quinctilius into so great security,
that he thought himself rather a Judge in the Roman Courts, than a General in
the midst of Germany.

Whereupon a young Gentleman of a sudden apprehension and quick wit, by Florus,
lib. 4. cap. 21.
name HARMINIUS, the Son of Sigimer a Prince of that Country, of a lively
Countenance, and carrying the sparks of disdain in his eyes, who had served
formerly under the Romans, and attained to the Equestral Order, seeing the
pride of Quinctilius increase with his security, entered into thoughts how he
might ease his Nation from that growing Insolence; For now the Germans
generally began to be weary of Quinctilius, who with his Rods and Axes
exercised a too arbitrary and Vell Paterc. lib. 2. Aventinus.
lordly power over them: wherefore taking into his Conspiracy a few of the
chief of his Country, namely, Liber a Priest of the Catti, Segimund the Son of
Segestus, a Priest of the Cherusci, Veromarus, Egmarus, and his Son Sosithacus,
Berthorites, Theodoricus, all Saxon Princes, he began to put his designs in
execution, but he could not carry it so privately, but that intelligence was
brought to Quinctilius of the design by Segestes the Father of Segimund, one of
the Conspirators; but Quinctilius not believing the report, like one lulled in
a deep sleep, and Harminius not giving time for a second Alarm, the plot took
effect. Quinctilius is assaulted by a Party just as he ascended the Tribunal,
whilst others in great numbers set upon the Roman Soldiers in their Camp, who
not being able to defend their Trenches, which were on every side invaded, and
trusting to the Woods and Marshes, are here most miserably cut in pieces and
destroyed by their nimbler Enemies.

Quinctilius seeing all lost slew himself with his own Sword, hastening that
death which otherwise the insulting Enemy might have made more dishonorable.
Caesar, when he heard of this defeat, which was ever after called Variana
Clades, like a man distracted tore his head and beard, often crying out,
Quinctili Vare read Legiones; he commanded Watches to be kept in the City, and
the Day continually to be observed with Mourning and Supplications: Besides he
vowed to Jupiter the Magni Ludi, or Great Solemnities (which were not usual but
in the highest extremity) if he would bring the Commonwealth to a better
condition. And this blow, says an Author of theirs, was so considerable, that
whereas the Roman Empire before was Florus.
scarce bounded by the Ocean, now it was contained within the banks of the
River Rhine.

HARMINIUS being rid of the Romans (take it from Tacitus) began to affect the
Kingdom, but the found the liberty of the People to cross his design, so that
after long contention with them, and various fortune on both sides, he fell at
last by the treachery of his own Relations, without doubt the Deliverer of
Germany, and who engaged with the Romans, not in their infancy, as other
Princes, but in their most flourishing condition. In Battles he had various
success, in War unconquerable, he is yet celebrated amongst Barbarous Nations:
These are the very words of Tacitus, so that we may reasonably imagine, that
this Herman Saul was set up to his Honor by the Saxons, who (as Schedius
reports) used in a kind of Martial dance, being completely armed and girded
with their Enemies Swords, in certain turns to surround the Pillar, and at
every turn falling on their knees kiss and adore it.

Besides, they had three other Idols Rugiivith, Porevith, and Porenuth.

Rugiivith was represented with seven Faces upon one head, and seven Swords by
his side, and an eighth in his hand; he was made taller and thicker than the
proportion of a Man, and was worshipped as Mars.

Porevith had five Heads, but had no Armor.

Porenuth had four Faces, and a fifth on his Breast, on the forehead of which
was his Left hand, and his Right on its Chin.

I believe they had the same Original as Suantovite, another Idol of theirs,
which Schedius.
was represented with four Heads and four Necks, two looking forward, the other
two backwards. In his Right hand he held a Horn set with diverse Metals, which
the Priest every year filled with Wine, prognosticating by the greater or
lesser decay of the Liquor the plenty of the year succeeding. His Left arm was
set a kimbo, his Tunick reached to his ankles, his Feet touched the ground, the
bottom of them being hid in the earth. Not far from him was set his Harness and
Chariot, and other badges of Divinity.

Once a year, after Fruit-time, they sacrificed before the doors of his Temple,
and kept a solemn Feast of their Nation; The Priest, all the while he was in
the Temple, held his wind, which when he had occasion to draw, he ran to the
door, for fear the God might be polluted with humane breath.

He had a Horse maintained for him, on which he was thought to ride to Battle,
for often after fight with the Enemy he was found in the Stable all in a foam,
and dirty. It was lawful only for the Priest to feed and keep him.

To this Horse they sought for presages in War, and inquired Events in battle;
and this Custom of consulting with Horses was generally used through all
Germany, and perhaps was the occasion of the Arms of Saxony, and the Names of
Hengist and Horsa, and others, who were so called from this particular Beast.

This Idol was destroyed by WALDEMAR, King of Denmark, but the memory of it
continued for a long time among the Boemians; nay, at this day they have no
greater salutation, when they entertaina Stranger or a Friend, than to say,
Wite Schedius.
Wite: Thus far Schedius, which if true, that the manner of saluting comes from
Suantovith, then Wite is the name of the Idol, and Suanto an addition only; and
hence we may derive Porenuth and Porevith, as much to say as Poorvith, and
Rugiviith, as much as Rugar with, or With the Helper; and it is to be observed,
that the make of all of them agree in the manner of multiplying their Heads and
Faces.

Rugyvith


Porevith


Porenuth


(...)


Geduet, another Idol, representing an Armed man, holding in his Right hand a
Club set together with sharp spikes, and in his Left a Shield with the Arms of ^
Saxony, a white Horse in a red Field.

This Statue was set up by Lotharius, Duke of Saxony, and called Adjutorium, in
memory of his victory against the Emperor Henry the fifth, the Country people
taking it afterward for a God, miscalled it Jedut instead of Adjutorium, says
Schedius.

Flints, so called by the Saxons, because he was placed on a Flint-stone; He
was represented just as we paint Death, but with a long Vesture cast over him;
in his hand he carried a Staff with the swelling Bladder of a Sow; On his left
shoulder sat a Lion; by him the Saxons expected to be raised from the dead.

Verstegan thus describes him: This Idol was made like the Image of Death, and
Verstegan, p. g. Sc.
naked, save only a Sheet about him. In his Right hand he held a Torch, or as
they termed it, a Fire-blaze; on his head a Lion rested his two fore-feet,
standing with one of his binder feet upon his Left shoulder, and with the other
in his hand, which to support he lifted up as high as his shoulder.

Of Basanwow Such, whom Verstegan calls Siwe and Rhadagaws, we have only the
names, saving that to the two last the Heathen Priests sacrificed Christians.

Soltwedel, the sorm of this Idol was a man holding with both hands a flaming
Wheel before his Breast; This, by some, is made the Sun, whom Verstegan
follows, hence Soltwell received its name.

Criglas, the Moon, her Head had three faces, and she carried the new Moon in
her hands, sometimes she was represented with long Ears instead of Horns; Form
this Criglas Verstegan takes his description of the Moon, but never mentions
this Idol.

Prono, this Idol held in its Right hand a Plow-share, in its Left a Spear with
an Ensign, about its Temples Coronets, his Feet decked up, upon one of them
hung a little Bell; his Priest was called Mich, he is taken for Brennus, not
the Gaul, but an Angle.

Crodo was another God of the Saxous, he was represented an Old man standing
Schedius.
upon a Fish, which we call a Perch, he was covered over with a loose Garment
tied to him with a Linen girdle, his Feet naked, he held a Wheel and a
Pitcher, full of all sores of fruits, Roses and Apples. His naked Head
signified that God ought to be worshipped with pure mind, and uncovered. By his
Linnen-garment was expressed Liberty, for the inviolable defense of which they
ought to resist their Enemies, even with hazard of their lives, as a Perch
does a Pike. The Wheel was to put them in mind of Unity, that they should
unanimously, and with joint force resist the Enemy. By the Linnen-girdle was
noted Friendship, which ought to be preserved without spot or blemish. The
Pitcher with the Fruit denoted Time, which produces all things for the use of
Man; Thus Schedius.

Verstegan describes him after this manner; The last, to make up here the
number of seven, was the Idol Scater, fondly of some supposed to be Saturnus,
for he was otherwise Verstegan, (...). 77.
called Crodo; This goodly God stood to be adored in such manner as I have here
pictured him. First, on a Pillar was placed a Perch, on the sharp-prickled
back whereof stood this Idol. He was lean of visage, having long hair, and a
long beard, and was bare-headed and barefooted. In his Left hand he held up a
Wheel, and in his Right he carried a Pail of water, wherein were flowers and
fruits. His long Coat was girded unto him with a Towel of white Linen; his
standing on the sharp finns of this Fish was to signify, that the Saxons for
their serving him, should pass steadfastly and without harm in dangerous and
difficult places. By the Wheel was betokened the knit Unity and conjoined
Concord of the Saxons, and their concurring together in running one course. By
the Girdle, which by the wind streamed from him, was signified the Saxons
freedom. By the Pail with flowers and fruits was declared, that with kindly
Rain he would nourish the (...), to bring forth such Fruits and Flowers; and
the day unto which we yet give the (...) of Saturday, did first receive (by
being unto him celebrated) the appellation.

Whence he had this description and Theology, or why he called Crodo, Seater, I
know not, unless we allow him a liberty (as he usually takes) of seigning what
best makes for his own purpose.

That Crodo was the same with Saturn, some have imagined from a derivation of
their own, wherein (...), and Crodo, carry a mavelous similitude; but how
Crodo and Seater come to be the same, if Seater be not Saturn, which Verstegan
says is a fondness to think, I consess I have not yet learned, and till we
hear of such a God in more anthentick History than his, I think it will be the
wisest way to lot Crodo alone, and grant that Saturday was dedicated to Saturn
by the Saxons, after their acquaintance with the Romans, though we know not the
name by which it was originally called. We read in Pontanus, that the Danes
called it Leftverda, which seems to have respect either to the public
Bathings they used on that day, or else to the consummation of Marriage, after
both Parties the day before had made their addresses to Frigga, for Lowen
loffte, and Bruy loffte, signisie in the German Tongue Nuptial Ceremonies, and
Croelowelfe with the Danes is a Contract.

Wormius, writing of this God whom he calls Crodan, intimates (contrary to
Verstegan) that he was taken for Saturn. They relate (says he) that Crodan was
Novam Dan. lib. 1. c. q. 4.
instead of Saturn, namely, the President of Evil and Mischief, hence En Crodan
skalck, signifies a man given to all wickedness. At Hartisborg he had a Statue
and ^
Pillar, together with the forementioned Jedutt or Jodutt. Thurius calls him
Croto, who says, his Statue at Hercynopolis was destroyed by Charlemain.

Besides this long Catalogue, they had other Idols, as Goea, the Daughter of
Thor, from whose name they called February, Goe-monat, Vagnoft and Hading
Presidents of War, Rostiph the Fore-feer, Rostar the Cruel, Fro or Froto the
Servant of the Gods, Methot their Priest, Blakulla the Goddess of the Sea,
Minning a notable Satyr, with many others too tedious to be repeated.

But before I conclude the History of the Saxon Gods, I will give one instance
more, because it relates to what was said before, concerning the analogy
between the Saxons and Romans, as to many points of their worship, whereby the
Reader may be able to guess how it came to pass that Nations so far distant
from one another, so different in Language and Manners, and so late acquainted,
should nevertheless have many things so exactly agreeing.

Part of the The Angles.
Suevians (says Tacitus) sacrifice unto ISIS; for the cause and original of
this foreign Worship I have little to say, unless the figure it self,
fashioned after the manner of a In (...) liturni. Libu (...) was a kind of
(...) made like a Brigandine, in which the Roman Nobility were carried.
Brigandine, shows that the Religion was brought to them. It is not
impossible but the Saxons, between the time of Julius Caesar and the days of
Tacitus, might have learnt the worship of this Isis from the Romans, as the
sorm of the Image, noted by Tacitus, might seem to imply; For not long before
Tacitus, Drusus had made good progress into Germany, and those Parts the Saxons
inhabited, as we find in Florus a Roman Author. Drusus (says he) for the
defense of the Province, placed every where Forts and strong Holds upon these
Rivers; The Mosel, the Elbe, and Weser, and upon the Rhine he erected above
fifty Castles. By the name of Castles, the Ancients meant not only Forts but
Cities, and possibly these places built by Drusus, might, by the negligence of
Northern Writers, be attributed, as they often are, to Julius Caesar, who,
according to his own writings, was not above eighteen days journey beyond the
Rhine, Caesar never makes mention of Isis, in reckoning the Gods of the
Germans, and therefore it may be thought that the Saxons learnt her Worship
afterward; And there is no time so probable as during the continuance of
Drusus in Germany, who, without doubt, was the first that laid the Roman yoke
upon their Necks, to the well fastening of which, it was always thought
necessary to enjoin the Roman Gods, as well as Customs, Language and Laws.

Now it may possibly be the time that those seven Towns were erected to the
Honor of Seven of the Roman Deities, the building whereof, by the Northern
Writers, is vainly attributed to Julius Caesar, namely, Saterburg to the honor
of Saturn, Hamburgh to Jupiter-Hammon, Marsburgh to Mars, Solwedel to the Sun,
Magdeburgh to Venus, Heresburgh to Mercury, Luneburgh to the Moon, and now it
may be also that Isenberg might be dedicated to the Honor of this ISIS.

And indeed we find that the Roman Soldiers paid their Vows to ISIS in
Germany, as appears by this Inscription there found:

ISIDI
SACRUM
SEX POMPEIUS
SEX L. SYRUS
MIL.
LEG. V. AUG.
US. L. M.
And another found in Bavaria:

ISIDI
MYRIONYMAE
SACRUM
FESINUS T. JULI
SUTURNINI
G. P. P.
SERRARI POSUIT.
FORTUNATUS
EJUSDEM SER. TS.
FACIUNDUM
CURAVIT.
These Roman Inscriptions testify she was highly worshipped in Germany, but I
believe she was not first brought thither by the Romans, but as may be gathered
from (...), by the Phaenicians upon the Sea Coasts of Belgium, or else by this
OSIRIS King of Egypt, who entered into Germany with an Army as far as the Danube.

This expedition (as Diodorus Siculus relates) he left inscribed upon a
Monument, which he thus translated into the Greek Tongue.

(...)

I am OSIRIS who led an Army into every Region as far as the uninhabitable
Countries of the Indians, and those lying to the North as far as the fountains
of the River Isther.

If this be true, we need not seek far to know, how the Gods of the Saxons and
Romans came to be many of them the same, having both of them the Egyptians for
their Masters.

ISIS (says Aventinus) after the slaughter of her Husband and death of her
Aventinus. lib. ^.
Son, came into Germany to Gambrivius (whom the Germans esteem the first
Inventer of Ale) whom she taught the use of Corn, and how to sow, thresh, and
grind it, and how to make Bread of it; and possibly to Her Gambrivius owed the
Invention of Ale likewise, for we read in Herodotus that a drink made of Corn
was first found out in Egypt: And this may suffice to have spoken of the Gods
of the Saxons.

HAving finished what I intend concerning their Religion, in the next place we
come to treat of their Civil and Military Customs. Some were of greater
Antiquity, as being derived from the first beginnings of their Nation before
they came from Asia. Of this sort I shall only touch of a few, because I desire
to hasten to those times that more nearly relate to our selves.

They had a Custom, which afterward spread over all Germany, not to begin
Battle until they had consulted with their Wives (whom they chose for that
purpose) whether by Lot, or other presages they found it convenient to fight,
or no: thus Tacitus, who also gives the reason; For (says he) they think that
in Women there is a kind of Sanctimony Tacit. ^.
and foresight, so that they disdain not their Counsel, nor neglect their
Answers.

Caesar, when he made War with Ariovistus King of the Nations, living upon the
Rhine, as himself declares in his Commentaries, understood by some Runagates,
that his Enemies were advised by a certain sort of Cunning Women not to give
Battle before the New Moon (a time very much observed by our Ancestors) which
when he had learned, and knew to be the way of those Countries, he forced them
to Battle; and this Stratagem, grounded upon the superstition of his Enemies,
so prevailed, that Ariovistus (though attended with four hundred thousand
sighting men) was quite discomfited and put to flight.

Clemens Alexandrinus writes thus: There are, says he, among the Germans a
sort Clem. Alex.
of Women which are called Holy, who observing the heads of Rivers, and the
sound and rolling of Water-falls, guess at, and foretell things to come. These
permitted them not to fight with Caesar until the New Moon.

These Women were called by the Saxons Adeltuns; the reason of their name I
have given before, how that it sprang from the Runic or Magic way of writing
invented by Woden. The Gauls called them Alirons, and Aventinus gives this
description of them: The Cimbrians had a kind of Women that used to foretell
things to come, Avent. lib. (...) Annal (...) ex Strabonis lib. 7. (...).
whom in their Country Language they called Alirones. These being girt about
with brass girdles or belts, barefooted and gray-haired, with a linen Tunick
and white Vest, which was under neath fastened with brass-buttons, running among
the Tents with naked Swords, fell among the Captives, and striking them flat to
the ground, drew them along to brass Cauldrons, then lifting them up cut their
Throats, and by the blood that fell into the Cauldron foretold the event of
War; Others opening their Bellies by their bowels, interpreted Victory. In the
midst of fighting they used to be at the Skins which covered their Carts so
quick and hard, that they would yield a fearful and horrid drumming.

The Saxons did not reckon time by Years, but by Winters, so likewise the Age
of their life: and this Custom they continued after Christianity it self.

Mr. Sheringham produces an old Saxon Manuscript, wherein the Age of our
Savior Christ is so computed, which for the sake of them who love to search
into the ancient Customs of our Ancestors, I will set down word for word out
of him.

Se haelend Crist syddan he to thatysum life com and mann aearth geeaxen THara
he aes thrittig thintra eald on thaere menniscnysse tha began he thondra
thircenne and geceas thata tthatelf leorningcnihtas tha the e apostolas hatad.

This Savior Christ, after he had come into this World and was grown up, when
he had lived in his Humanity thirty winters, he began to work Miracles, and
then chose (...) twelve Disciples, whom we call Apostles.

They likewise counted their time, not by Days, but by Nights, and we at this
day say a Sennight and Fortnight, not Sevendaies and Fourteendaies. And the
reason of their counting by Nights and not by Days might arise from that high
superstition they had of the Moon, whose Increase and Wane they observed in the
beginning of Actions of the highest concern.

They used to engrave upon certain squared Sticks (says Verstegan, but whence
he had it I know not) the course of the Moons of the whole Year, whereby they
could always certainly tell, when the New Moons, Full Moons, and Changes
should happen, as also their Festival days; and such a Carved stick they
called Al-mon-aght, that is to say, Al-mon-heed, to wit, the regard or
observation of all the Moon's; and hence, says he, is derived the name of
Almanac.

This derivation is like many others of the same Author, carrying a World of
seeming Invention and pure Ignorance, for who knows not that Almanac is an
Arabic composition, from which Language also we borrow many other terms in
Astronomy, as Nadir and Zenith, and in Chimistry the words Alchimy, Alembic,
all made up of Greek words with the Arabic particle Al.

They made Leagues and Friendships in blood: Thus Hading Son of Gran, King of
Denmark entered into Society with Liser, the Pyrate, as Saxo writes. The
ancient Saxo Gram. lib. 1.
Danes, When they made a League, used to bedaub their footsteps with blood
sprinkled on them, strengthening the Obligation of friendship with the mutual
mixture of their blood, by which Method Liser and Hading, being knit together
in the strictest Bonds of Amity, proclaimed War against Loker, Lord of the
Curetes.

This Custom the Getes in all probability, brought out of Scythia with them,
for, we read, it was the Customs of the Scythians, as is plainly seen in
Lucian's Dialogue, inscribed Toxaris, or Friendship,, wherein Toxaris is
introduced, thus speaking. As soon as we have cut our fingers, and dropped the
Blood into a Basin, and dipped the top of our Swords in it, and then lifting up
the Cup, and drunk both together, there is nothing that can part us.

And Herodotus writes almost the same of them, for having put Wine in an
earthen Herod. lib. 4.
Vessel, they mix their own blood with it. They that make the League with a
little knife, or sword, make a gash in their bodies; then they dip their Seax,
Arrows, Pole-Ax and Sword in the Cup, which done, they use many Imprecations,
and afterward drink up the Wine, not only they who make the League, but their
Followers of the chief Rank.

The same is witnessed also by Pomponius Mela: but it is needless to heap up
Testimonies in a thing so evident. And that this Custom generally spread over
GERMANY may be gathered out of another Author of good Reputation.

The Germans, says he, in their Drinking-Festivals embracing each other cut
the Athen. lib. 1. cap. 11. Dipnos. ex Posid.
Veins of their foreheads, and the blood that falls into the Cup they stir
about with the Wine and drink it off, thinking they have attained the highest
piece of Friendship, when they have tasted one another blood. After this sort
of drinking they anoint their Heads with the oil of Roses or Honey to allay
Vapors, but for want of that, they use Wine and Spikenard.

When they were to consult of matters of weight and importance, besides the
inspection of Beasts Intrails they especially observed the neighing of Horses;
For this purpose the whitest that could be picked out were kept at the public
charge in Groves and Parks set apart from them. These were never set to Common
work, but drew the Holy Chariot, which was followed by the Priest, and King or
Prince of the City. Their Presages, of all others, carried the greatest credit
both with Priest, People, and Prince, for they looked on themselves as the
Servants of the Gods, but their Horses as their Intimates.

This Custom continued longest in Pomerania, as Saxo Grammaticus and Cranzius
observe, where they had this custom of consulting them.

When a War was designed against any Province, they set up before the Temple
three rows of Spears, over every Spear two other ran cross-way, then the Horse
was led out by the Priest, who used many Prayers upon the occasion; when the
Horse came to the ranks, if he passed them with his right foot forward and not
left, then they counted it a good Omen, but if but once in passing them he put
his left before his right, then they desisted from their Enterprises. From this
great opinion they had of Horses, perhaps (says Mr. Cainbden) the Dukes of
Saxony gave a Horse for their Arms.

To try before hand what would be the issue and event of War, they used some
way or other to get a Prisoner of that Nation with whom they were to make War;
when they had taken him, they chose out one of their own Country men to fight
with him, and having armed both Champions with the distinct Weapons of their
own Nation, they reckoned by him that was Conqueror, which side would carry
away the Victory.

In matters of moment which could not otherwise be decided, they used among
Saxo Gram.
themselves to refer the Controversy to combat. Thus Handing, Prince of
Saxony, and Helgo, King of Denmark, fought about the right of the possession of
Juteland; in which combat Hunding was slain, and the Saxons upon agreement made
before, delivered the Country to the Danes: So our Historians mention the like
between our Edward, and Canute the Dane.

This was a very ancient Custom of the Saxons, as appears by those Reasons
given, Sched. Synt. 21 cap. 46.
why they retained it even under Christianity it self; amongst which this is
one, Because they had received it from their Ancestors in the Island Scandia.
This was called Kamp-fight, and he that fought it Kampffet.

I have spoken before, how the Saxons counted it the highest ignominy in the
World to die by Age, or Disease, and this was generally the opinion of all the
Northern Nations. Cicero writes of the Cimbrl, that about to die in Battle they
rejoiced exceedingly, but made heavy moans in time of Sickness. And Lucian
admires this Theology of theirs;

-- Certe populi quos despicit Arctus
Felices errore suo, quos ille timorum
Maximus haud urget lethi metus, inde ruendi
In serrum men's prona viris, animaque capaces
Mortis, and ignavum reditura parcere vitae.
Happy the Northern Lands in their mistake,
Whom Death, the Prince of Terrors cannot shake.
Headlong these Men on naked Swords dare run;
Their Souls never shrink at Death, which they might shun;
They think it base to hoord up life, and vain
To husband that which spent, returns again.
Strabo writes the same of the Massagetes, (...) Geogr. lb. 11.
(...). They who die of Sickness, they sling them out as wicked, and worthy to
be devoured of Beasts. And certainly the Saxons had the same opinion, that it
was a kind of wickedness to die idly, otherwise they had never invented a
Hell for it, as I have shown they did.

Herodotus writes of the Massagetes, that it was esteemed so ignominious a
thing to die of Sickness, that Ancient men were sacrificed to the Gods by their
nearest Relations. This Custom the Saxons used, for all Woden's Followers,
named Diars, were offered to him before their death:

Nior aff Niogard, holt sidan wen macht thet ypperste Blodsostet t Swerige
Cron, Antiq. Suegoth.
och bleff en masdzmatt ofmer thet, Ibans daghar war har godh tiidh sa at
folcket meente han radde for abr och fridh Bthi hans tiidh dodde bort the maste
Diat orh mordo all offcade til odhan och sedan brende Niord bleft dodh aff
Soot och sat agh offta till odhan for an han dodde sedan hrende the Swenska
honom och honom begrete.

Nlord, of Niogard afterward, that is, after the death of Woden, had the full
power of ordering the Sacrifices; In his dates all things prospered, so that
the People looked on him as advanced for their honor and quiet. In his time
all the Diars were sacrificed to Woden, and afterward burned. Nlord in his Old
age before he died, provided that himself should be offered to Woden,
afterward the Swedes burst him, and wept for him.

The similitude of Customs where other circumstances likewise agree, has been
always looked upon as a proper Argument to prove a near Relation of the People
themselves.

This likeness of Manners between the Saxons and Getes in the foregoing
Instances may serve a little to evidence from whence the Saxons took Original;
and because it may not seem a new Invention, I shall close up all I have said
upon this subject with the Law of Edward the Consessor, wherein the Getes,
there called Gutes, and the English, are confessed to be one and the same
People.

De illis qui possunt, and debent de jure cohabitare, and remanere in Regno
Britanniae.

Britones vero Armorici, cum venerint, in regno isto suscipi debent, and in
regno protegi, sicut probi cives. De corpore regni hujus exierunt quondam de
Sanguine Britonum regni hujus. Guti vero similiter, cum veniunt, suscipi
debent, and protegi in regno isto, sicut conjurati fratres, sicut propinqui,
and proprii Cives regni hujus. Exierunt enim quondam de nobili Sanguine
Anglorum, scilicet de Engra Civitate, and Anglici de sanguine illorum, and
semper efficiuntur Populus unus, and Gens una.

Concerning such who may, and ought of Right to cohabit, and remain in the
Kingdom of Britain.

The Britains of Britain in France.
Armorica, when they come, ought to be entertained in the aforesaid Realm, and
protected in the same as good Citizens: Of old they went out of the body of
this Realm, of the blood of the Britains of this Realm, Likewise the Gutes,
when they come, ought to be entertained and protected in the foresaid Realm, as
sworn Brothers, as near Kinsmen and proper Citizens of this Realm: for they
proceeded of old from the noble Blood of the Angles, to wit, out of the City
Engra, and the Angles from their Blood, and they are always esteemed one
People, and one Nation.

Thus much concerning the more Ancient Customs of the SAXONS; We come now to
those times, wherein they began to appear upon our Coast, until their arrival
in Britain: take the account as it is here and there delivered in Good Authors.

THis Nation of the SAXONS was generally of a most Warlike temper, their valor
and hardiness in War is thus celebrated by Zosimus.

For Courage of mind, ( says he) strength of body, and enduring labor and
travel, they are of all the Germans most renowned; the same says Orosius, who
styles them terrible for hardiness and agility. Marcellinus said, they were
dreadful to the Romans for their sudden and quick motions; and AEgysippus makes
them a nimble, swift, and dodging Enemy. Saxony, says he, is a Region or
Country in respect of its Marshes unapproachable, and surrounded with combersom
Countries, not easy to be passed through; By reason whereof, although they
procure to themselves greater security for War, and although it self was often
represented Captive to exalt the Roman Triumphs, yet they retain the repute of
being a most Valorous People, especially excelling all others in Piracy;
howbeit, trusting to their swift Pinnaces and Fly-boats (not in fine force)
provided rather for flight, and to make escapes, than to stand to battle.
Exactly after the same manner Isidore describes them. The Nation of the Saxons,
situated upon the Coasts of the Ocean, and among Marshes unpassable, is for
Warlike courage and nimbleness expert at Service, from whence they took their
Name, as being stout, valiant and hardy, and renowned above all others for
Piracy.

They were tall of stature, and for feature and good proportion of limbs
conspicuous. Witichindus the Monk thus sets them out: The Franks admired these
Men for their excellency, as well in Body as Mind; they wondered at them for
their new and strange Apparel, for their Armor, and the Hair of their heads
that covered their shoulders; but most of all for their steadfast and constant
Resolution, and Valiant spirits. They were clad in Soldier's Cassocks, and had
long Spears for their weapons; they put confidence in their little Bucklers,
and wore great Knives at their backs.

However it may seem, that in former time they shaved their head close, after
the Asian fashion, from whence they proceeded, leaving only a tuft of hair on
their Crown, wearing a Plate about their temples. And this appears out of the
Verses of Sidonius Apollinaris:

Istic Saxona cerulum videmus Sidon, Apoll.

Adsuctum ante salo solum timere,
Cujus verticis extimas per oras
Non contenta suos tenere morsus,
Altat lamina marginem comarum.
Et sie crinibus ad cutem recissis,
Decrescit caput, additurque vultus.
There the Tarpawlin Saxon we behold
Fearful ashore, but on the waters bold;
A Plate around his head, his Temples clasp's,
And keeps the hair up, which it closely grasps.
Beneath all shaved, the visage does advance,
What Is lost in head, is gained in Countenance.
Paulus Diaconus gives us an account of their Habits in these words: Their
Garments (says he) were large, loose, and for the most part made of Linen,
after the manner of the English Saxons, Trimmed and set out with very broad
gards or welts purflet, and embroidered with sundry Colors.

Long living in Piracy it was not strange to find them expert Seamen, insomuch
as being so long acquainted with the Sea they were fearful of the Land. They
wrought so much mischief upon the Coasts of Britain and France, extending their
Piracy as far as Spain, that particular Orders were taken by the command of
both Countries for providing Captains and Seamen to restrain their Insolences
and depredations, who thereupon were styled Counts and Earls of the Saxon shore
along Britain and France; which gave the occasion of Sidonius Apollinaris to
write thus of them,

Quin and Armoricus piratam Saxona tractus
Sperabat, cui pelle salum sulcare Britannum
Ludus, and assuto glaucum mare findere lembo.
The Coast of France began to fear
And dread, the Saxon Privateer;
Who in his patcht-up leather Pinnaces
Takes his delight and pastime on the Seas,
And seizing within Gaul, the Country about the Baieux.
Baiocesses, they held it for along time in their hands; Gregorius Turonensis
calls them Saxones Baiocassinos, and the common sort of them Soshes Bessins.

And Sidonius tells us, what great and cruel outrages they committed along
these Coasts: His words are these.

The Messenger ( says he) with whom we spent some time in Discourse, while for
Lib. 8. Epist. ad Numantium.
your sakes we held him with us, always affirmed, that of late you sounded
Alarms at Sea; and in your own Person performed the part sometimes of a
Soldier, sometimes of a Mariner, ranged up and down upon the winding Ocean to
affront and disquiet the flat-bottom Barks of the Saxons, and as many of such
Rovers, as you see, you may think you behold so many Arch-Pyrats. They all of
them together so command, obey, teach, and learn to steal and rob, that now you
have the greatest Cause to be warned, and to be most heedful and vigilant over
them. There is no Enemy so cruel as this, he sets upon others unawares, and
to save himself slips away as warily, he sets at naught all that did encounter
with him, he ruins all that take no heed of him, whomsoever he follows are
certainly overtaken; but when he flies he is sure to make his escape: To this
Service ship-wracks inure him, and so affrighten him not, and they are not only
skilful in the dangers of Sea, but familiarly acquainted with them. If a
Tempest arises, the same of one side serves to protect them, were they in
Jeopardy to be taken, on the other side, if they assail others, it hinders
them from being perceived, or discovered at a distance: In waves and craggy
rocks, they venture their Lives in the hopes to be rewarded by fortunate
success, and besides this, before they take shipping into their own Country,
and weigh their flowked Anchors from the Enemies shore, upon the point of
return, their way and custom is to kill every tenth Captain with equal and
dolorous torment (a Custom the more deplorable, because of its Superstition)
and among the number of such as are designed for death, for to disperse the
equity of Lot, mixed with the iniquity of Death. With such Vows they bind
themselves, and with such Sacrifices they pay their Vows, and not so much
purified and cleansed by such Oblations, as defiled with Sacrileges, the bloody
and detestable Murderers esteem it a religious Act, rather to torment a poor
Prisoner to death, than to excuse his miserable Punishment by receiving a
Ransom. And Isidore relates this of them in his History: The Saxons ( says he)
trust to their fly-boats, and not to their strength, and are better fitted for
flight than battle.

And Salvianus, who lived much about the same time, writes thus of barbarous
Nations. The Alani are a people vicious and unclean, but not treacherous. The
Franks are addicted to lying, yet full of hospitality, and especially kind to
strangers. The Saxons are out-ragious in Cruelty, yet for Chastity to be
respected, and honored. As for the Chastity of the Getick Women, hear what
Horace writes.

Illic Matre carentibus
Privignis Mulier temperat innocens;
Nec dotata regit virum
Conjux, nec nitido fidit adultero.
Dos est magna Parentium
Virtus, and metuens alterius viri
Certo fadere castitas,
Et peccare nefas, aut pretium est mori.
There Step-Dames to the Orphan Brood are kind,
Who in her Love do a lost Mother find;
No portion makes her against her Husband flant,
Or trust her Honor to the gay Gallant.
She Is the great Fortune, who much virtue has,
Who to her Lord holds an unshaken faith,
From other men she keeps a constant guard,
To Sin is base, and Death the just reward.
But it is not to be dissembled, but the Getes themselves were a Nation of all
others most addicted to Women; for Menander, the Greek Comedian, by Extraction
a Get, thus writes of his own Nation,

(...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
Thraces quidem omnes, maxim vero Getae,
Gens nostra (quippe glorior stirpem meam
Exinde duci) proniores caeteris
Sumus in venerem --.
So that I believe the Saxons learnt Chastity of the Germans after their coming
into their Country, for Caesar in his description of the Manners of the Germans
highly commends them for that particular virtue, and says, that they who
longest continued unmarried were most honored among them. By this means they
thought their stature and strength increased, and their Nerves grew firmer; but
to know a Woman before the age of Twenty, was esteemed the most Reproachful
thing in the World.

So firm and resolute they were, that they chose rather to be their own
murderers, and so die wilfully, than to be a mock and laughter to their
Enemies. For this cause it was, that, when Symmachus had provided a band of
them against the Public Lib. 2. Epist. 46.
shows which were to be exhibited, the very day on which they should have been
brought forth into the Theater, for Sword-play, to kill one another, by
strangling themselves they disappointed all hopes of showing bloody sport and
pastime to the Spectators. And Symmachus himself writes thus further of them:
The Band or Company of Saxons (says he) is lessened by death, for when as the
private Guard restrained not the liberty of the impious hands of those
desperate People, the first day of the Sword-fight-shew saw nine and twenty of
their necks broken without an halter.

Besides the Saxons, Angles and Jutes, which are particularly mentioned by
Bid, the FRISONES also about the same time came into Britain, as is gathered
out of Procopius, who is cited by Mr. Cambden for that purpose.

(...).

The Island BRITAIN three most populous Nations do inhabit, which have every
one their several King to rule them; And those Nations be called Angili
FRISONES, and after the name of the very Island, Britones. Now they seem to be
so great a multitude of People, that every year a mighty number of them with
their Wives and Children go from thence unto the Frankes, and they give them
entertainment in that part of their Land, which seems most desert above the
rest, and hereupon Men say, they challenge unto themselves the very Land. And
verily, not long since, when the King of the Frankes sent certain of his People
in Embassage to Constantinople unto the Emperor Justinian, he sent withal some
English, pretending ambitiously, that this Island was under his Deminion.

But, besides the testimony of Procopius, it may be gathered out of Bid
himself, that such a People did seat themselves in this Island; For when he
writes of Wilsrid, Wicbert, and Willibrord, who were sent out of England to
preach the Gospel, he says, they taught the Frisians with their own voice the
Gospel of Christ, which they could not have done, had the Language of the
Frisians been different from what they had learned in their own Country. And
the same Author, speaking of Egbert and English Saxon Anachoret, in his first
Book and tenth Chapter uses these very words:

Idem, opere inito Apostolico, verbum Dei aliquibus eorum, qui nondum
audierunt, gentibus Evangilando committere proposuit; quorum in Germania
plurimas noverat esse Nationes, a quibus Angli and Saxones, qui nunc Britanniam
incolunt, genus and originem duxisse noscuntur. Sunt autem FRISONES, Rugii,
Dani, Huni, Antiqui Saxones.

Having undertaken the work of an Apostle, he resolved to preach the word of
God to some that had not yet heard of it, of which sort he knew many Nations in
Germany, from whom the Angles and Saxons, which now inhabit Britain, are known
to derive their descent and Original. These are the FRISONS, The Inhabitants of
Pomerania.
Rugians, Danes, Huns, and Ancient Saxons.

Marcellinus co-temporary with Bid (who being sent with Willibrord out of
England, preached the Gospel in Frisia, and is highly commended by Ludger the
Evangelist of the Frisons) in the Life of Suidbert (his Countryman and
Companion in Travels, and first Bishop of Utrecht) which he wrote to Gregory,
the third Bishop of the same place, says thus: This Suidbert thirsted after
the Salvation of all Men; but especially of the Pagan Frisians and Saxons,
because the English sprang from them.

And in the same place, speaking of Willibrord and Suidbert, and others of
their Associates sent out of England, among which he was one, he has these
words: Because, says he, the holy Doctors were born in England of the Race of
Frisions and Saxons, therefore could they conveniently preach unto them the
Gospel of Christ in the German Tongue. And the Annals of Leiden say, that
Willibrord preached to the Frisians in the Frisian Tongue.

By comparing these Testimonies together, we may undoubtedly conclude, that
many of the Frisians came into Britain with other Saxon Nations, and that the
Language spoken in Britain in the days of Bid differed very little from what
was spoke on the Continent, from the mouth of the Rhine round to Pomerania, and
through all those Inland Countries of Saxony, Alsatia, Westphalia; and indeed
all those Territories were possessed by the same Nation of the Saxons, though
called by different Names. And the very Coasts lying upon the British Sea, even
to Frisia, Batavia, and the River Scaldis, even to the shore of Flanders, was
Anciently called by the name of Lower Saxony, as may be gathered out of an old
Chronicle writ about three hundred years ago in old Teutonick Verses.

Sit des sekex en gewis
Be of this assured and certain,
Dat die Graeffchap van Holland is
That the Earldom of Holland is
Gen stucvan Urieslant ghenomen
A piece of Friesland taken off.
Dude Boeken hoorde ic gewagen
Old Books I have heard mention,
Dat all hetland Ueneden Nitemagen
That all the Land beneath Newmagen
Wylen ueder Sassen hight.
Was formerly called Lower Saxony.
And then he goes on,

Alsoo als die stroom versscheit
Uander Maze end vander Rhyn
Die Schelt was dat west end Syn.
That is, That the Scheld taking in its waters from the Rhine, and Mosel was
the western bounds of it. The same Dutch Author adds further;

Die neder Sassen heitu nu Uriesen,
That is, The Nether Saxons are now called Frisians.
By which it is plain that the Frisians mentioned by Procopius, as Inhabitants
of Britain, were not a different Nation from the Saxons; And this may suffice
to be spoken of the diverse Countries from whence our Ancestors proceeded, and
of their Customs, Laws and Religion before their entrance into Britain.

In the next place shall further faithfully be related, by what means, and
under whose conduct they gained that Empire here in Britain, the foundations
whereof yet remain unshaken.

THE HEPTARCHY OF THE SAXONS IN BRITAIN.
(...)

THE KINGDOM OF KENT
Contained KENT. KINGS, Hengist. Oeric, alias Oisc. Octa. Ermiric, Ethelbert.
Eadbald. Ercombert. Egbert.

Lothair. Edric. Wigtred. Edbert. Ethelbert the Second. Alric. Ethelbert the
Third. Cuthred. Baldred.




HENGIST.
TO Page 352.
resume the History where it broke off, HENGIST having given his Daughter to
VORTIGERN King of Britain, and in Reward for her received the whole Country of
Kent by donation, began now to lay the foundation of a Saxon Monarchy in that
part of the An. Dom. 455.
Island: By gaining so fair and large Possessions, as Kent, so opportune for
Navigation, lying nearest to the Continent and open in its Ports, he had means
to receive, and room to encourage any new Adventurers he should have occasion
to invite over.

Besides these great advantages of Territory by near alliance to the Crown, he
gained these main points, namely, a trust and confidence in the King, and
consequently a certain dependence of the British Nobility upon him; He had now
a kind of Authority at Court, and carried a stroke in their choicest Councels;
if at any time jealousies of him arose, they were either stifled by a
temporizing remembrance of his good Services, or overawed by his alliance and
interest with the King. Such who had the wit to disern, or the honesty to give
warning of his growing Ambition, were looked upon as disaffected to the
Government, and Persons dissatisfied with the present management of Affairs;
And what added fuel to these Jealousies, was, that Vortigern himself was but
an Usurper, and Ambrose the Lawful Prince kept out by violence, so that
continually looking on that side from whence he expected most danger, he was
blind to the designs and contrivances of Hengist, and lay open to all his
encroachments. Add to this, that Vortigern, whether by Nature so framed, or by
Custom changed after his advancement to the license of a Scepter, was a
slothful and amorous Prince, uneasy to business, and restless, saving only in
his delightful pleasures.

Hengist on the other hand, watchful and contriving, and one who well knew how
to make the best use of those fair opportunities which were given him; so that
the one continually losing, the other insensibly gaining; the one never failing
in his demands, the other not daring to deny any thing, the Saxons got such
firm rooting at last, that the hands that planted them were not able to pluck
them up, when they most desired it. And now Hengist being well warm in his
Principality of Kent, obtains leave of the King to call over Octa and Ebissa,
his own, and Brother's Son, alleging, that if Lands were given them in the
North, they might be as a Bulwark and Fence against the incursions of the Scots
and Picts; They therefore sailing as far as the Orcades, as some write, with
five thousand Men, and all along curbing the insolences of those Nations, at
last seated themselves on that part of the Island which is now called
Northumberland. Affairs stated in this posture, and the Island lying open at
both ends to receive fresh supplies of Saxons, Hengist thought it now or never
high time to strike for the whole Empire; he wanted not pretenses for a
quarrel, alleging first, that his Soldiers pay was run much in arrear, which
being advanced to them, he then says plainly, that their wages was not
proportionable to their service, and requires an augmentation, otherwise
threatens open War.

Whilst the British Councels pause what Answer to return to these sudden
demands, He who desired not so much to be satisfied in that point, as to gain
occasion of quarrelling, immediately takes hold of their deliberating for a
positive denial, and entering into League with the Scots and Picts, issuing out
of Kent before any opposition could be made, he lays waste the whole Country
as far as the Western Sea.

Now begun the Britains to feel the dismal effects of foreign Succors; they
had not now their old Enemies alone to deal with, but a Nation far more
experienced in War; and what was more Pagan and Barbarous, whole Towns and
Colonies were overturned, not as in fair War, where the Conqueror is contented
with confession of Victory, but as it were to the utter extirpating of the
Inhabitants, desolation was heapt upon desolation, Temples and Palaces, Priest
and People lay buried in the wide Ruins of their Country. And yet these heavy
Judgments, to the shame be it spoken of a stupid and sinful Nation, were not
more deplorable, says Gildas, than justly deserved. As for Vortigern himself,
he was so far from being wakened by these Calamities, that to the scandal of
his Christian Profession he committed Incest with his own Daughter, a sin
scarcely named among the Gentiles; for which being censured in a Council by the
advice of the Peers, he retired to a strong Castle which he had built in
Radnorshire, leaving the management of Affairs to his Son Vortimer, whom for
his active courage and virtuous behavior the Britains generally chose for
their Leader.

This Prince in all likelihood, we may gather, had already given good proofs of
his Conduct, in repulsing the Saxons during the Government of his Father; for
although Hengist at first had made a sudden inroad, and entered the Country as
far as the western Coasts; yet we find that not long after, even in Vortigern's
time, he was fought with in Kent and Tanet, his old Possessions; and forced to
dispute his ground upon the edge of the Sea.

The Ancient Annals of the Saxons write thus: Hengist and Horsa, in the year
455, fought against Vortigern at Eglesthrip now Aylsford in Kent, where Horsa
was Bid, Ethelwerd, Florent, Annal. Sax.
slain, leaving his name to Horsted, the place of his Burial. But it seems in
this Battle the Saxons had a clear Victory, though much allayed by the death of
that Prince. For now Hengist, says the same Annals, assumed the Title of King,
and Peopled Kent with Jutes, who about that time held the Isle of Wight, and
part of Hampshire adjoining to it: here the Jutes are mistaken for Vites.

Two years after, Hengist and his Son at a place called Creganford, or Craford,
slew four thousand of the Britains, and four of their chief Commanders, forcing
the rest to quit Kent, and fly in great disorder to London: And although this
blow seemed Anno 465.
the total loss of that Country, yet eight years afterward we find the
Britains again pressing hard upon them, giving them Battle as far as the Isle
of Tanet, at a place called Now Elfler, Camb.
Wippeds fleet; but success was not answerable to their Spirit, for though they
fought it to the death of twelve of their Princes, yet the Saxons carried the
day, losing Wepped only an Earl of theirs who left his Name to the field he
fell in.

Another Battle was fought, but the place not mentioned, wherein the Britains
are said to be so totally routed, that flying in great confusion they left
their whole Baggage to the spoil of their Enemies. These, and many other
Skirmishes happened in the space of twenty years, says Malmesbury; in which
may be observed, that the Britains though worsted, according to these Saxon
Relations, yet seem to have been always the Aggressors, seeking out their
Enemy rather than sought for, as appears from the places wherein they fought,
being either in the heart of Kent, or further in the Isle of Tanet.

These vigorous Attempts to redeem the liberty of a sinking Nation, though
performed before the Resignation of Vortigern, yet seem to derive nothing from
him saving the ill success alone; The life and spirit by which they were acted
seemed to flow from Vortimer, the miscarrlages from that secret, but resistless
influence which inseparably attends an Impotent Government. And the event
proved accordingly, for instead of Vortigern, a lustful and giddy Prince, whom
neither years, or the neglect of Subjects could make apprehensive, Vortimer
being advanced to the Crown a, new scene of things immediately appeared. Thrice
he drove the Saxons and besieged them in the Isle of Tanet, and though they
were continually relieved with fresh supplies from the Continent, yet as often
as they broke in he repulsed them with loss.

In four Battles, whereof three are named, he utterly defeated them; the first
on the River Darwent, the second at Episford, where, Ninnius says, Horsa was
slain; and on Vortimer's side, his Brothern Catigern: The third in a field by
Stonar, then called Lapis Tituli in Tanet, where he beat them into their Ships,
glad to have so escaped, and not venturing to return for five years after; thus
Ninnius. And indeed Gildas writes of the departure of the Saxons much about
this time, during which space Vortimer dying poisoned, as some write, by the
contrivance of Rowena, commanded they should lay his Body in the Port of
Stonar, persuaded that his Bones lying there, would be a sufficient terror to
his Enemies for ever landing in that place, imitating herein (if not the Author
for him) the like conceit of Scipio Africanus, who would have his Tomb set
against Africa, to fright the Carthaginians from so much as looking toward the
Italian shores. The Britains, says Ninnius, (who makes a serious business of
it) neglecting his Orders, buried him at Lincoln.

The Son being dead, the Father is again restored to the Crown, whether by the
interest and prevalency of his Party is uncertain, or upon promises of
amendment, by Public Election, there being none remaining of that Family since
the death of his two Sons, Vortimer and Catigern, on whom to confirm the Royal
dignity. It should seem that the British Nobility were too deeply engaged in
the guilt of Vortigern's usurpation, for to think of restoring their lawful
Prince; it usually happening in public Rebellions generally countenanced, that
they who are involved in the Treason, choose rather to hazard the lust and
tyranny of an Usurper, than by confession of Error to rely on the mercy and
clemency of the Injured.

Hengist advised of this sudden change of affairs in Britain, not to slip so
favorable an occasion of recovering his lost fortunes, with all speed raises
new Forces and returns. But it seems the Britains, during his absence, as may
be gathered, had revenged themselves on those he left behind him, and we read
of many Skirmishes, and one set Battle fought between them, wherein the Saxons
always came by the worst. Hengist therefore at his landing, finding his
affairs upon the Island in a lower concondition than he expected, and not so
able to make open War, has recourse to his old tricks of Treaty and
Friendship; rid of his grand Opposer, he knew well enough how to manage his
Interest with Vortigern, whom he had obnoxious to him by ancient Leagues and
long Affinity; Proposing therefore nothing but terms of Kindness and Amity, and
pretending that former Breaches sprung from the Ambition of Vortimer and a
Court-faction, he easily works with the King, especially instigated by his
Wife, and not discouraged by his Peers, to give him a Personal treaty, not
doubting but by such an Interview, all jealousies might be removed, differences
composed, and a better understanding for the future settled between them. The
place of meeting was appointed upon Salisbury-Plain, whither both Parties were
to repair unarmed. But Hengist who meant nothing less than Peace, and yet had
plotted a general Massacre, commanded his Followers to carry privately under
their Vestures a Ihort Dagger or Seax, acquainting them before hand with his
designs.

When the Britains were in the midst of their Cups, the Saxons cavilling at
words, and picking small occasions of quarrel, provoking or provoked; at last
at the watchword given, Nienet cour Seares, at once drew their Daggers and
dispatched three hundred of the Assembly. The King they kept in custody, for
whose ransom Hengist received a confirmation of the Kingdom of Kent, and a new
addition of three Provinces afterward, called Essex, Sussex, and Middlesex.
Vortigern set at liberty upon these terms, retires to his solitary abode in the
County of Guorthigirniaun, so called by his name, thence to a Castle of his own
building in North Wales upon the River Tirby, where he perished at last by fire
from heaven, as some write; others, by Ambrostus Aurelian, whose right he had
usurped.

After this Massacre few or none being left in Britain, whose wisdom in
Council, or policy in War was able to do much for their Country, Hengist had
the leisure to establish his new Dominions. And although we read of some few
bickerings between him and the Britains afterward, yet by the consequences we
shall find that these last were always the loosers, and the Saxons the only
gainers. And now, about the year 477, Ella another Saxon Prince with his three
Sons, Cymen, Pletig and Cissa, An. Dom. 477.
entered the Island at a place in Sussex called Cymenshore, and made great
slaughter of the Britains; but of his actions, as being the founder of the
Kingdom of the South- Saxons, there will be occasion to speak in that History.
It is sufficient here to be hinted, that so fair a gap being laid open by
Hengist, not long after, as if Britain was the field of Fortune, many other
Princes out of Saxony and those parts came flocking into the Island, and soon
after one another settled Seven distinct Kingdoms, leaving to the Poor Britains
no more than what nature seemed to provide for them, namely, inaccessible
Mountains, and Rocks scarcely passable, where defending themselves, and
enjoying the use of their Religion, they sometimes to little purpose, as in the
main appears, made sallies upon the Saxons, who not withstanding all resistance
still more and more increased. Some of them fled over to their Brethren in
Armorica, others into Holland, where yet remains the Ruins of Brittenburg not
far from Leyden, to be seen at Low Water, either built, as the Dutch Writers
affirm, or seized by the Britains in their flight from Hengist.

Hengist reigned thirty four years, and then, as Marianus Scotus reports, died
honorably; but Peter de Ikam, Polydore and others, say, he was slain in
Battle, or taken by Edol Earl of Gloucester, and beheaded at Conesborow.

He was a Prince of the chief Blood of the Saxons, by birth of Angria in
Westphalia, and supposed Lord of that Territory, called at this day
Hengster-holt. He is thus derived from the deified Woden; Hengist the Son of
Wetgisse, the Son of Wecta, the Son of Woden.

When Hengist came first into Britain, he is said to have built Thong-Castle
near Sydingborn in Kent, so called because he had begged as much ground of the
King Verstegan.
to build it on, as he could compass about with an Ox-hide; Here he feasted
Vortigern, and here the fair Rowena in broken language drunk to him that fatal
Wassal, that for ever after like a strong, yet lingering poison, stuck close to
his side. Thus Hengist obtained the Kingdom by Craft as much as Courage, and
established it in blood by Treachery; yet there are who excuse that Massacre of
the British Nobility, and lay it upon chance, not design, alleging, that in
Saxony, not long before, there had been a meeting of Thuringers and Saxons,
where, if the Saxons suspecting fraud had not come privily armed, the
Thuringers had dispatched them all, fearing the like Treachery from the
Britains, they prepared for the worst in this Treaty; and in the midst of their
Cups, as drink is quarrelsom, they were provoked beyond the measure Wine is
able to bear. Thus Verstegan.

OERIC.
OERIC Surnamed Oisc, the Son of Hengiss, succeeded in the Kingdom; At An Dom.
489.
the Battle of Creganford, or Craford, he gave signal proof of his Valor in
assisting his Father in gaining that most remarkable Victory, not long before
he had been taken prisoner by the Britains, and was held in custody at York,
but by secret workings he made his escape, and came up to his Father before the
fight began. Being seated in the Throne, like a wise Prince, he set himself to
the establishing his Kingdom by good Laws, contracting his Dominions within the
Province of Kent, as most tenable, and neglecting those Out-skirts of Essex,
Sussex, and Middlesex, left him by Hengist, as not well bounded nor thoroughly
subdued. Sussex and Surry, which touched him on the West, he gave up to the
Conquest of Ella the Saxon, and Essex and Middlesex on the North, he left free
for Enchinwine, another Saxon Adventurer, to exercise his Valourin.

Thus whilst on all sides of his Kingdom the Britains were kept off by other
hands, he had leisure to follow the Arts and Methods of Peace, like Numa, to
settle the Kingdom left him by his warlike-Predecessor. And this is the reason
that we hear little of his Son and Grandson, saving their Names and Issues,
till the time of Ethelbert: For the Britains taken up with higher Wars, had not
opportunity or means to reach Kent, and till Ethelbert's days, the other
Saxons were so well employed by the Britains, that they had no leisure to fall
out among themselves.

In memory of this Prince, the founder of their Laws and Privileges, the
Kentish Men afterward called themselves Oiscings. He reigned 24 years, but
has not the honor by our Historians to be accounted the second Monarch of the
English Men, they giving that place to Ella, founder of the South Saxons, a
more active and bustling Prince.

OCTA.
OCTA, the Son of Eske or Oisc, began his Reign about the year 513: What An. D.
513.
his Father peacably left, he quietly enjoyed for twenty two years, in which he
had the pleasure to see many other Principalities of the Saxons begun in the
Island. He left the Kingdom to Ermiric.

ERMIRIC.
ERMIRIC the Son of Octa Reigned twenty nine years, more honorable in An. D.
535.
his Posterity than any actions of his own. He gave his Daughter Rikel in
marriage to Sledda Son of Erchinwine, first founder of the Kingdom of the
East Saxons, by which alliance he endeared to himself the neighboring
Provinces of Essex and Middlesex; his Kingdom he left to his Son Ethelbert.

ETHELBERT.
ETHELBERT the Son of Ermiric succeeded in the Kingdom of Kent; An. D. 564.
He equalled in length of Reign both his Predecessors, and as Bede rockoneth,
exceeded them three years. At his first coming to the Crown he was very young
and unexperienced, by which means, hastily aiming above his reach, he fell
almost beneath the contempt of his Neighbors. The causes of his Ambition seem
to be these.

We read that Hengist by leave of Vortigern had placed Octa and Ebissa in the
North to keep off the Scots and Picts from molesting the Southern borders they
and their Successors settling there a kind of Principality, had held it for one
hundred and eighty years, yet as in subjection to Kent the elder Family, and
owning its Protection though far distant; But Ida coming to govern in those
parts about the year five hundred forty seven, in the days of Ermiric, cast
off all manner of obedience to that Crown, and assumed an Absolute Royalty to
himself, which Indignity Ermeric, as may probably be guessed, resenting by
making strong Alliances, intended to revenge, but being snatched away by
untimely death, the quarrel was left entire to young Ethelbert his Son, who
partly instigated by this affront, whereby the honor of his Kingdom seemed to
be lessened; and judging withal, that Superiority was due to him not only from
that but other Kingdoms, from the priority of time wherein Kent was settled,
taking up Arms began to invade his Neighbors, and by open claim to assert the
Right of an universal Monarchy. But not well weighing the strength of his
Neighbors, and measuring his own Power rather by the number of his Levies,
than the goodness of his Men by long peace unaccustomed to War, he was
miserably baffled by Keaulin King of the West Saxons, an old experienced
Soldier, who with Cutha his Son leading an Army, trained up in Wars and well
fledged with Victories obtained against the Britains, twice defeated him, and
at last drove him into his own Territories. The first place of Battle is not
mentioned, that which seems to be the last was at Wiphandun, wherein two
Kentish Earls, Oslave and Cnebban, lost their lives. And this is the first War
the Saxons had among themselves since their entering the Island.

Ethelbert taught by these defeats, that the success of War depends not on the
eagerness of desire to conquer, but the steady management of the means,
referred the repairing of his losses to a more convenient time, and the event
proved accordingly; for being come to riper years, and Keaulin his grand
Opposer removed by death, in a short time he stretched his Empire over the most
considerable parts of the Island, all the Kingdoms on this side Humber either
by force or composition being brought entire under his obedience; And he is
worthily reckoned the sixth Monarch of the English men.

Thus grown great, he takes to wife Bertha the French King Chilperick's
Daughter, whom St. Gregory (as will appear in his Epistle writ to her) calls
Adelberga, she was a Christian, and by Covenant of Marriage was to enjoy the
exercise of her Religion; to that end she brought over with her Letard a
Bishop, under whose care and instructions, he daily exercised the Christian
Profession. The King as yet, and all his People, continued in the worship of
the Saxon Idolatry, and whether by the negligence of Letard, who perhaps
contented himself in the freedom of private devotion, or that the King taken up
in Wars had not the leisure to examine into their Faith, or lastly, that God in
his infinite wisdom reserved the Conversion of our Nation to other hands,
certain it is, that neither the example of the Queen, nor the preaching of
Letard, have left any tokens or Records of effects proportionable to such
advantages, as might be expected from an open and sincere Profession. St.
Gregory in one of his Epistles following, highly taxes the negligence of the
French Clergy in not taking care of the Saxons Cenversion; and Bid out of
Gildas, lays it to the charge of the British; But in what capacity, as to Life
and Manners they were in to perform so charitable an office, take out of Gildas
himself, as it is most elegantly translated by Mr. Milton.

Nothing better were the Clergy, but at the same pass, or rather worse than
when the Milton's Hist. of England.
Saxons came first in; unlearned, unapprehensive, yet impudent, subtle
Prowlers, Pastors in name, but indeed Wolves, intent upon all occasions not to
feed the flock, but to pamper and well line themselves, not called, but seizing
on the Ministry as a Trade, not as a Spiritual charge, teaching the People not
by sound Doctrine, but by evil Example, usurping the Chair of Peter, but
through the blindness of their own Worldly lusts they stumble upon the Seat of
Judas, deadly haters of truth, broachers of lies, looking on the poor Christian
with eyes of pride and contempt, but sawning on the wickedest Rich men without
shame, great promoters of other men's Alms with their set exhortations, but
themselves contributing ever least, slightly touching the many vices of the
Age, but preaching without end their own grievances as done to Christ, seeking
after preferments and degrees in the Church more than after heaven: and so
gained, make it their whole study how to keep them by any tyranny. Yet, lest
they should be thought things of no use in their eminent places, they have
their nicities and trivial points to keep in awe the superstitious Multitude:
But in true saving knowledge leave them still as gross and stupid as
themselves, bunglers at the Scripture, nay forbidding and silencing them that
know, but in Worldly matters practiced Cunning jhisters; in that only art and
symony Great Clerks and Masters, bearing their heads high, but their thoughts
object and low. He taxes them also as gluttonous, incontinent, and daily
drunkards: And what should thou expect from these poor Laity? So he goes on,
These beasts, all belly, shall these amend thee, who are themselves laborious
in evil doings? shall thou see with their eyes, who see right forward nothing
but gain? leave them rather, as bids our Savior, left ye fall both blindfold
into the same perdition. Are all thus? Perhaps not all, or not so grossly. But
what availed it Eli to be himself blameless, while he connived at others that
were abominable? Who of them has been envied for his better life? who of them
has hated to consort with these, or withstood their entering the Ministry, or
endeavored zealously their casting out? Yet some of these perhaps by others
are legended for great Saints.

This was the state of the Church among the Britains, scarce likely to convert
others, who were so much perverted among themselves; but whether or no they
were in a condition among so much hostility to preach the Gospel of Peace,
supposing they had men well-meaning thereunto amongst them, in a thing so far
distant is not easily determinable; Certain it is, that the Conqueror with less
prejudice receives Religion from any, than the persons conquered: And this
might be the cause that notwithstanding the Christian Faith shone round about,
yet the entire Conversion of the Saxons is owing to the Sea of Rome, which at
that time was possessed by GREGORY, afterward Surnamed the Great; and for his
upright behavior in this and other like occasions, worthily Cannoniz'd for a
Saint.

Now the first occasions of this great work, and the methods by which it
proceeded, because it has been of so high concern to our Nation, as which
still bears influence among us, I shall not stick more particularly to relate
out of faithful Historians, and Ancient Records yet extant.

The Original motives, which induced Gregory to this great undertaking,
Venerable Bede thus relates, as he received it down by tradition.

The Report goes, that on a certain day, when upon the coming of Merchants
lately arrived, great store of Wares was brought together into the Marketplace
(at Rome) for to be sold, and many Chapinen flocked together for to buy,
Gregory also himself among others came thither, and saw with other things,
Boys, set to sale, for Bodies fair and white, of Countenance sweet and
amiable, having the Hair also of their head as lovely and beautiful, whom when
he wistly beheld, he demanded (as they say) from what Country or Land they were
brought? Answer was made, that they came out of the Isle of Britain, the People
whereof were as well-favoured to see unto. Then he asked again, whether those
Islanders were Christians, or enshared still with the Errors of Paganisin? To
which it was answered, they were Painims, but he fetching a long deep sigh from
his very heart root, Alas for pity, quoth he, that the foul Fiend and Father of
Darkness should be Lord of so bright and lightsom faces, and that they who
carried such grace in their Countenances, should be void of the inward Grace in
their hearts and souls. Once again he desired to understand by what name their
Nation was known? They made answer, that they were called Angli. And well may
they be so named, quoth he, for Angel-like faces they have, and meet it is that
such should be fellow-heirs with Angels in Heaven. But what is the name of that
Province from whence these were brought? Answer was made, that the Inhabitants
of the said Province were called DEIRI. Deiri, quoth he, they are indeed De ira
eruti, that is, delivered from anger and wrath, and called to the mercy of
Christ. How call you the King of that Province, says he? Answer was made, that
his name was Aelle. Then he alluding to the name, said, that Allelu-jah should
be sung in those Parts to the praise of GOD the Creator. Coming therefore to
the Bishop of the Roman and Apostolical See (for himself as yet was not made
Bishop) he entreated that some Ministers of the Word should be sent into the
English Nation, by whose means it might be Converted to Christ, and even
himself was ready to undertake the performance of this work with the help of
God, in case it would please the Apostolical Pope that it should be so.
BENEDICT, who then sat in the Chair of: Rome, readily heard and joyfully
embraced so charitable a motion, and Gregory encouraged by the leave of that
Pope, undertakes the Journey himself; but he was not gone far, but the Roman
Citizens, who for his holiness of Life, and sincerity of Doctrine, looked on
him as their chiefest stay and comfort, by earnest supplications and passionate
requests obtained his Revocation, who thus put by his so much desired
enterprise, nevertheless continued his ardent endeavors for this great work of
Conversion, which he had means to perfect afterward, when for his great Merit
he was advanced to a higher capacity of acting; For after the death of
BONIFACE, being chosen his Successor, he pitched upon Augustine for his chief
Instrument in this work, a Man of whose endowments for such a Ministry he was
sufficiently satisfied, as having, together with an Austere sanctity of life,
the spirit and courage of an Apostle, and whom by preferment he had nearly
engaged to himself, having made him Provost of his own Monastery at Rome.

Augustine thus qualified sets on for his Journey, but the Monks who were to
attend him, and over whom he was created Abbot, whether by the disswasions of
others who represented the danger of their Journey, or discouraged by their own
Fears, draw off from the enterprise, and send back Augustine in the name of
all, to desire Gregory to release them from a Mission which was likely to be
not only dangerous, but ineffectual, as to a Nation fierce and barbarous, and a
Language they understood not. And this is the occasion of the following
Epistle, wherein Gregory encourages them to proceed in the work of Conversion,
which I have set down, and many others, because they show the unwearied
diligence, and vigilant care of that great Pastor, to remove all Obstacles that
might hinder, and to improve all Advantages to help on so necessary and
charitable an undertaking.

THE British EPISTLES OF GREGORY the GREAT.
GREGORY Bishop, servant of the Servants of GOD, To the Servants of our Lord
Jesus Christ.
He exhorts those that go from Britain, to be terrified with no difficulties
whatsoever, but bring to perfection what they had happily begun.

BEcause it is better not to begin good things, than after they are begun An.
Chr. 596: Regist. lib. 4. Epist. 52. Bid, lib. 1. cap. 23.
negligently to give them over, it concerns you, my Dearest Children, with
God's assistance to endeavor an accomplishing that Good work which lately you
have undertaken, neither let the tediousness of your Journey, or the tongues of
Evil men any ways affright you, but with all vehemence and zeal put an end to
those things (God being your guide) which you have already begun, knowing that
the greatness of your Labors shall be attended with eternal glory; In all
things humbly obey Augustine your Governor at his return, whom we have made
Abbot over you, knowing how abundantly it will profit your own Souls. If any
thing shall be completed by you according to his advice, Almighty GOD protect
you with his Grace, and grant that I may see the fruits of our labor in an
Eternal Country; And although I cannot labor with you, yet I hope I shall be
rewarded together with you, because I am willing to labor. *God have you safe
in his keeping, my Beloved Children; Given the tenth of the Kalends of August,
our Lord Mauritius Tiberius Augustus being Emperor in the fourteenth year,
after the Consulship of the said Lord the thirteenth year, Indiction the
fourteenth ( i. e.) in the year of our Lord 596.

Observations upon this Epistle.
Those things in the preceding Epistle which follow this mark * I find not in
the old Gregorian Register, but are annexed here by us according to the Copy of
that Epistle in Bedes Eccl. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 23. The Author of the Register
has every where omitted the Inscription of these Dates, to the great damage
and injury of the Curious Searchers of Antiquity.

In Bid there follows another Epistle of Gregory the Great, not found in the
Register. The Reverend Pope sent Letters, says he, by the same Persons
(meaning Augustine, and his Companions) to Etherius Archbishop of Arles, that
he would courtcously entertain Augustine going for Britain; of which this is
the style.

GREGORY, servant of the Servants of GOD, To our most Reverend and Holy
Brother, and fellow Bishop Etherius.
That he would courteously receive Augustine, and his Companions.

ALthough Priests having Charity pleasing to God, need not the Bid, lib. 1.
cap. 2, 4.
commendation of any other Religious person, yet because time has fitly
presented it self, we have taken care to send our Letters to your Brotherhood,
signifying, that we have sent thither Augustine the servant of God, and Bearer
of these Presents, with other servants of God for the benefit of Souls, whom
it is very necessary your Holiness should readily assist with a Sacerdotal care,
and speedily afford him what comforts you can; and that you may the willinglier
favor him, we have enjoined him particularly to declare the cause of his
Journey, hoping, that, that being known, you would for God's sake seriously
endeavor (the business requiring it) their benefit and welfare.

Gregory the Great To Candidus the Priest going to the Patrimony of Gaul.
To whose care he commends the Patrimony of St. Peter in Gaul, and that out of
it he should buy English Boys, and clothes for the Poor.

GOing forward (with the help of our Lord Jesus Christ) to the government of
the Patrimony which is in Gaul, we would that Regist. lib. 5. Ep. 10.
your charity, out of the money it shall receive, provide clothes for the Poor,
and English Boys that are about seventeen or eighteen years old, who being put
into Monasteries may do God good service, in regard the money of Gaul which in
our Land cannot justly be expended, may be laid out to advantage in its proper
place. But if you shall receive any thing out of the Revenues which are said to
be taken away, we will also that out of those, clothes be provided for the
Poor, or as we said before, Boys, who may be instrumental in the service of
Almighty God; But because they are all Pagans that are found thereabouts, I
will that a Priest be sent over with them, lest any sickness happen to them on
the way, that they may be Baptized, when he finds them ready to die. So let
your Charity act, and make have to fulfill these things.

Gregory the Great To Palladius Bishop of Xanton, To Pelagius of Tours, and To
Serenus of Marseilles, Fellow Bishops of Gaul.
To whom he commends Augustine, whom he had sent into England.

ALthough Priests having charity pleasing to God, need not the Regist. lib. 5.
Ep 42.
commendations of any other Religious person, yet because time has fitly
presented it self, we have taken care to send our Letters to your Fraternity,
signifying, that we have sent thither Augustine the Servant of God and Bearer
of these presents, with other Servants of God for the benefit of Souls, whom
it is very necessary your Holiness should readily assist with a Sacerdotal care,
and speedily afford him what comforts you can; and that you may the willinglier
favor him, we have enjoined him particularly to declare the cause of his
Journey, hoping that, that being known, you would for God's sake seriously
endeavor (the business requiring it) their benefit and welfare.

Gregory the Great To Virgilius Bishop of Arles, and Metropolitan of Gaul.
He commends Augustine to him, whom he had sent into England to propagate the
Gospel.

ALthough we are confidently assured that your Brotherhood is always Regist.
lib. 5. Ep. 53.
intent upon good works, and ready at any time of its own accord to interest it
self in causes pleasing to God, yet we thought it not altogether unprofitable
to speak to you out of a Brotherly charity, that the comforts, which ye ought
out of your own good natures freely to have afforded, stirred up by these our
Epistles, might be increased in a greater measure. We therefore declare to your
Holiness, that we have dispatched hither Augustine the servant of God, and
Bearer of these presents (whose zeal and diligence is well known to us) with
other Servants of God for the welfare of Souls, as he, when he comes into your
presence, can testify; in which business it is necessary that you assist him
with both Counsel and Supplies, and cherish him (as it behooves you) with your
Paternal and Sacerdotal consolations; For when he shall have obtained those
comforts from your Holiness (if it is any thing available, as we doubt not, to
promote the cause of God) you also shall receive your reward, who so piously
afforded the benefit of your assistance for the promoting of good works.

Gregory the Great To Desiderius of Vienna, and Syagrius of Augustodunum,
Fellow Bishop of Gaul.
He commends Augustine to them.

WE shall entertain a good opinion of the sincere charity of your Regist. lib.
5. cap. 57.
Brotherhood, if out of love to St. Peter Prince of the Apostles you bestow it
in relieving our Servants, since the nature of the cause requires it, in which
of your own accord ye ought rather to wish to be fellow laborers and
partakers. We therefore declare to your Holiness, that we have sent hither (God
so ordering it) Augustine the servant of God, Bearer of these presents (whose
zeal and diligence is well known to us) with other Servants of God for the cure
of Souls; when you shall understand exactly from his own Relation what is
enjoined him, your Brotherhood may in every thing the business shall require
with more readiness assist him, that you may be counted (as is meet) the
furtherers of good works; therefore in this thing let your Brotherhood study to
manifest the demonstrations of its affection, that the good opinion we have
already entertained of you, by hearsay, may receive a further confirmation in
us of you by your works.

Gregory the Great To Arigius a Noble man of Gaul.
To whom he commends Augustine.

HOw much goodness, and how much meekness with charity pleasing Regist. lib. 5.
Ep. 57.
unto Christ is shining in you, we are certainly informed from Augustine
Servant of God, Bearer of these presents, and we give Almighty God thanks, that
has given you these gifts of his grace, by which you may appear praiseworthy
amongst men, and in his sight, which is truly profitable, glorious. We beseech
therefore Almighty God, that these gifts, which he has so freely granted you,
he would multiply, and take you and all yours into his protection, and that he
may so order the manner of your glory in this life that it may be beneficial to
you here, and, what is more to be wished, in the life to come. Greeting
therefore your Honor, we desire with a Fatherly tenderness, that the Bearer of
these presents, and the Servants of God that are with him, may find in those
things that are necessary your assistance, since they will be the better able,
through God's help and the benefit of your favor, to perform those things that
are commanded them.

Gregory the Great To Theoderick and Theodebert, Kings of the Frankes,
concerning Augustine Servant of God, sent to the English Nation.
AFter that Almighty God had adorned your Kingdom with a pure Lib. 5. Ep. 58.
and upright Faith, and by the integrity of the Christian Religion had made it
eminent above other Nations, we conceived great grounds of presuming that you
would especially have desired that your Subjects should be converted to that
Faith in which you are Kings and Lords over them; And, indeed, there came to
our hands the earnest Petition of the English Nation (God commiserating their
condition) to be converted to the Christian Faith, but your Priests, their
Neighbors, wholly neglect it, and are much wanting by their Exhortations in
seconding their desires. For this cause therefore, we have carefully sent
thither Augustine servant of God, Bearer of these presents (whose zeal and
diligence is well known unto us) with other Servants of God, whom we have
enjoined to take some of the neighboring Clergy along with them to know their
minds, and with their Admonitions, as much as in them lies, further their
willingness; in which thing that they may prove effectually able, with a
Fatherly charity saluting your Highnesses, we desire that these whom we have
sent may merit your favor; and because it is a business of Souls, may your
Power protect and assist them, that Almighty God, which knows with what
devotion and diligence you further them, may take your state into his
protection, and after this Earthly power is ended, bring you to an Heavenly
kingdom.

Gregory the Great To Brunichild Queen of the Frankes.
Of the Conversion of the English, and of Augustine.

THe Christianity of your Highness has formerly so clearly appeared Lib. 5.
Ep. 59.
unto us, that we cannot in the least doubt of its integrity and goodness, but
ought rather to remain fully satisfied of it, because in matters of Faith it
carefully sustains and assists us, abundantly administering all those comforts
that proceed from a Religious sincerity; of which thing being confident we
salute you with a Fatherly love, intimating moreover, that we have heard of the
earnest desire the English Nation has (God so willing it) to become Christian,
but your Priests, who are their Neighbors, take no Pastoral care of them.
Therefore lest their Souls should perish through eternal damnation, we have
carefully directed thither Augustine, servant of God, and Bearer of these
presents (whose zeal and diligence is well known unto us) with other Servants
of God, that by them we might know their wills, and consider (you also
endeavoring as much as in you lies) the fittest means for their Conversion. We
have also commanded them for the better carrying on of the work, that they take
along with them some of the neighboring Clergy; We therefore hope that your
Highness, who was always naturally inclined to good works, will, as well for
the sake of this our Request, as out of a serious consideration of the Divine
Anger, in all things respect his honor and welfare, and bestow upon him the
favor of your Protection, and assist his labors with your Patronage; and that
he may thoroughly obtain his reward, provide that he may pass securely to the
aforesaid English Nation, that God who has in this life plentifully stored you
with all good things pleasing to himself, may make you here and in eternal Rest
rejoice with his Saints.

Gregory the Great To Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria.
He treats of the Conversion of the English, and makes mention, that in the
Council of Calcedon the Roman Bishop was styled, UNIVERSAL.

OUR Common Son the Bearer of these presents, when he brought Lib. 7. Ep. 30.
the Letters from your Holiness, found me sick, and left me so, which was the
occasion that in answer to the large fountain of your Beatitude so small
streams have been made you in return. It was surely, the gift of Heaven, when I
was so much indisposed in Body, to afford me the benefit of your Holiness's
writings, which, by the information they gave me of the Doctrine of the
Alexandrian Church, of the Conversion of Heretics, and of the Unity of the
Faithful, rejoiced me so exceedingly, that the extremity of my pain was in some
measure allayed by the refreshing of my mind: And, indeed, we always rejoice
with new joy at your good, but that you should act so perfectly we think it not
new at all; for that the number of the Holy Church increases, that spiritual
Corn for the Heavenly Barn is multiplied, we never doubted the grace of
Almighty God which so largely flows upon your Holiness. We therefore give
Almighty God thanks, because we see that fulfilled in you which is written:
Where is much Corn, there is manifest the strength of the Oxen; for if a strong
Ox had not drawn the plough of the tongue over the land of the heart of the
Hearers, so great an Harvest of the Faithful had never sprung up. But because
from the good you do, there arises something which enforces you to communicate
your joy to others, we also this way will repay your courtesy, and tell you of
things not altogether different from those you have related. The English Nation
placed in an obscure corner of the World, has hitherto been wholly taken up in
the adoration of Wood and Stones, but by the advice and light I received from
your Epistle, I have taken care to send thither (as I ought) a Monk of our
Monastery set apart for preaching to that People, who having before License
from me, is made Bishop by the Bishops of Germany, with whose prayers and
fatherly consolations he is gone to the aforesaid Nation placed at the end of
the World. And there came unto us lately Letters concerning his welfare and
proceedings, who either he himself, or those that were sent over with him are
grown so famous in that Nation, for the great wonders they have wrought, that
they seem to equal the virtues of the Apostles in the Miracles they have
performed. At the solemnity of the birth of our LORD, which was celebrated at
this first Indiction, above 10000 English are reported to have been Baptized by
this our Brother and Fellow Bishop; all which I have related to this purpose,
that you might know what you do by your speaking amongst the Alexandrians, and
what by your prayers in the uttermost parts of the World; your prayers are in
that place where you are not, whose holy operations and effects are shown in
that place where you are.

Moreover, concerning the Person of Eudoxius the heretic, of whose Error I can
find nothing in the Latin tongue, I rejoice that I am sufficiently satisfied by
your Holiness, for you brought against him the judgments of the ablest Men,
Basil, Gregory, Epiphanius, so that we must needs conclude him killed, against
whom so many Champions have cast their Darts.

Concerning those Errors which are grown up in the Church of Constantinople,
you have learnedly considered all things, and as became the Judgment of so
great a Cheyer; wherefore we render Almighty God thanks, because the Tables of
the Testament are yet in the Ark of God; For what is the Heart of the Priest,
but the Ark of the Testament? in which (because spiritual Doctrine abounds)
without doubt, the Tables of the Law lie. Your Holiness also endeavored to
show, that you don't now write high Titles to any one, which proceed from the
root of vanity, and yet in different Character you speak to me thus, As ye
Commanded, which word of Command I desire you would for ever take from my
hearing since I know who I am, and who ye are; by your place ye are Brothers
to me, by your gravity Fathers, therefore I did not command any thing, but
carefully intimated what I thought profitable, yet I find that your Holiness
would not perfectly retain what I hinted to your Memory. For I said that ye
ought not to write thus to me, or any body else, and yet in the very Preface of
your Epistle directed to me who forbad it, you have taken care to inscribe to
me UNIVERSAL BISHOP, a Title of too proud a signification, which I beg your
good Holiness would do no more; For from you is taken whatever beyond reason is
given to another, for I don't desire to be honored by words but by actions,
neither do I think it honor, where I know my Brethren lose their Honor; for
my Honor is the same honor of the whole Church, my Honor is the full vigor
of my Brethren; then therefore I am truly honored, when no body is denied the
honor due to him. For if your Holiness calls me Universal Bishop, it denies it
self, to be at all, what it confesses me to be only, that is, Universal; but
God forbid this. Away with those words stir up Pride and wound charity, and,
indeed, your Holiness well knows that this Title was offered my Predecessor in
the holy Counsel of Chalcedonia, and afterward by succeeding Fathers, but none
of them would ever accept of this Title, that whilst carefully in this World
they respected the honor of all the Clergy in general, they might preserve
their own entire with God Almighty. Wherefore (paying you due custom of
Greeting) I desire you would be pleased to be mindful of us in your Prayers,
that from the chains of my sins, because of mine own merits I am not able,
through your intercession God would deliver me.

Observations upon this Epistle.
The Annexer of the Title has not done ingeniously in this Epistle, for he
says, that in the Council of Chaleedon the Pope was styled UNIVERSAL, not
making any mention how that Title was rejected by the Pope and all his
Successors (as Gregory shows) but was also vehemently exploded and cast off by
Gregory himself in this Epistle, of which he has not taken the least notice in
the Title.

Gregory To Menna of Tolouse, To Serenus of Marseilles, To Lupus of Cavation,
To Agilius of Meris, To Simplicius of Paris, To Melantius of Roan, and To
Licinius, Fellow Bishops of the Frankes.
ALthough the care of the office ye have undertaken might sufficiently Regist.
lib. 9. Ep. 52.
admonish your Brotherhood with your utmost endeavors to assist Religious
persons, and especially those that labor in the cure of Souls; yet it will not
be amiss, if with this our Epistle we stir up your vigilance. For as the fire
by the fanning of the wind is made greater: so the affections of a good mind
are embettered by commendation. Because therefore the grace of our Redeemer
cooperating, so great a multitude of the English are converted to the Christian
faith, that our most Reverend and Common Brother, and Fellow Bishop Augustine,
affirms, that those that are with him are not sufficient for the execution of
this work in diverse Places; We have provided that some Monks should be sent
over to him, with our beloved and common Sons, Laurentius the Priest and
Miletus the Abbot; and therefore let your Brotherhood afford them that charity
it ought, and speedily help them with those succors that are necessary, for as
much as by your assistance all obstructions and causes of delays will be
removed; So that they being relieved by your charity, may rejoice together with
you, and you by freely bestowing it, may be found partakers with them in the
work they are intended for.

Gregory the Great To Clotharius King of the Frankes.
AMongst the many troubles and cares you daily meet with in governing those
Nations under you, it is the highest honor and Regist. lib. 9. Epist 55.
greatest advantage to appear in the Patronage of those that labor in the
cause of God; and because by many good Presidents you have shown your self to
be such that now we may presume better things of you, we are the willinglier
invited to desire those things of you, which at last will return to your own
benefit. Some of those who went into England with our most Reverend Brother and
Fellow-Bishop Augustine, at their return have related with how great humanity
and charity your Excellence entertained him in your own Court, and with what
succors you assisted him setting forward on his Journey. But because those
actions are most acceptable to God always which recede not from good
beginnings, We salute You with a Fatherly affection, desiring that the Monks,
the Bearers of these presents (whom we have sent over to our foresaid Brother,
together with our beloved Sons, Laurentius the Priest and Melitus the Abbot)
might be particularly respected by you, and whatsoever it was you bestowed on
those before, for the plentiful increase of your Honor continue likewise to
these, that through your assistance they may, without any delays, perform the
Journey they have begun, that God, the Recompencer of all good works, may be to
you in prosperity a guardian, and in adversity an helper.

Gregory To Brunichild Queen of the Frankes.
He returns Her thanks for assisting Augustine, and exhorts her courteously to
entertain the Monks that were sent unto him.

WE give thanks unto Almighty God, who among the rest of the Regist. lib. 9.
Ep. 56.
gifts of his grace bestowed on your Highness has so filled your breast with
the love of Christian Religion, that if you should know any thing tending to
the benefit of Soula or the increase of your Faith, you would never cease with
a devout mind and pious endeavor to bring it to perfection. With how great
favor and courtesy your Highness assisted our most Reverend Brother and
Fellow Bishop Augustine, going for England, Fame before has not been silent,
and since the Monks that returned from him have more particularly related. Your
Christianity may be admired at by those that know but little of your favors;
but we that are experimentally acquainted with them, have more reason to
rejoice than wonder, because by charitably obliging others ye advantage your
selves. How great, and what manner of Miracles our Redeemer has wrought in the
Conversion of the aforesaid Nation is well known to your Highness, for which
reason ye ought exceedingly to rejoice, because your charity in this thing may
claim to it self the greatest part, by whose assistance, next after God, the
word of Preaching became there manifest, for he that furthers another's good
consults his own.

And that the fruits of your reward may be the larger, we desire that to the
Monks, Bearers of these presents (whom with our beloved Sons Laurentius the
Priest, and Melitus the Abbot, we have sent over to our foresaid most Reverend
Brother and Fellow Bishop, forasmuch as those that are with him are not
sufficient for the work) you would courteously grant the favor of your
Patronage, and vouchsafe to assist them in all things, that the good beginnings
of your Highness may still proceed unto better, and that they meet with no
delays or difficulties in their Journey. May you in as great a measure stir up
God's mercy to be favorable to you and your posterity, most Dear unto us, as
you for his love shall behave your selves with compassion in causes of this
nature.

Gregory To Augustine Bishop of the English.
Of the Conversion of that Nation, and that he should not glory in the power of
Miracles, which oftentimes wicked Men have performed.

GLory be to God on high, and on earth peace, good will toward Regist. lib. 9.
Ep. 58.
Men, because a grain of corn falling dead upon the earth has brought forth
much fruit, that it might not alone reign in heaven, by whose Death we live, by
whose Infirmity we are strengthened, by whose Passion we are delivered from
passion, by whose Love we sought Brethren in Britain whom we knew not, and by
whose courtesy, whom not knowing we sought, we have found. Who is able to
relate how great the joy is that is arose in the hearts of the Faithful, that,
through the Grace of Almighty God cooperating, and your Brotherhood laboring,
the darkness of Errors being driven away, the English Nation is covered over
with the glorious light of holy Faith, that now out of a sincere mind and pious
devotion it tramples on those Idols to which before it madly croucht to, that
it prostrates it self before God with a pure heart, that it is restrained from
relapsing into sin by the rules and instructions of holy Preaching, that it
submits in mind to the Divine precepts, but raised in understanding humbles it
self in prayer on the ground, lest in affections it should grovel in the earth?
Whose working is this, but His that says, My Father hitherto works, and I
work? Who, that he might make it manifest to the World, that he converts not by
the wisdom of Men, but by his own virtue and power, The Preachers whom he sent
into the World he made choice of without learning, using the same method here
also, for in the English Nation he has wrought mighty things by the hands of
weak Persons.

But there is, my Dearest Brother, something in this celestial gift, which you
ought extremely both to fear and rejoice at. I know that Almighty God has shown
great Miracles by you in the Nation he would should be chosen, from whence it
is necessary, that concerning the same heavenly gift, you with fear rejoice,
and with joy be afraid. You may rejoice that the Souls of the English through
outward Miracles are drawn to an inward grace; you ought to be afraid lest
among the Miracles that are wrought your frail mind be puffed up too much by
presumption and self-confidence, so that outwardly raised in honor, it
inwardly falls through such vainglory. Moreover, we ought to remember, that
when the Disciples returning from preaching with joy said to their Heavenly
Master, Lord, in thy name Devils are subject unto us, they presently heard,
Rejoice not for this, but rather rejoice that your names are written in Heaven.
They had placed their mind in a temporal and private joy, because they rejoiced
in Miracles; but they are straight recalled from a private to a public, from a
temporal to an eternal joy, to whom it is said, In this rejoice because your
Names are written in Heaven: For all the Elect don't work Miracles, but the
Names of them all are registered in Heaven; to the Disciples of truth there
ought to be no joy, unless in that good which they have common with all, and in
which they have no end of their joy.

It remains therefore (My Dear Brother) that among those things which with the
help of God you outwardly perform, you always inwardly strictly judge your
self, and particularly examine your self, who you are, and how great Grace
there may be in that Nation for whose Conversion you have received the gift of
performing Miracles; and if ever you remember that you have offended our
Creator either by word or deed, always bear it in mind, that the remembrance
of the guilt may suppress the rising glory of the heart; and what power soever
of working Miracles you shall receive, or have received, always think it
given, not for your sake, but for those for whose salvation 'twas conferred
upon you.

There comes into my mind, thinking of these things, what became of one Servant
of God even extraordinarily elected. Certainly Moses, whilst he brought the
People of God out of Egypt, wrought wonderful Miracles (as your Brotherhood
knows) in the land of Egypt; on Mount Sinai, after he had fasted forty days
and nights, he received the Tables of the Law amongst dreadful Thunderings, all
the People being afraid. In the service of Almighty God he alone enjoyed a
familiar conference with Him, the Red Sea he divided, in his Journey his guide
was a Pillar of Cloud; When the People were hungry he gave them Manna from
heaven, he miraculously gave them Flesh, when they wanted, in the Wilderness
till they were cloyed; but when in the time of Thirst they came to the Rock, he
mistrusted, and doubted whether he could bring water from it, which, the Lord
commanding, he struck and opened a passage for the running water. How great
Miracles after this did he persorm in the Wilderness for the space of thirty
eight years? who can reckon them? who can trace them? as often as he doubted of
any thing, having recourse to the Tabernacle, he secretly inquired of the Lord,
and was presently informed by the word of the Lord concerning that thing. By
the interposition of his prayers he appeased the Anger of the Lord toward his
people, when they were puffed up with pride, or rebelled against him. He caused
the earth to open and swallow them up, he foiled the Enemy with victories, and
showed signs to his own People; but when they came to the land of Promise, he
was called into the Mountain, and heard of his fault that he had committed
thirty eight years before, because he despaired of bringing out water, and he
acknowledged, that for this thing he could not enter into the land of Promise;
wherefore we ought to consider, what a dreadful thing the judgment of Almighty
God is, who had done so many signal Wonders by this his Servant, and yet kept
his fault committed so long ago still in remembrance. Therefore (most Dearest
Brother) if we acknowledge him dead after so many Miracles for his fault, whom
we know to have been in a more especial manner elected by God Almighty, with
how great fear ought we to tremble, who know not whether as yet we are elected?

What should I speak of the Miracles of Reprobates, since your Brotherhood
knows very well what Truth it felf has said in the Gospel? Many shall come in
that day, saying unto me, Lord, in thy name we have Prophesied, and in thy name
we have cast out Devils, and in thy name we have done wonders. But I will say
unto them, I know ye not, depart from me all you workers of Iniquity. Therefore
the mind is very much to be depressed and kept under amongst Signs and
Miracles, lest in those things it should seek its own glory, and rejoice in the
joy of self exaltation. In Miracles we ought to have respect to the gain of
Souls, and to his glory by whose power those Miracles are wrought; but our Lord
has given us one sign concerning which we ought extremely to rejoice, and by
which we may acknowledge the glory of Election in us, By this it shall be known
whether you are my Disoiples, if you love one another; which sign the Prophet
desired, when he said, Grant some token unto me, O Lord, for good, that they
that hate me may see and be confounded. I speak these things that my Hearer's
mind might be laid prostrate in humility; but let this your humility have its
confidence too, for I a Sinner have most certain hope that your sins are
forgiven, through the grace of our Omnipotent Creator, and God our Redeemer the
Lord Jesus Christ. And to this end you were Elected, that others sins might be
forgiven through you; Neither shall you hereafter find sorrow for any guilt,
because you endeavor to make joy in Heaven by the conversion of so many; the
same our Creator and Redeemer, when he speaks of the repentance of Man, says,
I say thus unto you, There shall be greater joy in Heaven over one Sinner that
repents, than over ninety nine Just persons that need no repentanca. Now, if
over one Penitent there is made great joy in Heaven what great rejoyceing do we
think there was at the conversion of such a number of People from their
Errors, who coming to the faith by repentance has condemned the evil it had
done? Amidst therefore the joy of Heaven and the Angels, let us repeat those
words of the Angels which we said before; let us say therefore, Glory be to God
on high, and on earth peace, good will toward men.

Observations upon this Epistle.
Bid recites this Epistle, but not all, only as much of it as is included
within these two foregoing Marks; as thus,, but the Date which is here
wanting, he shows, for when he writ a Letter to Melitus going into Britain,
dated (as you see above) the fifteenth day of the Kalends of July, our Lord
Mauritius Tiberius Augustus being Emperor, in the nineteenth year after the
Consulship of our said Lord the eighteenth year, in the fourth Indiction; He
adds in the following Chapter, about which time he sent a Letter to Augustine
concerning Miracles, which he knew were wrought by him, in which, lest through
the number of them he should incur the danger of selfopinion and pride, he
exhorts him in these words, I know, Most Dear Brother, that Almighty God, etc.
as above. That date of the fifteenth of the Kalends of July, agrees with the
year of our Lord 601, about which time he wrote more Epistles.

Gregory To Aldiberga, Queen of the English.
HE that desires after this Earthly dominion to acquire the glory of an
Heavenly kingdom, to gain his ends ought diligently to Regist. lib. 9. Ep. 59.
labor in the service of his Creator, that by degrees of working he may attain
to what he desires, which we rejoice you have done; our Beloved Son Laurence
the Priest, and Peter the Monk, at their return related in what manner your
Majesty behaved it self toward our most Reverend Brother and Follow Bishop
Augustine, and what assistances and comfort you bestowed on them likewise; And,
indeed, we bless Almighty God, who out of his mercy propitiously vouchsafed to
reserve the Conversion of the English Nation for your glory and advancage. For
as by Helen of Blessed memory, the Mother of the most pious Emperor
Constantine, he inflamed the hearts of the Romans toward the Christian Faith:
So in regard of the frequent Zeal of your Majesty, we hope his mercy will
effectually work upon the English Nation. And, indeed, you ought also long
since by your good prudence, which is purely Christian, to have inclined the
mind of our most glorious Son your Husband, that, for the good of his Kingdom,
and of his own Soul, he should follow that Faith which you profess; forasmuch
as by him and through him, in the Conversion of the whole Nation, a reward
worthy of you would spring up in the joys of heaven. Since (as we have said)
your Highness has been confirmed in the right Faith, and taught the
Scriptures, this thing ought not to have been difficult or tedious to you. And
because by God's appointment a fit time is now offered, strive (the Divine
grace assisting you) to repair with gain what has hitherto been neglected,
therefore by daily exhortations strengthen the mind of your most Glorious
Husband in the love of the Christian Faith. Let your care and example increase
in him a love toward God, and let it so stir up his mind, especially for a
through Conversion of the whole Nation under ye, that from the servency of his
devotion ye may offer up to Almighty God an acceptable sacrifice, that those
things which are reported of you may increase, and in all respects be found
true concerning you. Your excellent virtues are not only known to the Romans,
who more particularly pray for your life, but also in diverse places, even as
far as Constantinople, to the most excellent Emperor, that as we have joy in
the consolation of your Christianity, so also in the Heavens the Angels may
rejoice at your further perfection. So therefore with all diligence and
devotion, apply your selves to the assistance of our abovenamed Reverend
Brother and Fellow Bishop, and of the rest of the Servants of God, whom we sent
thither for the conversion of of your Nation, that with our Most glorious Son,
and your Husband, you may reign with happiness here, and after a long time of
years, attain to the endless joys of the life to come. We beseech Almighty
God, that he would inflame the heart of your Majesty with the fire of his
Grace, to a performance of these things we have spoken of, and of his good
pleasure grant you the fruit of an eternal Reward.

Observations upon this Epistle.
It may be doubted what Queen of England this Adilberga was, for the Wife of
King Edilbert was called Bertha, as Bede affirms, lib. 1. cap. 25. but I think
them both the same; but as it commonly happens, strange words are ill rendered
by Foreigners, as hero Bdrga for Bertha, for Ald and Aldi are sometimes
corruptly added in proper names for Edil and Athel, signlfying in the Saxon
Language, Noble or Honorable, which may be seen in the Title of the following
Epistle, where Gregory calls the King Aldibert, whom Bid every where calls
Edilberth, others for the most part, Ethelbert, Ald also, because it properly
signifies Old, may by Translation denote Honorable, and may seem to be added
to the name of Berga or Bertha as an honorable Attribute, so that Aldi-berga,
signifies the same with Noble and Honorable Berga or Bertha.

Gregory To Aldibert King of the English.
He congratulates with him concerning the Conversion of that Nation.

FOR this reason Almighty God commonly advances the best Men Regist. lib. 9.
Epist. 60.
to the government of Nations, that by them the gifts of his Grace might be
dispersed among all those whom they are set over, which thing we know has been
done in the English Nation, over which Your Majesty was therefore made chief,
that by the good qualities that are given you, You might the better convey
those Heavenly comforts to the Nation under your subjection; And therefore,
Most Renowned Son, carefully preserve that Grace which you have received by the
especial providence of God, make haste to propagate the Christian Faith among
your Subjects, increase the servency of your own Faith in furthering their
Convension. Destroy the worship of Idols, raze their Temples, establish the
Manners of your Subjects in the great Purity of good living by exhorting,
terrifying, encouraging, correcting, and by showing the Examples of Good works,
that you may find him your Rewarder in Heaven, whose name and knowledge you
shall extend upon Earth, for he shall make your Name more glorious to
Posterity, whose Honor you endeavor to advance and preserve in your Nation.
So formerly, Constantine a most Pious Emperor, freeing the Roman Commonwealth
from the preverse worship of Idols, submitted himself, and It to our Almighty
LORD Jesus Christ, and applied himself and his Subjects with his whole mind
unto GOD, from whence it came to pass, that he transcended his Predecessors as
much in Fame, as he exceeded them in good works. And now therefore let your
Majesty make all possible haste to disperse the knowledge of one GOD, the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to Kings and their Subjects, that you may in
commendation and merit pass the Ancient Kings of that Nation, And by how much
you endeavor to wipe away the sins of others, by so much you may rest more
secure of your own offenses before the dreadful examination of Almighty God.

Our most Reverend Brother Augustine, Bishop, well taught in the rules of
Monastic life, filled with the knowledge of the Holy Scripture, and endued
(through God's grace) with good works, whatsoever he shall advise you,
willingly hear, devoutly perform, and carefully lay up in your memory, because
if you shall hear him in that which he speaks for God Almighty, the same
Almighty God will the sooner hear him entreating for you; But if, which God
forbid, you should neglect his words, when do you think Almighty God will hear
him for you, whom you neglected to hear for God? With all your mind therefore,
join your self with him in the fervency of Faith, and assist him, relying on
that power which God has given you, that he may make you partakers of his
Kingdom, whose Faith you have received and endeavored to preserve in your
Kingdom.

Furthermore we would that your Majesty should understand, that as we know in
Sacred Writ, out of the words of our Almighty Lord, that the end of this
present World is at hand, and that the Kingdom of the Saints shall come, of
which there shall be no end. But the end of the World drawing near, many things
shall happen which before were not, viz. alterations of the Air, terrors from
Heaven, and contrary to the course of Seasons, Tempest, Wars, Famine,
Pestilences, Earthquakes in diverse places, all which shall not come to pass in
our days, but all of them shall certainly follow our days. If therefore you
shall find any of these things happen in your Land, let your mind in no sort be
disturbed because these signs concerning the end of the World are therefore
sent before, that we should be careful of our Souls, mistrustful of the hour of
death, that we may be found in good works prepared for the Judge at his coming.

These things I have spoken to you in short, Most Excellent Son, that when the
Christian Faith shall be increased in your Kingdom, my discourse also may be
enlarged toward you; then 'twill be more proper to speak more, when the joys
for the perfect conversion of the whole Nation shall be multiplied in your
breast. We have sent you also some small Presents, which will not be small unto
you, when you shall receive them from us with the benediction of the blessed
Apostle Peter.

Almighty God preserve and perfect in you that Grace he has begun, and extend
your life to the course of many years, and after long time receive you into the
Congregation of his Heavenly Country. Let the Grace of Heaven, my Royal Son,
keep your Highness safe. Given the tenth of the Kalends of July, in the
nineteenth year of our Lord Mauritius Tiberlus Augustue Emperor, after the
Consulship of the same eighteenth year, Indiction the fourth ( i. e.) in the
year of Christ 161.

Gregory To Virgilius Bishop of Arles.
He commends to him Bishop Augustine.

HOW great kindness ought to be shown to Brethren coming of Regist. llb. 9.
Epist 63.
their own accord, may be gathered from hence, that to show our charity they
are most commonly invited by us, and therefore if it should so fall out that
our common, Brother Bishop Augustine should come unto you, let your charity, as
it ought, receive him with all tenderness and affection, and cherish him with
the benefits of your consolation, and teach others how fraternal charity ought
to be respected, And because it falls out, that those that are furthest off
commonly are informed first of what ought to be corrected, if he shall make
mention to your Brotherhood of any enormities committed either by Priests or
others sitting with him, by diligent search and scrutining examine all things,
and behave your selves so strict and careful in those things that offend God
and provoke him to anger, that for the example and amendment of others
punishment only may strike the guilty, and that false judgment afflict not the
innocent. Given the tenth day of the Kalends of July, Indiction the fourth.

Bid after this saich, Afflict not the Innocent, here in the end, and so goes
on, God keep you safe, Most Reverend Brother; Given the tenth day of the
Kalends of July, our Lord Mauritius Tiberius Augustus being Emperor, in the
nineteenth year after the Consulship of the said Lord the eighteenth year,
Indiction the fourth (i. e.) in the year of Christ 601.

Gregory To Melltus Abbot in France.
He gives Command to be sent to Augustine, about the conversion of that Nation.

AFter the departure of our Congregation which is with you, we Regist. lib. 9.
Ep. 7.
were in great suspense, because we could hear nothing of the happiness of your
Journey, but when it shall please Almighty God to bring you to our most
Reverend Brother, Bishop Augustine, tell him I have a long time carefully
considered of the condition of the English, and am of opinion that the Temples
of the Idols in that Nation ought by no means to be destroyed, but only the
Idols themselves that are in them. Let holy water be provided and sprinkled
about those Temples, let Altars be built and Relics kept in them; For if
those Churches are Elegantly built, it is necessary they should be taken from
the worship of Devils, and appropriated to the service of the true God, that
whilst the people see their Churches are not destroyed, they may put away their
Errors from their hearts, and knowing and worshipping the True God, may more
familiarly resort to those places they were wont to frequent. And because many
Oxen were wont to be slain in the sacrifice of Devils, some other solemnity
ought to be introduced instead of it, that on the day of Dedication, or
Birthday of the Holy Martyrs, whose Relics are there laid up, let them make
Arbors to themselves of the Branches of Trees about those Churches that were
formerly Temples, and let them celebrate the solemnity with Religious Banquets;
Neither let them any longer sacrifice Beasts to the Devil, but to the praise of
God let them kill those Creatures for their own eating, and in their fullness
give thanks to the Giver of all things, that whilst there are left them some
inward tokens of Rejoicing, they may the easier be brought to the inward Joys
of the Spirit. For to wean obdurate minds from all things on a sudden, without
doubt is impossible. He that endeavors to climb on high, it is necessary he
should rise by degrees and paces, not by leaps; so the Lord made himself known
to the children os. Israel in Egypt, the customary Sacrifices which they were
wont to offer to the Devil, he reserved in his own worship, that, by his
command, they should offer living creatures in his sacrifice; Forasmuch as
their hearts being changed, they lost somethings of the sacrifice, and retained
others, so that although they were the same creatures they were wont to offer,
nevertheless offering them to God and not to Idols, they were not the same
Sacrifices. These things I would have your charity to declare to our aforesaid
Brother, that he, for the present being placed there, may consider how all
things ought to be ordered. Given the twelsth day of the Kalends of July,
Indiction the fourth.

God preserve you safe, my Dearest Son, given the fifteenth day of the Kalends
of July, in the nineteenth year of our Lord Mauritius Tiberius Augustus
Emperor, after the Consulship of the said Lord the eighteenth, Indiction the
fourth ( i. e.) in the year of Christ 601.

Gregory To Augustine Bishop of the English.
Of the use of the Pall, and of the Church of London.

ALthough it is certain that the inexpressable Rewards of an eternal Regist.
lib. 12. Ep. 15.
Kingdom are reserved for those that labor in the service of God, yet it is
necessary that we should allow them the Ensigns of Honor, that by such Rewards
they may be encouraged the more abundantly to labor in Spiritual works; and
because the late Church of the English, through the mercy of our Lord and your
diligence, is brought, to the grace of Almighty God, we grant you the use of
the Pall in that Nation, but for only celebrating the solemnity of the Mals, so
that you ordain through all places twelve Bishops that shall be under your
Jurisdiction. Forasmuch as the Bishop of the City of London shall always
hereafter be consecrated by a Synod of his own, and receive the honor of the
Pall from this holy and Apostolic See, in which through God's grace I serve.

I will also that you send a Bishop to the City of Tork, whom you shall think
fit to be ordained, so that if the same City, with the bordering places, shall
receive the Word of God, let him also ordain twelve Bishops, that he may also
enjoy the honor of a Metropolitan, because we intend (God willing) to bestow
on him in like manner the Pall, if he is of a meek and courteous behavior,
whom nevertheless we will that he submit to the Authority of your Brotherhood.
After your death, so let him preside over the Bishops he shall Ordain, that by
no means he submits to the power of the Bishop of London; But hereafter, let
this distinction of Honor be between the Bishops of London and York, that he
be accounted first that was first ordained. Let them with common counsel, and
joint action, order whatever ought to be done for the love of Christ; let them
unanimously agree in the Right, and whatsoever they agree on, not by
contradicting one another, bring to perfection.

Let your Brotherhood therefore, have in subjection under you, not only those
Bishops whom you have ordained, or those that shall be ordained by the Bishop
of York, but also all the Clergy of Britain, our Lord God, Jesus Christ, being
the Author, forasmuch as from the life and doctrine of your Holiness, they may
receive the form of rightly believing, and living well, and may, by executing
their office with a sincere Faith and good Manners (when the Lord shall please)
attain to an Heavenly Kingdom. The Lord keep you safe, Most Reverend Brother;
Given the tenth day of the Kalends of July, our Lord Mauritius Tiberius
Augustus being Emperor in the nineteenth year after the Consulship of the said
Lord the eighteenth year, Indiction the fourth, that is, in the year of Christ
601.

THE LIFE OF St AUGUSTINE The first Archbishop of CANTERBURY,
Written in Latin by Sr. Henry Spelman.
IT would be needless to use many words concerning this Augustine; his Life and
Actions, after he was sent by GREGORY to convert the English, plainly appear in
the following discourse; But what, and who he was before, little concerns us.
He was a Roman, I think, by Birth, and a Monk of the Benedictine Order, and was
afterward made Provost of St. Gregory's Monastery at Rome, as you may
understand from the Epistle of St. Gregory himself to Syagrius Bishop of
Augustodunum; Called forth from thence by Gregory, he is sent into Britain with
sourty Monks his Companions, and others of the Clergy (over whom he made him
Abbot) in the year of our Lord 596, and in the year 597 arriving in Britain, he
converted to the Faith Ethelbert King of Kent, and the greatest part of his
People, whom, on the day of Pentecost, he Baptized in the Church of St. Martin
at Canterbury, which had continued from the time of the Romans till then; The
same year afterward he went to Arles, where he was by Etherius Archbishop of
that City, who was so commanded by Gregory, ordained the Archbishop of the
English the sixteenth of the Kalends of December in the City of Arles;
Returning to Fngland, he was received by both King and People with all
imaginable Joy and soleninity besttting his Quality, and had the Royal City of
Canterbury bestowed upon him by the King for an Episcopal See, and the Kings
Palace for a Cathedral Church to be erected unto Christ; so that the King
seemed to imitate what is reported to have been done by the Emperor,
Constantine the Great; Being ordained Bishop, he consulted St. Gregory by
Messengers and Questions, of the form of Government to be imposed on the Church
he had lately established amongst the English Saxons; The Answers he received
we will set down a little below. Soon after he was honored by the same Gregory
with the Pall (by which the fullness of Power is signisted) in the year, viz. of
Christ, 601. Being then Metropolitan of Britain, he summons a Council in the
borders of Worcestershire, that he might be something nigher the British Clergy
and Bishops, at that time residing in Wales, to which he warned them to appear;
the place of Session appointed was Augustine's Ac, that is, Augustine's Oaks,
where being assembled, Augustine demands from them Obedience to the Bishop of
Rome, and the Reception of the Roman Ceremonies into the British Church. The
Britains stiffly opposed this, and after the business had been a long time
controverted on both sides, another Synod or Session was agreed on, where a
greater number of the British Clergy were present; amongst them seven Bishops.
The old Controversy is again renewed, but when Augustine found that he was
likely to gain no further he desired they would but conform to him and the
Romans in three things only: 1. In the observation of Easter. 2. In the
administration of Baptism. 3. In assisting him with their preaching to the
English Saxons.


But they suspecting the pride of Augustine would not bondescend to him in
these things neither. Lamentable was the event of this Assembly, which shall be
related when we come in order to the place; for the British Church differed in
many things from the Roman, as appears out of Gildar and Bid, and this
following discourse.

Concerning the Manners of Augustine I shall determine nothing, he is blamed by
our Age, and extolled by Antiquity. They report him to have been learned,
pious, and an Imitator of Primitive holiness, the Apostle of the English, often
in watchings, fastings, prayers, and alms zealous in propagating the Church of
his Age, and of Religion, and earnest in rooting out Paganism. The first
Introducer of Roman Monks, and other Rites and Ceremonles, in repairing and
building Churches diligent enough, and for working Miracles extraordinary
famous. From hence, by reason of humane frailty his mind perhaps grew more
lofty and proud, which thing St. Gregory himself seemed to take notice of, who
admonished him by an Epistle, that he should not be puffed up with the
greatness of his Miracles. He is ill spoken of for the Massacre of the Priest
of Bangor, and not without a cause, if (as is reported) he excited King
Edilfrid to that horrid slaughter.

Concerning him, thus C^^grave in his Life: St: Augustine was by stature very
tall, so that he appeared from the shoulders above the rest of the people, his
face was lovely, but majestical withal; there is no body can relate the Wonders
and Cures he did among the People; He always walked on foot, and most commonly
he visited his Provinces barefooted, and the skin on his knees was grown hard
and insensible through continual kneeling.

Concerning the time when he died the opinions of Authors are many, so that
which to fix on is uncertain; Stow, makes it the 29 of May, in the year of
Grace 603; Bid in the year 604; Augustine himself in his Leaden Bull, if it be
truly his, cites a Character of King Ethelbert, dated the year of our Lord 605,
from which it is manifest that he was then living; Thomas Sprot relates, that he
held a Council at Canterbury in the year 605; Matthew (...) Westminster
following Segthert, says, that he died in the year of Grace 608; Howden, in
the year 610; Trevet and Polydore, in the year 611; Malmsbury, in the year 612,
and Savil in Fastis, in the year 613. How long therefore he governed the Church
of Canterbury, so great is the disagreement of Writers, that I date not
determine any thing concerning it; But it appears manisest enough, that he
began in the year of our Lord 596, in which he was sent by St. Gregory, or in
the year 597, in which he was received by King Ethelbert, and ordained Bishop
of Canterbury by Etheri^^s Archbishop of Arles.

It Is agreed on that he was buried in a Monastery of his own name, which he had
built with the assistance of King Ethelbert, and in the Porch of that Church
dedicated to St. Peter and Paul, but not as yet consecrated, in a stone Coffin
covered over with Iron and Lead, with this Inscription.

Inclytus Anglorum Praeful pius, and Decus Altum,
Hic Augustinus requiescie corpore sanctus.
The Church afterward being consecrated by Lawrence his Successor, his Coffin
was brought into the Church and placed on the North side, where afterward was
an Altar of his name, and this Inscription affixed.

Hic Requiescit AVGVSTINVS Dorobernensis Archiepiscopus, qui olim huc a Beato
Gregorio Romae Urbis Pontifice directus, and a Deo operatione miraculorum
suffultus, and Ethelbertum Regem, and gentem illius ab Idolorum cultu ad fidem
perduxit and completis a pace diebus officii sui; Defunctus est 7. Kal. Junii
eodem Rege Regnante.

He was Canonized for a Saint, and now holds a place in the Roman Martyrology
on the seventh day of the Kalends of June (i. e.) the 26 day of May.

He is said to have written one Book to Gregory of his prosperous success, and
one Book of the Statutes of his Churches, and Eleven Questions which Gregory
Answered, Magd. Burg. Cen. 6. cap. 10.
lib. 12. Tom. 2. which Bid also relates, lib. 1. cap. 37. Hist. Angl.

Augustine arrives in England, is courteously received of Ethelbert King of
Kent, he imitates the life and doctrine of the Primitive Church, he baptizes
the King, and is honored with an Episcopal See. Bid, lib. 1. cap. 25.

AUgustine being strengthened by the encouragement of Blessed Father Gregory,
returns with the rest of the Servants of Christ that were with him to the work
of the Word, and comes into Britain; Edilberth at that time was the most
powerful King of Kent, who had extended the bounds of his Empire to the Banks
of the great River Humber, by which the Southern and Northern people of England
are separated. There is toward the Eastern part of Kent the Isle of Tanet, of
indifferent bigness, the compass of it, according to the usual computation of
the English, is six hundred Families, which the River Vantsum parts from the
Continent; in breadth about three surlongs, and in two places omy fordable, for
it runs its head both ways into the Sea. Here landed Augustine the Servant of
the Lord with his Companions, as is reported about forty in number, they had
taken along with them Interpreters of the French Nation, as Pope Gregory had
commanded them. Being arrived, he sends to Edilberth, giving him to understand
that he came from Rome, and had brought good tidings, with the proffets of
Eternal happiness to them that would receive them, and an Everlasting kingdom
after this life with the true and living God. The King hearing this, commanded
that they should tarry in the Island they had landed in, and that all
necessaries should be afforded them, till he had determined what to do with
them; for he had heard of the Christian Religion before, having married a
Christian Wise of the Royal Family of the French, by name Bertha, whom he had
received from her Parents on this condition, that she should have free exercise
of Religion, and liberty to have a Bishop, by name Luidhard, whom they had
given her as an assistant and strengthner of her faith.

The King after some days past came to the Island, and sitting down in the
open Air, commanded that Augustine and his Companions should be brought into
his presence thither; for he feared to admit them into any House, being
persuaded by his old Superstition, that if they brought with them any Charms or
Incantations, they could not so easily work upon him. But they armed with the
power of God, and not the Devil, bearing a Silver cross before them for their
Banner, and the Image of our Lord and Savior painted on a Table, and singing
Litanies, prayed unto the Lord for the eternal salvation of themselves, and of
those for whose sakes and to whom they were come. But when with the Kings
leave, sitting down, they had preached the Word of life to him and to all his
Nobles that were with him, the King made Answer, saying, The words and promises
which Ye have made are indeed fair; but unto which, as being new and uncertain,
I cannot suddenly yield my assent; laying aside the Religion I have so long
maintained with all the English Nation. But because ye are strangers, and come
a great way, and, as it seems to me, would impart to us the knowledge of things
you believe the truest and best, we will not in the least give you any
molestation, but rather courteously receive you, and take care that all things
necessary shall be provided for your maintenance, neither do we prohibit, but
that ye may gain all ye can to the Faith of your Religion.

And accordingly he allotted them their residence in the City of Canterbury
(which was the Metropolis of all his Kingdom) neither did he abridge them of
the freedom of meeting, of preaching, or neglect their temporal provision. It
is reported, that when they came nigh to the City, after their manner with the
holy Cross, and the Image of the great King our Lord Jesus Christ, with an
agreeable-voice they sang this Litany. We pray thee, O Lord, in thy mercy, that
thy sury may be turned away, and thy Anger from this City, and thy holy House,
because we have sinned. Allelujah.

But when they came to the Dwellings provided for them, they began to imitate
the Apostolical life of the Primitive Church, by applying themselves to
continual prayers, watchings, and fastings, to the preaching the Word of God to
all that would hear them, by despising all things of this World as superfluous,
and receiving only those things that were necessary for those they taught for
their sustenance, living exactly according to the Rules they taught others,
having a mind ready to suffer any Adversity, even to die for the truth that
they preached. The success of which was, some believed and were baptized,
admiting the simplicity of their innocent lives, and the sweetness of their
heavenly doctrine.

There was near this City toward the East a Church anciently built in honor
of St. Martyn, whilst the Romans inhabited Britain, in which the Queen, whom
above we declared to have been a Christian, was wont to pray. In this therefore
first they begun to assemble, sing, pray, perform Mass; preach and baptize,
until the King being converted to the Faith, they obtained a greater liberty of
Preaching every where, and of building and repairing Churches. But when he
among the rest, being delighted with the pure life of these Saints, and their
sweet Promises, the truth of which they confirmed by showing many Miracles,
believing was baptized; many flocked in from all parts to hear the word, and
leaving the Rites of Heathenism, joined themselves to the unity of the holy
Church of Christ; at whose Faith and Conversion the King is reported so far to
have congratulated, as nevertheless not compels any to receive Christianity,
only those that believed he embraced with a nearer affection, as
fellow-Citizens with him of the heavenly Kingdom; For he had learnt from the
Teachers and Authors of his salvation, that the service of Christ ought to be
voluntary, not constrained, neither did he deser long, but gave his Teachers
places befitting their Degrees in his Metropolis of Canterbury, and conferred
upon them Possessions necessary in several kinds, in the year of Christ 601.

THE ANSWERS OF GREGORY TO THE QUESTIONS SENT BY AUGUSTINE The first
Archbishop of CANTERBURY,
For the better government of the new erected Church of English-Saxons. Out of
Bede's Hist. Ecclesiast. lib. 1. cap. 27.
IN the mean while Augustine the Man of God came to Arles, and by Etherius
Archbishop of the same City (according to the Commands he received from the
holy Father Gregory) was ordained Archbishop of the English. Returning
therefore into Britain, he sent immediately to Rome, Lawrence the Priest and
Peter the Monk, to certify Pope Gregory that the Christian Faith was received
by the English, and that he himself was made Bishop; desiring also his opinion
in certain Questions he thought necessary to be resolved in, to all which he
speedily received Answers proper to the Questions proposed, which we thought
fit here to insert into our History.

The first Question of Augustine, Bishop of the Church of Canterbury.

Of Bishops, how they should converse with their Clergy, of those things that
are presented to the Altar by the offerings of the Faithful? how many portions
there ought to be? and, how a Bishop ought to behave himself in the Church.

The Answer of Gregory, Pope of the City of Rome.

How Bishops ought to act in the Church, the Holy Scripture witnesses, which
you understand very well no doubt, and especially the Epistles of St. Paul to
Timothy, in which he endeavors to teach him, how he ought to behave himself in
the House of God. And it was ever the custom of the Apostolic See, to deliver
Instructions to Bishops that were ordained; that out of every thing that came
to the Altar there ought to be made four divisions, viz. One for the Bishop and
his family, for hospitality and entertainments the second for the Clergy, the
third for the Poor, and the fourth for repairing Churches: But because your
Brotherhood is well skilled in the Orders of a Monastery, you know nothing
ought to be possessed by the Clergy apart in your English Church, which lately by
God's grace is brought to the Faith; it ought to imitate the Conversion which
was used by our Fathers in the beginning of the Church, among whom, none said
any thing was his of those things he possessed, but all things were in common
among them.

The second Question of Augustine.

I desire to be informed whether Pr^ able (...) marry? and if they shall marry,
whether they must (...)

This Question Bid has not, but join the following Answer to the first
Question; Sr. Hen. Spelman has added in out of the Bath Edition, An. 1518.

The Answer of Gregory.

If there be any of the Clergy out of holy Orders that cannot contain they
ought to provide themselves Wives and to receive their stipends from without,
because concerning those portions which we have spoken of before, we know it is
written, that 'twas divided to every one, as every one had need, And, indeed,
there ought some consideration and care to be had of their Stipends, that they
may be kept under Ecclesiastical Rules, that they show good Manners in their
lives, that they may be diligent in singing Psalms, and that they keep, by
God's assistance, their hearts, tongues and bodies pure from all unlawful
things. What necessity is there of making a long discourse of dividing
Portions, of showing Hospitality, and of doing Mercy to those that live a
Common life when all that is overplus is to be bestowed upon Pious and
Religious uses? the Lord our Master teaching us all what remains, bestow in
Alms, and hold all things are clean unto you, Luke the 11th.

The third Question of Augustine.

Since there is but one Faith, why are there diverse customs of Churches? One
custom of Mass in the holy Roman Church, and another in those of Gaul?

The Answer of Gregory.

Your Brotherhood knows the Custom of the Roman Church, in which you may
remember you were bred; but it is my pleasure, that if you can find either in
the Roman Church, or those of Gaul, or in any other Church any thing more
pleasing to God, carefully choose it, and what things soever you can gather
from many Churches of honest Institution, introduce them into the English
Church, which as yet is young in the Faith; for things are not to be beloved
for the places, but places for the good things in them. Out of every Church
therefore choose what is Pious, Religious, and Right, and gather them together,
as it were in a bundle, and by practice infuse them into the minds of the
English.

The fourth Question of Augustine.

I beseech you, what punishment ought to be inflicted on him that commits
Sacrilege?

The Answer of Gregory.

This your Brotherhood may understand from the person of the Thief, how he
ought to be corrected; for there are some that have found ways to commit thest,
and there are others that offend in this nature out of necessity; From whence
it follows, that, some are to be punished with fines, others with stripes, some
more severely, others more gentily; and when you proceed against any with more
rigor than ordinary, you must do it out of charity, not fury; because it is
done to him that is punished with this intent, that he might not be committed
to Holl fire. For we ought to instruct the Faithful so, as good Fathers are
wont their carnal Children, whom, for their faults, they whip, and yet they
desire that those whom they thus afflict should be their heirs, and carefully
keep for them whatsoever they possess, whom angrily they thus seem to torment.
Alwales therefore keep in your mind this charity which suggests a mean in
chastizing, so that the mind can do nothing without the rule of Reason. Perhaps
you way ask, How these things that are taken by stealth from the Church may be
restored? but God forbid that the Church should receive with increase for the
loss of Earthly things, or go about to make advantage of vain trifles,

The fifth Question of Augustine.

Whether two own Brothers may marry two own Sisters, which are removed from
them by many degrees;?

The Answer of Gregory.

This is certainly lawful, for we find nothing in inholy Writ that seems to
contradict this point in the least.

The sixth Question of Augustine.

To what degree the Faithful may marry with their kindred? and, This is not in
Bid.
whether it be lawful for Stepmothers and their kindred in Law to be joined in
wedlock and

Gregory's Answer.

A certain Secular law in the Roman Common wealth permits, that whether Brother
and Sister, or the son and daughter of two own Brothers, or two own Sisters may
marry; but we have learnt by experience, that from such kind of Marriages no
issue can be produced, and holy Writ forbids the uncovering of the Nakedness of
our near kindred, from whence it follows, that the third and fourth generation
of the Faithful may lawfully marry. To be joined in marriage with ones
Mother-in-law is a great sin, for it is written in the Law, Thou shall not
uncover thy Father's nakedness, neither indeed may a Son discover the nakedness
of his Father; but because it is written, they shall be two in one flesh, he
that shall presume to uncover the nakedness of his Stepmother, which was one
flesh with his Father, has certainly uncovered his Father's nakedness.

It Is forbidden also to marry a near Relation-in-law, because by the former it
was made as the flesh of the Brother, for which thing John the Baptist was
beheaded, and ended his life in holy Martyrdom, on whom it was not imposed to
deny Christ, and yet he was slain for confessing Christ; but because our Lord
Jesus Christ had said, I am the Truth, and because John was killed for the
truth, he poured out his blood for Christ.

The seventh Interrogation of Augustine.

I desire to know, whether a Divorce may be issued out against those that are
married unlawfully? and, whether they may be denied the benefit of the
Communion?

The Answer of Gregory.

Because there are many in England which still remain in Infidelity, that are
reported to be joined in wicked and unlawful Matrimony, when they shall come to
the Faith, they are to be admonished that they abstain, and made to understand
that it is a grievous sin. Let them stand in fear of the terrible Judgment of
God, lest for a little carnal pleasure they incur eternal torments;
nevertheless they are not for this thing to be deprived of the Communion of the
body and blood of our Lord, lest we should seem to punish those things in them,
in which they had bound themselves through ignorance before the Laver of
Baptism. For in these times the holy Church corrects some things with rigor,
some things out of mildness it tolerates, and other things it wisely
dissembles, and so bears with some faults, and winks at them, as at last what
it disliketh, by forbearances and seeming connivance it overcomes; and all
that are brought to the Faith are to be admonished, that they commit no such
thing, and if any shall, they are to be deprived of the Communion of the body
and blood of our Lord; because as in those things which they did through
ignorance, the fault in some measure is to be born withal, so it ought
resolutely to be prosecuted in those that are most afraid knowingly to offend.

The eight Interrogation of Augustine.

If for the great distance of places Bishops cannot easily meet, whether a
Bishop may be ordained without the presence of other Bishops?

The Answer of Gregory.

Certain it is in the Church of the English, in which as yet there is no other
Bishop but your self, you can ordain a Bishop no other way than without
Bishops, for when can Bishops come from Gaul, that may assist, as witnesses at
the ordination of a Bishop? But we would that your Brotherhood should so ordain
Bishops, that they be not too far disjoined from one another, that there may be
no hindrance, but that at the ordination of a Bishop others may be present,
other Pastors also whose presence is very requisite, ought to have easy means
of access. When therefore Bishops shall be so ordained in places near one
another, the ordination of a Bishop ought never to be without three or four
Bishops assisting; For in Spiritual things, that they may be wisely and
maturely managed, we may draw an example from carnal things. When Marriages are
to be celebrated in the World, married people are invited, that they which are
gone in the path of Matrimony before, may be partakers in the joys of the
subsequent wedding. Why therefore in this Spiritual Ordination, by which, man
through the holy Mystery is joined unto God, ought not such to meet, who may
either rejoice at the advancement of the Bishop that is to be Ordained, or pour
out their prayers equally to Almighty God for his protection.

The ninth Interrogation of Augustine.

How ought we to behave our selves toward the Bishops of Gaul and Britain?

Gregory's Answer.

We allow you no Authority over the Bishops of Gaul, because in the ancient
times of my Predecessors the Bishop of Arles received the Pall, of which
Authority we ought in no wise to deprive him. If therefore it should so fall
out, that your Brotherhood should make a journey into the Provinces of Gaul,
you ought to treat with the same Bishop of Arles, how (if there be any
misdemeanors among the Bishops) they may be corrected, who if he be cold in
inflicting Discipline, he is to be stirred up with the zeal of your
Brotherhood, to whom also we have wrote Letters, that when your Holiness should
come into Gaul, he would assist you with all his heart, and quell those things
that are contrary to the Commandment of our Creator, in the life and manners
of Bishops. But you cannot judge any of the Bishops of Gaul by your own
Authority; but by persuasions and fair speednes, and by proposing good works to
their imitation, you may reduce the minds of the wicked to the study of
Holiness, for it is written in the Law, When thou come into the standing Corn
of thy neighbor, thou shall not put a sickle unto it, but thou may pluck the
Ears with thy hand and eat, Deuteronomy. 23. 25. For you cannot put the sickle of
Authority into that Corn, which seems committed to the charge of another, but
by the effects of good works you may take from the Corn of the Lord the chaff
of its Vices, and you may by admonishing and persuading, as it were by eating,
convert to the body of the Church. But whatsoever is to be done by Authority,
you must consult, about it, the aforesaid Bishop of Arles, left that be
omitted, which the Ancient wisdom of our Fathers invented. But all the Bishops
of Britain we commit to your Brotherhood, that the ignorant may be taught, the
weak, by persuasions, strengthened, and the perverse corrected by Authority.

The tenth Interrogation of Augustine.

If a Woman with child may be Baptized? or after she has brought forth, after
how long time may she enter into the Church? or lest what she has brought forth
be prevented by death, after how many days may it lawfully receive the
Sacrament of holy Baptism? or, after how long time may her Husband be joined
with her in Carnal copulation? or whether, if she be troubled with her terms,
it be lawful for her to come to Church, or to receive the Sacrament of the holy
Communion? or, whether a man that has lain with his wife, may enter into the
Church before he is washed with water? or, whether he may come to the ministry
of the holy Communion? In all which things the rude Nation of the English ought
to be satisfied.

Gregory's Answer.

I doubt not but your Brotherhood by this time is satisfied in what I have just
now given Answer, but I suppose, you urge whatever you can say or think, that
you may be confirmed by my Answer.

Why should not a Woman with child be baptized, since the fruitfulness of the
flesh is no offense to Almighty God? For when our First Parents had sinned in
Paradise, they forfeited the Immortality they had received by the just judgment
of God; because therefore Almighty God would not utterly extinguish in them all
Mankind for their fault, he deprived man of Immortality for their offense, and
yet out of the goodness of his grace, he left him the fruitfulness of his
Issue. What therefore is reserved for Human Nature by the gift of Almighty God,
by what reason can it be prohibited the favor of holy Baptism? For in that
mystery in which all our sins are utterly swallowed up, it is very foolish to
think that the gift of Grace should any ways seem to contradict it. When a
Woman shall have brought forth, after how many days may she enter the Church,
is manifest, from a Precept of the Old Testament, which runs thus: If a Woman
have conceived seed, and born a child, she shall continue in the blood of her
purifying three and thirty days; she shall touch no hallowed thing, nor come
into the Sanctuary until the days of her purifying be fulfilled; but if she
bear a Maid-child, she shall continue in the blood of her purifying three score
and six days, which ought to be understood and taken mystically; For if in the
same hour she brought forth she should enter into the Church to give Thanks,
she cannot be charged with any offense, for the pleasure of the flesh, not the
pain, is in fault; For in the joining of the flesh is pleasure, but in the
delivery of Children, pain, whence that was said to the first Mother of us all
that had transgressed the Commandment of God. I will greatly multiply thy
sorrow, and thy conception, in sorrow shall thou bring forth Children; if
therefore we forbid a Woman, that has brought forth, to enter into the Church,
we esteem her punishment her fault.

It is by no means forbidden to baptize a Woman newly delivered, or the Infant
newly born, if there be danger of death, no not in the very instant of the
delivery, or the first birth of the Child, because as the grace of the holy
Mystery is to be provided for the living with great discretion, so it ought to
be offered without any delay to those that are at the point of death, lest that
whilst we take too much time for the offering the mystery of Redemption,
through a little delay we are not able to find him that should be redeemed.

The husband ought not to go in to his wife, until such time as the child which
is brought forth is weaned. And it is a bad custom that has prevailed in the
manners of married people, that women neglect to nurse their own children, and
deliver them to other women to be nursed which thing seems to have been
invented merely on the score of incontinence, because, whilst they will not
contain themselves, they despise to suckle those they bring forth. These
therefore, that out of a wicked custom deliver their children to others to be
nursed, ought not to lie with their husbands before the time of their purgation
be over.

Moreover, when Women, that have not brought forth, suffer their Monthly Terms,
they ought to be prohibited the use of their husbands; so that the holy Law
punishes with death, if any man lie with a menstruous Woman, which Woman
nevertheless, whilst she suffers her monthly Terms, ought not to be forbidden
entrance into the Church, because the superfluity of Nature ought not to be
accounted a fault in her, and for what she unwillingly suffers, it is not just
to debar her coming into the Church. For we know, that the Woman, which was
troubled with a flux of Blood, coming humbly behind our Lord, touched the hem
of his Garment, and presently her infirmity departed from her. If therefore
she, having a Flux of blood upon her, might praiseworthy, touch the garment of
our Lord, why should it not be lawful for her, that suffers her menstruous
Terms, to enter into the Church of God? But you may say that infirmity
compelled her, so also those, whom we speak of, are compelled by their Terms:
Consider therefore (my dear Brother) because whatever we suffer in this frail
flesh, out of the infirmity of nature, was by the judgment of God appointed
after the fall. For to be an hungry, to thirst, to be hot, to be cold, to be a
weary, is from the infirmity of nature, and what is it otherwise to provide
food against hunger, drink against thirst, air against heat, raiment against
cold, rest against weariness, than to find out some Medicine against our
Diseases?

Women therefore and their menstruous issues are Diseases, if therefore she did
well, that in her grief touched the garment of our Lord, which was granted to
one infirm person, why should it not be granted to all Women, which are
rendered infirm by the corruption of Nature?

Therefore the receiving of the Mystery of the holy Communion at these times
ought not to be prohibited, but if out of a reverent fear, she shall not
presume to receive, she is to be commended; But if she shall receive, not to be
censured, for it is the sign of a good mind, even there after a manner to
acknowledge a fault, where there is none, because we many times do things in
themselves without a fault, which proceeded from a fault. We are an hungry
without fault, by eating proceeds from a fault. It proceeds from the first Man
that we are an hungry, for the Menstruous terms are faults in women, because
they come naturally, but nevertheless, because nature it self is so corrupted,
that it may seem to be polluted without the bent of the evil. From offense came
corruption, by which human Nature may know what through the judgment of God
it is come to, and the man, which of his own accord committed the fault, bore
the guilt of it unwillingly. And therefore women when they consider their
condition, if they shall not presume, during their Menstruous terms to come to
the Sacrament of the Lord's body and blood, they are to be praised for this
their honest consideration. But if out of a custom of a Religious life, by
receiving they are transported with the love of the same mystery, they are not,
as we said before, to be restrained from it; For as in the Old Testament, the
outward works were to be observed: so in the New Testament, not that so much as
is done outwardly, as that which is inwardly thought on is carefully to be
looked after, that it may be kept under by strict examination. For when the Law
forbids many things to be eaten, as unclean, in the Gospel the Lord says, Not
that, that enters into the mouth defiles a man, but those things that come out
of the mouth defile him, Matt. 15. 17. And a little after he adds by the way of
exposition, from the heart proceed all evil thoughts, where it is largely shown,
that that appears polluted to Almighty God indeed, which proceeds from the root
of corrupt Cogitation. Whence Paul also the Apostle says, To the pure all
things are pure, but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is
pure; And a little after showing the cause of this defiling, he adds, but even
their mind and conscience is defiled. If therefore his meat is not unclean to
him whose mind is not unclean, why should that which a Woman endued with a pure
heart suffers from nature, be accounted in her uncleanness? And a man sleeping
with his own wife, unless he is washed with water ought not to enter into the
Church, neither presently after his washing may he enter, for the Law commanded
the ancient People, that a man that had lain with a woman ought to be washed
with water, and not to enter into the Church before Sunset, which nevertheless
may be understood in a spiritual sense, because, unless the fire of
Concupiscence be before allayed in the mind, he ought not to look upon himself
as worthy the Congregation of his Brethren, who seems loaded with the
wickedness of a depraved will. Although many Nations think diversely of this
thing, and seem to retain different customs, yet this was always the use of
the Romans from the eldest times, that after a man had lain with his wife, he
was to endeavor his cleansing by the Laver, and to abstain somewhat reverently
from entering into the Church. Neither by saying these things do we make
Marriage a fault, but because the very lawful copulation it self cannot be done
without the pleasure of the flesh, we ought to abstain from coming into an Holy
place, because the pleasure it self can no wales be free from fault, for he was
not born in adultery or fornication, but in lawful wedlock, that said, Behold,
I was shapen in iniquity, and in fiu did my mother conceive me; For he that
knew himself to be conceived in iniquity, bewailed himself that he was born of
sin, for the tree bears the same vicious humor in its branches, which it drew
from the root. In which words, he does not call the copulation of married
people Iniquity, but the pleasure that results from that admixtion; For there
are many things that are lawful and right, by which in their acts we are
defiled, as oftentimes we angrily prosecute enormities, and disturb the peace
of our minds within us, when indeed, what we did was right, but no wales
approvable, for that our mind was thereby disturbed; for 'twas against the
wickedness of Male-factor she was angry that said, Mine tie is troubled for
very Anger, because nothing but a calm mind is able to continue in the
brightness of Contemplation, he was sorry that his eye was troubled through
anger, for whilst he persecuted wicked actions below, he was confounded and
forced from the contemplation of the highest things. Therefore Anger is
commendable against Vice, yet troublesome, because he that is disturbed by it,
thinks himself in some sort guilty.

Therefore the lawful copulation of the flesh ought to be, for Issues sake, not
for pleasure; and joining of the flesh ought to be for the procreation of
Children, not for the satisfaction of our vices. If therefore any man makes use
of his wife, not hurried there unto by the transport of pleasure, but only for
procreation sake, he surely, whether it be concerning entrance into the Church,
or the receiving the mystery of the body and blood of our Lord, ought to be
left to his own judgment, because he cannot be prohibited receiving by us, who
being in the midst of fire knows not how to burn, but when no desire of
procreation, but pleasure predominates, there results from such a conjunction
what husbands ought to bewail; For this the holy Preacher allows them, yet by
that very grant their mind is disturbed by fear, for the Apostle Paul writing
to the Corinthians, says, He that cannot contain himself let him take to him a
wife, and presently he took care to add, but I speak this by permission and not
of Commandment, for that is not permitted which is lawful because it is just,
therefore because he said by permission, he made it manifest to be a fault; but
we ought to weigh with a careful mind, that the Lord when he was about to speak
to the people on Mount Sinai, commanded the same people, first to abstain from
Women; and if, where the Lord spoke by a Creature subject to men, the cleaness
of the flesh with so much care was requisite, that they which heard the words
of the Lord were not to meddle with Women; by how much more ought Women, which
receive the body of our Almighty Lord, to observe the cleaness of their flesh,
lest they be overwhelmed by the very greatness of that inestimable Mystery?
Hence also't was spoke to David by the priest concerning his young men, That if
they were clean from Women they might receive the shewbread, which they could
never have done, unless David before had acknowledged, that they were clean
from Women; Then a man after the lying with his Wife, if he shall be washed
with water, may be capable of receiving the mystery of the Holy Communion,
when, according to the determined Sentence, he may lawfully enter the Church.

The eleventh Interrogation of Augustine.

If after Illusion, which commonly happens, in Dreams one may receive the body
of our Lord, or, if he be a Priest, celebrate the Holy Mysteries.

Gregory's Answer.

Such a one the Testament of the old, as we have said in the Chapter above,
declares to be polluted, and does not allow him, unless washed with water, to
enter into the Congregation till the Evening, which not withstanding a
spiritual people understanding it otherwise will take in the same sense, we
have spoke of above, because he is deceived, as it were in a dream. He that is
tempted through uncleanness, by real appearances, is defiled in his thoughts,
but he is to be cleansed by water, that he may wash away with tears the
impurity of his Cogitations, and unless the fire of Temptation first be
allayed, he ought to acknowledge himself guilty, as it were, till evening. But
there is a distinction in this kind of Illusion very necessary, which ought
carefully to be weighed, from what cause it happens to him that sleeps; For
sometimes it proceeds from surfeiting, sometimes from the superfluity or
infirmity of nature, and sometimes from thought, so that when it shall happen
from the superfluity and infirmity of Nature, such an illusion is no way to be
feared, because the mind being unsensible of it, is rather to be lamented that
it suffered it, than that it did it. When also the appetite is carried away
beyond reason in taking in its nourishment, and on that account the receptacles
of humors are overcharged, the mind thereby has contracted some guilt, but not
so far that it should be forbid the receiving the holy mystery, or of
celebrating the solemnity of the Mass. For if perchance an Holy day, or an
Administration of the mystery require his presence (for that there is never
another Priest in the place) necessity it self enforces it. For if there are
others present, that can lawfully administer that mystery, the Illusion which
happened through overcharging ought not to hinder him from receiving the holy
Mystery; But he ought, in my mind, humbly to abstain from the Immolation of the
holy Mystery, although it disturbed not his mind, when he was sleeping, with
any filthy Imagination. For there are those to whom Illusions oftentimes
happen, whose minds though engaged in the sleep of the body, are not defiled by
filthy Imaginations.

From hence there is one thing manifest, that the mind it self is guilty,
neither is it free in it is own Judgment; for although it remembers it saw
nothing in the body sleeping, yet it may remember, when the body was awake,
that it fell into Gluttony. If therefore Illusions in sleep arise from our
filthy thoughts, when we are awake, the mind is apparently guilty; for it sees
from what root that pollution proceeded, because, what it knowingly thought on,
it ignorantly brought forth. But we ought to consider whether such thoughts
arise from suggestion, delectation, or what is worse, from consent of sin, for
all sin is perfected three kind of ways. 1. By suggestion. 2. Delectation. 3.
Consent. Suggestion proceeds from the Devil, Delectation from the flesh, and
Consent from the spirit. For the first fault the Serpent suggested, Eve as
flesh was delighted, and Adam as spirit consented.

And certainly great distinction is necessary, that the mind which is its own
Judge, might distinguish between suggestion and delectation, and between
delectation and consent. For when an evil Spirit puts sin into the mind, if no
pleasure from the sin follow, that sin is not at all committed, but when the
flesh begins to be delighted, then the sin begins to commence, and if
afterward upon mature deliberation it consents, then the sin is known to be
perfected. In suggestion therefore is the beginning of the sin, in delectation
the nourishment, and in consent the perfection of it. And it often falls out,
that what an evil spirit suggests to the mind, the flesh turns into
delectation, and yet the mind consents not to that delectation; and since the
flesh cannot be pleased without the mind, the mind struggling against the
pleasures of the flesh, is, as it were, against its own Will obliged by the
pleasures of the flesh, so that from reason it resists it, neither does it at
all consent, and yet it is so fettered by this delectation, that it earnestly
bewails its bonds: from whence that great Soldier of the Heavenly army cried
out, saying, Romans 7. 23. But I see another law in my members warring against
the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is
in my members. But if he was a Captive he did not fight; and if he did fight
why was he a Captive? He warred therefore against the law of his mind, which
the law in his members resisted; but if he fought he was no captive. Behold
therefore a man (as I may say) both captive and free, free by the righteousness
he loved, and captive from the delectation he bore about him unwillingly.

Thus far are the Answers of Holy Pope Gregory to the Questions of the most
Reverend Bishop Augustine.

A SYNOD called by Augustine first Archbishop of Canterbury, by the assistance
of Ethelbert King of Kent, to Augustine's Ac, a place in Worcestershire; There
being present besides, Augustine and his Roman Clergy, seven Bishops, and many
British Doctors, to wit, in two Sessions, in which Augustine first demands
obedience to the Church of Rome, afterward that the Britains be conformable to
the Romans in three things, 1. In celebrating of Easter. 2. In the
administration of Baptism. 3. In the preaching with him to the English-Saxons.

AUgustine by the power of King Ethelbert called to a Conference the Bishops or
Doctors of the greatest and next adjoining Province of the Britains, to a place
at this very day in the English tongue called Augustineizac (i. e.) Augustine's
Oak, in the confines of the Wiccians and South Saxons, where he began to
persuade them with a Brotherly admonition, that regarding the peace of the
Catholic Church, they would unite their endeavors to his in the common
Preaching to the Nations, for they did not keep the Lord's day of Easter at its
due season, but from the fourteenth to the twentieth day of the Moon, which
computation is contained in the circle of eighty four years. Moreover they
observed many things contrary to the unity of the Church; who, when after a
long disputation, could not be brought either by the prayers, exhortations or
threats of Augustine and his Companions to yield their assent, but rather
valued their own Traditions above all the Churches In the World, under Christ.
Holy Father Augustine put an end to this long and difficult Controversy,
saying, We beseeth God, which makes us to dwell in the house of his Father with
one accord, that he would be pleased to inspire us with his heavenly gifts,
that we may know what Traditions are to be followed, which ways we ought to
take to enter into his kingdom. Let some sick person be brought, and by whose
prayers he shall be cured, let his faith and labors be looked (...) most
pleasing to God, and as fit to be embraced by all men; which when his
Adversaries, though unwillingly assented to, there was one brought of the
English Nation that was deprived of the light of his eyes, who after he had
been set before the British Priests, and could receive no help or cure from
their ministry, at length Augustine compelled thereunto by a just necessity,
bended his knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, beseeching him that he
would restore to the Blind the sight he had lost, and that by the bodily
enlightening of one man, he would cause the light of his spiritual Grace to
arise in the hearts of all the Faithful. Neither was it long before the Blind
was enlightened, and Augustine cried up by all the true preachers of heavenly
light; Then the Britains confessed, that they themselves indeed thought that to
be the'true way of Righteousness which Augustine preached, but that they could
not lay aside their Ancient customs, without the consent and free leave of
their whole Nation.

Whence they desired that there might be another Synod called to which more
might come, which when it was agreed on, there came (as is reported) seven
British Bishops, and many Learned men from their famous Monastery, which in the
English tongue is called Bancornaburg, over which at that time Abbot Dinoth is
said to have presided, who a little before their going to the aforesaid
Council, went first to a certain Man both holy and wise, who led an Anchorite's
life among them; They asked him, whether they should lay aside their Traditions
at the preaching of Augustine? who made answer; If he is a man of God follow
him; they said, how shall we know this? he replied, The Lord says, take my
yoke upon you, for I am meek and humble in heart; if therefore Angustine be
meek and humble in heart, it is credible that he himself bears the yoke of
Christ, and offers the same to be born of you; But if he be cruel and proud,
it appears that he is not of God, neither ought ye to take care what he
says. They said again, but how shall we make a discovery of that? he said,
Contrive it so, that he and his come first into the place of the Synod, and if
he shall rise up to you as you come near, know ye that he is the Servant of
Christ, and obediently hear him; but if he shall despise you, nor rise up to
you, when ye are more in number, let him be slighted by you also. They did as
he had said, and it sell out that Augustine, as they drew near, sat still in
his Chair, which when they saw, they grew presently angry, accusing him of
pride, and endeavored in all things he said to contradict him.

He said unto them, Ye do many things contrary to our custom, and that of the
Catholic Church, nevertheless if ye will obey me in these three things; That
ye celebrate Easter in its proper time; That ye perform the ministry of
Baptism, by which we are born again to God, according to the custom of the
holy Roman and Apostolic Church; That ye preach the Word of God together with,
us to the English Nation; as for the other things which ye do, although
contrary to our customs, we will quietly tolerate them all; But they made
answer, that they would do none of those things, neither would they acknowledge
him for an Archbishop; discoursing therefore among themselves, they said, If he
would not just now rise up unto us, how much more, when we are subject to him,
will be then condemn us as nothing? To whom Augustine the Man of God is
reported thus threatningly to have Prophesied, If ye will not accept of peace
with your Brethren, ye are like to accept of war from your Enemies; and because
ye would not preach the way of life to the Nation of the English, ye shall
suffer by their hands the punishment of death; which in every thing, the divine
Judgment concurring, was performed as he had foretold, for a little after,
Edilfrid the strongest King of the English, having gathered together a great
Army about the City of Chester, which by the English is called Legacester, but
truer by the Britains, Carlegion, he made a great slaughter of that Nation, but
when he was going to give the Onset, he espied Priests of theirs, who were come
thither to entreat God for the success of the Army, standing apart on a place
of advantage, he asked, who they were, and for what business they had met
there? Most of them were of the Monastery of Bangor, in which there is reported
to have been such a number of Monks, that when the whole Monastery was divided
into seven parts, with their Rulers that were set over them, no part contained
less than three hundred Men, all which got their living by the labor of their
hands. Many of these therefore after a Fast of three days came with some
others merely on the account of Prayer, to the aforesaid Army, having one
Brocmale by name their Captain, who was to defend them, being intent at their
Prayers, from the Swords of the Barbarians. But when Edilfrid had understood
the cause of their coming, he said, If therefore they cry unto their God
against us, certainly they, although they bear no Arms, fight against us, who
prosecute us by their Prayers; therefore he commanded the first slaughter to be
made upon them, afterward he utterly overthrew the rest of the Forces of that
wicked Army, yet not without great loss of his own. They report that there were
killed in this fight, of those that came to pray, about twelve hundred Men,
only fifty escaping by flight.

Brocmale upon the first coming of the Enemy fled away with his Company,
leaving those unarmed, and whom he ought to have defended, naked to the hacking
Swords of their Enemies. So was fulfilled the Prophecy of the holy Bishop
Augustine, although he went to Heaven long before it, that such perfidious
people might feel the revenge of a temporal death, who despised the advice
offered them of eternal salvation.

The Answer of the Abbot of Bangor to Augustine the Monk, requiring subjection
to the Church of Rome.
Bid ipfis Be it known a and diogel without doubt i chwi in, unto you, bod ni
holl un that we all are ac arral in and every one of us uvidd obedient ac and
ynn ostingedig subjects i Eglwys Duw, to the Church of God, ac and ic Paab to
the Pope o Ruvain, of Rome, ac and i boob to every kyar grissdion dwyual, godly
Christian, y garu to love pawb every one in i radd in his degree mewn in kariad
parfaich, perfect charity, ac and i helpio to help pawb every one o honaunt, of
them, ar air by word a and guec-thred deed i to vod be ynn blant the children y
Duw: of God: ac and amgenach wyddod other obedience na hwn than this nidadwent
vod I do not know due it neb to him yr yddeck chwi whom you name y benwi in
Paab, to be Pope, ne in Daad o Daad: nor to be the Father of Fathers: yw to be
gleimio claimed ac and yw ouunn, to be demanded, ac uvyddod hivn and this
obedience idden ni we are in vared ready yw rod to give ac and yw dalu to pay
iddo of to him ac and i pab to every krisdion Christian in dragwiddol
continually. heuid yr Besides ydym ni we are dan under the lywodrath government
Esgob of the Bishop kaerllion of Kaerleon ar wysc, upon Uske, yr hien who ysidd
is in oligwr to overseedan under Duw God arnom ni, over us, y wneuthud to cause
i ni us gadwr to keep ffordd the way ysbrydol. spiritually.

The Abbot of Bangor, which gave Augustine this Answer was, without doubt, the
renowned Dinoth, as will appear afterward in a Norman Manuscript: It Is
manifest also as well from his Answer as from those that are related above by
Bid, that the British Church at that time acknowledged no Subjection either to
the Roman Bishop or any other foreign Patriarch; neither had it any Communion
with the Roman Church, but 'twas subject as from the days of Eleutherius, to a
Metropolitan of its own (as to the Pope or Patriarch of another World) the
Archbishop of Kaerleon, who, as it is reported, acknowledged no superior in
dignity, but in obligar Dan Dum, under God governed the Church and People
committed to his Charge without any other sharer in his Authority; they had
received the Eastern-Customs, and the Asiatich rather than the Roman.

But who will not judge, that Augustine behaved himself toward these poor
Britains very uncharitably, by taking away on a sudden their old Customs, and
introducing as suddenly new? especially when his great Master Gregory had
advised him to proceed in that business with more moderation, in several
Churches bore with several Customs, neither would he that the Roman Rites
themselves should every where be imposed, but wisely considered the Custom of
the place, the circumstance of time, and the Constitution of Believers. For he
said, things are not to be loved for the places sake, but places to be beloved
for the good things in them, see his Answer to the third Question of Augustine.

Amongst these things I desire to know, how came it to pass that the Bishops of
Kaerleon, otherwise of Menew, and their Successors, (who from the age of King
Lucius to the very days of Augustine, that is almost 400 years, enjoyed the
privileges of a Metropolitan, and were called Archbishops, being by no Synod,
as I know of, driven out) could, without any Crime, be deprived of their
Province and ancient Jurisdiction? But it is enough that it was dorse by
Augustine, for his Party defend all their own actions stiffly, together with
that horrible Massacre he contrived for the British Clergy. For they say 'twas
sent from God for the better confirmation of their Traditions, and Doctrine,
whilst others urge, that Augustine himself was the greatest setter forward of
this action, and encouraged King Edilfred to the same. But if a true discovery
of this business (as many would have it) may be had from the event, we are to
think otherwise of this Butchery than they have delivered, and that God himself
abhorred such cruelty. For when Edilfred, King of the Northumbrians, and
Executioner of Augustine's wrath, had committed so great a slaughter upon the
innocent Monks of Bangor at Leicester, and was triumphally making haste to
destroy their remains with their famous Monastery, there met him three British
Princes, the revengers of God's anger, who confounded the Northumbrian King
with his whole Army, reeking in the blood of those poor Innocents, they killed
ten thousand and threescore, and put the wounded King with some others to
flight, as God seemed to come down into the Army against those Augustians in
behalf of those innocent Monks of Bangor, and to have taken vengeance for their
blood.

To excuse Augustine of this Bloodshed, Bid is cited, who says that he was
dead many years before; but if the time of his sitting Archbishop be truly
computed 16 years, he must survive this Action, and in the Book de Antiquitate
Ecclesiae Anglicanae, printed at London in the year 1572. it is said, that
those words of Bid, wherein Augustine is mentioned to have been dead long
before, were foisted into the printed Copy of Bid; by the Romanists, contrary
to the current of all Saxon Manuscripts. But the general opinion grounded on
Charity, and the good Life and Miracles of Augustine, however in some things he
might be blameable, has acquitted him of acting in so bloody a Murder. Neither
do all the Romanists attribute the slaughter of those Monks to the Judgment of
God inflicted on them for their rejecting the Rites and Customs of the Romish
Church. A Testimony hereof may be evidently shown out of an old Manuscript,
written about four hundred years ago, in the ancient Dialect of the Normans by
Nicholaus Trevet, a Dominican Friar, who thus tells the story.

OF THE Famous MONASTERY OF BANGOR, AND THE Conference held between AUGUSTINE,
and DINOTH Abbot of that place.
DOnc puis que Seint Augustine lestoit venuz, trova en Wales un Arcevesque, and
un Abbeie tresnoble en la cite de Bangor e estoit devisee en sept portions, e
en chescune estoient tres cenz moines q' vivoient de lur labor. Lur Abbe fu
apele Dinooth sage elerc, e ben apris en les sept arz que sont liberals apelez.
E qnant Seint Augustine li auoit perle, li demaunda subjection a li com a celi
qestoit mande legate en la terre per le Pape e per la court de Rome. Et outre
ceo, li priast q'il li eidast de praecher. Mes il li denia l'un e l'autre, Puis
apres la mort Seint Augustine, Adelberd Roy de Kent trop corouce entisa
Ethelfrid Roy de Northumbre e les autres Rois de Sessons, encountre le dit
Dinooth Abbe de Bangor, pour ceo qu'il auoit despit Seint Augustine.

L'an de grace sis cenze e unze e fu set son successor, Laurens. A cel temps
Ethelfrid Roy de Northumbre a la request Adelberd Roy de Kent sen ala oue
grant ost sur les Britouns, and venant par Leycestre dona bataile a lamestre
de la cite Brocmaill e puis q'il auoit ses genz tue e nausre: adrein lenchasa,
e puis q'il estoit enter la cite, troua leinz grant nombre de moines e de
hermites q'estoient Britouns, e pour ceo les ocist trestuz al nombre de mil, e
deus cenz, don't li auint male fortune.

Quar alant outre verse Bangor encountre treis Duks de Bretons, cest a savoir
Blederik Duc de Cornwaile, (...) Duc de Demethe q'ore est Southwales, e Cadwan
Duc de Venedoce q'ore est dit Northwales: lur dona bataile, mes il le naufrent
e fuerent de ses genz, dis mil e sessaunte. Lors se aniuerent les Princes de
Bretons e par acord fesoient Canwan le Duc de Venedoce lur Roy. Puis Cadwan
pursui Ethelfrid jusques a Humbre, mes il acomparnant a li les Rois de Sessous
le reumt encontre, mes acordee estoit par (...) Cadwan regnast de sa Humbre,
q'est de part le South, e Ethelfrid de la q'st depart le North.

WHen St. Augustine was come, he found in Wales an Archbishop, and a famous
Monastery in the City of Bangor divided into four Societies, every one of which
contained three hundred Monks who lived on their own labor. Their Abbot was
called Dinoth, a prudent Clerk, and well learned in the seven liberal Sciences;
with whom Angustine entering into Conference, demanded subjection to him, as
being sent Legate into the land from the Pope and Court of Rome. And moreover,
required that he would be assisting to him in preaching but he refused both the
one and the other. It sell out that after the death of St. Augustine, Ethelbert
King of Kent highly incensed thereat, stirred up Edelfrid King of
Northumberland, and other Saxon Princes against the said Dinoth, Abbot of
Bangor, because he had slighted St. Augustine.

And then after other Narratives he goes on;

In the year of Grace 611 his (Augustin's) Successor was Laurence, at which
time Edelfrid King of Northumberland, at the instigation of Ethelbert King of
Kent, leads a great Host against the Britains, and coming to Leicester gives
battle to Brocmail Governor of the City, and cutting and hewing apieces his
People, puts them to flight. When he was entered the City he found a great
number of Monks and Hermits, whom, because they were Britains, he slow
everyone, to the number 1200, upon which account he had afterward ill fortune.

For proceeding on toward Bangor, he was met with by three British Captains,
viz. Blederick Duke of Cornwall, Margeduc Duke of Demetia, which is Southwales,
and Cadwan Duke of Venedocia, which is North Wales, who giving him battol,
wound him, and slay of his Nation ten thousand and sixty. Then the British
Princes meet, and with general consent make Cadwan Duke of Venedocia their
King, who chased Edilfrid as far as the River Humber, but he making head again,
through the assistance of the Saxon Princes, the quarrel was took up by
Friends, and agreed that Cadwan should possess all on the South of Humber,
Edelfrid the North.

These are the chief Records extant concerning the foundation of the first
Christian Church among the English-Saxons, which was begun in Kent under King
Ethelbert. But the long Catalogue of Bulls, Charters, and Grants of Lands given
by this King, or by Popes, and Archbishops of Canterbury, during his reign, to
particular places, Churches, and Societies of Men I have purposely omitted,
because they tend not to the substance of Religion, and being most of them
forged, all suspected, show rather the cunning of later Ages in contriving,
than the possible magnificence of these times they are fixed to; when perhaps
the simplicity of the Christian Religion, and the poverty of them who first
propagated it in the Island, gave no pretense for such large Possessions and
Immunities to flow in of a sudden upon them. But it was not long before pomp
and state grew up in our Church by the continual influence of Rome, and that
most excellent Religion which was ever observed to gain most ground by the
meekness and humility of those who professed it, those virtues being spent, and
pride and luxury succeeding, was fain to be propped up with Secular advantages;
and the life and substance gone, shadows and forms introduced, and Secular
liberties being preached up as the interest of Christ, which were ever found to
be the most destructive to his Gospel.

ETHELBERT reigned fifty three years; Bid sets his reign higher, and allotteth
him fifty six years, but it is generally agreed that he died in the year six
hundred and seventeen.

EADBALD.
EADBALD, the Son of Ethelbert by his first Wife Birtha, succeeded his An. Dom.
617.
Father in the Kingdom of Kent. Being young at his entrance, he was no sooner
freed from the awe of his Father, says Bid, but he renounced the Christian
Profession, whose severity was not agreeable with the license of a Crown, and
was likely to prove too great a curb to his exorbitant lusts and unnatural
passions. For whether tempting for Lust, or tempted out of an ambition of Rule,
he took to wife his Father's second wife, whose Name has not had the honor of
being recorded; And being actually engaged in a sin, which Heathenism it self
did always abhor, he made it his business so much the more to discourage
Christianity, by how much he knew its Doctrine condemned such Incestuous
practices. And now might be seen what influence the Religion of the Prince had
upon the lives of the People, for they who had embraced Christianity only, as
the Religion most fashionable in the days of the old King, now thought it as
high a piece of Courtship to conform to the present way of worship, their old
Idolatry, and now again revived Superstition. In vain did Lawrence, Successor
to Augustine in the Sea of Canterbury, endeavor by diligent preaching to stop
the tide of this Apostasy, for preferment at Court, and the Countenance of the
Prince, drew more Proselites to Heathenisin, than the good lives and examples
of constant Professors could keep true and sincere in the maintenance of the
Gospel. But he was not long unpunished, for whether workt by the strength of
Education, which suffers, not without violence principles well grounded to be
rooted up, or whether indeed, as is related, possessed with an evil Spirit, he
fell into soul fits of phrenzy and distraction, the convulsions of the mind,
and often torments of an evil Conscience.

And now, whilst in human appearance there seemed no hopes of amendment, it so
fell out, that by extraordinary means he became penitent. The story goes, that
Lawrence, finding his labors ineffectual, was resolved to retire into France,
and follow Justus and Melitus, the one expelled London, the other Rochester,
(for the Apostasy was now spread wide into the Country of the East Saxons
also) being at his devotions, the night before his intended departure, in the
Church of St. Peter, that Saint appeared to him, and to make the Vision more
sensible, gave him many stripes for offering to desert his Charge, the marks of
which the next morning being shown to the King, with the cause why, and the
person from whom they were received, so wrought upon his fancy already
prepared, that immediately forsaking his Incestuous life, he embraced again the
Christian Religion, and became as zealous a Professor, as he had been a
violent Persecutor. Though it should seem by the following Epistle of Pope
Boniface, that Justus, not Laurentius, was his Converter.

The Epistle of Boniface V. To Justus late Bishop of Rochester, now Successor
of Melitus in the Archbishopric of Canterbury.

To our most Beloved Brother Justus, Boniface sends Greeting.

WIth what devotion and watchfulness your Brotherhood has labored for the
Gospel Bid, lib. 2. cap. 8.
of Christ, not only the tenor of your Letter directed to us has manifested,
but the granted accomplishment of your undertaking. For neither has Almighty
God forsaken the Obligation of his Name, or the fruit of your Labor, in what
he faithfully promised to the preachers of the Gospel; Behold I am with you
even to the end of the World. Which his clemency has particularly shown in
your ministry, opening the hearts of the Gentiles to receive the singular
mystery of your preaching, for with a great reward, and the assistance of his
goodness, he has illustrated the delightful course of your proceedings, whilst
of the Talents committed unto you by a faithful improvement rendering him a
plentiful increase, he has prepared for you to lay up by multiplying the kind.
And this also is conferred on you by that retribution, who constantly
persisting in the ministry laid upon you with a commendable patience wait for
the redemption of that Nation; and that they might be profitable to yours,
their salvation is begun. The Lord saying, Whosoever shall endure to the end,
the same shall be saved. Ye are saved therefore by a patient hope, and the
strength of forbearance, that the hearts of unbelievers being purged from the
natural disease of Superstition, might obain the mercy of their Savior. For
having received an express from King Eadbald our Son, we find with how great
knowledge in holy teaching your Brotherhood has brought his mind to a true
conversion, and the belief of our undoubted faith. Upon which occasion, having
a certain assurance of the continuance of the divine Clemency, we believe that
by the ministry of their preaching will follow not only the full conversion of
those under his command, but of the neighboring Nations also; Since, as it is
written, The recompense of your works accomplished, shall be given by the Lord,
the Rewarder of all good things. And it may truly be effected, that the sound
of them has gone throughout the whole earth, and their words to the ends of
the earth by an universal confession of Nations professing the Christian Faith.

Polydore Virgil relates that hereupon he was Baptized, but it seems strange
that Ethelbert, so Religious a Prince, had neglected that pious office to his
Son; and as for re-baptizing, in case of Heresy or Apostasy, it had been long
before condemned in the Church.

After his conversion he re-called Melitus and Justus from banishment, and
built a Chapel within the Monastery of Peter and Paul at Canterbury. He
reigned twenty four years, and by Emma daughter of Theodebert, a French Prince,
had two Sons, Ermenred and Ercombert. Ermenred died before his Father, and left
a Daughter Dompnena, and two infant Sons behind him, Ethelred and Ethelbert;
but the Kingdom required a man to govern it: Ercombert the younger Son
succeeded his Father.

ERCOMBERT.
ERCOMBERT, notwithstanding his elder Brother's Sons were living, took An. Dom.
641.
possession of the Kingdom. What he wanted in Right, he made out in good
Government, being reported a most Religious and Christian King. The Saxon Idols
yet standing he utterly demolisht, and commanded the Fast of Lent to be
universally observed; but he is noted by some, for not restoring at his death
the Kingdom to his Nephew, whose undoubted Right it was; But leaving two Sons
behind, Egbert and Lothair, whom he had by Sexburg, the daughter of Anna King
of the East Saxons, it fell to them successively. He reigned twenty four years.

EGBERT.
EGBERT, the eldest Son of Ercombert, after his Father's death obtained the An.
Dom. 665:
Crown: but conscious that the right of Inheritance lay in his Uncle's Sons,
Ethelred and Ethelbert, to secure himself he dispatched them both, casting their
bodies into a River that their murder might not be known; but they were
afterward by the stream cast up upon the shore, and discovered by the next
Inhabitants, who in great veneration (for before they were esteemed Saints, and
now Martyrs) interred their bodies, and built over them a little Chapel or
Oratory. Their bones were afterward removed, and laid in the Abbey of Ramsey in
Hantshire; Their Sister Dompnena, married to Merwald a Mercian Prince, founded
the Abbey of Minster in Kent, wherein (says Stow) she became the first Abbess.
Mr. Cambden places that Abbey in Sheppy, and says, it was founded by Sexburga
Wife of Ercombert. Speed Chron. Camb. Brit.


To make amends for this Murder, he gave to the Mother of these Princes part
of Tanet wherein to build and Abbey. His ill-gotten Power was but short,
reigning only nine years, he left behind him two Sons, Edric, and Wigtred, but
his Brother Lothair seized the Kingdom.

In his days the Province of Kent was divided into Parishes by Theodorus, not
Honorius Archbishop of that See, as Mr. Speed falsely accounts, who places
also this Action in the days of Ercombert.

LOTHAIR.
LOTHAIR taking the advantage of the Minority of his Nephews, stepped into An.
Dom 674.
the Throne, but he enjoyed it not in Peace, for Ethelred the Mercian,
continually molested him on the one hand, and Edric, dispossessed of his Right,
sat not down with his loss, but pursued all means to recover it by force, so
that gaining the Assistance of the South Saxons, to whose Protection he fled,
he enters Kent with an Army, and proclaims his Title to the Crown; many flocked
unto him, whilst others adhered to Lothair. Thus the Kingdom of Kent was not
only vexed with foreign forces, but miserably divided in it self. At last in a
bloody battle, Lothair was shot through with a Dart, and dyed under his
Chirurgeon's hands.

In him (says Malmsbury) were punished the murders committed by his Brother
Egbert, because he made a scoff at the death of his Kinsmen, and laughed at the
public Malmsbury.
mournings of the people; But we shall find divine Vengeance following the Sons
of Egbert himself, and the whole Family, for the Crown continued not in it to
the third Generation. Lothair reigned ten years, and was buried at Canterbury
among his Predecessors.

EDRIC.
EDRIC, his Uncle Lothair being dead, had none who could claim before him, An.
Dom. 684.
yet during his short Reign of two years he was continually exercised in Civil
Wars, and finally slain in them. What were the Causes of his troubles,
Historians have not related, possibly they rose from Lothair's Faction, not
suppressed with his death, or it may be from the general hatred of the people
to the whole Family, which had been so deeply embrued in the blood of their
beloved Princes. And this seems more likely, for his Brother Wigtred, though
a virtuous youth, and not personally engaged in the Crimes of his House, yet
came not to the Crown till seven years after his Brothers death, no Cause being
related why he was so long held from it, unless it proceeded from the following
Wars. For Ceadwalla, the West Saxon, an ambitious and turbulent Prince, taking
advantage of the civil Commotions, and marching easily through the Kingdom of
the South Saxons, whom he had subdued, entered Kent with an Army, and miserably
spoiled the Country with fire and sword, laying waste wherever he came; the
Kentish men, though at variance among themselves, yet in the public danger,
reconciling their home differences, unite all parties against the common Enemy,
and with joint force meet him in a set Battle. The West Saxons not able to
withstand their violence were driven back with great slaughter, leaving Mollo
their King's Brother a prey to the Enemy, who in the flight, with twelve of his
Attendance, to avoid the heat of pursuit, hid himself in a Cottage, but either
discovered, or betrayed, was beset by the pursuers, and there burnt alive.
Ceadwalla nearly touched with his Brothers misfortune, and his own dishonor,
rallies his dispersed forces, and making head again, sets upon the greedy
pursuers, routs and chases them into their own Country, and never left the
Province, till with fire and sword he had revenged the death of his Brother.

WIGTRED.
VVIGTRED the Brother of Edric obtained the Kingdom about the An. Dom. 693.
year 693. Ceadwalla being dead, he purchased his peace of King Inas with a
round Sum of Money, and governed quietly for the space of thirty years. Bid
mentions one Swebhard, that reigned with him, possibly some Prince of a
contrary Faction, and ascribes to Wigtred thirty three years.

He was a Prince that highly favored the Church, as it was termed in those
days, (...). Hen. Spelman, p. 189.
by granting several privileges and immunities to Religious persons, and
exempting them from public Contributions, Subsidies, Tolls, Taxes and Imposts,
especially in a full Synod of his whole Clergy held at a place called
Becanceld, in which himself presided, among many liberties in general conferred
on them, he particularly by name privileged these Monasteries, namely,
Upminster, Raculf, Sudminster, Dofras, Folcanstan, Hymming, Stepes and Hor,
with severe Anathema's to all his Successors, or any persons whatsoever that
should at any time violate or infringe these his Royal Concessions, which in
aeternam rei memoriam were to be kept upon Record in Christ-Church in
Canterbury, and this done for the health of his Soul, and the Souls of his
Predecessors. Such was the Zeal of these times heightened and improved by the
pride and ambition of the Clergy, to gain honor and riches to themselves by
preaching whatever was done to them, was done to the person of Christ, but from
what knowledge this Zeal was likely to spring we may learn from that sad, though
ingenuous confession of King Wigtred himself, who in a grant afterward made of
some lands in Thanet to Ebba an Abbess, plainly tells the World, that not being
able to write his name he had set his mark to the Deeds, namely, the sign of
the Cross, as likewise did his Queen Kynigith, and the rest of his Nobles, not
likely to have more skill than their Sovereign. Nay the Clergy themselves,
without any injury done to them may be shrewdly suspected not to be much
exceeding in knowledge, for the way of their subscriptions is, per signum
manus; and we are certainly informed of the times not two hundred years after,
and that from King Alfred himself, alearned and pious Prince, in his sorrowful
Epistle upon that occasion to Wulfug a Bishop; That on this side Humber there
were few Priests that understood their Latin prayers, or could turn them into
English, so few, faith he, that when I began to Reign, on all the South Side of
the Thames I remember but one. Such a mixture of blind devotion and ignorance
possessed those times.

Another Council this King Wigtred held at Berghamsted, which is found in a
famous Manuscript entitled TEXTUS ROFFENSIS, composed by Ernulph Bishop of
Rochester in the year 1116, but because it is omitted by Lambard, and in
several places, as Sr. Henry Spelman confesses not understood rightly by
himself, I have purposely omitted, especially considering that there is nothing
of moment in it, which bears not the same stamp as his other Constitutions,
being stuffed with many Immunities granted to the Clergy, with additions of
certain pecuniary mulcts for the breach of Fasting-daies, Adulteries, and
Theft; only thus much I thought would not be improper, namely, to set down that
part of it which particularly relates to the strict observation of the
Lord's Day, which is the first that we meet with on this occasion, and is thus
found in the 10, 11, and 12 Articles of this Council.

The Old Saxon. The English. Gif eshe ofer dryhtnes haere theoth eorc yrce an
sunnan aefen after hire setl gange oath monan aefenes setlgang. LXXX scill, de
dryhtne gebete. If in the Evening preceding Sunday after the Sun is set, or the
Evening preceding Monday after Sun set, any Servant by command of his Master
shall do any servile work, the Master shall be punished 80 shillings for the
fact. Gif esne def his pade aes daeger. VI sc ith dryhten gebete oththe
sinehyd. If a Servant shall go a Journey on these days, he shall pay his
Master 6 shillings. Gif friman thonne an thane forbodenan timan sio he heals
fange scyldig. and se man se are.
thatana sie he age healf that iae and daet eorc. If a Free man (shall do it)
on that forbidden time, he shall suffer the Mulct of Pillory, and the Informer
shall have half as well of the Mulct as the Wirgild.

Wirgild signifies a Composition made by the Party, or his Friends, for a fault
committed.

This is all that we find upon Record either in Church or State, that
particularly relates to King Wigtred.

He left Issue Edbert, Ethelbert and Alric, who all reigned in their turns.

EDBERT.
EDBERT, the first Son of Wigtred reigned peaceably twenty three years, nothing
An. Dom. 726.
is left memorable upon Record during his Reign, save that two blazing Comets
appeared, one before the Sun in the morning, the other after him at night, both
darting their beams to the North. It was thought to portend the Desolations
afterward made by the Saracens, who brake into France, but were soon after
expelled.

ETHELBERT the Second.
ETHELBERT the Second, and second Son of Withred, succeeded his Brother An.
Dom. 749.
in the Kingdom; He reigned for the space of eleven years, and has left
nothing behind of Name or Issue. He was buried among his Ancestors at
Canterbury.

ALRIC.
ALRIC the third Son of Withred, and last of the Royal Family of Hengist, An.
Dom. 760.
held the Scepter thirty four years; He was slain in the battle of Otteford by
the hands of OFFA the Mercian King, whose overthrow, says Malmsbury, was less
dishonorable, as vanquished by so great a Monarch.

The Saxon Annals of 784 mention one EALMUND now reigning in Kent, but he is no
where else mentioned. The following Kings, either by wealth or faction,
obtained the Kingdom.

ETHELBERT the Third.
ETHELBERT the Third Surnamed Pren, the Annals call him Eadbright, by An. Dom.
794
what means is unknown, usurped the Regal Power. After two years reign,
contending with Kenulph the Mercian King who invaded his Territories, he was
taken Prisoner and led captive into Mercia, and there for a while detained.
During his Imprisonment, Cuthred was appointed by Kenulph to govern Kent; and
Simeon writes, that Kenulph commanded to put out his eyes, and cut of his
hands, but upon what occasion, or whether the sentence was executed, he has
left us in the dark. Certain it is, that Kenulph having finished his Church at
Winchcomb in Glocestershire, either out of commiseration of Human chance, or
relenting so severe a punishment, or else to render the dedication of his
Temple more illustrious, taking this Princely Captive by the hand, he led him
to the High-Altar, and there in the presence of Cuthred his Viceroy in Kent,
and ten Earls, thirteen Bishops, and many other Nobles, he gave him his Liberty
without Ransom, and free leave to return to his Dominions; But coming to Kent,
he was not received, but retired to a private life; and this is he and not the
former Ethelbert, whom the Annals of Canterbury affirm to be buried at
Reculvers in the Isle of Tanct, where he may be supposed to have lived after
his expulsion, a place most convenient, and oftentimes used for such inglorious
retreats; He reigned only three years.

CUTHRED.
CUTHRED was created by Kenulph Viceroy of Kent, but our Historians An. Dom.
797.
make him King and Usurper; however he sat in the Throne but three years, and
we hear nothing of him, but that he was present at the release of his
Predecessor, which should seem to argue, that he was not the cause of his being
kept out from the Crown.

BALDRED.
BALDRED, last King of Kent was vanquished by Egbert the West Saxon, An. Dom.
805.
who seized his Dominion after he had reigned eighteen years, and forced him to
fly beyond the River Thames, at which time this Kingdom, and not long after
the rest of the Heptarchy, were reduced under the entire obedience of that
Monarch.

THE KINGDOM OF THE East Saxons
Contained Counties
Essex, Middlesex, Part of Hartfordshire.
KINGS
Sledda. Sebert. Sered. Seward. Sigibert the First. Sigibert the Second.
Sigibert the Third. Swithelm. Sighere. Sebba. Offa. Selred. Suthred.




SLEDDA.
SLEDDA, the tenth from Woden, is generally esteemed the first founder of the
East-Saxon Kingdom, though some following Huntington, give the honor to
Erchenwine his Father, of whom nevertheless they tell us nothing, saving his
Name and Pedigree, relating neither the number of his Forces, the place of his
landing, or so much as the least encounter with the Britains. In the same
obscurity we might have passed over Sledda his Son, had he not ennobled himself
by the marriagt of Ricula, Daughter of Emerick King of Kent, and Sister to
Ethelbert the first Christian Prince, and Great Monarch of the Englishmen. And
indeed the whole transactions of this Province seem all along to have been
redeemed from oblivion, not by the glory or worth of its Princes, or the
greatness of its own proper atchievments, but by the conjunction is had with
other Kingdoms more powerful, and the luster it borrowed from neighboring
Princes, with whom it was often linked in action. In its beginning it was
tributary to Kent, and received its Protection from thence, and this is the
reason I have placed it next in order; and though afterward it came to be in a
manner absolute, yet it never rose to that height, as to have one Monarch that
could pretend to give Laws to other Kingdoms of the Saxons, as all the rest at
one time or another did. It was bounded on the East with the Sea, on the South
with the Thames, on the West with the Colne, on the North with the River Stour;
But these two latter limits often varied, according to the encroachments of the
Mercians made upon them in the West, and the East Angles, and those of
Northumberland on the North. Neither is the time of the beginning of this
Kingdom more certain; some place it as high as the year 516 under Erchinwin,
others eleven years after, in the year 527, and the fifteenth of Oisc second
King of Kent. Some begin it at the first year of this Sledda's Reign, which
they will have to be in the year 587; but leaving them in their Disagreement, I
shall begin the computation of this Kingdom from the death of Sledda, who
having reigned, without any actions recorded, the space of many years, departed
this life Anno 596, leaving issue Sebert and Segebald.

SEBERT.
SEBERT the eldest Son of Sledda succeeded his Father, nothing more famous An.
Dom. 596.
than he, saving that he was the first introducer of the Christian Faith into
this Province. He was converted at the persuasions of his Uncle Ethelbert, and
the preaching of Melitus, afterward Bishop of London, and received Baptism at
his hands in his chief City of London, where, by the assistance of King
Ethelbert, then chief Monarch of the Englishmen, he founded a stately Church,
or rather repaired and enlarged the old Structure, dedicating it to the honor
of St. Paul, constituting it the Cuthedral of the Sea of London. This Church,
Ethelbert then present endowed with good possessions, as in his Grant to
Melitus is evident by this following Record.

AETHELBERT Rex, Deo Inspirante, pro animae suae remedio, dedit Episcopo Melito
terram quae appellatur Tillingham, ad Monasterium sive solatium, scilicet,
Sancti Pauli. Et ego Rex AETHELBERT ita firmiter concedo tibi Praesuli Melito
potestatem ejus habendi and possidendi, ut in perpetuum in Monasterii utilitate
permaneat, etc.

Afterward these two Princes founded the Church of St. Peter's on the west of
London, at a place called Thorney, where there stood a Ruinous structure,
built, as the report goes, by King Lucius upon the foundations of a Temple of
Diana. Here Sebert after thirteen years Reign was interred, as likewise his
Wife Anthelgoda, more to be commended, if he had laid the foundation of
Christian Religion in the hearts of his Children, as he had done in sticks and
stones; but dying, his three Sons

SERED, SEWARD and SIGIBERT, jumpt all at once into the Throne; three heady and
ungracious Princes, for their Father was no sooner laid in the earth, but they
cast off publicly the Christian Religion, and did open spite to its
Professors. Take the Relation from Bid:

Sebert departing this life to a better, left his Kingdom to his three Sons,
who immediately Bid, lib. 2. cap. 5.
returned to the open profession of Idolatry, which, during their Father's
life, they had partly dissembled, and by public allowance encouraged their
Subjects in the worship of Idols; when they saw the Bishop celebrating of Mass
in the Church, and delivering the Host to the people, they haughtily demanded,
as report goes, and with as much folly as impiety, Why reach you not out the
glittering Bread to us, as well as you used to do to our Father Suaba (for so
in derision they called him) and still continue to give unto the people? To
whom the Bishop made this Answer, If you will be washed in the same fountain of
life, as your Father was, you may also be partaker of the same Holy Bread. But
they persisting in their demands, and the Bishop resolutely refusing, they in
great passion and fury banished him their Kingdom, who there-upon returned into
Kent (which at that time under Eadbald was in the same plight) and afterward
passed into France with Justus then Bishop of Rochester. But divine Vengeance
suffered not long their impiety to go unpunished; For going out to War against
the West Saxons, they were all cut off by the sword. But nevertheless, though
the Authors of this Apostasy were taken away, yet the people could not for some
time be brought to embrace the Christian Religion. Seward left Issue Sigibert.
SIGIBERT the First.
SIGIBERT Surnamed the Little, the Son of Seward, the second Son of Sebert An.
Dom. 623.
succeeded his Father in the Kingdom; he has left nothing behind him of his
Reign, so that he might be styled the Little, as well for his Actions, as his
Person. He left a Son named Sighere, and a Brother called Sebba, but neither of
them immediately succeeded him.

SIGIBERT the Second.
SIGIBERT the second of that name, the Son of Segebald, the Brother of Sebert,
An. Dom. 648.
reigned next in the Kingdom of the East Saxons. At his first coming to the
Crown he was a Pagan with all his People, but was at length converted by the
ardent persuasions of OSWY King of Northumberland, with whom he had contracted
a near intimacy, resorting often to the Court of that Prince to visit him;
Oswy, who wisely knew how to improve the kindness of his Friend for the
advantage of his Soul, at last by friendly endearments, at his own Palace upon
the Wall brought him to Baptism, which he received at the hands of Finnan a
Bishop.

Being to return into his own Country, he desired that some Preacher might be
sent with him to instruct his People in the Religion which he himself had
received. Oswy, to satisfy his just Requests chooses one Gedda a laborious
Pastor, then residing in the Country of the Mercians, to go along with him, who
coming into the Country of the East Saxons, by the help of others joined with
him in the Ministry, so wrought upon the People committed to his charge, that
the Gospel of Christ daily increased more and more throughout the whole
Province.

Gedda, as a reward of his labors, and to gain more Authority to his
preaching, was afterward by Finnan at Lindesfern created Bishop of the
East Saxons, which office he executed with great commendation for the space of
many years, ordaining Priests and Deacons for his assistance, and Baptizing in
all parts, but especially at Ithancester and Tilbury; Whilst these things were
doing, Sigibert, who still continued steadfast in Religion, was almost
barbarously slain by the conspiracy of two of his Kinsmen who were attending of
his person. Being demanded after the Murder, what it was that moved them to an
act so foul and treasonable, it is reported they returned this savage Answer,
That they had killed him for his easiness of Temper, in forgiving Injuries, and
pardoning his enemies whenever they asked it. Some have attributed his death to
the judgment of God upon him for his disregarding the Censures of the Church,
and they give us this Relation.

One of these Earls that flew him had unlawfully married a Wife, and being
admonisht thereof refused notwithstanding to put her away, for which sin being
excommunicated, but still continuing obstinate, it was strictly forbidden under
pain of the same Censure for any one to come under his Roof, much less to eat
or drink with him. Notwithstanding this Sentence, the King invited to a Banquet
goes to his House, but in his return meeting the Bishop, he was struck with
remorse, and lighting from his Horse fell at his feet, begging pardon for his
offense. It is said, that the Bishop also alighting came up to the King, and
touching his head with his rod, spoke these words in the Authority of a Bishop,
Because thou would not refrain from entering the House of the accursed, in the
same House shall thou die. And so indeed it came to pass; This Gedda going
afterward to visit his Native Country of Northumberland, upon the motion of
King Ediswald there Reigning, founded the Monastery of Lustinghem, which he
consecrated with Fasting and Prayer.

Sigibert is said to have Reigned fourteen years, he left behind him a Son
named, Selred, but the Crown fell not to him immediately after his Father's
death, but he followed many others who wore it before him.

SWITHELM.
SWITHELM the Brother of Segibert succeeded him in the Province of the An. Dom.
662.
East Saxons; we hear nothing of him but the course of his Christianity, being
baptized by Gedda, in the Province of the East Angles, at a place of the Kings
called Rendelsham, Ediswald the Brother of King Anna and King of the
East Angles receiving him at the Font:

SIGHERE.
SIGHERE and SEBBA, after the death of Swithelm, took jointly on them An. Dom.
664.
the government of the State, the former was the Son of Sigibert the Little,
the latter his Brother. They divided the Province into two Governments, each of
which they ruled distinctly. In the beginning of their Reign there was seen an
Eclipse of the Sun on the third of May, which was followed by a grievous Dearth
and Pestilence, beginning in the south parts, but spreading to the north, and
over all Ireland with great Mortality. Sighere and his People unsteady in
faith, attributed this Plague to the displeasure of their old Gods, and
returned again to their Superstition, building up their Altar, and erecting
their Images which had been cast down. Which when Wulfur the Mercian came to
understand, he sent Jaruman a godly Bishop, who by faithful endeavors in that
kind soon recovered them of this second Apostasy. But Sebba with those under
his command, held steadfast in the Faith, and after the death of Sighere reigned
many years, until weary of the troubles of this World, he resigned his Crown,
and took upon him the habit of a Monk in the Monastery of St. Paul's in London,
which habit he received at the hands of Waldhere, or Walthere Bishop of London,
to whom he brought a great sum of money to be distributed in Charitable uses,
reserving nothing for himself, that he might (faith my Author) be as well poor
in substance, as in mind, and all to gain the Treasure of the Kingdom of
Heaven; where he died and was buried, and his Tomb to our days stood in the
North-wall of the Chancel of that Church, being thither translated in the year
1148.

He had two Sons, the eldest of which named Sigherd, was a Monk with his
Father, as Bede says, and of the youngest named Seofrid, there is nothing
recorded, though some make him to reign seven years after his Father. Sighere
married Oswith the Daughter of Edilfrith King of Northumberland, who, in the
days of her Husband, is said to be the Abbess of Barking, and was afterward
reputed a Saint. By her he had a Son named Offa, who succeeded Sebba in the
Kingdom.

OFFA.
OFFA the Son of Sighere, a comely person in his youth, and as much admired An.
Dom. 701.
for the endowments of mind, as of body, reigned the space of eight years, much
desired of the People. When out of a Religious fondness he forsakes his Wife
Kineswith the Daughter of Penda, and with Kendred King of Mercia, and Edwin
Bishop of Worcester goes to Rome, where he is shorn a Monk; his Queen after his
departure, vowed her self a Veiled Nun in the Abbey of Kineburg, where his
Sister was Abbess.

SELRED.
SELRED the Son of Sigibert the Good, came at length to the Crown, which An.
Dom. 709.
he held thirty eight years, and then died a violent death, but how or from
whom received, is not reported, leaving no Issue behind him.

SUTHRED.
SUTHRED, the last King of the East Saxons, was driven out of his Kingdom An.
Dom. 747.
by Egbert the West Saxon Monarch, at which time this Province with others was
annexed to the Crown of all the Principality of the Saxons this had been most
unstable in the Faith, having twice fallen into open Apostasy. And this
perhaps might be the true Reason, that of all the rest it was the most
Inglorious, being Tributary throughout to one Prince or other, and never able
to stand upon its own feet, by the just judgment of God who visited their sins
upon them, that they who could stoop to stocks and stones, should also be
servants to their Neighbors. For if we consider the outward advantages it
enjoyed in the beginning of its foundation, we should sooner judge it would be
able to give Laws to its Neighbors, than receive from them. It was excellently
bounded on the East and South by the Ocean and River Thames, which at once
enriched and secured it. It had under its command the City of London, which
Bid in these days writes, was a Princely Mart for all Comers both by Sea and
Land. On the other side it had no bordering settlements of Saxons in its first
infancy, to share in its Conquests, or strengthen its ground, an inconvenience
which many other Provinces were forced to struggle with. The lands were seated
very pleasant and fruitful, and the Countries adjoining lay open to their
farther progress; yet notwithstanding all these admirable advantages it was
continually in a pining condition, scarce able to bear up the name of a
Province, much less the dignity of a Kingdom. And in its final surrender to
Egbert, hardly afforded a good morsel to that Conqueror; For London obeying
the Mercians went not along with it, but holding out with the Countries near
adjacent, it cost some more time in the gaining of it.

THE KINGDOM OF THE South Saxons
Contained Counties
Surry. Sussex.
KINGS
Ella. Cissa. Edilwalch.




ELLA.
THE Kingdom of the South Saxons was precedent to the former in time, and the
glory of its Actions, but not continuance of its An. Dom. 492.
Dominion, for as it was begun with the first, so it was the soonest of all
determined; the foundations whereof were laid by ELLA the eleventh from Woden,
not long after the arrival of Hengist, for whether sent for by him, or coming
on his own accord as a New Adventurer with his three Sons, Kymen, Pletting and
Cissa, in three ships he lands at a place since that called Kymenshore, now
Shoreham, a well known Harbor in Sussex.

At his first landing he set upon the Britains, and with great slaughter drove
them into the Wood Andreds-league, which Mr. Cambden calls Andreds-wald, so
named from Caer-Andred adjoining, which in the Book Notitia Provinciarum is
termed Anderida, with a Haven hard by of the same name. But the Britains thus
driven back, suffered not Ella to enjoy his ground in quiet, for continually
sallying out upon him from the neighboring Woods and Forests, and their chief
Garrison at Caer-Andred, called by the Saxons afterward Andreds-cester, now
Newenden in Kent, they oftentimes repelled him with great damage, and as is
thought, with the death of his two eldest Sons, Kymen and Pletting. Ella to
supply these losses sends over to old Saxony, at this day Holstein in Denmark,
for more Recruits, which come, he gives them battle at Mercredeshowrn, or
Mercreds-Burnamsted, wherein he obtained an absolute Victory; but Huntington
makes doubtful, which side carried the day. And it appears, that after this
engagement new Forces were sent for into Germany, but whether a second time, or
that the last supplies are to be placed after this battle, is left uncertain.
But an Argument of Victory on the Saxons side is, that now it is generally
reported that Ella took upon him Kingly Dignity, namely, three years after the
death of Hengist, in the year of our Lord 492; for the difference of
computations herein is not great, unless we follow them who confound the time
of his Entrance with that wherein he assumed Power.

ELLA grown great with Conquests, and Recruits, taking his Son Cissa with him,
besieges Andredchester the chief Rendezvous of the Enemy, who nettled with the
thoughts to see their principal Garrison invaded, and weighing the fatal
consequences, if it should fall into his hands, there being scarce any other
place considerable left them in the South, gather from all parts, and strive,
if possible, to raise the Siege. Sometimes the Inhabitants sallied out, whilst
others from the Woods and natural Fastnesses, fell upon the Enemy in the Rear.
But Ella dividing his Army, ordering one half to attend the motions of the
Scouting Britains, and with the other part plying the Siege, at last won the
Town by Assault, and, as some report, put all to the Sword, sparing neither Sex
nor Age. The City it self he utterly demolished, and with so through a Ruin,
that it never after could be rebuilt. And at this day the ground whereon it
stood bears a little Village so small, that it scarce suffices to point out
the foundations of the Ancient City.

Ella by destroying this great Fortress had opened the whole Southern quarters
of the Island, whereby all that part of the Country lay at his devotion. What
he did in the following course of his Reign, which is reckoned twenty two
years, or thereabouts, is not particularly recorded, but he is numbered the
second Monarch of the Englishmen, and is said at last to have reduced all on
this side Humber, both Saxon and Britain, under his entire obedience. But under
his Successors, who were but few, and of no great fame, the Kingdom was
contracted into a lesser compass, containing only Sussex and Surry, and them
not entire; For the Kingdom of Kent on one side, and the West Saxons on the
other, both well settled Governments, pressing hard upon it, so daily wore it
out, that losing strength by degrees, what remained of it was quickly swallowed
up by Ceadwald the West Saxon, and afterward by King Ine his Successor,
wholly annexed to that Kingdom; Insomuch that continuing so short a while, not
beyond the year 1601, having so few Princes, and those in so great obscurity,
William of Malmsbury among other Writers, have taken no notice of it at all.

CISSA.
CISSA the youngest Son of Ella, the other two failing before him, succeeded in
An. Dom. 514.
the Kingdom of the South Saxons; he left nothing memorable behind him save a
long Reign of 76 years, as it is generally reported, spent only in the
foundation of two Cities bearing his Name, Chichester and Cissbury; of the
former, Mr. Cambden thus writes: Chichester, in the British tongue called
Caercei, in the English-Saxon Cissan ceaster, in Latin Cicestria, a City large
enough, and walled about, built by Cissa a Saxon, the second King of this
Province, and of him so named, for Cissan ceaster, is nothing else but the City
of Cissa.

Concerning the latter, hear the same Author: Hard by (i. e. near Offington)
there is a Fort compassed about with a Bank rudely cast up, wherewith the
Inhabitants are persuaded that Caesar entrenched and fortified his Camp. But
Cissbury, the name of the place does plainly show and testify, that it was the
work of Cissa, who being of the Saxons Line, the second King of this petty
Kingdom after his Father Aella, accompanied with his Brother Cimen, and no
small power of the Saxons, at this shore arrived, and landed at Cimen shore, a
place so called of the said Cimen, which now has lost the name, but that it
was near unto Wittering, the Charter of the Donation which King Cedwalla made
unto the Church of Selsey most evidently proves.

EDILWALCH.
EDILWALCH followed Cissa, nothing more famous than he, saving that by his
example the South Saxons, though late, embraced the Christian Religion. An.
Dom. 590.
The occasion of this Prince's Conversion is thus told in the History of St.
Swithune:

Berinus Bishop of Dorchester preaching at Oxford before Wulfur King of Mercia,
Lib. Historialis St. Swithuni, Winton.
it happened that Edilwatch then a Pagan, was present, who by the persuasion of
Wulfur, and the instruction of that Bishop, embraced the Faith and was
baptized, being received at the Font by Wulfur, who to gratify his new
Convert, and new Cambden.
Adopted Son, gave him the Isle of Wight, and a Province of the Containing now
three Hundreds in Hantshire, Meanshorow, East-Mean, and West-Mean.
Meannari adjoining upon the Continent, which Wulfur had newly gotten from
Kenwalke the West Saxon, and had there, as will appear out of Bid, begun to
plant Christianity. At the same time, following the example of their King, the
Dukes and Nobles of this Province received Baptisin at the hands of St.
Berinus; but the general Conversion of the South Saxons was wrought by Wilsrid
Archbishop of York, driven from his Seat by Egfrid King of Northumberland. The
whole story of which, as also the Conversion of the Isle of Wight, take out of
Bid, as it is particularly related, out of which relation our Historians
gather by piece-meals whatever is recorded of this Prince.

The Conversion of the South Saxons.
How Wilfrid Archbishop of York Converted the South Saxons.

WILFRID driven from his Bishopric, and wandering in several places, at last
went to Rome, whence returning into Britain, though he could not be Eede, lib.
4. cap. 13.
received into his own Country, and Diocese, yet he refrained not the duty of
preaching the Gospel; but going to the Kingdom of the South Saxons, containing
eight thousand Families yet sticking to their Pagan Idolatry, he preached the
Word, and administered Baptisin. Ethilwalch was King of that Nation, not long
before baptized in the Province of Mercia, Wulfur being present and exhorting
him, by whom he was received at the Font, and in sign of Adoption, had of him
by donation the Isle of Wight, and the Province of the Meannari in the Country
of the West Saxons. Wherefore the Bishop, by the consent of the King who
joyfully embraced the motion, baptized the chief Dukes and Officers of the
Province; but Eappa, and Padda, and Bruchelin, and Oidda, Priests, baptized the
Common sort about the same time, or a little after. Moreover Queen Ebba
received Baptism in her own Island of Wight, she was the Daughter of Eanfrid,
the Brother of Eanher, who both, with their people were Christians; but the
whole Province of the South Saxons, was for the most part ignorant of the Word
of God and Faith. But there was amongst them a certain Monk, by Nation a Scot,
by name Dicul, who had a little Convent in a place called Bosanham, encompassed
with Wood and the Sea, and with him five or six Friars, in an humble and poor
life serving God, but of the People, none cared to imitate their Life, or hear
their Doctrine. But Wilfrid the Bishop preaching to them, not only delivered
them from the pains of eternal damnation, but from the sad calamity of temporal
destruction. For before his arrival into the Province, for three years together
no Rain had fallen in those parts, so that a bitter Famine falling on the
Common sort, made lamentable destruction among them. It is reported, that
forty or fifty together wasted with hunger would, creeping to the Seaside and
there clasping their hands together, fling themselves off from the Rocks or
Cliffs, either to perish in the fall, or drown in the waters. But on the very
same day that Nation received Baptism, gentle and plentiful showers fell from
heaven, the Earth flourished, and to the green Fields succeeded a glad and
fruitful year. So that casting off their ancient Superstition, and hating their
Idolatry, the hearts and flesh of all rejoiced in the living God, who by his
heavenly Grace had not only enriched them with internal, but external blessings
also.

This Prelate at his first coming into the Province, seeing the plague of
Famine so great, had taught them to get sustenance by fishing, for the Sea and
Rivers abounded with all sort of fish, but their skill extended only to the
catching of Eeles. Having therefore gathered together many Eele-Nets, they cast
them into the Sea, and by divine assistance presently caught three hundred fish
of diverse kinds, which dividing into three parts, they gave a hundred to the
Poor, a hundred to them of whom they had borrowed the Nets, and a hundred they
reserved for their own use; By which benefit this Prelate gained the affections
of every one toward him, and they were easier brought by his Preaching to hope
for eternal things, by whose Ministry they had received temporal.

At which time King Edilwalch gave by donation to the most Reverend Father
Wilfrid Land of eighty seven Families, where he might receive his own People
who wandered about in Exile, that is to say, Seolesu, which in Latin is called,
Insula vituli marini, the place is every where surrounded with the Sea, saving
on the West, Selsey in Sussex.
where it has a passage of about a stones cast wide. This place when Wilfred
had received, he founded there a Monastery for Priests Regular, placing therein
such especially whom he had brought with him, which to this day his Successors
hold. For he lived in those parts five years ( i. e.) till the death of King
Elfrid, worthily honored by all, exercising the office of a Bishop both in
word and deed. And because the King, together with the possession of the same
place, had granted him all the Demesne with the Lands and Tenants, he baptized
them all into the Christian Faith, among which many men and maid Servants, to
the number of one hundred and fifty, he not only by Baptism delivered from the
slavery of Satan, but by giving them freedom released them from the yoke of
human bondage.

The Conversion of the Inhabitants of WIGHT.
AFter Ceadvalla had obtained the Kingdom of the West Saxons, he took the Isle
of Wight, which hitherto was generally given to Idolatry; By tragical slaughter
Bid, lib. 4. cap. 16.
he endeavors to root out the Natives, and in their place plant people of his
own Province, obliging himself by a Vow, though as yet not baptized, as is
reported, that if he took the said Island, he would give the fourth part of it
and the spoil to holy uses, which he likewise performed, granting it to Wilfred
the Bishop, who was then by chance come thither from his own Country.

The measure of the Island, according to the account of the English, is a
thousand two hundred Families, out of which was given to the Bishop the
possession of three hundred. But that part which he received, he bestowed on
one of his clergy, by name Bernuvin his Sisters son, assigning him a Priest
called Hildila, who should administer the Word and Sacrament to all such as
desired salvation, where I think it ought not to be passed by in silence, how
that for the first fruits of them who of the Island by believing were saved,
two young Princes, Brothers of Arwald King of the Island, by the special favor
of God were first crowned. For the Enemy approaching, they got out of the
Island, and were carried into the next Province of the Vites, where being
brought to a place called Stoneham.
Ad lapidem, and thinking themselves hid Cambden.
from the fury of the Conqueror, they were betrayed and commanded to be stain,
which when a Priest, and Abbot by name Cimbreth came to understand, having not
far off a Monastery in a place called Now Redbridg. Cambden.
Reodford, he came to the King, who then lay in those parts Incognito under the
cure of his wounds, which he had received in fight in the Isle of Wight, and
desired of him, that if of necessity the Youths must die, they might first be
baptized with the Sacrament of Christian Faith. The King granted it, and he
instructing them in the words of truthi, and washing them in the fountain of
life, gave them certain assurance of their entrance into the eternal Kingdom;
Which done, they joyfully received at the Executioner's hands a temporal death,
by which they doubted not but to pass to life everlasting.

In this order therefore, after all the Provinces of Britain had embraced the
Faith of Christ, the Isle of Wight also received it; in which Island not
withstanding (by reason of the inconvenience of external subjection) none ever
took the dignity of an Episcopal See and Jurisdiction, before Daniel the
present Bishop of the West Saxons and Geuisses.

By this last Relation of Bid, the Isle of Wight had not received the Faith
till after the death of this King Edilwalch, and the arrival of Ceadwalla,
though others relate otherwise, as has been shown before. For Edilwalch
assisting the West Saxons against Ceadwalla was slain by him before he the said
Ceadwalla had invaded the South Saxons, and in this Prince ended the Royal stem
of the South-Saxon Kings; but after his death, two Dukes of this Province
Berthun and Authun assumed the Power to themselves, and in some Conflicts
repelled Ceadwald with loss; but he having united his Subjects, and gathered
more Forces, returned upon them, and with the slaughter of Berthun totally
subdued the whole Country, which (with the uttermost violence of a Conqueror)
he brought into miserable Thraldom.

Thus they who received the Faith last, were the first who were brought to
subjection, long before hand leading the dance to other Kingdoms, who were to
follow in the universal Obedience to the Western-Monarchy.

THE KINGDOM OF Northumberland
Contained Counties
Yorkshire. Durham. Loncashire. Westmorland. Cumberland. Northumberland.
KINGS,
Ida. Ella. Ethelric. Edelfrid. Edwin. Osric the First. Eanfrid. Oswald. Oswy.
Egfrid. Alkfryd. Osred the First. Kenred. Osric the Second. Ceolwulf. Egbert.
Oswulf. Ethelwald. Alcred. Ethelred I. Elfwald. Osred the Second. Ethelred II.




IDA.
THE first settlement of the Saxons in these parts we may remember was under
Octa and Ebissa, the one the Son, the other the Nephew of King Hengist, who
being called over in the days of Vortigern, by his leave landing about Humber,
and not long after sailing to the Orcades with forty ships, subdued all the
Northern Tract, and at last fixed themselves in that part of the Island which
is now called Northumberland. These Transactions happened about the year 450,
since which time till the year 547 we hear nothing of them, but that they and
their posterity quietly possessed and enjoyed what by force they had won of the
Britains, but still paying homage to Kent, though far distant, as to the elder
Family.

But now about this An. D 547. Kingdom of Bernicia.
year one IDA, the tenth from Woden, began to set up a separate Kingdom in
Northumberland, called the Kingdom of Bernicia, and to assume absolute Royalty
to himself. What his Title was, or whether he got it by Election or Usurpation
Authors give no account, contented to satisfy us in the Nobility of his
extraction; But however he came to wear the Dignity, he is certainly reported
worthy of it, being invincible in War, and in Peace tempering the awe of
Majesty with a natural sweetness and humanity, with which Princely qualities he
Reigned fourteen years, some say but twelve, during which time he built the
Castle or Town of Bebanburg or Bamburg, which he first fenced with Pales, aad
afterward encompast with a Stone-wall. He had twelve Sons, half by Wives, half
by Concubines. His Legitimate were, as Huntington reports, Adda, Bealric,
Thedric, Ethelric, Osmer, and Thedred: Illegitimate, Oga, Ecca, Oswald, Ailric,
Soge, and Sogother, who, says Matthew of Westminster, arrived at Flemuburg in
forty ships, and assisted their Father in many of his Wars.

The bounds of this Kingdom began in the South at the River Tine, and extended
to the North as far as the Frith of Edenborough and Dunbritton.

ELLA.
ABOUT this time, namely in the year 561. (...) Prince, the twelfth An. Dom.
561. Kingdom of Deira.
from Woden, but by another Line follow (...) example of lda, erected another
Kingdom in (...) the bounds whereof reached from the Humber to the River Tine.
He reigned thirty years, and left a Son called Edwin, and a Daughter named
Acca, but after his death the Kingdom was seized by the race of lda, who taking
advantage of the Childhood of Edwin, kept him from the Crown, and annexed the
whole Territory to their own Dominion.

ETHELRIC.
ETHELRIC the only Son of lda surviving, after his Brothers and Kinsmen An.
Dom. 591.
had reigned without other Memory in Bernicia came to the Crown in his old age:
Nothing of him memorable is recorded, and (...) writes, that had it not been
for the luster of his Son succeeding him, he might utterly have been forgotten,
however we must not pass over, that during his Reign Edwin the lawful King of
Deira enjoyed not that Crown, but whether Ethelric usurped his right, or only
managed the state during his Minority, is left uncertain; but sure it is, that
he held both the Provinces, and so left them to his Son and Successor
Edelfrid, who resolved to keep what his Father left him, though never so
unjustly.

EDELFRID.
EDELFRID sir named the wild succeeded in his Father's Kingdom of
Northumberland, An. Dom. 595.
a Prince valiant, and thirsty of Renown, and some describe him a Lover of War,
for War's sake only. None of the Saxons ever wasted the Britains so much as he,
whose Countries he either peopled with his own Nation, or made Tributary to
him. Edan King of the bordering Scots jealous of his success raises a mighty
Army, and invades his Kingdom, whom Edelfrid meeting at a place called
Degsastone in a set Battle totally discomfits, and with such slaughter, that
Bid writes none of the Scottish Kings to his days durst ever after in hostile
manner pass into Britain: But the Victory was not obtained without great loss
on the Saxons side also, for Theobald, the Kings Brother, and that wing which
he commanded, was unfortunately cut off. After this he turned his Arms against
the Britains, moved thereunto, as some report, by the instigation of Ethelbert
King of Kent, at the request of St. Augustine, because the Britains refused
obedience to his Authority, but the whole course of this action I have before
related in the life of Ethelbert, King of Kent. But Edelfrid growth so famous
abroad began to be disquleted with Jealousies at home; he knew the Title Edwin
had to half his Dominions, and though he had made some amends for his Injustice
to that Prince in marrying of his Sister Acca, yet for all that he could not be
sure of his affection, and never rested till he drove him out of his
Government, who wandering from place to place, was at last enrertained in the
Court of Redwald, then King of the East Angles; Edelfrid informed of his kind
reception with that Prince, grows incensed thereat, and sends his Ambassadors
to have him delivered into his hands, or else declares open War. Redwald at his
Message at first somewhat startled, but at length yielding, is dissuaded from
it by his Wife, who laid before him the inviolable Laws of Hospitality, and how
pitiful and mean a thing it was for the menaces of an Enemy to betray his
friend, to whom he had sworn protection: upbraided with his weakness Redwald to
make amends, not only refuses to deliver him, but resolves to maintain his
Cause, and to be beforehand with Edelfrid, with an Army suddenly raised he
comes upon him little dreaming of an Invasion, and in a fight near the River
Idle easily dissipates those forces he had collected together, and in the same
Battle slays Edelfrid himself who yet dyed not unrevenged: For to show that it
was the Error of his fortune not valor that he lost the day, with his own
hands he slew Reiner the Kings Son.

Thus died Edilfrid, after he had reigned victoriously for the space of twenty
two years, to whom Bid applies the saying of Jacob to Benjamin, That like a
ravening Wolf he devoured his prey in the morning, and divided the spoil in the
evening. His three Sons were conveyed into Scotland by their Mother Acca, not
daring to trust the good nature and generosity of Edwin, whom their Father had
so injuriously offended.

EDWIN.
EDWIN the Son of Ella established in his Kingdom by the assistance of Redwald
An. Dom. (...)
the East-Angle, as has been related, extended his Dominions further than any
King of Northumberland had done before him; for Eanfrid, Oswald, and Oswy, the
Sons of the late Edilfrid flying into Scotland, left the Province of Bernicia
absolute to his disposal; But besides this addition to his Paternal right,
partly by Conquest, and partly by Resignation, he annexed to his Territory the
Counties of Durham, Chester, and Lancashire, subduing all, both British and
English, ar far as the Mevanian Islands, Anglesey and Man, all which he either
new planted, or made Tributary to him. He had not regined above six years when
Redwald, the chief Monarch then of the Englishmen departed this life, leaving
his Son Earpwald to succeed him in the Kingdom of the East Angles. Him Edwin
though entreated himself to accept of the Government, seated in the Throne of
his Fathers, contented with the same acknowledgments from him, as he received
from the rest of the Saxon Provinces, Kent only excepted, namely some small
confessions of Power, and the owning of his supreme governance.

Having thus well established all things round about him, he sends to Eadbold
Son of Ethelbert, then reigning in Kent, to desire his Sister in marriage, But
by his Ambassadors he receives this Answer, That the Christian Law did not
permit them to give their Daughters unto Pagans. Edwin, whose business was
Love, not Religion, replies, that, that ought not to be any hinderance, for the
free exercise of her own ways in her own Family, with all the Rites and
Ceremonies belonging thereunto, should be left entire to her disposal, and if
upon due examination he found the Christian Law to be better than his own, he
would himself embrace it.

These fair and ingenuous offers opening so large a way for the propagation of
the Gospel, and readily assented to, and Otherwise named Tate.
Ethelburga, for so the Virgin was called, is sent into Northumberland under
the spiritual Tuition of Paulinus, created Bishop by Justus for that occasion.
But Edwin continued still in his old Idolatry, and though Paulinus by preaching
and persuasion used his utmost endeavor, yet he gained little either upon
Prince or People for a whole twelvemonth, to forsake their own, or embrace the
Queens Religion; But at length, an unexpected accident made more way for the
entrance of the Faith, than the labor and industry of the Bishop could ever
do; For Edwin having narrowly escaped an Assassine sent by Cuichelme King of
the West Saxons to dispatch him, and lying under the cure of a dangerous wound,
took such impression in mind, especially Paulinus improving that occasion, that
he solemnly promised, that if Christ, whom they so much extolled, would give
him cure of his wound, and victory over his bloody Enemies, he would without
more ado receive his Religion. Paulinus was not wanting to encourage this Vow,
and the King, to show his sincerity, gives his Daughter Eanfled to be bred up
in Religion, who with twelve others of his Family, were baptized by Paulinus on
the day of Pentecost; The King not long after recovering, raises an Army, and
invades the West Saxon Province, and with such wonderful success, that in a
short space, he not only laid the Country desolate, but had means to bring the
chief Actors of that bloody contrivance to punishment, they all by one means or
other falling miraculonsly into his hands; Loaded with Victory he returns home,
and from that time worshipped no more his Idols. But the open profession of the
Christian Faith he could not yet be brought to own, but stood wavering between
the prejudices of Education on one side, and the Evidences he had received on
the other, from the power of that God whom Paulinus had taught him, and who
plainly seemed to be his Deliverer.

Whilst he stood in this doubting condition, he receives Letters from Boniface
then Bishop of Rome, the Copies of which are yet extant, containing ardent
exhortations, not to delay his Promise, but to embrace the Faith which he had
vowed; Neither was the Bishop wanting by Letters to his Queen, to stir up and
quicken her endeavors toward the conversion of her Husband; But all was in
vain, for the King tossed between two great Seas, inclined neither to the one
side or other, until Paulinus by divine Revelation coming to the knowledge of a
Secret, One day when the King was private in his Chamber, comes boldly in, and
laying his hand on his head, asked him, if he remember what that sign meant?
Edwin all in a maze, as whose memory had newly recovered some former
impressions, rose up, and fell prostrate at the Bishop's feet. Behold, says
Paulinus, taking him up by the hand, God has delivered thee from thy enemies
thou fearedst, and has granted the Kingdom thou desiredst; Forget not
therefore the third promise, in receiving his Faith and keeping his
Commandments, for if from henceforth thou obey his will, which by my mouth he
declares, to thy temporal Kingdom he will after this life add a Crown eternal.
What this third Promise was, and upon what occasion made by Edwin, is thus
related by Venerable Bede: When Edwin was an Exile in the Court of King
Redwald, and Edilfrid by his Ambassadors demanded Bid, Hist. Angl.
that he should be surrendered unto him, Redwald, as has been related, partly
dazzled with the Gold, and partly a wed by the threats of that Prince, had at
first yielded to deliver him, which wicked determination was brought to Edwin
by a Friend of his who had all along stuck close to him in his Adversity, and
who now promised his assistance to further his escape. Edwin uncertain what to
do, as loath to distrust the King, who had given him his Royal word, and had
hitherto protected him, and yet not questioning his Friend's good will, and the
truth of his intelligence, in the dead of night, from them was the news brought
him, goes out of the Palace and casts himself upon a cold stone, musing what
course was best to be undertaken, when, behold, there advances unto him a
Person unknown, and in Language full as strange, and thus accosteth him, Who
art thou, who thus in the dead of night, when Mortals are at rest, lie here
without doors cold and benumbed? Edwin, whom grief suffered not to be very
Ceremonious, returns this sharp reply. That he might meddle with his own
concerns, and that it was nothing to him, whether he lay within or without
doors. Think not, Edwin, says the Stranger though nothing moved, that I am
ignorant who thou art, or the cause of thy heaviness, why thou sit so
pensive here alone, sad, and making. But tell me, what would thou give him
who could deliver then from the danger that threatens thy life, and persuade
Redwald, neither to do thee hurt, nor to deliver thee to thy enemies? Any
thing, answered Edwin, who now began to listen to him. But what (said the
other) would thou give, if the same person should give thee a Kingdom, and
cause thee to surpass all thy Predecessors in power and glory? I do not
question, said Edwin, but that I should make answerable returns of gratitude.
But, what if he that foretells thee these good things to come, said the unknown,
should also instruct thee in a way to life and happiness, that none of thy
Forefathers or kindred ever knew? Would thou obey him, and consent to receive
his wholesome admonitions? Edwin, without stope made answer, That he would in
every thing follow the advice of such an one, as not only could deliver him
from his enemies, but would also give him a Kingdom; At which words the Person
advanced to him, and laying his hand on his head, said, When this sign shall
next befall thee, be not forgetful of this time, nor of this Conference, and
remember what you have promised, you accordingly perform. Then disappearing,
left Edwin as full of amazement, as joy, to know what this unknown should be.
When in comes his Friend, and advises him to cheer up and not to be daunted,
for he brought better news to him than formerly, viz. that the King by the
persuasions of his Queen was so far from betraying him, that he resolved to
defend him with his utmost power. And this is the reason why he fell down
before Paulinus, after he had laid his hand upon his head.

At last Edwin, being thoroughly convinced of the double Miracle shown to him in
the favorable and speedy promotion of his Conversion, consented to receive the
Faith, yet would advise first with his Nobles about it, who being asked what
they thought of the Doctrine of Paulinus? understanding withal the Kings
private inclinations, generally consented, nay, the eminentest of their
Priests, Coysy (who, as it appears by his Reasons, measured the truth of all
Religions by Worldly success, for he was angry that his Gods had not advanced
him to the King's favor above others) was the first that gave his consent,
offering himself to the King as the fittest Instrument to destroy those Idols,
whose worship he himself had so much promoted.

After this Paulinus had free liberty openly to preach the Gospel, and the King
with his Sons born to him of his first wife Quenburga, with a great part of his
Nobility and People, renounced their Idolatry and were baptized. The King with
his Family in St. Peter's Church at York, which he had hastily erected of
Timber, and the People for their number, near the Rivers of Glevie in the
Province of Bernicia, and Swale in the Province of Deira.

After the Conversion of Northumberland, Paulinus dispersed the seeds of Faith
amongst them of Lindsey, a Province in Lincolnshire. First he converted Blecca
Governor of the City of Lincoln, and his Family, where he built a Church
curiously wrought of stone, which was very much decayed in Bede's time. Neither
was Edwin any less careful to set forward the Conversion of the English; by
assisting Paulinus, and by his persuading Eorpwald the Son of Redwald to
embrace the Faith, who soon after was slain by one Richert, his own Countryman.

Pope Honorius, after he had heard of the Conversion of the Northumbers, sent
to Paulinus a Confirmation of his being Archbishop of York, withal exhortatory
Letters to Edwin, to persuade him to continue firmly in the Faith he professed,
the style and substance of which Epistle, as much as relates to him, was this.

Bishop Honorius, servant of the Servants of God,
To Edwin King of the English, Greeting.
THe integrity of your Christianity is so warmed through the zeal of Faith
toward the worship of the Omnipotent Creator, that it casts a luster every
where, and is talked of over all the World, so that we, with you, may abundantly
enjoy the reward of your labor, for then you may account your selves Kings,
when, having been informed of your King and Creator, by a true and Orthodox
preaching, you believe in God by worshipping him sincerely, and paying to him
(as much as the weakness of your condition will permit) the unseigned devotion
of your minds; For what else are we to offer up to our God, but that per
severing in good actions, and confessing him to be the Author of Mankind, we
make haste to worship him, and to pay our vows unto him? And therefore, Most
excellent Son, we exhort you, as is meet, with a Fatherly love, that since the
Divine pity has vouch safed to call you to his Grace, you would endeavor with
a careful mind, and by continual praying, to preserve it, that he, who in this
present World has brought you free from all Error to the knowledge of his
Name, would prepare for you the Mansions of the heavenly Country.


After King Edwin had Reigned seventeen years, Cadwallo King of the Britains
rose up against him, who being assisted by Penda the Merolan, who envied
Edwin's Greatness, after a terrible battle at Heithfield, slew this great King
and his Son Osfrid.

This Edwin was renowned for his justice and moderation, and the great care he
took to help and ease his poor Subjects; For in his time any one might travel
safely all over his Dominions, even from Sea to Sea, and for the benefit of the
wayfaring Man, he commanded Iron-dishes should be fastened to every Fountain for
convenience of Travelers to drink. Neither was he unmindful of his own
Grandeur, having a Royal Banner always carried before him. He was buried in
St. Peter's Church at Streanshal, afterward called Whitby. His Queen
Ethelburga with her Children, and Paulinus, fled into Kent to her Brother
Eadbald, who kindly received his Sister and her Children, and made Paulinus
Bishop of Rochester, in which See he ended his days, and to which at his death
he bequeathed the Pall, which he had received for York. Ethelburga afterward
spent her days in a Monastery of Nuns, built by her self near the Seaside at
a place called Lymming.

The Issue of King Edwin by Quinburga his first wife, Daughter of Creda King of
Mercia, but Bid faith of Ceorl, is this, Osfrid, the eldest Son of King Edwin,
was slain with his Father, he and his Son Iffy had been both baptized by
Paulinus. Iffy after the death of his Father for fear of Oswald, was conveyed
into France, where he died in his Childhood. Edfrid second Son of Edwin, for
fear of Oswald, fled to Penda King of Mercia, and was barbarously murdered by
him. He left Issue Hererik, of whom and his wife Bertswith descended Hilda the
famous Abbess of Streanshalch, and Hereswith wife of Ethelhere King of the
East- Angles.

And the Issue of the said Edwin by Ethelburg his second wife, Daughter of
Ethelbert King of Kent, is Ethelme, who died young, and not long after he had
received Baptism, and was buried in St. Peter's Church in York. Uskfrea was
conveyed into Kent, and afterward into France with Iffy his half Brother, with
whom also he died and was buried; Eanfled the elder Daughter was married to
Oswy King of Northumberland, Ethelred the younger died an Infant, after he had
received baptism, and was buried with her brother Ethelm.

OSRIC, EANFRITH.
AFter the death of Edwin the Kingdom of Northumberland became divided, as An.
Dom. 633:
in former times, each rightful Heir seizing his part. OSRIC the Son of Alfrid,
Edwin's Uncle, by profession a Christian and baptized by Paulinus, Reigned in
Deira, and EANFRITH the Son of Edilfrid the Wild, in Bernicia. He had been
conveyed into Scotland with his two Brothers, Oswald and Oswin, and there with
others of the Nobility, had been baptized and instructed in the Christian
Faith. But now these two Kings having each of them a Crown, turned Apostates
from the Church, and fell again to their old Religion and Idolatry; But divine
Vengeance soon followed at their heels, for in less than the compass of a year
they were both destroyed, one by the force, the other by the fraud and
treachery of Cadwallo, the manner whereof is thus related in Bid, as likewise
the succeeding Calamities in Northumberland, caused by the tyranny and
oppression of the Conqueror.

Cadwallader the British King, the Summer following slew them both, and though
by Bid, Hist. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 1.
force and violence sufficiently wicked, yet the vengeance was by them
deserved. OSRIC was surprised with his whole Army, and in a City of his own
besieged, and there finally with all his Forces destroyed. After which the
Conqueror entering Northumberland brought all under his power, using his
victory, not with the moderation of a King, but the pride and insolence of a
merciless Tyrant, laying wide desolation wherever he came. EANFRITH the other
King, coming to him to beg his peace, was barbarously put to death. This year,
says he, is counted to this day hateful and unfortunate, both for the
Apostasy of these English Kings, as the fury and tyranny of the British,
wherefore the Historians of those times have thought convenient, that the
memory of these Apostate Kings should be utterly razed, and the same year
reckoned the first of King Oswald, a man dearly beloved of God.

OSWALD.
OSWALD, after the death of his Brother, was made King of Northumberland. He
was a Prince well grounded in his Religion, and besides many other virtues, had
accomplished himself during his Exile in all Military exercises, An. Dom. 634.
to which in his youth he had studiously addicted himself. And indeed, the
state of the Kingdom at his first entrance upon it, being miserably harassed by
Cadwallo, required no ordinary man to redeem the glory and honor of it. He had
to deal with an enemy used to Conquer, but withal proud and boasting, and who,
by often beating the Northumberlands, had now little opinion of the Saxon
Valor in general, and was therefore grown somewhat secure and negligent in his
proceeding. Him therefore Oswald with a small, but Christian Army, attacks by a
little River running into Tine near the old Roman Wall, the place called
Denisborn, and after a sharp fight slaies him, with the greatest part of his
huge Host, which he boasted was Invincible.

It is reported that the first day Oswald, though provoked, would not join
battle, but spent the whole time in prayers and supplications, commanding his
Army to do the like; and to show that his trust was more in the protection of
the Almighty, than the arm of flesh, and to profess himself the Soldier os
Christ, he erected for his Standard a great (...) in the field wherein he
encamped, (sustaining the same with his own hands, until the Soldiers with
earth filled up the ground it was fixed in from this Cross, and the Victory
ensuing, the place was afterward called (...), and the Cross it self was long
after much frequented for the Miracles said to be wrought by it.

Being settled in his Throne by the death of his potent Enemy, like a good
Prince, his first care was to have his people again instructed in the Christian
Religion, which, by the Apostasy of the former Princes, and devastations of
those times, was almost utterly lost among them. To this purpose he sends into
Scotland, where himself had been bred up, to have some godly and laborious
Preachers sent unto him; his desires were readily assented to by the Clergy of
that Country, and Aidan a Monk and Bishop, with others to assist him, are
accordingly dispatched, who coming into Northumberland, by their good example
and diligent preaching, wonderfully restored the Christian Religion, insomuch
that many thousands are said in few days to have been Baptized by them.

This Aidan had assigned to him from the King for an Episcopal Seat a place
then called Lindesfarn, now Holy Island, but he was not so famous by the
dignity of his Sec, as the singular virtues of his mind, being a man above the
level of that Age, of wonderful moderation, and not carried away with the nice
and trivial points of Theology, which most desperately infected those, and
latter times. And this will more evidently appear by the Testimony of Bid, in
his preamble to the Council of Whitby, which you may find in the Reign of the
following Prince. And this might be the reason that he gained so much on the
minds of his Auditors, for whereas others following the example of Colmar, a
preacher then in Northumberland, delighted more to show their profound skill in
points then controverted, than plainly to set forth the grounds of
Christianity: Aidan on the contrary, by easy Doctrine, and yielding in things
Ceremonial, made more Christians by far, though fewer Disputants. Neither is
the devotion and humility of Oswald himself to be passed over, who disdained
not to be Interpreter to the Bishop in his first preaching, for whereas Aidan
at his first coming spoke Scotch only, or very broken English, the King
himself, to secure him from contempt, and to make his words carry more
Authority, was, as you have heard, himself the conduit to coveigh them to his
People.

Neither is this King less celebrated for his exceeding Charity and pity to the
poor, feeding them with his own hands at the Gate, and often distributing the
plate it self amongst them, for which it is said that Aidan being once present,
taking the King by the right hand, thus said or prophesied, That it was
impossible that hand should parish, which had so often sustained others; which,
report goes, after his death was fulfilled, for that hand remaining
uncorrupted, was afterward shrined in Silver, and preserved entire in St.
Peter's Church in Bebba, now Bamborow.

Thus the Kingdom of Northumberland, by the blessing of God, and the good
endeavors of King Oswald, enjoyed the benefits of peace, during which time
Religion good Laws and Ordinances were established, Churches erected through
the whole Province, and the general State so flourished, that all the
neighboring Countries invited by the Princely virtues of Oswald, especially
the moderation of his Government, daily flocked under his obedience, insomuch
that he had at command at one time, people of four different languages,
Britains, Picts, Scotch, and English.

Thus after he had Reigned the space of eight years, worthy of a longer life,
he fell by the same fate and the same hands (...) Edwin his Predecessor; For
(...) the Pugan King of Mercia, envying the greatness of his State, made war
upon (...), and at a place called Maserfield now Oswester in Shropshire, cut
him in pieces with a great part of his Army, on the fifth of August 642. His
Body was buried at Bradney in Lincoinshire.

By his wife Kinburg, Daughter of Kingils, he had a Son named Ethelwald, who
being left young was put by the Kingdom by his base Uncle Oswy, but he
continually gave him trouble in the keeping of it, and obtained lastly a
Principality in Derra, which he held by force, after that Oswy had slain Oswyn
the Nephew of Edwin, who for seven years had held it.

OSWY.
OSWY the base Son of Edilfrid the Wild, after the death of his Brother,
succeeded him in the Kingdom. The beginning of his Reign was exceedingly An,
Dom. 642.
turmoiled with the continual incursions of Penda, the rebellions of his base
Son Alkfrid, and the opposition of Ethelwald Son of Edwin, and rightful Heir of
the Crown. But his greatest eyesore was Oswyn the Son of Osric, Edwin's
Brother, who had possession of Deira, a Prince highly beloved by his People for
his good nature, and much admired for zeal in Religion, and humility in the
profession of it. Against him Oswy raises an Army, and Oswyn meets him, but
finding himself far Inferior in number, he broke up his Camp which was then at
Wilfaresdown, ten miles west of Cataracton, and reserving himself for a better
opportunity, with one Attendant named Condhere he withdrew to the house of Earl
Hunwald, on whose fidelity he much relied, but contrary to his expectation he
was by the said Earl basely betrayed to King Oswy, and by his order as basely
murdered at Ingethling. Aidan the good Bishop survived not twelve days this
murder, dying, as some report, for grief, having not long before foretold the
death of that Prince upon this account, because he was a man the World was not
worthy of, being an Humble King.

Aidan was buried in the Isle of Lindesfarn, and Finan succeeded him in that
See. This fact of King Oswy was odious to all, and therefore to explate the
guilt, a Monastery was erected upon the place where the murder was committed,
and prayers daily offered for the Souls of both Kings, the slayer, and the
slain. But notwithstanding Oswyn was thus removed, the Kingdom of Deira, or
part of it, was seized by Ethelwald the Son of King Oswald: But Oswy was still
infested with the incursions of King Penda, and had long endured many sore
devastations; Once he had almost lost his strongest City Bebanburge, now
Bamborow Castle, which Penda with fire and sword had assaulted. And now weary
of continual standing on his defense, he resolves, if possible, by any means to
buy his Peace, and to that end sends large gifts and presents to Penda, with
humble suit desiring League and Amity. But these being with scorn refused, he
prepares for War, and first imploring divine assistance, if God would grant him
Victory, he vows his Daughter a Nun, and twelve Lordships for the building of
Monasteries, which done, he raises an Army and meets Penda at a place called
Loyden, now Leeds in Yorkshire. The Army of Penda, as is reported, exceeded
Oswy's thirty times over, and was commanded by expert Captains, nevertheless
they were utterly routed and put to flight, and many of them swallowed up in
the River Winwed, which at that time was unusually swelled with Rains.

Penda himself was slain in the battle, and Ethelhere King of the East Angles,
the contriver of the War. Ethelwald the Son of Oswald was in the field upon the
Mercian side, and is said to have been the cause of their desear, for
withdrawing his Forces at the first Onset, and meaning to expect the event, he
discouraged the Mercians, who misdoubted there was treachery in it. The death
of Penda was received with great joy through all the neighboring Provinces, as
the Song witnesses, At the River Winwed Anna was Avenged.

Oswy, after this Victory, enters Mercia with an Army, which he presently
reduced to his obedience, but unto Peada the Son of Penda, as his near Kinsman,
he gave the Principality of the South Mercians, containing five thousand
Families, and separate from the (...) Mercians by the River Trent (...). But
him slain by the treachery of his, wife (...), and Eadbert three Mercian Earls,
set up Vulfer, and fling off the Government of Oswy, who was now employed in a
Pictish War, and had subdued the greatest part of that Nation.

This Oswy had in him a strange mixture of Virtues and Vices, in his beginning
bloody and tyrannous, toward his latter end just and moderate. Highly addicted
he was to Roman Superstitions; and resolved a Pilgrimage thither, had not he
been taken off by death, for in the twenty eighth year of his Reign, and fifty
eighth of his Age, he departed this life, having vowed that Journey, as some
write, to expiate the murder of King Oswyn; Under this Oswy was held a Council
about the observation of Easter, which because it is much celebrated by all our
Writers, I shall put it down as it is originally related.

The Synod of Streanshalch now Whitby, at the request of Hilda Abbess of that
place, under Oswy the Father and Alchfrid the Son, Kings of Northumberland, in
the year of Christ 664. In which is controverted the Celebration of Easter, and
other Ecclesiastical Rites.

There being present on the side of the Romans and English, King Alchfrid the
Son, Agilbert Bishop of the West Saxons, Abbot Wilfrid, Agatho Presbyter, James
a Deacon, and Romanus.

On the side of the Scots and Britains, King Oswy the Father, Colmanne Bishop
of Lindisfarne, with other Scottish Bishops. Cedda Bishop of the East Saxons,
Hilda Abbess of Streanshalch, with a great many others of the Clergy on both
sides.

Bede's Preface to this Synod.
IN these times was startled a common and great question concerning the
observation Bid, Eccl. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 25.
of Easter. Those that came from Kent, or Gaul, affirming that the Scots keep
the Lord's day of Easter contrary to the custom of the Catholic Church. Among
these was one Romanus by name, a stiff defender of the true Easter, by Nation a
Scot, but had learned the true rules Ecclesiastic in Gaul or the Confines of
Italy, who disputing with one Finan, made many sensible of their error, or at
least persuaded them to a deeper search into the truth, but he could not in the
least stir Finan, who being of a fiery nature was rather made worse by his
instructions, and an open enemy to truth; But James, formerly Deacon under the
worshipful Archbishop Paulinus, observed the true and Catholic Easter with
those whom he had taught the true and correct way. Queen Eanfeld also observed
it with her household, according to what she had seen performed in Kent, having
with her a Priest from Kent named Romanus of the Catholic opinion, from whence
they report, in those days, it sometimes happened that Easter should be kept
twice in one year. For when the King's Lent being done, was keeping Easter,
then the Queen with hers, Lent with them not being yet ended, was celebrating
Palm Sunday. But this different observancy of Easter, Aidan living, was
patiently born with by all men, who understood thus much, That though he could
not celebrate Easter contrary to the custom of those that had sent him, yet he
took care that the works of faith, charity, and love, in which all Saints
agree, should be diligently performed, so that he was deservedly beloved by all
men, nay even of those that thought otherwise of Easter, and was not only
respected by the meaner sort, but by Bishops themselves, Honorius of
Canterbury, and Foelix of the East Angles.

But Finan being dead who succeeded Aidan, when Colman came into the
Bishopric, for he also was sent from Scotland, there arose a more solemn
controversy concerning the observing of Easter, and other Precepts relating to
an Ecclesiastical life, so that this question justly moved the hearts of many,
lest peradventure the name of Christianity being only retained, they should run
or had run in vain. It came at last to the ears of the Court, to wit, of King
Oswy and his Son Alchfrid, for Oswy was taught and baptized by the Scots, and
was well skilled in their Language, and esteemed nothing truer than what they
had taught him. But Alchfrid had for his Instructour in Christianity Wilfrid a
right learned man, who had made a Journey to Rome on purpose to learn of the Law
Ecclesiastic, and had lived many years with Dalphin Archbishop of Lions in
Gaul, from whom he had received the right custom of Church-shaving. He
therefore thought this Man's Doctrine to be preferred before all the Traditions
of the Scots, for which reason he had lately given him a Monastery of forty
Families in the place which is called Humpum, which place he had given a little
before for a Monastery to those of the Scottish persuasion. But because, they
afterward of their own accord chose rather to relinquish the place than alter
their Customs, he gave it to him, whose Doctrine and Life was worthy of it.
About this time came Agilbert Bishop of the West Saxons, a great friend of King
Alchfrid's and of Abbot Wilfrid to a Province of the Northnmbers, and continued
sometime among them, who made Wilfrid, at the request of Alchfrid, Presbyter in
his said Monastery, but he had with himself a Presbyter named Agatho.

The question therefore of Easter, Shaving, or other Ecclestastical Rites being
there moved, it was ordered that in the Monastery which is called Strensalth,
which is interpreted Sinus fari, over which at that time Hilda the Abbess, a
Woman devoted to God, was Governess, a Synod should be called, and this
question determined. Both Kings came thither, viz. Father and Son; Bishops,
Colman with his Clergy of Scotland, Agilbert with the Presbyters, Agatho and
Wilfrid: James and Romanus were on this side, Abbess Hilda with hers on the
Scottish Party, on which side also was the worshipful Bishop Chad, not long
before ordained Bishop of the Scots, who also was a diligent Interpeter on both
sides in that Council.

First King Oswy by a short Speech opened the Assembly, saying, that they which
served one God ought to observe but one Rule of Living, neither to differ in
the celebration of the heavenly Sacraments, who all expected but one Kingdom in
the Heavens, they ought more especially to enquire which was the truest
Tradition, and all with one consent to follow that. He commanded his Bishop
Colman to speak first what had been the Custom, and from whence that had its
Original, which he followed. Then Colman, The Easter, said he, which I am wont
to keep, I received from my Ancestors, who sent me Bishop hither, which all our
Fathers, men beloved of God, are well known to have celebrated the same way,
which that it may not be contemned and rejected by any, it is the very same,
which the blessed Evangelist John, a Disciple particularly beloved by our Lord,
is said to have celebrated in all Churches which he governed. After he had said
this, and more to the same purpose, the King commanded Agilbert to relate and
set forth from whence the Custom he observed had its beginning, and by what
Authority he followed it. Agilbert made Answer, I desire that my Disciple
Wilfrid, the Presbyter may speak in my stead, because we both have the same
Sentiments with the other followers of Ecclesiastical Tradition, that are here
present; for he can explain it more clearly and better in the English Tongue,
than I by an Interpreter.

Then Wilfrid, the King commanding him to speak, began thus. The Easter which
we follow, said he, we have seen celebrated by every body at Rome, where the
blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul lived, taught, suffered, and were buried. This
we have seen observed in Gaul, most of which we have traveled through, either
teaching or praying. This we know is performed in Africa, Asia, Egypt, Greece
and in all the World, wheresoever the Church of Christ is spread, through
diverse Nations and Languages at one and the same, and not distinct order of
time, except these only and their Accomplices in their obstinacy, I mean the
Picts and Britains lying in the utmost Islands of the Ocean, nor all those
neither, who by foolish endeavors strive against all the World.

As he spoke this, Coleman answered, I wonder why you should style our
endeavors vain and foolish, in which we follow the Example of so great an
Apostle, who was found worthy to lie in the bosom of our Savior, and since it
is well known, that the whole World is satisfied in his Wisdom.

Then Wilfrid. God forbid, that we should accuse St. John of folly, when he
observed the precepts of Moses his Law according to the Letter, the Church as
yet Judaizing in many things: Neither were the Apostles on a sudden able to
abolish all Observances of the Law, which was instituted by God, as it was
necessary that all which come to the Faith should reject Images, which was an
invention of Devils, viz. lest they might offend those Jews which were
dispersed among the Gentiles. On this account it is, that Paul circumcised
Timothy, that he offered Sacrifices in the Temple, that with Aquila and
Priscilla he shore the head of Chorinthus profitable to no other end, but
avoiding the offending the Jews. You see, Brother, how many thousands there
were among the Jews, which believed all, which were followers of the Law;
neither to this very day, the Gospel beginning to shine all over the World, is
it necessary or lawful for the faithful to be circumcised, or to offer up
fleshly sacrifices to God. Therefore John according to the manner of the Law
began the celebration of the Paschal Feast about Evening on the fourteenth day
of the first Month, not valuing, whether it fell out on the Sabbath or any
other Festival. But Peter, when he preached at Rome, mindsul that the Lord rose
from the dead on the first day of the Sabbath, and gave to the World hopes of a
Resurrection, understood it so to be celebrated, that according to the Custom
and Precept of the Law, he should always expect the fourteenth Moon of the
first Month, even as St. John, rising at Evening, and that being risen, if the
Lord's day (which then was called the first of the Sabbath) should happen in
the Morning, he began to celebrate the Lord's Easter that very Evening, as we
all do at this day. But if the Lord's day happen not on the next Morning after
the fourteenth Moon, but the sixteenth, seventeenth, or any other Moon take the
twenty first, He waited for it, and the preceding Sabbath, in the Evening he
began the Holy Solemnities of Easter, so it came to pass, that the Lord's day
of Easter was not kept, unless from the fifteenth day to the twenty first.
Neither does this Evangelical and Apostolical Tradition diminish from the Law,
but rather fulfils it, in which it is observable, that Easter was commanded from
the fourteenth of the first Month at Evening, to the twenty first Moon of the
same Month at Evening, which observation all St. John's Successors in Asia
after his death, and the whole Church throughout the World were inclined to
follow. And that this is the true Easter, and that this ought only to be
celebrated by the faithful is confirmed by the Nicene Council, not lately
established, as Ecclesiastical History informs us; whence it plainly appears, O
Colman, that ye do not follow the Example of John (as ye think) neither in the
Observation of your Easter do you agree with the Tradition of St. Peter, which
wittingly you contradict, nor with the Law, nor with the Gospel, for John
keeping Easter time, according to the Decrees of the Mosaic Law, observed not
the first day of the Sabbath which ye do, who will not celebrate it upon the
first day of the Sabbath. Peter solemnized the Lord's day of Easter from the
sisteenth Moon till the twenty first which ye do not, who observe the Lords day
of Easter from the fourteenth to the twentieth Moon, so that on the thirteenth
Moon at Evening ye often begin Easter. Neither did our Lord the Author and
giver of the Gospel, eat the old passover on that day, but on the fourteenth
Moon at Evening, or deliver the Sacraments of the New Testament to be
celebrated in Commemoration of his Passion; also the twenty first Moon, which
the Law especially commends to our Observation, ye utterly reject in the
celebration of your Easter; so that, as I said before, ye neither agree with
John nor Peter, Law or Gospel, in the solemnizing the great Festival.

To these things Colman answered, Did Anatholius a holy man, and much commended
in the sore-mentioned Church History, think contrary to either Law or Gospel,
who writ that Easter was to be kept from the fourteenth to the twentieth? Is it
to be imagined, that our most reverend Father Columba and his Successors, men
beloved of God, either thought or acted any thing contrary to Holy Writ, When
there were many amongst them, of whose heavenly Holiness the wonders and
powerful Miracles they wrought, have given sufficient Testimony? who, as I ever
thought them to be Holy men, so I will never desist from following their times,
manners and discipline.

Then Wilfrid, It Is evident, said he, that Anatholius was a man very holy,
learned and praiseworthy, but what does that concern ye, when ve do not
observe his Decrees? for he in his Easter, following the Rule of Truth, set
forth a Circle of nineteen years, which ye are either ignorant of, or else
utterly contemn, if ve acknowledge it to be kept by the whole Church of Christ.
He in the Lord's Easter so reckoned the fourteenth Moon, that he acknowledged,
that on the same day, after the manner of the Egyptians, to be the fifteenth
Moon at evening, so he observed the twentieth day for the Lord's Easter, but
so, that he believed that the day being done to be the one and twentieth, of
which rule of distinction he proves thee ignorant, because sometimes ye plainly
keep your Easter before the full Moon, that is, on the thirteenth Month. As
concerning your Father Columba, and his Followers, whose sanctity ye say ye
will imitate, and whose rules and precepts confirmed by heavenly signs ye are
resolved to follow; I might Answer, when many at Judgment shall say to the
Lord, that they have prophesied in his Name, and cast out Devils, and wrought
many wonders, the Lord will answer, that he never knew them; But far be it from
me that I should speak this of your Fathers, since it is more reasonable of
uncertain things to entertain good thoughts, than bad; for which reason
therefore, I do not deny them to be the Servants of God, and beloved by God,
who out of an innocent simplicity, and a pious intention love God. Neither do I
think such an observation of Easter to be much prejudicial to them, as long as
no body comes among them that can show decrees of a better institution which
they may follow, who nevertheless, I believe, had some Catholic Calculator
better instructed them, would have followed those things which they knew, and
had learned to be the Commands of God.

You therefore, and your Associates, if you despise to follow the decrees of
the Apostolic See when you have heard them, nay, of the Universal Church, and
those confirmed by Holy writ, without doubt ye sin. What though your Fathers
were holy, are the paucity of these in a corner of the farthest Island to be
preferred before the Universal Church of Christ over the World? What if this
your Columba, and ours too, if he be Christ's, was holy and powerful in
Miracles? ought he to be preferred before the blessed Prince of the Apostles,
to whom the Lord said, thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my
Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, and to thee will I
give the Keys of the kingdom of Heaven?

After Wilfrid had thus spoken, the King said, Colman, is it true that these
words were spoken by the Lord to Peter? Who answered, True, O King: Then said
he, Have you any thing that you can bring to prove so great power was given to
Columba? but he said, No, we have not. The King again said, Do both you agree
without any controversy on this, that these words were principally spoken to
Peter, and the Keys of the kingdom of Heaven were given him by the Lord? They
both answered, Yes. Then the King thus concluded; And I say unto you, because
he is the Doorkeeper, I will not contradict him, but as far as I know and am
able I desire to obey his commands in all things, lest perchance, I coming to
the Gates of the Kingdom of Heaven, there be no body to open, he being turned
aside whom you have proved to hold the Keys. After the King had said thus, both
those that sat down, and those that stood, great and small, assented; so that
the less perfect Institution being abandoned, every one made haste to apply
themselves to those things they thought better.

The Dispute being ended, and the Assembly dismissed, Agilbert returned home.
Colman seeing his Doctrine slighted, and his Party despised, taking along with
him those that were resolved to be of his sect (i. e.) they that would not
admit of the Catholic Easter, and shaving of the Crown (for there was no
little question about that) returned into Scotland to treat with his Party what
he should do in the business. Chad leaving the tract of the Scottish Doctrine,
returned to his See, as acknowledging the observation of the Catholic Easter.
This Disputation fell out in the year of the Incarnation of our Lord 664, the
twenty second year of King Oswy, and the 30th. year of the Bishopric of the
Scots, which they had born in the Province of the English.

The wife of Oswy was Eanfled Daughter of Edwin King of Northumberland; after
the death of her husband, she spent her days in the Monastery of Streanshalch,
where she deceased, and was interred in the Church of St. Peter in the same
Monastery.

The Issue of King Oswy by Eanfled was this; Elwin was slain in a battle
against Ethelred King of the Mercians. Elfled the eldest Daughter, at a year
old, according to the Vow of her Father, was committed to Hilda Abbess of
Streanshalch to be bred up in Religion, where she was afterward Abbess, and
was buried in the Church of St. Peter's in that Monastery. Offrid the younger
Daughter was married to Ethelred King of Mercia. His natural Issue, Alkfrid,
who succeeded Ethelwald in Deira, came at last to the whole Crown of
Northumberland; Alkfled, married to Peada Son of King Penda, she is taxed by
most Writers for the death of her Husband.

EGFRID.
EGFRID eldest Son of King Oswy by his wife Eanfled, succeeded his Father An.
Dom. 671.
in the Kingdom; A Prince, as he is reported, of an unquiet disposition. His
first wars were with Ethelred King of Mercia, who had married his Sister, with
whom encountering by the River Trent, he lost great part of his Army, and his
Brother Elswin, a youth generally beloved, who amongst the thickset was there
unfortunately cut off. Greater bloodshed had like to have ensued, had not
Theodorus Archbishop of York interposed and took up the quarrel, so that a sum
of money being paid to Egfrid for the loss of his Brother, the business was
happily concluded. His next wars were with the Irish, a Nation, says Bid,
harmless, and great friends to the English; These he unprovoked furiously
invades, making no distinction between things holy or profane, but with fire
and sword laid waste the Country, and buried it in the Ruins of its Cities,
Temples and Monasteries. The Irish, on the other side, used no other weapons
but Prayers, and, as my Author has it, bitter Imprecations, which may be
supposed at last to have reached Heaven it self; for the next year, against the
counsel and earnest persuasion of his sagest Friends, and especially Cudbert
the Bishop, going to wars against the Picts, he was trained into narrow straits
by the Enemy, and there cut off with most part of his Army. This was so great a
blow to the English; that not only the Scots and Picts, who before durst not
look beyond their own Country, but the Britains also began to bear up for
Liberty, and yearly to gain upon their old enemies.

This King took to wife Ethildrith Daughter of Anna King of the East Angles,
she had been wife to Eunbert Prince of the Gervii, a Nation lying in the Fens,
but notwithstanding marriage, had kept her Virginity. Nor did her second
Nuptials with a King make her in the least alter her resolution, and though
invited to his Bed, sometimes by passionate entreaties, otherwhiles by
persuasions of her friends, who were made privy to it; yet she continued
obstinate, contrary to the Apostle's Rule, the dictates of Nature it self,
which at one time abhors communion and separation, and against the Laws of
common prudence and civility; And all this to pursue an extravagant chastity,
and a purity of living against all other obligations whatsoever, however she be
cannonized St. Andrey of Ely, where, it seems, leaving her Husband, she ended
her days.

ALKFRYD.
ALKFRYD, the natural Son of King Oswy, during the Reign of his half An. Dom.
686.
Brother, had retired into Ireland, where he was well instructed in the
Liberal, Sciences, and, as Bede says, exceedingly well read in the Scriptures.
Advanced to the Crown, he wore it with much prudence and moderation, but the
bounds of his Kingdom were much straightened by the inroads of the Picts, and
encroachments of the Britains. But what he wanted in extent of Dominion, he
made up in the prudent management of what he had. He married Kenburg Daughter
of Penda the Mercian, by whom he had an only Son that succeeded him; he ruled
twenty years.

OSRED.
OSRED, the Son of Alkfrid, was eight years of age when he came to the Crown,
but he was no sooner grown up to any ripeness, but he gave himself An. Dom. 706.
to all viciousness of life, committing Incest with veiled Nuns: for which his
wife Cuthburga weary of her own dishonor sued a divorce, and built a Monastery
at Winburn in Dorsetshire, where she ended her days, But Osred lived not long
after her departure, for he was slain by his own Relations, Kenred and Osric,
in the eleventh year of his Reign.

KENRED.
KENRED descended from Ida by a Bastard-line, and succeeded Osred in the An.
Dom. 717.
Kingdom of Northumberland; his Reign is short, being only of two years
continuance, during which time he left nothing memorable behind him.

OSRIC.
OSRIC Reigned ten years without memory of Acts, Parentage, Wife, or Issue An.
Dom. 719.
.

CEOLNULF.
CEOLNULF the Brother of Kenred Ruled the space of eight years, when An. Dom.
729.
changing his Crown for a Cowl he turned Monk in Lindisfarn, or Holy Island;
yet he proved none of the severest, for he brought his Brethren from Milk and
Water to drink good Wine and Ale, bringing along with him good store of
provisions and great Treasures, by Simeon, and all, as the same Author writes,
to follow poor Christ. To him Bid dedicates his History, but writes no more of
him, but that the beginning and process of his Reign met with many troubles,
and that the conclusion of them was doubtfully expected. And this is the time
of Peace so much commended by the foresaid Author, when Princes, Queens, and
Nobility forsaking their charges, and other duties incumbent, run themselves
into Monasteries, striving who should be foremost, as if no salvation was to be
obtained but in Cells and Cloisters. His Brother was Archbishop of York, and
there founded a stately Library.

EGBERT.
EGBERT, Nephew to King Ceolnulf, succeeded in the Kingdom; Whilst he An. Dom.
7; 8.
was in wars against the Picts, Ethelbald the Mercian taking advantage of his
absence invaded part of Northumberland, but upon what account, or how revenged
is not related. In these Pictish Wars Egbert subdued Kyle, and brought the
Countries adjacent to it under his obedience. Afterward, in the year 756, he
joins battle with Unust King of the Picts, besieged and took by surrender the
City Alcluith, now Dunbritton in Lennox, from the Britains of Cumberland, and
ten days after lost his whole Army about Niwanbirig, when resolving to lay
down his Government, though entreated to the contrary by his Subjects and
Neighboring Princes, who proffered to make good to him his losses by
surrendering great Territories to him, after the example of his Uncle turned
Monk, when he had Reigned twenty years. About these times happened two
extraordinary Eclipses, one of the Sun in September, Anno 733; the other of the
Moon, Anno 756.

OSWULF.
OSWULF Son of Egbert succeeded his Father; but in the same year was An. Dom.
758.
slain of his Servants at a place called Mikelwoughten.

ETHELWALD
ETHELWALD surnamed Mollo, after the death of Oswulf was advanced to the An.
Dom. 758.
Crown. In his third year he fought a great battle at Eldune by Melros, slew
Oswyn a great Lord, who rebelled against him, and gained an absolute Victory,
but three years after he was slain by Alcred, who succeeded him.

ALCRED.
ALCRED descended in the fifth degree from Ida King of Bernicia, after the An.
Dom. 764.
murder of his Sovereign, seized the Kingdom of Northumberland. In the fourth
year of this King's Reign Cataracton now Catarik in Yorkshire, a famous City in
the time of the Romans, was burnt to the ground by one Arnred a Tyrant, who the
same year came to the like end. I should think that this Arnred might be
Alcred, did not others report that he Reigned five years. Afterward when
driven out by his Subjects, with a few Attendants, he fled first to Bebba, a
strong Castle in those parts, thence to Kinot King of the Picts. He left Issue
Osred, who afterward came to be King of Northumberland, and Alnud slain by the
Danes, and Canonized for a Saint.

ETHELRED.
ETHELRED the Son of Mollo succeeded, who having caused three of his Nobles,
An. Dom. 774.
Adwulf, Kinwulf, and Ecca, to be treacherously slain, he was driven out of his
Kingdom by Edelbald and Herebert, who overcame him in a set battle.

ELFWALD.
ELFWALD the Son of Oswulf succeeded, a just and upright Prince, yet not An.
Dom. 778.
freed from civil Commotions, for in his second year Osbald and Ethelheard two
Earls, raising an Army against him, routed his general Bearn, and pursuing,
burnt him at a place called Seletune. Others relate that Siga was chief
Conspirator, and that the King was slain at Scilcester on the wall, and his
body buried at Hexam upon Tine: Siggan, five years after laid violent hands on
himself. Elfwald left Issue Alfus and Alfin, both slain by Ethelred Son of
Mollo.

OSRED.
OSRED the Son of Alcred succeeded, and the same year was deposed and driven
An. Dom. 789.
from his Kingdom.

ETHELRED.
ETHELRED Son of Mollo after twelve years banishment (imprisonment, says An.
Dom. 790.
Alkuin) was restored again to the Crown, having taken Osred his Predecessor,
he shaved his Crown and encloystered him at York, next he draws by fair
promises Alfus and Alfwin, Sons of Elfwald, from the place they had taken
Sanctuary in, and barbarously murders them at a place called Wonwaldremere, a
Village by the great Pool in Lancashire now called Winandermer. Nor was his
following Reign less bloody, for Osred, who by force had been made a Monk, not
liking the life, had desired Banishment and obtained it. And going into the
Isle of Man, raises some small Forces by the encouragement of certain
Northumbrian Nobility with whom he kept intelligence, and who promised by oath
to assist him in his return, but coming into his Country, he is basely betrayed
and deliveren unto Ethelred, who immediately put him to death. To strengthen
himself in these Violencies, he marries Elfled the Daughter of Ossa, putting
away his former wife, but he enjoyed not long his Cruelties and Injustice, for
he was slain by his own Subjects at Cobre in the year 798. After his death many
petty Princes, or Dukes rather, seized the Kingdom, dividing it into parcels,
much molested by the Danes who made continual Inroads into those as well as
other quarters, which shall be treated of in order in the life of Egbert the
West Saxon, who laid this, as well as other Provinces, to his own Dominion.

THE KINGDOM OF THE East Angles
Contained Counties
Suffolk. Norfolk. Cambridgshire. Isle of Ely.
KINGS
Uffa. Titulus. Redwald. Earpenwald. Sigebert. Egric. Anna. Ethelherd.
Edelwald. Aldulf. Elswold. Beorn. Ethelred. Egilbert.




UFFA, TITULUS.
THE name of this Province testifies what Nation they were who seated
themselves in it, to wit, the Angles a People of Denmark, of the same stock and
Original with the Saxons, who coming some of them with Hengist, others with
other Captains, chose at length these quarters as the principal Rendezvous of
their particular Tribe, whither they flocked so fast that (as Bede reports)
their Native Country in his days was left almost desolate and uninhabitable.
The first time of their fixing in these parts is uncertainly guessed at, but
with most probability supposed about the year 500, when coming over in several
parcels (says Bid) they were divided into as many Principalities and petty
Governments, continually striving among themselves as they had leisure and rest
from the Common enemy.

But about the year 575, UFFA the eighth from Woden, in strength and policy
overpowered the rest, and either quelling or uniting different factions,
molded the An. Dom. 500.
several Lordships into one Crown which he wore with great honor, leaving his
name to his Subjects many years after called Uffins, and his Scepter to his Son
TITULUS, who upheld the greatness of it during his whole Reign with equal An.
Dom. 575.
glory, but the particulars of his life and actions are utterly lost, and had
not the luster of his Son and Successor redeemed his Name from oblivion he
might well have been left out in the Catalogue of Kings; And this is the reason
I shall begin the date of this Kingdom from Redwald his Son who raised it to
the highest glory, and made its Infancy more illustrious than its riper years.
And this is to be said of this Province above others, that in its first
appearance in History we find it in its full proportions, though they not so
great, as of other Kingdoms.

REDWALD.
REDWALD the Son of Titulus came to the Kingdom about the year 593. An. Dom 593.
In this first beginnings he was Tributary to Ethelbert King of Kent, and
served him as a Viceroy over all his Dominions, by which means he gained
experience in Government, and after the death of that Potent King so managed
his business that he became Monarch of the Englishmen, and had all his
Neighbors at his disposal. The great Scene of his life, which raised him to
extent of dominion and reputation in the World was, his encounter with Edilfrid
the Wild, a mighty Conquequerour, and who had stretched his Dominions from Sea
to Sea. Him Redwald in the height of his glory and the pride of Victory
undertakes in the quarrel of Edwin, as has been related in the life of that
Prince, and overthrows with his whole Host at the River Idle near Nottingham,
after which he marched into Northumberland, where having established Edwin in
his Throne he returns into his own Country laden with Honor, leaving the
World to admire his Moderation and Justice as well Conduct and Valor.

He had formerly been Baptized in Kent, but it seems more in compliance to
Ethelbert, than that he was really persuaded of the truth of that Religion; For
returning into his own Country, by the persuasions of his Wife he was easily
brought to his old Idolatry, but fearing perhaps that the Christian Faith might
prove true he was not willing wholly to reject either, so that to be sure on
one side or other he crected in the same Temple an Altar for the service of
Christ, and another for burnt Sacrifices to his Idols.

This Prince kept his usual Court of residence at Rendelisham nigh Ufford in
Suffolk, and as Bede interprets the word Rendelisham, it is nothing but
Rendil's Mansion place, that is, says Mr. Cambden, Redwald's Court.

EARPENWALD.
EARPENWALD the Son of Redwald succeeded him in the Kingdom, and An. Dom. 624.
by the persuasions of Edwin King of Northumberland openly professed the
Christian Religion which his Father would not own but by halves, but he not
long survived his Conversion, for he was slain by Ricbert a Pagan. He had been
baptized by Foelix a Bishop a Burgundian by Nation, whom Honorius Archbishop of
Canterbury sent into the Province to teach the Nation, who held his Seat at a
place called Dommoc now Dunwick, a Town well peopled even to the Conquerours
days, and long after much frequented and strongly fortified, till upon the
removal of the Bishop's Seat and the breaking in of the Sea it became almost
desolate.

SIGEBERT.
SIGEBERT succeeded in the Kingdom, he was the Son of Redwald's Wife,
half-Brother to the late King. The jealousies of Redwald had caused him to
retire An. Dom. 636.
into France, where he continued during his Reign and the Reign of his
Successor, having the opportunity all the while to instruct himself in good
Literature in which that Country then abounded, and learn the Christian
Religion of which he was a sound Professor. After the death of Earpenwald
returning home of his own accord, or, as others write, recalled, he took upon
him the Government of the Kingdom, which with great prudence he ruled, taking
care first that his People should be rightly instructed in the Christian
Religion, and that afterward they might secure themselves from Ignorance and
Idolatry, he introduced the custom of France in their Schools, modelling a form
after the example he had received there: And sending for some Teachers out of
Kent, by the assistance of Foelix his Bishop he settled a place of teaching,
generally thought to be the University of Cambridge, after which he betook
himself to a monastic life, recommending the care of Government to Egric his
near Kinsman.

EGRIC.
EGRIC Reigned four years, when being invaded by Penda the Mercian in one
battle he lost both life and kingdom. It is said that before the fight began,
An. Dom 639.
the East Angles trusting to the conduct of Sigibert their former King, had
entreated him to take the Command that day, having to that purpose, though much
unwilling, drawn him from his Monastery to the Camp. But he playing the Monk,
not Captain, with only a white Wand in his hand went upon the enemy, where,
with Egric he was slain.

ANNA.
ANNA next of Blood, and descended from Ufsa in the sisth degree, succeeded An.
Dom 643.
Egric in the Kingdom of the East Angles, Recorded a just and good man, but his
virtues exempted him not from the fate of his Predecessors, for he was taken
off by the same hands of Penda the Mercian. His eldest Son Firmimus fell in
battle with him, and was buried with him at Blithborow; his other Son was
Erchenwald Abbot of Chertside and Bishop of London; his Daughters were royally
married, and we meet with them as they are mixed in the Histories, only thus
much may be said of them together; That after their death they had all the
fortune to be Canonized.

ETHELHERD.
ETHELHERD the Brother of Anna succeeded him in the Kingdom. Fearing Au. Dom.
654.
the power of Penda he joined with him, who was now about to make war upon
Northumberland; but he found the Amity of that Pagan as fatal to him as his
Arms had been to his Brother and former Predecessors; For whilst in a battle
against Oswy he assisted that Tyrant, he fell with him, leaving three Sons
behind him, Aldulf, Elswolf, and Beorn, who all three not long after succeeded
in the Kingdom. His wife was Hereswith Sister of Hilda, the famous Abbess of
Streanshalch, and Great-Grandchild to Edwin King of Northumberland.

EDELWALD.
EDELWALD succeeded his Brother in the Kingdom of the East Angles, An Dom 656.
and held it nine years without any Action, leaving a Son called Ethelred, who
came not to the Crown till Ethelherd's Children had Reigned in their turns.

ALDULF.
ALDULF the eldest Son of Ethelherd succeeded his Uncle Edelwald in the An. Dom
665.
Kingdom, and held it ten years without other memory.

ELFWOLD.
ELFWOLD the second Son of King Ethelherd Reigned seven years in the same An.
Dom. 684.
obscurity.

BEORN.
BEORN the youngest Son of King Ethelberd succeeded without any other An. Dom.
691.
circumstance of his life, only his Reign is supposed to be twenty three years.
But indeed the length and continuance of these three last Princes Reigns are
uncertainly calculated by Historians, whether it were that the Province of the
East- Angles lay at so great distance from the Scene of Action in these days,
or indeed, that they did nothing worth Recording. The next Prince we hear of is
Ethelred.

ETHELRED.
ETHELRED the Son of King Edelwald, Brother of Anna, succeeded in An. Dom. 714.
the Kingdom of the East- Angles about the year of Grace (as may be most
probably guessed) 714, and reigned fifty two years, all which time is passed
over in silence, saving that the Writer of his Life mentions his Wive's name
to be Leofrun the Mother of the next unfortunate Prince.

EGILBERT.
EGILBERT Son of Ethelred and Leofrun his wife, succeed in the Kingdom An. Dom.
766.
of the East- Angles; A Prince of great hopes in his youth, addicting himself
to the studies of good Literature, and in his advancement to the Crown ruling
his Kingdom with great justice, prudence and moderation. But in the year 792 he
was taken off by the treachery of Ofsa the Mercian, who by fair promises of
giving him his Daughter in marriage, drew him to his Court at Sutton Wallis in
the County of Hereford, and there against all Laws of Nature and common
Hospitality, most batbarously chopped off his head.

Matthew of Westminster reports it done by the instigation of his wife,
envying the pomp and splendor of this Princely Woer, who to take his Lady it
seems brought with him a gay and more than ordinary Retinue. His body was at
first privately buried at Morden upon the River Lug, but afterward upon
remorse Ofsa removed it to Hereford; And to make amends at least to the Church
for the murder, he hunts out the Relics of St. Alban, it seems his particular
Saint, and them miraculously found enshrines in pearl and gold, such trivial
satisfactions showed in those times to daub over the Conscience, for Villainies
scarce practiced amongst the most barbarous Pagans. For notwithstanding this
splendid kind of Repentance, Ofsa takes possession of the Inheritance of the
murdered, laying the Country of the East- Angles to his own Dominions, which
Vineyard as it was bloodily obtained, so it lasted not long unto him or his
posterity; For the Danes breaking in like wild Bores, laid it waste not long
after. But of the occurrences of those times I shall speak in the successive
Ages they were done in, intending in this Heptarchy to write only to the times
of King Egbert the West- Saxon, the first sole Monarch of England.

The Kingdom of the East- Angles was bounded on the East and North by the Sea,
on the South it bordered upon Essex and Hartfordsbire, and on the West it had a
Ditch commonly called St. Edmund's Ditch for its principal limits.

THE KINGDOM OF MERCIA
Contained Counties
Cheshire. Darbyshire. Nottingham. Staffordshire. Shropshire. Northamptonshire.
Leicestershire. Lincolnshire. Huntington. Rutland. Warwickshire.
Worcestershire. Oxfordshire. Glocestershire. Buckinghamshire. Bedfordshire.
Part of Hertfordshire.
KINGS
Crida. Wibba. Ceorl. Penda. Peada. Vulfer. Ethelred. Kenred. Kelred.
Ethelbald. Beornred. Offa. Egfrid. Kenmolf. Kenelm.




THE Kingdom of Mercia though of largest extent, yet was inferior in point of
strength and power to far lesser Provinces, whose Pavilions though not
stretched so wide were sure fixed in the earth, and had means by turns to prey
upon this great body, not able at once on all sides to secure it self from
their several incursions. Thus like a Bull at stake, seated in the midst of the
Island, though sometimes it found means to toss and almost overturn particular
Kingdoms, yet staved off by others and constantly kept warm by new Assailants,
it ever lost behind what it gained forwards, and was not at any time able so to
keep all employed, but that one or other taking breath would return afresh upon
it. It had on the north the Kingdom of Northumberland, and its Limits on that
side were the Humber and Mersey, from whence it is supposed to have taken name.
On the East it extended to the Sea through Lincolnshire; and South-east had the
East Angles and East-Saxon Kingdoms lying upon it. South it reached to the
Thames, where it was obnoxious to Kent the South and West Saxons; and on the
West it was kept in by the Severn and Dee, which gave passage to the Britains
to break in upon it.

Thus we see this unwieldy Kingdom, which in front would seem to bear down all
before it, is so coopt up and hemmed in on every side, that it rather labors
under its own greatness,

CRIDA, WIBBA, CEORL.
THE first beginner of this Kingdom was CRIDA, the eleventh from VVoden, who
having reigned ten years without other memory left it to his Son WIBBA in the
year 594, who enlarging the bounds of his Kingdom by continual Conquests upon
the Britains, reigned twenty years, and had Issue three Son, Penda, Kenwalk,
and Eoppa, and a Daughter Sexburg, married to Kenwald King of the West Saxons.
But he was succeeded by his Nephew CEORL, who holding the Scepter twelve years,
dying left it to the right Heir

PENDA.
PENDA the Son of Wibba at fifty years of Age came to the Crown, a warlike
Captain, but withal bloody and restless. His first Wars were with Kingils An.
Dom. 627.
and Cuichelm, joint Kings of the West Saxons, whom he met at Cirencester, and
after a battle fought well on both sides, made Truce with them in the year 632.
He joined with Kedwalla or Cadwallon King of the Britains against Edwin King of
Northumberland, slaying him in Battle with his Son Osfrid at a place called
Hethfield. In the year 642. with his own forces he overcame Oswald, the
Successor of Edwin (who before had victoriously cut off Cadwallon with his
whole Host) at a place called Maserfield, now Oswestre in Shropshire, where he
slew him. He conquered Sigebert, Egbert, and Anna, Kings of the East Angles,
and killed them in the field, as has been related in the story of those
Princes. Next he makes War upon Kenwalch, King of the West Saxons, who had
taken his Sister in marriage, and unjustly put her away; him he drives out of
his Kingdom. When proud with these Successes, taking into his Society Ethelherd
King of the East Angles, and Ethelwald King of Deira, he resolves upon the
Conquest of Northumberland; but Oswy then King of that Country with a few
forces soberly managed cut him off with the greatest part of his Army.

The news of his death was joyfully received by all the Saxon Princes, glad to
be well rid of him, who during his Life had given them so much trouble. He was
a Pagan through choice not ignorance, and in several Conjunctions with
Christian Princes had learnt to despise the Professors of that way, as who
owning in words a Faith more excellent, showed nothing less in their Actions,
yet he prohibited not preaching in his Dominions, but giving free liberty to
all, he only hated and despised such, who did not obey that God in whom they
chose to believe.

His Male Issue by Kinswith his Queen runs thus, Peada his eldest Son, Ulfere
and Ethelred both Monarchs of the English, Merkthel famous for holiness of
Life, Merwald, who had a Principality in Mercia, and married Edburga daughter
of Egbert King of Kent. His Daughters were Kineburg Wife of Alkfrid King of
Northumberland, Kiniswith Wife of Offa King of the East Angles, both which
Daughters afterward became Nuns.

PEADA.
PEADA the eldest Son of Penda succeeded not in the whole Kingdom of An. Dom.
659.
Mercia, for Oswy King of Northumberland entering the Country, took possession
in right of a Conqueror, but to Peada, who had married his Daughter, he gave by
Donation all on the South Side of Trent, and reserved to himself the North. By
his Father Penda long before he had been made Prince of the Mid-Angles, a
particular branch of the Mercian Crown, and there with his good liking had
planted the Christian Religion to the knowledge of which he came upon this
occasion: Applying to King Oswy for his Daughter Alckfled, he received Answer,
That unless he turned Christian, and admitted that Religion into his Dominions,
he should surcease his Suit. Peada unwilling to be baffled accepts the motion,
and having heard some Preachers to that purpose, professes himself to be so
taken with the Doctrine, that whether he receive the Lady or not, he resolves
to embrace it with all his People, which good Intentions of his were furthered
by Alckfrid Oswy's Son, who, besides that he had taken to wife Cymburga his
Sister, had contracted a near Friendship with him. All things therefore agreed,
he is baptized by Bishop Finan, at the King's Palace on the Wall, and then
with his Wife and new Religion, returns into his own Country, most part of
which, by the assistance of some Priests carried along with him, he soon
brought to the same profession. But now Prenda being dead and his Territory
enlarged through the Accession of South Mercia, he had not reigned three years,
when he was cut off by the Treason of his Wife, whom he had taken for a special
Christian.

WULFER.
WULFER the Brother of King Peada succeeded him not only in the Province Ar.
Dom. 659
of South-Mercia, but in the entire Kingdom of his Ancestors: For Immin, Eaba,
and Eadbert, three Potent Earls casting off the Yoke of Oswy, restored the
whole North into his possession, which he maintained during the whole Reign of
that Monarch. But Oswy dead, Egfrid his Son and Successor endeavored to
recover what his Father had lost, and invading this Wulfer, won from him the
Isle of Lindsey, and the Countries adjacent, and content with that revenge
returns home with his forces. But Wulfer was now employed in War with Kenwald
King of the West Saxons, against whom he had better success; for entering his
Country with a powerful Army, he laid it waste from one end to the other, took
away from him the Isle of VVight, which with some Countries of the Meannari
adjoining, he gave to Edilwalch the South-Saxon, whom he had made a Christian,
and received at the Font. Afterward he fought a Battle with Escwin King of the
West Saxons, at a place called Bedanhafde,, but which side won the day is not
recorded. He reigned seventeen years, and was buried at Peterborough, his Queen
Ermenheld after his death veiled her self at Ely. He is reported to have had
three Sons, whereof the eldest named Kenred reigned after his Brother Ethelred,
his two younger Vulfald and Rufin, as the Records of Peterborough report, were
slain by their Fathers own hands, being found in an Assembly of Christians. For
this King at first (as is said) was a great Persecutor of that way, and if Fame
belie him not after his conversion none of the sincerest Christians. For the
Bishopric of London he sold to Wini, who had been driven out of Winchester by
Kenwalch the Saxon King. But however this Simony be blameable in Wulfer, yet he
afterward made amends in sending Jerumannus, a painful Bishop to recover the
East Saxons, who had fell from the Christian Religion into open Idolatry.

ETHELRED.
ETHELRED the Brother of Wulfer obtained next the Kingdom, for Kenred An. Dom.
676.
the Son of Wulfer was put by, upon what Account is not recorded. His first
Actions were the recovery of Lindsey, and other Territories adjoining, which
his Brother had lost to Egfrid King of Northumberland. Afterward he turned his
Arms upon Kent, wasted that Country, sparing neither Church or Monastery, and
sacked the City of Rochester, notwithstanding what resistance Lothair could
make against him. Putta their Bishop was forced to fly into Mercia, where he
sustained his old age by teaching School. But Ethelred after thirty years
Reign, weary of the cares of Government retired to a Monastery at Bradney,
which himself had built and to make amends for his Injustice, he restored the
Crown to Kenred his Nephew, though he had a Son of his own of Age able to
succeed him. His Wife Ostrid was slain by her own Subjects, as Bedes Epitome
Records.

Florence names them South-Imbrians, but tells not the occasion of such horrid
Treason.

KENRED.
KENRED having received the Crown from his Uncle Ethelred held it but An. Dom.
705.
four years, when desirous to return to his private Life, he commended the care
of Government to Kelred, the Son of Ethelred, and in company of Offa, the Son
of Siger, the East-Angle King, and Edwin Bishop of Worcester went to Rome in
the time of POPE Constantine the first, where he and his Royal Companion were
both shorn Monks, and ended their days.

KELRED.
KELRED the Son of Ethelred by the Resignation of Kenred came to the An. Dom.
709.
Crown of Mercia in the year 715, he had an encounter with Ina King of the
West Saxons at a place called Wodnesburg in Wiltshire, the success whereof is
left doubtful. Mr. Speed in his succession of English Monarchs, treating of
this Kelred gives him high commendations, as a Prince beloved of his Subjects
for his Virtues, and much lamented by them at his death. Thus he dresseth him
up, whom he will needs have to be the fourteenth Monarch, but, as his custom
is, without the least show of Authority, nay absolutely against it; For we read
in an Epistle of Boniface Archbishop of Mentz, written to his Successor
Ethelbald and yet extant, that he Spelm. (...). page 235.
was a defiler of Nuns, and a breaker of the Privileges of the Church. And he
admonishes that Prince by his example to beware of such ossences, lest they
bring him into the same destruction; For Kelred one day sitting at a Feast with
his Nobles, in the midst of his jollity was taken with an evil Spirit, which
work him into high fits of distraction, so that mad and raging he talked
wildly by himseif, and refusing the comforts of the Ministry and Saeraments,
finally died in despair of his salvation.

ETHELBALD.
ETHELBALD of the Royal blood succeeded Kelred, not unlike him in his
exorbitant life, as the same Epistle of the Archbishop of Mentz does An. Dom.
716.
witness, but reclaimed in the end by that and other good advices, he proved an
excellent Prince. Aften the death of King Ina the West Saxon, he so managed his
affairs that all on this side Humber was entire at his Command. He besieged and
took the Town of Somerton about the year 740. And whilst Eadbert King of
Northumberland was taken up in his Putish wars, he entered his Country in his
absence, as the supplement of Bede's Epitome Records testify. Afterward he
waged War with Cuthred the West Saxon, newly come to his Crown, whom he often
engaged with inter changeable success. But at last coming to a Peace, they join
both their Forces and invade the Welsh, whom in a great battle they overthrow.
But in the year 752 Cuthred the West Saxon falling again at variance with him,
they sought another battle at Borford, now Burford in Shropshire, and a year
after at a place called Secundune now Seckinton, eight miles from Tamworth in
Warmickshire. He was slain, as Huntington reports, by the same Prince, others
say, he was murdered in the night by his own Guards through the Treason of
Beornred, out of ambition to succeed him.

In this King's Reign at a Synod held at Gloveshow by Cuthbert Archbishop of
Canterbury it was ordained, among other things, that the Lord's day should be
carefully Spelm. Cincil. page 244.
observed, that the reading of the Holy Scriptures should be generally used in
Monasteries, that the Creed and Lord's Prayer should be taught in the English
tongue, and that public Supplications should be made for Kings and all in
Authority.

BEORNRED.
BEORNRED having traitorously slain King Ethelbald, stepped into the Throne
himself about the year 754, but he enjoyed not long his ill-gained An. Dom. 754.
Honor, for Offa the next of the Royal Family having for some time lain
concealed until he could unite his Interest, at length came upon him, and in a
set battle slew him, after he had held the Kingdom by Usurpation for the space
of two years or thereabouts, as may be most probably calculated.

OFFA.
OFFA at the death of Beornred was received by the universal consent of his An.
Dom. 756.
People, and advanced to the Crown of his Ancestors. He proved the Greatest
that ever swayed this Scepter, but though he often gave fair strokes for the
whole Monarchy of the Island, yet he was never able to compass that design. His
first enterprise was against the Hestings a neighboring People, whom he
quickly subdued and added to his own Dominions. Next he invades Kent, and
slaies their King Alric at a place called Ottenford, then recalled by the
West Saxon King he engages with him at Besington, where he wins the day and the
Town for which they contended. And now to add Treachery to his Conquests, he
invites Egilbert King of the East Angles to his Court with fair promises of his
Daughter in marriage, whom no sooner come but he beheads', and then seizes his
Kingdom. But the baseness of this action blunted his Sword, and we never after
find him the same man as before, so that the remaining part of his life will be
spent in recounting his satisfactions, Pilgrimage and such other deeds. To
expiate this murder, he gave the Tenths of all he had to the Church, and great
possessions to the Church of Hereford, where Egilbert was buried; He caused the
Relics of St. Alban to be enshrined in a Cask of Gold set with precious
Jewels, and to the Martyr himself gives Lands and Tenements the Ancient demesns
of his Crown. He took a Journey to Rome, to the College of English there he
gave a yearly Pension, and a Tribute to the Pope through all his Dominions, for
which he obtained that the Primacy of England was translated from Canterbury to
Litchfield in his own Dominions. He obtained of Charles the Great, that the
English going to Rome should be free from Customs, and other duties. With
Charles the Great during his whole Reign he had great intercourse, sometimes
enmity, otherwhiles friendship, as appears by the kind Letters of that Emperor
written to him yet extant, wherein he styles him the MOST POTENT KING OF THE
WEST CHRISTIANS.

And now about this time were Images first brought into the English Church to
be worshipped; for Charles the Great sent the decrees of the Synod of Nice into
Britain, of which hear what Hoveden writes, wherein says he, Alas for pity! by
the unanimous consent of three hundred Bishops or more met together in that
Council were decreed many things inconvenient, may quite contrary to the true
Faith, as is most especially the worshipping of Images, which the Church of God
does absolutely hate. Against which Book Alcuinus.
Albinus wrote an Epistle, excellently well strengthened with the Authority of
the Holy Scriptures, which, together with the aforesaid Book, himself presented
in the name of the Princes and Bishops of this Land unto the aforesaid Charles
King of France.

Which Book is reported to have so worked with that Emperor, that in the Synod
of Frankford he caused those Constitutions to be repealed.

This Offa to keep the Britains from making inrode into his Country, caused a
Ditch or Trench to be made almost an hundred miles in length from Sea to Sea;
that is, from the mouth of the River Wy unto Dee, concerning which in after
days John of Salisbury in his Policration writes thus, Herald ordained a Law,
that what Welch-man soever should be found with a weapon on this side the limit
which he had set them, that is to say, Offa's Dike, he should have his Right
hand cut off by the King's Officers.

The Issue of King Offa was,

Fgfrid, his Son and Successor.

Ethelburga, married to Birthric King of the West Saxons, of whose life and
death you will read in the next Kingdom.

Elsled, supposed second wife of Ethelred King of Northumberland.

Elsrid the youngest Daughter, promised in marriage to Egilbert King of the
East Angles.

EGFRID.
EGFRID the Son of Offa had in his life time been made Partner with his Father
An, Dom. (...).
in the Kingdom, and as if his life had been woven up with his, he survived him
but four Months, having given his Subjects the hopes of a longer Reign he
restored to the Church whatever his Father and Predecessors had taken from
them. He had neither Wife nor Issue, and was buried in the Church of St.
Albans, of his Father's foundation.

KENWOLF.
KENWOLF of the Royal blood succeeded Egfrid in the Kingdom; he An. Dom 794;
had Wars with Ethelbert surnamed Pren King of Kent, whom taking prisoner he
brought into Mercia, and soon after at the High Altar dismissed, having, as
Simeon reports, put out his eyes and lopt off his hands. He Reigned twenty one
years, and was buried in the Monastery of Winchcomb, which himself had founded.

KENELM.
KENELM the Son of Kenwolf, a Child of seven years, was left under An. Dom. 815.
the Tuition of his elder Sister Quendrid, but she ambitious to Rule her self
caused him to be made away by one Askbert, who alluring him to the Woods on
pretense to hunt there, slew him and secretly buried his body, the murder is
said to be miraculously discovered by a Dove dropping a written Note on the
Altar at Rome; it was this,

(...).

Mr. Milton thus renders it:

Low in a Mead of Kine under a Thorn,
Of head bereast ly'th poor Kenelm King-born?
Soon after the death of this Prince the Kingdom of Mercia became Tributary to
Egbert the West Saxon Monarch, though not without some struggling on both sides;
but the Actions of suceeding Princes in this Kingdom, as they were but few and
happened all in the life of that Monarch, so I shall reserve them to be told
there in their due place, for in this Heptarchy I design not to write any
further than to his days, who by degrees united the divided States, and
molded them into one entire Dominion.

THE KINGDOM OF THE West Saxons
Contained Counties
Cornwall. Devonshire. Dorcetshire. Somersetshire. Wiltshire. Hantshire.
Barkshire.
KINGS
Cerdic. Kenric. Ceaulin. Cearlick. Ceowlf. Kingils. Kenwalch. Eskwyn. Ketwyn.
Ceadwalla. Ina. Ethelard. Cuthred. Sigibert. Kinwulf. Birthric.




CERDIC.
CERDIC, the Tenth in descent from Woden and the Beginner of the West Saxon
Kingdom, with five ships and Kenric his Son An. Dom. 495.
setting forth from Germany arrived at Britain in the year 495, and landed at a
place afterward called from his name, Cerdic-Shore. He was an old experienced
Soldier, and long exercised in the Wars of Saxony. At his first setting foot
on land he gave signal proofs of his Valor by often repelling the Britains who
endeavored to hinder this New settlement, and for six years together without
any fresh supplies maintained his ground with advantage; about which time,
Porta another An. Dom. 501.
Saxon, with his two Sons Bida and Megla in two ships arrive at Portsmouth,
thence called, and at their first landing slay a British Noble man, with many
of the Common sort, who disorderly gathered against them.

The Britains to redeem these losses, with strong Musters though slowly
assemble together under Natanleod, or Nazaleod, a British King, and one of
their greatest, says An. Dom. 508.
Huntington (however he came by so unusual a name) but are miserably defeated,
with the death of their Prince and five thousand of his men. In this battle it
is said that Cerdic was assisted by Ella the South-Saxon, and Oisc King of
Kent, together with Porta who had now been seven years in the Island. From this
British King the Saxon Annals write, that a small Region adjoining to
Cerdicsford was called Nazaleod.

Six years after Stuf and Withgar, Cerdic's Nephews, with three ships land at
Cerdicsford, or as others say, Certic shore, and in a set battle overthrow the
Britains, and An. Dom. 514.
five years following, if the former battle be not to be referred to this time,
Cerdic again with his Son obtained another signal Victory, upon the gaining of
which, and the strength of the new supplies, he at last assumed Regal Dignity.
After he had continued conquering in the Isle twenty four years, the Saxon
Annals report a third Battle fought at the same place, but with doubcful
success, as if this only had been the field of fortune.

Mr. Cambden in his Chronographical Description of these two places, Cerdic
shore and Cerdics-ford has much confounded the natural course of this History,
by placing them at so vast a distance, which if true, can never be reconciled
with the truth of these Relations. Cerdic shore be places as far as Yarmouth.
Cerdic a warlike Saxon (says he) landed here (i. e.) at Yarmouth, whereupon
the Inhabitants at this day call the Cambden in Icenis.
place Cerdic-sand, and the writers of Histories Cerdic shore, and after he had
made sore War upon the Icent took Sea, and sailed from hence into the West
parts. But our Historians make no mention of his ever changing his design, or
sailing into any other parts after his first landing; and I am afraid the
Coincidence of like Names, honorably to derive a place, was the cause of this
neat invention; for otherwise, what reason could there be that he should
forsake a Country, wherein he had good success, and from whence he might easier
expect supplies from Saxony, to go seek out new Territories further off, and
where (for ought we know) he had no reason to expect better quarters or kinder
entertainment? Let us see therefore where he places Cerdics-ford, for by the
course of the story, Cerdic-shoar is not to be sought far from it, and we shall
find them both on the Coasts of Hantshire. Hard by the Western bounds (says
Mr. Cambden) the River Aven carries a still stream, and no sooner runs into
this shore, but it meets Cambden in Belgis.
with the Ford of Cerdicus, in old time Cerdics-ford, afterward Cerdeford, and
now by Contraction of the word Chardford, so named of Cerdic, that Warlike
English Saxon. For here the said Cerdic in a set Battle so daunted the
Britains, that not only he enlarged the bounds of his Empire, but also
delivered an easy War unto his Posterity, having before time, in the year of
our Salvation 508, after great Conflicts in his Tract, vanquished the most
mighty King of the Britains Natanleod, called also Nazaleod by others, with
many of his people. Of whose name likewise a small Region reaching unto this
Place was termed Natanleod, as we read in the Annals of the English Saxons,
which I sought very curiously for, but hitherto could not find so much as any
small sign or sample of that Name, neither can I guess, who that Natanleod
should be. This seems naturally to be the place where the foresaid Actions
were performed; for, besides the Testimony of the Name, the place it self lying
at a moderate distance from the South Saxons new acquests, it is reasonable to
think, that Cerdic would not go much further, but rather sit down at such a
convenient distance, where he might give or receive Assistance, as occasion
should serve, from his Countrymen already settled.

It being therefore granted, that this Charford was the ancient Cerdics-ford,
let us see if we cannot find Cerdic-shoar also upon this Coast. For since his
Nephews are said to land at Cerdics-shoar, and bring him thither new Supplies
after his Battle at Cerdics-ford, either Cerdics-shoar must be nigh this
Cerdics-ford, or else they must land at Cerdics shore at Yarmouth, and so,
through the Enemies Country march to Cerdics-ford in Hantshire, which is
fondness to suppose. Or lastly, the whole action must be laid at Yarmouth,
which will not suit with the foundation of the Western Kingdom. I have sought
many places on this Coast of Hantshire, but can find none that answer exactly
to the name of Cerdic, but allowing that Cerdicford, as Mr. Cambden says, makes
Charford, we find another place of the same name, not far off, upon the
Seaside in the Isle of Purbek in Dorsetshire, and Norwest of Pool a Town
called Charborough as much as Cherdic-borough; but herein I desire not to be
too fanciful, but certain it is by the consent of all our Historians, where
ever Cerdics-ford lay, Cerdics-shoar was not far distant, though the name be
now worn out, and perhaps the places aforementioned, as likewise Charmouth by
Lime may give some satisfaction that this was the Coast.

Mr. Speed with whom nothing would go down of the British History, whilst he
followed the Light of Mr. Cambden, now he is left to himself in the Saxon,
swallows whatever any fabulous Monk, Trivial Legend, or his Brother Stow
imposes upon him; from them I suppose it is, that he reports that the Isle
of VVight, after the Conquest of it by Cerdic, was given to his Nephews, Stuff
and VVithgar, the later of which slew the Iahabitants thereof, and named the
place of his Victory VVithgarbirg, and afterward reigning King there, was
after his death buried in his Royal City VVithgar.

This is a reach, I suppose, whoever was Inventor, to derive the name of the
Island, for in Authentic story we find no such Relation.

Cerdic had Issue two Sons, Kenric and Chelwolf, the former succeeded him in
the Kingdom; Chelwolf died before his Father, but left a Son of whose race
afterward sat upon the Throne. Cerdic Reigned nineteen years after he had
assumed Royal Title, and left his Kingdom to his Son Kenric.

KENRIC.
KENRIC the eldest Son of Cerdic succeeded his Father in the Kingdom. Twice he
fought the Britains and foiled them, once at Searesbirig now Salisbury An. Dom.
533.
in the eighteenth year of his Reign, and four years after at Beranvirig now
Banbury, accompanied with his Son Ceaulin. In this field the Britains, says
Huntington, were divided into three Battalions, but the Saxon charged in one
main body, the success, says he, was doubtful on both sides, and the night
parted them. Kenric Reigned twenty seven years, and had three Sons, Ceaulin,
Cuthwolf, and Cuth, the last of which was notable in his Issue, for his eldest
Son came to be King, the second was Father, the third Grandfather of a King, as
in the following History will appear.

CEAULIN.
CEAULIN the eldest Son of Kenric, his Father dead, entered upon the Kingdom.
In the beginning of his Reign he employed his Arms against young An. Dom. 560.
Ethelbert of Kent, who, as has been related, aspired to an universal
Monarchy, and forced him to sit down quiet, with the harassing of his Country,
and the death of two of his chief Earls. In his tenth year he managed his Wars
by his Brother Cuthwolf, who encountering the Britains at Bedanford now
Bedford, gave them a great defeat, and took four Towns from them, Liganborough,
Egelsborough or Allsbury, Besington now Benson in Oxfordshire, and Ignesham or
Evesham; but he outlived not long his good success, but left a Son behind him
who succeeded his Uncle in the Kingdom.

Cuthwolf dead, Ceaulin in person with his Son Cuthwin undertakes the War, and
about the year 581 at a place called Diorth Deorrham in Glocestershire he
obtains a great Victory, slaying in one battle three British Kings, Coinmagil,
Condidan, and Farimnagil, which good success was attended with the surrender of
as many Cities, Badencester, Gloucester, and Cireneester. About five years after
at a place called Fedanly or Fechanly, possibly about Fekenham Forest in
Worcestershire, he again met the Britains, but not with like success, for
Matthew of Westminster gives a clear Victory to the Britains, and Huntington
allows the beginning of the day to be theirs, for with the death of Cuthwin
the Saxons were wholly put to rout, but Ceaulin rallying his scattered Forces,
not only put stop to the pursuit, but as that Author writes, recovered an
entire Victory, with the purchase over and above of many Towns and large
Territories. But the sequel declares nothing less, for the same year, or not
long after, we find the Britains again giving him battle, and that in Wiltshire
at a place called Wodens-Beorth or Wodens-Dic, that is to say Woden's Mount,
the conclusion of which was, that the Saxons lost the day with the ruin of
their whole Army, and Ceaulin for this or other miscarriages was driven out of
his Kingdom, and the year after died in Exile after he had Reigned thirty two
years.

CEARLIK.
CEARLIK the Son of Guthwolf Brother of the late King followed his An. Dom. 592.
Uncle Ceaulin, advanced, as may be guessed, from his Father's virtues, and the
dislike the people had to the Line of Ceaulin, who by his Son Cuthwin left two
Grandchildren, Kenbald and Cuth, whose Right it was to inherit; but the latter
of these Reigned afterward in his Posterity, being the Grandfather of the
famous Ine, the eleventh King of this Province, whose Brother Ingils was
Progenitor in the fourth degree to Egbert that reduced the whole Heptarchy into
an entire Monarchy. This Cearlik, as he had obtained the Kingdom by fraud and
usurpation, so he held it but a short while, Reigning five years and odd
months, and them without any action worthy of remembrance.

CEOWOLF.
CEOWOLF the Son of Cuth, the third and youngest Son of Kenric, after the An.
Dom. 597.
death of his Cousin-German Cearlic, obtained the Kingdom. During the whole
time of his Reign, which lasted twelve years, he had continual wars, sometimes
with the Britains, then with Redwald King of the East Angles, and afterward
with the South Saxons, with interchangeable success, but, says Huntington,
with the greatest loss to them of the South. In these Wars he died, leaving his
Kingdom to Kingils.

KINGILS.
KINGILS the Son of Ceola younger Brother to the late Ceowolf second Son of
Cuth, who was the third Son of Kearic, succeeded his Uncle in the An. Dom. 609.
Kingdom; He assumed for his Associate Cuichelm his Brother, or as Florent of
Worcester and Matthew of Westminster write, his Son: In their third year with
joint Forces they engaged the Britains at Beandune now Bindon in Dorcetshire,
and Sax. Annal. Malmsbury.
at the first encounter put them to flight with the slaughter of above two
thousand.

Cuichelm proud with this success, and envying the glory of Edwin who now
Reigned in great honor King of the Northumberlands, and had lately molested
the West Saxons, drew a greater War upon himself and Associate by sending an
Assassin to murder that Prince. The name of this Villain was Eumcrus, who
under pretense of a Message from his Master was admitted to the presence of
Edwin, then at his Court on Easter-monday on the River Derwent in Yorkshire,
being advanced up to the King, as if he would deliver his Embassy, he suddenly
drew forth a poisoned weapon which he had privately hid under his Coat, and
made a blow at him; but by the interposition of Lilla one of the Kings
Attendants, who stepping between received the Poniard through his own body, the
thrust was put off, yet not so fully but that part of the weapon reached the
King's Person. By this time the whole company came in and encompassed the
Murderer, who now grown desperate died not tamely, but revenged his fate with
the death of Forder a Courtier who next pressed upon him.

Edwin thus delivered, though lying under cure, resolves upon Revenge, and
promises Paulinus who had been long working him to the Christian Faith, that
if God would bestow Victory on him over his Enemies, he would embrace the Faith
and receive Baptism. With these assurances given, he raises an Army and invades
the West Saxons, and with that success, that overcoming them in several battles
he gets into his hands many of those who had conspired his death, some of which
he executes, others pardons, and at last returns with great Honor into his own
Country.

This expedition happened about the year 625. Four years after Kingils and
Cuichelm had a battle with Penda the Mercian at Cirencester, the result of
which was a League of peace and amity betwixt them. About this time the Kingdom
of the West Saxons received the Faith by the example of Kingils, who was
converted thereto by the preaching of Berinus and encouragement of Oswald (who
was then Suitor to his Daughter) and received him at the Font; the
circumstances of which, as likewise the progress of Religion under his success,
take altogether out of Bid, who has exactly related it.

The Conversion of the West Saxons.
THE Nation of the West Saxons, anciently called Gevisses in the Reign of
Kingils, Bid, lib. 3. cap. 7.
received the Faith of Christ by the preaching of Berinus Bishop, who by the
advice of Pope Honorius came into Britain, having promised by his assistance to
go into the innermost Countries of the English, where never yet Doctor had
been, and there sow the seed of holy Faith. Whereupon, by the command of the
same Pope, he received Episcopal Orders at the hands of Asterius Bishop of
Genua. But being arrived at Britain, and first setting foot on the Country of
the Guisses, finding them all Pagans in the highest degree, he thought it more
profitable to preach the Word there, than by going further to hunt out those
whom he first intended. Wherefore preaching in the aforesaid Province, when the
King himself first catechized and instructed together with his People were
washing in the fountain of Baptism, it happened that the most holy and
victorious King of the Northumberlands, Oswald, was then present, and received
him at the Font. By a blessed conjunction taking him for his Son in the second
Birth, whose Son himself was to be by the marriage of his Daughter. Both the
Kings thereupon gave to the same Bishop the City of Dorchester for an Episcopal
Seat, where having built up and dedicated Churches, and by laboring converted
many people, He departed this life, and was buried in the same City.

This King dying, Cenwalch his Son and Successor refused to receive the Faith
and Sacraments of the Heavenly kingdom, and not long after lost his Earthly
one; For putting away his wife the sister of Penda King of Mercia, he took
another, wherefore being invaded by him, he was driven out of his Kingdom, and
forced to fly to Anna King of the East Angles, with whom living in exile three
years, he acknowledged the Faith and embraced the truth. For the King with whom
he lived in exile was a good man, and happy in a good and holy offspring. When
Genwalch was restored to his Kingdom, there came into his Province out of
Ireland a certain Bishop, by name Agilbert, by Nation a Gaul, but yet who had
been in Ireland for the reading of the Scriptures not a little while. He joined
himself with the King on his own accord, taking upon him the Ministry of
preaching, whose learning and industry when the King perceived, he made motion
that he would accept there an Episcopal Seat, and remain Bishop of his Nation,
who at his requests, for many years ruled that Province with Sacerdotal
Jurisdiction. At last the King, who understood the Saxon tongue only, growing
weary of a foreign Dialect, underhand brought another Bishop of his own
language into the Province, by name Wini, who had been ordained in France, also
dividing the Province into two Diocesses; To him he gave Winchester for his
Episcopal Seat, at which Agilbert being highly offended that the King had done
this without his advice, he returned into France, and receiving the Bishopric
of Paris, he died there an old man and full of days. But not many years after
his departure from Britain, Wini was driven out of his Bishopric by the same
King, who repairing to Wulfur King of the Mercians The first (...) of the
Saxons.
, bought of him with a good sum the Seat of London, and remained Bishop of it
during his life. So the Province of the West Saxons for no small time was
without a Bishop, at which time the forementioned King of that Province, being
often afflicted with great losses in his Kingdom received of the enemy, began
to call to mind him whom by fraud he had formerly made forsake the Kingdom, and
resolved to call him back, considering that the Province destitute of a
Governor, was bereft likewise of Divine protection.

He sent therefore Ambassadors into France to Agilbert, promising
satisfaction, and submissively desiring he would return to the Bishopric of
his Nation. But he excusing himself by solemn protestation, that he could not
possibly come, because he was bound to his own City and Diocese; yet
nevertheless not altogether to be wanting in his assistance to so ardent
desires, he sent thither a Priest, by name Eleutherius, his own Nephew, whom if
he please might be ordained Bishop for him, giving him this Testimonial, that
he himself thought him worthy of the Bishopric, who being honorably
entertained by the King and People, they sent unto Theodoruc then Archbishop of
Canterbury, desiring that he might be consecrated their, Bishop; who being
consecrated in that City, for many years held alone the Bishopric of the
West Saxons, as it had been ordered by Synodical Decree.

KENWALCH.
KENWALCH the Son of Kingils followed his Father in the Kingdom, of An. Dom.
640.
whom what relates to his Ecclesiastical Affairs has been before related.
Having divorced his second wife whom he had unlawfully wedded, and retaken
Sexburg the Sister of Penda whom he had unjustly put away, He enjoyed the Crown
in peace for some years, even until Anno 652, falling into wars, but with whom
is not related, Ethelwald calls them Civil. He fought a battle at Bradanford by
the River Alene. Mr. Cambden makes the place to be Bradford in Wiltshire upon
the River Avon, and says, that it was with Cuthred his near Kinsman he was
engaged Cambd. in Eelgis.
in Civil Wars; but I wish he had told us from whence he gathered it, for we
find no such thing in History; Certain it is, that not long before, Kenwalch
had given large possessions to Cuthred, but whether it could oblige him to sit
down quiet with the loss of a Kingdom is uncertain, for no doubt his Title was
precedent to Kenwalch's, if Cuchelm his Father was eldest Son of Kingils; and
Stow writes, but upon what grounds I know not, that he did really succeed his
Father, and possibly there may be some Record extant concerning these Troubles,
not commonly appearing. But things being settled at home, and Kenwalch desirous
to enlarge his Dominions, invades the Britains, and had a fight with them at a
place called Witgornsborough, mentioned by Malmsbury, but without any other
circumstances, afterward at Pennum or Pen in Somersetshire, the success of
which is not left so doubtful, for Cambd.
the Victory was great on the Saxon side, who followed the pursuit to a place
called Pedridan now Pederton, afterward the Royal Seat of King Ina, and the
Britains for a long time after would scarce look the Saxons in the face. But
Kenwalch falling at variance with his old enemy Vulfur had not the like
success, for fighting with him at Possentesburg, though Ethelwerd relates he
took Vulfur prisoner, yet the Saxon Annals record clear contrary, and the
sequel shows that Vulfur won the day, for not long after he wasted the Country
of the West Saxons as far as Eskesdun, and took the Isle of Wight, till then in
their possession, with other Provinces of the Meannuari, and gave them to
Edilwalch his Godson, King of the South Saxons.

These are all the memorable Actions of Kenwalch; for his good deeds, he is
reported to have founded the Cathedral of Winchester, and the Abbey of
Malmsbury, and, as appears in a Grant of King Ina afterward made to the
Church, he bestowed several privileges on these places, Ferlingmere, Beokerey,
Godein, Martinesey, Edredesey. He reigned 31 years and left no Issue to
inherit. Sexburg his wife for a while after his death assumed the Government,
but she was driven out, says Matthew of Westminster, by the Nobles, who could
not endure the government of a Woman. Some say she died the same year, others,
that she built a Nunnery in the Isle of Shepy, wherein her self was a otress,
and afterward became an Abbess of Ely.

ESKWIN.
ESKWIN, derived in the fifth degree from Kerdic the first founder of this
Kingdom, of a younger house succeeded Kenwalch. He Reigned but two years, An.
Dom. 672.
in which time he fought a battle with Wulfur, wherein many of the Saxons on
both sides were slain: the place was Bidanheaford, soon after which he died.

KETWIN.
KETWIN younger Son of Kingils, whose Right preceded Eskwins, and who (as Bede
and Malmsbury write) was Partner with him in the Crown, after the An. Dom. 674.
death of Eskwin proved the scourge of the Britains pursuing them even Saxon
Annal.
to the Seashore; but no other circumstances are related of him or this
action. He is allowed nine years Reign. In a grant of King Ina to Glastenbury
it is reported, that this Prince highly favored that Monastery by freeing it
from the secular Services, and often calling it the Mother of Saints.

CEADWALLA.
CEADWALLA of the blood Royal, derived in the third degree from Guth the third
Son of Kenric, succeeded Ketwin. He had been banished his Country An. Dom. 683.
by the prevalency of some faction, but returning obtained the Crown. He made
war upon the South Saxons, whom he overcame and annexed to his own Dominions,
took the Isle of Wight, and twice wasted Kent, the circumstances of all which
Actions have been formerly related under the Kingdom of Kent, and the
South Saxons. Afterward he went to Rome (for as yet he was a Pagan) to receive
Baptism, which was given him by the hands of Pope Sergius on Easter eaven, in
the year of our Redemption, says Bid, 689, and was called Peter; but on the
twentieth day of April following he died, and was buried at St. Peter's Church
at Rome under a fair Monument with this Epitaph:

Here CEADWALL, otherwise named PETER, King of the West Saxons lies buried,
who departed this life the twentieth of April, in the second Indiction. At the
age of thirty years, or thereabouts, in the fourth year of the Reign of
JUSTINIAN the most Noble and Mighty Emperor, and the second of Sergius, who
then sat in Peter's Chair, being a true Pattern of the Apostles.

The British Writers from the similitude of name will needs have this Geadwall
to be their Cadwallader; but the Monument it self, as well as the course of
this Princes actions, does sufficiently convict them of the fraud and folly of
that invention. He reigned five years, and left no Issue to succeed him.

INA.
INA, derived in the third degree from Cuth the younger Son of Ceaulin, An. Dom
689.
third King of the West Saxons, succeeded Ceadwalla in the Government. His
first expedition was into Kent, to revenge the death of Mollo, Brother to
Ceadwalla, who, as has been related, was burned to death; but Wigtred, who
then had newly come to the Kentish Crown, appeased his anger with Mar. Wistm.
Will. (...)
the delivery of about thirty of the chief Actors, or, as others say, with a
round sum of money, amounting to no less than thirty thousand Mark of silver.
Peace thus concluded, he returns into his Country, where we hear not of him
again till about the one and twentieth year of his Reign, when attended with
his Cousin Nun, he fought a battle with GERENT King of the Britains, in the
beginning of which Higelbald a Noble Man of the Saxons was slain; but in the
end, Gerent with all his Britains was put to the rout. The course of his
succeeding Actions runs thus:

Five years after he fought with Cheolred King of Mercia, but with doubtful
advantage. Ten years after that, he invaded the South Saxons, who under petty
Princes began to bear up for the Liberty of their Country lately enthralled by
Ceadwalla; Here he slaies Albright, driven from Taunton, and taking refuge in
this Kingdom, whom Mr. Hollinshead, without Authority, makes King of the
South Saxons; after this he vanquished the East Angles more than once, as
Malmsburry reports, but sets not down the time when.

By these Victories it is said he possessed the whole Monarchy of England and
Wales. For, if we believe what is written in the Laws of Edward Confessor, he
was the first Crowned King of English and British since the Arrival of the
Saxons; of the English by Conquest, of the British in right of a second wife
not named, yet some way related to Gadwallader last King of Wales; but we may
easily imagine through what hands such stories crept in.

This Prince is truly famous for his good LAWS yet extant in the Saxon tongue,
out of which Language I have translated them as carefully as I can.

THE LAWS OF King INA.
Ic Jne mid Gods gyfe Westseaxna cyning mid getheaht and mid laere Cenredes
mines faeder. and heddes mines bisceopes etc. IINA, by the grace of God King of
the West Saxons, by the advice and institution of Cenred my Father, and Heddes
and Erkenwald my Bishops, with all my Aldermen and sage Ancients of my people,
in a great Assembly of the Servants of God have religiously endeavored, both
for the health of our Soul, and the common preservation of our Kingdom, that
right Laws and true judgment be founded and established throughout our whole
Dominions, and that it shall not be lawful for the time to come, for any
Alderman, or other person whatever, to abolish these our Constitutions.

Of God's Ministers.
IN the first place, we command that the Ministers of God keep and observe the
appointed Rule of living, and next, we will that amongst all our people these
Laws and Alias aep.
Judgments be observed.

Of Infants.
A Child shall be baptized within 30 days after it is born, if not, the
neglect shall be A Saxon shilling consisted of five pence sterling.
punished 30 shillings; if it die before it be Christened, it shall forfeit all
that belongs to it.

Of working on Sunday.
If a Servant do any work on Sunday by command of his Master, be shall be free,
and the Master shall pay 30 shillings; but if he went about the work without
command from his Master, he shall be beaten with stripes, or redeem the penalty
of whipping with a price. A Freeman, if he work on this day without command of
his Master, shall lose his freedom, or pay 60 shillings: If he be a Priest his
penalty shall be double.

Of the Churches Portion.
The Portion or Dues of the Church shall be brought in by the Feast of St.
Martyn, he that pays them not by that time shall be punished 40 shillings,
and besides pay the dues twelve times over.

Of the Privilege of a Temple.
If any one guilty of a Capital crime shall take refuge in a Church, he shall
save his life, and make recompense according to justice and equity; If one
deserving stripes take Sanctuary, he shall have the stripes forgiven him.

Of Quarrels.
If any one fight within the King's Court, he shall forfeit all his goods and
Chattels, and it shall be at the will and pleasure of the King, whether he be
not to lose his life also. He that fights in a Cathedral Church shall pay 120
s. in the house of a Alderman.
Senator, or another sage Noble man 60 s. Whosoever shall fight in a
Villager's house paying scot, or any Yeoman's, shall be punished 30 shillings,
and shall give the Villager 6 shillings. And if any one fight in the open
field, he shall pay 120 shillings. If there happen among Guests a quarrel, and
some of them shall patiently take ill language, the rest shall be punished 30
shillings a piece.

Of Theft.
If any one shall steal without the privity of his wife and Children, he shall
be punished 60 s. But if he steal, his whole family consenting, they shall be
all given into servitude. A child of 10 years old shall be accounted accessory
in theft.

Of claiming Justice.
If any Plaintiff shall require right to be done him by a Senator or any other
Judge, and the Defendant give no pledge, he (the Judge) shall forfeit 30
shillings, and nevertheless within a sevennight do him true justice.

Of Self-vindication.
He that on his own private account shall take satisfaction for a wrong done to
him, before he has demanded public Justice, shall restore what he took away
on that score, or give the worth of the thing, and besides forfeit 30 shillings.

Of Rapine.
If any shall rob within the confines of our State, he shall restore what he
has taken, and be punished 60 shillings.

Of Men-buyers.
If any one shall buy his Countryman, either bond or free, or guilty of a
Crime, and send him beyond Sea, he shall pay the value of his head, and give
over and above sufficient satisfaction.

Of false Testimony and Pledge.
If any before a Bishop give false witness, or Pledge, he shall be amerced 120
shillings.

Of Robbers taken.
If a Robber be taken, he shall lose his life, or redeem it according to the
estimation of his head. We call Robbers to the number of seven men from 7 to 35
a band, all above an Army.

Of a Band.
One accused to be among a band of Robbers, may purge himself by oath to the
value of 120 hides of Land, or make him due satisfaction.

Of an Army.
One accused to be in an Army of Robbers, may purge himself according to the
estimation of his head, or give satisfaction. But this purgation by Oath shall
consist one half of The word signifies also Communicants.
Housekeepers. But after the Thief is once in the King's Goal, he shall not
have the liberty of purging himself.

Of a Thief-slayer.
He that shall slay a Thief, shall make oath he slew him for his Theft only;
but nevertheless he shall not be exempted from all payment to his friends.

Of stolen Flesh.
He that shall find stolen Flesh and hide it, it shall be lawful for him (if he
so dare) to depose by oath it is his own, but the Informer shall have his
reward.

Of a Country Boor detected of Theft.
A Country Boor often arraigned for Theft, if he be afterward convicted, shall
have his hand or foot cut off.

Of a King's Villain.
A King's Villain's oath is valued to 60 hides of Land; and if he be a
Housekeeper, the estimation of his head is 1200 shillings.

Of a Forraigner.
A Forraigner or Stranger, if he wander in the Woods, and neither make a noise
with his mouth or wind a horn, as a Thief he is to be judged to death or
ransom; And if any one demand of the slayer the estimation of the slain party,
the slayer may by oath make out that he killed him as a Thief, and then he
shall be free from any payment, either to the friends of the party, or his
Lord: But if he hide the thing, and the fault be afterward discovered, by that
conceslment he has put it in the power of the slain party's friends by oath to
acquit the dead from all guilt

Of a Villain that commits Theft.
If thy Villain steal, admonish thy Sureties (if thou have any) to make
satisfaction; if thou have none, thou must thy self make bare restitution, and
abate him nothing.

Of a Stranger slain.
If any one kill a Stranger, the King shall have two parts of the estimation of
his life, and the third his Children or Relations, if he has no Relations, the
King shall have half, and his Companion half. In the same manner an Abbot or
Abbess, if it be their concerns, shall divide with the King. A Welsh man paying
yearly scot shall be valued at 120 shillings, his Son at an 100, a Servant
sometimes 60, sometimes 50 shillings; a Welchman shall buy off a whipping for
12. a Welchman possessing five hydes of Land is to be valued at 600 shillings.

Of one that has lost his Freedom.
If any English man that has lost his Freedom afterward steal, he shall be
hanged on the Gallows, and no recompense made to his Lord; if any one kill such
a man, he shall make no recompense on that account to his friend, unless he
redeem him within a twelve month.

Of Buyers in the Land.
If a Buyer buy any thing among the people he shall have witness of it, for if
any Alias, (...)
thing stolen shall be found with him that he bought not with sufficient
testimony, he shall purge himself by oath according to the value of the thing,
that he neither stole it, or was privy to the stealing of it, otherwise he
shall pay 36 shillings.

Of an Infant exposed.
For the breeding up of an Infant exposed, the first year shall be given 6
shillings, the second year 12, the third year 30, afterward according to his
worth.

Of the apprehendidg of Thieves.
He that apprehends a Thief shall have 10 shillings, and the King the Thief,
and his Relations shall give their Oath not to rescue him; But if the Thief
shall obstinately resist or fly for it, he shall be counted guilty of the
fact; but if he will free himself, he may do it according to the proportion of
the value of the thing, and the greatness of the penalty.

Of him that has Children in private.
He that has Children in private, and concealeth them, if they are killed,
shall not have the value of their heads, but it shall go to his Lord or the
King.

Of him that lends Weapons.
He that lends a Sword to another man's Servant, and he kill himself, he
shall pay the third part of the value of him; if he lend a Spear, he shall pay
half; but if an Horse, he shall pay to a penny what the Servant's head was
valued at.

Of him that shall entertain a Runagate.
If a Boor shall be accused to have given food to a Runaway, he shall purge
himself of it according to the value of his own head, which if he cannot, then
he shall pay the value of his own and the Fugitive's head.

Of him that shall buy a Woman.
If any one buy a Woman, and performs not the bargain, he shall give the money
it self, and pay as much more, and nevertheless suffer such penalties as if he
had violated his security.

Of a Boor that possesses Land.
A Welsh man that holds a whole hyde of Land shall be valued at 120 shillings
his head; if he has but half a hyde, at 80, if none at all 60.

Of a Welsh man the King's Querry.
If a Welsh man the King's Querry is able to carry a Message, the value of his
head shall be 200 shillings.

Of Manslaughter.
If any one shall be present at Manslaughter, he shall purge himself according
to the estimation of his own head, or the head of him that is slain, and if the
valuation of his head be 200 shillings, he shall pay 50 shillings; the same Law
shall be to them of the Nobility.

Of a Robber slain.
He that kills a Robber shall depose by oath that he slew him as a thief,
flying, and shall evidence it to his friends by the oaths of men, not
housekeepers; but if he conceal the fact, and it be afterward found out, he
shall pay the valuation of the dead party.

If any one be arraigned for other men's goods, and shall deny the possession of
them by an oath beforehand taken, and shall not fear again to swear to it, let
him give oath according to the greatness of the penalty and the value of the
things. But if he refuse such an Oath, let him suffer the double penalty of
perjury.

Of him that shall suffer a Thief to escape.
If any one apprehend a Thief, or have him in custody, and suffer him to escape
or conceal his theft, he shall pay the price of his head: If it be a Noble man,
he shall lose his Lieutenantship or Shreivalty, unless the King pardon him.

Of a Boor accused.
If a Boor often accused of theft, shall by selling or any other way be
discovered, his hand or foot shall be cut off.

Of Children begot in lawful marriage.
A husband, after he has begotten Children of his wife, dying, the mother
shall have the Children to breed up, and six shillings for their maintenance;
in the summer a Cow, and in the winter an Ox, but the next of kin shall keep
the Firstlings of the Cattle till the Children come to age.

Of him that shall depart from his Master without leave.
He that shall depart from his Master without leave, and put himself into
another Service, shall return from whence he fled, and pay his Master 60
shillings.

Of a Boor's field adjoining to his house.
The field of a Boor adjoining to his house shall winter and summer be fenced,
if it be unfenced and lie open to his Neighbor's Cattle, the Boor shall demand
no satisfaction for trespass, but he shall drive the Cattle out, and sustain
the loss alone.

Of denying Security.
It is lawful for any one to refuse Security, if he wot that he rightly does.

Of a Boor's Pasture ground.
If a field of Common pasture or any other Land be possessed by many, and some
of them fence about their proper parts, and the rest neglect theirs, so that
the enclosed parcel be eat up with Cattle breaking in, they shall pay the
damage whose ground lay open, and the Masters of the Cattle shall make
satisfaction according to right and equity. But if it be a great Beast that
throws down the hedge, and will forceably break in at any place, and the owner
cannot or will not keep it in, then he that finds it in his ground may kill it,
and the Master shall have the flesh, but lose every thing beside.

Of fire set to a Wood.
If any one shall set fire to a Tree in a wood, he shall pay the whole penalty
of a thief, and 60 shillings besides; for Fire is a secret thief. He that is
convicted to have cut many Trees in a Wood, for the three first Trees shall pay
30 shillings apiece, and no greater penalty for any number whatsoever; for the
Ax with its noise betrays the fact, and it cannot easily be concealed.

He that shall be convicted to have felled a Tree, whose branches would have
given shelter to 30 Hogs, shall pay 600 shillings damage.

The yearly Clothing of a Family.
Gafol for a house shall be valued at six pence.

Of the breach of Peace in a Town or Borough.
The penalty of the Breach of Peace in a Borough belonging to the King or
Bishop, shall be 120 shillings; In the Town of a Noble man 80 shillings, in the
Town of the King's Minister 60; and in the Town of any Boor that is a keeper of
the peace, and possesses land, 35 shillings: the like measure shall be for the
purgation of the fault.

Of the Accusation of Theft.
If it be laid to the charge of any, that he either stole, or received stolen
goods, he shall free himself from the fault according to the estimation of 60
hides, if he be worthy to swear. An English man accused of theft shall purge
himself with a double number, and a Welsh man shall be obliged to no more.
Besides, it is lawful for any to purg himself by oath concerning the admission
of thieves, or the estimation of a slain party, if he can and dare.

Of the Booty of Thieves intercepted.
If at any time stolen goods be intercepted, none of servile condition shall be
admitted to the cause.

Of one that has lost his Freedom.
If any one for a Crime being lately adjudged to servitude, shall be accused of
theft done whilst he was free, it is lawful for the Accuser to beat him once
with stripes, and according to the value of the thing stolen away he may be
forced to the Whipping-post.

Of Acorns or Mast of Oak eaten without the leave of the Lord.
If any one shall find Hogs in his Wood, eating of his Mast without leave
granted to the Owner, he shall agree at first for 6 s. and if this was the
first time of their entrance, the Owner shall pay one shilling damage, and
besides according to the value of the Hogs shall make oath they came not Alias,
(...).
oftener. But if it appear they broke in at other times, then he shall pay two
shillings. He that takes Hogs to fatten in his Wood, of such as shall be three
fingers deep in fat, he shall have every third Hog, of those that are two
fingers deep every fourth, and those that are an inch deep every fifth.

Of the Petition of a Boor that is a keeper of the Peace.
A Boor that is keeper of the Peace, if he desire any thing from the King or a
Senator, in favor of his own family, or the Lord in favor of his Servant or
Freeman, he shall not obtain any abatement of penalty, because he did not duly
punish the offenders at home.

Of a Boor that is keeper of the Peace, and refuses his Military service.
A Boor that is a keeper of the Peace, and possesses land, if at any time he
refuse to serve the King in his Wars, he shall forfeit his lands and pay 30 s.
if he has no lands he shall pay 60 shillings, a common Boor 30 shillings.

Of secret Villainies.
Whosoever shall be accused of secret Villainies, shall purge himself after the
rate of Alias, (...).
120 hides of Land, or shall pay as many shillings.

Of the finding of a stolen Man.
If another man's Servant be privily stolen away, and found with a stranger,
and the party be dead from whom the stranger bought him, he shall go to the
Tomb of the dead party, and there make oath that he bought him of him, and so
he shall be free from all penalty, and the Servant shall return to his former
Master. The same law shall be for all other things stolen; but if he be certain
that they were the goods of the dead party, he may go to law with him for them,
unless the other will make oath that they never were the goods of the deceased.

Of him who is accused to have bore Mortal enmity.
If one be accused to have bore mortal hatred to any, and upon that account the
valuation of the dead party be required of him, and he by oath averreth that he
gave him not his deaths wound, he shall take the oath called the Royal Oath to
the estimation of 30 hides, joining to himself other Boors, keepers of the
Peace, or of the common sort. But if he be found guilty of the fault, yet it is
free for him to give any of his Companions for a gift a Sword and Breastplate,
although he be not able to pay the estimation. A Welchman having forfeited his
Liberty, let him purge himself after the rate of 12 hides; an Englishman 34.

Of the price of an Ewe.
An Ewe with its young before the fourteenth day after Easter shall not be sold
for more than one shilling.

If a man buy any thing that is unsound, and find it out before 30 days, it
shall be taken again, unless the Seller make oath that he knew not of the fault
before he sold it.

Of the Husband that shall Rob.
A married man stealing any thing, and hiding it in a secret place, after
conviction shall be held guilty of the theft, but his wife not, for she was
bound to obey her husband as her Superior. But if the wife dare by oath depose,
that she did not participate of the Booty, she shall be rewarded with the third
part of the things.

Of Oxen.
He that breaks an Oxes horn shall pay ten pence, a Cows horn two pence.

He that shall cut off an Oxes tail shall pay four pence, a Cows five pence.

He that shall put out an Oxes eye shall pay five pence, a Cows one shilling.

Of yearly Barley every Season shall be given 6 pound, etc. Here wants
something.

Of a yoke of Oxen borrowed.
If a Boor shall hire a yoke of Oxen, and has Corn enough, he shall pay the
whole hire with Corn; but if he want sufficient Corn, he shall pay half in
Corn, and half in other goods.

Of Church Dues.
Every one shall pay his Church-dues at that place where he resided in the
midst of winter.

Of him of whom Pledge is required.
If at any time a Pledge is required of a person accused, and he has not to lay
down in pledge before his cause is heard, and another will lay down pledge for
him, upon condition that the other may be in his custody till he receives his
goods laid down for him, and the second time the accused be forced to give
Pledge, and the party that first engaged will not again be security, and so his
cause fall, it shall not be restored to the Surety what he laid down in the
first cause.

Of the departure of a Boor, keeper of the Peace.
A Boor that is keeper of the Peace, if he leaves his house and goes to another
place to dwell in, he shall have power to carry with him his Overseer, his
Smith, and a Nurse.

Of them who possess Lands.
He that possesses 20 hides of land, and is going to another place, shall
leave behind him 12 hides ready sown; he that holds 10 shall sow six hides;
he that has 3 hides and is a departing, shall leave half an one sown.

If any one has hired Roods of land of the Lord, and has plowed them, and the
Lord not content with the rent and service, requires more work and duty than
was bargained for, the Tenant shall not be bound to hold on those conditions
unless the Lord give him an House, neither shall he be prohibited plowing.

Of a Boor keeper of the Peace banished.
If a Boor keeper of the Peace shall be Alias, (...)
banished for any misdemeanour, his house shall not be a refuge for him.

Of Wool.
A sheep shall not be sheared until Midsummer, or the Fleece shall be redeemed
with two pence.

Of the estimation of Men.
Out of the estimation of the head of a Man that whilst he lived is valued at
200 s. there shall be subtracted 30 s. to recompense his death to the Lord;
out of the estimation of the head of a Man valued at 600 s. 80 shall be
subtracted; out of the estimation of the head valued at 1200 shillings, an
hundred and twenty shillings shall be subtracted.

Of Maintenance to be allowed.
Out of 10 hides of land for maintenance shall be given 10 fats of Honey, 300
loaves, 12 gallons of Welch-Ale, 30 gallons of small Ale, 2 grown Oxen, or 10
Weathers, 10 Geese, 20 Hens, 10 Cheeses, 1 gallon of Butter, 5 Salmons, 20
pound of Fodder, and an hundred Eeles.

Of estimation by the head.
If any one be required to pay to the valuation of his head, and being about to
swear, confesses what in words before he denied, nothing shall be demanded of
him for penalty before he pay the whole value of his head.

Of a Robber that has been Amerced the price of his head, and is taken.
A Robber having been punished the price of his head, and taken, if he escape
the same day, the entire penalty shall not be again required if he was taken
about night; but if theft was committed before the foregoing night, they shall
pay who took him before, as they can agree with the King or his Justices.

Of a Welsh Servant killing a free English man.
If a Welsh Servant shall kill an English man, his Master shall deliver him
into the hands of the Lord, or the dead man's Relations, or redeem him with 60
s. But if he will not part with money, let him free his Servant, and let the
friends of the slain sue for the value of his life: If the freed Servant has
friends that will uphold his cause, if not, let him look to himself. It is not
required of a Freeman to pay with Servants (unless he will redeem with a price
the penalty of Capital enmity) nor for a Servant to pay with Freemen.

Of things stolen and found with another.
Goods stolen and found with another, if if he that vents them being called to
an account, will not take upon him the goods, or the sale of them, and yet
confesses that he sold some other goods to the party, then it is the part of
the Buyer to confirm by oath, that he sold those very goods, and no other.

Of the death of a Godfather or God-son.
If any one kill a God-son or his Godfather, let him pay the same to the
Relations as he does to the Lord, to satisfy for his death, and his payment
for the proportion of the value of the slain is to be more or less according as
if payment were to be made to a Lord for his Servant. But if the dead party the
King received at the Font, let satisfaction be made to him as well as to the
Relations: But if his life was taken away by a Relation, substraction must be
made of the money to be paid to the Godfather, as it uses to be done, when
money is paid to the Master for the death of his Servant. If a Bishop's Son be
killed, let the penalty be half.

BUt this King INA is more especially celebrated by the Monkish Writers of
those times, for a great favourer of a Monastic life, and a supporter of its
Interest, as well by his own profession of the same, as by large Revenues and
great Privileges granted to its maintenance and honor. But the chief of all
his works was his stately Church at Glastenbury, a place so renowned for its
ancient Sanctity, as being the first Seat of Christianity in this Island; that
our Ancestors called it, The first Land of God. The first Land of Saints in
Britain. The beginning and foundation of all Religion in Britain. The Tomb of
Saints. The Mother of Saints. The Church founded and built by the Lord's
Disciples. In the first planting of Faith in this Island there had been built,
as has been shown in the foregoing History, by Joseph of Arimathea, Philip, or
some of their Disciples, a little Cell or Chapel for the exercise of Religion
by those Primitive Apostles. This being by this time decayed, was afterward
repaired, or rather a new one built in the same ground by Devi Bishop of St.
David's, which also exposed to ruin, was again kept up at the cost and charges
of twelve Men coming from the North.

But now NIA having well settled his Kingdom, demolished that ruinous building,
and in the room of it erected a most stately and magnificent Church, dedicating
it to CHRIST and his two Apostles, Peter and Paul, guilding it throughout with
gold and silver after a most sumptuous manner. Upon the highest coping thereof
he caused to be written in large Characters and golden Letters these Verses.

Syderei montes speciosa cacumina Sion,
A Libano geminae flore comante Cedri;
Caelorum portae lati duo lumina mundi,
Ore tonat Paulus, fulgurat arce Petrus:
Inter Apostolicas radianti luce coronas,
Doctior hic monitis, celstor ille gradu,
Corda per hunc hominum reserantur, and aftr a per illum:
Quos docet iste stylo, suscipit ille polo.
Pandit iter coeli hic dogmate, clavibus alter,
Est via cui Paulus, janua fida Petrus.
Hic Petra firma manens, ille Architectus habetur,
Surgit in his Templum quo placet ira Deo.
Anglia plaude lubens, mittit tibi Roma salutem,
Fulgor Apostolicus Glasconiam irradiat.
A sacie hostili duo propugnacula surgunt,
Quod fidei turres Vrbs caput orbis habet.
Haec pius egregio Rex INA refertus amore
Dona suo populo non moritura a dedit.
Totus in affectu divae pietatis inhaerens,
Ecclesiaeque juges amplificavit opes.
Melchi-sedech noster merito Rex, atque Sacerdos
Complevit verae relligionis opus.
Publica Jura regens, and celsa palatia servans,
Vnica Pontificum gloria, norma fuit.
Hinc abiens, illinc meritorum fulget honor,
Hic quoque gestorum laud perennis erit.
Sion, whose losty Turrets reach the sky,
Two fair and blooming Cedars bear on high;
The World's great Lights, Two mighty Thunderers,
Paul from his mouth, and Peter from his Towers.
Amidst th'Apostle's glorious Circle, he
Excels in Doctrine, This in high Degree.
The one unlocks the Heart, The other Heaven,
And lets those in who there by Paul are driven.
Paul is the Way, and Peter is the Door,
Who ope's what t'other's Doctrine did before:
This is the Rock, but he the Builder is,
To both of these, Temples and Altars rise.
England rejoice, Thee mighty Rome does greet,
The Apostles Light in Glascon now does meet.
The same two Towers are raised against thy soes,
To whose Protection, Rome her safety owes.
These Blessings here for ever to endure,
INA did by his proper means procure.
INA, whose God-like Virtue constant is,
Whose daily bounty does the Church increase.
It Is He, this work did to perfection bring,
Our true Melchisedec, both Priest and King.
A righteous Prince who Public works redeems,
Of Priests, The Example, and the Glory seems.
Departing hence, his worth in Heaven does shine,
His Name on Earth this Temple shall enshrine.
He gave moreover to it a stately Altar, Chalice, Censer, Candlesticks, Basin,
Bucket, Images, and Plate for the Altar. The Gold belonging to it amounted to
three hundred thirty three pounds weight, and the silver to two thousand eight
hundred thirty five pounds weight, besides precious Jewels set upon the
celebrating Vestures.

Besides this, he granted large immunities and privileges to it, and exemption
Sr. Hen. Spelman's Coun. page 227.
from Episcopal Jurisdiction, as may be seen in his Charter of Donation yet
extant. He founded also a School at Rome for the breeding up of English Youth;
for the maintenance whereof, as likewise for other Charitable uses, he laid an
Imposition throughout his whole Realm, which was at first called the King's
Alms, afterward claimed by the name of Peter Pence. After which resigning his
Crown, he went to Rome and took upon him the habit of a Monk, in which not long
after he ended his days, after he had reigned thirty seven years. Ethelburga
his Queen, who by a stratagem not worth relating had brought her husband to
give-up his Crown, took upon her a Nuns Veil, and was afterward Abbess of
Barking near London, wherein she died.

ETHELARD.
ETHELARD, to whom Ina at his departure to Rome bequeathed the Kingdom, An. Dom
727.
was lineally descended in the fourth degree from Kenbald, elder Son of
Cuthwin, Son and Heir of Ceaulin third King of the West Saxons, though then in
his minority put by the Crown. In the beginning of his Reign he had a Contest
with one Oswald his kinsman, who pretended to the Right of succession; but the
controversy was soon decided by the interest and power of Ethelard, and Oswald
forced to quit his pretentions and Country to boot, leaving Ethelard in the
quiet possession of his Kingdom, which he governed peaceably without any
remarkable Action the space of fourteen years.

CUTHRED.
CUTHRED, a Prince of the same Lineage succeeded; His first beginnings An. Dom.
741.
were troublesome, having to deal with Edtlbald King of Mercia, a subtle and
powerful Enemy, who not only with open war invaded him, but secretly encouraged
Rebellion among his Subjects. But in the fourth year of this King's Reign they
came both to a conclusion of peace, and with joint forces set upon the Welsh,
and overthrew them with great slaughter.

Seven years after he was engaged in Civil wars with one of his Nobles, Adelm
or Ethelhun, a good Soldier, but upon what occasion seditious is not
mentioned. Huntington.
With him encountering in a set battle, he was almost overpowered, though far
exceeding in numbers, until Adelm receiving a wound, minded therewith of his
disloyalty slacked fight, and was at the same time vanquished and pardoned, and
in token of trust, two years after in the wars with Edilbald the Mercian he
received Commission from the King, who reposed much confidence in his Valor,
which he so well executed, that at Beorford, now Eurford in Shropshire,
Edilbald was put to flight with the discomfiture of his whole Army. Not long
after he fought a battle with the Welsh, of whom he obtained an easy Victory,
and the year following died, after he had Reigned fourteen years. His only Son
Kinric, a youth of a violent spirit, had been slain five years before his
Father's death in a Mutiny of the Army, as is said, for his too rigorous
discipline.

SIGIBERT.
SIGIBERT, no Issue being left of the former Prince, stepped into the Throne,
having neither Title nor desert; an insolent Tyrant at home, bold, and daring
An. Dom. 755.
in wickedness, but in the field soft and cowardly. Advised of his miscarriages
by Cumbrae one of his chief Captains and best Counselors, in recompense for
his good will he barbarously flew him; But not long after driven out of his
Kingdom by consent of People and Nobility, and flying into the wood Andredswald
to hide himself in obscurity, he was discovered at a place called Privetsfloud
by a Swineherd of Cumbrae, and known to be the King, was there slain by him in
revenge of his Master's death, after he had reigned scarce two years.

KINWULF.
KINWULF, after the death of Sigibert was with universal joy saluted King, An.
Dom. 756.
being of the Blood Royal of the West Saxons, and his Right unquestioned. The
first experiments of his Reign he made against the Welsh, whom in several
fights he often discomfited, but in his twenty fourth year in a battle fought
with Offa King of Mercia, at Benfington or Benton, he lost the day, and the
Town also for which they contended. Afterward governing ingloriously by the
space of seven years, he at last came to an unfortunate end, which was thus
occasioned.

In his latter days growing loose and amorous, and conscious of the want of
that Merit by which he formerly held secure, from Self-confidence he grew
jealous of his Power, and fearing that Kineard, Brother of Sigibert the former
King (a man of great Spirit, but who hitherto had behaved himself loyal) might
at last revenge his Brother's expulsion, or usurp after his death, he commanded
him to Banishment. Kineard seeming really to obey, yet intending nothing less,
with a small retinue privately hides himself in the neighboring Countries,
watching an opportunity of Revenge, which he wanted not long; For the King
resorting, as his custom was with a small Attendance, to a Ladies House of
Merton in Surry, whom he much admired, he went by night and beset the place.
Kinwulf first by persuasion from the windows sought to appease the Assailants,
but that not doing, he sallies out upon them, and making at Kineard wounds him
sorely, but overpowred with numbers, he is there fighting amongst them slain.

The noise of this great Accident soon came to Oseric and Wivert, two Earls,
who not far off waited the King's return, who with some other Attendants
hastening to the place, came up before Keneard could quite disengage himself
from them, who still fought in their Princes quarrels. At their first approach
Kineard stood upon his justification, excusing the deed by the injustice of his
Banishment, and promising great Rewards if they would acquiess in his
proceedings. But they upbraiding his Treason, and rejecting his proffers with
disdain, beset him round, who fighting in the midst of them, was there cut in
pieces with above an hundred of his Followers.

The Body of King Kinwulf was conveyed to Winchester, and there buried. He is
said to have founded the Cathedral Church of St. Andrews at Wells.

BIRTHRIC.
BIRTHRIC lineally descended from Cerdic first sounder of this Kingdom, An.
Dom. 787.
after the death of Kinwuls was advanced to the Crown, a Prince soft and easy,
he was joined to Ethelburga Daughter of Offa, the Mercian, a Lady of a haughty
and wicked spirit. By her persuasion, or the King's own jealousy, Egbert a
Prince of the Royal-Blood, whose Title was thought precedent to Birthric's, was
constrained to go into Exile, which he was the more willing to do, for that he
saw his life continually endangered by secret practices; At first he repaired
to the Court of Offa, the only Warrior in those days; but not safe with him,
who had given his Daughter to Birthric, he went over into France, and served
three years in the Wars under the victorious Emperor Charles the Great. The
banishment of this Prince proved the exercise of his Virtues, as if it had been
necessary that he who was to unite the English Nation, and rise higher than his
Ancestors, was first to be laid low in affliction, and run through many
hazards. And it is to be observed, that in the building up of any Nation so
high, the grandeur is generally performed by men who have undergon the greatest
difficulties, and been tried in the severest Fortunes, so that as truly may be
said, as to the person of Egbert, and the English Nation united by him, what
was spoke of the Roman, Tantae molis erat Anglorum condere gentem.

But after three years, Birthric being poisoned by a draught which Edelburga
had prepared for others, Egbert is by public voice recalled from banishment,
and with universal Joy created King. But a further account of his Actions, as
the first sole Monarch of England, I shall leave to be treated on in the second
part, if God lengthens my days, and this work be kindly received.

Edelburga fearing to be called to an account for what she had done, with as
much Treasure as she could get together, flies beyond Sea, and received by
Charles the Great is created Abbess; but afterward detected of Unchastity is
driven from her Charge, and wandering about the World unpitied, dies at last in
extreme poverty in Pavia in Italy.

Elenchus Capitum.
THE description of the Renowned Island of Britain in general, page 1 The
Languages in Britain, 4 The first Inhabitants of Britain, 7 The Map of the Old
World, showing the Progress of the Cimbri, Phoenicians and Greeks into Britain,
16 The Explication of that Map, showing the ancient Names of Kingdoms, Islands,
Havens, Cities, etc. as well those expressed in the foregoing Map, as others,
which in that narrow compass could not be set down, gathered out of the
Phoenician tongues all which to prove the ancient Name of Britain, 17 Places
which took their Names from Gods, or some sacred Rites eminently practiced in
them, 22 All ancient Cities in Spain taking their Names from Baal, 23 Places
taking their ancient Names from the Habits, Nature, Manners and Arts of the
Inhabitants, 23 Whether the first Planters of this Island came by Sea or Land?
and, whether Britain was ever part of the Continent? 25 The depths of the
North-Sea from the Foreland, 34 When Britain was first known to the
Phoenicians, and how it took its Name from them, 38 That the Islands of Scilly
were the Cassiderides of the Ancients, 40 The time when the Phoenicians came
from Tire and Zidon, their own Native Country, to discover Britain, 47 Names of
Offices and Gods in Britain and Gaul, of Phoenician derivation, 68 The
Antiquity and Original of the Phoenicians, 71 The Greeks in Britain, p. 74 The
Landing place of the Graecians, 81 The Antiquity and Original of the Greeks, 91
The Customs and Manners of the Britains, their Laws and Government, 99 A
Sculpture of a Druid Priest in Britain, 101 A Sculpture of the Wicker-Image,
representing the manner of burning of Men alive in sacrifice, in Britain, 105
The Sculpture of an Ancient Britain, representing the Habits of the People in
those times, 117 The Custom of the Britains in their Wars, and their manner of
fighting, 119 The Sculpture of their Chariots in war, representing the manner
of their fighting against the Romans, 122 The British Idolatry, their several
Gods, and superstitious Rites and Ceremonies of worship, 125 The Sculpture of
Hesus, alias Mars. showing another manner of the British Sacrifice, 128 A
Sculpture of the Hieroglyphics, shewthe Worship of the Britains, 130 The
Sculpture of the Phoenician OGMIUS, and the first Phoenician that discovered
this Island after it was planted by the Cimbri of Germany, 139 The Life of the
Phoenician Hercules, called by the Britains OGMIUS, 141 The Kings of this
Island from Samothes to Brute, 145 The British Kings from Brute to the Romans,
146 The Chronicle of the Celtick Kings ruling this Island, 147 The Chronicle of
the British Kings, with the History of Brute, 153 Observations upon Brute's
History, p. 158 The Chronicle from King Silvius, who descended from the Kings
of Alba, 167 The Genealogy of King Silvius, 169 The Names of the Roman
Emperors, who governed this Island from Julius Caesar to the entrance of the
Saxons, 183 The Sculpture of Julius Caesar, 184 The first Invasion of Julius
Caesar, 185 The British History relating to the first Invasion by Julius
Caesar, 193 Julius Caesar's second expedition into Britain, 194 The Life of
Julius Caesar, 200 The British History relating to the second expedition of
Julius Caesar, 201 The first Inter-Regnum of the Roman's of thirteen years, 202
The second Inter-Regnum of seven years, and the third Inter-Regnum of four
years, follow in the course of the History. The Sculpture of Drusus Claudius
Caesar, the second Roman in Britain, 205 Drusus Claudius Caesar's Invasion of
Britain out of the Roman Histories, 207 The British History concerning the
expedition of Claudius, 211 The Sculpture of the first Christian Church of the
Britains, 213 Observations upon that Christian Church, 214 The Continuation of
the Roman History under D. Claudius Caesar, by his Lieutenants, 215 The
Sculpture representing the manner how the Romans used sometimes to take Forts,
219 The Life of D. Claud, Caesar, 221 Nero, ibid. The Sculpture of Queen
Boadicia, 227 The Life of Nero, 231 Galba, 232 Otho, 233 Vitellius, 234
Vespatianus, 235 The British History, 238 The Continuation of the Roman History
beginning with Titus Vespatian, 239 Domitian, 241 Galcacus's Speech to his
Soldiers before battle, 243 Agricola's Speech to his Army before battle, 244
Nerva, 250 Trajan, ibid. Hadrian, 253 The Continuation of the British History,
from Vespatian's days to the fourteenth year of Hadrian, 255 The Roman
History, p. 527 Antonius Pins, 258 Marcus Aurelianus, 259 Commodus Antoninus,
260 The British History out of Bid, 261 Observations upon the Epistle of Pope
Elutherius to King Lucius, 263 The succession of Bishops in the Sea of London,
264 What the Flamens and Archflamens were, and their being changed into Bishops
and Archbishops, 264 Concerning the Flamens and Archflamens of the Gentiles,
and the limits of their Jurisdiction after they were changed into Bishops and
Archbishops, 265 The Continuation of the Roman History under the Emperor
Commodus, as it relates to this Island, 269 The Oration of Clodius Albinus
Lieutenant of Britain, 270 Helvius Pertinax, 275 Aurelius Commodus Severus to
the Praefects Greeting, 275 Didius Julianus, 276 Septimius Severus, ibid.
Severus's Wall, 279 The manner of the Romans Deifying their Princes, 283 The
British account of the Wars of Severus in this Island, 287 Bass. Caracalla
Anto. and his Brother Septimius Geta, 288 The British History, 289 Opilius
Macrinus, 290 Anton. Heliogabulus, 291 Alexander Severus, 292 Jul. Maximianus,
293 Pupienus Maximus, and 294 Clodius Albinus, 294 M. Anton. Gordianus, 294 M.
Jul. Philippus, 295 Gn. Messius Quintus Trajan Decius, 296 Trebonianus Gallus,
296 Publius Licinius Valerianus, 297 Pub. Licinius Galienus, 297 Marcus
Aurelius Flavius Claudius, 298 The British Writers concerning Claudius, 299 L.
Domitius Aurel. Valor. Aurelianus, 301 M. Claudius Tacitus, ibid M. Aurelius
Valor. Probus, 302 M. Aurelius Carus, Carinus, his Sons and Caesar's.
Numerianus, 303 C. Aurel. Valor. Dioclesianus Jovius, and 303 M. Aurel. Valor.
Maximianus, 303 The Panegyric Oration ascribed to Mamertinus in praise of the
Emperors, Dioclesian and Maximian, Entitled only to Maximian, p. 306
Observations out of the foregoing Panegyric, 311 The British History in the
days of Dioclesian and Maximian, 314 Fl. Val. Constantius Chlorus, 315
Constantine the Great, 317 The British History in the days of Constantine the
Great, 320 Constantinus Jun. 321 Constans, 322 Flav. Val. Constantius, 323 The
British History in the days of Constantius, 325 Flav. Claud. Jul. Apostata,
326 Flavius Jovianus, ibid. Flavius Valentinianus, 327 Flav. Gratianus, and 331
Flav. Valentinianus, 331 The British account of Maximus', and the state of
affairs in his days, 333 Flav. Theodosius, 334 Honorius, 335 The British
History in the days of Honorius uuto Vortigern, who brought in the Saxons, 341
The Affairs of Britain, from the decay of the Roman State to the entrance of
the Saxons, 343 The Antiquity and Original of the Romans, 353 With the
distinction and division of the People, 354 Of their Civil Governments, 357 Of
their Religion, and some of their Gods, and manner of worship, 364 Of their
four kinds of Sooth-saying, 366 Their Order of Sacrificing, 372 Of their
Religious places of worship, 373 Of their Military discipline, 375 Of their
manner of Encamping, 379 Of their Habits, both Men and Women, 383, 386 A
Catalogue of the British Kings in the days of the Saxons, 388 The History of
the British Kings in the days of the Saxons, 389 A Treatise of the ancient
Monument called Stone-Henge, 395 The Continuation of the British Kings in the
days of the Saxons, p. 403 The Antiquity and Original of the Saxons in
Britain, 411 First of the Saxons, 412 The next are the Angles, 414 The last are
the Jutes, 417 That the Saxons were the same with the Getes, and a branch of
the Cimbri, proved by the Language, Customs, etc. of both Nations 419 Of
Tuisco, that he is vainly supposed the Founder of the German Nation, and
Conductour of our Ancestors: Of the Progress of the Getes under diverse Princes,
Ericus, Woden, and others, 424 The Saxon Catalogue of Kings from Noah, with the
Scripture Catalogue as far as it goes, 427 Of Prince Woden, 435 The Sculpture
representing the Temple of Thor, with whom is placed Woden and Frigga, 445 The
Sculpture of Rugiivith, Porevith, Porenuth, and Swantovite, 455 The Heptarchy
of the Saxons in Britain, 469 The Catalogue of the Kings of Kent, 470 Hengist,
the first Saxon King of Kent, 471 Oeric, Octa, Ermiric, Ethelbert, 475 The
British Epistles of Gregory the Great, for the Conversion of the Saxons, 479
Gregory to Bishop Etherius, 480 Gregory to Candidus the Priest, going to the
Patrimony of Gaul, ibid. Gregory to Palladius Bishop of Xanton, to Pelagius of
Tours, and to Serenus of Marseilles, fellow-Bishops of Gaul, 481 Gregory to
Virgilius Bishop of Arles, and Metropolitan of Gaul, 481 Gregory to Desiderius
of Vienna, and Syagrius of Augustodunum, fellow-Bishop of Gaul, 482 Gregory to
Arigius, a Noble man of Gaul, ibid. Gregory to Theoderick and Theodebert, Kings
of the Franks, concerning Augustine Servant of God, sent to the English Nation,
483 Gregory to Brunichild Queen of the Franks, of the Conversion of the
English, and of Augustine, ibid. Gregory to Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria, he
treats of the Conversion of the English, and makes mention that in the Council
of Calcedon the Roman Bishop was styled Universal, p. 484 Observations upon
that Epistle, 486 Gregory to Menna of Tolouse, to Serenus of Marseilles, to
Lupus of Cavation, to Agilius of Men's, to Simplicius of Paris, to Malantius of
Roan, and to Licinius Fellow-Bishops, 486 Gregory to Clotharius King of the
Franks, 487 Gregory to Brunichild Queen of the Franks, 487 Gregory to Augustine
Bishop of the English, wherein he treats of the Conversion of the Nation, and
that he should not glory in the power of Miracles, which oftentimes wicked men
have performed, 488 Observations upon that Epistle, 491 Gregory to Aldiberga
Queen of the English, 491 Observations upon that Epistle, 493 Gregory to
Aldibert King of the English, wherein he congratulates with him concerning the
Conversion of the Nation, 493 Gregory to Virgilius Bishop of Arles, he commends
to him Bishop Augustine, 495 Gregory to Melitus Abbot in France, wherein he
gives command to be sent to Augustine about the Conversion of that Nation, 495
Gregory to Augustine Bishop of the English, of the use of the Pall, and of the
Church of London, 496 The Life of S. Augustine first Archbishop of Canterbury,
498 Augustine is courteously received at his Arrival into England, by Ethelbert
King of Kent, 500 The Answers of Gregory the Great to the Questions sent by
Augustine for the better Government of the new erected Church of
English-Saxons, 502 A Synod called by Augustine the first Archbishop, by the
Assistance of Ethelbert King of Kent, to Augustine's Ac, etc. There being
present the Roman Clergy, seven Bishops, many British Doctors. First, he
demands Obedience to the Roman Church, and that the Britains be conformable to
the Romans in three things, first, in the Celebration of Easter, Secondly, in
the Administration of Baptism. Thirdly, in preaching with him to the
English-Saxons, 509 The Answer of the Abbot of Bangor to Augustine the Monk,
requiring subjection to the Church of Rome, p. 511 Of the famous Monastery of
Bangor, and the Conference held between Augustine and Dinoth Abbot of that
place, 513 Eadbald, 515 The Epistle of Boniface V. to Justus late Bishop of
Rochester, now Successor of Melitus in the Archbishopric of Canterbury, 515
Ercombert, 516 Egbert, ibid. Lothair, 517 Edric, ib. Wigtred, ib. Edbert, 519
Ethelbert the Second, ibid. Alric, ib. Ethelbert the Third, ib. Cuthred, ib.
Baldred, ib. The Kingdom of the East Saxons, 521 Sledda, ibid. Sebert, 522
Sered, Seward, Sigibert, ib. Segibert the First, 523 Segibert the Second, ib.
Swythelme, 524 Sighere, ib. Offa, ib. Selred, 525 Suthred, ib. The Kingdom of
the South Saxons, 527 Ella, ib. Cissa, 528 Edilwalch, 529 The Conversion of the
South Saxons by Wilfrid Archbishop of York, ib. The Conversion of the
Inhabitants of Wight, 530 The Kingdom of Northumberland, 533 Ida, ibid. Ella,
534 Ethelric, ib. Edelfrid, ib. Edwin, 535 Bishop Honorius to Edwin King of the
English, 537 Osric, 538 Eanfrith, ib. Oswy, 540 The Synod of Streanshalch, now
Whitby, at the request of Hilda Abbess of that place, under Oswy the Father and
Alchfrid the Son, Kings of Northumberland, in the year of Christ 664; In which
is Controverted the Celebration of Easter, and other Ecclesiastical Rites, 541
(...), Osred, p. 545 (...), Ceolnulf, Egbert, Oswulf, (...), 546 (...),
Ethelred, Elfwald, Osred, Ethelred, 547 The Kingdom of the East Angles, 548
Usfa, Titulus, 549 Redwald, Earpenwald, Sigebert, 550 Egric, Anna, Ethelherd,
Edelwald, Aldulf, Elfwold, 551 Beorn, Ethelred, Egilbert, 552 The Kingdom of
Mercia, 553 Crida, Wibba, Georl, Penda, Peada, 555 Wulfer, Ethelred, Kenred,
556 Kelred, Ethelbald, Beornred, 557 Offa, 558 Egfrid, Kenwolf, Kenelm, 559 The
Kingdom of the West Saxons, 560 Cerdic, 561 Kenric, Ceaulin, 563 Cearlic,
Ceowolf, Kingils, 564 The Conversion of the West Saxons 565 Kenwalch, 566
Eskwin, Ketwin, Ceadwalla, 567 Ina, 568 The Laws of King INA. 569 Ethelard,
Cuthred, 580 Sigibert, Kinwulf, 581 Birthric, 582
FINIS.

