Three Tracts Of the Great Medicine OF PHILOSOPHERS FOR Humane and Metalline
BODIES.

I. Entitled, Ars Metallorum Metamorphoseos. II. Brevis Manuductio ad Rubinum
Coelestem. III. Fons Chymicae Philosophiae.
All Written in Latin By EIRENAEVS PHILALETHES Cosmopolita.

Translated into English for the Benefit of the Studious By a Lover of Art and
Them.

LONDON, Printed and sold by T. Soul, at the Crooked-Billet in Holy-well-Lane
Shoreditch, Anno 1694.

THE Publishers Preface To the READER.
Reader,
BEing Conversant for many Years with Writings of this kind, and also with not
a few Persons in pursuit of the Mastery, who together with me have not only
read the true and false Books with equal Credit, (by which thou may judge of
the Event in practice) but also have embraced the Notions or Practice of
confident Affirmers with suitable Credit to the hopes of Attaining.

This Labyrinth having no more possession of me, and the Theory of Principles
so far prevailing as to Enable me to make choice of Authors and Persons to
converse with, can do no less then contribute as much as in me lies to the help
of those Ingenuous Searchers under the same Difficulty. In order to effect this
I have already communicated a short but candid Tract not long since, which was
communicated to me by my very good Friend, as may be seen in his Kind Letter,
in which it was enclosed and Printed with it, called PHILADELPHIA; which I
think in no ways falls short of the Title. This I thought might have terminated
my Care of that kind, contenting my self that every one, tho perhaps more
capable, had not born a Proportion; but receiving this second Kindness from my
Friend, wherein he freely communicates his Thoughts according to his promise
and my Request; which I persuaded my self could not but prove of advantage to
the Searchers of Art, especially in their Beginnings. And let it not be an
Objection, that he does not assume the Title of a Possessor, but rather an
Argument of his Sincerity, since I believe it possible that something may be
gained from such early thoughts, which more ripe Experience denies. I meet with
confirmation in this from a great Master, Viz. Eirenaeus Philalethes, in his
Preface to his Expositions on Ripleys Compound of Alchymy. Where Speaking of
the Benefit he had Received from Authors, has this expression; some in good
sooth, who are not professors of this Secret, Write more Edifyingly to the
informing of a Tiro, then those whom Skill has made Crafty.

However least this should not be sufficient to recompense thy Expense I have
added three excellent Tracts which I received from the Hands of a Friend that
had taken some pains and care in their Translation from the Latin Copies
Printed in Holland; and I take this Opportunity the rather, because the first of
them is so highly Commended by my Friend. This is Entitled Ars Metallorum,
etc. Which indeed well Answers the End. Here the Studious may meet with help,
the Ignorant with Light and Information and Reproachers and Myso-Chymicks with
Demonstration beyond Dispute.

The Second Brevis Manuductio, etc. In which not only the field in which it
lies, and the Reason of its Epithet, but the means to attain it is also
shaddowed forth. And indeed there are some peculiar Hints that are not common.

The third Fons Chymicae, etc. As this Answers the Title so no doubt it will
the desire of Searchers. For as nothing is more needful, so nothing is more
earnestly sought then the true Fountain, Bath or Menstruum in which Sol is
Dissolved and amended.

Thus Reader having performed this in good will to the Studious give me leave
to withdraw, and spend my time more privately: And do thou endeavor to bear a
Proportion with me in communicating, rather then Carp; at what perhaps thou
cannot Imitate; However since I seek no Honor from thee I shall be safe from
the Contrary.

By Remaining, PHILOMATHES.

Esteemed Friend,
LYing under the Promise in my last (in which I sent Philadelphia) according to
thy earnest Request, that I would communicate my thoughts concerning the Secret
Art of Hermes, and finding that little Tract so Generously communicated to the
World, hastens the fulfilling it.

But in the first Place let me premise, that as these are my Thoughts and
Conceptions, let them merit no otherways then such, always preferring the
Writings of known Masters to all, and no farther then these agree with them,
and by them are Confirmed trust or embrace them.

Having observed in my Convers with those Studious in this Art, that not one
amongst many were possessed with so much as the Theory of the Possibility of
it, tho of many Years Consideration, it was a Motive to me to consider things
Radically, especially remembering the saying of Philosophers, 'that it was never
found of any by Chance. And in the first place the possibility of the thing,
whence I might be assured that it was, nor that only, but that it was
sufficient to recompense the Time, Cost and Labor necessary to it.

I therefore (after many Errors) betook my self to the most valued and candid
Authors treating of the Theory and Possibility of the thing, such as were
recommended by those certainly knowing; as Trevisans four Books, etc.
Sendivogius and many more, but one small Piece fell into my hands of greatest
value which I think fit to mention, it was Entitled, Ars Metallorum, etc.
Written by Eirenaeus Philalethes, this fully manifesting the possibility and
worth of the Art; in a Style not ambiguous but full of Learning and
Demonstration; which was confirmed by all but by none more then Philadelphia.

Thus prosecuting this effectually, I found it not very difficult to conceive
the possibility of such an Exaltation of imperfect Bodies to perfection; seeing
that no Essential Difference was between them but only accidental, and that all
had one and the same Matter, which is easily known to be Mercurial, and that
Natures Design or End was, if she could have worked free from Accidents, to
have brought all to perfection.

Therefore it will easily be granted and gathered from hence, that if a
plusquam perfection of Tincture endued with fixity and penetrability could be
attained of the same Nature these imperfect Bodies (so much of them as is
Mercurial says Philadelphia) might be influenced and Enobled to the Perfection
of Gold; whose perfection is the Standard. So that as much as any Body shall
exceed in Tincture this Standard, so much it is capable of communicating to
those short of it. Vide Philadelphia, etc.

So that we are not to think this Transmutation of Metals is a changing of one
Species into another (as those who conceive Metals differ after that Manner
object) neither any thing contrary to Nature; but only changing of the same
Aureous Matter from the state of Crudity to the state of Maturity, in natures
own way. I could give Examples in Nature of this, but seeing it is plentifully
shown by Masters of the Art themselves it ought to suffice.

And for the possibility of Multiplying this Tincture it is plentifully shown
by many (at which some Carp) neither is it hard to conceive since our
experience shows in common Ferments there is no end, as it were, of the power
of Ferment, as it comes to have reiterated Operations on suitable matters.

These Considerations Leads immediately, through an necessity, to abandon all
thoughts of Agents and Patients out of kind, or that are not Homogeneal to the
bodies to be mended, and one to another; this no small security to a young
Searcher against the many Pretenses and Practices of those who prosecute those
things blindly and Corruptly.

How this may be effected is indeed worth enquiry. Therefore let us consider
that next.

Nature being arrived at her End in the perfection of Gold the Standard, and
fallen short of it in imperfect Metals through Accidents, we to perfect them,
must go as near to Perfection as we can to begin, and as Philosophers say where
Nature left. If therefore we hope to move this Perfection to a plusquam
perfection, the Perfection must dye. Our great Care then must be to seek and
find such an Agent that is capable to effect it. Which appears to be, from all
candid Authors and reason it self an homogeneous Humid: Which does not only
Kill the Body but dies with it, and are both raised far more Noble and
Perfect, endued with a Multiplicative Power. Like as a Grain of Corn, when by
its own Humidity, in a proper Matrix, is thus Killed and Raised, it puts
forth many Grains, each endued with the same Multiplicative Virtue with the
first Seed, which may be Multiplied, as it were, Infinitely.

This Humidity, I very well know, is the desire of all true Searchers of Art;
who know by sad Experience how Difficultly it is obtained: But how difficult
soever it may be thought or found to be, it must be attained or we Labor
without Reward.

To reincrudate, necessarily requires a Crudity; and as this is to Dye, Rise
and Dwell with the Body reduced, must also through necessity be the same in
kind and only differ with respect to Crudity: Which then will naturally follow
to be that Crude out of which Perfect Gold is produced; according to all candid
Writers.

Philadelphia has Illustrated and Bernard Trevisan with others, has affirmed
that Mercury to Metals is like common Water to Vegetables, Viz. their Matter.
Therefore the Crudest Mercury must be the only Agent to reincrudate ripe
Mercurial Bodies.

I have observed a pretty Likeness between Mercury in Metallic Works, and
Water in Vegetables. For if I would produce a Vegetable it must be by Seed and
Water, if a Metal it must be by Mercury and its Ferment. If I would purify a
Vegetable Body) which is Water congealed) as Sugar, Salt, etc. which are
Capable of being mixed with extraneous Earth or Feces, I must dissolve it in
Water, which Water being of the Unity of its Matter possesses it and rejects
the Feces, which being evaporated leave the Body free from those impurities.
Just so in Refining Metals (which are Mercury Coagulated) we Dissolve them in a
sufficient quantity of Mercurial matter, (by Fusion) then evaporate the Crude
Mercurial Matter on a Test, etc. and the pure Metal remains behind. In this
Work of Refining Running Mercury is not chose or used but Corporeal; as in Luna
Saturn is Chose, and in Sol Antimony. Silver being less perfect, is purified by
Lead, less Crude; Gold most perfect is purified by Antimony most Crude. And as
Antimony is too Crude for Silver, so is Lead not Crude enough for Gold. From
hence may be Learned the Reason and Ground of the Refiners Art. And further to
manifest the difference in Maturity between Lead and Antimony, I have observed
in the union of them with other Metals this different effect. When in the
Reduction of Lead Oar, we add Iron, and what else may be requisite and a fusion
of both is made, the metal that resides is malleable. But if the like be done
with Antimony, we find, instead of that, a brittle Metalline Mass. The Reason
of adding Iron in such Works is from hence, the Mercuriality or Metalline part
in the Oar is held in Chains by the abundance of impure Sulphur, which
violently attracts to its self the Metallic Sulphur in the Iron, through which
Union, the Accidents in great measure are thrown off, and the Metal resides in
the Bottom. Also we see that when some ripe Metal is mixed with a greater
Quantity of Crudity or immature, the immature is blown off and the ripe
remains: But if the Crude too much exceed the ripe it will carry that also:
whence it is easy to err in Quantities, and degrees of Fire. For if a small
Quantity of Silver be mixed with a great Quantity of Antimony, and that hastily
blown off, how easily do this Crudity Conquer and carry off the Ripe Body. This
by the By.

But to return to that which is sooner spoke then done, viz. The Reduction of a
perfect Body by a Crude Agent; and as this is no doubt the End of our Labor,
so we shall find it attended with many Difficulties. First in finding the
Extremes; then in uniting them which must be through Mediums; and perhaps in
purification; for Crudity is generally attended with Impurity, and every
perfect Generation and Union requires purity in the Principles.

The Mediums of Union ought to be Adapted to the Nature of the Extremes, least
they should alinate rather then unite. Also Mediums imply middle Natures, that
are not so Crude as the one, nor so ripe as the other.

Now Astrologers say that Mer^^^^ (...) begin to move, least we Return without
Recompense.

I am not ignorant that the Practice is diversely conceived by Searchers as well
as Principles; for the Philosophers having spoken Allusively of both, we may
easily mistake. But I am obliged by the necessity of it to believe the
Principles were the same to all true Philosophers; Neither can I admit, for the
same Reason, of any other thoughts of their Operations. I remember a saying in
Ars Metallorum very confirming, where he speaks of the certainty of the Art
from Argument, and amongst others brings this as none of the least. This at
least is clear, that it is so far from being a new Device, that there have been
men skilful in it through many Series's of Ages, who being Different both in
Tongue and Nation, and very many of them Contemporary have written so
Agreeingly of the Art, that they cannot be proved by such as understand them
either to Corrupt or diversely to handle so much as one Operation.

This perhaps may seem strange at first, as it did to me being prepossessed
with a conceit of the contrary, viz. That their seeming Contradictions were
owing to their different Working on diverse Principles. But considering the
thing I found that he said not this alone, but that all admonish that we should
observe wherein they all agree and there was the truth. This admits that they
do all agree, and consequently the same Principles and Practice or it could not
be so. There fore resolving to make an Essay, I deeply weighed their sayings:
Prosecuted them one by one, Observed their Explication one of another, and at
length perceived a Harmony beyond compare, most secretly couched in their
Writings, yea in those I before thought most differing: Tho not indeed without
Tropes, Allegories and Figures are these things expressed; to conceal them from
the Vulgar.

In short therefore let us not, like the Alchymists of Sendivogius, propose to
accomplish the thing by Mercury alone or Sulphur alone, but let both be the
Subjects of our Contemplation and Practice. For if I conceive aright the matter
of this most secret Mastery is a Sulphurous Mercury, and the Stone it self
nothing else but that Coagulated; which then is a Mercurial Sulphureity
penetrating, tinging and fixing.

Admit of my short Conceptions, but believe, this is not obtained without the
Propitious Smiles of Diana (who parting from the Conjunction of the Sun appears
Horned, the Earth interposing) and Venus Orient who foreruns the Sun and
proclaims the joyful day approaching.

Excuse me with Friendship, that I thus presume to mention things so Secret,
since we have little else but such Shadows to Satiate our Longing Minds, till
the Sun arise and overcome the night of Moonshine as well as Darkness and all
the Clouds, and the Horizon wholly become Sol's then is the time to write
Adeptus.

Thus with hearty Wishes of Success accept this Cordial Communication of my
thoughts, and continue the Bond of Friendship inviolable as does thy
Well-Wishing and Hearty Friend,

PHILETAEROS.

TRACT The FIRST
The ART of the Transmutation OF METALLS.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Authority of the Art, its Professors, and the way of
searching out the Secret.
SEeing that all Men, of whatsoever kind and Fortune, do propose some Bounds to
themselves of their hours spent in searching out of things; to wit that they
may obtain the Skilfulness of that Art in which they are Conversant, and use
all Industry that they may come to the Perfection.

Notwithstanding this Fortune blesses very few, for although many Labor after
Architecture but few Archimedes's are found. Many however they adict themselves
to Physic, yet there are not many Paratelsas's, few endued with the Wit of
Helmont; nay if they can arrive to an Indifferency in their Art, they will not
think they have lost their Cost and Pains. Hence it comes to pass, that no one
can think he has studied in vain, though every Geometrician cannot be equal to
Archimedes, or Poet to Homer, or Rhetorician to Cicero. For that also
Rhetoricians of an inferior stamp, may (according to the Talent bestowed upon
them) profit the Commonwealth. Any men may I say, although something unskilful
in that Art in which they have been conversant, be thought useful in that
Commonwealth where they live.

But as many as do adict themselves to the Metamorphosis of Metals, do seem to
press after a very useful thing, at least not unwisely nor unprofitably. For
the top of this Art. is Artifice it self, which who has attained, has
acquired the Height, but he that has not proceeded hither, will carry back no
profit. For no thing but the Loss both of Money and time, comes from the Science
of Alchimy half Learned. Moreover he will expose himself both to be Laughed at,
and Disgraced by Myso-Chymicks. But the object of the Art is so Noble, that it
promises Infinite Riches to the Possessor, and moreover most perfect Health.
Hence it comes to pass, that there is hardly any Idiot, who after he has heard
never so little of the Art, does not presently Apply himself to the
Disquisition thereof, and presently puts on the Name of Chemist, and as soon as
he has Conceived any hopes, by reading some Receipts, he forthwith claims the
title of Philosopher. But least that he should seem to adore a foolish
Philosophy, every one according to the happiness of his own Genius, Excogitates
subtilties, and according to what ability he is of, builds Furnaces, gets him
Glasses, and sets upon the Work with a wonderful Solemnity. So he Lavisheth
away his Money, till it is too late, and very little, if any subsistence is
left. Least in the mean time he should be reproved of mad Rashness, he can talk
ye of the first Metallick-matter; the Rotation of the Elements, the Marriage of
Gabritius with Bega, and that in an Idiom commonly unknown, he shall cite ye
the Philosophers, and Expound them at his pleasure, and extremely comfort
himself with the hopes of his future Fortune. But in the mean while he endures
Labors in this Philosophy, even to a Consumption both of his Strength and
Money, until he has miserably practiced upon himself that Metamorphosis which
he sought on the Metals.

Which thing, when some captious Myso-Chymicks observe, and have seen the same
Event to happen to most, they laugh at the Art forthwith, as fabulous and
deride it. But they who have deceived themselves by their own rashness, do go
about to Entice others into the same way of Loss, and by their Devices and
feigned Receipts, do blurr Paper, that they may seem at least to have gained
some skill by the Loss of their Money. With which Sophistications, the world is
so full, that almost no studious Tiro of the Art, but is seduced by them. No
Despiser of Science, who may not take an occasion of Barking against it from
hence. So that as well the Art it self, as its Ingenious Professors, suffer
unworthily for the baseness of some Rascals, who although they are more stupid
then a Block in the Art. yet Write so as though they were truly Adepts, and do
freely devulge their Impostures so far, that the first Inextricable Labyrinth
to a young Chemist, is to distinguish between the true and false Books, from
which sophistical Deceivers, do build up no less specious an Edifice, then the
true Artists, nay for the most part they promise greater things. Concerning
these, Bernard Trevesan, (a man not unexperienced in the Cheat of this kind)
writes thus, "Unless (says he) thou avoid these as the Plague, thou milt never
taste any good in this Art. Therefore I have writ this Treatise, to Inform the
blind more fully in this Science, least wandering through Desert Places, they
miserably Rove. And first I have decreed to Vindicate the Art from Calumnies:
Nextly, I thought good to subjoyn the Qualifications of them who study this
Art: and lastly, I will describe the true manner of Inquiring: Which things
being premised instead of a Preface, I will presently betake my self to
Dilucidate the Art it self.

For that there are found many deceiving Sophisters Treating of Althimy, should
it be reproved either of falsity or folly. For that the Possibility of things
is to be weighed, by which, if the Truth of the Art can be disproved, let it
fall, If not, it is not only foolish, but unworthy a Philosopher to slander it.
For the baseness of men who handle this Art rashly, makes nothing to the
destroying it, for the Light of Nature is clearer, then to be obscured by those
Dark Fellows. Moreover I will Instruct the Sons of Learning, lest they should
be seduced by Errors, and it shall appear to these more evident then the Sun
that the Transmutation of Metals, is real, possible and true from the state of
Imperfection to Perfection, and that by the Cooperation of Nature and Art.
Seeing that no material or essential Difference is seen betwixt perfect and
Imperfect Metals, but only an accidental one, which consists in the
disproportion of Maturity. This alone being greater or lesser, does diversify
Metals in their Species's, unless that some superadventitious superfluities do
appear distinct among Metals, which being only dreggs, have no Correspondence
with the Matter, but being altogether Irreptitiously surrogated, not purified,
because of the Defect of Digestion, have remained mingled with the Indigested
pure. Hence the disference of metallic Forms. But if at any time these
superfluities shall be cast off, by the complete perfection of Digestion, then
the Metals is seen no longer Imperfect but rather perfect; Hence out of a
Mineral of Lead, in a convenient space of time, without much trouble, Miners do
witness that a great deal of Silver is found. And in like manner, if this same
thing could be performed by Triumphant Art, without the means of the Earth,
there is nothing in Nature to hinder but the same Effect should sollow. But the
certainty of this thing is plain from hence, (to wit, that all Metals arise
from the same matter) because Mercury which is generated in the Bowels of the
Earth. is the Universal material Mother, of all those things which are Endued
with a Metallic Species, which will not be hard to be proved from hence,
because Mercury is accommodated to all those things and may be joined by Art;
but it were altogether impossible to perform that, unless all participated of
one matter. For that Mercury is a Water, yet such a one, as is mingled with
nothing which is not of the Identity of its own Nature. Therefore since it
Drinks up all Metals, by moistening them, that all those do retain a
Correspondency of matter with this I add, that by Art, the Handmaid of Nature,
Mercury may be so Successively concocted with all Metals, that one and the
same, under the same Color, and form of Flux, may subalternatly show and
Express, the true Temperature and the true Proprieties of all of them. Which
would be impossible in Art, unless Nature did supply the possibility of this,
by the Correspondency of matter.

For thermore, There are not wanting other Arguments to prove the same.

And first of all truly this is not light, The all Metals may be reduced into
running Mercury, as also Minerdls that do consist of metallic principles. And
moreover, these metallic Mercuries may be so changed, that a Saturnine may
become a Martial neglecting its own force the mean while) only by the Decoction
of a Martial Essence in the same, by sagacious Artifice; moreover the same
Martial may become Venereal, by the Ferment of Venus; The same also Lunar,
Jovial, or Solar, by a Ferment of them, in the mean while no alteration being
made either in Color or Fluxs excepting that one Mercury is more pure and
defficated then the other. An admirable Mercury is separated also from Antimony
which will also put on the Nature of metallic Mercuries, by the subtle
Administration of Art and Nature. Nor this alone but also those above said
Mercuries, will so change the Common Mercury, as well of Metallic as Mineral,
so that by its commixtion it being digested with them, takes to it self the
same Natural Qualities with them, that it makes one and the same Mercury with
them, according to the Species of the Corporal Mercury, being joined with it in
a Spiritual Bond, and one and the same individual by successive Operations, can
put on the Farms of all, and choose one new one, neglecting the former, until it
has run through the Kingdoms of all the Planets. And what does this argue, but
that all claim to themselves one matter, from which all come, and to which all
return, and that all things being reduced to this mercurial matter, according
to the variety of Digestion, may go from one into another Species, and alone
successfully travel through all. Which Argument, as being true in it self, so
also it will remain a firm Foundation to this Art, and inviolable. Against
these most evident thing I know not what can be Objected, unless some, the
dullness of whose wit does not reach to receive these things do Complain that
they have often tried these things, and that according to the prescript of most
famous Authors, yet the Event has no way answered their Hope. Whom we may
Answer, that their Ignorance makes nothing to Reprobate so Noble an Art. Let
not this be imputed a fault to the Art, if any thing in Nature possible by Art,
escape their Intellect; for this Objection will be no less a mark of affected
Arrogance, then gross Ignorance, as though those things alone were to be
performed by the Administration of Nature, Art Cooperating, which without an
exact Scrutiny, fall under the Capacity of their Wit. The rest being, ipso
facto, Excluded, as the there were the same measure of their Intellect, and the
possibility of Nature. Moreover, I would meet by an experimental affirmative
Knowledge, their negative Experience. I my self that write these things can be
a faithful Witness of Nature, that all these aforesaid things are true, without
any Falsity, and certain without Pretense, and I have seen all these things in
and about Metals, have tried them, and by Experience have found them true.
Therefore they must not contend with bare Negations (whose Basis is Ignorance)
against eye Witnesses; of whom I profess my self one, who also, am backed with
one mouth, by all the true Philosophers, such are Albertas, Raimundus, Ripley,
Flammel, Moren, and many others, whose names it would be tedious to reckon. I
confess at least, that it is no light Work to perform this which I have said,
but on the contrary very much hidden from Philosophers, and I might affirm it
the most hidden thing in Nature. Furthermore I make it known, that the Key of
the Art is delivered to us by Philosophers, which whee soever has, the Key of
unlocking all the doors is committed to him, so that he Learn to handle every
thing in its Order and true Method. For it is not all one what Metal or Mineral
is first took in hand, or which way, or by what Operations it goes on, but in
knowing of these an Ingenious Sagacity is required, and besides the Theory, a
Practical Knowledge, or else he will err let him do what he can. I could here
reckon up diverse Mutations of Metals, as for Instance, Mars into Venus, by the
acid Stalagma of Vitriol, Mercury into Saturn, Saturn into Jupiter, Jupiter
into Luna, which Operations indeed, many vulgar Chemists (far enough from the
top of Art) know to perform. I add that it is known to few, (and those only
true Philosophers) that there is a middle substance, hidden, noble, betwixt a
Metal and a Mineral, of which the one end is a Metal, and the other a Mineral,
whose Commixt Heavenly Virtues make one certain anonymous Metal, when yet it is
not a Metal, but a Chaos, that is a Spirit, because wholly volatile, from
whence (although in it self it be wholly Volatile) all Metals may be drawn,
without the Transmuting Elixir, even Sol and Luna, also Mercury, whose Virtues
I shall not willingly describe, I have seen, done, known, the Transmutation of
this into all Metals, and this the Adepts will witness with me to be true. I
will tell thee, (if thou will conceive) it is called Chalibs by the Author of
the New Light, and it is the true principle of the Work, the true Key (as it
may be handled) of unlocking the most hidden Secrets of Philosophers. What in
the mean while if Philosophers have hidden these things, and have Painted out
parabolically the truth to the sons of Art, under a mask of Falsehood; shall
therefore this so Divine a Science be contemned; far be it. For it is plain,
that in the Nature of an imperfect thing there is no Impediment, but it may be
changed into a perfect, since of its own nature it retains a propensity of
putting on Perfection, if so be it be tried by an Homogeneous Agent, prevailing
with a Digestive power. Now then we will inquire into its Virtue, and first
indeed, we will determine, that by which this ought to be done. And then we
will adjoyn Philosophical reasons. As for the first, we do, and will profess it
to be nothing else but Gold digested to the supreme Degree to which it can be
brought by nature and Art; which then will be seen not simply Gold, but a
thousand times more perfect then Common Gold. Which being so exalted it
radically penetrates Metals, tinging and fixing them. Neither let this seem
wonderful to any one, since whilst it remains in its Corporeal Existence, it
can diffuse its Tincture far and near, above what is credible to any one who
does not see it: Insomuch that it seems to color into its Tincture, as tho by
littles, almost six Pound of Silver with one single Ounce of Gold. For Example,
let a mass of Silver be gilded (tho it be very great) let it afterward be
drawn into a Thread (as small as a Hair) that whole Thread will appear as though
of the purest Gold, and the Artist will sooner be wanting to attenuate the
Thread, then the Gold to the Power of Coloring. Moreover, if this Corporeal
Metal, Earthly and dead is able to perform this so unspeakable a thing, from
whence I pray, is this Inconstancy of Tincture, except because a Body cannot
alteratively enter into a Body, for there is not wanting a Tincture to Change
it, but the Corporality of the tinging Matter hinders the Transmutation. But if
this Corporeal Earthly, would become a spiritual Fiery, its kind being altered,
then truly it would sundamentally enter, and what it did outwardly to the
sight, it would perform the same alteratively Internally, yea, and much more;
by how much fire is of a more subtle property and Essence then Earth.
Therefore this being supposed, to wit, that terrene vulgar Gold, may be so
circulated, until it be placed in the Seat of a Fiery Essence, it will easily
be gathered, that this fifth Essence, is a thousand times more perfect then its
former substance, and that from the Law of the disproportion of subtilty
amongst the four Elements, and therefore it is of power to defuse its Tincture
further; it has this moreover, that whilst it is a Spirit, it may
Intrinsically be mingled with the least things, which a Body of Gold, although
it should be extended far, cannot attain to, because of its Corporality, and if
it shall so enter, without doubt it would Transmute it, since every Natural
Ingression by Littles, is the Transmutation of the passive Nature, unless the
Identity of Nature be between the thing entering and entered, as Water mixed with
Water.

This Supposition instead of a Preface, we do assert to be true, and in its
Place will describe the manner of it.

Here at least we will bring some Arguments Confirming the possibility. Amongst
which, this is of no light moment that Seed is the Perfection of every thing
having Seed, and that which has not Seed is wholly Imperfect, as Sung the Poet.

In auro --
Semina sunt auri licet haec abstrusa recedunt,
Longius --
This is not only perfect, but the most perfect, in its Metallic Species. If
therefore there be the Seed of Gold, it will follow, that this does reside in
Water which is the Habitation of the Spirit, for Seed is a certain spiritual
Means of Conserving the Species, hence the possibility of the Dissolution of
Gold. Although it is the Work of a very quick sighted Philosopher, Blessed by God
with no mean Talent, to find out a powerful Agent to perform this. Moreover, if
Gold could be dissolved to bring out its Seed, reason persuades, that this is
to be done no other Way then into Water Homogeneous of its own Kind. Which
Dissolution being once made, the Body has put off its form, to wit, a terrine
form of Gold, and has put on another Watry-Golden form. Moreover all Motion is
from something, to something, and every perfect Motion, is the bound of a
generative in the same kind, whence motion is a Progression, which will be done
by Various Homogeneous Mutations to the thing moved, wherefore when Aureity is
the terminus a quo, the same will be terminus ad quem, and there will be
Intermedial Progressions in a Metallic Homogeneity, by the Necessity of the
Law of Nature, which being observed, the Effect is forced to its End, through
the necessity of an End, if so be the Operations shall not be Intermitted by
the Contrary. Wherefore from dissolved Gold we put a regress of the same
dissolved, to aureity; and we conclude it to be proved. But this Golden form
which it shall reassume, in no wise shall be the same which it has put off,
since a regress from a privation, to a habit is impossible. Therefore there is
necessarily another Golden form to this, which will be so much more Noble, then
the former, by how much more spiritual, as far as Fire is more subtle and pure
then Earth. I have Writ enough, and too much, to Direct the Sons of Learning,
now let the Chief Myso-Chymicks bark at safely those things which they are
Ignorant of, they can in no wise rebate the force of those things which I have
said, or disprove the truth, and they shall certainly bear away this Reward of
their slanders, deep Ignorance. For I write nothing to the Haters of Art, to
the rest what I have said is abundantly sufficient.

Now this Science being Established, and Vindicated, something is to be said of
its Professors, for that (as is above said) it comes to pass from the
Wickedness of some sorry Fellows, that this Divine Art as well as its Friends,
has suffered much by Calumniators. For when some stupid Mechanics, seduced by
blind Presumption go about the handling of these things, being vexed they
presently curse Chemical Philosophy, speak evil of its Practitioners, and tear
with railing the Authors that write thereof. Others, although little Learned
preposterous Men, blinded with the thirst after Gold, do gape after the Art,
and set upon the thing without Mature Deliberation, and err, yet nevertheless
they conceive a possibility of the Art, and speak well of it, and being ashamed
to consess their Ignorance therein, pretend a skilfulness, to the Ignorant, and
perhaps go on to Write about the Art, and being allured with a silent hope of
recovering at last what they have lost, will yet try again, until they do
multiply their Losses; they will comfort their Friends with the hope of future
Good, but in the mean while they are poor, and every day made poorer, so giving
an occasion to the foolish Mockers of Chemistry to deride them. Indeed so great
is their Wickedness, since they are seduced themselves they go about to entice
others with their false Receipts, Lies and Sophistical Writings, into the same
predicament of Error; at length some, howsoever skilled in the Art, yet being
stirred up thereto by envy, do handle the thing very Scabiously and
deceitfully, and under the promises of true Doctrine, do seduce Tiro's with
most miserable Impostures, so Geber, Arnold, Lully and almost all others,
amongst whom there is not found one Candid Writer, and if any, yet he will be
found to handle the Matter very obscurely. Hence an inevitable Labyrinth to one
that is to begin Chemistry, that there seems to be need, even of the Immediate
finger of God, if any one shall desire to go the right Path. Hence also the
Name of the Art is so odious that a body cannot set to it easily without the
greatest derision. Therefore it is very necessary to be known what is to be
done in the first place by one that will be a Son of Science, to obtain this
Golden Art, to obtain this Fleece, since there will be many hindrances to drive
him back, unless he has a firm Resolution of mind, many things to delude his
hope and expectation, unless he has a quick sighted Wit.

First Indeed, that he may be made safe from them who Deride his undertaking,
his Course ought to be Secret that his Labor may be known to none, therefore
the ancient wise Philosophers Commanded to hide this Science, like a word in
the Mouth. Neither truly may it seem unprofitable so to Exhort, since that the
disgraces and Calumnies of Men, make not little toward the Casting of a
dispondency in the mind of a Tiro, who abhorring the Art themselves have its
Practitioners in the highest Contempt. Moreover if any one consider the Event,
there will appear to be need of a Secret Concealing of the Art. For if any one
shall be frustrated of his hope, can Silence hurt him any thing, when
otherways, he shall be propounded, who is so disappointed, for an Example of a
foolish throwing away of Money and time (as it is commonly reputed.) But if on
the other hand he shall obtain this Treasure, it shall not only be found
profitable, but also extremely necessary to have concealed it. For he is
propounded a Prey to Tyrants and wicked persons if any one shall enjoy and use
openly so great a Treasure; and some also being too improvident in this thing
having endangered the safety of Life, have repented too late. Moreover he ought
to be of a Constant mind, which would Descend into this Palestra, Diligent,
Industrious, I earned, a devourer of Books, Private, Solitary, unless that he
has one faithful Companion, not more, not Poor; for although a little quantity
may suffice when the Art is once tried, yet it will happen that he will err
sometimes, to repair which errors, he has need of money; moreover to supply
Charges necessary for Food and Raiment, whilst he is incumbent in this Art,
least by chance he should be obliged to do something else, when he rather ought
to be of an undisturbed Mind. And that which is the greatest thing, let him be
honest and fearing God, abhorring Sin and soliciting Heaven with his Prayers to
prosper his Undertakings, thus qualified let him go on, but without the clear
Light of Nature he will err. Moreover, let him get the Books of Learned Men,
and not Sophisters, let him diligently mind those let him read and read and
read again, and Consider things deeply with himself, and have a care least when
he has once Concluded the thing, he presently try it Practically, but let him
often ponder, examine and weigh his Conclusion, and Compare it with the Opinion
of the most Learned Authors, and alter in so long, until he shall have chose
some one, which shall endure all probations, then at length let him begin a
Praxis, Praying for Gods Assistance, let him consider his Experiments, which as
reason shall persuade, let him alter and renew, until he shall see the Signs
Described by Philosophers. And omitting erroneous Operations, let him insist
only upon one true Complement, neither let him despair, although he err often, and
yet let him have a Care of great Charges, so by the blessing of God, he shall
at length obtain his desire. I moreover to instruct such a one have writ the
following Treatise true, plain, perfect, without Deceit. And yet I would
admonish all Covetous, Fraudulent Persons and the rest of that Classis, that
they let alone the Art, and this Treatise. For

Certum est procul hinc arcere profanum.

CHAP. II. Of the beginning of the Art, its Writers, and its Foundation, in
which it is Treated of the Metallic Principles and the gradual Production of
Metalls and Minerals.
HErmes by Surname Trismegistus the Father of this Art, is introduced into the
Scene of Philosophers, of whom various Opinions of Authors are reported, who he
should be; there are not wanting who affirm him to have been Moses, at least
they agree in this, that he was an Egyptian, also a most quick sighted
Philosopher. He is called the Father of this Philosophy, to wit, who first of
all (whose Books are extant) handled this Philosophy. Yet some will have this
Science derived from Enoch, who foreseeing the Flood, Writ the seven Liberal
Sciences, (amongst which is Chemistry) upon Tables, and left them to Posterity.
But Hermes entering into the Valley of Hebron found them, which are yet called
the Emrald Pillars and thence Learned his Wisdom. Others sharply contend that
Noah knew this Art, and carried it into his Ark. Not a few do endeavor to
establish this Art from some places of Scripture and write that Solomon had it.
Some bring it down from Adam himself, to Abel and so to Seth; but such like
subtilties do not please me, being about to write the Simplicity of Nature,
they do not Illustrate, nay rather obscure Art, that it seems Enthysiastical,
and they that so Write, do nothing else but yield an Occasion of deriding to
Myso Chymicks. For that if the Art has a real Foundation in Nature, why should
I be Solicitous whether this or that man understood it or no, since we know
that its Lovers and the Adepts have always concealed themselves with all their
endeavor, even as also it is declared to others in their Books. Neither have
all, or at least very many been known but after their Death, but whilst they
were alive they lay concealed with the greatest Diligence. This at least is
clear, that it is so far from being a new Device, that there have been men
skilful of it through many Series's of Ages, who being Different both in Tongue
and Nation, and very many of them Contemporary, have writ so agreeingly of the
Art, that they cannot be proved, by such as rightly understand them, either to
Corrupt, or diversely to handle so much as one Operation. I confess at least,
there may appear a great difficulty in Reading their Books, to a man unskilful
of the thing, they write so obscurely, tropically, allegorically and
figuratively; some also do intermingle many false things to ensnare the
unworthy and unwary, that by this means they may distinguish Philososophers
from Fools; but in sum, all of them do strike at one mark and lead to the lame
Inn. But those things which they deliver more Obscurely, they do this to no
other end, but that they may exclude the unworthy, as they often witness in
their Books. Bernard Trevisan (much adored by me) is found most candid; also
Ripley an Englishman, Fla^^^el a Frenchman, Sendivogius the Author of The new
Light, also the anonymous Author of the Hermetick Secrets, yet whose name has
delivered a double Anagram, as to wit (spes nea est in agno) in a Book whose
Title is Enchiridion hysicae Restitutae, and (penes nos unda tagi) in his
Hermetick arcanum. I would not pass by here the Ladder of Philosophers, the
great Rosary, the Works of Arnoldus, the Boys play, the Works of Dionysius
Zacharius, Aejidius de vadis, the Works of Moren, Augurellus his Poems of
making Gold, also Five Treatises of the Rosary abreviated, the Works of Peter
Bonus of Ferrara, In a word I would have all the Books included which are
agreeable to these asoresaid, and those which are otherwise excluded. Which
being compared, as is fit, before the Work be begun, in the first place the
studious Scholar of Art may learn the Lives, Kingdoms, Manners and Habits of
Metals, and also of Minerals, nor delight himself in the bare Notion, but know
them Seientifically, that is Practically. But to this end, there is need of a
Profound meditative Contemplation, that he may Learn and Understand the
Original of Natural things in the genus and of Mineral Bodies in the species.
As for me, being only intentive to the Doctrine of Metals, to wit, as far forth
as it seems to Explain the Art of Transmutation, I willingly pass by the
Original of Natural things in the genus; Content to have spoken those things
which may satisfy the aforesaid purpose, yet I will briefly touch the rest in
Order.

All the Common Philosophers have delivered that there are four Elements
Compounding all things Originally, from whence are all things, to which they
resolve, from whose diverse Coalition, diverse things proceed. Almost all
Chemical Philosophers have subscribed to this unhappy Opinion. No other Cause
of which I am able to conjecture then that without mature Deliberation (they
being prepared to their own Interest) they have hastily described these first
Foundations of things. Which Opinion of theirs, I not daring to disallow, upon
the account of the Honor and Reverence I have for them, will handle it
Philosophically otherways according to the Truth of the matter. For I only
acknowledge three Elements, which they Contend to be four, all which Experience
teaches to be cold of their own nature, to wit, Air, Water and Earth, for that
the only defect being caused by the remote distance of the Califactive Sun,
which does bring a coldness upon all these things and that is more remiss, or
Intense, by how much the greater or lesser distance it is removed. For I
altogether reject an Elementary Fire, also I deny that there is any besides our
Common Fire which burns in the Kitchins, whose heat is always distructive in it
self. Neither do I deny, notwithstanding, that there is heat in things,
flowing, either from Light or motion, or Life, or alterative Blas, no other.
The Pyrate Vulcan does burn and waste Concrete things, by feeding upon them and
it is the most Corrupt Violent motion, caused from the Repugnancy which arises
from two contrary active things, but yet it is not an Element, as being neither
Substance nor Accident as far as appeartains to the actual burning, but the
expression of the Activity of two Agents, mutually in themselves, in a
Capacious Subject. I would not show now what things are required in order to
Fire actually burning, besides the accident of Heat and substance, in which
this Action is made, at least we assert this hear, although its heat be an
Accident, yet that it its self is neither an Accident nor a substance, but the
express Operation of the activity of two active things and acting mutually upon
one another, which activity I could easily demonstrate in every Combustable
thing burning, but that it would be foreign to this place. And as I do
altogether reject Elemental Fire, in the mean while being content with a
Ternary number of the Elements and do assert, the first native quality cold,
neither do I attribute to them heat, except accidental as is said; so neither
do I admit these three by their Commixtion to go into the Composition of
Natural things. For that the Disproportion of things to be mingled, takes away
the mixture fit for Generation, and the possibility thereof. For a Natural
Generation is made by the Union of Generative Ingredients. Moreover Union is an
Ingression of things to be united per minima, but if the least of one thing be
tenfold or a Hundreafold more subtle then the little of another, the adequate
littles cannot come together, for that it behooves very little things to come
together, which we seek to unite per minima. From hence water mixed with Earth
is not united with it, even as neither Water with Wine, or Phlegm with Spirit,
yea they may be separated, because of this disproportion amongst the littles.
If any one shall say in order to make this mixture, one thing undergoes the
subtilty of another, and so by consequence are united, I urge that if it be
equally subtle ( which was first thick) that it may enter liquid by uniting it
self, it behooves that it be altogether brought to the same Nature, and what
then I pray is Earth but Water, (for that, Water will not go into Earth that it
may have an umon with Earth, that is to say a Body will not enter a Body so
unitively and if it be so, how foolish is it to imagine this, that Earth is
convertible to Water, that it should promote the Generation of a Conerete with
Water, and if this should be granted, the thing would be said to be produeed of
Water; if so be before it was possible to be produced, the Earth had gone into
real Water, but this is necessary, or otherwise the little of this will not be
able to agree with the little of the other. And as yet Air is wanting, whose
little is much more subtle then the little of water, unless all things be held
to vanish into Air, that also the aforesaid water may have it a Companion to it
self in generating, which if it should be granted, it would follow that all
things did consist of Air alone, which Air, although it be Originally in its own
Nature from it self, or gathered together of Earth and Water, Changed between
themselves, yet it will be the same thing, nor diversified because of the
difference of its Original; for unless it be the same it cannot be united, to
wit, that Water may have the same subtilty with Air, it is obliged to have the
same first Qualities with it, the same also is to be Judged of the Earth, that
it may be adequated to the rarity of the Water, and if it be so Water so
subtilized will be real Air, and Earth so subtilized will be real Water, and
now where is the composition of things generated by Elements, when according to
this Doctrine all things are necessary to proceed from Air, and of Fire how
much more subtly, a quaternity of Elements being admitted, with this Doctrine
of Mixture. But if any one should say, that it is true that the Elements are so
Converted, I would ask him by what Agent they were changed: Moreover if Earth
goes into Water, water into Air, that so there may be an union of Compounding
Elements, to make an Elementary thing, I would ask again what need there is to
unite another new to Earth reduced into real Water, so also to mingle new Air
to Water subtilized to the rarity of Air, as tho one and the same Flement, so
convertable into another, being converted could not procreate an effect of its
self, without the mixture of the other. If it be said that Earth as aforesaid,
being Subtilized, is equal to Water in Rarity, and yet is not Water, even as
neither is Water (...) would ask then whether or no the on can put on the first
Qualities of the other if not, neither will they have Correspondence in their
littles, for this is impossible; if so, I desire to know whether if one first
should put on the firsts of another first, that would not be really the first,
whose firsts it first puts on. To assert the Contrary is not Philosophical,
therefore it is concluded that all things Materially take their Original from
one Element, which cannot be neither Earth nor Air, which unless I studied
Brevity I could easily Demonstrate. The Earth is a Soil or Bed in which all
Bodies Increase and are preserved, the Air, into which they grow, it is the
means and bringer of heavenly Virtues, wherewith it is filled, and by which
they are Communicated to all these Inferior things, the Seed of all things is
put into the Water by the Creator in the first Creation, which some do produce
into the Air, as Vegitables, some keep within their own Reins, as Animals, in
some it is hid very abstruse as in Metals, and there is, even to the end of the
World, seed sufficient to produce all things of Seed, whose Habitation (as is
said) the Water is found to be. This Seed (other ways Idle) being stirred up by
its form (which form is a certain particle of Ineffable Light, Heavenly Virtue,
which is present to Endue (in reference to place and a convenient Agent) with
its force, Inferior things aptly disposed, and to stir them up to Motion) so I
say the Seed being stirred up with an active Virtue, does Coagulate the
Material Water with its fermentatious Odor, which it so Changes by various
Fermentations, the Author of all Changes, until it has produced that, to
produce which the Seed was propense. If therefore there be a Metallic Seed,
there grows from thence first a dry humor slippery not wetting the hands, to
wit Mercury the Mother of all Metals. I could here teach the Procreation of
stones of every fort, also note very many things worthy of observation, about
the First Nativity of Mercury: But I purposely pass by those things making
little to the purpose. For Mercury has deserved to be called the true Matter of
Metals, because before it was Mercury that it might be destined to Metal, yet
it might happen by some defect, that some thing different from Metal did result
from thence, but when once it is Mercury then indeed no longer can any thing be
born from thence but Mineral or Metaline, from this the different kind of
Metals which are seen, as for Instance, Jupiter, Saturn, Luna, Venus, Mars,
Sol, which all have one and the same Mother, Mercury; also some middle Minerals
arise from hence, some also are made of the Metals themselves eroded with acid
Mineral Salts, so Vitriol from a Vein of Copper, eroded by such an acid,
Stalagma, whose Generation to teach would be from the Matter, therefore I
purposely omit it. But not any Intervening Sulphurous Fatness, (as some think
fakly) is joined to the Mercury which it Coagulates, boiling it with its heat,
whose Expurgation afterward is the perfection of Metal. For we know that
Sulphur, as it is called, in Jupiter, is much more impure then Sulphur in
Saturn, although Mercury in Saturn be more Crude and unclean then Mercury in
Jupiter, and yet even Common People will witness that Jupiter is a more pure
Metal than Saturn, therefore we must not think with them of a Metallic
Digestion by such a fatt Colostrum, when in Mercury there is a proper Internal
digesting Agent, to wit, Heat, which being caused by a Celestial influence,
infuseth Life and Motion to this our Matter, which life and motion depend from
an Adaptation of a Convenient Matrix, or Place fit for Ganeration. For although
all of these abovesaid things are full of this most plentiful Virtue, and this
is present to all, to the Information of them; yet it does not actually act by
Informing, that is by exciting to Motion, except as far forth as it is helped
by Extrinsicks rightly accommodted; and so then this Heavenly Virtue acts
incessantly, which although it be Uniform, and one in the whole World, yet it is
varied by reason of the Seed, according to which, the Ferments of things are
diversified to produce diverse Transmutations, wherefore if Mercury born here
all find a place in its self fit for Generation, althoin its self without such
a Place it appear Cold, for that it is dead, yet within the Center of its own
Nativity, (the generative action not being yet Intermitted) this force or
Heavenly virtue, being Caused as well from the Light, as a Rotation of Superior
things, and by means of the Air most plentifully diffused to all things, and
through all things, I say this Virtue (as it has reference to Light) will cause
some Heat, (and as it has reference to the Rotation of the Superiors (...) will
cause Motion in this Inferior Subject, this Heat, and Celestial Motion, cannot
be without its Life, in which they are, (I mean not an Animal Life, nor yet
Vegintable; but a formal) from these, ferments are produced by an altering
Blass; which daily does change the Matter and Transmute it, until the Heavenly
Predominate Inducing a greater or lesser fixation, according to the
Accommodation of the Place, helping or retarding Digestion, from one and the
same Mother, the aforesaid different Offspring do proceed, only diversified by
the inequality of the Maturity. By reason of which Inequality, some Crude Super
fluities which are not of Metallic Imposition, but being in the Mercury are
separable from it, these I say being not purged receiving a Coagulation with
the pure, does seem to specificate amongst Metals, and those feculent
Crudities, being different by reason of the Variation of the Generative Matrix
Mercury, and it is Coagulated Different, and possesses this difference,
according to the Embrio of the Place. Moreover the Matter of all Metals is one,
to wit, Mercury which properly tends to procreate Sol or Luna, for the
different respect in the degree of perfectien, if any Feces of Mercury be
Commixed in its Generation, these are Accidents, neither do enter into a
Mercurial ubstance of which partly the diversity, and partly the Difference of
the place in which the Digestion is made, from a different Coagulation with
this one pure, the same one thing puts on different Meeks, and so produces
Imperfect Metals in their Species. I avoid a particular Description of the
Genealogy of all Metals, because I make haste to the Renovation, and
Multiplitation only of Sol and Luna. Therefore I betake my self to the Tack.

CHAP. III. Of Gold and Silver, how they come of Mercurial-Matter, and of the
possibility of Changing Imperfect Metals, to the perfection of these.
OUt of the forsaid Fountain. as is said, springs Sol and his Sister Luna, to
wit, this Matter is brought to perfection by Digestion. Now Perfection is
twofold, either begun or Complete, that is, partly or wholly. Complete
Perfection is the outmost bound to which Nature aims of her own accord, to wit,
that all Crudity being decocted, and all Dregs Cleansed out, the Metallic
Nature may Triumph without any Coagulated Dross. This Sun of ours has its
Rising, and does Illuminate the Earth with its Beams and Splendour. But begun
perfection, (as I may so say) is not called Perfection properly, and yet in
respect of that which is formally Imperfect it deserves not Improperly, to be
called Perfection. For it is to be judged formal in perfection, when the
Crudity is not so decocted, which did stick to the pure in Generation (by
accident) nor yet the Heterogeneous superfluity is so purged out, but it is
left mingled with the pure in Coagulation; in so great quantity that it
predominates over it, and at last overcomes it; so it happens to all Metals, (
Sol and Luna excepted) which are Corrupted easily by all Corrupting Elements,
also are Constimed by Fire. But when the Crudity is so bound, and the feculent
super fluity so purged out before Coagulation, that the pare has such Do ninion
over the Impure, to be delivered from the Corruptive Tyranny thereof, this is
to be accounted the first Degree of Perfection. But a total Expurgation of the
Feces, and the rejection of the Impure is the top or highest perfection of
Metallic Operations. And yet these Crudities and Feces were not Originally of
the same Imposition of nature with Metallic Mercury, nay they were separable,
whose Separation before Coagulation is the Perfection of Metals. But if they be
not purged out before Coagulation, yet this has in no wise united them to the
pure, nay they are separable yet, although not by Nature without the Help of
another, but by Art the Hand. Maid of Nature. Hence the Original and Basis of
the Transmutatory Art, and this the true Foundation of Alchimy, to wit, that a
more Impure metal may possess in it self the same pure of which Gold is, with
which although some Impure be Concoagulated, yet this impure is no wise of
Metallic Imposition, although one Imperfect Metal differs from another, also from
the Perfect, therefore since it is Heterogeneous it may be separated by a
Triumphant Agent, which if it could be found above the Earth, most surely an
Impure and Imperfect Metal would go into pure perfect Gold and Silver, with
respect to digestive Separation. For that every Separating Agent, will be by
the same Reason a digestive Agent, since this Separation is impossible to be
effected without an Effectual Digestive Power. Such an Agent our Divine
Arcanum, forit is a Heavenly Spirit and of a fiery Virtue, therefore has the
Power of penetrating, and yet does show the Native Propriety of Gold, for it is
Gold digested to the supreme degree, [wherefore it transcends and excells
common Gold by many degrees, in an Homogeneity of the same kind and nature.
Although furthermore it be a spiritual body, yet] it does overcome any other Body
in the World by its fixity, to the end it may retain the Homogeneous Pure when
it is cast upon Impenfect Metals, least they should fly away from the Fire,
because of their Crudity: whilst the Feces are expoled to be burned by its
Heterogeneous Violence, in which thing alone all Transmutative Digestion
Consists. For Fire is the Trial of Gold, I say our Vulcan, which by burning
will take away all Combustible Impurity from the Pure, if so be that that which
is pure don't fly away from the trial of the fire because of its tender
Crudity. But all Imperfect Metals (although they contain a Pure in themselves) yet
this Pure is so Crude, that is mixed with the Impure, that that not bearing the
Fire, and yet predominating over this, flying away from the fire snatches it
along with it, which otherwise would rejoice at the fire as its like. Moreover
our Arcanum, because a Spiritual Hamogeneous substance, does enter such like
Imperfect Metals per minima, and what it finds like to it selt, and by its
Prevailing Power, defends it from the Violence of the Burning fire, and retains
its more then Perfect fixity, in the mean while Burning Vulcan does feed upon
the Combustible by his Flame, which being Consumed by the Fire, pure Gold
remains, or Silver, (according to the quality of the Medicine) sustaining all
the Violence of the Fire, and remaining in all Probations, not at all inferior
the Mineral, but rather Excelling it. Wherefore we do not (as some Detractors
Object) profess to Create Gold or Silver, but to find and effect an Agent which
being cast upon Imperfect Metals, can enter them peminima, because of its
Homogeneity and Spirituality. Moreover that it may defend the Pure by its
prevailing Power and Virtue, from the Combustion of the Fire, which finding a
Like to it Self, Retins it, until the Superstions Feces be destroyed by the
Burning Tyranny of Vulean; which Operation is Chrysopoetick Transmutation. All
this our Secret Elixir performs. Moreover it has this, that it as well
Commeunicates its Tincture, as it is to: Finits actually to the Imperfect,
since that it is both of the highest Exuberant Color and Fixity.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Seed of Gold: also the Question answered whether
other Metals have Seed.
FOr the preserving, propagating, and producing every Species Seed was given by
the great Creator to things: And Seed is the perfection of every thing; and
that which has no Seed, is deservedly to be Judged Imperfect: Therefore it is
not to be doubted that there is Metallic Seed. Either all these things were
Created in the first six days, which are or have been in the World, or at
least they have Increased being Augmented daily. The first both Reason and
Experience denis, therefore if the latter, then no body can deny that there is
Metallic Seed; which if there be, surely the Metal does not loose it in
Coagulation, for Coagulation is the effect of perfection, (or rather of
Maturation which leads straight to perfection, if the Exteriors be rightly
Disposed) moreover its Seed is a sign of perfection, because it is so Matured,
therefore it is not probable that the Seed is lost by Coagulation, but is
rather rendered more noble. It is plain by this, that Metallic Seed is in
Metals: Therefore it may be asked, whether all Metals have Seed in themselves!
I would answer by saying all have one and the same Seed, but in some it resides
nearer, in others more remote: But this Seed is the Seed of Gold. For it is in
no wife lawful to think, that Jone has the Seed of Jove, Saturn of Saturn, and
so of the rest, that is in a Jovial form, Saturnine, or Martial, for it is
purely accidental, but the pure matter is Aureous, to which nothing is wanting
besides a bare digestion, separative of the Dreggs. Consumptive of the
Crudities and Inductive of Fixity. But the form of Gold is substantial, that
is, founded upon the fubstance of matter it self so purified: Therefore there
is an Aureous seed in all imperfect Metals tending to perfection, but
accidentally hindered in its pregress In digested Gold there is the same Seed,
closly shut up, Triumphing in Perfection; Therefore if it should be sought to
bring Seed out of impersect Metals, it being far remoto, although truly existing)
the Labor will be in wain, for it is necessary that all be eualted to Sol,
other wise the Seed is not separated from them, (being the perfection of the
thing.) I Mean Seed, not Mercury, which is in all, and is to be ardwn out of
all; to that force in which and by which, they are all multiplied: But Saturn
is not multiplicable in Saturn, but in Gold only, to wit, where he shall come
to Gold, that he may afterward emitt his Seed, that is, his most digested
Virtue from himself, that multiplication may have its Original from this.
Concerning Lune it may not be unprofitable here to add something, whom any one
would easily believe to have Seed, because she is perfect. It seems to make for
this Opinion, there being an Elixir serving to the projection of the white.
Truly I grant that there is a multiplicative Seed, both of the white and red,
but this white is only contained in the Reins' of Sol. And although there be a
Multiplication of Luna, yet the Seed will not be found immediately in Luna, but
has a necessity to proceed from Sol: Therefore as we have said this Lunar
whiteness is the first degree of perfection, whose Solar yellowness is the
Complement. For the Mother of our Stone which is called Land, (not Common but
Philosophical) is whith, because it dealbates our Sol, which is the father of
our Stone) with its whiteness, from whence the Offipring, which arises from
these two Parents, is white, first in Imitation of the Mothers form, and then
it is Perfect Seed, multiplicative white, after wards it grows red with a Royal
Sanguineous redness, endued with a Chrysopoetick Power.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Virtue of the Seed of Gold, and in what it is
immediately included.
BUt that we may obtain this Arcanum, with which we might bring Imperifects to
perfection, by a projection upon them first of all it is to be Noted, what we
have said of our Arcanum, to wit, that it is Gold exalted to the supreme degree
of Perfection to which it can be brought by Art and Nature; also it will be
observed that in Gold, Nature has obtained a bound of her Operation, neither
can it move it self of its own accord any further. And yet its Seed is further
to be matured with sagacious wit. But this lies further abstruse, neither
easily appears to the sight, as otherwise the seed of Vegetables or Animals
may be exhibited to the Eyes, not withstanding by sagacious Art it may be
Extracted, and so far enalted above its own Virtus, in which Nature has rested,
that it may excel it a thousand times. I could relate many things of this Seed,
which are rather to be kept Secret; but the difference between this Metallic
and Vegetable, or Animal seed is diligently to be observed: For this, because
the Dissimilarity of the part bringing forth seed is discerned when parted from
the whole Body, but that Metallic is not so. But since the least of Gold, is
real Gold, therefore its Seed lies by littles, neither can be separated from
its Body, the Body in the mean while remaining a guest; but when the
manilestation of the Seed it is done with the plenary Destruction of the Metal;
and so Metal Reduced goes wholly into Seed therefore there is made a
multiplication of the Seed, rather by Virtue and Dignity, than Quantity and
Number, that is, it is Nobiliteted rather than Increased (the Golden matter
being reduced into Seed) because of the similiarity of Parts: Because in
respect of a Stone, Gold is wholly matter, when the secret profundity is
manifested is wholly Sperm, which by Circulating receives the Virtue of
Superiors and Inferiors, and then it becomes wholly form or heavenly Virtue
capable of Communicating this to others, which are related to it by the
Homogeneity of matter. The place in which the Seed refideth is immediately
Water, for in speaking properly and exactly, the least part of Metal is Seed,
but invisible; but because this Invisible is universally poured out, through
all the Water of its Kind and inhabits it, and exert its Virtues in it, nor is
any thing else manifested but Water, although the internal Agent, which properly
is Seed, reason persuades us to be there; wherefore we promiscuously call the
whole, Seed, as we call a whole Grain Seed, when yet the Germinating Life is
only the least particle of the Grain. But Life or seminal Virtue is not so
distinguished in Metals, but is inseparatly Commixt, through the least of the
Body containing. I have added these things of the Seed, because it is said
above that a Metal, whose profundity has been so mamfest under a Mercurial
form, does all go into Seed; for we name all that water the Seed of Gold,
because it is Exquisitely diffused through it, in as much as it cannot be
separated but by Reason alone. This is called occult Ferment, Poison by the
Ancient wise Philosophers; also invisible fire, the secret Agent. Neither also
have I alone named the whole promiscuously Seed after a manner, but these also
have often called their Water, Fire, sometimes they Taught that fire resides in
their water. Wherefore they distinguished this into Soul and Spirit, of which
the former is the means, the latter the active Virtue, by that means. Therefore
we name Water Seed Metonimically, when yet in speaking properly, the seminal
Virtue universally inhabits, and is diffused through the whole Water, which
indeed is Seed, but is not separable from the habitation of its water. If it
seem a wonder to any one, that I assign water the Seat of the seminal Spirit,
let not this seem a wonder, that the Spirit of God in the first Creation was
carried upon the Waters, that is, the Heavenly Spirit infused through the
Waters, it enriched them with its Power and prolifick Virtue. For in this alone
all Seeds which are in the Universe were founded from the first beginning,
neither ever go out of it, and yet, in Vegetables they are produced into the
Crude Air, in Animals preserved within their Reins, in Minerals they are firmly
shut up in their profundity. For it is impossible that Seed should go out of
its Original Seat. Therefore if all things are from Water (as we have said)
Reason will teach us, that the Seed even as yet, does reside in Water. Things
are not preserved any other way then from whence they spring, for the Cause of
the Original being taken away, the Effect is taken away, hence it comes to pass
that the multiplication of all things is in humido and per humido even as the
Nutriment. Vegetables by a watery Leffas of Earth, Animals by a liquid Chile,
Metals by a Mercurial Liquor. Hence Vegetables being Increased and produced, of
their own accord does separate a Seed different from their whole Body, into the
crude Air, which will be a Coagulated Body, but that it may be known that it
has proceeded from Water and does retain its seminal Spirit in the water, it is
committed to the Earth to increase its species, in which Matrix, by a watery
Leffas of Earth, it is resolved into its next watery matter, and then begins the
Vegetation. Moreover the Watery seminal, receives this Watery Leffas (by which it
is manifest in the Dissolution) and that Germination is for the Radical
Nutritive Humor by which it receives Increase, to a plant, or Tree, according
to the specific Ferment of the Seed. Animals do keep within their Reins a Seed
sprung from Imagination, which by the Act of Generation, being Diffused into a
due Matrix, forms a Faetus, tender and abounding with much Humidity, which
afterward is increased by the Liquid Female Menstruums, and increases into a
perfect Infant, and coming into the world, in the hour of its Nativity, is
Nourished by milk, until he can bear stronger Aliment, which then unless they
are changed into a Liquid Chyle (as Bones in the stomach of a Dog,) don't
nourish. In like manner to all these things Metals Coagulated does shut up
their Seed, perfectly elaborated under thick Coverts, yet being placed in
Water, this afterward being Extracted by sagacious Art, Increases, and is
Cherished in a due Matrix, until by a previous Corruption, it receives its
glorification. But this Work is very difficult, because of the secret foulds of
Metals in which this Seed is shut, giving place to no force, unless there be a
subtle wit. Moreover I make it known, that there is a Matrix, in which Gold
being put (from whence Seed alone is to be Sought) will emitt its Sperm freely
and sweetly, until it be weakened and dye, and by its Death, shall be renewed
into a most glorious King, having afterward got the power of delivering all
his Brethren from the fear of Death.

CHAP. VI. Of the Manner and Means of Extracting its Seed.
THose things are always most difficult which are most excellent, as the
Experience of all Ages will bear ample Testimony. It is not to be wondered
therefore, if so great a difficulty be found in a subject so noble before
others. For I do not well know any work, in Rerum Natura, encompassed with more
Difficulties then this is. Wherefore if any one shall enter upon this Work, and
yet would spare his mind from study and Labor, he must return back again, for
he has missed his way in the very Entrance. For that the Evils which are in the
Work appear Terrible, Chiefly upon the account of Dispondency. But if the
Father of Lights, shall grant the Key of the Art to any one, there remains to
him nothing more, then the Work of Women, and the Play of Children: As to
delight his Eyes as he Labors, with most beautiful appearing Signs, until he
shall reap his Harvest, that he may possess the most precious Treasure of all
the World. But without this, Error and Loss, Care and Vexation, will be the
Fruits of his vain Philosophy. Therefore every wise man, before he enters upon
his Work, shall be first and chiefly solicitous of knowing it with its marks,
that if by chance any Difficulties may appear in it, he being Armed against
them, may not after his Work is begun, be compelled to return with trouble and
sorrow. Therefore let all sons of Art know, that in order to attain our
Arcanum, there is need to manifest the most hidden Seed of Gold, which is not
done but by a plenary, and every way volatilization of the fixed, and then the
Corruption of its form. Moreover so to destroy Gold is the most secret Work of
the whole World. For this Divine Science is not completed in a Corrosise
Deturpation of the Mtal, nay all such Corrosions are false and Erroneous; sinee
that there is required to our Work not any Dissolution but Philosophical, that
is, into Mercur al water, made by a previous Calcination, by a Mercurial Agem,
which is produced by a subt i will Rotation and Conversion of Elements, which
Calcination is a mortification of a Homogeneous Humid, with a dry of its own
Nature, that afterward the dry may be vivisied by the said Humid so far, that
the must digested Virtue by dissolving, being extracted by the Dissolvent, may
be the Cause of this Calcination and Dissolution. Is there any thing here
Common with a Corrosive Contrition of Bodies by Mireral waters? Nay rather the
foresaid Operations are Diametrically opposite. If any one shall consider these
things rightly, he will easily perceive the trouble of the Work. For Gold being
the most solid, most fixed of all Bodies and of the strongest Composition, most
Patient of the fire and not at all obnoxious to Corruption. does not easily
pass over into a Nature so Contrary to this of its own, Therefore if any one
shall attempt this by force he will profit Nothing: Seeing there is required an
Agent of an Excelling Virtue to do this, which ought to be Homogeneal, Amicable
and Spiritual, namely that it may be related to the Body, and yet be able to
overcome it and fundamentally penetrate it whose secret Parts, since they are
distended so fart, and so little Gold, is true Gold will not so easily putting
off its form; nay it will fight until it be wholly overcome, it lies down and
Dies, also it follows that our Agent ought to have an enlivening virtue, that
it may Raise up a new pure Body, from the dead Carcasses.

CHAP. VII. Of the first Philosophical Agent, or Matrix, into which our Seed is
to be Emitted and into which it is Ripened.
MOreover such an Agent remains to be sought out by us, where with we may do
all the aforesaid things. In which it is required, first of all, that the Water
be Homogeneal, that is, by a Law of Necessity. For that I have Taught before,
That the Golden seed does lie hid in the Water alone, and does obtain its
Power. But it is shut up in the Body of the Gold under most thick Foulds, of
which is manifest a plain Contrary one to that hidden one which we seek.
Therefore this Water remains to be drawn out by a subtle Artifice, but it does
not enter in of its own accord; therefore this is to be effected by another
thing, which other thing indeed ought to be of the same Nature, with that which
we seek to draw forth. For every like begets its like, that is every Agent
Exercising its Generative Action upon any thing, changes that upon which it
acts, into its own Nature as near as it can. And nextly it behooves this water
to be related to the Body to be dissolved, and therefore pure, Clean and
exquisitely cleansed and purged from all filth. Neither is this enough, but
Gold is held to be Contraried in all its qualities, in which it differs from
the Water we seek, wherein the Seed lies hid. The former is highly fixed, the
other highly Volatile, the former a most solid Body, this a most penetrating
Spirit, the one thick, the other subtle, the one dead, the other living and
enlivening, and all the other Conditions, are required which we seek in it
after dissolution, but they are wanting in a dead Coagulated Body. Therefore it
is Concluded, that Mercury alone is the true Key of the Chemical Art, which is
indeed that dry Water, so often described by Philosophers, sluent, stipery, and
yet not wetting the hands of the Toucher, or any other thing, which is not of
the unity of its Matter, and moreover it is endued with the Virtues above
described: this is the Keeper of our Gates, our Balsam, Oil, Honey; our Urine,
May-dew, our female, Mother, Egg, Secret Furnace, Stove, Sieve, Marble, true
Fire, venomous Dragon, Treacle, burning Wine, Green Lion, Bird of Hermes, Goose
of Hermogenes, Double Sword in the hand of the Cherub, that defends the way of
the Tree of Life, and is famous for Infinite other Names; and it is our Vessel,
true, hidden, also it is our Philosophical Garden in which our Sun rises and
sets, it is our Royal Mineral, and Triumphant Vegetable Saturnia, also the
Caduce of Mercury because it Operates wonderful things, and transforms it self
according to its own pleasure, that it may put on Different Masks. Concerning
this water the Philosopher says, Let Chemists boast as they will, but the
Transmutation of Metals is impossible without this. What shall I say, what
shall I Discourse, that I may report its Praises. It is not so in its own
Nature, as we render it by our Artifice: it is a thing very Vile, and yet the
most precious Treasure of all the World. O the perfection of Nature! and the
head of Metallic Works! therefore thou Son of Learning, and studious of Art,
attend that thou may attain thy desire. Take that which is most unclean of
its self, that is our Harlot, purge thoroughly all the Filth and draw from
thence what is the purest, that is our Menstruum, or Regal Diadem. Behold I
have finished in few Words that which Enobles a Philosopher, delivers from
Errors and leads forthwith into a most fair field of Delights. Therefore that I
may conclude this Chapter, I will repeat succinctly all things which has been
said before. There is a Certain and true Science called Alchmy, whereby every
imperfect Metal is perfected into Gold or Silver, by the projection of the
Triumphant Arcanum upon them, penetrating and tinging, which Secret is no other
then Gold Exalted to its supreme degree of perfection, and this by Sagacious
Art, the Handmaid of Nature. For that all Imperfect Metals are of the same
Material Imposition with Gold, nor do differ but in the Accidents alone, as
also by the Manners and Degrees of incompleated Decoction. And that which being
Imperfect, is mixed with them, is plainly heterogeneous, and although it stick
Externally to the pure yet it is not United Inwardly, and therefore may be
rejected, by a prevalent Agent, such is our complete Elixir to obtain which
Secret, the Sperm (which lies secret in the Body of the Gold) is to be drawn
out, which is shut up in most thick Coverts, and gives place to no power, but
only is manifest by Sagacious Art. Which when it appears (being hid first) it
comes out under a Mercurial form, from whence it is Exalted into the fifth
Essence, first white, then Red, by a Continual decocting fire. And all this is
done by a Homogeneous Mercurial Pontique Agent, Pure, Clean, Christaline
without Transparency, Liquid without humectation, which is Water truly Divine,
neither it is found upon the Earth, know the Son of Philosophers is made by
this, Nature Cooperating. Which we know, have seen, have done, have and
possess, and study to make it plain to the Ingenious, yet so that driving away
the unworthy, we may Exclude them altogether from the Art, who being Cast off,
we will accompany the studious into this most beautiful Garden.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Genealogy of the Philosophical Mercury, its Rise, Birth and
distinguishing Signs that go before and accompany it.
SOme Boasting and Arrogant Sophisters, after having Learned from the Reading
of Books, that Common Mercury is very Foreign, to this Art, also reading that
Philosophers do call this by diverse Names, being led presently with a blind
Opinion, they think themselves secure of the Art, and do not blush to Affirm
themselves Masters of this Science, when in the mean time they are more
blockish then the Wood it self. Some will have this to be a Diaphanous
menstruum and Limped, others a certain Metallic Gum, when they Dream it to be
permissible with Metals, and to no purpose; Others who seek the true Mercury,
do endeavor to draw it either out of Common Mercury, by infinite previous
Purgations, or of Metals, by refuscitative Salts (as they call them) neither
Water nor Gum, nor Calx nor Powder, notwithstanding fatt or unctuous. But those
that Endeavor to draw Mercury out of Herbs and such like, are thick Skull'd,
and of wretched Wit. But this Opinion happens to them through a deep Ignorance
of Metallic matters. They seek things pure, but what are they Ignorant of,
they do not apprehend the Operations of Philosophical Mercury in its Causes,
being uncertain, they therefore seek something Instead of Common Mercury: For
they do not know in what, the Mercury of the vulgar, is wanting to be the the
true Mercury of Philosophers, and yet they reject it, because Philosophers, do
not Choose it; or lastly do seek, by washing, subliming and decocting, to alter
it from its Nature, not doubting but it will put on its true Philosophical
form, if it has once put off its own. It would be a trouble to reckon up such
like Operations. Wherefore I pass over to the thing it self, whence there may
be a true Index of its Truth and Falsity, of its streightness or Obliquity. I
have taught before, that all Metals are of the same material Principle, to wit,
of Mercury, it follows therefore that Mercury is indeed a Metallic thing, and
therefore although Common, yet Originally does obtain a Homogeneous matter with
all Metals. If therefore Philosophical Mercury will be an Homogeneous Metallic
Water, it follows that materially and Fundamentally it is not Distinguished
from other Mercury, unless so far forth as one is purer then the other and more
hot, and yet both a dry Mineral Water. Therefore let the Sons of Learning know
that the matter of Common Mercury, ought and can pass into the matter of
Philosophic Mercury, although not into the whole Substance which is beheld in it.
For certainly all Ingenious Chemists know, that there is no other Mercury, from
whence come all Metals, then Common (namely in respect of its Original) which
is generated in the Bowels of the Earth, as long as it has remained safe from
the Crude Air, in a place fit and accomodated to Generation, it is altogether
destined to Procreate Metal, and did retain its Motion and Excitation in its
self, that it might be stirred up to a perfect Generation, for the fitness of
the Place being violated, or viciated by Chance, this Matter, as tho it were
struck with the Hammer of Death, altogether loses all Motion, neither be
moved further any more, like an Egg, (upon which a Hen has set for some time)
being Cooled is thence forth rendered unfit to produce a Foetus, the pure Life
or Internal Heat altering, vanishes away, the outward failing, and so that
which before every day tended to perfection, now being hindered by chance,
becomes abortive, no hope being left of a future spontaneous Motion. This is
the cause when some have tried with Heat Artificially Invented, to heap Earth
upon Mercury, they have obtained but a mock Reward of their Labors. Therefore
the Form in its access is taken away, or rather hindered, which (as above said)
is a particle of ineffable Light, which is present enlightening its dwelling so
long as all things shall be rightly disposed outwardly; and so it leaves an
Impression of its self in things, which being received by things, does produce
the ferment, which is the true Author of all Transmutation, altering things
themselves, in which it is, by its Fermentatious Odor, stirring up to a
Corruptive as well as a Generative Motion, but the accidents required to these
things, failing from without, all these things fall of their own accord,
neither is the ruin easily repaired by any Art. Therefore there is left to us a
Crude Metallic, Indigested, Cold Matter, neither purged by Decoction; which
(in respect to Minerals) Immitates the Nature of Fountain Water (in respect to
Vegetables and Animals) this is the true Matter to which the form of
Philosophical Mercury is wanting, for which it is held to change its own, that
there may be made from thence what we seek for. But it is different from this
form, in a double Respect, first of the superfluity it retains in it self;
Secondly of that Spiritual Virtue which is wanting in it. Superfluity is
twofold, the Leprous Earthy part, and the Hydropical watery part. But there is a
defect of true Sulphurous heat, the Addition of which will thoroughly purge out
all its superfluities. For Philosophical Water is the Womb, but there is no
Womb fit for generation without Heat, add therefore and supply to Mercury, that
which is wanting, to wit, a Fiery Force to Burn, and his Dreggs will fall from
him of its own accord, which thou shall Exquisitely separate, if thou shall
perform this, thou have perfected the Work of a very quick-sighted and skilful
Philosopher. Then Jupiter has got his Kingdom, and the Louring Clouds of Saturn
being Discussed, he has made a bright and Glittering Fountain to appear unto
thee. Thou will wonder at the extraordinary brightness of this Water, whose
extraordinary Virtues, which it does not receive from the matter, but the form,
are to be found in no other thing in the whole World. For Instance it Dissolves
Gold Naturally, by a true Philosophic Solution, not as endeavoring Sophisters
Dissolve, by Corrosive filthy Waters, and endeavoring to estrange it from a
Metallic matter as far as they can. This Mercury does produce naturally Gold
and Silver of it self, also the Arcanum of Aurum Potabile, which I write
knowingly, also the Adepts do know and witness the same.

Therefore I will conclude this little Trertise, because what other things do
remain to be spoken, are delivered in a peculiar Treatise heartily written by
me. In the mean time, enjoy thou these things, expect the Blessing from God.
Farewell.

For thou shall obtain this from the Father of Lights alone.

So I have said, so done.

Praise to GOD.
A Short Manuduction To the Caelestial Ruby.

Written in LATIN By Eyraeneus Philalethes.

Translated into English by a Lover of Art and Nature.

LONDON, Printed, by T. Soul in Holy-well Lane in Shoreditch, 1694.

TRACT The SECOND
A short Manuduction to the Caelestial RUBY.
Of the Philosophical Stone, and the Secret thereof.
THe Stone of Philosophers is a certain Caelestial Substance, Spiritual, fixed,
Perfecting all Metals into true Gold and Silver, (according to the quality of
the Medicine) exposed to all Trials and that according to the Imitation of
Nature and its Operations, as near as it can be done.

About this Substance the Art of Chemistry is conversant, which handles and
teaches the Means and way of doing it, but not by diverse things, but by one
thing alone it is done, to which nothing is to be added, nothing taken away but
only the superfluities removed.

But that which appertains to the Authority of this Art, Experience in this
thing would be of much value to Convince men: For if it could be proved, that
true Gold was made thereby, then indeed it would not be doubted both concerning
the truth and benefit thereof. But it is plain that imperfect Metals are
Transmutable after this manner, because also general have been Destinated to
perfect on, but some have remained imperfect for want of Digestion. Therefore
if they can be duly Cocted would also be perfect, and seeing nothing hinders in
the Matter, but this may be done, because out of one Fountain all Metals have
proceeded, to wit, Crude Mercury; Cold and Moist, in which there has been no
difference between Sol and Saturn, but only what Nature works after wards in
this Matter, to wit, Decocting it more or less, this alone has made the
Diversity. Therefore all other Metals may be perfected into Sol to wit, by the
help of our Divine and most perfect Magistery, which being projected upon
imperfect Metals, is able so far to perfect them, by Decocting, as it is of a
more then due perfection required in Gold. Here therefore we may observe, of
how great Virtue and spiritual a Nature this our Divine Stone is, which can
perfect that in one hour above the Earth, by a bare Projection, which Nature
could not have Perfected by Subterranean Operations. Therefore it is manifest
here, what Nature helped by Art can do. For that our Stone as it was perfected
by Nature without the help of Art, was only of Vnary Virtue, but the Virtue
which is acquired by Art, Nature Cooperating and assisting is Denary, in every
Regimen, that is, after a manner infinite, for it cannot be computed, for that
first by dissolving it, and again Coagulating and Decocting it, one part of the
Medicine falls upon a Thousand of imperfect Metals, penetrating and perfectly
Tinging it: But if the Dissolution and Coagulation, being Iterated, thou shall
try to promote this Medicine further, behold it is Extended in infinitem: For
you shall sooner want wit to compute, then the Elixir Virtue to penetrate and
tinge: Not that immediately by its Corporeal Touch, it tinges the whole, but by
its Virtue and Influence, passes through the whole, since the least particle of
the Imperfect Body is touched and tinged immediately by the Medicine. But the
Matter is so, every part is tinged by the contagious part, like Leaven,
therefore the Elixir tinges that which it touches more immediately, with a
Tincture a little more feeble then it was it self, this again ferments that
which is nearest it, by Communicating the Tincture, and that so long until the
whole Mass be brought to the Perfection of true Gold. But this is done in a
short space of time, because of the Spirituality of our Agent, which being a
true Metallic Fire, like that Elemetary one, does Imperceptibly warm and
penetrate the hardest Bodies, even those parts which were not touched by the
Coals; and so this does penetrate with its virtue Metals, being resolved by the
Fire and fused, in a moment: So it has often times been observed, that Dow is
fermented by the ferment, even that outward part, which the Corporeal part of
the Ferment never touched: just so it is done in this Work; observe therefore
how Natural this Progress is in this Work. For we do not Profess to Create Gold
and Silver (as some Reproachers falsely Object) by our Art, but out of those
things we say only in which these are by Nature, to wit, out of Metals, which
are of the same Matter with Gold and Silver, but of an inequal Digestion, and
therefore remain imperfect, which by the Projection of our Arcanum upon them,
we Digest and Perfect after this manner, since nothing else is required to
Perfect them, besides this simple Decoction of their Crudity, which our
Medicine can abundantly perform.

Ho therefore you Sons of Learning! attend to me! because I will make known to
you the whole Secret of our Stone, which is not a Stone, and it is in every
Man, and may be found in its own Place at all times. If you have this you have
the most precious thing in the whole World. But it is Divine, and therefore not
to be Communicated to all. But to you Sons of Learning, I will manifest the
whole thing, neither will I conceal any thing necessary to this Magistery. But
be present with attentive Minds and perceive my words, and lay them up in your
secret Breasts.

You have heard before, The possibility of Transmutation, to wit, that a thing
destined to Perfection, but being left Imperfect, through defect of Decoction,
may by the Application of an Agent, of the same Essence and Nature with the
Perfect, but of greater Digestion, be perfected (to which these Imperfect were
Destinated) and matured, in as much as the Agent is of a more Exuberant
maturity, and more then perfect virtue. But our Stone is such to all other
imperfect Metals, whence we conclude without Controversy, that these are
Transmutable thereby into Gold and Silver.

Consider therefore you Lovers of Wisdom, what and of what kind, that ought to
be, which can perform this, which by the Philosophers is called a Stone, but it
is in every Man, and in every thing, and at every time of the Year to be found
in its place.

Observe my words! Note the Mystery! because it will most certainly Consist of
the Elements, then which nothing is more Universal, and those not simply, but
Compounded and Anatized, that is, every Element being to be known by its
Quality: Therefore in every thing is our Stone, or every thing, or rather out
of every thing, that is, Element, for any one of them, being destroyed, the
Aureity perishes. Be not therefore Solicitous concerning any thing Combustible
by the Fire, for certainly that which is made out of every thing, that is,
Contains the virtue or Qualities of every Element Anatized, resists the
Violence of the Fire without danger.

Hearken therefore you Sons of Learning! Behold I make known to you, the
greatest Mystery! and God help you to conceal this Arcanum from all unworthy
Persons. Our Stone does not draw its Original elsewhere then from Metals, and
those the most perfect: But ye shall suffer Common Operators in this Art, to
seek it in all things Extraneous; but as many of you as are Lovers of Truth,
don't attempt to find it out else where then in Metals: For this is our one,
nay only true Principle. But what that is, it will be your part to Observe;
neither to induce any Heterogeneous thing into this Work, but to leave that to
others, which seek our Stone in such things, but they shall always Labor, as
long as they shall be Ignorant, what our only true Principle is.

But I do make known this to you, remember therefore, that a Lion is Generated
of a Lion, a Man of a Man, but to expect the Generation of these from other
things, it would be absurd and Ridioulous: Combustibles are produced even as
Combustibles, Incorruptibles as Incorruptibles. Do you expect to gather Grapes
from Thistles, or Roses from Thorn: It would be so absurd, if any should go
about to make our Stone out of Animals, Herbs or such like things, as though
the Principle of Gold making were elsewhere to be sought then in Gold:
Therefore our stone is not to be sought in such things, which ought to have the
Natural Proprieties of true Gold, which are not in such like things, neither to
be found in them, except we be able to Create Sperms, which is in the ower of
no Man, but is proper to God alone; and if any one should promise himself to
enect this, he would be false and a Liar. Therefore let it suffice us, to
dispose and administer Sperms which are ready to our Hands, but it is not to
the Mattet, that new ones should be Created from Heterogeneous things, which is
both impossible to be done, and if it should be done, these Artificial Sperms
would be of no more virtue then those Natural Ones, which Nature has fitted to
our Work; therefore we must in no wise believe him that professes to produce
the Seed of Metals, out of Vegetables, etc. For although he take to himself the
Title of a Wonderful Philosopher and a skilful Artist, with the ignorant sort,
yet whilst he knows not to use Created things, it is much less probable that he
can Create Sperms.

Whosoever therefore will be a Son of Art, let him learn and acknowledge that
our Stone, the Transmutor of Metals into a perfect species, is nearly included,
and contained in most perfect Metals: Out of these therefore let him be
admonished to Learn its Production, and not elsewhere.

Now therefore, if I be not deceived, you have heard plainly enough, whence the
Matter of this secret Stone is to be sought: And if you have well observed, it
will not happen that you should act in this thing: Now let us say something of
its Name, for it is explained how it is in every Man and Place. Now I will
teach how, and why it is called a Stone and not a Stone: Lastly I will
adumbrate how it is to be Found. For the Philosophers say that it is a Stone,
and not a Stone, which some understand ill; but the Vulgar for the most part,
but it is Interpreted according to the letter, to be something, but what they
are Ignorant, to be like a Stone, tinging every thing, even by the very touch,
into pure Gold, whether it shall be Wood or Stone, which they repute for false
(and deservedly) therefore they judge it impossible to every Art, (except
Diabolical:) Therefore the name of a Chemist being heard, they presently abhor
and detest him, nor look upon him any other then a Foolish Waster of his
Estate, being incited to this, by the false and confused Understanding of our
most secret Stone; therefore the more Ignorant Men do superstitiously believe,
that such men are to be Punished by the Civil Law: But under the Name of
Ignorant Men, I do not only mean those that are Plebeians, or Illiterate, and
unlearned, but also I mean some, nay many men otherwise Learned, and perhaps
Pious, whom I therefore name Ignorant and unskilful in this Art; and also that
they endued with such Rude Manners, to bark at every thing unknown, like Dogs,
and speak Evil of those things, which they neither, either have or could
conceive in their minds, my reproof Extends to them most, because they being
both Learned and Pious, do what is contrary to Piety and Learning, to wit,
Judge such things which they neither do nor can discern. For when Learning
admonishes, Piety Persuades that every one should Consider and Examine those
things which he judges; these on the other hand condemn it undoubtedly, which
yet after they have Condemned, they know not, and are ignorant what it is,
which is very unworthy every wise Man.

Moreover, others studious in the Art of Chemistry, although they understand the
thing a little more Natural, yet in this they err, because they would make some
Stony Congealation, to wit, they would make something to bear the form of a
Stone, for this alleging the words of Philosophers which affirm it to be a
Stone.

But I would have you to Understand, that it is not called a Stone because it
is like a stone, but for this Cause alone; that it flies not from the Fire, but
remain sixed in it, like as it were a stone, and for this it is called a stone,
for the sake of hiding this secret, but it is like a stone no otherways, and
therefore it is not a stone; but in species is Gold more pure then the purest,
in fixity or incombustibility, a stone, in Figure of most subtle Powder, to
sight a grave Body, to touch impalpable, to taste sweet, of good smell, in
virtue a most penetrating spirit, being dry and yet unctuous, easily flowing
upon a Plate of Metal and tinging: Therefore it is deservedly called the Father
of all wonderful things, since it has all the Elements in it, yet so anatized,
that none Predominates, but all four make one fifth Essence or Nature, which is
none of the four, but partakes of all, and is a most temperate Complexion, tho
it be pure Metallic Fire, and this is our stone, which is not a stone, nor has
any Name proper to its self, and yet there is nothing in all the World whose
Name it may not have, under some Consideration. For that it is of so wonderful
a Nature, as if we call it spiritual, it is true, if Corporeal we speak
properly: For it is Gold, and that not Vulgar but Spiritual, that is, subtle,
penetrative and Noble: wherefore it is a spirit or fifth Essence, the most
Noble of all Creatures, after the Rational Soul, and bringing all Distempers,
and all Imperfections both in Animals and Metals (according to the Quality of
the Medicine) to a most exact and perfect temperature: And that is truly our
Microcosme, which we esteem so much. Having this Stone or Powder or fifth
Essence, neither Riches nor Health will be wanting, God giving, to whom be
glory for Ever.

But that I may come to the last part of my undertaken Task, to wit, that I may
show by what Means this our Stone may be obtained, for it is not Fabricated by
Nature, but it is to be sought, and to be Composed by the Art and Ingenuity, of
the Workman; yet nature helping and seconding his Endeavor, for as it is
abundantly enough Declared, that the Matter of this Stone is not to be fetched
elsewhere then from Metals; Yet nevertheless these Metals are not our stone,
for they have Another form Different from our stone. Notwithstanding, I do not
deny that our Medicine, is to be drawn from them, but the former form of the
Metal must necessarily be taken away, that it may be drawn out, and that under
the Conservation of the species, tho under the Destruction of that particular
and Individual Metal. But the species of Metals dwells, and is Conserved in the
spirit, which spirit resides not in any other thing, but in Water Homogeneous
of its own kind: For water is the Habitation of the spirit, which is Especially
to be retained in the Conservation of its species. Therefore Gold is to be
Changed from its Form, and that into Water Homogenous of its own kind, in which
Water the spirit of the Gold is preserved, which afterward, Re-inspissates its
Water, and Induces a new Form, after putrefaction, a thousand times more
perfect then the form of Gold, which it lost by being re incrudated.

Therefore Metallic Bodies are to be reduced into Homogeneal Water, not
wetting the Hands, that out of this Water a new Metaltick Species may result,
far more Noble than any Metal. This is our most precious Medicine and
Celestial Ruby.

But all this Work, very well Answers to the subterraneal Operations of Nature,
from whence the Work is deservedly called Natural. For Nature does produce
Metals, according to their species out of Mercury alone, Cold and moist, by a
daily Digestion and Coction in the Veins of the Earth. But Art to shorten the
Work, has found out a far more subtle Operation, yet like to this: For it
Conjoyns with Crude Mercury, cold and moist, ripe Gold, and both of these by
Commixtion, and secret Conjunction, makes one Mercury, which they Name Aqua
Vitae, which Mercury at last they Decoct into Gold not Vulgar, but far more
Noble: which fulls upon all Imperfect Metals, and tings them into tried Gold,
exposed to all Trials.

You understand, therefore, as I believe, that tho our Stone be of Gold alone,
yet it is not Vulgar Gold. That therefore our Gold may be fetched from Vulgar
Gold, it is to be Dissolved into Water, not Elementary, but not wetting the
Hands, that is Mineral: which Water is Mercury, which from a Red servant, has
means in its self; to perfect the whole Work, without any Imposition of Hands,
and this at last is that only, true and Natural Principle, to which nothing is
to be added, nothing taken away, unless some superstuities, which without any
humane help, its self will perfect, by its own Virtue and Natural Instinct.
Therefore thou having this Mercury mind nothing else. With good Reason
therefore, the Philosopher said, Employ thy whole study in Decocting Mercury,
but I say to thee, let thy whole Study be Employed in getting this Mercury,
that is in Dealbating our Red Laren, which being done, thou have done thy Part,
what remains is the work of Women and the Play of Boys: For Nature will be
present to dispatch the rest, but in the mean while, a desired rest is given to
thee, which indeed, as the Philosopher said, Is more desirable then any Labor.

For know that our Albification is no Light Work, being Radical, for this will
be the Indicium of an Altered and reduced Body. Neither will Gold so
Albificated, ever return to its Pristine form; for from a Body it is made a
Spirit, and from a fixed, Volatile, by this Operation. Therefore be wholly
intent in Dealbating Laton, for it is easier to make Gold, then so to destroy
it, for he that dissolves so, Congeals it rather, for the solution of the Body,
and the Coagulation of the Spirit, are Coincident in it.

But Consider you Sons of Wisdom, and Note these Mysteries: That which
Dissolves is a spirit, but that which Coagulates is a Body. Therefore if you
would Dissolve your Body, first of all, you have need of a spiritual substance,
because a Body cannot dissolutively enter a body, But a Spirit enters it,
Attenuating and Rarifying; and because you require Water, therefore you have
need of Water to manifest this: for every Agent Exercising any Act upon any
thing, Assimilates that on which it Acts to its self (as far as it can be done)
and every Natural Effect is conformed to the Nature of the Efficient, therefore
to draw Water out of the Earth you have need of Water.

I don't mean (as some badly think) by Water, Aquafortis, Aqua Regis, and other
Corrosives, which Common Alchymists, Artificially Compound to themselves, and
put them to dissolve these Metallic Species's which yet they don't Dissolve,
but Corrode, foul and Corrupt: for who would believe that those Waters, can
Destroy the old form of the Metal, under Conservation of a Metallic Species,
which yet themselves are Aliens from a Metallic Nature? for they are not
sufficient Enough to destroy thoroughly the Species! Else they would Convert
them into their own Nature? But as far as they can, they do Transform them into
some fordid thing: for the more Bodies are Corroded, the more they are
Estranged from a Metallic Nature.

But our Water is Water of Mercury, and dissolves Bodies into Mercury, and
inseparably is joined with them, being Dissolved, Cohabitates and is Concocted,
that from them may be made that one All-Spiritual thing which is sought. For
every thing that any thing Naturally dissolves, (that so the Species of the
thing Dissolved may be preserved) remains with the thing Dissolved, Materially
and formally, and does Coalesce, and is Inspissated by it, and nourishes it, as
a Body may see in a Grain of Wheat, which being Di^^olved by a terrene Hamid
Vapor, this Vapor remains with this Grain after dissolution for its Radical
Humidity, and Coalesces with it into a Plant. Another thing also will be to be
Observed in every Natural dissolution, which since such like Dissolution, is
the enlivening of a Dead thing, can be done by nothing else then that Living
thing which was of the Essence of the Dead thing before it was Dead: As in a
Grain the Life is dead as (I may say) which we would have vivified; this can be
done therefore by nothing else but the vapor of the Earth, the Humidity and
Calidity of the Air, for that the Grain its self was Extracted out of the
Earth, and formerly was nothing else but such like vapor which afterward
became dead by Decoction, therefore, by this alone naturally to be Vivified,
under the Conservation of its Species. Therefore I write this, because so many
and so Learned Men are so much Deceived with that Vulgar Mercury, for although it
is a Mineral Water, yet not of a like Nature or Essence with Gold. For who will
not confess, that if a Grain of Wheat, be cast into a Pool of Water, it will
not Germinate nor Increase (yet Bull-Rushes are wont to Vegetate there) whence
is this I Pray? Except that the Aquaous humor was not essential to it, neither
of a like Nature with the Wheat; wherefore it does not Naturally Dissolve it,
but Destroys it: Not otherways Gold if it be mixed to be Decocted with Common
Quicksilver, or any other Mercury, Except alone of its own Humidity, it does
not receive a Dissolution in them, to wit, because these Waters being too
Crude, Cold and unclean, are of a far unlike nature with Gold: wherefore in
these it is not amended, neither retained, neither with these Matured into a
fart more Noble Perfection, then its Nature. Therefore at Length our Mercury is
not vulgar Mercury, for it is a pure Water, Clean, Clear, Bright and
Resplendent, and worthy of much Admiration: It is Crude, Cold and Immature, if
Compared with Sol, but in Respect of Common Mercury Digested, warm and Mature,
which has no qualitys like to this, except alone in whiteness of Color, and of
its form of Flux in which notwithstanding there is a great Difference.

But lastly that you may well understand what our Water is, by Circumstances, I
tell thee (and that moved with Charity) that it is Living, Running, Clear,
Shining, White like Snow, Hot and Moist, Airy, Vaporous and Digesting, in which
Gold is melted like Ice in warm Water, in this is Contained the whole Regimen
of Fire and Sulphur which Exist but Predominates not. This is indeed the keeper
of our Gates the Bath of the King and his Queen, davly Warming and that
Incessantly, and yet is taken elsewhere then from the Matter, and is
distinguished from the whitening Substance of the Water, yet joined and
appearing, under the same form of Flux, and the same Color. This is that heat
of the Lamp, which if it be Temperate, every day will Circumact the Matter,
(until by Calcination the Humidity being dried a second Fire of Ashes is
produced, in which the Vessel or Water is Hermetically shut and Sealed,
according to the Saying of the Philosopher, take a Vessel strick it with a
Sword, take its Life, this is the Closure. Therefore this our Water is our
Vessel, and in that our Furnace dwells secretly, whose Fire ought to be
moderate, least the whole Work be destroyed, yet strong enough least the Life
Dispond for want of Heat. Therefore in this Water the whole Secret of our
Vessel confists, also the Structure of the hidden Furnace is founded in the
Composition of this Water, in the Knowledge whereof, all our Fires, all our
Weights, all our Regimens lie hid. This Water is the Clear Bright Fountain in
which our King is to be washed, that he may overcome all his Enemies, of this
Water and its Preparation be Careful, because surely without any other help
except the Apposition of a perfect purged and Cleansed Body, Nature will make
from hence our most Secret Stone.

And I say to thee in Truth, that this Water is Mineral, pure and Clean,
neither can it be Extracted elsewhere, but out of those things alone in which
it is by Nature. And the things out of which it is immediately Drawn, are most
secret above all others. Also the Means of Extracting it is most wonderful;
also its Virtues Stupendous. For it does Dissolve Sol without violence, and is
made friendly to it, and it washes him from all his Foulness: It is White,
Warm and Clear; therefore praised be the most High, who has Created this
Mercury and given it a Nature overcoming all others. For certainly the Work of
Alchymy would be in vain and useless, without this Water. But consider thou
what this Water is, and Learn from the Work as I have done. For having this
Mercury thou have the Key of the whole Art, with which thou may unlock all
the most secret things of Philosophers. Therefore our Water is of alike Nature
with Gold, of an unlike Substance, in the making of which there is a great
Stink. Consider therefore and deeply weigh the possibility of Nature, and do
not mix any Heterogeneous thing: For Nature is only amended by its own Nature,
and by no other. But if you do not yet understand do not blame me, for I have
sincerely (as far as it is Lawful for a Man to speak) Expounded to you the
whole Matter: That therefore you may understand the Conclusion of the Matter,
be very attentive. Our Stone is made out of one thing, and four Mercurial
Substances (whereof one is Mature, the rest Crude, but pure, of which two are
drawn out of a Mineral by the third, but wonderfully) joined with a Temperate,
not Violent Fire, and so Cocted every day, until all be made one by a Natural
Conjunction, most secret, not Manual.

Afterward the Fire being changed, let it be Digested with a Fire daily
increasing, at first more Moderate, and so every day increased until these
Volatiles are fixed by a Sulphur of their own kind, fixed and incombustible,
until the whole Compound possess the same Nature, Fixity and Color. For then
it securely Resists the Fire, and this is the most powerful Power of Power,
overcoming every subtle and penetrating every solid thing; the virtue of which
being turned into Earth appears complete.

But there are, that I may describe the thing particularly, manifold Degrees of
this our Process, in Number Twelve, all which I will hriesly run over, the
first whereof is called Calcination.

Of Calcination.
And Calcination is the first Purgation of the Stone, the Exsiccation of the
Humidity, by the virtue of the Natural Heat of our Water, stirred up by the
External Heat, from whence the Composition is turned into Calx or Powder of a
black color, yet unctuous, and retaining the Radical Humiaity.

The final Cause of this Calcination is, that the Solution may be the better
induced to the Stone, which without this cannot be had: For Gold is a very fixed
Body, neither can it be immediately Dissolved by our Water, except only in part,
that is, be made soft, Incrudated and Albificated: In which Albification two
Natures appear, volatile and fixed: which we liken to two Dragons, or Serpents.
Wherefore that a full Dissolution may be made, there is need of Contrition,
that the Body by Calcination may be made spongious and viscous, because then at
last it is fit for Dissolution.

The Second final Cause is this, that we Reconcile contrary Qualities, for
whilst they fight, they are unprofitable unto us: For in the first Conjunction
our Water distinguishes between Sulphur and Mercury, volatile and fixed, and
these are Enemies to one another, and Different things, but it is our part to
bring them to a Union, but contrary qualities are not reconciled, but by a
Medium; there are therefore in our first Operation, four contrary qualities,
Heat, Cold, Dryness, and Humidity, of which two, Hot and Dry, are Attributed to
Sulphur, Cold and Humid to Mercury, therefore they are opposed Diametrically,
the heat of Sulphur and the Cold of Mercury, also the Humidity of Mercury, and
Siccity of Sulphur: To reduce these Contraries to friendship cannot be done
without a Medium, but the Medium must be partaker of both, also suited to both.
Would we therefore reconcile Cold and Heat, the Medium will be by Siccity,
which may be joined to both Heat and Cold; by turning therefore the Composition
into Earth, heat and Cold agree in this third thing, that they may dwell
together, to wit the Degree being abated: But afterward being dissolved into
water, also two other Enemies are Reconciled Siccity and Humidity, by the
Frigidity of Water, so that now one is made of two by the Conjunction, made
after a Natural Separation.

But the Efficient of this Calcination is, the Operation of Heat upon Moisture,
turning every thing that resists it into most subtle Powder, but the moving
Instrument is the Fire contrary to Nature, which is hid in our dissolving
Water, stirring up heat in the body, and digesting the Humidity into a viscous
and unctuous Powder.

But that this Operation is prior to dissolution take these Reasons; it is
prior, because a certain Solution is made (as I may so say) by our Divine
Water, therefore the congealation of our Spirit, will be expected in the next
place, because Spirits are always congealed after the dissolution of the Body:
For they have the same Operation, such therefore as the Solution is, such the
Congealation is to be expected after it.

Then the Order of Nature requires this, for a Woman Exercises her Dominion
first, then it is necessary to be overcome by her Husband, but the Woman
retains her whole Domination in the Water; this therefore will be the first
Work, of the Man Exerting his Power to overcome that, in which the Woman
possesses both her Qualities, which being done, he will easily Subject to
himself that, in which she has only one quality.

Lastly, Heat is not Consequentially joined necessarily to any Quality, but
Siccity will always be the end of Heat: from whence it appears, that the man
ought first to exert his Power, therefore Calcination is rightly called the
beginning of the Work.

Therefore Calcination is the head of the Work, for without this, will neither
be Commixtion or Union, this therefore is to be done in the first days of thy
Stone, for in the first Dealbation, the Body is Reduced into its first
Principles, Sulphur and Mercury, of which the first is fixed, the other
volatile, therefore are compared to two Serpents, or Dragons, the one Winged,
showing its Volatile Nature, the other without Wings, denoting fixity, both
these coming from one Fountain, tends to one thing, therefore is likened to a
Serpent taking his Tail in his Mouth, to show that Sulphur is nothing without
the substance of Mercury, nor Mercury without the substance of Sulphur, but
that this Mercurial Sulphur, and sulphurous Mercury, perfect the whole Art.
Therofore it is deservedly called one Composition, that although it appears
twofold in the beginning of the Work, whence it is called Rebis, yet by
Conjunction they may be made one and the same, and this is called one Elixir,
which never would be possible unless they were quite of the same Nature.
Therefore the Nature of sulphur and Mercury is diligently to be Observed, and
we must take care of Errors, for these two are not contrary things, but one
and the same sulphureal Mercury, Mature and digested, and Mercurial Sulphur,
crude and Imature.

Therefore that Divine kind of Generation, will be neceslary to be observed, to
wit, how Nature has Operated in Procreating Metallic Bodies in the Mines under
the Earth, because we do all things in our Work in Imitation thereof, as near
as can be, therefore we choose the same Matter which she has made use of, although
Art has found out a far more subtle way to the Abreviation of the Work, and
the more then perfect Exaltation of the Stone. For in Metallic Veins, one
thing alone is found, viz. Mercury, which is very crude and frigid, and in
which the sulphureal quality altogether is unactive, also no Digestive heat is
found there, but by an imperceptable Motion after a long time, by little and
little this Metallic Principle is changed, until at last it be converted into
fixed sulphur: for that whilst it remained Frigid and Humid, it was called
Mercury, in this Eleration or Excitation, it is named sulphur.

But the matter is otherways in this our Work: For besides Mercury Crude and
Cold we have another thing, to wit, Mature Gold, in which Act, more active
qualities Exist, this therefore we join to our Mercury, in which passive
qualities are found, that the one may relieve the other, and that which Nature,
helped by no Heat has digested in the Mines, we having a double Fire, Digest,
whence it comes to pass that we don't make simply Gold, but some other thing
much more Noble and excellent then Gold.

You see therefore what Sulphur is, what Mercury; how also we have a double
Snlphur and a double Mercury in our Art, which yet are not distinct in Essence,
but in maturity and perfection; also you understand, as I think, after what
manner they are worked, since the Perfect Body of Gold is Incrudated by our
Divine water not wetting the hands, and it is reduced to its first Principles,
to wit Mercury, which is not without Sulphur, participating of the Natures of
the Luminaries, therefore in this Operation the Woman Ascends upon the Man, and
predominates over him for a Time, which indeed is unnatural, till the man
begins to exert his Power, and then first of all by his siccity-bringing heat,
does Exsiccate the Humidity of the Woman, by converting all into a most subtle
and viscous Powder, from which Powder by solution, water is afterward
dissolved, in which Water is the spirit of the Dissolvent and dissolved, the
Man and the Woman are joined together. But the excited Heat does not here find
a Bound, but as yet Works every day by separation, by distinguithing between
the subtle and the gross, that the first may swim at the lop, the latter may
subside so long till all are of the fame quality, and then at length in the
hour of their Nativity, they are inseparably Conjoined, and the Man ascends
upon the Woman, and Impregnates her: at length she brings forth the Cloud which
the has Conceived, in which me Putrisies and is Corrupted, and afterward both
of them ascend or arise again Glorious; not now divided, but made one and the
same by Conjunction, and are so Coagulated, Sublimed, Cibated and Exalted, into
a most perfect nature and Multiplied in weight and goodness of Quality,
according to your Discretion; whose excellent Use will be proved, as well in
Projection as in Medicine.

Therefore these black and stinking Ashes, are not to be despised, since in
them the Diadem of our King is contained, and I tell you in all truth, that
whiteness will never be had unless you make it black, for unless the Body
putrifies it will remain without fruit, but if it be Corrupted then indeed thou
shall see them arising from thence, where it seemed they had lost their Bodies
which they had, and they will appear that which they never were before. Honor
you therefore the Sepulcher of our King, for unless you do this, you shall
never admire himcoming from the East.

Therefore you must take Care that you don't Err in this first Entrance, for
the Work is spoiled unless you be wary here. The common Errors in this
Operation are many and various; Firstly, of them who know not what is to be
Calcined, but seek the Principle of Goldmaking in Extraneous things. Some bring
in for their Material Principle, those things which are not of the same
Imposition with Metals, such are Borax, Alloms, Attrement, Vitriol, Arsnick,
Seeds of Plants, Wine, Vinegar, Urine, Hair, Blood, Gums, and the Rosins of the
Earth; some do endeavor, (such is their Blockishness) to Generate Salts of
every kind, out of the Flame, I pass by these understanding nothing at all in
this Art. Others, although they work in Metals, yet desire to perfect Calcination,
either with Corrosive Waters, Spirit of Salt, Sulphur or Fire, and do indeed
Corrode the Bodies, not Calcine them. For this Calcination is not made by the
Native Calidity, of the Body, helped by a Friendly heat, but by a Corrosive
Force of Waters, without any propensity of the Metal to it; therefore Metals
are fouled and Dissipated, and so Estranged from a Metallic Nature, but not
Naturally Calcined. Therefore every Calcination, which is made elsewhere then
in the perfect Body of Gold, is vain and unuseful to our work.

Also every Calcination of Sol, in which a Dissolution, without laying on of
Hands, does not follow, is false and vain.

Therefore this our Calcination, is necessarily to be made by Mercury, which
being joined to Gold (a due weight and proportion both of Quantity and Quality
being observed) softens it and takes away the Solidity and Incrudates it; and
by its internal Heat, joined with the outward Heat of Vulcan, stirrs up that
Native heat of the Gold, which being stirred up, acts upon the Humidity and
Exsiccates it into a subtle Powder, Viscous and Black: And this is the true
Key of the Work, to Incrudate the Mature, by the Conjunction of an Immature,
being incrudated, to Calcine it, being Calcined to Dissolve it, Philosophically
not Vulgarly.

The signs of this our Calcination are these, first, after the Body shall be
satiated with Water, as soon as the Keeper of the Gates shall stir up the Heat
of the Bath, the Water begins to be Obscured, or that which was a splendid
Composition before, then it visibly grows Turgid, and swells, ascending and
descending continually, until the whole at last become a viscous and fatt
Powder; in which it appears that the Humidity is conserved in this Operation,
otherwise the Labor would be in vain. From thence therefore, it is easily
resolved into Mineral Water, which is the last and most certain Sign, that our
Calcination has been true and Philosophical. For as soon as the heat begins to
Operate, the Frigid and Humid, being Impatient thereof, goes to the top, from
thence it melts and descends, and so reduces it, as much as may be, to its own
Stmilitude: Doing this daily until at last the whole be resolved into Fat, and
as it were Glutinous Water: For so our Operations are Concatinated, that one is
the Cause and beginning of another, neither can one be had or understood
without another. But we, that we may instruct the Sons of Art more fully, and
drive away the unworthy, as far as may be from this Art, do handle, as it were,
diverse Operations, when there is but one Recipe, one thing, one Regimen and
successive Disposition to black, white and red, neither are we to be understood
otherwise. Wherefore every one that will truly be a Philosopher, should regard
the Sense, not the Letter of Writers in this Art.

But that we may come to our true Calcination, these things are to be
Confidered that follow.

Firstly, that thou should get our Mercury, without which, nothing is done in
this Art: See then that thou be not deceived in that Common Mercury, which is
altogether unuseful to our Work, for if thou Work in it to thy Dying day, thou will find nothing in it.

Secondly, thou must take Care, that the Fire of the Furnace be not too
Intense, but let it be clibanically measured, which that thou may fully
understand, know, that the Sulphur which Predominates not in the Mercury or
Water digests the Matter, which together with Azoth is abundantly sufficient
for thee. Let not therefore, its Internal quality, confound the external form,
then be not solicitous about the manner of making the Fire, only have a care
that it be not too Gentle, for then thou will easily dispond for want of Heat,
nor yet let it be over Violent, but of a Moderate degree, according to the
Nature of the Bodies, and exclusive of Cold: Take these things on the other
Hand, concerning the Internal and Natural Fire, I call that Internal which
increases the Work in the End.

Thirdly, be careful of the quantity, that thou do not put so much to be
drunk by Laton, that he cannot afterward Eat, for if thou shall put on too
much, there will be a Sea of trouble, if too little, it will be burnt into
Smoke be not therefore Covetous or Prodigal, between the Extremes, keep a Mean.
Therefore, in joining the Male with his Female, remember that it behooves the
Activity of Sulphur, to Exsiccate the superfluous Humidity of Mercury,
therefore do not drowned the active with too much Crude Sperm, the Woman will
also desire to Rule, therefore do not Choke the Humidity of thy Stone, with too
much Earth, but with Discretion mix it sweetly, and according to the Exigence
of Nature, lest the Virtue of the Stone be diminished; make therefore an
Amalgama, not as the Goldsmith does, with four or five Parts of Water, but as
the Philosophers do, with a double or treble to the last, but it is better, to
take three to four, then one to two, since the solution will be better, because
the Call ination, will be more Natural. Ripley Witnesses with me, That by;how
much the more Earth (says he) and less Water thou take, so much the
better;Solution shall thou make. In the first place therefore, beware that your
Land be not overwhelmed with waters, because the Fire is hidden in the Earth,
which will not Operate if there be too much Humid Superfluity: whence the Error
will be Incorrigible, and the work vain.

Fourthly, Be careful of the closure of the Vessel, lest the Spirits should fly
out and the Work be destroyed. Keep therefore the Vessel and its Ligature, nor
look upon this to be of little moment. Consider therefore Man, who as he is
Generated by Nature, so also our Gold is Matured by Art helped by Nature:
Therefore consider with how great care. Nature has shut the Womb of a pregnant
woman, lest any thing should either get in, or pass out; otherwise the Foetus
would parish. with no less Industry be thou cautious in perfecting this
Philosophical work, lest thy Labor be in vain. (...) therefore the
Philosopher, saying, Take thessel and Fire, strike it with a (...), take the
Life, this is the Closure: Hermes also says, The Vessel of the Philosophers is
their water,and know for certain, that the vessel of Nature is only fit for us
in this Art, which diligently is to be shut. For in forming the Embrio, there
are very great winds, which if they should vanish, we are undone; for the error
is Irreparable, whence the Damage is most certain.

The Work in the Fifth place is Patience, that thou don't dispond or study to
make the solution too speedy, but firmly believe, that too much bast is the
greatest Enemy to Conjunction, and hinders it: For the Body to be dissolved,
Impertinently Rubifies, stirring up a Fever, that is, a Fire against Nature,
whence being struck as it were with the Hammer of Death, it becomes
impertinently passive from active, and instead of black, it appears citrine,
like a wild Poppy. But our true Calcination, conserves the Radical Humidity in
the Body to be dissolved, and it is finished in no other color but black, and
becomes a discontinuous Calx, unctuous, fatt, and fit for fusion. Be therefore
Patient, that thou may obtain thy Desire, because you will have very much
cause of Despair. When therefore we speak of our Operations, do not think that
we perfect them in one or two days, or see the colors or signs in the first
hour, No verily; but we have expected much and long, till there was made an
Agreement betwixt contrary qualities, wherefore Trevesan Teaches in his
Practice, who was a Learned and good man in this Art, that be staid in Prison,
that is, suspense of mind and Doubt, forty days, but that he returned
afterward, and saw Clouds and Mists. Moreover if thou should put Grain into
Good Land, thou shall not look into the Earth, by moving it every hour, that
you may see, whether, and how much it begins to increase, if you should do
this, you could not expect a sweet vegetation, much less Fruit from thence. So
foolish and Insipid are they who as soon as ever they have joined the
Dissolvent with the Dissolvend presently seek some signs of the Operation, nor
can satisfy themselves, but they either move or open, or add, or detract
something, or at least increase the Fire to accelerate the work, and so by this
means hinder the work of Nature; and therefore do not attain the wished for
Ends. Therefore attend to my Doctrine, as soon as thou have prepared the
Matter, that is, mature Sulphur yellow, with his Crude white Sulphur, and have
duly espoused them, shut them up in a vessel and let them stand without
trouble: if thou rightly proceed, within twenty four Hours, thou shall see thy
Compound swelling, and perhaps sending forth some Bubbles, by reason of the
Heat of thy Sea water, striving to excite the heat of the Included Matter; but
in the first Entrance, thou shall behold the variation of the colors slowly,
(as at least it will seem to thee) because then the keeper of the Gate,
necessarily sustains many Labors, because whatever is done, he alone then does
it, because the Bath is not yet prepared, that is, the Natural heat of the
King, is not yet stirred up. But when the Bath is made hot, our Housekeeper
shall sustain but few Labors, and the operations will be easily to be
distinguished. Therefore let the Sons of this Art know for certain, that the
first color that will appear, after the si ver color of the Amalgama of the
Body will not be perfect black, for this color does not come in a moment, but
every day the more the whiteness is diminished, the more blackness will
supervene, until at last it be completed. For blackness is a sign of a
dissolved Body, which is not made in one hour, but by little and little, but
Incessantly: for the Tincture proceeding from the Reins of Sol and Luna, shows
it self black to the Eyes, but is Extracted insensibly, and imperceptibly.
Therefore, the coming of Blackness and the departure of the Tincture, out of
the Bowels of the Dissolvend Body, is the same measure and term of time,
because as soon as the Tincture is wholly gone out, so soon the blackness will
be perfect and absolute. Concerning this, hear what Ludus Puerorum says,
First, by how much the more thou Decocts, so much the more thou subtilizeth the
Gross, and blackens the Compound. And Bernard Trevesan says, The Earth of the
rest beginning to predominate, the blackness of the Element appears, but does
not obtain his Dominion but by little and little. To finish in a word, there
are only four Principle Colors, the first whereof is Blackness, and that most
slow in coming, and longest in duration, which if it were made perfect by a
momentary Ingress, the work would be most expeditious, for it should not perish
more slowly then it came, and remain in the top of blackness for an hour: For
there is no Interstitium in these Operations, but it Increases to the height
of one Degree, at which it no sooner arrives, but Decresses again, therefore it
ascends slowly to blackness, and descends slowly from it but there is not a
Moment in which it does not ascend or descend, for nothing rests but in its
End, but blackness is not the end of our Stone, ergo, etc.

How then shall blackness appear? to wit even as night comes, for first the
Twilight, at last Dark Night, and that by insensible Degrees, every moment
there being less Light in the Air then another, until at last there be no Light
at all, then it is deep Night, but all this is wont to be within an hour, yet
the Motion is Insensible: But our work because it requires a longer time, the
motion must needs be more Imperceptible. Thou therefore that seek this,
consider the Example produced, and thou shall have thy Answer.

Objection, But after the first Excitation of the Matter, the Tincture goes out
every hour and moment, but the color of the Tincture going out, is blackest
blackness, therefore after the first stirring up of the Matter, blackest
blackness will appear in an hour.

We Answer, the blackest blackness, is of the Tincture gone out, but not of the
going out, or if so, yet it goes out Insensibly, but insensible blackness,
although most black, when it goes into much white, will not manifest the blackest
blackness in the whole Compound, but a whitish color, but if so be the Subject
of Whiteness, be not subtle and well depurated, even as this white is now,
then its Tincture in its first Egress, is not completely Black, but it obtains
this by a Putrefaction, which is not a bare Egress of the Tincture, but a
Repugnance and Resistance from it, which arises between the outgoing Tincture,
and the extracting Water, that is, between Sulphur and Mercury. Concerning this
thing hear the saying of Morienus, Our operation is nothing else, but an
Extracting of Water out of its Earth, nor that only, but a returning of the
Water upon the Earth, until the Earth putresie. Therefore the Tincture is not
altogether black of it self, but most white, because by how much the more the
Tincture goes out, which is the Soul, by so much the more the Earth which is
the Body, is dispirited, and so it putrefies and Blackens.

How long time then, must we expect, before it be perfectly black? In this
thing attend to what Flammel says, The color which thou ought first to see is
blackness and that not every, but most black, and that within the space of
Forty days. Also Ripley says, suffer the Commixt, and Coequated Natures, to
lie together six Weeks, which time expect with a slow Fire. When the Colors
dye they will show it, for at that time they will Boil like Liquid Pitch and
will putrify. And Bernard in his Parable says, The King pitting off his
splendid Robes, gives the Silken ones to Saturn, being Clothed in black, which
be retains forty days. All this understand of blackness in its height, which
is plain from the above-repeated words of Flammel, but a more remiss blackness,
will appear sooner; so the Scala Philosophorum says, within sixteen days in
the degree of Putrefaction, an easy Fire being kept, the matter will be
continually Covered with blackness. And this either later or sooner, according
to the Ingenuity of the Operator, in Adapting the Matters.

But whether will intermedial Colors appear, in a Progress from white to
black, as in the Progress from black to white? It seems so, because there is no
transition from one extreme to another, unless by Mediums: And we answer that
they so appear, although indeed confusedly, and some in some Works will appear in
a Progress to the height of blackness, which perhaps will not appear in
another, because they are only accidental Colors: but not altogether the same,
betwixt the first Whiteness and Blackness, which are between this, and ultimate
Whiteness, because there is not the same Reason of Matter; in the former the
thick Terrestrial Matter was to be burned and purified, but in this work the
Matter is more Spiritual and pure; therefore in a pure or Depurated Subject, in
a Progress from the extremity of blackness to the extremity of Whiteness, the
Intermedial Colors will be much more clear and admirable, then those which
appeared in an Earthly Subject. But in both progresses they will appear, in the
former transition, between the Extremes, Obscurer, fewer and fouler; in the
Latter, more, more shining and splendid, witness the Philosopher, After the
height of Blackness, before Whiteness, in the hour of Conjunction great
Miracles will appear: For whatever Colors could be thought on in the whole
World then will be conspicuous. And Riply says, In our work colors will
appear, then which never more fair appeared. Also before perfect Blackness the
intermedial Colors will show themselves, witness the Philosopher, who Painting
the Colors of the Dragons, says They are black, Yellow and Azure, and these
intermedial Colors says he, denote that thy Confections are not yet perfectly
putrefied. In a Word, the various Colors in Dying, will appear more obscure,
but thin and few, and this before black Night obnubilate the whole Horizon. But
in rising again, very many and very Splendid ones will arise, because the Body
now begins to be glorified, and the Light to predominate over the Darkness and
this in a depurated, and spiritual Subject.

But in what order will these foresaid Colors appear? This truly cannot be
determined, because they are varied many ways, but the better the juice of the
Water of Life shall be, the better the Signs shall appear. The order of the
four Principle Colors is described by all, but no one can determine the order
of the accidental ones, let it suffice thee if within forty days, thou have a
complete blackness, don't mind other things much, but it is good to attend, for
blackness is first Especially desirable, and tho others appear, unless thou
see this without doubt thou have erred, But as I said, other Colors are not
to be Despised, except the Venerial, or imperfect Red, which if it appear
before blackness, is to be suspected, especially when the siccity of the
Compound, and Discontinuity of the parts accompany it, I say this Precipitation
is a fatal Index to the Operator of his lost time.

This same thing the Philosopher witnesses, saying, A vehement Fire hinders
Conjunction, and tinges white, with the color of the wild Poppy. And Flammel
in his Hierogliphical Figures, says, unless thou shall behold, the blackest
black of black whatever other color thou see, thou art in the way of Error:
But especially a reddish color is to be suspected, for if thou see that,
thou have burned, or art burning the lively virtue of the Stone.

But I must stay no longer in these things, since one Water does all this, so
that the Internal Compound, continually be ruled, with External heat; neither
is there any thing, in the whole Work more Wonderful, then this our Water.
which I have fully Described above, to which place I send thee back.

Concerning Solution.
And the Dissolution of our Stone, is the Reduction of it into its first
matter, the Manifestation of the Humid, and the Extraction of Natures from
their Profundity, which is finished by bringing them into a Mineral Water.

This Operation is of no Light Work or Moment, for how hard it is, those that
have toiled in it can attest.

FINIS.
THE FOUNTAIN OF Chemical Philosophy

Written in Latin By EYRENAEUS PHILALETHES

Printed in the Year, 1694.

TRACT The THIRD.
The Fountain of Chemical Philosophy.
I Will divide the whole of the Art into these parts: The first shall contain
things substantially and essentially Constituting the Work: The second the
disposition of them: The things Essentially Costituting the Stone, are a Body
or Mature Sulphur, or red Brass and Water, or Immature Mercury, or white Brass,
to which a Vessel is added, a Furnace and Triple Fire. The Disposition of these
things, Considers the Weight and the Regimen. The Pondus is twofold, the
Regimen twofold: Those things which perfect these Operations, are Calcination,
Dissolution, Separation, Conjunction, Putrefaction, Distillation, Coagulation,
Sublimation, Fixation, and Exaltation, of which the two first, are made
especially by a Temperate Incomburent and altering Ignition of the Fire;
heating the Kings bath and Changing him first into a subtle viscous Earth,
Discontinued black and stinking, then into Mineral Water, diversely colored,
and this is called a Fire against Nature. The three Operations which follow are
made from the Combining of the first and third Fire, to wit, of the Natural and
Contra-natural, which being so joined together, make an unnatural Fire, by
Circulating the Matter every day, and separating the more subtle from the
Thick, till all be of the same Temperament, and then Conjoyning the things
separated, impregnating them, and so putrefying them.

The five last Operations are made by the Fire of Nature, daily increasing and
Predominating, which first Circumacts the putrefied Matter daily and cleanses
it from Filth, by an often ascension, and descension, which therefore is called
Distillation, Volatization, Ablution, Mundification, Cohobation Imbibition,
Cibation, Humectation of the Earth, and this is done so long by the heat, until
the Siccity begins to Coagulate, which is called Inspissation, which by a
longer Concoction, or Sublimation, brings a fixity, whose Bound is Exaltation:
This is not the change of an inferior place, for the Superior, but of the most
vile thing, to make the most Noble.

These are all our Opperations and successive Dispositions, which by some are
called so many Regimens, which name if any one had rather impose, he may:
however know there is only a double fire, Natural and against Nature, of which
the Latter Acts first, because the other is not brought to light, but by this,
and Putrefaction must go before Regeneration; and when these two fight with one
another, they make an Unnatural fire, and from this Contention rises
Putrefaction: and after this is a Glorious Regeneration in which the Sulphur
and Water become one thing, and also receive a Congealation, from no fire but a
Natural.

Therefore our Body which is commonly Called Terra Lemnia, perfects the whole
work: but it can in no wise be moistened but in its own Water, which Water is
truly Pluvial, not such as the common people knows to get, but ours, which
none ever saw, but a true Philosopher, believe me for I speak the truth, Fools
know how to Extract many Waters, to wit wetting the hands, but our Water is the
Life of all things, about which thou must take pains, then neither Sol, nor
Luna will be wanting to supply thee with Riches.

But I will tell thee, and that faithfully, what kind of Water this is, it is
the Water of Salt Petre, which is known as Mercury, but in the heart a pure
infernal Fire: but have a care thou be not deceived by Quicksilver, but
understand that Mercury, which the returning Sun cefuseth every where in the
Month of March. Gather thou it in the Month of October, because then surely it
is found ripe, and the most precious Treasure in the whole World.

But that I may describe our Mercury to thee, our Rain Water so that thou may
find it, know that it is before the eyes of he whole World, that yet are
Ignorant thereof, or at least, does take the vulgar for it, and deturpates it
with various Tortures, but neglects our true Mercury in its season, therefore
it never perfects our Magistery. For the common Alehymists does look upon it
with a blew look; whence it comes to pass, that they scorn it: but it
astonisheth the Sons of Learning with its Splendour, and is greatly accounted of
by them, therefore it is a vile thing, and yet the most precious, which no one
ever contemned without a great judgment of God.

But thou when thou see it don't despise it because it will appear very
durty, and if thou therefore despise it, thou shall be deprived of the
Magistery, but if thou do greatly esteem this contemptible thing, then indeed
it shall seem Glorious, having changed its countenance: For our Water is a most
clean Virgin, and is loved by many, but she meets all her Wooers, Clothed in
sordid Garments, that by this means she may distinguish Philosophers from
Fools, for whosoever shall behold nothing but externally, will scorn him as
unworthy of such a Secret, since Whores show themselves to their Wooers, dressed
in splendid Garments; but this chaste and most precious Maid, seems outwardly
foul, but is inwardly fair, which indeed cheats many Fools. But whatsoever
Mental man, can see the Spirit which lies hid, under the patent body will not
esteem her little, also our Virgin will look upon him as a Friend, and putting
off her filthiness, will shine most amiable, whom then none but a fool but must
admire and love, for she will bestow upon him infinite Riches, and perfect
health. Therefore honor ye this Female, the Sister and Wife of our King, to
whom if you be assistant in putting off her dreggs, she will get most splendid
Garments for her self, and bestow infinite Riches upon thee. Therefore this our
Queen is clean above measure, whom if you shall behold, you will think you look
upon a certain Heavenly Body, for the is indeed the Heaven or the fifth Essence
of Philosophers, whose brightness you cannot imagine, unless you see it:
believe me for I have seen her Snowy Splendour with my Eyes, touched with my
hands, then which nothing can be thought fairer. Our Water is then truly
Pontick, Serene, Christaline, pure and clean, which is not so in its Nature as
we make it by our Art; and its our Sea, our hidden Fountain, out of which our
Gold naturally is Created, when yet it prefers its self to Gold, and conquers
it, and in the hour of its Nativity, Gold is joined with it, and is washed in
it, and both increases together into a Stout Hero, which neither Coesar nor
the Pope can buy with Money. Therefore with all thy strength get this Water, of
which an Ounce is worth above a Thousand Pound, because by this alone, without
any other Labor, except the Addition of a perfect clean, pure body, thou may
perfect our most Honored Stone, to which no Treasure in the World can be
equaled.

But there is need of profound Meditation before thou can conceive our Sea,
to wit its Flux and Reflux: But if thou be diligent, by the help of God, thou
shah obtain thy defire; I for my part, after I knew the Field in general, where
this our Secret Fountain did Purl, yet I did not learn to get it out, till
after a year and a half, giving my self, to daily study and profound
Contemplations, because the Fiery Furnace of the wise men lay hid from me long:
but after I knew this, and how it was fitted to its proper Verel, after a few
days I beheld the admirable Brightness of our Water, which being seen I could
not but be amazed, for as in the Practice, so it is in the Theory, and on the
contrary: for he that exactly knows the Magistery of this Water, no Words or
Secrets of the Philosophers; Sayings, Writings or Enigmas, will be concealed
from him; so whosoever has once made up our Water, nothing remains to be done,
but to cast in a clean Body in a just quantity, shut the Vessel and so let it
stand, till the Complement of the Work. But we have another twofold Fire, which
thou shall easily know, as soon as thou have Learned this first: but that we
may return to the Water, in which believe me, the whole secret Consists, which
Water although it be one, yet is not simple but Compound, to wit of the Vessel and
Fire of Philosophers to which a third is added, namely the Bond. When therefore
we speak of our Vessel, understand our Water, when of the Fire, in like manner
understand Water and when we Dispute of the Furnace we would have nothing
Diverse, or divided from the Water. Therefore the Vessel is one, the Furnace
one, the Fire one, and all these are one to wit Water.

Therefore the fire Digesteth, the Vessel Whiteneth, and Penetrates, and the
Furnace or Bond Encompasseth and includes all, and the Fire is Mercury, the
Vessel also Mercury, lastly the same Furnace is Mercury, and Note well, there
is no fire in the whole work but Mercury, when notwithstanding, the fire is
manifold, and the water manifold: therefore as well fire as water is
diversified by their virtue, in the work; as in Number, so they agree in one
and the same Gender, to wit Mercury, therefore our Fire is Living, our Water
Living, our Vessel Living, our Furnace Living, and all these are one.

Know also dearest! that there is only one thing in the whole world, in the
which this our Mercury is to be found, it is of a like Essence with Gold,
unlike in Substance, by converting the Elements whereof, thou shall find what
thou seek. Join the Heaven with the Earth, upon a Fire of friendship, and in
the midst of the Firmament, thou shall see Hermes his bird. Do not confound the
Natures, but divide them and join them again, and thou shall Reign in Honor
all thy Life; hear therefore this great Secret, in the Southern Coast is found
a very high Mountain, very near to the Sun, which is one of the seven, and
highest but one: This Mountain of which we now speak is of a very hot
temperature, because it is not far from the Sun, and in this Mountain a Vapor
or Spirit is shut up, which is highly necessary for our Work; but it does not
ascend unless it be enlivened, neither is enlivened unless the Earth be dug
Knee deep in the top of the Mountain, but if this be done, the Spirit or thin
Exhalation ascends, which being congealed by the Air, drop by drop, runs into
most clear Water, warm like a Bath, which is presently gathered, for it is the
true Caduce of Mercury, with which he works Wonders; this is our Water, our
Fire, our Furnate and it is our Mercury, and not the Vulgars; but the hot and
humid Liquor of the most pure Salt, which we name Mercury; because comparing it
with the Sun, it is immature and Frigid. Verily I say unto thee, except the
Almighty had Created this Mercary, the Transmutation of Metals were impossible,
because the Sun does not tinge unless it be tinged. But he is not tinged but by
this our Water alone. O this blessed Humidity! which is the Philosophical
Heaven, whence wise men have drawn their Inestimable Dainties! O per manent
Water! Dissolving and amending Sol, our Nitre and wonderful Salt Petre! whose
price is Inestimable yet it is little esteemed. Therefore the thing is vile and
yet very Precious, whom our Sol Loves as his only Bride, whose virtue if the
vulgar knew, they would not sell a drahm for a Thousand Ounces of Silver; for
it is most precious Gold Lively and penetrating, therefore it turns the Body of
Gold into a mere Spirit, and is joined in Marriage, as the Woman to the
Husband, whose fairness Sol admires, and rejoices in her, and for Love kills
his own Wife, and she moved with Love makes him alive, and is impregnated by
him, Conceives and grows big, also brings forth a Son a most serene King. O
happy they who can go to this Fountain of our Water! for if they shall Drink of
it, and shall Eat afterward a little piece of fat Flesh, they shall reign as
Princes all their Life on the Earth. Therefore the whole secret of our Work
consists in knowing this our Sea, which who ever is Ignorant of, he has long
ago Destined his Money to perdition, if he does spend any about this Work. For
our Ocean draws its Original, from one Mountain and that a very high one, as I
have said above. But if ascending to the Top thou digg Knee Deep, a Certain
Exhalation or white fume will ascend, which will perfect the whole Magistery,
but there remains another Secret, which thou art obliged not to be ignorant of,
that thou may obtain thy desire, to wit, how thou must digg in the Mountain,
since that the Earth in the Superfice of the Mountain, is to be cut with no
Blow, for is his Dryness, that it is Concreted by the means of Heat, into a
Substance harder then Flint. Attend therefore to this Secret, in Saturnine
places is found a certain Herb called Satarnia, whose branches appear dry, but
Juice abounds in the Root, gather this Herb together with the Root and carry it
with thee, until thou come to the foot of the Mountain, under which by the
Ministry of Vulcan, thou shall digg and Bury the Herb, which presently goes
through the pores of the Mountain, by loosing the Earth thereof, then at
length, Climing to the Top, thou shall easily Bore Knee deep, and shall pour so
much Fat and dry Water, that descending to the Bottom of the Mountain it may
wet the Herb there laid, which presently being made moist, together with the
Water, ascends like smoke, and hurries with it the Spirit of the Mountain,
carrying it up with it, which Spirit is a fiery Virtue, mingling it self with
the water, and inhabiting therein, and it is the Water into which thou have
cast thy Bond, or the Vessel or Furnace; the spirit of Saturnia is a whitening
fume, and the vapor of the Mountain is fire, and all these are fire, so thou
have Saturnia a Vegetable, Royal and Mineral Herb, of which with fat Flesh is
made such a Broth, to which no Dainties in the World may be Compared. Now thou
have the whole secret of our Water, described under an enigmatical Discourse,
yet not so abscurely but thou may Easily if thou be diligent and Learned, by
Contemplations and Experiments perfect the Work. For all these are the true
Material Principles of our Stone, besides which, nothing can or ought to enter,
into our Work: to wit, the King and the Water, which is the Bath of the King,
and know that our Water is a Vessel, as our King is Contained in it; and a
Furnace as our Fire is included in it; and our Fire, as the Virtue or Spirit of
the Mountain Inhabits in it; and the Female, as it contains the Vapor of
Vegetable Saturnia, which is very friendly to Sol; and Penetrates, Whitens and
Molifies him and makes him to cast out Sperm; then the Fiery Virtue which is
shut up in the Water begins to work upon our Body so reduced, by wasting it and
Mortifying, by burning and Putrefying, or rather exciting to these things until
the innate heat of Sol, is deduced from power into Act, which dealbates,
Coagulates, Fixes and Tingeth: and therefore our Stone is called the world
because it contains both the Agent and Patient in it. It is the moving and the
moved, Active and Passive, Fixed and Volatile, Mature and Crude, one whereof
succors the other, and the one is amended by the other, because both is
Homegeneous in its self. For Sulphur and Mercury are the same in Water and in a
Body, in Identity of the Genus, and only are diversifyed by Decoction. Keep
this Secret. Therefore we do not to that end, order Crude and Volatile Mercury,
to be mingled with Mature and fixed Sulphur, that we might affirm that Sulphur
is different in one and the other, and the Mercury different also; For where
would then the Homogeneity, of Metals be, which we affirm in our Stone, but
therefore we mix these two Species's, that we by our Art, might Perfect Gold, a
thousand Degrees more, in a far shorter space, than Nature has formed simple
Gold in the Mines. For Nature from only Crude, Humid, and Frigid Mercury,
without any Addition, Generates Gold by a long Decoction, under the Earth: But
Art to contract the work, throws in Mature and fixed Sulphur to Mercury made
most pure by Art. and so Extracts the most digested virtue of Sulphur by
Mercury, which Sulphureal Virtue, strongly Changes and perfects Mercury into a
Complete Elixir. Observe therefore, the Work and the Process thereof, whence
thou shall understand the Cause of the wonderful Abreviation of the Work, Gold
is a Body hot and dry, Luna Gold and moist, Mercury the Medium of Carrying the
Tinctures: The Body of Sol is most digested, of Luna imperfect and immature;
Mercury the Bond, by which these two Contraries are United. Join Luna to
Mercury, with a due and Convenient Ignition, and mingle them so, that Luna and
Mercury may become one Mercury, retaining the fire in it self, and all the
feces and superfluities will fall from Mercury, and he shall become clear, as
the tear of the Eye, although not Diaphonous, then lastly mingle this Mercury with
Gold, in which is Luna and Fire, and then the hot and Dry will love the cold
and moist, and will lie down together in one bed, that is in the Fire of
friendship, and the Man will be dissolved upon the Woman, and the woman will be
Coagulated upon the Man, and then the Spirit and the Body will be one by
Commixtion. Go on afterward with that foot thou have begun, and so often
Reiterate the Heaven upon its Eearth, until the Spirit put on the Body, and
both be fixed together. For then our Stone is perfect, and endued with Regal
Virtue, the which no price can Buy. For Mercury is the water of all Metals,
they being decocted in it: And even as simple water, which in its own Nature is
cold and moist, which notwithstanding if it be mixed in decoction with any
Vegetable, receives and puts on other Qualities of the thing mixed with it,
whose force and spirit or life, which resides in the water, goes out by
Decoction into the water, and the water Convertibly, receives its Nature: Yet
the thick and Corporeal Earthly part of the substance decocted, is not that
spirit that Changes the quality of the water, but is separable from the water
after decoction. In like manner we must understand of Argent Vive, with its
Species's yet differently, for whatsoever Metal or Mineral shall be so familiar
with Mercury, as to be mixed per minima, and decocted with it, that Mercury
according to the Species of the Metal so joined, puts on other Qualities, and
will cast off his own Dreggs. Therefore Metallic and Mineral species's are
subordinately, and subalternately to be decocted in it, and it is their water,
into which Mineral spirits are emitted, by Decoction, and do alter it no other
ways then Vegetables decocted in their simple water. Yet a double difference is
to be noted, between the foresaid Decoctions, first that water is not fixed with
the Vegetables, as Mercury with Metals, therefore these are of a stronger
Composition than those. The Second, that in the Decoction of Vegetables or
Animals, the water being a Diaphanous Humor, not only receives new Virtue and
Qualities, but also a different Color to what it had. But it is not so in
Mercury for its Nature is altered, but not its Color nor form of Flux: but the
color of a dissolved Metal lies under the form of Liquid Argent vive, and by
its virtue does not appear. Therefore Mercury first acts up a Metal by
dissolving it, afterward the Metal Acts upon Mercury by Coagulating it, and as
in Dissolution, the form and color of the Metal lay under the form and color
of Mercury, so also in Coagulation the form and Color of Mercury is hid under
the Color and form of the Metal, so neither the Qualities of the Metal in
dissolution hinders the Flux of Mercury, nor the Qualities of Mercury in
Coagulation, hinder the fixity of the Metal. Do thou not see here a certain
wonderful Agreement: betwixt Mercury and Metals, for they Love like Mother and
Son, Sister and Brother, Male and Female, therefore their Bodies are made
better by Water for the Generation of all things is by water, and they take in
it, and by it, a Latitude of subtilty, that is a spiritual and volatile Nature,
and the Water in like manner is amended by the Bodies, and is retained and puts
on a Corporeal Nature, and so the whole compound is matured together, when the
Agents become Patients, and on the contrary. But the reason that the Color of
Mercury is not changed in Decoction by the Body Dissolved, is this, that the
Earth and Water are Homogeneous in Mercury, and so temperate that neither can
be separated from the other, and they are so strongly Commixt, that in so
wonderful a tenuity of matter, there is such great density of Substance, as to
hide the Colors, whence if any proportion of Mercury be spoiled, either
destructively by deturpating things or Generatively with a Body Appropriated to
its self, it will manifest the color that is thrown into the substance. But
there are Proportions of Mercury in respect both of Earth and water, in respect
of the second it flows and is Liquid, in respect of the first it wets nothing
that it touches, but that which is of the Unity of its Nature. From what has
been said, all Errors of Operators in Mercury are detected. For some Obstruct
or Divide its Homogeneity, by drying it with various sublimations, others
Spoiling and Disproportionating the Earth, to bring in a Transparency. As many
as do this, do nothing but a Sophistical work. For Mercury is Sperm of Metals,
which Nature with much sagacity has formed in the Veins of the Earth, for
Metal; Neither is any thing wanting to it but pure Digestion, but it is not
Digested unless by pare metallic incomburent sulphur, which indeed it has in
its Center, by which Nature would form Gold in a long time; but it is
altogether unknown to man how he should make this by his Art. For although Gold
might be made of Mercury alone without any addition, yet it would not be
perfected but by long time and great cost, which would be foolish to undergo in
making simple Gold. Therefore Sulphur is the only thing in the world which
Nature has perfected, that is familiar to Mercury. This therefore is mixed
Radically with it, and by this Mercury is decocted, and Mercury because of the
Repugnance of Qualities putrefies it, and so by Regeneration it rises again,
not Gold such as is had in Mines, but spiritual Penetrative and tinging, in so
much that it easily enters all Imperfect Metals, when cast upon them, which in
a very short time, it Digesteth to the Anatical proportion of Gold, and the
dregs being cast off Restores them to perfect Health. Thou see therefore that
Mercury is by no means to be Disproportionated from its own Nature, but to be
Matured and that not by it selt without any addition, and yet without any
outward addition, but a Radical Union of a clean Body with it per minima, which
is done by our secret Conjunction. Yet see you be not deceived, for this
Conjunction is not made by manual operation, but only by a Natural, man not
only not helping, but also not well understanding its Cause, therefore this is
called a Divine Work. Fools can confound the Body of Gold with Mercury, and
then they call it animated Gold, but they find nothing in it. For although these
two should remain together a Thousand Years, nevertheless they would afterward
recede one from the other in their own proper Nature. Therefore the Conjunction
was not alterative but only a Confusion of two between themselves. But in out
Operation, the spirit of Sol Infuseth its self into the spirit of Mercury, so
that they never depart the one from the other afterward, even as water does
not, being mixed with water. Therefore in this Operation the greatest nay the
whole secret of the Art lies hid. Attend therefore thou Son of Learning and see
warily that thou do not err here. Therefore the Body of Sol will never be
joined with Mercury inwardly, unless Luna mediating, or an imperfect Body and
Fire; and this Luna is the Juice of the water of Life, which lies hid in
Mercury, which is sharpened by the fire, and is a spirit entering a Body, and
altring it and Compelling it to retain its Soul. Now therefore thou see of
what Mercury we have hitherto spoken, not vulgar but pluvial; which properly is
not called Mercury, but Mercurial water; for the Mercury of the vulgar is
water, but a Spirit and fiery virtue is wanting to it, supply if thou can
that which is wanting with all thy Art, then it will no longer be Mercury of
the vulgar, but like to ours. But if thou can not do this let that Mercury
alone, for thou can expect nothing but loss from it. Behold now God is my
witness, I have told the whole matter, which if thou art wise thou can not be
ignorant of. For vulgar Mercury has seduced more, then any thing else, for the
Workers herein have found nothing, because they did not know our Mercury. But
to return to Conjunction, which believe me is the whole Secret of the Art, for
the Earth is not united inseparably with the water, but water adheres strongly
to water, hence it follows, that this laudable Conjunction is not celebrated
till after Dissolution; attend thou therefore to solution, and Nature will join
together, and this Dissolution is made in Mercury by the help of included Luna,
and Fire. For Luna penetrates and Albifies, and the fire mortifies and
Triturates, but the Water includes both these Virtues, according to the saying
of the Philosopher, The Fire which I will show thee is water. And another,
Unless Bodies be subtilized by Fire and water, nothing is done in the
Magistery. O Blessed Mercury of ours, which frees us from those many Labors
which Sophisters endure! for they make many Operations with their hands, and
profit nothing, because they know not the true Course of Nature. But we do
nothing, but leave all things to be done by our Mercury, which proceeds in a
better Method, according to its Natural Instinct, then any man could invent:
for he is constrained by the necessity of his End, wherefore he never misses
the right way if he be not hindered.

But there are some Sophistical Operators, who take Gold and put it to Mercury,
then shut them in a Glass and set them over the Fire, expecting some notable
thing from thence: But since they cast fat and good Seed into barren Land, they
are deceived, for they find not the Harvest they expected, because, as is
abovesaid, and shall be further said more plainly, Gold is not the matter of
our Stone in its whole Essence, nor yet Mercury, wherefore the bare mixture of
these cannot Generate our Stone, for Gold, in the Work, is a Male to the Work
of Generation, in whose most secret Reins the Seed lies hid, which if it once
send forth, being received in a due Matrix and conjoined with the passive
female Seed, it is Cherished with a due Heat, and Cibated with a proper Aliment,
then truly we shall have from Gold abundantly to perform our Work. So neither
a man, as he is man, can neither be called the Father, nor the matter of the
Embrio: but he has in him such a matter, from which by the Conjunction of a
Dissimilar spermatick matter, in the same kind, by an apt Disposition the
Infant is formed: In like manner we must understand of Gold. For Gold is the
most perfect of all Metals, and the Father of our Stone, yet it is not the
matter thereof for the Sperm which Gold sends forth if it be handled by Art,
will be the masculine matter of our Stone, and is nothing else then a most
digested Virtue of Gold, which is Extracted from it by sagacious Art, and then
is called our Living Gold, and not vulgar, which is dead: So also in the
Procreation of man, a man may be said to be Dead, (Respect being had to to the
Act of Generation) until he pours out the due matter which he has in himself
into a fit Place, just so it is in our Art; therefore our Gold is not vulgar
Gold, for they differ as a Father differs from his Sperm which he has, the
first is necessary to our Work, and Living, the other dead and unprofitable,
that is, sends forth its Seed, which is the Active Virtue of our Stone. So
therefore go ye on with a great deal of Caution, take this Body which I have
Demonstrated, and sweetly Extract the Seed from it, then (and not till then)
this Gold (which before was Dead, Idle and useless) being made Living, active
and fit for our Work, will supply thee with the first matter of our Stone, to
(...) the masculine, and so is no longer called Gold by us, but Brass,
Magnesia, Lead, Dung, nor can it indeed properly be called Gold, for Gold is a
Body but this a Chaos, that is a Spirit, nor will Return by any Art to its
Pristine Species of Gold, because the Body is turned into Spirit, from hence
says Menabdes, I order Posterity to make Bodies incorporate. Hermes also says,
O Son Extract the Shadow from the Radins, that is, Extract from the Gold which
is called the Radius, its Seed which is called the Shadow, both because it
lies hidden and as it were in a Shade, and also because it comes out under an
obscure Shade of Blackness. Aristotle also says, The first thing that ye ought
to do is to sublime the Mercury, then cast clean bodies into a clean Mercury.
But I would have the Reader Admonisht what sort of sublimation is here
intended, for there are infinite false Erroneous and Sophistical Operations,
one true and Natural, which notwithstanding is done by Art, I omitting all
these Vulgar Operations follow the Intention of (...) Philosophers, and mean
that Sublimation which they call the Preparation of the Thin Matter, by which
the Eclipse of the Earthy Interposition is taken from Luna, that she may
receive Light from Sol, which comes to pass when the Dark Sphere of Saturn
which obnubilates the whole Horizon is vanquished then Jupiter obtaining the
Empire ascends into the Air with a splendid Cloud, whence sincere, Beautiful
and Lovely Dew drops upon the Earth, which mollifies it, and raises great
Winds in its Belly or bosom, which brings our Stone upward whence it is endued
with Heavenly Virtue, which falling down again to the Earth which is its Nurse,
puts on a Terrene and Corporeal Nature, so it receives the Force of Inferiors
and Superiors. We conclude therefore, that neither Gold nor Mercury, can
afford us the first matter of our Stone, until the Tincture be Extracted from
Gold, the Dissolvend, by Mercury the Dissolvent, which Tincture is a Living
active virtue, not Dead as Gold was before its Dissolution. This is the matter
of the old Philosophers, which we ought to take, which as the Author of the new
Light says, is, but does not appear until the Artist pleases, in knowing
which all the Perfection consists. Wherefore I order you who ever would be
searchers out of this Secret, that you would take that which is vile, and
manifest to the whole world, out of which, by a wonderful manner, ye shall
Extract that which is most hidden therein, that is our Menstruum; and the
Western Mercury is our Philosophical Field, in which your Sol shall arise and
ascend; Join this with his Delectable Bridegroom, and let them lie in the bed
of Love without stirring, until from this hidden Nature (which is Mercury
regenerated by the Philosopher there proceed a Living Virtue which may raise
the Dead, then comes a Royal Offspring, of which Sol is the Father, and Luna
the Mother; and so you have a most true Explication of the new Light, you must
take (says the Author) that which is, but is not seen till the Artist please,
and you must use this, for the true matter of the old Philosophers, and so we
have spoken fully and plainly of our body, and of our water; and of our Red
Sulphur, and white Brass. We have said there ought to be added to these a
Furnace, Vessel and triple Fire: Note well what, and about what, I speak here,
for the Furnace is of Lute, or Brick, the Vessel Glass, and the Fire
Elementary, of which we will speak lower in the last place of this little
Treatise, concerning our Disposition, but here we speak of things Essentially
and Substantially Conducing to the work. For the Furnace of Brick, is not wont
to be called by us our Furnace, nor Elementary fire ours, nor the Glass vessel
ours: for these commonly are common to us and Sophisters, and they will excel
us often in the Curiosity of these Externals. But we call those things ours
which they Neither have nor can have, verily I say that our Fire, our Furnace,
our Vessel are secret, nor obvious but to Philosophers, for they enter into the
very Essence of our Work, hence a certain Philosopher writing of this fire,
says, Behold the fire which I will show thee is Water, also another witnesses
thus of the Vessel, The vessel of Philosophers is their water, another also
writes, The Intention of all the Philosophers is this, that all operations
should be made in their humid fire, in a secret furnace and vessel, which
Testimonies plainly enough declare another Fire, Vessel and Furnace then are
commonly known. Moreover my Brother, let it not be a cause of scruple to thee,
that I have before numbered, our furnace, fire, and vessel amongst the things
essentially Constituting our Stone, for in this I follow the Intention of all
Philosophers writing in this Art. Concerning this Vessel Sendivogius Writing,
names it the Vessel of Nature, also the Fire of Nature. Flammel, Artefius,
Lully, and all the rest have kept the same Method; it is plain therefore that
they would have something hidden from the eyes of the Vulgar. But I in good
truth say, that these three are but one, for Nature is but one, the Adept Sons
of Art do know, and will Witness this. For the Fire is, to the Excruciating of
Bodies, more then fire, therefore it is called burning Wine and a most strong
fire, hence the Philosopher, 'Burn our Brass in most strong fire; which whilst
Sophisters hear, they are deceived, thinking it to be a fire of Coals or flame,
which is contrary to our fire. concerning this John Mechungus speak, "No
artificial fire can infuse so great a heat as that which comes from Heaven.

The First Gate.
Concerning Philosophical Calcination. Not Printed in the Dutch Edition.
CAlcination Purges our Stone, Restores Natural Heat, destroys nothing of the
Radical Humidity, and brings a due Solution to the Stone: The Caution is, that
it may be done Philosophically, not vulgarly with Salts or Sulphur variously
prepared, etc. Whoever therefore truly desires to Calcine, should desist from
this Work till they understand our Caleination better, for that every
Calcination destroys Bodies, destroying the Humidity of the Stone; we also do
Reprobate all dry Calxes, for that we Increase the Radical Humidity by
Calcining, but diminish none. In Calcination, we join Nature to its Nature, for
that like loves like, if any one denies this he will not be worthy of the Name
of a Philosopher, nor ever will get any benefit from our Writings, for he
understands them not. Therefore apply thou Nature to Nature, as Reason
requires, seeing all things have this from nature, that Like begets its Like,
Man is begot by a Man, a Lion by a Lion, so let every thing be Calcined first
in its proper nature. Learn this and never doubt to be benefited by it.
Therefore we make Calxes unctuous both white and Red, which are not perfected
but by three Degrees, they are fluid like Wax, other ways to be rejected, nor
are perfected, but in a year, to Tinge without a Fucus. But thou must take care
in the first place Concerning the Weight, for it is possible for thee to doubt
in this: Lest therefore thou should loose thy Labor, let the body be
Calcined with Mercury, made so subtle, in which there is one part of the Solar
quality, two of the Lunar, until the whole flow together like a Liquid Wax.

Afterward Increase the Solar quality in Mercury, that there may be four parts
of him, two Lunar, so that thou shall begin the work at the Figure of the
Trinity. Three parts of body, three of spirit, and to Complete the Unity, let
there be one part more of the spiritual, then the corporeal substance. This is
proved by the testimony of Raymond, If any one seek the Proportion there, the
Doctor has demonstrated to me the same. But Bacon has taken three parts of
the spirit to one of the body, I did not sleep of many nights. But choose which
way thou will.

FINIS.

