The Love of God To all Mankind, In the Glorious Work of their Redemption by
Jesus Christ, Asserted and Vindicated. With a plain and sober Discussion of
those Controversies which are the constant Concomitants of it, viz. Election
and Reprobation, God's Foreknowledg, his Nature, Attributes, and Decrees; the
sufficiency of Means vouchsafed to all Men to believe; the use of the Law to
Believers under the Gospel. Also concerning Original Sin, Free Will, and
falling from Grace.

All fitted to the meanest Capacity, in a way of Dialogue, By ZACHARY STANTON.

LONDON, Printed, and sold by M. Fabian at Mercers Chapel in Cheapside, 1700.

TO THE READER.
Courteous and Impartial Reader;
I Should not have troubled thee with any Preface, were it not to comply with
the desire of some Friends, and the Mode of the Times.

This Treatise (which I have adventured to expose to public view and censure
of all) I desire thee to take notice, is much of it a Collection, gathered from
the Words and Writings of Persons concerned in this Controversy; methodized and
reduced to Form and Order (as my slender Knowledge and Leisure gave me leave)
for the benefit of all well-disposed People that have a desire to look into the
things controverted in this Point, and either could not reach the Price, or
procure those large Volumes wherein this Subject is largely handled, by Men of
piercing Judgments and known Abilities: here they may see the Substance of all
the Controversy compendiously, in a little room, and with that plainness and
brevity, that the meanest Capacity may reach it, as well with their
Understanding as their Purses.

I know that those who live at ease, and have none to disturb the Peace of
their Church, and the Prosperity of the Gospel, by sowing Tares in the Lord's
Field, may think it strange in this Day (wherein there should be rather a
healing of Breaches, and a closing up the old Wounds than a heightning and
increasing of them) to see any appear in print upon this Subject; nor have I
done this as if I could be a Means to bring any new Matter which by former
Worthys had not been said before, but for the settling and establishment of
those to whom I belong, some of them looking that way; that so Satan might not
beguile them to draw them from the simplicity and purity of that Doctrine
revealed in the Word of God, and that I might prevent others from falling into
error, through the studious Labors of many of corrupt Judgments, who, to our
great sorrow we have found, care not how they stumble the weak, or what
Divisions they make in the House of God, so they can but proselite a Party to
carry on their uncouth Notions and preposterous Opinions, and whose heady Zeal
has brought this forth.

Tho at first it was written for the Information of a few private Friends, yet
without any design for the Press, and has been kept from it this two or three
years, till of late this Opinion has held up its head in our Parts; which tho
it has formerly and of late been often encountered by the Sword of the Spirit,
yet like the Monster Hydra, having one Head chopped off, two grew again: So this
Error seems to spread and grow faster than of late; and tho they have left off
openly to assert (tho owned in private) many of those frightful Sayings, and
horrible Blasphemies found in many Authors, which are enough to make a godly
Man's heart to bleed; yet now they with open face maintain, and by secret ways
labor to undermine the Divine Foundation, and by crying up Grace, and the
unconditionality of the Gospel Covenant, and descrying all Inducements to Dutys
and Obedience, as legal Preaching, with the terrible noise of Free-willers,
Arminians, Popery: many wellmeaning Christians, by such subtle Wiles, and
secret Insinuations, are wounded and deceived through the cunning pretense of
some that pretend to a more than ordinary pitch of Holiness and Purity, who, to
carry on their Design, labor to work upon the Affections, and to gain upon the
Hearts of th^se that are ready to entertain as Gospel any Errors, because of
the affection to the Person that broached them; and when once the Judgment is
distempered by Affection, all things are carried according to the pleasure of
it. The vilest Deformitys, if they are Affection's Darlings, shall be accounted
comely Ornaments: Let God and Man say what they will, it is all in vain; when
their Understanding is captivated and lulled asleep by their Dalilah, then
Judgment and right Reason must truckle, and those dark and mysterious Sayings
in the Scripture must be made to speak according as they fancy, while wholesome
Truths are distastful, and will not go down by reason of some Prejudice
conceived against the Author.

And therefore I am not without a foresight, that both my Person, and this my
good Meaning, will be made the Butt at which will be shot all those sharp
Arrows that Wit, Pride, and Envy can invent: But I am content to receive a
Scratch, that others may escape a Wound, and to be accounted as the Filth and
Offscouring of all things, that those who are entangled in Errors might learn
the Truth; and therefore if I be reproached for it, notwithstanding all the
care taken, I am content to suffer Reproach for the Cause of Christ, and do
count it a very small thing to be judged of Man's Judgment.

And, Reader, I do assure thee, in the words of a Christian, that it is neither
Profit, nor Credit, nor Thanks that I expect for my pains, but rather the
contrary. I by experience find Persons are too apt to be offended with Truth
and Plainness; yea, many men's Spirits are so exasperated against such as hold
forth the Grace of God to all (which is the Subject of this Book) that if it
were in their power, they would convince us we were in the wrong by Fire and
Faggot; so distastful are either the Sayings or Writings of those that would
take their Diana (that is, their Opinion) from them; and when they cannot ward
off the downright stroke of Truth, they will then set themselves to censure,
slight, and revile those that speak for Truth. But great is Truth, and it will
prevail in spite of the Sharp Tongues, or Iron Teeth of those that oppose it.
And now, Reader, if thou be a Reprobatarian, I do not know what cause thou
have to dislike me, or this Book, if thou will be true to thy Principles, that
God from all Eternity freely and unchangeably ordained whatsoever comes to
pass, and that God has precisely decreed what Good and Evil shall be done;
that all things happen not only by God's Prescience, but by his express Order
and positive Decree; and that Man does that which is not lawful for him to do,
by the just impulse of God. If this be so, then surely all that I have done in
this case, is but the necessary Issue of the Divine Decrees, having done
nothing but what was not only natural, but necessary, being overborn by Fate,
which I could not withstand; and if I have done amiss, I deserve pity from you
rather than blame, tho I know (if your Doctrine be true) neither your Pity nor
Prayers will do me any good, unless they were able to make a change in God's
absolute Decree: for there cannot one Soul be saved which is ordained to Hell,
nor one Soul be cast away which is appointed to Heaven; and so your Pity and
Prayers may as well be spared, as spent to no puroose.

And, Reader, if thou be one that art learned, it is likely thou will think
this Discourse is a homespun Piece: Why truly I am just of your mind, I think
the same, and so there is no danger we should fall out; and by this let thee
know it was designed for them that love to have it so, and written for the use
of those that neither could nor did expect any Rhetorical Flourishes, or
School-Distinctions from me, but only plain Truths: They knew that as I was
ignorant of School Phrases, so I was clogged with worldly Business, and had
neither learning nor time to dress up my Lines with Wit and Eloquence; neither
does Truth stand in need of gingling Flourishes or outward Bedaubing to make it
more renowned in the World, it being best seen in its naked plainness.

And, Reader, if thou art a Critic (as this is a peevish and critical Age) or
so highly conceited, that thou disdainest to look any farther, all that I shall
say to thee is this, It will not hurt you if you can but let it alone: I never
commanded you, neither do I care whether you read it or not; and if you read
it, and think your time and pains ill bestowed, blame your self for meddling
with that you had nothing to do with. I know that all courteous and impartial
Readers, and especially those that have desired this, will esteem it as much as
I desire they should.

Reader, I will keep thee out no longer, pray walk in, and if you like your
poor entertainment, you are heartily welcome; fall to, and much good may it do
you. Vale.

June 30. 1700. ZACH. STANTON.

NB. Pray correct the following Fault with thy Pen before thou go on.
Page 35. line 12. Philadelphus is to begin with these words, What God
foresees, etc. The last line but one of the same page, blot out Phil.

The Love of God to all Mankind, Asserted and Vindicated.
By way of Dialogue between Martha and Philadelphus, etc.
Martha. WEll met Philadelphus, you are walking and viewing the Fields.


Philadelphus. Yes, and the more I view, the more my heart is drawn forth to
bless and admire our good and gracious God, who has not left himself without
witness, filling our hearts with joy and gladness: and though we have almost
spent the Fruits of the last year, yet is the Lord preparing for us against
another; how does the Hills and Valleys abound with Corn and Grass, burdned
Ears with plenty? They rejoice and clap their hands, and loudly proclaim that
the Lord is good to all, and his tender Mercies are over all his Works.


Mar. Why is your heart so affected with the Creature, or any goodness that is
in them?


Phil. No, not so much as with the good God that sends them; yet I cannot but
admire that the glorious Majesty of Heaven and Earth should have any regard to
us worthless Worms, thus to mind us with the Eyes of his Providence, when we
are unmindful of him.


Mar. Why doubtless it is for the sake of his Elect People, that the Nation
injoys such Mercies; otherwise the Lord would quickly turn this fruitful Land
into barrenness; yea, overthrow it as once he did Sodom and Gomorrah.


Phil. Although I do not question but (next unto Jesus, who is said to bear up
the Pillars of the Earth) the Godly are the Pillars of a Nation; they stay just
deserved Judgments; God Almighty would make short work in the World, bring all
to its first Nothing, if it was not for the Godly; which, as you say, are as so
many Lots in Sodom, that preserve from such an overthrow; yet surely God has
some gracious ends and design in giving such Temporal Mercies to the worst of
Men, even that his Goodness and Mercy might lead them to Repentance.


Mar. Truly all these outward and temporal Mercies and Blessings which the
worst of Men enjoy, are but like Crumbs which the Master of a Family throws to
the Dogs; or given with no other intent, than Men give good Pasture to their
Cattle, to fit them the sooner for Slaughter: The prosperity of fools destroy
them, says Solomon; that is, it shall be the means of heightning their Lusts,
and thereby fitting them for Destruction.


Phil. As is your Name, so are you; Martha is your Name, and bitter are your
words. Come sit you down here by me under this Shade, and let us spend one hour
in Discourse together, if your occasion will permit.


Mar. I am content.


Phil. Truly I did not think (till I heard it out of your own Mouth) that any
could entertain such harsh and unworthy suspicions of the God of Love; as if
his Mercies to any were designed on purpose to multiply their guilt, or to
heighten their eternal Damnation: No, Martha; God has more noble and worthy
Ends and Designs than such you spoke of: God is Love, and he has no pleasure
in the ruin of his Creatures. If their Prosperity destroy them, if his Mercies
(which should lead them to Repentance, and have been a powerful means to engage
their hearts to love the Lord) any ways heighten their guilt, and thereby fit
them for Destruction; it is not the effect of God's goodness, but rather of
their obstinate wickedness, their abusing his Goodness, and turning his Grace
into Wantonness, and not into Thankfulness; this is that which kindles the
wrath of God, as 2 Chronicles. 32. 25. But Hezekiah rendered not again according to
the Mercies, etc therefore wrath was upon him, etc. and for this cause was it,
that the Heathens were given up to vile affections. But pray tell me, do not
all Men in the World stand bound to be thankful to God for outward Mercies?


Mar. Yes, doubtless they do.


Phil. But how can any Man look upon himself any ways obliged to be thankful to
God, for good things given with such hard intentions, even to make his
Condemnation so much the greater? Had Amasa any cause to thank Joab for taking
him friendly by the Beard to kiss him, when his intent was to stab him to the
heart? And as little cause have any to be thankful to God for Temporal
Enjoyments, when all is made as a Gin and a Trap for their Souls; and God
intends nothing but evil to them, and a fuller Cup of wrath to come. If this be
a truth, how can the bountifulness and long-suffering of God be said to lead
Men to Repentance, which is the Apostle's Doctrine, Romans 2. 4? Nothing can
properly be said to lead Men any ways, but that which is proper to persuade or
invite them to it.


Mar. Well, for all you think these words of mine are such hard sayings, yet I
do farther affirm that all Men that are not by true Faith grafted into Christ,
but remain in an unconverted state, all their Mercies are cursed to them: yea,
they are cursed in every thing, in their Name, in their Estate, in their Food:
for if they receive Food, they are Usurpers of that which is none of their own;
if they receive no Food, they are self-Murderers; yea their Prayers, the Word
and Sacraments are cursed to them.


Phil. The Psalmist says, Ps. 145. 9. That the Lord is good to all, and his
tender mercies are over all his works. Martha, God is good to all during the
day of our Patience and long-Sufferance; and what Mercy he affords to them may
be called tender Mercy, considering their sinfulness, who deserve every moment
to be cast into Hell: But how the tender Mercy of God can be said to be over
those, when whatsoever God does for them in a providential way, he does all
with an intent to harden them, that so he might bring destruction with the more
severity and terror in the end; will Men, or can they call Health, Peace,
Liberty, Food, Raiment, given with an intent to become a Snare unto them, and
to bring unavoidable damnation upon them, the tender Mercies of God? Does the
Lord cause the Sun to rise upon the bad as well as upon the good, and send Rain
upon the Unjust as well as upon the Just, in wrath, and with a curse? What, can
infinite Goodness and Perfection be implacable to his Creatures? God forbid:
Ah, Martha! What would have become of you and I long before this time, if God
had not sought the good of his Creatures? Consider we are all called the Lord's
Offspring, Acts 17. All his Children by Creation.


Mar. What by that? What would you prove from thence?


Phil. What? Why then I think that the Lord must needs have a very tender
regard to all, as they are his Creatures, the workmanship of his hands, and is
not implacable to them in this World: Why may not God deal with his Offspring
as we deal by ours? Goodman's Parable of the Prodigal Son.
which of us that have Children, though they should prove very undutiful to us,
and we could not love them with the love of delight, as we do those that are
very dutiful, and are good and virtuous; yet at the worst we cannot choose but
pity them, and heap favors upon them: Why, thus does the Lord to the Sons and
Daughters of Men, though his delight is with them that fear him; yet those that
are the worst he pities. And how can you think otherwise, when there is not one
Soul but is dearer to him than the whole World? Neither did he count the Blood
of his own Son too great a price for their Redemption; but I doubt you are one
of those that hold, that God did from all Eternity fore ordain the greatest
part of Adam's Off spring to everlasting destruction.


Mar. What if it was the Pleasure of God, to make a thousand Worlds, and then
destroy them all? Is it meet for Man to say unto God, Why have thou made me
thus, or what do thou? For he might glorify his Justice in the Damnation of
all for their Sins, who shall question God about this.


Phil. I say that God is so far from destroying one whole World, that he is not
willing that so much as one Soul should perish, 2 Pet. 3. 9. and indeed who can
think that our good and gracious God, whose Name and Nature is Love, should
provide means of Life and Nourishment for Man in his Mother's Womb, when he
could neither breath nor eat, should after he is born not provide as sufficient
Means to nourish his Soul and Body to eternal Life? I may say in this case, as
the Apostle in another, does God take care for Oxen? has God such a tender
regard for the Bodies of Men, and has he none for the Soul? surely he is every
way as desirous of the welfare of the Soul as the Body! and has declared by
Oath, that he takes no pleasure in the Destruction of any, Ezekiel. 33. 11, 12.
Who then is he that dare charge the God of Love with so much Cruelty, as to
expose his own Children (at least by Creation) to be a prey to the Devil? What
says our Savior, Luke 11. 11. which of you having Children, if they ask
Bread, will you give them a Stone, etc. Can we that are evil have Compassion
upon our Children? and will God harden himself as an Ostrich against his
Offspring? Job 39. 16. Does God condemn Cruelty in others, and can we think he
will harbor it in himself? No, the Scripture of Truth does every where abound
in giving Testimony of the Love, Goodness, and Bountifulness of God to all his
Creatures, and to Mankind above all other Works of his Hands in this lower
World, in so much as our blessed Savior recommends him in his Carriage toward
the worst and most unworthy of Men, as an absolute Pattern for us to imitate,
in doing Good, and showing Mercy, even to our Enemies, Matt. 5. 44, 45. Be ye
therefore perfect, even as your heavenly Father is perfect; that is, be you
true Imitators of the Lord, Followers of God, as dear Children, in these works
of Mercy and Kindness. Now Martha, pray you observe this; if we should suppose
that God has irreversibly from Eternity doomed to everlasting Destruction, and
without any respect to their Sin, those unjust ones, upon whom he causes the
Sun to rise, etc. it must necessarily follow, that while he did these good
things to them, he intended the greatest Evil that can be inflicted or
imagined, even the Vengeance of Eternal Fire; which if so, then must those that
imitate him in such ways be the most accursed Hypocrites and Dissemblers under
Heaven, making shows of Love and Kindness, while War and Blood are in their
Hearts; and so by this a Man may be most unjust, unmerciful, full of
Dissimulation, hating most Men without any Cause, and yet be most like God; O
horrid, and most unworthy a true Christian Believer!


Mar. What will you deny God to be omnipotent? has not he an absolute
Sovereignty and Lordship over his Creatures, with full Power to dispose of them
as he pleases, and you that contend with God about his Sovereignty, unless you
repent?


Phil. It cannot be denied, but that God has an absolute Sovereignty and
Lordship over his Creatures, that is, a lawful Power to dispose of them as he
pleases; yet it is a horrible Indignity put upon him, and a great Injury done
to the Goodness, Mercy, and fatherly Compassion of our good and gracious God,
to affirm that he exercises this his Power upon the hardest Terms, and the
most grievous unto his Creatures, that is, or can be imagined, and that which
no ways is conducing to his own Honor and Glory, nay, very injurious to his
Goodness, yet directly and immediately opposite to his very Nature, which is
mere Goodness and Happiness, and has no Affinity with Rigor, Cruelty or
Misery: Read Psalm. 34. 6. Psalm. 86. 5. Joel 2. 13. Jonah 4. 2. Micah 7. 18. If
God does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men, without just
cause, Lam. 3. 33. how can we in reason think, that God in his eternal Purpose,
and absolute Pleasure, should affect the extreme Misery of any of his
Creatures, for the showing of the absolute Sovereignty he has over them? If
so, he may as well damn them, as create them.

How can we think that he should send them one after another into this World,
to enjoy some of the good things of this Life, and after this short Life is
over, to torment them with Devils and damned Spirits for ever, to show his
Power over them without just cause in the Creature? What says Abraham, Genesis
18. 25. when he was interceding with God for Sodom, with respect to a temporal
Judgment; Will thou destroy the Righteous with the Wicked? that be far from
thee: Shall not the Judge of all the World do right? If to destroy the Righteous
with the Wicked was far from God in Temporals; shall we think that God resolved
to punish the Innocent in Hell with wicked Spirits? For pray you observe; if
God has from Eternity reprobated the greatest part of Mankind; it must be
understood that he looked on them as Persons that would in time prove sinful,
or else he reprobated them simply as Men. If the first, then was their
Sinfulness wherein he beheld them the cause of their Rejection; if the second,
then the pure and perfect Workmanship of his Hands, yea, that which was very
good, Genesis 1. 31. must be the Object of his Reprobation, which cannot be: it
was a saying of one of the Ancients, Aug. Lib. 3. Cont. Julian Cap. 31. Page
164. God is Good, and God is Just; he may without any desert, free Men from
Punishment, because he is Good, but he cannot without Evil, desert and condemn
any Man, because he is just. And again, Aug. Epist. 106. ad Bonifac. If God be
believed to damn any man, that by Sin deserves it not, he is not to be
believed to be free from Injustice. And therefore for any to say, that God has
irrevocably reprobated the greatest part of the World to eternal Misery, before
they had a being in this World, or any possibility of doing Good or Evil, he
speaks more like a Mahumetan than a Christian, however more harsh of the God of
Love than he ought to speak, and reflects dishonor upon him, making him to be
the Prime, Principal, and Irresistible Cause of the Damnation of Millions of
Souls, appointing them to Destruction of his own voluntary Will, antecedent to
any desert in them. No Martha, there is nothing can proceed from the God of
Love, that is unjust, nothing unequal, nothing hard, nothing that any ways
inclines to the hurt of any of his Creatures considered as innocent; and
therefore no irreversible decreeing or ordaining of Men to everlasting
Destruction, as you pretend.


Mar. But does not the Apostle, Romans 9. 20. 21. show, it is no unrighteous
thing, no unequal or hard thing in God, to reprobate or predestinate to
Destruction, which, or how many of his Creatures he pleases? It Is his lawful
and just Prerogative, as he is absolute Lord of all: Who art thou that reply
against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou
made me thus? Has not the Potter power over his Clay, to make one Vessel to
honor, and another to dishonor?


Phil. I know this 9th Chapter to the Romans, is the great Magazine and
Fortress, wherein all your imaginary Strength lies, and those Verses are the
Weapons which you draw to silence those that question your horrid Notions about
Personal Election and Reprobation. Pray do you think that Paul was about to
prove personal Election and Reprobation in these Verses?


Mar. Yes, what else but to prove that God has Power to create and appoint
Vessels of Honor and Dishonor; and consequently of Wrath, as the Potter has
to make Vessels at his Pleasure, without contradiction, of the same Lump of
Clay?


Phil. You are under a great mistake; the great Controversy lay about the Terms
of Justification, whether by the Law or Faith, and not about personal Election
and Reprobation; so that the Prerogative which the Lord claims to himself as a
Royalty annexed to the Crown of Heaven and Earth, in this 9th of the Romans, or
elsewhere, in respect to the Condemnation and Eternal Destruction of his
Creatures, stands not in leaving what Persons he pleases to eternal ruin, but
in making the condition of Life and Death, Salvation and Damnation as he
pleases, according to the Counsel of his own Will, Ephesians. 1. 1. Now the Apostle
was showing the Way and Method that God will take in saving Sinners; and that
it is not the purpose of God, that men should be justified by the Law, but by
Grace, and through Faith: and tho the Jews much boasted of their being
Abraham's Seed, and Moses's Disciples, and their observing of the Law, and
judged it an equal thing, that God should make that Law to be the Law of Life,
and Salvation to Men, and the neglect of it the Law of Death and Damnation; yet
it being the good Pleasure of God to do otherwise, and to ordain Faith in his
Son Christ Jesus, to be the way of Justification and Life, and Unbelief the way
to Condemnation and Death, this Choice or Election shall stand, whatever Men
may think meet and fitting for him to do. Therefore, says he, Verse 15. I will
have Mercy upon whom I will have Mercy, and I will have Compassion upon whom I
will have Compassion. Men shall not prescribe unto me Laws or Terms of showing
Mercy; my Will shall not be bounded by Man's Will, neither will I be obliged by
them what manner of Persons, or how qualified, I shall justify and save; I mean
to keep close to the Counsel of my own Will, in that which concerns the Life
and Death, the Salvation or Destruction of my Creatures; and so in this 21st
Verse, Has not the Potter power over his Clay? etc. meaning that God Almighty
has the like Power over the whole Lump of Mankind in Adam, to make what Laws
of Life and Death he pleased, and to appoint what manner of Persons should be
saved or condemned, which the Potter has over the Lump of Clay, to make what
Vessel he pleases for Honor or Dishonor. Now at best, this Scripture is but
an Allusion; and should we suppose, that the Apostle does compare the Lord to a
Potter, as we often in Scripture find him compared to Persons and Things, and
human Actions, Affections, and Members of a Man attributed to God and divine
Things, because God in his Word descends as it were to our Capacities,
expressing heavenly Matters after the manner of Men; yet it is not necessary,
that all those things which are attributed to God, should have something in his
Nature correspondent to them; according to that ancient Saying, Similitudes are
not wont to run on all-fours. Metaphors are not to be strained to express
things in themselves quite opposite, nor make the parallel run till it grows
lame; but great care must be taken, that no mean, base, or unworthy thing be
attributed to the most high. And therefore from the Potter's Power over his
Clay, to make thereof a Vessel of Honor or Dishonor as he pleases; to infer
positively from thence, that God has purposely made some to be Vessels of
Wrath, is an unjustifiable Inference from that Similitude. Surely the Holy
Ghost compares not our most wise Creator to a foolish Potter; who, because he
might make what he would of his Clay, did therefore make the greatest number of
his Pots to be broken again, to show that he had as well a Power to break them,
as to make them, which none but a mad Man would do; but rather to a wise
Potter, that designs his Work for some good end and use: Doubtless God so made
all things, that not one of his Creatures has so much cause of dislike, as to
say, why have thou made me thus? No Vessel of Wrath came so made out of his
Hands: So that if any be Vessels of Wrath, the fault is not in him, but in
themselves, by reason of their Infidelity and Contempt of the Lord, and his
long Sufferance. I know this place is usually made use of, as a Fortress for
such as you are to flee to, and is misunderstood to imply what you say; but if
you will but mind what the Apostle was upon, and let this place be expounded by
the Context, and other places of holy Scripture, so that the whole, and every
part of God's Word may agree in one Truth, then we shall never take it in this
sense of yours; for then this dark and obscure part of Paul's Epistle (which
the Apostle Peter says, many wrest to their own Destruction, 2 Pet. 3. 16.)
must be taken openly to oppose and contradict the whole Course and Tenor of
God's Word. Is there no way to understand the 9th of the Romans, than by making
those places which sound severely to clash against those that sound
compassionately? Is it not far the best way to interpret hard and doubtful
Texts, by those many Texts that are clear and easy, than to interpret the many
clear Texts by one that is dark and difficult? or if one Scripture may have a
double sense, must we needs take it in the worst? must I needs say, that the
Father of Mercy, and God of Consolation, which does not afflict willingly, nor
grieve the Children of Men, did absolutely damn him, before he had done either
good or evil? is it not the best so to understand it, that his Mercy and
Justice, his Love and Power may embrace and kiss each other? Now the Scripture
speaks in some places darkly and dubiously, in other places it expresses the
same thing more clearly and certainly; the doubtful are to be expounded by the
certain, and dark places by those that are clear, and all Exposition answerably
to the Current of Scripture not contrary to it. Now it does seem as if the
Apostle in these Words had an Eye to Jeremiah 18. 3, 4, etc. where he speaks of
the Clay in the Potter's Hands; not as it was in Creation, but in Vocation;
being marred in the Hands of the Potter; and so finding it would not be for
that use he designed it for, made thereof a Vessel as pleases him: So God
sometimes, whilst he is at work to fashion a Soul for his own Work, by the
preaching of the Gospel, by the sweet motion of his Spirit, by Mercy and long
Sufferance; yet the Vessel is marred, the Clav yields not, nor is pliable to
the Will of God; and so finding it will not be a fit Vessel for Honor, he
makes a Vessel of Dishonor. Read the 7, 8, 9, Verses, and compare them with 2 Timothy 2. 20, 21. so that it is plain, God made of one Lump all Innocent and
Upright, Genesis 5. ult. Eccles. 7. ult. at the first. See what Mr. Loveday says
upon this, in his Personal Reprobation Reprobated, Page 243; God (says he)
like a Potter makes of low vile Man honorable Vessels: Has not the Potter,
any ordinary Potter, power over the Clay, to make it what Vessel he pleases?
and when a piece thereof runs coarse, and is marred upon the Wheel, has he not
power to make it a less honorable Vessel? and has not God the same (and much
more power) over you that have imbas'd your selves by slighting, and abusing
all those Mercies he has designed to bestow upon you, and thereby make you
honorable? To be plain (says the Apostle) why may not God for your
Disobedience and Rebellion to his Son, as zealous as you are for the Law of
Moses, of a glorious People, and invested with all those extraordinary
Privileges, make you a base and contemptible People; and besides your
continuing still in Unbelief, make your Condition far worse in the World to
come? Such a Paraphrase as this seems to bear a sweet Harmony with Jeremiah 18.
also with the Scope of the whole Context, and with the Apostle's conclusive
Result, Verse 32. that they did not attain to it, because they sought it not by
Faith, but as it were by the Works of the Law. So that when Persons do Evil
against God, and will not obey his Voice, but obey Unrighteousness, and harden
their Hearts against him; then he will make them Vessels of Dishonor, prepared
for Destruction: These are they that Jude speaks of, Verse 4. that were of old
ordained to this Condemnation, not simply, as they were Men, but ungodly Men,
turning the Grace of God into Wantonness, etc. By what is, or might farther be
said, we may see that those absolute Decrees of Mers inevitable Damnation is no
part of God's revealed Will: for if this 9th of the Romans fails to prove
what you bring it for, as it is evident it does; then there is not the least
show in the Scripture for it: Nay, this Opinion of yours seems rather to be
taken out of the Turkish Alcoran, or Heathen Authors, than the Bible; for the
Holy Scriptures are so far from containing, or asserting any such Exercise in
God over his Creatures, which consists in a most severe and dreadful dooming
them from Eternity to endless Misery, that on the other hand they frequently
exalt him, as very gracious, loving, merciful and bountiful toward all; and
that there must be a great Breach on the Creatures part, in point of
Degeneration, before the Lord gives him up to ruin, Isa. 27. 11. yea, the Love
and Pity of God to his Creature Man, exceeds the Affections of a Father to his
Son, or of the tenderest Mother to her sucking Child, Mat. 7. 11. Isa. 49. 15.
Martha, I cannot forbear my Testimony against such unworthy Doctrines, when
just occasion is offered; for truly it makes my very Heart sink in me, to think
what great Injury is done to the Justice, Mercy, and Love of God, who has
graciously engaged himself as a Creator to love and respect his Creatures,
until they voluntarily renounce him, by walking in, and choosing sinful Ways, or
suffer the God of this World to blind their Eyes, and to deface the Image of
God in them. See what the Lord says by the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 44. 2. Thus
says the Lord that made thee, and formed thee from the Womb, which will help
thee, etc. and so Chap. 46. 3, 4. Hearken unto me, O House of Jacob, and all
the Remnant of the House of Israel, which are born by me from the Belly, which
are carried from the Womb; even to old Age I am he, and even to hoary Hairs
will I carry you, etc.


Mar. Pray to what purpose do you bring these Scriptures? What would you have
them prove? God speaks here to his Church, his Elect ones.


Phil. He speaks to the whole House of Israel, and you will grant that all were
not true Israelites that were of Israel; nor because they were of the natural
Seed of Abraham, were they all Children; but God reminds them that he was their
Creator and Maker, and so consequently bore the love of a Creator to them all:
and you ought to understand that the Relation of a Creator is one and the same
to the Believer and Unbeliever, the one being the Workmanship of his hands as
well as the other; as Holy Job speaks, Chap. 31. 13, 14, 15. and Job 34. 19.
shows that God tenderly loves and respects all, as they are his Creatures,
till they renounce him, etc.


Mar. But did not the Lord say of Pharaoh, That for this same purpose he had
raised him up, to show his Power in him? Does it not show, that God before he
created Pharaoh, did peremptorily decree his State and Condition of Sin and
Punishment? yea, and as God dealt with Pharaoh, so does he deal, and will deal
with all Reprobates to the Worlds end.


Phil. How was that?


Mar. Why, as God hardened his heart, so that he could not but be disobedient
to all the Applications of God by Moses to him; so those that are under an
Eternal Decree of Reprobations; are under an impossibility of repenting or
believing. In this Romans 9. 17. the Apostle shows that God raised Pharaoh, made
him a Man, a King, gave him Power over the Children of Israel, left him to the
Corruption of his own heart, for the same purpose to manifest his Glory in his
Confusion and Destruction.


Phil. You have no saying in the whole Book of God, that speaks of Pharaoh's,
being reprobated to eternal misery before he was born; or that he was decreed
and ordained before he was born, by the Lord, to be a Vessel of Wrath; or that
God created him for this same purpose, that he might make his Power known in
his Destruction. And therefore, as Mr. Loveday shows upon these words in his
Personal Reprobation Reprobated, p. 157, 158, 159. it is not to be understood as
referred to his Creation, or raising him to be a King, for then this Message
would have been applied to him when God first sent Moses to him, but we have
not one word of it, till after the six Plagues; and now he speaks of raising
him up: so that this raising up must have respect to God's dealings with
Pharaoh, in extending some special Favor to him, and so (says he) To raise up
signifies (as the Learned in the Greek tell us) to raise up out of some low
state and condition; sometimes out of some Sickness, James 5. 15. The Hebrew
words from whence the Apostle draws this, (Latined Stare feci) is read thus, I
have made thee to stand; the vulgar Latin reads it, I have sustained thee; the
Septuagint reads, Thou were kept alive; the Chaldee Paraphrase reads, For this
cause have I endured thee, or patiently born with thee; the generality of
Interpreters, as well Calvinists as others, do receive this as the most proper
reading; I have made thee to stand; I have kept or sustained thee; thou have
been laid low under the sentence of Death, but upon Moses's Intercession I have
raised thee up, I have rescued thee, I have forgiven thy disobedience, and
tried thee again, by taking off my Plagues from thee and thy Land; but if still
after all this, thou should remain obstinate and rebellious, then the stroke
shall be the heavier at last, my Power shall be seen in thy Destrustion. And
now as Pharaoh would not obey the Lord, in letting his People go, but bore
himself proudly and stubbornly against the Lord, (being seduced by the
Magicians) notwithstanding he had tasted of God's longsuffering and Mercies in
raising him up at the request of his Servant Moses; so now he should deeply
feel his Power in his Destruction; and so will the Lord do to all wilful
rejecters of his Grace and Mercy in Christ Jesus, in these Gospel days. But I
observe farther, that you seem to say, that God necessitated Pharaoh to be
rebellious and hardhearted against him, by an eternal Decree, so that he could
not but be disobedient: But surely God does not necessitate that which is
contrary to his Nature; See Mark 3. 5. where Christ grieved for the hardness of
their hearts, which, says Mr. Loveday p. 173. supposes these 4 things.

1st. That Christ had done what he could, i. e. what he could in Wisdom and
Justice, to soften their hearts.

2dly. He declares, that such a frame of Spirit, to wit, hardness of heart, was
contrary to his Spirit, or else he had not grieved for it.

3dly. They had sufficiency of means to have made them soft.

4thly. They were not necessitated to be so from him.


Mar. But did not the Lord tell Moses before he went to Pharaoh, that he would
harden his heart, Exodus 4. 21?


Phil. It Is true, God did predict this Judgment which was afterward executed;
he did tell Moses, that he would harden Pharaoh's heart, that is conditionally,
if he first hardened his own; for we find that the Scripture charges this Sin
of hard-heartedness upon Pharaoh himself, 1 Samuel 6. 6. So that Pharaoh first
hardens his heart against God, and after that, God even in Judgment, delivered
him up to this hardening, as the effect of his sin and disobedience: for God
never changes the nature of a soft heart into a hard one; and though it is
said by God, I will harden Pharaoh's heart, yet God did not do it primarily, or
necessarily, as may be seen by the means God used, which tended rather to
soften than harden him, though accidentally he did, and that many ways, (
Loveday p. 178.) by sending that Message to him to let Israel depart his Land,
which was so much against his proud and covetous Interest: If God had been
pleased that Israel should still have been Slaves to him, we had not heard of
Pharaoh's Rebellion as we now do.

1st, Thus God was concerned in hardening Pharaoh's heart, as he crossed his will
by declaring his own.

2dly, God accidentally hardened Pharaoh's heart, by declaring himself above
him in Power; this must needs provoke him, to hear of a Jehovah.

3dly, By deferring the full Revenging Power so long as he did, Eccl. 8. 11.

4thly, God hardened his heart accidentally, by his condescending to remove his
Judgments so soon at his request: and that this Act of God hardened his heart,
you have declared in the History; when God had removed this or that Plague, it
is said that Pharaoh hardened his heart: So that after Pharaoh had hardened his
heart, and dealt deceitfully six times, Exodus 8. 29. then the Lord threatened to
pour out all his Plagues upon his heart, he would punish his acquired hardness
with judicial hardness, and would withdraw those Influences of his Spirit that
should soften him, leave him to the perverseness of his own heart, and to
follow his own Counsel to his destruction. Now, though I might largely show you
the invalidity of your Opinion, as it crosses some principal Attributes of
God; God does not make Decrees contrary to his own Nature, nor simply according
to his own Will; but works all things according to the Counsel of his own Will:
So that in whatsoever God does, we are not only to look for Will, but Counsel,
Wisdom, and such things as tend to Ends worthy of him; God's Will always
follows his Nature. The Apostle says, 2 Timothy 2. 13. God cannot deny himself,
yet give me leave to give you two Reasons why I cannot assent to your Opinion,
that God of his mere Pleasure did from all Eternity decree to glorify his
Sovereignty, in the Eternal Rejection and Damnation of the greatest part of
Mankind: I will be short, because I would willingly put an end to this
Discourse at this time.


Mar. Pray do, for the time is far spent, the Sun grows low, and my Occasions
call me away at this time.


Phil. Then, my first Reason is this, because no Man had a Being from Eternity;
nothing having been from Eternity but God: and therefore, in true Propriety of
Speech, Men cannot be said to be Reprobated but in time; it is true, the Law, or
Decree of God, whereby Men come in time to be reprobated, was from Eternity:
God from Eternity did decree, that all those that live and die in a State of
Impenitency should perish; but this Decree takes hold of Persons in time, when
they come to be actually disobedient to the Lord: As the Lord said to Moses, he
which sins against me, him will I blot out of my Book. Therefore if nothing
be Eternal but God, and if that be a truth, that whatsoever is in God, is God
himself; then if God condemned or reprobated any from Eternity, it must be
himself; or else we must say, that Man was Coeternal with God, and so give the
Glory and Honor, which is due to God alone, to a poor contemptible Creature.


Mar. But had not Man some kind of Being in God from Eternity, as he was the
common Root, or producent Cause of all Men?


Phil. Yea, and as all Men were singly one in him, they were all alike holy,
innocent, and free from blame, and so all alike beloved of him; all being yet
nothing but himself: Nay, if we consider all Men's State in Adam, while he was
standing Just and Righteous in that State, none of Mankind could be the Object
of God's Hatred, but of his Love; and I hope you will not deny but we were in
him, while he stood in a State of Righteousness, as well as when in a State of
Sin; and therefore, none reprobated when they never had sinned, nor were
capable of sinning; for they could not sin before they had a Being in the
Flesh, and man had no being in the Flesh from Eternity: Therefore, etc. So that
if God proposed from Eternity to appoint to Everlasting Misery Millions of Men,
it must be whilst they were nothing but himself.

My second Reason is, if God from all Eternity of his mere Pleasure, did decree
to glorify his Sovereignty in the Eternal Rejection and Damnation of the
greatest part of Mankind, and that when they were innocent and harmless (as
above) he must of necessity destinate them unto Sin also; for where there is no
Sin, there Punishment cannot justly take place: For if a Man be foredetermined
to Damnation, he must unavoidably sin, else he could not be damned; by this you
make God the Author of Sin.


Mar. I do not say God is the Author of Sin in any; yet this I say, God did
from Enity freely, and unchangeably ordain whatsoever comes to pass: and if a
hair of our Heads falls not to the Ground, or a Sparrow to the Earth, without
the Will of God, how can you think, that any Action of Men can come to pass, or
be performed, but by the fore-determinate Will of God? for all things come to
pass, according as his Hand and Council had before determined.


Phil. No, it is likely you will not be so blunt as to say directly, that God is
the cause of Sin, that would spoil all, when stated in its proper Terms; but I
know it is usual with such as you are to put it in a more disguised and
specious Phrase, that so you may impose with the more Art upon those that are
ready to receive as Gospel what you say: yet when you say that God has
appointed, and unchangeably ordained whatsoever comes to pass, it follows by
necessary consequence that he is the Author of it; so that there is no Murder,
nor Whoredom, Robberies, Blasphemies, or any Rogueries whatsoever, that fall
out in any time or place, but they are all the effect of God Almighty's
Decrees. What Dishonor is done to the God of Love by such Doctrines as these,
that he should appoint, ordain, and unavoidably decree, to make the greatest
part of the World eternally miserable; and that he might accomplish his ends,
did necessitate them to do Evil, drawing them on from Sin to Sin, till they had
filled up the Measure of their Iniquitys, that so he might inflict upon them
that Vengeance which he had provided for them; this is contrary to his revealed
Will: David says, Psalm. 5. 4. Thou art a God that has no Pleasure in
Wickedness; and James 1. 13, 14. Let no Man say when he is tempted, I am
tempted of God, for God tempts no Man; and John tells us, that the Lust of the
Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, is not of the Father, but of
the World: Surely God does not use to necessitate that which his Soul abhors,
and which he not only forbids in his Word, but also is the Condemner of it.
Says one of the Ancients, to wit, Prosper, (vid. God's Love to Mankind, p.
50.) It Is against Reason to say, that he that is the Damner of the Devil would
have any to be his Servants; what, do you think that God Almighty does so
delight in the Blood and Ruin of Men, that rather than not destroy them Soul
and Body, he will have them live and die in Sin, that he may destroy them? This
is like that which Suetonius reports of Tyberius, (in God's Love to Mankind,
Page 59.) who being minded to put certain Virgins to death, because it was
against the Roman Laws to strangle Virgins, caused them all to be defloured by
the Hangman, that so they might be strangled; but far be any such thing from
the God of Truth, and Father of Mercy, that he should appoint that the Devil
should lead Men into Sin, that afterward he might take occasion to damn them
for it.


Mar. But you ought to distinguish between the Actions of Men, and the Sin of
the Action; tho God is the Author of the Actions of Men, yet not of the Evil of
their Actions.


Phil. This is a nice Distinction; you would seem to split a Hair. God you say
is the Author of the Fact, but not of the Fault of their Disobedience, not of
their Sin; but is this any part of God's revealed Will?


Mar. You read, Acts 4. 27, 28. Of a Truth, Lord, against thy Child Jesus, both
Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the People of Israel were
gathered together for to do what soever thy Hand and Counsel determined before
to be done. Here you see that it was the determinate Counsel of God, that his
Son should not only suffer, but also that Herod, Pontius Pilate, Jews and
Gentiles should betray and murder him: Now had they done this in Obedience to
the Will of God, they had not sinned; but they doing of it to make him a
Sacrifice to their Revenge and Malice, that was their Sin; here God decreed the
Fact, but not the Fault.


Phil. This is no good Distinction: How much better had it been for the World,
and what Peace might the Church of God have enjoyed, had People contented
themselves with what was spoken to them from the Lord, and had not given their
Imagination such unbounded Scope, as to pester the World with such abundance of
Scriptureless Distinctions, and frivolous Niceties. Now I readily grant, that
it was the determinate Will of God to redeem lost Man, by the delivering up of
his Son unto Death; that is, by leaving him in the Hands, and to the Will of
those who were his Enemies, and whom the Lord did foreknow would put him to
Death, unless he did interpose by his Power, to prevent their Rage and Malice.
Now for the effecting of this great and blessed Work, the Redemption and
Salvation of Mankind, it was sufficient for God to decree, that in case these,
or any other should attempt his Death, he would not hinder them from effecting
it: but neither this Scripture, nor any other says, that the Hand and Counsel
of God had determined, that the Jews and Gentiles should betray and murder
Christ; but only that these were gathered together to effect that which God in
his Counsel had determined before to be done, (to wit) the Redemption of the
World. Compare this Text with Act. 2. 23. where the Apostle plainly lays this
Sin upon their own Heads; in that they took, and by wicked Hands crucified and
slew the Lord of Life and Glory. Du-Veil commenting upon this place, says,
That this Jesus, by the Decree of the Father, to whom he in all things
voluntarily obeyed, being surrendered into your Hands, with incredible
Importunity you forced the Romans to nail to a Cross: -- Therefore, Christ by
the determinate Decree of God, was given up into the power and disposal of his
Enemies, whose hostile and inhuman Rage God did not predestinate, but only
foreknew. Now, tho God did decree to leave his Son in the Hands of wicked Men,
that so he might die for Sin; yet it is no less than Wickedness and horrid
Blasphemy, to say that God decreed, that such and such Men by Name, should
betray and murder him: Now, to kill a holy and innocent Person is a sinful Act,
which is not from God, but of the Devil, who is the Author of it, John 8. 40,
43, 44. and therefore it is said, John 13. 2. that the devil put it in Judas's
Heart to betray Christ; and that Judas fell by Transgression, Act. 1. 25. Now
if God, who has by his Word prohibited the shedding of Blood, or taking of any
Man's Life away unjustly, should any way incline or compel Men to it, so as to
lay them under a Necessity of being wicked, he must needs be the Author of it.
Bishop Usher, in his History of Gotteschalk, p 138. as quoted by the Author of
God's Love to Mankind, has these Words: Whosoever says, that God has laid a
Constraint, or a Necessity of sinning upon any Man, he does manifestly and
fearfully blaspheme God, inasmuch as he makes him by that the Author of Sin;
and therefore I look upon your Distinction no better than mere Delusion, to
deceive the simple and inconsiderate ones.

First, Because in wicked Actions the Acts themselves are simply Sin; as Adam's
eating the forbidden Fruit was simply Sin: and is not Murder, Drunkenness,
profane Swearing, Stealing, Whoring, in themselves Sin? Is it not because of
such things, that the Wrath of God comes upon the Children of Disobedience?
Ephesians. 5. 5, 6. The Wrath of God does not take hold upon Men for such Actions, as
bare Actions, but as sinful Actions, as they are the Transgression of the
Righteous Law of God, 1 John 3. 4. How shall God be just in rendering to every
Man according to the things done in the Body, if Men sin by the Determination
of God?

Secondly, Because, if God by his divine Decree lays Man under a necessity of
sinning, he is truly the cause of Sin, and Man by thi^ comes to have some Cloak
for his Wickedness, because he cannot justly be blamed nor punished for doing
of that which he had no power to withstand, but was forced on by an
irresistible Necessity. It was a grave and true Saying, (says Goodman upon the
Parable of the Prodigal Son) of Seneca; Necessity is the great Sanctuary of
human Infirmity, which whosoever can lay claim to, obtains Protection, for it
perfectly excuses all the Faults it commits. No Punishment, either Temporal or
Eternal can in Justice be inflicted for any bad Action, where there is no power
in the Party to avoid it: Why does our Law condemn Men to suffer Death for
wicked Actions, if they were unavoidable? and that when they murder, steal,
plot Treason, or practice any other Villainies, they do them by Necessity of
God's unalterable Decree. Pray see what we have, Deuteronomy. 22. 25. where we may see
the Law of God awards no Punishment to the Damsel, because what she did was by
Compulsion, being overborn by force which she was not able to withstand. Nay,
farther, if God has decreed all the Actions of Men, and bound them under the
Dominion of absolute Necessity to commit them, why then should we be afraid of
any Sin, that is attended with Pleasure or Profit, if they must needs sin? or
what reason has a Person to repent, to weep and mourn for doing that which he
could not but do, or omitting of that which was never in his power to effect?
If there be such a rigid Fate upon Persons, all Sorrow, Fear, and mourning for
Sin, and all other Acts of Repentance whatsoever, may as well be spared as
spent to no purpose.


Mar. Well, but whatsoever comes to pass at any time, or in any place, with
relation to any Persons, they are foreseen and foreknown by the Lord; and if
so, is there not then an absolute and unavoidable necessity of their coming to
pass? What God foresees must necessarily come to pass; but it must come to pass
in the same manner that he foresees it, which is as it shall be in respect of
time. But his foresight does not make it an absolutely necessary thing: for as
the knowledge of things prefent, lays no necessity on that which is done; so the
fore-knowledg of things future, lays no necessity on that which shall be;
because whosoever either knows, or sees things, he knows and sees them as they
are, and not as they are not. God's foreknowledg of this, or the other Man's
Sins from Eternity, does infer, that these his Sins would be committed; for God
cannot be deceived: yet his fore-knowledg that Man would sin, has no influence
upon his Sin, which shows Man's Destruction to be of himself.


Phil. God foreknows all the Evil and Wickedness that was, is, or will be; yet
he does not decree it: It cannot be thought but God did foreknow that the Jews
would mock his Messengers, despise his Word, misuse his Prophets, till his
Wrath arose against them, till there was no Remedy; yet did not he decree it,
but sent his Messengers, etc. in true love to them, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16. God
Almighty, through the Infinitness of his Wisdom and Knowledge, is able infallibly
to know and foresee all Men's Ways and Actions, and what they will be from the
beginning of the World, to the end thereof, as well, nay, far better than Man
does, when his days are finished; being without all possibility of Error or
Mistake: yet this fore-knowledg of this or the other coming to pass, does not
cause a necessity that it shall so come to pass, no more than my fore-knowledg
that Men will die, is a cause of their Death. Without all question, God
foreknew that Herod would seek the young Child Jesus to destroy him; and in all
probability, had Jesus been in the coast of Bethlehem at that time, when
Herod's bloody Inquisition was put in Execution, Jesus had died; that the Lord
foresaw, and therefore warned Joseph to take the young Child and flee into
Egypt. But very full to our purpose is that in 1 Samuel 23. 11, 12. where David
inquires of the Lord, if Saul would come down to Keilah, and the Lord said he
would come down; and that the Lords of Keilah would deliver David into Readiness
Hands, in case he should stay in their City. But it did not follow from this
fore-knowledg, that therefore Saul must of necessity come down, or David be
delivered by the Lords of Keilah into Readiness Hands. Predestination, says St.
Austin (as quoted by Du-Veil on Act. 2. 23.) cannot be without Fore-knowledg,
but Fore-knowledg may be without Predestination; for by Predestination, God
foreknew those things he was to act, but he may foreknow those things which he
himself does not do, as all manner of Sin. Where we may see, that tho the Sins
and wicked Actions of Men may be the Object of God's Fore-knowledg, yea, and of
his Providence too; yet it is Wickedness to say, that God is operative about
the bringing of them to pass.


Mar. But if it was not for Sin, God's Glory would not be exalted in the
punishing of it; by this is much of the Justice of God seen.


Phil. What, is God so much wanting in himself, that he could find out no means
for the Exaltation of his own glorious Name, nor find out means to advance his
Justice, but by the bringing in of Sin into the World, which his Soul hates,
and to appoint Men to commit it, that so he might exalt his Justice in
punishing of it? Surely if our Righteousness cannot profit God, our Sins
cannot, Job 35. 6, 7. But a Word with respect to the term Fore-knowledg, which
the Scripture in several places attributes unto God, tho held by Learned and
good Christians to be an unproper Term, and attributed to God, as the Parts and
Passions of a Man are; as Hands, Eyes, Ears, Grief, Joy, Repentance, Anger,
etc. And the Holy Ghost is pleased to use such vulgar Terms, applying himself
to our Capacity, that so we might receive some Light of God's Eternal Workings,
and might be enriched with such Conceptions and Knowledge of him as we are
capable of. Now with respect to us that are temporal, we say, that God Almighty
does foresee, and foreknow us, and predestinate us; yet we must not think, that
God's Actions, that are Eternal, must be wrought like ours in time. This was to
raise such Fancies in us, which are unworthy of him, and not consistent with
the truth of his Being: for this is adjudg'd for a Truth by the Learned, that
God wills nothing in time. Mr. Perkins, in his Commentary upon Heb. 11. 40,
speaking of God's Fore-knowledg, says, That to soresee, is ascribed to God,
not properly, but in regard of our Capacity; for if we speak of God properly,
God cannot be said to foresee any thing; because all things be present to him,
whether past, or to come. Dr. Moulins, upon Romans 8. as quoted by De-Laun, in
his Sec. Philo, page 70. God is said to foreknow such which he foresaw would
believe in his Son; not that there is any future time properly ascribable to
God, in whom no Acci-Condition, or Circumstance of Time or Place can be
admitted; but these things are spoken of God, after the manner of Men. Now, if
God wills nothing in time, neither does he foreknow, or foresee any thing in
time; his Fore-knowledg being as Ancient as himself, even from Eternity: so
that with God, there is no Word nor Thought, nor Actions, past or to come, but
are all at once with God, even in one eternal present Being, Psalm. 139. 2. yea,
our Birth, our Lives, our Death, our Election and Predestination, Acts 15. 18.
are all at once with God, with whom is no variableness or shadow of changing,
Heb. 13. 8. Rev. 1. 4. Jesus Christ, the same Yesterday, to Day, and for ever;
always like himself, invariable and immutable; so that whatsoever God foreknows
or intends, it is from Eternity. May we not say with the Apostle, Romans 11. 33.
that the Knowledge as well as the Wisdom of God, is past finding out; yea,
unsearchable to Men and Angels, in respect of that absolute and perfect
Knowledge which God has of all things, and of the Ways and Actions of Men?
Psalm. 139. Let us then here learn to become Fools, that we may be wise, and
leave prying into those things, which are beyond our human Reason to conceive,
and let us keep close to God's revealed Will, which is our Duty; for the want
of this has filled Professors Heads with Fancies, and so they have been
smiting one another, and weakening the Hands of each others in the Lords Work,
while Piety, Virtue, the Love and Fear of God, the true Spiritual Substance of
all Religion is too too much neglected. So that what if God did foreknow all
the wicked Actions of Men before they came to pass, yet might not God as well
foreknow, that if they had but improved those Means which he through his Grace
had afforded them, they might not have come to pass? for the fore-knowledg in
God of what Men will do, does not imply any absolute necessity of their doing
of it; neither have they any less Power to refrain doing of it, because of
God's fore-knowing that they will do it. Whilst it remained, says Peter to
Ananias touching his Possession, was it not thy own? i.e. were thou not at full
liberty to have kept it for thy own private use? and when it was sold, was it
not in thy Power, viz. whether thou would part with thy Money or not?
Doubtless, God foreknew what Ananias would do; yet this did not take away the
Liberty or Freedom of his Will, to dispose of it as he pleased; otherwise God's
Foreknowledg should necessitate him to sell the Possession, and to keep back
part of the Money, and lie against the Holy Ghost, by saying, there was all,
when there was not: this Act must be looked upon, not the Act of Ananias, but
of God himself: for whatsoever a Man is necessitated to do by an unresistable
Power out of himself, is the Act of the Necessitator, not his: As the Apostle
says, Romans 7. 20. If I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but
Sin that dwells in me. I would not have you admit into your thoughts, that God
is any ways Author of the wicked Actions of Men, or that he decrees any thing
that is an Infringement to his Justice, or his Mercy in the least.


Mar. I am against those that hold that God works Sin by an operative Decree;
as Mr. Perkins in his Commentary upon Heb. 11. 40. who says, that under the
large extent of God's Decree, we must include the sinful Actions of Men; for
God does not barely foresee them, but decrees the being of them, and so wills
them after a sort, tho not to be done by himself, yet by others. And so upon
Jude, ver. 4. that nothing comes to pass without the Decree of God; no not the
wicked Actions of Men, which God not only foreseeth, but decrees. Now it is
true which you have said, if God should be operative in the working of Sin,
then he would be the Author of Sin: yet that all Sin comes to pass by the
permissive decree of God, is a thing I hope you will not deny.


Phil. I see you can play fast and loose with your Opinion; sometimes you say
that God did from Eternity freely and unchangeably ordain whatsoever comes to
pass; and when by this Doctrine you find that Man is laid under a necessity of
sinning, and consequently God becomes the Author of all the wicked Actions of
Men, then you would help your self, by saying, Though Man sin not by the
operative decree of God, yet he does by the permissive decree. This is no more
indeed, than what we find and hear in the Sermons of all those of your way;
when they preach on this Subject, the Doctrinal part of their Sermons
countenance one thing, and the Applicatory part that which is contrary unto it;
laboring to beget such a Faith in their Auditors, as would destroy the Faith
of their Doctrine. What wooing and beseeching does your Ministers make for
Sinners to close with Christ, to repent, believe, and obey the Lord, and not to
withstand the Day of Grace? when yet notwithstanding all this, they believe
there is no Grace nor Mercy, but for very few before them; and that their
strongest Endeavors to repent, etc. effect just nothing, but the overruling
Decree of God does all; and so they pull down with one hand, what they build up
with the other. And the Truth is, this Doctrine of God's eternal decreeing the
greatest part of Adam's Offspring to Sin and Damnation, includes in it so many
Absurdities, horrible Blasphemies, undermining the very Foundation of all
Religion and Piety, that my Hopes are, that it will shortly fall, with the
unsupportable weight of its own Evil. Yea, were it not for so many Volumes
written to uphold it, I should hope it would appear so wicked, that all good
Christians e're long would be ashamed to own it; and God's Love to all would be
exalted in the Hearts, Tongues, and Writings of all Men. One thing I perceive
is the cause why this Doctrine does so flourish and lift up its Head in this
Day, is an overmuch confiding in Persons, of whose Learning and Piety they
have had a high Opinion. This draws many ignorant, tho well-meaning Hearers, to
be zealous in what they teach, be it right or wrong, and to follow Persons,
reputed Godly and Learned, more than the pure unerring Word of God: Alas! all
good and pious Men have Errors and Fits of Distempers, through human Frailty; and
we ought not to take their Words upon trust, but upon trial, and in those
things that appertain to Salvation, bring them to the Law and Testimony; and to
suspect that for Truth, where the Word of God administers much more Ground to
doubt and question than believe, as this Doctrine of personal and respective
Reprobation does.

But a word to the permissive Decree of God. If by the permissive Decree of
God, you mean that God permitting, or suffering such, or such a thing to be
done, or come to pass, supposes a necessity of the coming of it to pass: This
I deny; for if it be true, that a Sparrow falls not to the Ground without his
Permission, yet has not he decreed eternally, that it shall be at such or such
a time, or in any cruel way, as it often falls out directly contrary to his
Will, Deuteronomy. 22. 6. and though it be a Truth, God has decreed to suffer Sin,
otherwise there could be none; yet it is also a great Truth, that this
permissive Decree of God is no cause of Sin. God does permit one Man to take
away the Life of another; but it does not follow, that therefore he did
appoint, or ordain them to such wicked Actions: No Decree of God, that is
purely, and barely permissive, either induces, or supposes any necessity of
the coming to pass what is so decreed; no more than a Capital Law necessitates
to Murder: Permission supposes a Possibility of sinning, or not sinning, in
the Party permitted. From whence I conclude, there is no damning to Misery,
without relation to Sin; for it is Sin, as Sin, and in no other Consideration,
is the Cause of Punishment; and surely, God being most pure, perfect, and
Goodness it self, cannot be a Cause, either Moral or Physical, of that which is
nothing but Deficiency. If any of us miss Happiness, let us not foolishly and
sawcily charge God with our Ruin, who delights not in it, but rather upon our
selves. And I pray take heed, while you dislike Mr. Perkins's Phrase, you hold
not to his Opinion; for then would you make God worse than the Devil, because
the Devil does only tempt and persuade to Sin, and his Motions may be resisted;
for it is granted on all Hands, the Devil can but allure, not compel to Sin.
But by this Opinion, God does not only will Sin, but procure it by a powerful
and effectual Decree: This is not only contrary to God's revealed Will, but
also fights against all the Attributes of God, which I might largely show.
Surely it is Men's wilful sinning, which renders every Castaway liable to
Reprobation, and no fore-determination of God necessitates him thereunto; as
you may see, Psalm. 81. 11, 12. Ezekiel. 18. 39. Romans 1. 21, 24. Rev. 22. 11. Those
that are here left to themselves, are the obstinate and wilful Sinners, which
hate Instruction, and scorn Mercy, Prove. 1. 24. And says Hockins, on God's
Decree, p. 44. All Men do by their Sins and Iniquities truly reprobate
themselves; so that eternal Destruction becomes Men's choice, not their unhappy
Destiny; and our Misery, derive its Original, not from God, but our own Wills:
so that we need not seek for any hidden Cause, but our own secret and open
Impieties. And indeed for my part, I cannot find that God has necessitated any
to be wicked, and thereby justly miserable; but has graciously provided Means,
whereby both Sin and Misery might be prevented or removed, if timely embraced.
But I shall say no more at this time, for I see it grows late; but I could
heartily wish we might have a little farther Discourse together, so it may be
in Love.


Mar. Well, I agree to it; and if you please, appoint the Time and Place, and
if the Lord will, I Will meet you; and if we cannot agree in our Judgments, yet I
desire we may maintain the bond of Love, which will make part of amends for our
Failings: But I do not question but you will be of my mind before you die, and
renounce this your Error.


Phil. My Friend, I stand ready to revoke any Error that I shall be made
sensible of, and be convinced by the written Word of God, the Touchstone of all
Men's sayings and doings; and if I err, I err with a good Intention, as in
Charity I hope you do: tho in my Apprehension, what you hold tends more to the
dishonor of God than his honor. And I heartily pray, and hope you will be
ashamed and sorry for it upon further Consideration; and I rest hopeful, that
all those that have been led into this Error by Ignorance, or too much trusting
in Human Wisdom, if they be not ashamed to revoke their Judgment before Men of
their own Parties, will better consider what they ought to believe, in relation
to these things. And seeing you are so kind to accept my Motion, if you please,
let it be to Morrow about Noon; and let this shady Grove be the place.


Mar. Let it be so, till then farewell.


Phil. A good Night to you.


A Second Conference.
Philad. WEll met Martha, now I see you are as good as your Word.


Mar. Nay, I think I am better than my Word, for I am not only come my self,
but I have brought one or two with me.


Philetus. This is a very pleasant Walk, and a curious Shade indeed.


Moderatus. It is so.


Philad. Why, here I love to retire my self sometimes, and to get out of the
Noise and Hurry of the World, which too much interrupts us in our Contemplation
on Divine Things; yea, here all alone, I can take a view of the Corruption of
my Heart, and the Errors of my Life, and see the Vanity and Uncertainty of all
created Things: And here in my Walkings and Musings, methinks all the Herbs in
the Field, the Beasts on the Earth, the Birds of the Air, preach forth the
wonderful Love, Wisdom and Providence of God; and many other things are
represented to my Thoughts, in this my Solitary Walking: but I will not prevent
our Discourse for which we met this Day, etc.


Mar. I have imparted to these two Friends of mine the Substance of our
Discourse Yesterday, and they are desirous to spend this Afternoon with you, I
hope in true Love and Compassion, as Friends and Lovers of the Truth of God,
and your Souls good; knowing that if you should remain settled upon the Dregs
of any rotten Opinion, contrary to the Truth of the everliving God, that
Sorrow, Shame, and Confusion of Face will be your Portion; for there are
damning Principles, as well as damning Practices.


Philad. I do with a Cordial Affection readily embrace you all, and also
believe that there are Principles which are of a Grace-destroying,
Heart-hardning Nature, that tend to banish the true Fear and Love of God, and
to nourish Carnal Security, and beget Strife; but if all those engaged in
Religious Contests, would leave off advancing Parties and Opinions, and aim
with a single Eye, and sincere Heart, to advance Truth and Piety, with Sobriety
and Christian Prudence, this would renew that brotherly Love and Peace, which
is now almost universally destroyed by imprudent Zeal, to the hazarding of all
true Piety, and indeed Morality and all.


Mod. You say true; it is a great deal of pity, that Persons that own one God
and one Lord Jesus Christ, and expect one Heaven, should be so injurious to
each other, as to put off that Spirit of Gentleness and Meekness, which does so
highly become the Saints of Jesus Christ.


Philet. It would be well if all sorts of Christians would endeavor patiently
to bear, or mildly instruct those that lie under Errors and Failings; this
would maintain and cherish Peace and Concord in all the Churches of Christ.


Mod. Well then, in this Days Discourse, let it be accompanied with love to
Truth, and in love to Peace, and the good of each others Souls; and let all
things be tried by the true Standard, the Word of God: and wherein you find
each other mistaken, take heed of passing heady or hasty Censures upon each
other; as because I am not of your Mind, nor you of mine, that therefore we are
excluded out of the Kingdom of Heaven: this will make us out of love with one
another.


Philad. I have found it too true, that many that can speak fair, yet carry
Wrath in their Hearts, neither can they bear the least Opposition that may be,
but presently they carry it so, as if God himself was opposed, when their
Dictates are not admitted for Divine Oracles; and because I cannot see that to
be a Truth, which I believe is an Error, presently they are ready to say, I
cannot see it, because God has purposely blinded my Eyes, and am such a one as
is cast out of the Love and Favor of God; and when this is once settled in
their Hearts, how can I expect Love from them, unless I can believe they can be
better to me, than they represent God to be to the greatest part of Mankind?


Mar. I see that which is uppermost will out; you still are of the same mind
you was, you hold fast your Error, and will not let it go.


Philad. Truly I am much of Rawlin the Martyr's Mind; when the Bishop, after he
had read Mass, asked him if he would revoke his Opinion; answered, my Lord,
Rawlin you left me, and Rawlin you find me, and by God's Grace Rawlin I will
continue; and tho I may seem to you to err, yet I have considered every
Particular, and it seems so pleasing an Error, if it be one, and so
comfortable a Doctrine to poor Mankind, and does so much exalt the Justice and
Mercy of God, that I think I shall never be of a contrary Mind. Yea, and if for
any thing in the World I could suffer the Loss of all that is dear to me,
methinks it should be to witness to this great Truth.


Mar. I know that natural Reason seems to stand on your side; but you must
know, and allow Faith to be above Reason, and God may have, and questionless
has Ways and Actions, which are known only to himself, past finding out by
Man; neither does he give an Account or Reason of any of his Matters, Job 33.
13. You must have a care of searching into God's Decrees, they are not to be
fathomed by Man's weak and shallow Capacities: what Eye looks upon the Sun,
does not by that dazzle? So, while Men would by the Eye of Reason see a Cause in
God's secret Will, they stumble and fall. Pray ye, what Reason can be given
concerning the Mystery of the Trinity? or that the second Person should take
our Flesh upon him, and be conceived of a Virgin? or that the same Bodies,
after dissolved to Dust, should be restored to a Spiritual, Immortal, and
Incorruptible State? These things are the object of Faith, and are above our
Reason to comprehend or define; yet are we to believe these things to be Truth,
because revealed to us by God in his Word: So, tho it be beyond the Reason of
Man to define how God (whose Ways are all equal and just) should from Eternity
predestinate the greatest part of Adam's Offspring to Everlasting Misery, or
freely and unchangeably ordain the coming to pass of every thing in the World;
and yet he himself, neither guilty of Cruelty, or the Author of Sin; yet we
ought to believe it is so, when declared to us by the Word of the Lord.


Mod. These are great Mysteries which we ought not to pry into: Secret things
belong unto God, but those things which are revealed belong unto us and to our
Children, Deuteronomy. 29. 29.


Philad. This is true; but surely Moderatus, This wretched Opinion of God's
positive Reprobation does not carry the Nature of Divine Mysteries along with
it: It is not accompanied with so great Awe and Majesty, as that it should be
only obeyed, and no way disputed: For God himself denies it to be any Decree of
his, Ezekiel. 3. 11. And as Calvin says, We should not be ashamed to be ignorant
of some of the Nature of Divine Predestination: Yet as Eusebius says, It Is an
Argument of great Sloth and Idleness not to seek unto that, whereof we may
justly make inquiry. Hockins on God's Decrees, Page 126, 190. Now I do not
pretend to draw the Curtain to look into the wonderful and astonishing Mystery
of the Holy and Blessed Trinity, or of the Incarnation of the Son of God, God
manifest in the Flesh, 1 Timothy 3. 16. which is so great a Mystery, that infirm
Man with all the strongest Faculties of his Soul cannot reach unto. I also
freely grant, that whatsoever God has revealed in his Word, must needs be a
Truth, and meet and worthy to be believed of us all: But where do you find,
that God has revealed in his Word, that he has appointed the greatest part of
the World to Everlasting Misery? and tho there may be many things above Reason
quite out of the Apprehension of it, yet not altogether against Reason. How is
it contrary to Reason, that God the first Being of all things, being Infinite,
should have a manner of subsisting far different from all created and finite
Beings? Neither is it contrary to Reason, that God should be able to make a
Virgin to conceive in a way beyond the Course of Nature, or ordinary
Providence, for the accomplishing of so great and glorious a Work, as the
saving poor lost and undone Mankind. Neither ought it to be looked upon, no,
not in the Eye of Reason, as a thing incredible, that God should raise the
Dead, Act. 16. 8. Is it not every way as easy for God to restore a Body
dissolved to Dust, and give a Perfection and Glory to it, as to restore a dry
Hand to Life and Activity in the Body, or cause Aaron's dry Staff to blossom
and bare Almonds? Can Man burn a Tree into Ashes, and change it into shining
Glass? And cannot God cause that Dust that was once Flesh, to become Flesh
again, and to restore it to a Spiritual, Immortal, and Incorruptible State? But
to let this pass; are these Friends of yours, to whom you say you have imparted
the Substance of our Discourse, etc. of your Mind?


Mod. There is some Difference, for what I hold you have heard: But Philetus
looks upon Mankind as lying in the Fall, under the Guilt of Adam's Sin; so that
God looking upon Man as fallen, did decree the greatest Number of Men to
Eternal Misery, for the Declaration of his Justice, without affording them a
Savior; which is the only Way and Means of their Recovery, or without
sufficient Grace for the avoiding of Sin.


Philad. Truly, I see little difference between you; you both place the Sin and
Damnation of the greatest part of Mankind upon the alone absolute Will and
Pleasure of God, you looking upon it from Eternity, he as lying in the Fall.
But surely God never left any Man in that State whereunto Adam brought him; but
as I have said, has graciously provided means whereby both Sin and Misery
might be prevented, or removed, if timely embraced, seeing Christ has
abolished that Wrath and Death, and has brought Life and Immortality to light
by the Gospel; and God has so far reconciled all Sinners to himself, that through
the Sacrifice, and for the sake of that Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of
the World, he is graciously pleased to be reconciled to them, and to open a
Door of Hope for all the Sons of Adam. And tho it is a great Truth that Adam,
in breaking the Law of his God, brought not only himself, but all his Posterity
(if he should have had any) under Sentence of Death and Condemnation; yet did
the Lord, who delights in Mercy, before he pronounced the Sentence due to him
for Sin, graciously promise a Savior, Genesis 3. 15. by which he was put into a
state of Recovery from this dreadful Fall: And God by this gracious Promise
took whole Adam into Grace and Favor. And you can no more exclude any from
Justification of Life, which has abounded toward all by Christ, than you can
exclude them from the Condemnation, which has abounded toward them by Adam.
Romans 5. 16, 17, 18, 19. Here the condemned Ones by Adam, and the justified of
Christ, are computed by one and the same Number: For as we hear of the
Condemnation of all Men by the Offense of Adam, so of no fewer than all Men
justified by Christ, and no more than many made Sinners by Adam, or of any
fewer than many made Righteous by Christ.


Mar. Let it be well observed, that the Scope of the Apostle in this place, is
to show, that as Death and Condemnation came inevitably upon all the first
Adam's Posterity, by his Fall; so shall the free Gift of Righteousness come
infallibly upon all, in whose room and stead Christ died, as their Second Adam,
their Surety and Mediator: the first Adam's All was all Mankind, the second
Adam's All was the Elect, upon which Justification and Sanctification shall
most certainly and infallibly be bestowed upon them.


Philad. But why the All in the first Clause should be taken for all Mankind,
without excepting so much as one, and All in the latter should exclude all Men,
a few only excepted, I know not. For unless Persons will take to themselves a
lawless Liberty, to exercise Dominion over the Expression of the Holy Ghost,
they cannot make them greater or lesser in one Clause than in the other: for if
Condemnation should come upon all Men by the offense of Adam, and Righteousness
only upon some few by the Obedience of Christ; then where Sin abounded, Grace
should not super-abound, as Verse 20. unless Grace has a proportionable Reign
unto Life, (so as to put all Men into a Capacity of Life and Salvation) as Sin
reigned over all Men without exception unto Death.


Philet. The Apostle's Scope is to show, that as Death came in by one public
Person, so Life and Salvation came in by another public Person; and that the
Lord Jesus will infallibly justify and save his All, for whom he undertook, and
died as their Head and Representative.


Philad. But it seems you will not own, that the Grace of Christ did profit
Mankind, as much as the Sin of Adam damnified it: No, you make Christ less than
Adam; and that Adam did more to the damning of the Souls and Bodies of all his
Posterity, than Christ did for the saving of them; if so, what will become of
Paul's glorying over the Grace of God in Christ, as much more abounding? as in
Verse 15. For if through the offense of one, many be dead, much more the Grace of
God, and the Gift by Grace, which is by one Jesus Christ, has abounded unto
many. But now if many more Millions of Men are dead, through the offense of Adam
than are made alive by the Grace of God in Christ, where is the much more?


Philet. All Men being fallen in Adam, God beholding Mankind in the corrupt
Mass (and he being the Sovereign Lord of all) might at his Pleasure, and in his
electing Love, pardon one, or a few of fallen Mankind; and by an eternal Decree
of Reprobation, leave the greatest part of Mankind in that sad and depraved
Condition, without any Power to believe, or a Christ to believe in; and this he
might do, because he has an absolute and uncontrollable Power, and Dominion
over his Creatures.


Philad. Now you run upon a Fundamental Mistake, about personal and absolute
Election and Reprobation: You make Adam's Sin the Foundation of building your
fearful Opinion upon; that Man suffers Eternal Damnation for Adam's Sin. This
is a most sad Doctrine, that God should lay men under a necessity of being born
under the Guilt of that Sin, which was out of their Power to help or withstand,
(for men can no more help Adam's Sin, than they could help being born) and yet
for that, cast away the greatest part of Mankind forever; Shall one Man sin,
and will the Lord be wrath with all? Number. 16. 22. It Is true, when Man by
disobedience became Bankrupt of the Divine Bounty, and had run himself so far
in Debt, both to the Law and Justice, beyond any possibility to pay the Debt,
the Lord in Justice might have left him in the Fall, and made him Partaker of
his fierce Wrath: Yet was the Lord pleased to break forth in high and much
Mercy, and in the tenderness of his Love, deeply compassionating Man's Misery,
entered into a Covenant of Peace, freely giving his only Son to satisfy the
whole Debt, and set us free; (for which we are obliged to be unfeignedly
thankful to our dear Lord, and truly to love him that first loved us) and has
promised, that whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but have Everlasting
Life. God has now tied himself by promise, and has firmly indented with us in
the Covenant of Grace and Mercy, through Christ, that if we believe and obey
the Lord, we shall undoubtedly reap the blessed Fruits of the Promise in
Eternal Life. Therefore I beseech you, do not entertain such dreadful
Apprehensions of an Infinite Gracious God, that he should send Millions of Men
to endless torments for Adam's single Transgression. Surely, if it was so, the
Holy Ghost, who so effectually in the Scriptures of Truth vindicates the
Righteousness and Equity of God's Proceedings in the Condemnation of wicked and
ungodly Men, would have insisted more or less upon it; we should find something
of it in the Word of God, either from Christ, or some of his Servants; but I
cannot find the least hint of it in the whole Scripture, that ever the Lord
decreed to assign Men their Portions with Devils for that Sin, it being taken
away (as to the condemning Guilt of it) by the Grace of God in Christ. Where
does the Scripture say, that for Adam's Sin in eating the forbidden Fruit, God
hates the greatest part of his Posterity? yea, so hates them, as to reprobate
them to the second Death? but plainly tells us, the Child shall not suffer for
the Father's Sins, Ezekiel. 18.


Philet. But does not the Lord say, Exodus 20. 5. That he will visit the Sins of
the Father upon the Children, etc.


Philad. Yea, but it is to those that hate him; mind the words, If Children come
to be haters of God, as their Fathers were, treading in the same steps of sin
and disobedience with their wicked Parents, they thereby becoming partakers of
their sins, shall share with them in their punishment* But this does not show
that God will condemn any for that offense which they never did in their own
persons, especially when satisfied for it by their Surety. And as Dr. Tailor
says in his Apology for the Baptists, speaking of Infants dying before
baptized, and under the supposed guilt of Adam's sin, tells us, That original
sin, either will not be laid to their charge, so as to be sufficient to condemn
them; or if it could, yet the Mercy and absolute Goodness of God will secure
them, if he takes them away before they can glorify him by a free obedience.
As Infants without any consent of their own, contracted the guilt of Adam's
sin, and are liable to all the punisament that can with Justice descend upon
his Posterity, who are personally innocent; so Infants shall be restored
without any Act of their own, or any others for them, by the second Adam, by
the Redemption of Jesus Christ, by his Righteousness and Mercy.


Mod. I have a good Opinion of all dying Infants, especially Children of
Believing Parents.


Philad. And is there not as good ground of hopes for all, as some? Does not
Mr. Baxter, a Friend of yours, tell us, in his More Proofs, page 8. That all
Mankind was brought by Christ under a Covenant of Grace, which is not vain, nor
repealed by God, but as the abuse of the Grace of the Covenant may cast them
out; for as a Covenant of entire Nature was made with all Mankind in innocent
Adam, so a Covenant of Grace was made with all Mankind in lapsed Adam, Genesis 3.
15. in the Promised Seed; and renewed again with all Mankind in Noah. And this
is no more than what the Scripture agrees with, Ezekiel. 18. where the Lord
expressly tells them, That he that sins shall die; that the Son shall not
bear the iniquity of the Father: and God's dealing thus in Mercy with fallen
Mankind, is so agreeable to the pure Nature of the Deity, that it is to be
wondered, that any should be so wicked, as to believe that he has
fore-determin'd the Reprobation of any for another faults, and when they
themselves were incapable of doing good or evil, in their own persons.


Philet. What will you go about to deny Original sin? Shall none go to Hell?
For that David says, Ps. 51. That he was born in iniquity, and in sin did his
Mother conceive him.


Philad. Deny Original sin, no; but I do believe that all have sinned, and come
short of the Glory of God, and that by reason of Adam's sin, Death reigns
over all, of which none is free, being all concluded in unbelief, and corrupted
in the original. Adam, when he was first created, was said to be made in the
Image of God; which Image did not only stand in having Dominion over the
Creatures, as some of the Ancients have expounded it, neither as if the Soul
was of the substance of God; but the Image of God, in which Adam was created,
was in Knowledge, Righteousness and Holiness, Col. 3. 10. Ephesians. 4. 14. endued
with all Perfection which was requisite for a Creature, and sufficiently
furnished with necessary Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, Patience, Bounty, Love,
Humility, and such like; that so they might, in some measure, hold forth the
Divine Perfection and Majesty of God, and know how to use aright their Dominion
and Sovereignty over all the inferior Creatures; and also might understand the
Will of God toward themselves, that so they might render that Obedience which
was due unto God, as their supreme Lord and Lawgiver, whereby they might have
been forever happy and blessed. But now Man being tempted to sin, soon yielded
to the temptation, lost the Perfection of his Nature, his Holiness, and pure
Innocence, which was the condition of his Blessedness; in dissolving of which
he lost his Happiness, and was driven out from the presence of the Lord, being
now fallen from a most glorious condition in Creation, unto the miserable state
of Corruption; in which State of Corruption it is said, Genesis 5. 3. That Adam
begot a Child in his own lineness; it does not say that he begat a Son in the
Image of God (in which he was created) but in the Image of himself, that is in
the same condition of himself, at that time of Generation. Had Adam begotten
Children before he fell, he had begotten a Righteous Seed, after the Image of
his Perfection, because the Image of God in him was unpolluted; but begetting
Children after the Depravation of his Nature, the Stream could not rise purer
than the Fountain; none could bring a clean thing out of an unclean one. And
though all, with respect of what was derived unto them from Adam, are wholly
lost, and in the strictness of Justice worthy of eternal Death, yet the guilt
of it (as to eternal Death) is taken away by the abounding Grace of God,
vouchsafed to the World by Jesus Christ; which extends it self to all that were
lost in Adam.


Philet. You seem to hold that Adam's sin became ours, and we all involved in
the Fall, because we were all in his Loins, as he was the Root and common Stock
from which we all, by the appointment of the Lord, should come; yet you will
not hold that any deserves Hell and Damnation for that sin.


Philad. You cannot prove that that Death which was threatened to Adam, if he
disobeyed the Lord, was Damnation to Hellfire; neither if the Promise of
Christ had not been made, whether Adam had lived to beget Children or not, or
whether he had not immediately gone to the dust, from whence he was taken. It Is
no better than sinful curiosity, to be too confident in such unrevealed
matters: it is the safest way to be sober, and to go no farther than the
Scriptures guide us; and where the Holy Ghost has not a Pen to write, let us
not have a Tongue to speak: God has revealed enough to make us wise to
Salvation. Yet this I say, that whatsoever State Adam was in, there was all
Mankind with him, there was a time (if Eternity may be called so) when all Men
considered as in God, were nothing but God himself; according to that Maxim,
Whatsoever is in God, is God. All Men had a being in God, before they had a
being in Adam, Luke 3. 38. where Adam is called the Son of God.

2dly. There was a time, when Adam, and so all Men in him, was righteous and
holy, as during his State of pure Innocence. In which State all Men must needs
partake of the same Holiness and Integrity with him, Eccl. 7. 3. Romans 5. 12. 1
Cor. 15. 22.

3dly. There was a time when Adam, with Eve his Wife, being beguiled by Satan
(free from all inward or outward Necessity) sinned against God: by which
Transgression they became liable to Eternal Death; and so his Judgment, Will
and Affection, came to be corrupted: in which State all Mankind stood, and so
Original Sin is come upon all, and Death by Sin, yea, upon those that have not
sinned after the Similitude of Adam's Transgression.

4thly. There was a time when God, who is rich in Mercy, of his Free Grace, (
Isa. 43. 25. Jer. 31. 3. Hos. 14. 4. Romans 5. 8, 9. Ephesians. 1. 5, 6. 1 John 4. 10.)
did enter into a Covenant of Grace with Adam, and all Mankind in him, in the
promised Seed, Genesis 3. 15. in which he took all Men to Grace and Favor: for
surely we were as much in Adam when he was restored, as when he fell, and as
much Partakers of his Mercy from God, as we were of his Sins. And I suppose you
will not say, but God pardoned this Sin in Adam, upon the account of Christ;
and if he pardon him, who freely acted it in his own Person, do you think he
will send others to Hell for it? God forbid.


Philet. How then must Justice be satisfied?


Philad. Have not I told you often, that it was by Christ?

He poor was made, that he our Debts might pay;
He base became, to take our Shame away.
He entered Bond, our Freedom to procure;
He Dangers tried, our Safeties to assure.
He scorned was, our Honor to advance;
He seemed a Fool, to help our Ignorance.
He Sin was made, our Errors to conceal;
He wounded was, that he our Minds might heal.
He thirsted, that our Thirst might have an end;
He wept, that Joy our Sorrow might attend.
He lost his Blood, that we our Blood might save;
He died, that we Eternal Life might have.
Here is the Lamb of God, that has taken away the damning Guilt of Adam's Sin.


Philet. But does not the Apostle positively say, Ephesians. 2. 3. that we are all by
Nature the Children of Wrath, by Nature, that is, by our Nativity or Birth?


Philad. What; did not Christ take away the original Guilt from none? What, the
the Elect which were taken into the Love and Favor of God before the
Foundation of the World, yet Children of Wrath by Birth? What, did not Christ
take it away from them?

Pray take heed you charge not the human Nature with a Sin, where God has not,
under pretense of doing him the greater Honor thereby, tho in the main, it
lays to the Lord's charge the chief Cause of all Evils. Surely by Nature
here, cannot be meant our Descent from Adam, by partaking of the human Nature.
For where do you find, that the Wrath of God is entailed upon Adam's Posterity,
as they are Men? but as they are vicious and sinful, Ephesians. 5. 6. by reason of
their actual Sins, comes the Wrath of God upon the Children of Disobedience.
You never find the Judgments of God threatened to any for Adam's Sin, nor
against the human Nature, as if the very Essence and Being of a Man was the
Object of God's Reprobation. Now, as our National Laws lay no Penalty upon a
Child that is gotten in Adultery, because it partakes of the Nature of a Man,
(in this case, the Child is by all acquitted as innocent, not worthy of any
Punishment; it being a thing quite out of its Power to help, and so quite out
of the reach of Penal Laws, which are inflicted upon those that are Criminals:)
and so it is in Divine. I will give you three Reasons why I cannot take this
Scripture in your sense.

1st. Because we do not find, that the word Nature in Scripture, signifies
Conception, or natural Birth; neither is it mentioned as a thing that is sinful
in it self in being born.

2dly. If by Nature be meant our Descent from Adam, and by Wrath be meant to be
so under the Displeasure of God, as to deserve Hell, notwithstanding what
Christ has done for them, then I cannot see, but all dying Infants must perish
eternally; for they cannot be born again by Faith in Christ, and yet they must
have Salvation by him, or not at all, and how they should have it by him, but
as he was the Lamb of God that takes away the Sin of the World, I do not know:
for surely Christ has brought a greater Advantage to human Nature, than the
Loss it sustained by Adam's Sin.

3dly. If Nature was so vile a thing as you would have it, Christ would never
have taken our Nature upon him, for he was in all Points like unto us, Sin only
excepted. Now, if all that are conceived and born, be by their Birth, Children
of Wrath; then, why was not Christ under it also, for his Flesh was the same
with ours?


Philet. But he was conceived by the Power of the Holy Ghost in a wonderful
manner, without the help of Man: had he taken Flesh by a carnal Generation, he
had been polluted with Sin as well as others.


Philad. What, tho he was formed in the Womb of the Virgin, so as to be without
carnal Generation; yet it was not without her Conception, Luke 1. 31. I hope I
need not tell you how dangerous it is to believe, that Christ passed through
the Virgin, as Water through a Spout, without partaking of her Substance. But
surely he took Flesh, not only in, but of the Virgin; and was as really David's
Son and his Offspring, as he was David's Root and David's Lord. So that I think
it is no more Sin in us in being conceived and born of our Mothers Substance,
than it was for Christ to be formed of his Mother's Substance. And I suppose,
that what was Adam's personal Sin, was not the Affection of an universal
Nature; nor can you prove there was the consent of human Nature to it, but
merely of Adam. Now, where there is no consent or acting, there could be no
Transgression; Transgression is the Breach of a Law, of which Nature may not be
guilty, when Persons are.


Philet. But Adam's Sin became ours, because we were then all in his Loins, and
he was the common Root or Stock, from which we all should come; so that hereby
we came to be included and involved in the Sin of Adam.


Philad. Why then are we not guilty of all other Sins which Adam committed
after, as well as the first? yea, of all the Sins of our Progenitors, since we
were in their Loins, as well as in Adam's: So that yet this Scripture does not
prove what you bring it for; it does not prove that any deserves Hell and
Damnation by Birth, nor can it favor or support that horrible Doctrine of
God's positive and absolute Rejection of Men for Adam's Sin: but this Scripture
is better understood of those that sin against the Law of Nature, which the God
of Nature, according to his divine Will, has placed in them, Romans 1. 26. Romans
2. 14. 1 Cor. 11. 14. which Light discovers Sin, reproves, yea, judges and
condemns for Sin: If our Hearts condemn us, etc. and tho the Light set up in
them, the Law written in their Hearts, did flash Wrath in their Faces, their
Consciences accusing them, Romans 2. 15. yet they abused the Light, or Law of
Nature, living in Sin and Disobedience, and so were by Nature the Children of
Wrath, etc. and so are all that come to act Sin; but no Persons by Birth are
thus the Children of Wrath, nor none out of the Covenant of Grace made with
Adam, till they come to abuse the Grace of the Covenant: For God hates none
till they first hate him, leaves none till they first forsake him, makes none
Partakers of Everlasting Burning, till they kindle his Wrath by their actual
Sins; for he does not so delight in the Blood of Souls, as by his pure and
naked Will, to decree Man to Eternal Death, before they enjoy any Life, or
commit the least Sin. Infants are accounted Innocent; and our Savior tells us,
it is not the Will of his Father that any of those little ones perish.


Philet. This is a strange assertion, to say, That all Infants come into World
in a state of Innocence; and that if they die in Infancy, they die in a state
of Innocence: Alas! there is a universal depravedness in the Soul of an Infant,
which if it live to express it, will discover it self. A young Cub of a Fox or
Wolf does not presently discover its ravenous nature, but it is inherent in it,
bred with it, and Men kill those young Cubs, though they never did any
mischief, because it is their natures to be ravenous and mischievous: So an
Infant has the Seed of all Sin, a corrupt Nature, though it does not act as it
does when Age comes on; and I say, God may for the guilt of Adam's sin, and
because there is such Rebellion and Wickness in Man's nature against him,
glorify his Justice upon them; though they should die in their Infancy, they
are far from dying in Innocence.


Philad. It seems by what you hold, because Man may slaughter Beasts of Prey
without any cruelty or injustice, therefore God may as well, nay more, appoint
as many of poor Infants to the Torments of Hell, if he pleases, and yet be
just and good notwithstanding: May we not as well reason thus? God without any
injustice, appointed brute Creatures to be slain for Man's use, therefore he
may ordain Men to be cast into Hell Torments for ever. Though God permits,
nay appoints Man to slaughter Beasts, that they might be Meat for his use,
and so gives him power to kill them; yet it would be looked upon barbarous
injustice and cruelty to prolong the Life of a Beast to vex and torture it, to
show what Power and Sovereignty he has over it. So I do not doubt, but God
may, when he pleases, take away the Life of an Infant, or Man; yea, resolve
them to nothing, without any cruelty or injustice: Yet he cannot without both
these, decree to keep them alive in Hell, there to torment them without end, to
show his Sovereignty, without just cause in the Creature. Some poor Infants
never so much as saw the Light of this World, or received the least Good, and
yet must be punished with Devils to Eternity. O wretched Doctrine!


Philet. I do not think God would have destroyed the Old World, and called them
the World of ungodly, and destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, and made them suffer
the vengeance of eternal Fire, amongst whom, no doubt, were many Infants, if
all Infants were innocent: I will not meddle to determine the eternal State of
those that die in Infancy; to be sure you go too far to assert what you do, you
are not the Sovereign and Judge of all.


Philad. All Infants, through the Grace of God in our Lord Jesus Christ, are
discharged from the condemning Power of Original sin; and they having no actual
sins, it is not the infirmity of their Nature shall damn any: neither can it, I
hope, enter into the heart of a Christian, to believe that God should create
any Infants on purpose to damn them; and though it be true that Original sin is
come upon Infants, and Death by sin, yet this is as true, that Original Sin was
not committed against the Covenant of Grace; and seeing that you cannot prove
any Infant has sinned against the Covenant of Grace, they cannot come into
Condemnation of Hell Torments, for our Gracious God will condemn none but those
that first destroy themselves by sinful courses, though it is true they many
times suffer the first Death for the sins of others, as those you mention.


Mar. All Infants are under a Sentence of eternal Damnation, only such Infants
that are elected, and have the Principles of Grace infused in them, shall be
saved.


Philad. What then is become of that Gracious Speech of the Almighty God, Ps.
145. His tender mercy is over all his works? sure damned Infants have no share
in hs Mercy; no, not so much as a Toad, by a thousand degrees. And thus by your
Doctrine you not only most dreadfully preach Millions of poor harmless Souls to
Hell, but also represent the Father of Mercy and God of Goodness, more like a
Tyrant that destroys his Subjects for will and pleasure (though they never
provoked him by breaking the least Law in their own Persons) only to show his
Power over them: Would not such dealing be looked upon (amongst Men) mere
Cruelty, when acted by bare Prerogative and Power, not being attended with
Equity, Justice and Mercy? Would this be Cruelty in Man, and shall we think,
that the Infinite God, who is Goodness and Truth it self, will harbor it, or
that he will proceed with Man according to his Absolute Power and Sovereignty,
without being accompanied with Justice and tender Mercy? Or do we think the
Lord will fall below man, and suffer himself to be outdone in Justice, Mercy,
and Goodness, by any of his Creatures? Surely, no: so though the Nature of man
is too sadly depraved, by the sin of our first Parents; yet it must needs be a
contradiction to the Divine Goodness, Mercy, and Justice of God, to say that
any suffer for their Fathers sins.


Mar. You talk of God's Justice, as if God could not punish one for the fault
of another, and yet be Just; you do not know what you talk of, I Will give you an
instance to the contrary; it is that of Saul utterly destroying of the
Amalekites, 1 Samuel 15. 2, 3. he was to slay both man and woman, Infants and
Sucklings; and the reason was, because Amalek laid wait for Israel when he came
up from Egypt, ver. 1. Exodus 17. 8. But now what had this People done, that was
so many Generations removed from Israel coming out of Egypt? Or what had the
poor Infants and Sucklings done? Or how can it stand with Justice, that the
Fathers committed the fault, and the Children are punished for it?


Philad. This was only to a Temporal Death; I hope you will not say that it was
the Decree of God, after Saul had destroyed those Infants and Sucklings Bodies,
that he would send their Souls to Hell for their Fathers faults; sure it was
not the sin of Infants that caused the Lord to plead in such wrath with them,
no more than the Cattle which was to be destroyed as well as they; Was God
offended with the Beasts of the Field? But come, I believe it was no unjust
thing in God, to take away by Death those Infants and Sucklings, no more than
to take away by Death many thousands which daily die through the World; for
Death reigns over all, and when Infants are taken away, either by a Natural
Death, or in any cruel manner, it is for Sin, even that of Adam's; yea, many
times their own Parents Sin hastens the Death of the Child: and in Temporals,
very often the Children suffer for the Father's fault; not only in the good
things of this Life, but also Death it self, as in the Old World, and in the
overthrow of Sodom; and are slain with the Sword as in this Case, and likewise
in those common Calamities which have befallen Nations and Cities. But what,
will any one dare to say that such Infants and Sucklings are damned? Who can
forbear trembling at such a dreadful conceit? And surely you that hold than
Infants have sin enough from Adam to damn them to Hell, had need bring good
Scripture Proof for such a dreadful Doctrine. But I need say no more to this,
than to refer you to what Mr. Grantham has writ upon this Subject, in his
Answer to Mr. Petto, and Mr. Firmin, in his Presumption no Proof, and his
Infants Advocate, First and Second Parts; where, if you be not wedded to your
Opinion, or blinded with Prejudice, you will see that though all are guilty of
Adam's Sin, Romans 5. 14. yet Infants by the presentment of the Satisfaction of
Christ, are, and shall be saved, for the free Gift comes upon all, Rom 5. 18.


Mar. Come, leave this, Philetus, you may easily perceive that Philadelphus
owns that rotten and corrupt Opinion of universal Redemption, a grand piece of
Popery.


Philet. Yea, I see he is an Arminian, and I doubt a Free-willer too, which is
an old Pelagian Heresy, and has been condemned for an Error long since, by the
best and most knowing Christians.


Philad. This is but the Devil's subtilty and delusion to hood-wink Peoples
Eyes, and to draw on a Vizor upon the lovely Face of true Religion, to make it
extremely deformed, that so People may start at the naming of it.


Mod. Come pray let us have no Heats.


Philad. There shall be none for me; yet methinks they deal in our Day and
Time, by those that own the Truths of the Lord, much like the barbarous Pagans
did by the Christians under the persecuting Emperors, who, that they might have
some Pretense to put them to death, loaded them with odious Names and
Imputations, as if all the Troubles that were in the World happened for their
Sakes: As may be seen in Tertullian's Apology for the Christians. Or as they
did when they put them to death in their public Theater; they put upon them
the Skin of some Savage Beast, or put them into the shape of Monsters, such as
the nature of Man has the most Antipathy against, that they might be the more
excited to destroy them, and the more exposed to the fury of the Dogs. Even so
the noise of Arminians, Pelagians, Popery, Free-willers, and I know not what,
sounds so terrible to the Ears of some, that they neither will nor dare examine
either the Writings or Opinions of those that differ from them, by the Word of
God.


Mod. Neither will nor dare! for what reason?


Philad. Why, only their Teachers whom they admire have drawn them into a
dislike of the Truth of God, by putting the Name of Ignominy and Reproach upon
them: What tho the Papists hold universal Redemption, and are so unhappy to
hold this part of Truth in unrighteousness? Does it therefore cease to be a
Truth? Or must I be ashamed or afraid to own it because held for a Truth by
them? May I not as well renounce the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament,
yea God and Christ too, lest I should be accounted a Papist? The Devil held
that Christ was the Holy One of God, and may not I do so too? It will not
excuse any in the Rejection of any Truth, to say the Papists hold it. Tho it
was told Paul, Acts 28. 22. That this Sect was everywhere spoken against; yet
it did not turn him out of the way, or make him out of love with the Truths of
God, neither ought it to do any; and tho you may call this Truth, Popery,
Arminianism, etc. yet was it owned for a Truth, before Popery or James Arminius
was heard of, or had any being in the World, and is indeed the ground of all
Saving-Truth, and Soul-establishing Comfort, since the Foundation of the World;
and the contrary to it will be found to appear rotten and unsound, having no
firm footing in the Word of God, let it be varnished over with never such
dresses of Words, or pretense of Zeal, thereby to make the Face of it shine in
the Eyes of others. And I must tell you, I look upon it to be a piece of daring
Pride in any that shall confidently attempt to set bounds and limits to God's
infinite Wisdom and Goodness acted toward all Men, in the death of his Son.


Philet. Well, I am one of those that hold that God looking upon Man in the
Fall, did set his Love upon some of the fallen Race, choosing some to eternal
Life and Salvation, for which he gave his Son to die for them, and rejected
others, and never afforded them an Object to believe in, nor power to believe,
but has left them to perish.


Philad. Pray prove what you affirm, if you can.


Philet. That God chooses some to Life, and leaves others in the Fall, of his
mere Will and Pleasure; I prove it by the Instance of Jacob and Esau, Romans 9.
13. As it is written, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated. And this was
done before they were born: the one elected to eternal Life, and the other
reprobated to eternal Death, and this at the mere Will and Pleasure of God.


Philad. I know it is concluded from this Text, that Esau in Person was damned;
but this is but Men's Rashness and Presumption; there is not the least Syllable
in all the word of God (that I know of) for Persons to ground such a Belief, or
from whence to draw such a dreadful Conclusion, that Esau should be damned
eternally. Love and Hatred in this Text may be with respect to Temporal
Blessings; and so Esau may be said to be hated, and Jacob loved, because to
Jacob was given the fruitful Land of Canaan, and to Esau was given the barren
Country of Mount Seir: Or Love and Hatred may be with respect to Christ, the
promised Seed; and so Jacob was separated or sanctified, to be the Fore-father
of Christ according to the Flesh; and Esau, with respect to that rejected, and
so was but a common or profane Person. (Now this was one end of Circumcision,
to distinguish the Family, of whom Christ should be born, and to keep that
People, of whom the Messiah was to come, unmixt from the idolatrous Nations.)
Now Esau very justly lost that Blessing for selling his Birthright at so base
a Price; for Esau being the Elder of Right, the Blessing did belong to him; but
he undervaluing of it, sold it to his Brother: So that now the Blessing, as
well as the Birthright, was his Brothers; and so after Isaac had blessed
Jacob, Esau could by no Means cause his Father to repent, or reverse his
Blessing, tho he sought it carefully with Tears, Heb. 12. 17. but said, Genesis
27. 33. I have blessed him, and he shall be blessed, he could not recall it
again. Yet this Rejection, as to his being the Person from whom the Messiah
should come, or with respect to temporal Blessings, gives no one Ground to
aver, that he was reprobated, in respect to the Salvation of his Soul: or these
Words might be spoken, with regard to what they would do in time, God certainly
knew what Esau would do in time, and might thereby show what would in time be
done unto him; or rather with respect to the Works of the Flesh and the Spirit:
Esau being a Type of the one, and Jacob of the other; so the Works of the
Spirit are pleasing to God, and always beloved of him: and so the Works of the
Flesh are abominable to him; so that these two may be but two Types, as Sarah
is said to be of the Gospel, and Hagar of the Law, and Isaac and Ishmael Types
of the two Covenants, Gal. 4. 21, to 31. Besides, it is very plain, that it is
not Jacob and Esau personally to be understood in this Text, but two distinct
Nations, or People, which should proceed from them; as may be seen, if you read
Genesis 25. 23. Rebekah being with Child, and finding a strange struggling in her
Womb, went to inquire of the Lord, and received this Answer; Two Nations are in
thy Womb, and two manner of People shall be separated from thy Bowels, and the
Elder shall serve the Younger, and the one People shall be stronger than the
other People. You see the Lord did not tell this good and godly Mother, that
one of those she went with should be damned to all Eternity, but speaks of them
as two Heads of two Nations; for we do not find these Words, the Elder shall
serve the Younger, ever fulfilled in Jacob and Esau personally. Where do you
find, that Esau was subser vient to Jacob? but rather the contrary, Jacob
calling Esau Lord; so that this Text speaks not of single Persons, but of
Nations; and so the Love and Hatred there spoken of is National, as you may see
by comparing this Verse with Obadiah, and Psalm. 44. 4. where the Edomites are
called Esau, and the Jews Jacob: and the cause why the Lord hated the Posterity
of Esau, was for their Wickedness and Enmity against the Israelites the Seed of
Jacob, Verse 1, to 12. and so Malachi 1. 2, 3, 4. I loved Jacob and hated Esau,
and laid his Mountains waste; but this could not be before Esau was born, or
had any Mountains to lay waste; so that it cannot be here understood a personal
Hatred: for it is plain, that what is here said is upon a national Account. Now
for the better understanding this Romans 9. we must take notice what was the main
thing the Apostle was carrying on: Now, the main thing that he was upon, was
not to maintain absolute and personal Election and Reprobation; this was not
the way to convince the Jews of their Sin, in rejecting and crucifying the Lord
of Life and Glory, and their slighting the Gospel; for this would have been the
way to establish them in their Error, of being the only elect People in the
World, because Abraham's Seed, to whom the Promise was at first made; and
therefore their State safe enough, tho they did not believe in Christ. And
says Mr. Loveday, p. 224. It is known for a Truth, that there was no People
under Heaven more cordially principled in personal Election than they: they
took all but themselves to be reprobated, and forbad the Gospel to be preached
to the Gentiles, that they might be saved, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16. The Jews, the Elder
Brother, could not bear to see the kindness showed by the Father to the
Prodigal, Luke 15. Nay, Peter himself greatly questioned his Lawfulness of
going to preach to the Gentiles, till convinced of it by a Vision from Heaven,
Act. 10. And when Peter came to Jerusalem, they contended with him about his
going and conversing with the Gentiles, Act. 11. 1, 2. Yea, and for some time
after the death of Stephen, many preached the Word of God to none but the Jews
only. It appears, that notwithstanding Christ had given a Commission to preach
the Gospel to the whole World; yet they were ignorant of the calling of the
Gentiles to partake of Mercy through Christ. Now if the Jews had understood,
that personal Election and Reprobation had been the thing Paul was about to
prove, they would never have quarrelled with him about it; for they believed,
that if any People in the World was beloved of God, it must needs be
themselves; for they above all other were chosen to be a peculiar People, and
beloved for their Father's sake, and unto them pertained the Adoption and the
Glory, and the Covenant, Romans 9. 12. but this was not the Point, but the great
Controversy between Paul and the Jewish Rabbis, was about the Terms of
Justification, whether by the Law, or by Faith; or upon what account a Sinner
might be justified and saved; and who was the Person to whom the Blessing
belonged. Now the Apostles Business is to assert and maintain Justification and
Salvation to come in by Christ alone, without the Works of the Law; and that
there was an absolute Necessity of believing in Jesus Christ (where God has
afforded the Means) both by the Jews as well as Gentiles; which will appear, if
you look Chap. 3. 4. and Chap. 10. 30. and in Gal. 2. 10. he shows, that a Man
is not justified by the Works of the Law, but by Faith. And this he proves from
the Example of Abraham, who was not justified himself by Works, but by Faith;
and tho the Jews boasted much of their being Abraham's Seed, yet he tells them
Abraham's Seed was many; one by Hagar, another by Sarah. Now if the Promise was
made to Abraham's natural Seed, then Ishmael as well as Isaac, and Esau as well
as Jacob had inherited the Promise: but the Promise was not made to Seeds, as
of many, but to a Seed; which Seed was those that believe and walk in the steps
of Abraham, Romans 4. 12. These, whether Jews or Gentiles, were truly and only to
be the reputed Children of Abraham, Gal. 3. 7. and Heirs of the Promise, Verse
29. so that it is neither Birth nor Works was perferred by God, nor any thing
should be challenged by Birth or Works, but only through Faith in Christ; and
so the Elder serve the Younger, that is, the Jews the Elder, which seek
Salvation by the Works of the Law, or according to the Flesh, shall not have
it; but the Gentiles, the Younger, who seek Salvation by the free Grace of God,
through Faith in Christ, shall have it, Romans 9. 33, etc. So that this Text
proves not what you bring it for; neither can you fairly understand it of such
a Love or Hatred, as to prove either Persons or Parties are saved or damned;
much less does it prove, that God hates any personally, considered as they are
Sinners in Adam, etc. Very well, says Dr. Homes, p. 8. God cast off none till
they cast off him, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. Prove. 29. 1. And in the New Testament, only
for the Sin of refusing Christ, all along is Damnation pronounced: -- God does
not actually cast them off beyond all Remedy, till they actually cast off him,
and so cast them off, not for original Sin, but actual Sins; and that not too
for every actual Sin, but for those that cast off the Remedy, namely, the Word
of Christ, and Christ the Word.


Philet. That God choseth some, and leaves others in the Fall, I prove from
the very Word, Elect, or Election; which is a separation, or singling out some
(in a way of Mercy or Choice) from a Number; and whether these Scriptures do
not prove this Election to be personal, without any respect unto Faith, 2 Timothy
2. 19. Phil. 4. 3. John 10. 3. Act. 19. 15. Romans 11. 5, 7. Rev. 7. 4. Romans 9.
11. Mark 13. 20. Ephesians. 1. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 20. Tit. 2. 14, etc.


Philad. But you know that the Word Election does not always suppose Rejection,
but preferring one thing above another; and it is frequent in Scripture to call
both things and Persons of great Value, of special Worth and Excellency in
their kind, Elect or Chosen, 1 Samuel 26. 2. Isa. 22. 7. In this sense the
Messiah was termed by the Jews, the Elect or Chosen of God, Luke 23. 35. and
called a Cornerstone, elect and precious, 1 Pet. 2. 4. and Paul an elect or
chosen Vessel. And Dr. Hammond tells us, The Greek Words used in Rev. 17. 14.
viz. Chosen and Faithful, are joined together, as words of the same import.


Mod. I hope, Philadelphus, you will not dare to limit the Lord; suppose God
has Elected some to Life and Salvation from Eternity, or from the Fall; Is not
God's Mercy his own? May he not do with it as he pleases? What if God will
give to one that comes into the Vineyard at the eleventh hour, nay give to one
gratis, for doing nothing, as much as he will to me for working according to my
Covenant, what wrong does he do to me? Why should my Eye be evil because God is
bountiful, or I repine that another obtains Mercy?


Philad. I am none of those that pretend to keep the Keys of God's Secrets: I
dare not say God never did, nor ever will choose any personally considered. But
can it justly be concluded from God's predestianting, some, personally
considered, to Eternal Life, that therefore all the rest were decreed
absolutely to Condemnation, without any respect to their Disobedience; any more
than when a King, without any Condition premised, pardons some that are guilty
of the same Offense with others; that he thereby implys, that all the rest (to
whom he offers Pardon upon such conditions as they were able to perform) should
be Executed without Mercy? Neither do I see any grounds from these Scriptures,
that we must needs understand Persons under a personal consideration, without
respect to Faith in Christ, or any other Qualification, to be the object of
Electing Love, and as such shall infallibly enjoy Eternal Salvation; I know no
Scripture that says so, nor can any Man be said to be chosen before the
Foundation of the World, or from the Fall, any otherwise than in the Decree of
God, which is brought forth in time, when they come actually to believe in
Christ; for God calls things that are not, as if they were, Romans 4. 7. and it
is a usual thing in Scripture to speak of things to be done in time, as if
already done; as Romans 8. 30. where the Apostle speaks as if they were already
glorified, yet not actually glorified, nor any otherwise, than in the Purpose
or Decree of God: and so 2 Timothy 1. 19. Tit. 3. 5. they are said to be saved,
who were not at that time actually saved; so in Ephesians. 1. 4. they are said to
be chosen in him before the Foundation of the World, though not chosen till
they came to believe in Christ; for as Christ was called a Lamb slain from the
Foundation of the World, Rev. 13. 8. though not slain till he took Flesh upon
him, which was some thousands of Years after, even so Persons are said to be
Elected from the Foundation of the World, though not chosen till they be in
Christ; and when Persons have once obtained a Being in Christ by Faith, they
may truly be said to be Chosen, by virtue of that Decree of Election, which was
in God before the Foundation of the World, whereby he decreed to choose all
those to Salvation who should repent of their Sins, believe in his Son, and be
obedient to his Will; and when they come into this State, God may be said to
choose them before the Foundation of the World, by virtue of the Decree that was
in him. So that whatsoever Elective Love God has, or might have for any of the
degenerate Sons of Adam, more than for others: Yet this is a thing, that wholly
lies hid in the secret Counsel of God, and wholly unknown to us; but this the
Scripture reveals for a truth, That whomsoever God predestinates, them he
calls, before they are either justified or glorified, Romans 8. 30. and so 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. through Sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the Truth,
etc. Now if the Saints are chosen to Salvation through, etc. and were called to
it by the Gospel, then they were not chosen actually before they had believed
the Truth, or before they heard the Gospel. And to make this more plain, you
know Paul was a chosen Vessel, or a most choice Instrument, a Vessel for the
Lord's use, Acts 9. 15. yet he tells us, that he was before a Blasphemer, and a
Persecutor, and Injurious, 1 Timothy 1. 13. and writing to his Son Titus, chapter 3.
3. speaking of himself, says, We our selves were sometimes foolish,
disobedient, deceiving, serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures, living in Malice
and Envy, bateful, and hating one another. Now shall we say that Paul during
his unbelief and impenitence was in a justified State, an adopted Child of God?
Surely no.


Philet. Well, how and when came Paul to be an adopted Child of God?


Philad. How, why first God humbles him, brings him to the foot of Christ,
calls him by his Grace, Gal. 1. 15. to which Call he was obedient, Acts 26. 19.
and was regenerated and born again by the Washing of Regeneration, and Renewing
of the Holy Ghost; by which he was led to believe and obey the Gospel, Acts 24.
14, 15, 16. and to live entirely to him that died for him, and so he came to be
sanctified, justified, and to obtain Mercy.


Philet. I believe that Paul, being an Elect Person, was as much in the love
and favor of God, before he believed as after; yea, the Elect Corinthians,
that were Fornicators, Idolaters, Thieves, Drunkards, etc. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11.
had as much right to Salvation before they believed as after.


Philad. I look upon this Speech of yours (that Paul and the Corinthians during
their unbelieving State, were as much in the love and favor of God as after)
to be very impious, and opens a gap for Men to run into all manner of
Abomination; for if I once fancy my self to be one of the Darlings of Heaven,
one of the Elected ones, and that I cannot possibly sin my self out of the love
of God, and that I am no nearer Salvation after I believe, than I was before;
Why may not I take liberty to commit any crime? For it seems Heaven may be
found in the way to Hell, and in the Service of Sin and Satan; I may fulfill the
Lusts of the Flesh, and of the Mind, and be fruitful in the works of Darkness,
and God love me never the worse: no danger of forfeiting my Sonship, if this be
true; all the Precepts of Virtue and Holiness, with all the gracious Promises
of an Eternal Reward in Heaven, are all in vain; and all those powerful
dissuasions from Sin, with those severe threatenings of an Eternal Punishment as
a Reward to the guilty, are all invalid, if the greatest sinner, the most
profane Liver, may arrive at Heaven as well as the most eminent Saint: Did
ever such Doctrines proceed from the Lips of Truth, or are they to be found in
the true Sayings of God? No, no, but rather the contrary, Ephesians. 5. 5. Romans 2. 8,
9. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God? etc. so that no Man that is an unregenerate sinner, is, or can
be said actually to be Elected till Grace comes, and Faith comes and puts him
into Christ, Ephesians. 3. 17. This is evident from the Ephesians; Paul calls them
Elect or Chosen before the Foundation of the World; and yet however Elected, he
tells them, that during the time they walked according to the Course of this
World, etc. they were the Children of Wrath as well as others, and at that time
they were without Christ, and Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, having no
hope, and without God in the World, Ephesians. 2. 12. Surely it is impossible for any
Person to be in Christ and out of him; dead and alive; old and new born at one
and the same time; so that before Conversion we are not actually justified:
This is so clear a thing, that the Assembly in their Confession Chap. 11. say,
God did from all Eternity decree to justify the Elect. Nevertheless they are
not justified until the Holy Spirit does in due time actually apply Christ unto
them. And so Dr. Homes, in his Antidote against Antinomianism, p. 56. If the
Lord impute Christ to me a true Christian, my sins unto him, as 2 Cor. 5. ult.
and so reputes me justified actually in him: He does all this under the notion
of Faith, Romans 4. 3. If any say we are eternally justified in God's Election or
Purpose; we reply, just so as we eternally believe in God's Purpose, for he
has purposed eternally both equally: He that eternally purposed to justify,
did eternally purpose to justify by Faith.


Mar. But does not the Apostle say in Romans 4. 5. That God justifies the
ungodly?


Philad. Yea, but we do not read of those that persevere in their ungodliness,
that he will justify them; for as God has never promised, so he never
purposed Salvation to an unregenerate heart, and a loose life. Persons may
pleasingly dream themselves the Friends and adopted Children of God, though they
will know, to their own smart, that all that are under the Reign of sin, are
yet under wrath: No Enemy to God and Holiness is actually elected, nor has
received the Spirit of Adoption; and if they have not received the Spirit, they
are none of his. Now where the Spirit of God comes, it convinces of sin, John
16. 7, 8. and witnesses with their Spirits that they are the Children of God,
Romans 8. 16. but do you think that the Holy Spirit will witness for us or bring
Joy and Comfort to us, if at the same time our Consciences testify to our
Face, that our Deeds are Evil; and that our walking is not such as to be deemed
the workmanship of God, created in Christ Jesus to good Works, which God has
before ordained? Doctor Cliffora upon the New Covenant, p. 14. says
excellently; Can you imagine that the Spirit seals to a Blank, and witnesses to
a Lie? What! teach People to cry Abba, Father, before they are born of God? or
persuade them they are justified when in a state of unbelief, and the Wrath of
God abides upon them; or assure them they are Heirs of the Promise, when they
are Strangers to the Covenant; or that their Estate is safe, when a Curse, and
Death and Hell are denounced against them? Is this the Spirit's witnessing, do
you think? or his way of sealing? No, he first works Grace upon the heart, and
then gives testimony to his own work; he sanctifies first, and then seals to
the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. Romans 8. 14. As many as are led by the
Spirit of God, are the Sons of God; and those that have not Christ's Spirit,
Christ's Image, cannot have any true Fellowship with him: Can two walk together
except they be agreed? Amos 3. 3. Does Reconciliation with God stand with
agreement with Satan? Can a League with Heaven and Hell stand together? Do you
think that the Judge of all the Earth will say, Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom, to his Enemies? But Philetus, what makes you think that
Paul and the Corinthians were as much in the Love and Favor of God, before
they believed as after?


Philet. Why, because their believing and obeying the Gospel, was an Effect of
their Election: Our Persons must first please God before our Actions can please
him; and when once God loves a Person, he never cease to love him, for the
Gift and Calling of God are without Repentance, Romans 11, 29. and so Malachi 4.
6. I am the Lord, I change not: Now if Paul and the Corinthians were elected
before they were born, and that then God set his Love upon them, and after
during their Unbelief and Sin, should be supposed not to love them; it would
argue a strange Inconstancy and Mutability in God; and so according to this
Notion of Election, God must be supposed one while to hate a Person when
wicked, and another while to love him when regenerate.


Philad. Indeed, if we must needs understand, that God had elected Paul and the
Corinthians, as Paul, or as Men simply so considered, and not as Believers, or
as their being in Christ by Faith; then for God to love a Person to Day, and
hate him to Morrow, would evidently show a change in his Affection, according
to the change made in the Creature. And I must needs tell you I like this plain
dealing the best; you are herein truer to your Principles, than many of your
Brethren that hold this Point of personal Election. But for my part, I believe
that God loves and accepts more of Actions that are good, than of mere
Persons; and contrary to what you say, that such and such Actions do therefore
please him, because the Person pleases him; but rather because their Actions
please him, therefore their Persons please him: tho God hates all the Workers
of Iniquity, Psalm. 5. 5. yet said he to Cain, Genesis 4. 7. If thou do well,
shall thou not be accepted? and Heb. 11. 5, 6. Before his Transgression he had
this Testimony, that he pleased God, but without Faith he could not: Read John
14. 23. and 15. 14. and 16. 27. These are those that he will love; yet may
those that were once beloved of God by reason of Sin, come to be the object of
his hatred, Isa. 63. 9, 10. But they rebelled and vexed his Holy Spirit;
therefore he was turned to be their Enemy, and fought against them; Now you
that say, that where once God loves, he must never cease to love; Pray you,
what think you of the Angels that fell? Do you think God did not love them
while they stood in that pure and holy State, in which they were created? and
if he did, do you think that he loves them now in their Apostasy? So God is
said to love Jacob and Israel, yet at another time he is said to hate Israel,
Jer. 12. 7, 8. Amos 6. 8. yet is this taken off again, Isa. 60. 15. whereas
they were hated, God loved them again. So that God may love at one time, and
hate at another, without the least change in him, in respect of Love or Hatred,
because no Person of Man is supposed to be the Object of elective Love, but
only as Righteous, nor any Person the Object of Reprobation, but only as
Wicked; so that the Love of God being set upon such kind of Persons as are true
Believers, those who have Christ formed in them, whose Souls are regenerated
and formed into the Image of Jesus, and Partakers of the heavenly and divine
Nature, having received that heavenly and divine Anointing, by virtue of which
they become Christians, 1 Cor. 6. 17. John 15. being wrought into a Conformity
to Jesus; this is that State, in which the true Election stands; Christ being
the elected Root, and Believers the elected Branches. These are those whom God
does justify, and will glorify; these are those whom the Lord has set apart
for himself, Psalm. 4. 3. These are those whom the Lord has chosen from the
rest of the World to be his own peculiar Favorites, upon whom he intends to
bestow an heavenly Inheritance; and as Persons decline from Christ, living in a
State of Unbelief and Impenitency, being Strangers to the Life of God,
disobedient, and to every good Work reprobate, they remaining such, are in that
state in which Reprobation stands, not being brought over to Christ, in whom
the Father is well pleased. So that I conceive that Unchangeableness which the
Scripture asserts of God, is to be considered with respect to his Essence,
Attributes and Decrees, and not in his constant loving the same Persons, how
wicked soever they prove. For, suppose God should dearly love a Person while he
is faithful to him; and in case this Person should apostatize, and die in a
state of Impenitency, and he should destroy him with eternal Death, this does
not show the least Alteration in any of the Lord's Attributes, either of Love,
Goodness, Mercy, Justice, etc. And suppose a Man passes from a State of Sin,
wherein he lived to the Displeasure of the Lord, to a State of Faith and
Holiness, and in this Condition comes to enjoy the Love and Favor of God; yet
his Love and Hatred cannot be said to be changed, tho the Persons of Men change
never so often from Good to Evil, or from Evil to Good: This shows indeed a
change in Man, but no change at all in the Lord; he still loves and hates, but
what he loved and hated before. Pray consider, Ezekiel. 18. at what Instant I
spoke, etc. if it does Evil, I will repent: Here you see God is said to repent,
so he is said to repent that he made Man upon the Earth, Genesis 6. 6. he is said
to repent that he made Saul King, 1 Samuel 15. 11. And yet the Scriptures cannot
be broken, which testify that with God is no Repentance, or shadow of change, 1 Samuel 15. 29. Number. 23. 19. James 1. 17. Mal. 3. 6. Psalm. 102. 25. yet here is no
real Contradiction: And as I said before, in respect of his Essence, Attributes
and Decrees, God cannot repent; yet after the manner of Men he is said to
repent, in respect of his Works; for as Men, when they repent, alter their
Works, so, when God alters his Work, he is said to repent, as in Genesis 6. 6. I
will (says God) destroy Man from the Earth, for it repents me, etc. God made
Man to dwell upon the Face of the Earth, but now coming to destroy Man from off
the Earth, seems to repent; and so concerning Saul, I repent that I have made
Saul King, that is, I have determined to depose him, and to prefer another. And
so concerning Ely, etc. Delawn Sacr. p. 50. So that no such Conclusion can
reasonably be drawn from God's once loving, he must for ever love (how wicked
soever the Person proves afterward) or else be mutable; for I do not find in
Scripture, that God hates any of the Works of his Hands, as they are his
Creatures, nor any thing but Sin and Sinners for the cause of Sin: and there is
the same Consideration, or the like Reason of his Election being placed upon
Faith and obedient Persons, or Persons really brought over to Christ.


Philet. The Elect are justified in the Eternal purpose of God; and tho the
Elect do sin, yet the Lord sees it not so, as to condemn them for it, neither
can it do them any hurt, or make them less lovely in the sight of God.


Philad. Hold, one word before you go any farther; you seem to say God was
never an Enemy to the Elect: Do you not by this make the Fall of Adam (in whom
the Elect were included) a mere Fiction, and the whole Story of the Gospel
concerning Christ's Suffering a Fable, and the Passion of Christ, if you grant
he suffered for the Elect, a mere Vanity, more than needs, to die to reconcile
and bring those into Friendship with God, which were never out of his Love, nor
with whom he was never offended?


Philet. I say, all the Sins (of the Elect, both past, present, and to come)
are taken away by Christ, Romans 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the Charge of
God's Elect, etc. and so Romans 4. 23. Isa. 35. 8. The Lord has laid upon him
the Iniquity of us all; and 1 Pet. 2. 24. himself bore our Sins on his Body,
etc. and what I said, I will say, that tho the Elect may sin as well as others,
yet their God in Christ will never un-son them, nor yet touching their
Justification and eternal Salvation, will he love them ever a whit the less;
yea, tho they commit never so many, and great Sins: For this is a certain
Truth, that as no Good in them, or done by them, did move him to elect and
justify them, and to give them eternal Life; so, no Evil in them, or done by
them, can move him to take that away, when once given.


Philad. This is like that which is in the Mouth of some, Be in Christ, and sin
if thou can; what pity is it that Men pretending to Wisdom and Sobriety, and
Professors of Godliness, should fall into such Raptures as are next to Madness?
What a bundle of Errors are here wrapped up together, and that under
Scripture-guize; but surely you do not read the Scripture in that Spirit in
which it was wrote, or else you might see, notwithstanding the Apostle's
triumphing, that till Persons repent of their Sins and turn to God, they stand
charged with many things, as I have told you from Ephesians. 2. and from Paul, who
was before his Conversion, a Persecutor, a Blasphemer, and confessed himself
the chief of Sinners; yea, before the Apostle comes to this Triumphing, he was
long exercised with Frights, Terrors within, and Frightnings without, and tells
the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 2. 3. that his Preaching among them was in great fear
and trembling; so that we must Fight before we Triumph, and Mourn before the
Lord Comfort us. And how clearly does 1 Pet. 2. 24. show that the proper
intention of Redemption is Dominion, eternal Redemption is an eternal
Obligation to Service. Ye are bought with a price, ye are not your own; your
Bodies and Spirits are the Lord's, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. Romans 14. 9. You may see
that one end of Christ's being a Redeemer, was that he might be a Sovereign
Lord over his Purchase; yea, this is one great end of the Lord's entering into
Covenant with his People, promising to do great things for them, Ezekiel. 11. 19,
20. I say, the end of all is, that they might serve him: Hockins on God's
Decree, p. 93. Can we entertain so ignoble a belief, that the eternal Son of
God should suffer for any less end than to advance our Human Nature to the
greatest height of Piety and Purity of Life; and to raise our Souls to the most
refined and sublimate goodness? What, did Christ take our Nature upon him, and
become Surety for us, and pay such an infinite price for us, that we might
spend more freely and daringly on the Stock of our Surety's Satiffaction? Ah!
Who can withold their Eyes from Tears, to think that any should make use of
Mercy to damn them? For many had not been guilty of so many Sins, nor persisted
in them without Repentance, had it not been for their false hope in Christ, not
considering Christ came to redeem from all Iniquity, as well as from all Wrath.


Philet. But Christ dying for the Elect, has thereby fulfilled all
Righteousness, satisfied Divine Justice, and purchased Heaven for them.


Philad. And what then?


Philet. Why, then there is no doubt but they shall be saved; for in the very
moment of Election they were pardoned of all Sins past, present, and to come.


Philad. What, as if now nothing could endanger their Souls, they have enough
for Heaven: Pray what should hinder them from bidding all Sin welcome? Why may
they not kill, whore, etc. and commit all Abomination; and if impleaded for it,
bring in this as an Evidence, that they were in the very moment of Election
pardoned of all Sins past, present, and to come; they have a Gracious God that
will forgive them, and a Surety who has paid for all?


Philet. I perceive what you are driving at: You hold that Faith and Obedience
in us to be the cause of God's Electing or Choosing us to Life and Salvation:
Does not the Scripture prove that Election is not according to foreseen Faith,
not because Men do or will believe, but because they should believe, Romans 9.
11. 1 Pet. 1. 2, 3, 4. 2 Timothy 1. 9. Tit. 1. 1. Now if Faith and Obedience be
the cause of God's loving us, then here is Merit; this eclipses the Glory of
God's free Love, and renders Salvation of Debt, and not of Grace.


Mar. This is downright Popery; nay, I affirm, that Faith and Repentance are
no more a means to go to Heaven by, than profane Cursing and Swearing.


Philad. That Faith in Christ, and Obedience to the Lord, is a cause without
which God chooses none to Life and Salvation, is a Truth, unless you can prove
that God has designed his Son to die, to save such as will neither repent of
their Sins, believe, nor obey him, but live and die in open Rebellion against
God, and do despite to the Spirit of Grace, and trample under foot the Blood
of the Son of God, etc. but that it is the cause for which God chooses any, I
disown as well as you: For the Love of God the Father to the Sons of Men, as
they were Sinners, and Enemies to him, was the essential cause of our
Salvation, John 3. 16. Romans 5. 6, 8, 10. 1 Pet. 3. 18. and Jesus Christ the
meritorious and procuring cause of Man's Salvation; and should we admit of any
thing else but Christ to be the matter of our Justification, or the meritorious
Cause of Eternal Life, this would be injurious to the Perfection of Christ's
Righteousness, and overthrow the freeness of Divine Grace and Love. But you and
all Men ought rightly to divide and distinguish between the Cause and Condition
of our Salvation, that Christ may be owned as the Cause and Author of it, and
Faith and Obedience as the way and means to attain to it: for as God Almighty
has prepared a Heaven for Men, so he has appointed the way and means to fit
and prepare them for it; as Christ is the Way, so if I should say that Faith
and Obedience is a way to come to enjoy it, I might say it was advancing Nature
above Grace, or setting up our own Righteousness in the room of Christ's
Righteousness, and so robbing him of his Honor, or asserting Merits; surely
Eternal Happiness hereafter has some dependence upon Holiness here.


Mod. I like this well, and do believe that God that has appointed the end,
has also appointed the means, as in the Case of Paul, Acts 27. 22. though God
had promised to save Paul and all that were in the Ship, yet they were to use
the means, otherwise they could not be safe. I would have none think, that God
will do all our Works for us, while we sit still and do nothing: For as God
must blow upon the Spark of Grace by his Spirit, so we should be storing up
Holy Endeavors; God will not bring his People to Heaven sleeping, but praying
in the use of Means and Holy Ordinances, yet may Means and Duties be greatly
abused if we be not careful.


Philad. Yea, they are abused when we do not look through them all to Jesus, or
when we make them as Mediators, set them in the room of Christ; or when Christ
is not eyed, sought to, admired and trusted in: Alas! What can poor Sinners do
without a Jesus? There is no Salvation in any other; the highest measure of
Believing, Doing, or Suffering, cannot turn away God's Wrath for the least Sin:
All our Prayers, Tears, Alms, Duties, do not pacify God; no, we must with Holy
Paul count all as nothing to win Christ; so that had not Christ perfectly
fulfilled the Law, and have been made a Curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. the exactest
Christian could have no grounded hopes of Heaven, there is no escaping the
Curse but by Christ; so that all that do, or have escaped the Curse, have cause
to say, that not their own Graces, nor their own Works, but Christ has
delivered them from Wrath to come. It Is Christ's precious undertaking that
gives us a right to Heaven; but yet our walking in the Holy Commands of God,
fits us for it, For without holiness none shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. Rev.
21. 27.


Philet. If Christ be our Righteousness and Sanctification, as 1 Cor. 1. what
need we have any Righteousness of our own? Nay, there is no Qualification or
Condition (in the New Covenant) required on our part, it is all free; 'twas free
Love in God to send his Son to die for his People; and free Love in Christ to
lay down his Life for the Elect: neither is it the Elect, but Christ that
stands engaged to God by the New Covenant; free Grace wholly excludes Self, or
any thing we can do, as a Cause procuring, or as a Condition qualifying us for
the receiving of it. Here Is a comfortable difference between the New Covenant
and the Old; the Old was such, that in case Man did fail to perform his
Condition, the Covenant was broke, and God was free from giving Life; but in
the New Covenant Man is tied to no Condition that he must perform, which if he
does not, it will make the Covenant void to him; and those that teach
otherwise, detract and lessen the free Grace of God, and attribute something to
the Creature.


Philad. Though the Love, Grace and Mercy of God in our Redemption be wholly
free; no one sought out to him for a Savior, but he alone was moved by his own
Love to a poor lost Creature, and first sought after him, when he was fallen;
God was not bound to bring forth a Savior for any, he was not laid under any
necessity to cast an Eye of Pity upon Man; it was an Act of free Grace to save
Sinners by the Obedience and Suffering of Jesus: Yet is nothing to be accounted
free Grace, without the Lord, for the sake of Christ, pardon the Sins of the
most Impure and Impenitent, and bring them to Heaven whether they will or no?
Was not God at liberty to pardon Sinners in what way, and upon what terms he
pleased, such as he in his Wisdom, should judge most meet, and most consistent
with his Justice, Mercy, Truth and Holiness? God has no where promised to save
Men by Jesus Christ, that I know of, but by Repentance, Faith and Obedience, as
the means, as you may see, John 3. 16, 36. Mark 16. 16. Luke 13. 3, 5. Mat. 4.
17. Acts 3. 19. Rev. 22. 14. Romans 2. 7, 8, 9, 10. and in Heb. 5. 9. Christ is
there said to be the Author of Eternal Salvation; To whom? To those that
continue in their Rebellion and Impenitency? No, but to such as obey him; it is
true, Christ came into the World, that the Sentence of Eternal Death might not
be executed upon us, yet it is ungrateful wickedness, and no better than to
tread under foot the infinite price of Forgiveness, to think, because his Blood
has purchased a Pardon, therefore we are freed from our Duty to him. And
whereas you say that in the New Covenant Man is tied to no Condition that he
must perform, etc. and that not Man but Christ stands engaged to God, etc.
methinks it is a very sine way to acquit your self of all Sins, and consequently
of all punishment for Sin; but if Christ stands engaged to repent, believe, and
obey the Gospel, how comes it to pass that Persons are exhorted to them, and
charged with Sin upon the omission of them? Surely then all the Sins of the
Elect (for they sin as well as others) must be charged upon Christ; and he
stands guilty of all the breaches of the New Covenant: how an you endure to
speak this without abhorrence? But is there no Condition, no Qualification
required on our parts, in order to come to partake of the Great and Gracious
Promises? Then what is the meaning of all these Scriptures, John 15. 10. Prove.
4. 5. Romans 8. 13. Mic. 7. 21. prove. 28. 13. Romans 2 8, 9. and what are all those
Blessed and most Gracious Promises in Mat. 5? Do they not include Conditions,
something to be done on our parts, if we would find acceptance with the Lord?
Pray read Luke 13. 3. John 6. 53. Mat. 18. 3. John 3. 5. Mat. 5. 20. John 15.
20. Nay, view those many Expressions which you find in the Word of God in the
Commands, Exhortations, Instructions, Threatenings, and Promises; and then see
whether we come to enjoy the great Blessings of the Gospel without conditions.


Mar. Does not the Scripture say, Isa. 64. 6. That all our Righteousnesses are
as filthy Rags, yea, as a menstruous Cloth?


Philad. I am satisfied that this Scripture is greatly abused for want of a
right understanding, and rightly distinguishing between that Righteousness
which does justisie us at the Bar of God's Justice, and that Righteousness
which is God's Requirement, and so the Creatures Duty; now taken in one Sense,
they are no better than filthy Rags, and in the other they are: now if we
expect to merit Heaven, and obtain Eternal Salvation for well doing, this is to
overthrow the blessed undertaking of Jesus Christ, and lessen the free Grace of
God, as if Persons could go to Heaven without being beholden to Jesus. And here
it is that they are no better in the sight of God, having no worth or value,
but are rejected of the Lord as filthy Rags: but now as they are the Holy
Commands and Appointments of the Lord, and the Creature's Duty; who dare say
that they are in the sight of God, as filthy Rags, or as stinking Carrion?
What, has God required his Creatures to perform such and such Duties, and has
promised his Spirit to assist them in the performance of their Duties; and when
the Creatures have done the best they can, nay when they have the assistance of
the Spirit; What, all no better than Abomination? Ah! what pity is it that Men,
to hold up a fond Opinion, should have such unworthy thoughts of God; What said
David Ps. 141. 2. Let my Prayers be set forth before thee as Incense, and the
lifting up of my hand as the evening Sacrifice; and said the Angel to
Cornelius, Acts 10. 4. Thy Prayers and thy Alms-deeds are come up for a
memorial before God; they were acceptable in the sight of God, and the Lord was
well pleased with them, as Heb. 13. 16. but to do good and to communicate,
forget not; for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased: and so Phil. 4. 18.
An odor of sweet smell, a Sacrifice acceptable and well pleasing to God: Read
Prove. 12. 22. Psalm. 147. 11. Act. 10. 35. Mal. 3. 4. In all which you may see,
That as they are commanded of the Lord, and the Creatures Duty, they are
acceptable to him.


Mar. If of Works, then not of Grace; there is no Reward belongs to any good
Works, Heaven and Eternal Salvation is the free Gift of God: And I must tell
you, that all such as you are stand condemned, and accursed by the Apostle
Paul, that set up the Golden Calf of your own Sanctification.


Philad. What, is it not possible for free Gift and Reward to stand together,
nor for Gospel-Dutys, and a heavenly Reward to be linked and joined together;
or is it a Dishonor to God, to say he rewards his own Grace? What, are you
such a Stranger to the Scripture, that you have not read of Recompense or
Reward, which God will bestow upon those that are faithful, not for the desert
of the Work or Worker, but for the Faithfulness of the Promiser, which God, who
cannot lie, has promised? Pray read Prove. 19. 17. Blessed is he that has
Mercy upon the Poor, the Lord will recompense that which he has given him. And
says our Savior, a Cup of cold Water shall not lose its Reward, Matt. 10. 24.
Mat. 20. 34. Rev. 22. 12. Psalm. 19. But it seems you would put it out of all
doubt, that you pretend to depend upon your own Righteousness; and that the
Almighty, by his Bounty and Grace, having elected you, he cannot expect any
Duty from you. You must (as Cliford, in the New Covenant, p. 197. says) Have a
cheap Religion, Faith without Works, pardon without trouble of Repentance, and
Heaven without Holiness, and free Grace to save you without Obedience, or you
are undone to Eternity. Indeed, if any shall believe that their own Obedience
to any Precept of the Lord, justly merits Heaven, then they might dance about
their Duties, as the Israelites about their Golden Calf; but I hold no such
thing, but do believe that we are far from meriting any thing at the Hand of
God; for he that merits must do these three things.

1st. He must do the Work of himself, without the Help and Assistance of
another; for if he does it by the Help and Assistance of another, the other
merits both the Praise and Reward. Now, where is the Man that can come forth,
and say, that what good he does, he does it without the assisting Grace of God;
and if he cannot say so, then the Thanks and Praise is due to God alone.

2dly. He must do it of mere good Will, and not of Duty; that which is of Duty
cannot merit, because a Man is bound to do it; so that if Men could love the
Lord with all their Hearts, Strength and Soul, and their Neighbors as
themselves (which is a thing no Man can do) yet is it far from meriting,
because it is but their Duty, and but a reasonable Service, that they should
honor the Lord with that which they receive from him, as holy David said, 1 Chronicles. 29. 11, 12. and so on: the more we do, the more we stand indebted to
Divine Grace, for enabling us to do it; what have any, that have not received
it first from God? 1 Cor. 4. 7. 2 Cor. 3. 5. Ephesians. 2. 8.

3dly. The Work done to merit, must be proportionable to the Reward, or there
can be no Merit; but alas! what is the best of Performance, which is performed
by infirm Man? can it have that Worth and Dignity in them, as to oblige the
Lord to give unto them eternal Life, by way of Retribution? If God should
reward us according to our Works, miserable would be our Case; so that unless
it can be proved, that our present Work is comparable to the Glory which is to
be revealed, there can be no Merit, it is a free Gift, it is Bounty: for suppose
I should set any Man to work, to mow in my Field; and for that Labor give him
a Shilling, or Fourteen, or Sixteen Pence; here is only Equity and Justice the
Man's Labor really deserved it; but if for this one days faithful Labor,
according to his Strength, I should give him a Thousand Pounds, this is Bounty:
so that no finite Creature or Worker can merit an infinite Reward; or a finite
Act cannot merit of an Infinite God an Infinite Reward.


Philet. Therefore, you that preach and press to Duty, are but legal Preachers
and such as would lead Men to Popery, and into a dead Faith; for it much
derogates from the free Grace of God, and lessens the alsufficiency of Christ's
Merits, and at best makes but moral Christians.


Philad. Is there any such thing as Holiness and Duty to be observed? if there
be, may they not be preached, and urged? or how can any of you that own the
Scriptures scorn or disallow it, seeing it calls the Saints not only to the
Study and Practice of Holiness, but also to grow and increase in it, 1 Thessalonians.
4. 16. 1 Pet. 1. 15. 2 Pet. 3. 18. 1 Cor. 15. 58. Tho we cannot merit Heaven,
yet it is our Obedience, both in Heart and Life, makes us capable of enjoying
Heaven, through the Redemption of our Savior: we must be Workers or Laborers,
not Loyterers. St. Paul exhorts the Christians of his time to be working out
their Salvation with fear and trembling: It seems the Christians are to do
something toward their own Salvation, Phil. 4. 17. In 2 Cor. 9. 6. Paul
speaking of Charity, shows it to be a means (not a merit) to conduce to a
plentiful increase: and 2 Pet. 1. 11. tells us, that Grace exercised, is a
means to farther our Salvation. But it seems we must not acknowledge God a
Rewarder of his own Grace, or any good Duty which he enables his People to
perform, but straight we preach Popery: how then can any desire to be good, or
do good?


Philet. For all the pressing us to Duty, yet we do not build the Hopes of our
Salvation upon so sandy a Foundation as our own Righteousness; our hopes are in
the Lord, we put our trust in Christ, and hope to be saved by his precious
Undertakings.


Philad. I never did, nor I hope never shall desire you to lay the stress of
your Salvation upon your well doing, for that would be to build upon the Sands
indeed, a very infirm Foundation: Seeing that without shedding of Blood, there
is no Remission of Sin, and consequently no Heaven. Yet, give me leave to tell
you, that to expect Salvation through Christ, without Righteousness of Heart
and Life, is a most infirm Foundation to build our hopes of Heaven upon; and
indeed it is nothing but downright Presumption, and at the best but the hope of
the Hypocrite which will perish, Job 8. 13, 14. Deuteronomy. 29. 19. If you think to
find Heaven, because Christ died for your Sins, and you not bound to the actual
Performance of those Duties God has injoined you to perform; I cannot see but
you must show us another Gospel, yea, and blot out all the Ten Commandments:
But I tell you, Christ himself will not save such; it is contrary to the
Attributes of his Justice, for he will render to every one as their Works shall
be, Romans 8. 13. 1 Cor. 6. 9. Let but any of you show me a Word from God or
Christ, that he will save Persons in the profane Contempt of his Service, and I
will open my Mouth no more against it.


Philet. Did not I tell you, he would lead us back again to the Law, which is
wholly abolished by Christ? we are not now under the Law, but under Grace.


Mar. The Law is a cursed Creature.


Philad. A Creature! what do you mean by that? Where does the Scripture call
the Law a Creature? I doubt your design is to invalidate the Law of God, which
is a divine Direction for all Men, in all holy, just and spiritual Duties.


Mar. I could show you it under the hands of fifty Divines, that the Law is a
Creature; besides the many Arguments I could give to prove it a Truth, if you
please to hear them.


Philad. If you can prove it from the Scripture, I Will hear you, but I see you
do not that; and as for those Divines you speak of, tho they may be Men of
Piety and Learning, yet we ought to follow no Man, but as he follows Christ,
nor take notice of the Quality of Persons, and what they believe, but the
Solidity of their Proof, and how they agree with the Standard of God's Word:
for want ofthis, Persons are ready to suck in corrupt Notions, without any
serious Examination, merely because others said it, for whose Piety and
Learning they have a great and venerable Esteem; and indeed, when Men's Persons
are admired presently, their Notions, tho never so unsound, are received as the
Oracles of God: which thing has been of fatal Consequence in all Ages, and has
given footing to most, or all the pestilent Doctrines and Errorst hat have
encumbered the Church of God. Pray ask those Divines you spoke of, whether they
will stand to this. That the Law, as it is the Mind and Will of God, is a
Creature; whether there is any thing in God perishable or changeable. As
Learned as they hold these three things as a Truth.

1st. That God wills nothing in time.

2dly. That God cannot but have that Will which he has.

3dly. That God cannot have any Will which for the present he has not. Now as
the Law contains the Mind and Will of God, it is as ancient as himself; yea,
there is in it a supernatural, divine, and unperishing Virtue, resembling God
himself, which shall as easily be destroyed as his Law, and was, and is, and
shall remain a word of Eternal Verity, Equity and Purity, planted in the Heart
of Man, and is an immutable and eternal Rule of Duty; and the breach of it
calls for an eternal Punishment upon all Contemners and Abusers of it
(notwithstanding their boast of Gospel Grace) if not repented of.


Philet. I tell you the Law is wholly abolished by Christ; we are not now under
the Law but under Grace.


Philad. It Is true, Believers are not now under the Law, namely in respect of
Justification by it, or of personal and perfect Obedience to it, which Christ
in our stead has performed, Gal. 4. 4. nor under the Curse of the Law, that
is, the damning Power of it; they are now under Grace, that is, the
Dispensation of Gods Grace, the Gospel: yet we are not to think that Believers
are so freed from the Curse of the Law, as to be freed from exercising the Duty
and Precepts of Righteousness and Holiness: Nay, tell me you that say the Law
is wholly abolished, what there is in all the Ten Commandments that is not a
Christian Duty? If the Law be wholly abolished, what should hinder Persons from
worshipping false Gods, breaking the Sabbath, Swearing, Killing, Whoring,
Stealing, doing any thing at all? no Sin if there be no Law: for where there is
no Law, there is no Transgression.


Philet. The Apostle tells us, That Christ is the end of the Law for
Righteousness to every one that believes, Romans 10. 4.


Philad. But what end? the fulfilling end, but not the destroying end of the
Law: though it is true, with respect to the Ceremonial part of the Law, which was
only a shadow of good things to come, Heb. 10. 12. and centered in Christ; and
end in him, he being the true Spiritual Substance, unto whom that part of the
Law was directed, it may be said that Christ was not only the fulfilling end,
but the abolishing end of the Law. He is also the end of the Moral Law; First,
because he fully and perfecty obeyed the Law, and so the Law in him obtained
its end, which it had not done amongst all the Sons of Men.

2dly, He was the end of the Law, on whom all the Maledictions of the Law had
full accomplishment.

3dly, He was the end of the Law, in whom all the Blessings and Promises of the
Law obtain their end, for they are all in Christ Jesus Yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.
20.

4thly, He Is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes,
because God does impute unto Believers that Righteousness which the Law
requires: Thus Christ is the end of the Law. Yet it is folly to believe that
Christ is so the end of the Law, that we are now wholly exempted from our
Obedience to those Precepts which the Law requires; or that Gospel Grace, which
has appeared to all Men Tit. 2. 11, 12. should absolve the Creature from that
Love and Obedience which is due to his Creator. Disobedience cannot be the spot
of God's Children: It Is true, the Jews thought that they must needs reject the
law, if they admitted the Doctrine of Paul concerning Justification by Faith;
whereas the Apostle proves that his Doctrine was so far from prejudicing the
Law, that it indeed established it, Romans 3. 31. Chap. 4. So that neither Christ
put an end to the Moral Law, Mat. 5. 17. nor his Apostles: therefore the Law is
not abolished.


Philet. The Apostle says that the Elect that believe are dead to the Law; the
Law can no more command a Man, than a dead Husband can command his Wife.


Philad. It Is true, Believers are dead to the Law with respect to the Curse and
Rigor of it; but yet this Death to the Law brings Believers to a New
Subjection: you are dead to the Law, that you might be married to another, that
you should bring forth Fruit to God: so that you may see the blessing of the
Marriage-Union between Christ and faithful Souls, is fruitful before God, in
living in Subjection to his blessed Maker and Redeemer.


Mar. But does not the Apostle bid Believers stand fast in the Liberty
wherewith Christ has made them free, and be not entangled in the Yoke of
Bondage, which is the Law?


Philad. This word Liberty, not rightly understood, may be a Snare to destroy
precious Souls; we are bid to stand fast in the Liberty in which Christ has
made us free, but not in the Liberty in which Satan, the Lust of Men, the
Spirit of Error, Carnal Interest, etc. make us free. Christian Liberty is a
freedom from Sin, not in Sin; Romans 6. 18. it is a free serving of God, to do
his Will, not the will of the Flesh; we are called to Liberty, but we are not
to use it as occasion of the Flesh, Gal. 5. 13. Gospel Grace brings glorious
freedom, it is true, from the Curse of the Law, the guilt of Sin, and wrath of
God, and from the burden of legal Ceremonies, Sacrifices, Circumcision, with
other heavy Yoaks; yet is this Liberty to be confined to Scripture Rules.
Believers freedom should be like the Heavenly Liberty: Angels are free, but
it is to Duty, not Rebellion; and here will come in the surest Mark, and the
best Evidence of our Election, 1 John 3. 7, 10. Little Children, let no Man
deceive you; he that does righteousness is righteous, etc. in this is manifest
the children of God and the children of the Devil. 1 John 1. 6. If we say we
have fellowship with him and walk in darkness, we do but lie. 2 Pet. 2. 19.


Mod. I believe, that in many things Philadelphus is in the right; Duties are
means which God has appointed for us to walk to Heaven in; and those that
belong to him he will give them Faith and Repentance, and will by his Grace
overpower their Hearts that they shall obey him in all his Holy Precepts: I
also believe that the New Covenant includes Conditions, something to be done by
us that believe; for though the Love of God, the Suffering of Christ was wholly
free, yet the Saving Fruits and Benefits by the Suffering of Christ, does not
actually become ours upon the bare shedding of his Blood, till it be received
by Faith; for his Death does not necessarily save any, but only as God the
Father, Son, and Spirit shall think fit to communicate and dispense with the
Issues of them; as he that pardons an Offender, may bring him to Terms before
he pardons him; and he that dispenses Crowns and Scepters to unworthy Persons,
may require Homage and Observance from them, without rendering it no Act of
Grace. As to the Law, I say we are not justified by that, but by Christ alone
received by Faith, and that it is necessary that Godly Preachers should teach
the Moral Law, or the Doctrine of Good Works, as the Doctrine of Faith; for
Satan is a deadly Enemy to both.


Philad. Well said, Moderatus: indeed to what end should the Great God of
Heaven give forth his Divine Laws, if they do not require our due observance?
for the Life of Christianity is not barely a Speculative, but an active Life,
and does as seriously tell us what we are to do for Christ, as well as what we
are to receive from him.


Mar. There are many that lead sober Lives, yet may, nay shall go to Hell for
all their Morality; it is not that will save them.


Philad. I believe so too; but why should you condemn honest Men fearing God,
as only Moral Men, and as such who must certainly go to Hell, yet others must
escape it that are guilty of far worse Vices, and who have been outdone by
mere Heathens in their Practices? Some must question their Condition for every
Sin, though never so small; but such as you that reckon your selves true
Believers, must by no means question your Condition though your Sins be never
so great: No wonder to hear such expressions as these, viz. that if a Believer
be overtaken with gross Sins, yet he blasphemes Christ that dare serve a Writ
of Damnation upon him; and that if they be but Believers, and have once set
their foot upon Christ, they need not stagger for the greatness of their Sins,
nor their continuance in them; it seems tho you be not good Moral Men, yet you
have a right to Heaven for all that.


Mod. Well, but there are many very ignorant in the Mystery of Faith; Faith
has the honor to be the Grace that apprehends the Mercy of God in Christ, and
lays hold upon his perfect Righteousness, by which Persons come to be justified
and to have peace with God, Romans 5. 1. yea, by which Persons become the
Children of God, and by which they receive Christ as tendered to them in the
Gospel, and see him to be the end of the Law. God has now in respect to us,
canceled the Law, which stood as a handwriting against us, and has by the
Gospel showed us a way whereby to be made Righteous without the Law: nay
justified from those things, by which we could not be justified by the Law; for
says the Apostle, by the Works of the Law shall no Flesh be justified, but by
Faith, or by Christ made ours by Faith; this was the great overthrow of the
Jewish Nation, Romans 10. they being ignorant of Christ's Righteousness, went to
establish a Righteousness of their own, etc. this is a Righteousness without
the Law, and yet witnessed to by the Law and the Prophets: and the whole Law is
fulfilled in the Children of God, because Christ's Righteousness is made theirs
through believing; and I must tell you, that in many things Faith stands at
defiance with Working and Doing.


Philad. I believe, Moderatus, these things to be true, and that it is the work
of Faith to do what you say; yet by the Scripture it is plainly evident, that
it is not a bare naked Faith, a Faith that swims and floats in the Brain, or a
lazy Reliance upon Christ, destroying of good Works, that can or will save any:
let not any Persons flatter themselves into Misery; for that Faith, that is
barren of the Fruits of good Works, bears its own Curse; that Faith that is not
accompanied with good Works, is styled a dead Faith, a Faith that can never
bring us to Life, and no better than the Faith of Devils, James 2. 19, 20. And
tho it is true, as you have said, Faith has the Honor to be the Grace that
apprehends the Mercy of God in Christ, etc. yet this is not all that Faith
does, for it sanctifies, Act. 26. 18. and purifies the Heart, Act. 15. 9. it is
a Flesh-mortifying, and a World-conquering Faith, 1 John 5. 4, 5. and leads
forth the Soul to cleave to the Lord in obedience to his Will. Hence is it
said, that Enoch by Faith walked with God, and Abraham by Faith obeyed, and
went, and by Faith offered his Son Isaac: All Faith that is not such a Faith is
but a fancy, or a fantastical Faith, a Faith of the most wicked and profane,
that believe they shall be saved, tho they never are sanctified, and so
overlook the Precept of our Lord, and Injunction of our Savior. I may say in
this case, as Peter in another; many, while they promise to themselves Liberty,
become the Servants of Sin; so many, while they advance the Grace of Faith,
destroy the Power of Godliness, not considering that they are two inseparable
Companions: Persons may as well separate Light from the Sun, or Heat from the
Fire, as true Faith and Holiness; but for the present let this pass. Have you
any thing to say farther, to prove that God has chosen some to Life, and
rejected others without any respect to Faith or Holiness?


Philet. I might prove it from Cain and Abel, Genesis 4. 4, 5. where you may see,
that the Lord had respect to Abel and to his Offering, and not to Cain and his
Offering; and so Heb. 11. 4. Abel offered a more acceptable Sacrifice than
Cain. Now, it is not said, that the Lord had respect to Abel's Offering, but to
Abel and his Offering; so that if you ask me, why the Lord had respect to
Abel's Offering, I must answer, because he had respect to Abel's Person: And
why did he respect Abel's Person, but because it was his pleasure to choose him
in Christ? For had not Abel's Person pleased God, his Offering could not; and
so the contrary of Cain: to Cain and his Offering he had no regard; Cain being
reprobated in his Person, his very Sacrifice was abominable in the sight of
God, and no less than Sin.


Philad. Abel did offer a more acceptable Sacrifice, and God had a respect unto
it for this Reason; because Abel offered with a cheerful Heart, and willing
Mind in Faith: to which purpose it is said, that he brought not only of his
Sheep, but of the fattest and best of them; he did not think the best of his
Flock too good to serve the Lord with; what he did, was from an upright Heart,
and for holy and divine Ends, and offered in Faith spiritually: But Cain's
Oblation was of the Fruits of the Ground, and (as it seems) without choice or
difference, and from an impure Heart, and wicked Mind, or at the best done in
Formality; so that the Lord accepting Abel was not the Effect of absolute
Election, but shows the sincerity of Abel's heart, and the demonstration of
his great Faith; neither was Cain's Rejection the real effect of an
irrespective Reprobation, but rather of his outward formality and inward
corruption; for afterward the Lord said to Cain, If thou do well, shall thou
not be accepted? God is not willing that any should perish, but that all should
come to repentance, and Cain amongst the rest.


Mar. I suppose, Philetus, if you could but own that rotten Notion of Universal
Redemption, you might soon agree; otherwise there is no hopes of doing any good
with him, or drawing to any conclusion in this point.


Philad. Martha, Universal Redemption is no rotten or unsound Doctrine; for if
it be, then Christ did not die for all, which is to give the Lie to the Holy
Ghost, seeing the Scriptures in great plainness and expresness of Words, assert
the Redemption of all by Christ, without excepting so much as one: For to my
knowledge, I never yet read in the Scripture, that Christ laid down his Life for
some few elect Persons only; neither do I believe any Scripture can be
produced, that affirms that Christ died only for the Elect, only for Believers;
or any Text that denies that he died for all Men, without exception; if it
does, show me the place.


Philet. Does not Christ say, John 10. 11. I am the good Shepherd; the good
Shepherd gives his Life for the Sheep. Verse 15. I lay down my Life for the
Sheep: and so Ephesians. 5. 25. where Christ is said to love his Church, and to give
himself for it: Does it not therefore follow, that he gave his Life for his
Church, his Elect only?


Philad. No, not at all; tho Christ did lay down his Life for his Sheep (for
such as hear his Voice and follow him) and loved his Church, so as to give
himself for it; yet it does not say, that he loved no other, nor laid down his
Life for none but his Sheep; seeing the Scripture says, he bought those that
deny him: neither did Christ die for any, as they were his Sheep, as Saints, or
as his Friends, but as his Enemies and Sinners, such as were polluted in their
Blood, and without his gracious Undertaking for them were like to perish.


Philet. But says the Scripture, Christ came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister, etc. and to give his Life a Ransom for many, Matt. 20. 28. Romans 5.
15. Heb. 9. 28. Surely he that gave his Life a Ransom for many, shed his Blood
for many, did not die for all.


Philad. What you would have these Scriptures prove, I grant you: Christ died
for many, for his Church, for his Elect, for his Saints and Sheep; yet it does
not prove, that he died for none else; this is contrary to Scripture, Reason
and Sense: for no Scripture says, that he died for none but such; and I may as
well prove from Gal. 2. 20. that Christ died only for Paul, because he says,
that Christ loved him, and gave his Life for him, as you can prove from these
Texts, that Christ died only for Saints.


Philet. Had Christ died for all, he would have prayed for all, John 17. 9. You
have these Words, I pray for them, I pray not for the World, that is, the
wicked Reprobates of the World: Surely, those that Christ never prayed for, he
never died for; but the Non-Elect he never prayed for, therefore he never died
for them. Who can imagine, that if Christ had loved the World, so as to shed
his Blood for them, that he would refuse to pray for them? yet in ver. 19. he
says, that he prayed for them that were given him of the Father, that had, or
should receive his word believingly: and he said he prayed not for the World;
which World must be understood of those that were not given him by the Father,
the Non-Elect; he had no desire they should be saved. Now, those whose
Salvation he prayed not for on Earth, he interceeds not for in Heaven; and
those that he interceeds not for, he purchased not with his Blood.


Mar. Our Savior being now near his Death, he declares who he was to die for,
not for all Adam's Posterity, but those whom the Father had given him to be his
mystical Body: and for those I pray, as ver. 9. I pray for them, I pray not for
the World: As if Christ had said, I am so far from dying for all Adam's
Posterity, that I will not so much as pray as Mediator for any but those thou
have given me.


Philad. Could it be proved, that Christ did not pray for all, yet it does not
follow, that he did not die for all; because no Scripture says, Christ did not
die for those he did not pray for, Scripture Redemption freed from Restraints,
p. 75. And Dr. Homes, in many things a Friend of yours, yet upon John 3. 37. p.
15. says, When Men urge that Argument out of John 17. 9. Christ prayed not for
the World, therefore he paid not for the World: The Consequence may be excepted
upon many good Reasons; for tho Christ did not pray for the World, yet he might
pay for the World.

1st. Paying is giving Satisfaction, praying solicites God's Mercy.

2dly. Paying contains a Preparation of the Plaster, necessary for Man's
Salvation: Praying is the means of applying the Remedy to the Malady.

3dly. Paying Satisfaction belongs to the common Nature of Man which Christ
assumeth: Praying is a special Privilege, vouchsafed to such Persons only as
the Father has given to his Son. -- Thus you see one of your Favorites
against you in this Case: But what if Christ did not pray for the World in this
9th Verse; does it therefore follow, that he did not pray for the World at all?
Christ being now just taking his leave of the World, and about to be taken from
his faithful and true Followers, and to leave them as Sheep amongst Wolves,
does therefore most earnestly recommend them to his Father: and from Verse the
6th to the 19th, makes mention of his Disciples only; and then, in verse 20,
and 21. prays for all those that should believe on him, through their Words:
and in ver. 21, and 23. prays for the World, that they might have a belief and
knowledge of him.


Philet. Ay, but what Belief and Knowledge?


Philad. Why, doubtless saving Knowledge; such a Faith and Knowledge as was
accompanied with Salvation.


Philet. But surely, if Christ had prayed for the World, that the World might
have savingly believed in him, and known him, then the World would have
believed on him, and known him; because, whatsoever Christ prayed for to the
Father shall certainly be granted: Christ was always heard of the Father, and
the Father's Mind and Will was eternally known to the Son, and he came into the
World to do the Father's Will. Now, Christ knowing that there was a World,
which the Father never intended to redeem, to give him to die for, it would
have been vain, yea, inconsistent with the Wisdom of Christ, to have prayed for
that which stood diametrically opposite to the Will and Intention of the Father.


Philad. Christ made Intercession for Transgressors, Isa. 53. 12. and prayed
for his Enemies, for those that crucified him, that they might be forgiven,
Luke 23. 34. and also commanded us to pray for our Enemies, for those that
persecute us, Matt. 5. 44. and for the World Christ prayed for, as I have
proved: but it seems by what you say, that Christ did not pray for the World
with his whole Heart, or with a desire to obtain what he prayed for. Now,
whereas you say, that whatsoever Christ prayed for shall certainly be done, and
that he was always heard, this I believe; it was, and shall be, according to
what he intended: yet when Christ prayed that the Cup might pass by him, tho he
prayed very earnestly, he was not heard, because this Prayer was conditional,
and with Submission to his Father's Will: and so Heb. 5. 7. says of Christ,
who in the Days of his Flesh, etc. How was Christ heard in this? was he
exempted from Suffering? no, his Prayer was conditional, if the Lord will; but
he was so heard, as to get support under his Sufferings. But if whatsoever
Christ prayed for, was absolutely granted, without any Qualification to fit the
Creature for Mercy; then those Jews and Gentiles that crucified him, must be
forgiven, without Faith or Repentance, because Christ prayed that they might be
forgiven. This would be inconsistent with the Wisdom of Christ, to pray for
that which stood diametrically opposite to the revealed Will of his Father: For
where do you find the Lord has promised, that any shall be forgiven their
Sins, whether they repent or not? you your selves grant, notwithstanding this
Prayer of Christ, that the Wrath of God burned at the same instant of time, and
afterward against some of the Accusers, Condemners, Crucifiers and Mockers of
Christ. Synod of Dort. Part 2. p. 82, 83. Goodwin, p. 565. Again, Christ prayed
in this Chapter, that all those that believe in him might be one (as he and his
Father were one;) yet where do you find, that Christ was heard in this, that
there was no Disunion in Affection between the Saints, as there was none
between him and his Father? And did not he pray the Father to keep his
Disciples from Evil? can you infer from thence, that they never sinned, nor
suffered? Whatsoever Christ prayed for, I believe God the Father did grant him
an Answer to, according to the true intent of his Prayer.


Philet. Well, I could give you many Arguments, that Christ did not die for the
wicked and unbelieving World, but for the Elect.


Philad. We will leave that to the Learned; yet give me leave to produce some
Scriptures to prove Universal Redemption a Truth; and the first sort of
Scriptures that speak the Universality of Redemption by Christ, are John 3. 16.
God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life: and so John 6.
51. He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but the sins of
the whole World, 1 John 2. 2. God was in Christ reconciling the World to
himself. Here you see from these Scriptures, with many more that might be
added, that Universal Redemption is no rotten, nor no unsound Opinion; here
Christ died for the whole Word.


Philet. Ay, for what World? for the World of Believers, the World of the
Elect, that shall in the successive Generations of the World believe: it is not
to be understood in such a Comprehensive Signification, to include all the Men
and Women in the World; for the World is taken two ways in Scripture; largely
for all Men, and strictly in a restrained Sense for the Elect, or Believers:
Taken in this Sense Christ died for the whole World; by the World understanding
the Elect, dispersed up and down the World.


Philad. But where does the Scripture speak of a World of Elect Persons, but
rather the Elect are opposed to the World; as, 1 John 5. 19. we know, etc. John
14. 17. John 15. 19. but if by the World be meant the Elect only, then it will
follow that God gave his Son to dye for those that stood in no need of him; for
God by Virtue of his Absolute Prerogative might pardon Sinners without the
Death of his Son. Now for you that hold there was an absolute Election, and an
absolute Reprobation considered under the Fall, and that without respect to
Faith in Christ on the one hand, or disobedience on the other, what do you do
but overthrow the Truth and real Expiation of their Sins by the Death of Christ
for them? For if God in his Elective Love, did in the very Act of Election,
freely, and of his mere good Will and Pleasure, irrevocably assign and give to
his Elect Justification and Salvation, then Christ could not die to purchase
these things for them, because they were theirs truly and of right before, and
so he needed not die to bring those into Covenant with God, and to make them
near by his Blood, and to make them dear Children to God, who were all this
before: for those that were Elected unto Life, upon the account of their being
absolutely Elected to Salvation, they are likewise upon the same account in
actual favor with God, and already beloved of him, with the highest Love, and
such as is peculiar to those that are the Sons of God.

But again; if by the word World be understood the Elect only, then this word
whosoever must needs imply, that some of the Elect might possibly not believe,
and so Christ must be supposed to speak at no better a rate of Wisdom and Sense
than thus, God so loved the world of Believers, that whosoever of the world of
Believers believe on him, shall not perish. Nay, further, if there be Salvation
in Christ for none but the Elect (in your sense) then it is not true, that
whosoever believes in him shall be saved.

But that it cannot be meant of the Elect only, read the two preceding Verses,
14, 15. with this whole Verse, and the words following: for as Moses lifted up
the Serpent, etc. and, Ver. 17. for God sent not his Son into the World to
condemn the World. If then we must understand the Elect here by the World, then
we may read the words thus, God sent not his Son into the World to condemn the
Elect, but that the Elect should be saved: this was to affirm that which none
was likely to deny, or ever trouble themselves or the World about.

But again; if by the World we must needs understand the Elect only, then will
the Parallel between Moses's lifting up the Serpent in the Wilderness, and
Christ's being lifted up upon the Cross, run very lame: for Moses did not lift
up the Serpent, with an intent that none should look upon it, and receive
healing by it, save a small parcel; but that whosoever was stung might look
upon it, and that whosoever did look upon it should receive healing thereby,
Numb. 21. 8. Now you will hold, that all without exception are stung with Sin,
will you not?


Philet. Yea, I do.


Philad. Very well; then unless Christ be lifted up with an intent, that every
Man might believe on him, and every one that should believe on him, should be
saved by him, he could not be said to be lifted up for the universal benefit of
all those that were stung with Sin, as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the
Wilderness, for the benefit of all that were stung with the fiery Serpent. Thus
you may see that by the World, must needs be meant the whole Lump of Mankind;
and those that take it otherwise, do greatly eclipse the Mercy, Love, and
Goodness of God to all his Creatures. Very well, Musculus upon this place, John
3. 15, 16. by World, understands the Universe of Mankind; so that here his love
of the World, and his love of Man, is the same. After the same manner it is in
this Redemption of Mankind whereof we spoke, that Reprobates and desperately
wicked Men partake not of it: It Is not through any defect of the Grace of God,
nor is it meet for the sake of the Sons of Perdition it should lose the Glory
and Title of a Universal Redemption, since it is prepared for all, and all are
called to it. De Redemption. Genesis humani. Yea, Calvin himself upon this place,
with other more ancient and modern Expositors, take this word World in a
universal sense.

But take another Scripture, 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the
World to himself.


Philet. Well, pray read out the whole Verse, and you may see cause to believe,
that by the World is there meant the Elect, because, he says, not imputing
their Trespasses: Now it is plain he does impute the Sins of all Men to them
but the Elect only, but unto them he does not impute Sin; therefore he
reconciles unto himself none other but those he does not impute Sin to, which
are the Elect.

Besides, the word World signifies only some part of Men in the World, and not
the entire Universality of Men, as Luke 2. 1. Acts 19. 27. Rev. 13. 3. Yea,
World is put sometimes for those that believe, and are converted. The Bread of
God is he that comes down from Heaven, and gives Life to the World; that is,
to the Elect, to Believers of all ranks throughout the whole World: and no more
is intended in any suchlike Expressions.

Again, John 14. 31. That the World may know that I love the Father. And, John
17. 21. That the World may believe that thou have sent me. By the World here we
are to understand such as shall be saved.


Philad. I know the word World signifies only some part of the World; but where
do you find the Elect called the World, in opposition to those that are Enemies
and Strangers unto God? but it is rather put for the Wicked, who are the
greatest part of the World, as John 1. 10. and 7. 7. and 14. 17. and 15. 19.
and 16. 20. and 17. 9, 14. 1 Cor. 11. 32. 1 John 3. 1. and 4. 5. and 5. 4, 5.
Hence the Devil is called the Prince of the World, John 12. 31. and 14. 30. and
16. 11. But that this 2 Cor. 5. 19. cannot be meant only of the Elect, may be
proved from the word reconciling. Reconciliation signifies, a making those
Friends that were before at variance. Now how can it be said, That God was in
Christ, reconciling to himself those with whom he is not, nor ever was
offended? Nay, he was so far from being offended with them, that he loved them
with such a Love, that he did absolutely purpose (from the Fall, which was long
before the coming of Christ in the Flesh) to confer Eternal Life upon them.

Besides, the Apostle is not there speaking of any inward Act of God upon the
Souls of Persons, whereby they are brought to believe in Christ, whereby they
come to witness their Peace with God; Being justified by Faith, we have Peace
with God: But he is there speaking of the Tenor of the Gospel, the word of
Reconciliation which was committed unto him, and whereof he was a Minister, and
tells them, That God was in Christ, reconciling the World to himself. The
Quarrel began in Adam, Sin was that which set God and Man at variance, Isa. 49.
1. But now the Lord being minded to take whole Adam into Grace and Favor, and
to found a Universal Covenant of Peace, was pleased to appear in Christ, that
those that were Strangers, and afar off, might be made near, yea the Sons of
God.

But I Will give you a Scripture that is far from such Objections, it is 1 John 2.
2. He is a Propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours only, but for the Sins
of the whole World. Here you plainly see that Christ is a Propitiation for the
whole World, as opposed to Believers, therefore he must needs die for all. Now
these words were spoken to strengthen the Faith of those that through the
subtilty of Satan, and prevailing Temptation, were fallen, or should fall into
Sin, and thereby raise doubts in their Spirits, whether Christ died for them,
or was a Propitiation for their Sins, or not. Now the Apostle, to remove all
doubts and fears out of their Minds, tells them, That he did not die for some
few particular Men only (which might have augmented their fears) but was a
Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World. Now this will greatly add to the
Comfort, and put new Life into a sorrowful tempted Soul, one cast down under
the sense of Sin, to think that Jesus Christ is a Propitiation for his Sins,
being the Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World. But pray tell me, what
could it add to the comfort of those to whom John wrote his Epistle, who were
weak in Faith, to tell them that Christ was a Propitiation for the Sins of all
his Elect ones, for some few particular Men; but a great many, yea the far
greatest number, shall have no part with Christ, but shall be damned? Would not
such a Doctrine rather augment their Fears than their Comforts? Would they not
be ready to say, Ah, then I fear I am none of those that Christ is a
Propitiation for? Therefore the Apostle puts the matter out of all doubt, by
telling them that Christ by his Death became a Propitiation, or made a full
Atonement for the Sins of all Men, without excepting so much as one Person in
the whole World. But that Christ died for all, I prove from 1 Timothy 2. 6. Who
gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in due time. If you look back to
the Context of this Verse, you will find Paul exhorting his Son Timothy, That
Prayer and Supplication, etc. should be made for all Men; and telling him, That
so to do, was good and acceptable in the sight of God. And to prove that it is
good and acceptable in the sight of God to pray for all, he lays down this for
his ground, That God would have all Men to be saved. And for a further
confirmation, that it is the Will of God that all Men, without exception,
should be saved, he gives this reason for it; that Christ Jesus gave himself a
Ransom for all: so that Christ's dying for all, gives us a ground for Faith to
pray for all Men; which we could not do if Christ did not die for all, 2 Cor.
5. 14.

I would have you, Philetus, to consider 2 Cor. 5. 14. a Text that you cannot
well cavil with: the Apostle thus argues, If one died for all, then were all
dead; but one died for all, therefore all were dead. The thing that the Apostle
is about to prove, is, that all were dead; and the medium to prove it is, that
one died for all; so that if it be clear that all Men were dead by the fall of
the first Adam, it must be clear that Life was offered to all by the death of
the second Adam: for if Christ died for none but the Elect, then the Elect only
were dead, for the word (all) must signify as many in the minor as it does in
the major, or else the Apostle's reasoning would be fallacious.

And so, Romans 11. 32. God has concluded all in unbelief, that he might have
mercy upon all. Now if this last (all) belongs to none but the Elect, then none
but the Elect were concluded in unbelief: but it is plain that all without
exception were, first or last, concluded in unbelief; therefore the Mercy was
meant to all without exception.


Philet. But you know very well, that this word all men is not of necessity to
be taken simply and universally for all without exception of any, but is very
often taken in a restrained signification, when a part is put for the whole; as
in Exodus 9. 6. and all the Cattle of Egypt died; that is, all that were in the
Field: and so, 2 Samuel 16. 22. and Isa. 2. 2. and Mat. 3. 5. Jerusalem, and all
Judea, and all the Regions, etc. that is, very many Men of those places: and so
John 10. 8. Act. 2. 5, 17. Act. 10. 12. Mat. 4. 23. Luke 11. 42. with many
others.


Philad. Tho it be true, that the word all Men is not at all times to be taken
for all Men simply or universally; yet it never signifies the smallest number
in comparison with a greater: however, it cannot be taken here for some of all
sorts of Men, or for the Elect only, or the like, but of necessity for all Men
universally. If we take it in any other sense, we make the Apostle to argue
very weakly: for mind, here is first a Duty enjoined, I will that prayers, etc.
and to stir us up to so good a work, he tells us, that it is good and acceptable
in the sight of God, because his Will is, that all should be saved; God is so
kind, so tenderhearted, that out of his love and pity, he would have all Men
enjoy a happy and blessed end; and therefore in Charity we must pray for all,
no Men, tho never so wicked and profane, are to be excluded from our Prayers,
unless we know them to be such as have committed that unpardonable Sin against
the Holy Ghost, 1 John. 5. 16. Now if by all Men we must needs understand some
of all sorts of Men, or the Elect only, then the all we are to pray for,
reaches and extends not so far as God extends his Love. Again, if we must
take it in your sense, then we may read the Apostle thus; It Is good and
acceptable in the sight of God, that we should pray for all Men, without
exception of any, because God would have all his Elect to be saved: surely the
word all in both places is of the same extent. Much of the same nature is 2
Pet. 3. 9. wherein the gracious and good Will of God toward all Men appears,
there it is said, the Lord is not willing that any should perish; here the
Apostle asserts an unwillingness in Christ, that any Person of Mankind
whatsoever should perish; and therefore delayeth his promised coming, and
exercises much patience and long-sufference, his will and desire being, that no
Person whatsoever should perish, but that all might by his patience and
long-sufferance be led to Repentance: which if it be a Truth, then doubtless we
must here understand all Men, and not restrain it to the Elect only: for the
Lord is not here said to be not willing that any of his Elect should perish,
but that all these should come to Repentance; but not willing that any
universally should perish, but that all should come to Repentance (viz.) as
they are Men, while they are capable of Repentance, that so they may be saved.


Philet. This Text also must be restrained to the Elect; therefore, says the
Apostle, The Lord is long-suffering to us-wards, not willing that any of the
Elect, or true Believers, should perish, etc. and if you mind, this Epistle is
writ to the Elect, to those that had obtained like precious Faith with God's
Elect.


Philad. But the contrary will appear, if you consider the Persons here
mentioned are those toward whom the Lord exercised much patience and
long-suffering: what, are they the Elect with whom the Lord is not angry?
therefore no need of patience; for there is no room for patience to take place,
but only in such cases, where a Person is apt to be stirred up and provoked;
but now God was never offended with the Elect, but loves them with the
greatest love that can be, neither (according to your Principles) were they in
any danger or possibility of perishing, therefore could not the patience and
long-suffering of God have any reference to any such End, either of Salvation,
or Condemnation, they having Salvation infallibly assured to them by the
irrevocable Decree of God. So that let Christ's coming be long or speedy, or
should they die the first moment they breath in this World, or live after never
so many Sins committed, yet their Salvation being decreed of God, and that
Decree irresistible, must needs produce their Salvation. Besides, if we should
understand it of the Elect, then we may, without wrong to the Apostle, bring
him in speaking thus, God is patient to the Elect, not willing that any of his
Elect should perish, but that all the Elect should come to repentance:
therefore we must needs understand, that the patience and long-sufferance of
God is exercised toward those that contemn his Grace, yea, such as go on in
Sin, treasuring up Wrath to themselves against the day of Wrath; yet the Lord
exercises his goodness and forbearance and long-sufferance, that so his
Goodness might lead them to repentance, Rom 2. 3, 4. yea, those that the
Apostle calls Vessels of Wrath fitted for destruction, are yet endured with
much long-suffering. There is nothing that makes the Lord withhold his hand of
indignation against the Wicked, but the tender Compassion that is in him
through Christ: and therefore is the long-suffering of God said to be
Salvation; this is the main End and Design of God's Patience, and affording
Sinners a Day of Grace, that so Grace and Mercy might be obtained; and his
Goodness and Mercy leads them to repentance; and so long as God exercises his
long-suffering toward any, they are under a possibility of Repentance. 1 Pet.
3. 19, 20. We read that the patience and long-sufferance of God waited upon
Sinners in the days of Noah, and all those 120 Years he afforded them means of
Repentance by Noah, who was a Preacher of Righteousness to them: this shows
that they were not under an absolute Decree of Reprobation, but rather God
would have none of them to perish; if they do perish, it is through their own
fault and folly.

Now this is very consistent with the Will of God, and the Mind of the Holy
Ghost in other Scriptures; as Ezekiel. 18. 30, 32. and 33. 11. we find this People
was ready to affront and cavil with the most High, much after that rude manner,
as in Paul's time, in the 9th of the Romans; and as you and many others in
these our days, who say, that Children are made liable to Eternal Death by
their Parents Transgression, before they had any Sin of their own;
notwithstanding God has said, nay sworn, the contrary. Is it not strange to
think how you complement, nay, dissemble with God? when you pray unto him, you
tell him how merciful and bountiful he is to all, and when you have turned your
backs, represent him as a hard Master, making us pay for that which we never
tasted, and punishing us for that fault which he knows others had committed,
with such like injurious Imputations, and horrid Blasphemies: so here, these
fly in the Face of God, and charge the Death of the Wicked upon him, and boldly
lay the blame at his Door, and say, The Ways of the Lord were not equal; tho
when the Lord comes to judge every one according to their Work, the inequallity
will be found on their side, not on God's: for, Psalm. 145. 17. and 25. 10.
hereupon the Lord proceeds to vindicate his most righteous proceedings with the
Sons of Men, and shows, that the Son should not bear the iniquity of the
Father, nor the Father the Son's, but the Soul that sins should die; and
therefore calls upon them to repent.

Where now is the Man that dares charge the God of Heaven with his Destruction?
Surely as God delights not in the Sin of any, so neither does he in their
Death: but if you do not believe the Lord upon his bare Word, you have his
Oath, Ezekiel. 33. 11. As I live, says the Lord, etc. I will not your
Destruction; if you perish and die in your Sins, it is because you Baxter's Call
to the Unconverted, p. 152, 153, 170.
choose Destruction, your own Will is the cause of your Woe: The Lord, which
cannot lie, Tit. 1. 2. says so; nay, he that cannot be perjured, As I live, he
swears (says Dr. Homes) by the choicest of Attributes, his Life, which is the
Root of all others, and the excellency of his Being, and therefore carrys a
great weight with it, that he is in good earnest, and most cordially desires
they would not perish, or die eternally; God will not eat his Word, or be
forsworn. 1 Samuel 15. 29. Romans 3. 4. Tit. 1. 2.


Mar. You need cite no more Scriptures. I know and believe the Scripture stands
full of Exhortations, and many Promises, etc. in his Revealed Will; but he has
a Secret Will contrary to his Revealed Will, relating to the same People and
Object: So God would have all Men to be saved, and none to perish, by his
Revealed Will; yet by his Secret Will he would have Millions to be damned: and
tho it be his Revealed Will that all Men should believe in his Son, and all
should, as you say, repent and turn to God; yet his Secret Will is, they shall
neither do the one nor the other.


Philad. I believe God has a Secret Will and a Revealed Will, a Will that
neither Men nor Angels know.

If it be God's absolute Will that the greatest part should be damned, it is
then the duty of the greatest part of Men to go industriously to Hell and be
damned: and to do good, would be a Vice; to labor to attain Heaven, a Sin,
because it crosses the secret Will of God: and if it be God's Revealed Will
that all should repent, and his Secret Will that very few shall, it follows
from thence that it is his Will that his Will should not be done; and that when
a Reprobate says, Thy Will be done, he rather curses himself than prays for a
Blessing.

And since you affirm that God has a Secret and a Revealed Will, I would have
you careful that you do not interpret his Revealed Will by what you conjecture
of his Secret One, his Secret Will being a thing that cannot be known; but
rather guess at his Secret Will by his Revealed one, and so judge of his Eternal
Decree by what we find in his Word concerning his Promises and Threatenings,
which are the Copies of his Decrees. It is very ill done of you to say, God
has a double Will, the Revealed Will being not only diverse but opposite to his
Secret One, God ordaining Sin with the one, whilst he forbids it with the
other; and not always willing in secret what he reveals himself will do.

So that by what you say, you had as good tell us God does not mean as he
speaks, and so make him a hypocritical Dissembler. This is a very high Affront
put upon the Divine Goodness, and your Testimony is not at all to be credited,
unless you have the Witness of God for you, 1 John 5. For whosoever delivers
any thing for a Divine Truth, if it be contrary to what is revealed to us in
the Scriptures of Truth, it ought to be rejected as Diabolical Suggestions; all
things of this nature must be warranted by the Word. Let our Hearts be never so
strongly inclined to believe it; yea, let Persons pretend never so much to the
Spirit, and to receive new Light, yet if it be contrary to the Spirit of God
speaking in the Scriptures, it is no better than a delusion of the Devil;
therefore to the Law, and to the Testimony, Isa. 8. 20. John 16. 13, 14, 15. 1
John 4. 6. Now seeing by this your Speech you make the pure and holy God (who
hates and detesteth, yea, forbids and punishes Hypocrisy and Dissimulation in
Man, 1 Pet. 1. 15. Psalm. 51. 6. 1 John 3. 18.) insincere, and a great
dissembler in his Word, professing one thing, and intending another; which
Imputation consists not with his Honor, Justice, and Mercy, which is always
one with his Will, and his Will always the same, and not two opposite Wills. I
therefore challenge a proof for what you say, or I shall record your words as
blasphemous.


Philet. I cannot prove it in those positive terms, but if you look 1 Samuel 2.
30. it may give us some grounds to think so; I said indeed, that thy House
should walk before me for ever; but far be it from me, etc. Here you see the
Lord said one thing and decreed another; and so Jonah 3. 4. where Jonah in
positive words asserts it to be the revealed Will of God; Yet 40 days and
Niniveh shall be destroyed: yet it was the secret Purpose, Decree or Will of
God that it should not. Yea, and so far as the Prophet could conceive, and he
had already manifested his Counsel, he purposed to overthrow the City; but yet
the Lord had indeed determined to preserve it.


Philad. I called for a proof, that God has a Secret Will, and a Revealed
Will, contradictory to each other, relating to one and the same Persons and
Things; and instead of that you bring two Texts that make nothing to the
purpose; that of Jonah concerning Niniveh shows, that God's Will, whereof one
part revealed and preached by Jonah was, that Niniveh should be destroyed
within 40 days if the Inhabitants thereof repented not, but remained in an
obdurate and impenitent State; and the other part of God's Will which was kept
secret and concealed was this, that it should not be destroyed if it did repent
within that time; so that that part of God's Will that was revealed, and the
other part kept secret and concealed, was one and the same, and tho delivered
in positive words, yet there was a Condition implied in them, tho not
expressed. That Niniveh was not destroyed at that set time which the Lord
threatened they should, plainly shows that his Purposes and Threatenings were
conditional: Upon supposition of their Impenitence he threatened to destroy
them; but when they repented, he promised to preserve them: this you know by
what Jonah did when he withdrew to see what God would do with the City, and by
what the King and People did; they understood the whole Will of God concerning
them, tho but part thereof was vocally revealed: therefore I heartily advise
you, to detest that vile School-distinction, of a Secret and Revealed Will in
God opposite one to the other; so that by his Revealed Will he would have none
to perish, but professes his unfeigned desire after the Salvation of those that
perish, and seems to be burdened in himself, and lament over those that
stubbornly run in destructive courses, as Deuteronomy. 5. 29. Psalm. 81. 13, 14. Isa.
48. 7. and 65. 2. Jer. 44. 4, 5. Mat. 23. 37. and yet by his Secret Will he
has no desire after their Salvation: Nay, he is so far from willing or desiring
their Salvation, that he has grounded and settled Intentions to destroy them
for ever. By his Revealed Will he would have all Men to repent and believe in
his Son, and by his Secret Will, the contrary: Now if there be any Secret Will
in God whereby he wills the destruction of any, at the same time that he
wills the Salvation of all, these two Wills must needs contradict one
another; and of two contrarys, if one be good, the other is bad; and so in
God's Secret and Revealed Will, if one be good, the other is bad.

But surely, if God injoyns Repentance, Faith, and Obedience unto all Men, with
Promises upon their complying with his Will they shall be saved, as Mark 16.
16. Acts 3. 19. John 20. 21. then he does not will with a Secret Will, the
condemnation of any: for it is clear that his Revealed Will runs, that he would
have all men every where to repent, etc. and certainly his Revealed Will must
needs be one with his Secret Will, or else we shall represent the great God of
Truth as false as Man: for if God's Word, which is his Revealed Will, be no
Interpretation of his mind and meaning, then it is not true; for that speech
that is no signification of the Mind is a lie: God's love to Mankind, page 96.
this is properly lying (says Lombardus as quoted by Morton, Page 51) when a
Man speaks any thing contrary to his mind. And says Aquinas, this is properly
to lie, when a Man signifies in outward words, another thing than that which he
thinks in his mind. And whereas you charged Universal Redemption as savouring
of Popery, pray what greater piece of Popery than their mental Reservation, and
wicked Equivocation, saying one thing, and meaning another? Have there not been
whole Volumes writ to detect it? But if professing one thing while the contrary
is intended, be Holy in God; why not in them? or if some things in God may be
Holy which are abominable in Man, by what Rule must we distinguish between Holy
things in God* which are Holy also when found in Men* and such other Holy
things in God, which when found in Men are abominable? Is it not of dreadful
consequence to impute that to God, which common and approved Reason judges to
be unrighteous in Men? His Works are so just, his Word so pure, and so merciful
is he in his Ways, that there is no appearance to the contrary; and in
performing his Covenant and Promises, he is most highly faithful and constant,
and is in no wise a Dissembler, that under such most affectionate Expressions
of Love and Kindness to Man, should conceal settled Purposes and Intentions of
doing them the greatest Mischief: Surely in God's Revealed Will cannot possibly
lurk any mental Reservation or Insincerity.

What a dishonor and a crime of a high Nature would it be, if Persons should
deal thus with an earthly King, as you do with the King of Heaven? Suppose a
King should set forth a Proclamation of a General Pardon to all his Subjects
that had offended him, without excepting High Treason, or any other Offense
whatsoever; yet if they will but repent, submit to his Mercy, sue forth their
Pardon, they shall have it: And now after all this is proclaimed throughout the
Nation, others should assume to proclaim that which is quite contrary, that tho
it was the King's Pleasure to offer such a General Pardon, yet it was the
King's Secret Will (yea, before the Proclamation came forth) that the greatest
number should never reap any benefit by it. Can any Man, endued with reason and
understanding, any ways think that such Officers proclaimed that which made for
the King's Honor? Or if it was a Truth, would not the Soul of a Person
abominate such pretending to Kindness and Mercy? And now whereas the King of
Kings, the God of Heaven has vouchsafed an Act of Grace, and in tender
compassion and pure love to all, has sent forth a General Pardon tendering his
Grace to all, telling us, that for his Son's sake he will freely and fully
pardon all our Sins whatsoever, if we will but accept of it; and if we sue
forth our Pardon, we shall have it freely; and the God of Heaven, to make this
known to the World, has sent forth his Messengers to proclaim these
glad-tidings to all without excepting one (Glory to God high on Earth, Peace,
Good Will toward all) which was proclaimed by a Heavenly Herald. And how has
the Lord, both in the Old and New Testament, proclaimed and professed himself a
God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth:
yea, how earnestly does he allure Persons to repentance, promising them pardon
of Sins with all the Blessings of the World to come, and seriously and solemnly
protests and swears, that he desires not their Death, he would not have one
Soul of them perish. But now if after all this others should come and say, that
tho it be the Revealed Will and Pleasure of God, that such a General Pardon
should be divulged to the World, yet it was the Secret Will of God, yea before
this Proclamation came forth, it was decreed, that he would cast out of his
favor and devote to Eternal Burning, millions of his most excellent Creatures,
Men, Women, and Children, that never offended him, any otherwise than Children
may offend before they are born: Do you think such words any ways advance the
Glory, Holiness, and Excellency of God? No; thus under pertence of glorifying
of him, you most dishonor him; as if God did not really intend that Grace and
Good to Man which in his Word he tenders to them; and so Persons must be
damned, because God did not really and in good earnest call them, which is a
thing more fit to be applied to Cheaters and Juglers, than to the righteous,
pure, single and secret Will of God. Is it not pity you should impute that to
the Lord, which is proper to none but the worst of his Creatures? surely all
God's Decrees are perfectly just, and whatsoever he wills is perfectly good,
neither can he will any thing but what in it self is Righteous, Just, and
Equal; and to say of things unequal in themselves, yet done by God, that they
are just, is a great dishonor to him. Wither's Paraphrase on the Lord's
Prayer. How dare you speak of such a Will to be in God which he has no where
revealed in his Word? His Secret Will, how come you to know it; and if it be
revealed, how is it Secret?


Philet. God by his Revealed Will shows that he approves of the Salvation of
such Persons that perish, as Good, and shows what Persons ought to do, and
what would be well-pleasing to God was it found in them: yet he does not will
it with his Effectual Will; for if he did, he would give forth strength, and
such a power that they should not but believe.


Philad. These are but the perplexing Subtilties of the Schools, and but Briers
and Thorns to entangle Men in endless disputations: What, does God approve of
the Salvation of Persons as good, by his Revealed Will, and has he by his
Secret Will positively determined and decreed from Eternity their destruction,
which is quite contrary to what he approves, takes pleasure and delight in;
what woeful work is here? As to his Effectual Will, if you mean by it his
absolute irresistible Power in converting of Sinners beyond all possibility of
perishing; or the irresistible efficacy and predetermining Power of Grace; this
is such a Will as you cannot prove to be in God.


Philet. No surely; whatsoever the great and glorious God has purposed and
intended he will do, shall certainly be effected by his Glorious Power. It Is a
dishonor to the most High God, as if he was uncertain to effect what he
purposes and intends to do; for seeing God's Power is infinite, and he being
no less than the Omnipotent God, he cannot fail or fall short to effect
whatsoever he wills and pleases to do in the conversion of any he pleases to
convert, or in any other thing that is his Will and Pleasure to effect and do,
his Counsel shall stand, and he will do all his Pleasure.


Philad. It Is true, God is Omnipotent, and can do whatsoever he pleases, tho
all Creatures opposed him, yet God can many times do more than indeed he ever
will; his Will is regulated, and is acted forth agreeable to his Wisdom,
Righteousness and Justice, and according to his Divine Nature; and as God has
made Man a rational Creature, so he very seldom forces Man to repentance
against his will; yet is the Lord pleased so to will the Salvation of all, yea
with such an effectual Will, that he does that which is of a proper tendency,
and sufficient thereunto, that unless they wickedly and wilfully oppose the
Means, they should be saved; yea, so far as is any ways meet for him to act, or
assist, toward their Salvation; Isa. 5. 4. What could I have done more? that
is, tho God could have done more than he did, yet it was not consistent to that
method and stated order of things; but more of this hereafter.


Mar. No Text of Scripture must be understood as to make God Impotent, instead
of Omnipotent, or in the least reflect upon the Sovereignty, Immutability, and
Omnipotency of God, as if he could be disappointed in bringing to pass what he
has purposed and intends to do.


Philad. Nor no Scripture must be so interpreted, as to disparage or undervalue
the Love and Bounty of God to all Men, the general tenor of them, representing
in the highest degree the Goodness of God; and as God is perfect in Power,
perfect in Wisdom, so also perfect in Goodness, yea, Perfection it self: any
Defect is inconsistent with a perfect Being; and above all, a Defect in
Goodness, which gives a Value to the other Attributes of God. If therefore some
things in Providence, or some Passages appear in Scripture that we cannot
exactly reconcile, but that they seemingly oppose this Point, we ought to
impute that to our deficiency in understanding, and to try if they may not
reasonably bear another sense, or reserve them to be understood hereafter, than
to adhere to them in contradiction to the general Tenor of Scripture, and the
Light of Nature and Reason, seeing nothing can be alleged which with that same
clearness oppugns the perfection of Goodness in God, as others may which assert
it. And seeing the Nature of Goodness consists in the taking a pleasure in the
Happiness of others, and in promoting it: We must conclude from hence, that God
hates no Man, but loves and desires the Happiness of all Men; and that for his
Will-sake he reprobates none either from Eternity or in Time: to think
otherwise, greatly opposes God in all his Attributes, it opposes his Mercy. God
is in Scripture declared to be a merciful God, Exodus 34. 6. 1 John 4. 16. God
is Love; yea called the Father of Mercy, and God of all Consolation; yea, rich
in Mercy, Ephesians. 2. 4. abundant in Mercy: Pray see Psalm. 33. 5. He loves
Righteousness, and Judgment; the World is full of the Goodness of the Lord: And
Mica. 7. 18. He retains not his Anger for ever, because he delights in Mercy.
And, Psalm. 145. 9. the tender Mercies of God are over all his Works. But how
God could delight in Mercy, and how his tender Mercies are over all his Works,
I do not understand. What, does God delight in Mercy, when he has made such a
Decree, which shows more Severity toward poor Man than Mercy? Are his tender
Mercies over all his Works, when for one only Sin, and that once committed, and
that not in their own Persons, he has shut the greatest part of Mankind up
under invincible Sin and Damnation? not affording them a Mediator, which was
the greatest and most choice Act and Manifestation of God's Mercy that he could
bless the World withal. Now all the Attributes of God must take place upon Man:
And I beseech you tell me where the tender Mercy of God takes place upon those
for whom Christ did not die; for you will own there is Mercy in God, as well as
Justice, do you not?


Philet. Yea, I do; and God by his Decree does fully manifest both Mercy and
Justice; his Justice to the Reprobate, and his Mercy to the Elect.


Philat. Well; but do you think that one Attribute of God destroys another?
Does Justice in God wholly devour and eat up his Mercy, leaving no room to take
place upon some Persons?


Philet. God who is the Supreme Lord of all, may do what he will with his own;
when Man had sinned, he was at perfect liberty whether he would show Mercy to
any or not; and if he had made no provision at all for any of fallen Man, it
could not be termed an Act of Unmercifulness.


Philad. I did not ask you what an Almighty God can or might do, but I ask you
how or wherein the Goodness and Love of God is manifested to those for whom
Christ did not die? Or how God, who is the Perfection of all Goodness, Mercy,
and Bowels of Pity, can be said to bear any Love, Good Will, or Affection, unto
those (before any personal or actual Sins by them committed) upon whose ruin he
was so bent, that he has wholly left them without all possibility of escaping
Eternal Misery and Torment? How can Mercy stand with such a Decree? Does not
the Apostle Paul, Tit. 3. 4. speak of the appearance of the Love of God our
Savior toward all Men? But can there be any appearance of Love and Kindness to
those for whom Christ did not die, and whom God was resolved from Eternity to
exclude from all parts and fellowship in Eternal Life? Was not there as much
Mercy, Kindness, and Good Will showed to the very Devils, as to such Men? Nay,
Mr. Keach tells us, That if Christ did not die for all, God deals more severely
with many of Adam's Offspring, than he dealt with the Devils, because they
were excluded from all terms of Reconciliation for their own actual
Disobedience; but Mankind only, for the Sins of Adam, made theirs by
Imputation, and as they partake of the same Nature: Neither is their
Condemnation aggravated by Christ's coming, as those Persons are for whom
Christ did not die. Youth's Celestial Guide. Much to the same purpose you may
see God's Love to Mankind, page 136, 137, 138. That although the Devils are set
forth in Scripture for the greatest Spectacles of God's ireful Severity; yet is
God more merciful to them than to such Men: and though they are both sure to be
damned; yet in three things Man is in a far worse condition by such a Decree.

1. In their appointment to Hell, not for their own personal Sins, for which
only the Devils are damned; but for the Sin of another that lived and sinned
long before they were born.

2. In their unavoidable destination to endless Misery, under a color of the
contrary: the Devils, as they are decreed to Damnation, so they know it and
look for no other: But Men that are appointed to Wrath, are yet fed up with
hopes of Salvation, and made to believe, that if they perish, it is not because
God would not have Mercy upon them, but because they will not be saved, when
indeed there is no such matter.

3. In their Obligation to believe, and the aggravation of their Misery by not
believing: The Devils, because they must be damned, are not commanded to
believe in Christ, nor is their punishment heightened by their not believing;
but miserable Men, who by this Decree have no more liberty to escape Hell than
the Devil, must yet be tied to believe in Christ, and have their Torments
increased, if they believe not: May we not say, Where was the sounding of the
Lord's Bowels, and his Mercy? Were they not restrained? Isa. 63. 15.

Now tho I grant you, that God's Mercy is his own, and he might give it to whom
he please, I do also grant, that when Man had sinned, God was not obliged, but
was absolutely free and at perfect liberty whether he would show Mercy to any
or not: The Love of God in Christ was undeserved, undesired, and every way free
indeed; neither had it been unmerciful if God had made no provision for fallen
Man.

But now seeing he was pleased to enter into a Covenant of Peace with Man, tho
under no constraint or Obligation, and to give his Son a Ransom, not for a few,
but all, as a means whereby his poor Creatures might be saved, and has
promised Mercy, without exception, should be vouchsafed to all that believe in
his Son, and has bound it with an Oath, that he desires not the death of a
Sinner, that no cruelty is in him; but that he is a God gracious and merciful,
thereby to beget in us such amiable thoughts of himself as might incline us to
love him with all our heart and strength; and without the least scruple resign
up our selves to his Will:

Now, I say, since God, who was absolutely free, has made such Promises of
Mercy to all that believe in his Son, this his Promise binds him to perform it;
he cannot deny himself, he is not like unto frail Man; he will not eat his own
words; so that now he is not at liberty to deny Mercy to those to whom he in
his Word has promised to show Mercy, neither can he do it: for we may modestly
affirm, there are some things God cannot do; God cannot lie, he cannot deny
himself, neither can he deal unfaithfully and unjustly in his Promises, nor go
contrary to his Will revealed in his Word: so till you prove by the Word of
God, that he has made no provision for the Salvation of all Men by the death
of Christ, all you say proves nothing; neither do you yet show me where the
great Attribute of God's Mercy takes place upon those for whom Christ did not
die.


Philet. Does not the Mercy of God wonderfully appear in this, that when Man
had sinned, and thereby run himself so far in debt, beyond any possibility to
pay, but was liable to have been eternally a Prisoner, without any redemption
from thence, till he had paid the utmost Farthing, neither Men nor Angels being
able to make God amends for the wrong Man had done him, Psalm. 49. 7, 8. And
whereas God being the most Sovereign Lord, and no ways a Debtor to any of his
Creatures, being not constrained by any inward Necessity, or outward Force, to
show mercy to any, being wholly at his own choice whether he would show Mercy
to any, having cause enough to cast off Man for his disobedience, as he did the
fallen Angels; does it not argue and prove more abundantly the rich Grace and
Goodness of God, in providing for the Salvation of a few, than in making no
provision for any, but leaving them to perish in their Sins?


Philad. It Is true, it is an act of Grace and Mercy for God to make provision
for the Salvation of any by Christ, and to cast his Love upon any of the
degenerate Sons of Adam, when he passed by the Apostate Angels, being invested
with a power to show Mercy to whom he please: But certainly if to show Mercy to
a few amongst the many millions of millions of poor perishing Creatures,
renders God gracious and merciful, how prevailing must that Love be which has
made such rich and full provision for the Salvation of all Men, who unless they
wilfully neglect so great Salvation, shall most certainly be saved? for if the
providing for the Salvation of a few out of many, renders him most gracious and
lovely, then if he had refused to make provision for any, certainly the greater
the number for whom this provision was made is, the more lovely and gracious
does God appear. Pray take heed you do not bring your Soul under guilt, by
denying Christ's Death for all, which is the greatest illustration of his Love
and Mercy to Sinners: for in my understanding, it is a great injury done to the
Goodness and Mercy of God to affirm, that he has eternally decreed the
reprobation of all mankind except a very few in comparison of the rest.


Mar. None can be damned but those whose damnation God wills to glorify his
Justice; for God wills the Salvation of all that are saved, and he wills the
Damnation of all that are damned: and tho it is certain that the Lord is
gracious and full of compassion, and of great mercy, yet he has mercy on whom
he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens, Romans 9. 18. It Is true, there
is such infinite Mercy in God, that he could have pardoned all the Angels that
sinned, and could have saved all Adam's Posterity: if he had pleased, there
might have been no Hell, no place of Torment for Devils or Men; if he had
pleased, there might have been no place but Heaven for all the Angels, and all
the Children of Men to sing Hallelujahs to Eternity: but we must not order what
God shall do, how he shall exert and put forth his Mercy; but let his Grace and
Mercy be adored for ever, in that he saves any that have sinned, and his holy
Justice adored in punishing so many with Eternal Damnation for Sin. And God
has his Glory, not only from them that are saved, but also from them that
perish; in the one the Glory of his Grace, in the other the Glory of his
Justice.


Philad. Who questions these things? but you still avoid the Question so often
urged, viz. Wherein the great Attribute of God's Mercy takes place upon those
for whom Christ did not die?


Philet. You asked me if I thought one Attribute of God eat up another? And I
may ask you this Question, whether you think God is made up of Mercy without
any Justice?


Philad. No, I do not think so; I believe that Justice and Mercy were
essentially in God before all time, and both beloved and favored by him; and
to maintain the favor and love God bore to Justice, he has caused whole
Nations to drink of the Cup of his Wrath: in this he threw the sinful down from
Heaven; drowned the old World; rained Fire and Brimstone out of Heaven upon
Sodom, etc. yea such love does God bear to Justice, that not only Men and
Angels, Citys and Nations, but Heaven and Earth and all shall fall, rather than
God will not observe Rectitude and Justice, in giving to every one his due; yea
so just is God, that he would not spare his best beloved Son; yea, and God is
glorified by Justice as well as by Mercy; and should there be any jarring and
disagreeing in the Divine Being, all would run into confusion, yea, Heaven and
Earth would be a Chaos: but certainly there is nothing more lovely, than when
Justice and Mercy do embrace and kiss each other; God has promised in Judgment
to remember Mercy, and that he does not willingly afflict and grieve the
Children of Men; the Divine Goodness is such, that he always pities where he
must punish, Lam. 3. 33. and is very unwilling to strike but from mere
necessity; he seldom or never makes any Patterns of his Wrath, but such as are
despisers of his Mercy, and forgetters of his Favors, yea, and after a long
time of forbearance, Isa. 65. 2. So tho God has a respect to Justice as well
as Mercy, and one is as much beloved as the other, yet in the expressions of
his Love to the Sons of Men, it is said to be above all his Works: But where
has Mercy any place upon those that are made the butts of God's Displeasure?
yea, view but the Scriptures, wherein the Mercy and Goodness of God are legible
to all, and you will find that his love to sinful Man is truly inconsistent
with the Nature of those absolute Decrees you speak of: see Hos. 11. 8. How
shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? etc. Here the Lord speaks as if to punish a
sinful and disobedient People went to his very heart; yea, he is so unwilling
to inflict Punishment, that his very Bowels are moved as is intimated, by
turning within him. Consider the case of Sodom, when upon Abraham's earnest
expostulation with the Almighty, the Divine Bounty rose so high, that had there
been in those Five great Cities, but Ten righteous (the effectual Prayers of a
righteous Man carry such a kind of Omnipotency a long with them, that they tie,
as 'twere, God's hands from Judgments and open them to Mercy; Let me alone,
said God to Moses) nay, it may be conjectured, that not only Ten, but Five, or
less, might have prevailed for the saving those Citys. Consider the Case of
Nineveh, Jona. 1. likewise Mat. 23. 37. O Jerusalem, etc. Certainly this
Scripture does highly speak forth God and Christ's great Love to Mankind,
Sorrow mixed with Love and Pity: and you shall find few or none commenting upon
this text, but say, Christ showed abundance of Love to these poor
Jerusalemites. Mr. Keach in his Scripture Tropes, having showed the compassion
of Christ to Sinners under the similitude of a Hen, says, that Jesus Christ
was moved with the greatest compassion imaginable to wards the poor Jews, and
Jerusalemites, whom he was first sent to, and came toseek and save; this is
signified by that wonderful passion that seized upon his Spirit, etc. And
having showed with what a mournful Voice the Hen calls her Chickens to her when
there is danger, says, so Christ calls to poor helpless and impenitent
Sinners, very often with a mournful Voice, and tears in his eyes; Luke 19. 42.
And from thence does infer it to be no better than presumption, for any to dare
to charge their eternal ruin upon God. And a little after, Who will pity
Sinners if they perish at last and be damned, when all is from their own vile
stubborness? And in his Youth's Guide he says, That God's commiserating the sad
estate of perishing Sinners, argues there was once Mercy extended to them,
which could not be if Christ died not for all. And in God's Love to mankind,
page 132. St. Austin says, Our Lord did compare himself to a Hen, rather than
to any other creature, because of her singular expression of Love to them when
out of sight.


Mar. But here is a distinction which you either do not understand, or have not
considered, as touching our Lord Jesus; for he has a Will distinct from his
Will as God: Now as Jesus Christ was Man, he wept; and as he was Man, he willed
Jerusalem Salvation; but as he was God, he wills it not, for it was his
determinate Will that Jerusalem should be destroyed as an effect of their Sins:
therefore tho Christ did weep for Jerusalem; nay, had he prayed for them, God's
unchangeable Will must take place; Tho Moses and Samuel stood before me, etc.
Jer. 15. 1.


Philad. I grant, tho as I said before, that faithful Prayer greatly prevails
with God; yet in some cases the most importunate Prayer of the most upright
will not become effectual; where Inquity is grown up to that height of
malignity, and desperate sinfulness, that should not God punish it he would
deny himself, and cease to be God, as he says in Ezekiel 14. 14. that tho these
three Men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, stand before me, and would intercede, their
intercession for others will become fruitless, where Justice calls for a
cutting off: but your distinction about a twofold Will in Christ, I look upon
to be but barely notional; and nothing but to gratify Peoples pregnant fancies
(to say no worse) and I doubt such sancies may prove of dangerous consequence;
for by this, Christ in the Flesh had one End in his weeping, and endeavoring
to gather Jerusalem, and in his Spirit another: Christ, as he was Man, would
have saved Jerusalem; but as he was God, he wills their destruction: Christ, as
he was Man, was filled with bowels of pity to their Souls and Bodies, and would
have gathered them under the Wings of his Grace, and would have blessed them,
by turning them every one from their Iniquities, Acts 3. ult. but as he was
God, he had no more love for them than for Wolves and Tigers: Christ, as he was
Man, wept for the Bodies of those that should be destroyed by the Romans; but as
he was God, he had decreed the Romans should destroy their Bodies, and the Devil
should have their Souls to Hell: Christ in the Flesh is good and gracious,
seeking the Salvation of all; but as God he has consigned millions of Men,
Women, and Children, to perpetual Torments for Adam's single transgression.

What, is Christ divided? is not Christ in the Flesh and in the Spirit, the
same yesterday, to day, and for ever? Was not the Word made Flesh, and was it
not united to the Divine Nature, and anointed with the Holy Spirit above
measure; and did not he satisfy and bear our Sins, as he was Man, in our
Nature? did not he die as Man, and rise in our Nature; and has he not carried
our Nature into Heaven? And from this full Christ, in Flesh and Spirit, Godman,
we receive Grace for Grace. Leave off such things, and draw not People into a
Labyrinth of Errors by such trifling Distinctions, lest you draw some to
account the Blood of the Covenant, wherewith they are sanctified, an unholy
thing, and make all the Precepts of the Gospel uncertain whether they be the
Will of God or not; or whether Christ when he prayed to his Father for his
People, or for Sinners, prayed as a Mediator, or as Man only; yea, give footing
to that Opinion, which begins to evidence it self too much in many, even
denying the personal Union of God and Man in Jesus Christ, in whom the fullness
of the Godhead dwells bodily, Col. 2. 9. which did influence and give a value
and worth to all things done for us by the Manhood; and therefore his
Righteousness and his Blood was called, the Righteousness and Blood of God,
Acts 20. 28. 1 John 3. 16. Romans 10. 3. Christ as he was God-Man, and our
Mediator, what he did upon this account, in the Flesh, he did in the Spirit
also. Now in this place where Christ bewailed Jerusalem's state with tears,
either they flowed from true inward compassion, or they did not; if the first,
then Christ in the Flesh and in the Spirit, willed one and the same thing, and
had no distinct Will for Jerusalem's Salvation as Man, different from his Will
as God; but if the second, then his tears were only feigned, and his bewailing
nothing but dissimulation, which is a capital Sin to affirm. And tho the Lord
was resolved to bring Jerusalem to desolation, by delivering them into the
hands of their Enemies; yet as you say, and say truly, it was an effect of
their Sins, the neglect of the Day of their Visitation, mocking his Messengers,
and stoning them that were sent to her to have drawn her from the evil of her
ways, and for crucifying the Lord of Life, thereby filling up the measure of
her Iniquity. So tho the Lord brought her to desolation, yet Punishment is
rather his refuge than his choice; and his defense against Sin, than the hurt
of his Creatures; and the Sinner with his own hands most cruelly pulls down
punishment upon his own head: for the evil of Sin, and the evil of Suffering
are Twins; or rather Sin gives birth and being to the other: God never
inflicted the least punishment on any merely as Men, but as workers of Evil, as
continuing sinful and disobedient. So that it was Jerusalem's actual Sins, and
her refusing to be healed that brought her to ruin, and not any irresistible
Decree of the Almighty; for you may as well deny the Being of a God, as
entertain a belief, that he takes pleasure in the death and destruction of his
Creatures. His Nature is perfect Goodness, and he is a stranger to Cruelty; and
all the expressions of Love and Good Will in Christ to poor Sinners are such,
that they neither admit nor are consistent with fraud or falsehood: so that yet
you have not told me where the Attribute of God merely takes place upon those
that God is resolved, against all means possible to be used, to punish by his
Decree, as you use to say.

But before I leave this, let me ask you one Question more, which is this,
Ought not, or do not all Men stand engaged to love God?


Philet. To love God? yea, who should they love if they do not love God?


Philad. Ay, but I ask you for what Reason?


Mar. There may be many Reasons given; the receiving the good things of this
Life may engage all Men to love God.


Philad. Yea; but you will not own that God gives the good things of this Life,
with any good intention to the greatest number, but rather gives them to them
to heighten their misery; does God intend any good to the Souls of such by what
he gives?


Mar. No; yet are they to be accountable for the abuse of them.


Philad. But you hold, that God did decree they should abuse them accordingly;
and for that end were they given to them, that so the abuse of them might
heighten their misery; this is but like the Proverb, Give a Man Roastmeat, and
beat him with the Spit: Can any Man become grateful, or be tied in the Bonds of
Love and Gratitude to such a Man, that should feast him for a while, yet after
condemn him to Death and Destruction?


Philet. The Apostle says, 1 John 4. 19. We love him, because he first loved
us; but this is meant of the Elect only.


Philad. Why should you go about to confine the Lor'd Mercy, which is
altogether Infinite, and as incomprehensible as his Divine Essence? why should
you thus contract the Divine Goodness, whose Mercies are not only exalted above
our Conceptions, but also above and over all his Works? Therefore do not
presume to measure the Lord's Mercys by your narrow conceit, nor labor to make
it run into a lesser Channel than the Lord intended.

But God's great Love to all Men, in giving his Son to die for them, is the
ground and cause of their Love to God again: True love must first spring from
the knowledge of God's Love to them; neither can I think that any Men in the
World will ever heartily and cordially love God, unless they believe that God
Almighty had designs of Love to them; yea, so far loved them, as to send his
Son to die for them: otherwise instead of loving and living to God, it would
tend to a most horrid and desperate alienation of the Hearts of poor Creatures
from their dear and ever-blessed Creator. For how is it possible that the poor
Creature should divest himself of those Delights and Pleasures of this Life,
and entirely love and delight himself in God and his blessed Will, if he knew,
or had strong grounds of fear, that before he made him, or without respect to
his Sins, or unworthy carriage in the least, he so far hated him, as to
resolve, against all Mediation whatsoever, to cast him out of his sight, and to
doom him to suffer the Vengeance of Eternal Fire?

You may preach up God's Sovereignty, pronounce Justice and Judgment (as some
have done) till they have brought Despair and Hell into the Souls of many, and
beget more Fear than Love, make God feared as a Tyrant; but it is the making
known Christ's meek Condescension, Long-suffering, and the superexcellent
Amiableness of free Love and tender Mercy, that soonest and most effectually
works in us Repentance of our Sins, and inclines us to love him that first
loved us. Wither's Paraphrase upon the Lord's Prayer.

Who is able to persuade Men by Arguments, or move them by Threatenings, to love
God, whose love to them in particular is doubtful? Do you think it can, or ever
will be a motive for Persons to love God, to tell them, That before all Worlds,
or before they were born, or there were any possibility of offending him in any
manner, it was decreed, that the greatest number of Adam's Offspring should be
eternally reprobated and damned? And tho he had provided means whereby Man
might have been saved; and that the worth and value was so great, that it was
sufficient for the Redemption of thousands of Worlds; yet then it was decreed,
that very few should have any benefit thereby, when they had done their utmost
they could do to obtain it? Is it possible that Men should truly love God,
while they apprehend him as an Enemy bent in an unappeasable manner to destroy
them, and that to Eternity? can any thus be induced to love him, or live to
him? Thus your Doctrine cuts asunder the very Sinews of Religion, discourageth
Holiness, and encourages Profaneness; for by your Opinion Heaven shall
unavoidably be obtained by those that are elected, and Hell must be as
certainly endured by those that are reprobated; and a Man may as well stop the
Sun in its course, and mete out the Heaven with a Span, as force the Lord to
revoke his Decree. Truly if poor Man lies under such a rigid Fate, all that he
can do for the obtaining Heaven, or avoiding Hell, is but a piece of
industrious Folly. Why should we take upon us a strict course of Life? why
should we submit to Divine Precepts, or address our selves to God by Prayer;
and like good Jacob wrestle with him for a Blessing? to what purpose should we
maintain a warfare against Satan, Sin, and all Vice, when the greatest
industry, in the use of means to obtain them, signifies nothing, if not decreed
to it? May not this cause Persons to be swelled up with sorrow, and destroy the
chiefest inducements to Holiness, when they shall seriously reflect upon all
they had done to be purely in vain? And again, if Persons be absolutely
appointed (by the immutable and irreversible Decree of the Almighty) to
destruction, it is not all their hearing, reading, praying, Works of Charity,
nor all mourning for Sin, nor believing neither, that can possibly procure
their Salvation, damned they must be: And on the other side, if Persons be
absolutely ordained to Salvation, their open contempt and neglect of all Holy
Duties, their living in pleasure, and walking in ungodly courses, cannot bring
Damnation upon them, they must be saved. See God's Love to Mankind.

What Man, rightly master of his own Reason, will ever trouble himself about
such impossible or unavoidable things? it is in vain to repent, fruitless to
weep, yea, madness to add to my own Infelicities, by denying my self of any
Pleasure or Profit which I might enjoy by closing with the World, and in
gratifying the sensitive Part: Or why should we take upon us a strict course of
Life, endeavoring to keep God's Commandments, and fighting with the
Temptations of the Devil, and keep them under our Bodies, and bring under
subjection, when all we effect by it is an honorable Nothing?

What compass we by striving therewithal?
Why spend we time in rising up to fall?
Why linger we to act so many Crimes,
To suffer over Grief so many times?
And live so many several Deaths to taste,
To be no worse, nor better at the last?
Or wherefore have we prayed, since we know
What must be, must be, tho we pray not so?
Wither's Britain's Rememb. p. 54. So that your Doctrine makes all Endeavors
and Undertakings of Persons, in order to the attaining Heaven and Eternal
Felicities, fruitless, and highly gratifies the Devil's Interest; such an
Opinion frames and fits a Soul for the Suggestions of Satan, by which he draws
Souls with more ease into Eternal Misery: for will not Persons be ready to say,
I am one of those that are absolutely elected to Grace and Glory, one of those
that Christ died for; or I am ablolutely cast away and left in the Fall, to die
and perish, without a power to believe, or a Christ to believe in? If I lie
under a necessity of either, why should I trouble my self about Means or Ends,
since if I perish by my Sins, I did but what was natural for me to do, and
which I was compelled to by an overpowring necessity, and therefore I Will take
my ease, and swim down the Stream of all Delights: so that your Opinion
overthrows the very Foundation of all true Piety, and gives Persons the
greatest discouragement to Duties, and quite breaks the Anchor of the Soul that
it cannot fix it self upon any Offers of Grace and Invitation, nor stay it self
upon any Promise of Heaven upon their repenting, believing or obeying the Lord.
Hope stirs up Men to begin, and to continue in well-doing. Hope is a patient
and well-grounded Expectation of the fulfilling of whatsoever God has
promised: But how is the Anchor well-grounded, when notwithstanding the
Promises of Heaven to all those that by patient continuance in well-doing seek
for it, Men by the most vigorous undertaking for Heaven, shall be rewarded with
the Wages of Death, and crowned with eternal Shame for all they have done in
their Christian Progress; Is not this enough to shipwreck the Soul upon despair?

Yea, I dare say,
This is the nearest, and the straitest way
To all Profaneness; if the Bridle gives
To Carnal Liberties, and makes the Lives
And Hearts of many Men so void of care;
From hence Distractions, hence Despairings are;
Hence Mischiefs, hence Self-murders do arise;
Hence is it that such multitudes despise
Good Discipline; yea, this contemned makes
The Life of Faith, if once it rooting takes,
Disableth pious Practices outright,
And where it roots, destroys Religion quite.
Britain's Remembrancer, p. 56. Which I could prove by many Instances from the
Writings of others, and the known Experiences of our Age; one in my knowledge,
when reproved for his wicked loose Life, would answer, God might have made him
better. And in God's Love to Mankind, page 204. we have it recorded, concerning
the Landgrave of Thuring, who being reproved for his debauched Life, and warned
of the dangerous consequence thereof, that so it might move upon him to
consider his miserable condition, and return, gave this Answer, If I am
absolutely predestined to Heaven, the committing of the vilest Crimes will
never exclude me: And if I be reprobated, let me manage my Life never so
carefully, let me steer my course never so prudently and piously, I shall never
arrive at Heaven and Happiness.


Philet. But our Doctrine is not, as you say, a hinderance to Piety and a godly
Life, for those that hold it are Men of singular Piety, endued with a Spirit of
Prayer, and live according to the strictest Rules of Holiness, far beyond any
that hold the contrary, who are a company of loose livers.


Philad. I know there are many of your opinion of late flown very high in their
own conceit, and condemn others; we are apt on all hands, according to the old
Proverb, to count our own Geese for Swans; and every Fowl thinks its own Bird
the fairest: yet I doubt not, if Persons of the one Judgment and the other were
but truly compared together, and an estimation made of the religious worth and
holiness of each; those that own General Redemption, need not count it robbery
to make themselves every way equal with their Opposers, General Redemption
having been not only avouched by our Blessed Savior and his Apostles, but also
owned and asserted for a Truth by Men of singular Learning, piercing Judgments,
Gifts, Piety, Zeal for the Truth, and greatest Pillars and Lights of the
Christian Church next after the Apostles; it being never scarce brought into
question till near St. Austin's time, which was about 400 years after Christ.
If you look into Mr. Goodwin, he shows at large the Testimony of those called
Fathers, for General Redemption. Those Fathers before St. Austin's time are
Ireneus, Justin Martyr, Clemens of Alexandria, Cyprian, Tertullian, Epiphanius,
Gregory Nazianzen, Gregory Nyssen, Basil the Great, Arnobius, Eusebius, Cyril
of Jerusalem, Hilary, Athanasius, Jerome, Ambrose, Chrysostom; these he cites,
and proves by words at length out of their Works, that they held General
Redemption. Surely the Primitive Christians for between three and four hundred
Years after the Apostles, may fully balance, both for Number and Holiness, all
those in the Reformed Churches since Calvin's Days.


Philet. I spoke of our Days and Time which we live in.


Philad. Well, compare those Lands and Provinces where some hold to the one and
the other, and what are those Lands that own the Genevah Principles, or the
Doctrine taught by Mr. Calvin; then those called Lutherans: nay, compare the
People in the United Provinces, those that stuck to the Synod of Dort, with
those called Remonstrants, or Arminians, and how will you make it out that
those Predestinarians that maintain unconditional Election and Reprobation, are
men of a more pious heavenly frame of Spirit, making it more truly visible in
the integrity of their Lives and Actions, than the other called Arminians? what
Spirit the Calvinists are of, has been seen these forty Years past, not only in
other places, but in England also.


Philet. I meddled not with any Foreign Lands.


Philad. Well, if you look home upon England, I challenge you to show me any
particular Church or Person this day of your Opinion that is a Phoenix, whom
none of the Universalists may compare with in Grace and Divine Life; as far as
the Eyes of Man are able to pierce, the latter live as godly, religiously, and
soberly in this present World, and act as zealously for God, and are as
fruitful in good Works, as any you can produce of your Judgment: but I find
it is easy for any that fancy themselves the only Saints upon Earth, to despise
others. In Genesis 38. 24. Judah when he heard that Thamar was brought in for an
Adulteress, presently sentenced her to the fire; but when the Pledges of his
own Folly were brought forth, then he cried out, she is more righteous than I.
Consider the proud Pharisee, tho he was ready to cry to the Publican, Stand
off, I am more holy than thou; yet the other was more justified. You only bring
Accusation without Proof: I shall only say in the words of Seneca, If it be
sufficient to be accused, who can be innocent? for our Lord Jesus, even
Innocence it self, was accused.

Remember, he that is wise in his own conceit, is but a fool; and till you show
me in some Particular wherein you exceed all others in Divine Virtue, I shall
look upon your Speech to be nothing but the impulse of a giddy Zeal, and desire
you to be more considerate, lest you thereby come to condemn the Innocent, and
justify the Wicked, which are both abominable to the Lord, Pro. 17. 15. so that
neither the good nor the bad, the godly nor the ungodly deportment of Persons
professing such or such particular Principles, is any proof of the goodness or
badness of the Principles, unless their Principle does naturally tend to
either; nay, should the foundness or rottenness of Opinions be esteemed by the
goodness or badness of the Lives of many professing them, the Opinion then of
Atheism may be as sound as any other Christians, seeing that many Heathens have
acquitted themselves upon far better terms of honor and approbation in their
Lives, than many Christians.

But come, what if I should yield to what you say, that many that hold this
Opinion of yours, are godly Men, and walk in a pious and religious course of
Life beyond all others; yet we may say it is no thanks to their Opinion that
they are so: your Opinion naturally tends to beget sloth, disengageth from the
strictest Rules of Piety, Uprightness, and Integrity of Life, and countenances
Men in carnal liberty, seeing those that are elected can never fall out of his
Love and Favor, but he loves them as well while great Sinners, as the most
faithful, humble, mortified Christians. May not this encourage any Man to take
liberty to commit the most enormous crimes, go on in sin, and cry peace and
safety? and seeing the greatest part of Mankind are shut up in a state of
unbelief, without a Christ to believe in, or power to believe, but are left to
die and perish, may not such conclude their labor in Religion will be
unprofitable, and so will rather sit still than labor at all?


Moderat. Come neighbor Martha, and Philetus, I would have you yield to this,
that Christ died for all, for the Scripture fully testifies that he died for
all, and every Man; and we may safely conclude, that the Lamb of God offered up
himself a Sacrifice for the Sins of the whole World: for tho Man by his
Apostasy fell from God, and by reason of Sin our whole Nature came to be at the
utmost moral distance from the Lord, which was, and is, the depth of all
Misery, yet did not God wholly leave Man in this state, tho fallen into Misery,
but was he capable of recovery; which was done by Christ's taking our Nature
upon him, and laying down his Life for all; for he took upon him the Nature of
Man, not of Angels; he pitied not the Angels that fell, because their Nature
was not to be received by Christ, but he taking upon him the common Nature of
Mankind, made it saveable, brought it nearer to Salvation than the lapsed
Angels: and what Christ has done in the Flesh, he must needs have done for
all, and the direct and immediate Fruit thereof belongs to all, for he took
upon him our Flesh, not the Flesh of the Elect, but of Mankind, etc. so that
the Work of Redemption being by his Blood wrought for us through his Flesh (in
which all Mankind have union) it must needs be therefore universal.


Philet. Surely Christ took upon him the Nature of Men, because the Elect Seed
was found in that Nature, not in the Nature of Angels: the Apostle says, Heb.
2. 14, 15. that because the Children were partakers of Flesh and Blood,
therefore he took part of the same, and herein there is a Union; the Children
have a Union with the Flesh of Christ above all others in the World, Ephesians. 5.
30, 31. And the reason Christ took part of Flesh and Blood, was for the Elect;
and none shall, nor can have any saving benefit by it but only such: for to
what purpose was it for Christ to be at the expense of his Blood for those,
which when he had done all, should have no benefit by it, because not elected?
For the benefit provided in Redemption, extends to none (with respect to
Eternal Life) but such as are elected, otherwise these things would follow;

1. That he must love those in Redemption, that he never loved in Election.

2. That Christ died for all alike, which contradicts these Scriptures, Romans 8.
33. John 11. 52. Ephesians. 5. 23, 25. Tit. 2. 14. John 10. 15. Rev. 14. 14. in
which Scriptures who can deny but there are expressions of singular respect and
love, for all are not Christ's Elect Children, peculiar People, given Ones,
redeemed from amongst Men.


Moderatus. I believe Election is absolute of particular Persons, not the
choosing of Believers only to be saved (as Philadelphus speaks) but the choosing
Persons to believe; and for those that are these peculiar Ones, Christ died for
them in a more peculiar manner, and to such he will give Faith and Repentance
to carry them safe through all, that so they shall never perish: yet Christ
died for all, and loved all Men in a sense, being the Savior of all Men, 1 Timothy 4. 10. Yet did not Christ die for all alike; some he died for with an
intent to adopt for Sons, others he died for to purchase Pardon and Salvation,
upon condition of their Repentance, believing and obeying the Lord.


Philet. But have all Men a power to perform these Conditions?


Moderat. No; it is not from the power of our own Free Will.


Philet. It seems then Christ dying, as well for those that shall perish, as
for those that shall be saved; I see you are for the middle way, you hold
absolute Election of some, with universal Redemption of all; likewise the
purchasing a power to believe only for some, and the tenders of Salvation to
all, upon condition they believe, repent, and obey the Lord, without a power to
believe; so that many thousands shall, nay must perish, notwithstanding Christ
died for them: Will you say that Christ died with an intent to save all?


Moderat. Tho he died for all, yet not with an intent to save all.


Philad. Pray let me interpose, I perceive there is no great difference between
you.


Philet. I must confess I was for the middle way my self, till I found that
Universal Redemption would not comport with Particular Election.


Philad. Moderatus, I perceive, can play fast and loose, and deceive us both,
being true to neither; sometime we think we have him fast on our side, and you
think him as fast for you, and yet he is as slippery as an Eel to us both, as I
could show, but time will not give me leave to day: But, pray tell me, how you
hold Christ died for all, and yet did not intend their Salvation thereby.


Moderat. Then I Will tell you how I hold it.

1. Christ died so far for all, as to purchase for them the Blessings and
Benefits of this World.

2. He died so far for all, that there is a potent Argument from thence to
persuade all Men to live to him, 2 Cor. 8. 15.

3. He died so far for all, that the Gospel should be preached to all.

4. He died so far for all, that all should be raised from the Grave, Romans 14.
9.


Philet. I hold the same.


Philad. So do I: but did Christ die for all in such a manner, and yet never
intend their Salvation thereby? this justly seems strange.


Philet. Why, it is one thing to die for the Reprobate in some sense, and to die
for them with an intention to save them.


Philad. As to the first I suppose you mean, that God is so bountiful a God,
that he will not let the least act of Charity, or the least appearance of Good
in any go unrewarded in this Life: And that Christ died for the obtaining of
these lesser Mercies, but yet had no love for them in order to their Salvation,
I have already disproved.

But as to your second, you say that Christ died so far for all, that there is
a potent Argument from thence to persuade all Men to live to him; but then I
must prove, beyond all Exceptions, that God Almighty has designs of Love to
all Men, and a desire after their Eternal Well-being, seeing that true Love to
God must first spring from the certain knowledge of God's Love to us: And the
Holy Ghost teaches us, 1 John 4. 19. that love to God must or ought to be
kindled in the Hearts of Men, by the sense of this Affection in God to Man:
neither (as I said before) can I think that any Man can heartily and cordially
love God, unless he believes God had a love for him: And how can any use
Arguments to persuade all, or any Man, to love and live to God, whose love to
them is doubtful? Neither does any Man stand bound, either to use Arguments, or
believe them when used, unless he has a sufficient reason to do so, seeing the
Apostle says, Romans 14. 23. Whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin; whatsoever a
Man does, not having sufficient reason on which to ground his belief of the
lawfulness thereof, is sinful, and an irregular Act, and displeasing to God,
Prove. 19. 2. and 14. 15. All Arguments are out of doors, neither will wise Men
use them to Persons who are necessitated, by an overruling Power, to be what
they are, seeing you will not say that Christ died with an intent they might be
saved.


Philet. I believe Christ's Death was sufficient for all: that is to say, the
Death of Christ, simply and in it self considered, was sufficient to redeem and
save all Men, yea many Worlds, as well as those who are redeemed and saved by
it; and so there is sufficient ground to persuade all Men to love and live to
him.


Philad. It Is true, the Satisfaction that Christ gave to Divine Justice, was
infinite, his Righteousness infinite, and therefore sufficient for the
Redemption of this and many Worlds had they been made. In this sense it is
sufficient to save the Apostate Angels that fell; but have the fallen Angels
any sufficient ground or reason to hope for Salvation, upon the absolute worth
and merit of Christ's Satisfaction?


Philet. No; Christ never died to free them from their Chains of Darkness, and
to readmit them into the Love and Favor of God; and as Moderatus told us, he
took not upon him the Nature of Angels, therefore there is no ground of hopes
for them, God never by Christ provided for the Salvation of the fallen Angels,
this was besides the Lord's Intention.


Philad. Well, you grant that Christ died sufficiently for all, yet unless you
grant that he died intentionally for all (that is, Christ by his Death has
purchased such Grace and Favor in the sight of God for all Men, that upon
their repentance and believing in him, they should be justified, and receive
forgiveness of their Sins, and persevering therein, shall be eternally saved)
the sufficiency of his Death is no sufficient ground for any Man to believe in
him, or to cast himself upon him for Salvation, no more than the fallen Angels.

Now either Christ shed his Blood for all, with an intent to save them (unless
they be their own destroyers) or to damn them, or for nothing; pray tell me
which of these three things Christ intended in dying for all?


Philet. I cannot say to save all.


Philad. For what then?


Philet. Why truly, I believe, all that Christ did for the Reprobate, was to
effect for them the good things of this Life.


Philad. But does he not give his Grace to all?


Philet. Yea, common Grace.


Philad. For what use is it given?


Philet. For no use in respect of Eternal Life; all that it effects for them,
is to make their Condemnation in Hell the greater; or, as some say, if they use
it well, the lighter.


Mar. Others beside the Elect may have the inlightning and conviction of the
Spirit, and God has wise and holy Ends in it, to restrain some of them from
being Persecutors of his Church, and to restrain them from gross Idolatry, and
suchlike Sins, whereby they are less punished in Hell; but if they abuse these
common Graces, it will make their condemnation in Hell the greater.


Philad. Then was Christ's Death rather grievous than gracious; and Christ came
not that they might have life more abundantly, but that they might have Hell
and Damnation more abundantly. Blush, O ye Heavens, at this! How cruel do you
represent the God of Love? For if Christ shed his Blood for all, and yet did
not intend Salvation to all, then he must needs shed his Blood not for them,
but against them; and so God gave his Son to die for the condemnation of the
World, contrary to our Savior's Expressions, John 3. 17. and 12. 47. and 1.
29. So that here can be no potent Argument used to persuade all Men to love and
live to him; for he that shall pay for the ease and benefit of another, what
was sufficient to have eased me as well as him, and yet shall neglect me in
such a Payment, and leave me in misery, when he might, without the least
trouble or charge to himself above what he voluntarily put himself upon for the
sake of others, have relieved me, and of miserable made me happy; what reason
is there that I should wholly live to him, who wholly neglected me in my
greatest need, or that he should expect service or thanks for doing nothing?
It Is a senseless conceit to think Men are engaged in any Bond of thankfulness or
service unto Christ, for dying sufficiently for them, unless he died
intentionally also.


Philet. What, do you believe Christ shed his Blood intentionally to save all?
then if all be not saved, Christ must miss of his Intention, God shall be
frustrated of his Design, and Jesus Christ be defeated of that excellent Honor
provided by his Father for him: Now if one of those that Christ died with an
intent to save should miscarry, why not another, and consequently all, and so
by this God's Counsel and Christ's Honor must be laid in the Dust?


Mar. For all you make such a noise about Christ's dying for all Adam's
Posterity, yet do you really deny that Christ died for any Man or Woman in the
World in a true Scripture-sense: for unless Christ died so for Persons, as to
make satisfaction for all their Sins, and to purchase saving Grace here, and
Glory hereafter, to be infallibly bestowed upon them, all you talk of universal
Redemption by Christ, is a universal Nothing.


Philad. It may very well be conceived, that God may intend the Salvation of
all Men by Jesus Christ, and yet not all Men saved; nay, should all Men prove
so neglective of themselves, as voluntarily to deprive themselves of that great
Salvation which Christ out of his great Love has provided for them, yet it
does not follow from hence, that the Counsel or Design of God should thereby
miscarry, nor Christ's Honor be laid in the dust, because of the wilful folly
of Men to forsake their own Mercy, and destroy themselves; see Isa. 49. 5. And
now, says the Lord that formed me from the Womb, etc. Tho Christ was sent to
save, and make Israel blessed; and as the Apostle says, Acts 3. ult. Has
raised up Jesus, and has sent him to bless you, and to turn every one of you
from your evil ways (here you see it was God's Mind to gather Israel, and to
turn them from their Sins) yet all Israel was not gathered, nor turned from
their Sins; yet no disparagement to Christ, nor a defeating the Counsel of God.

Indeed if it had been the Design and Intent of God, that the saving Benefits
intended to Sinners by the Obedience and Sufferings of Christ, should
immediately become theirs upon the bare shedding of his Blood, and that
therefore God must needs pardon the Sinner, and bring him in by head and
shoulders, that is, by a strong and irresistible hand, save him whether he will
or no, or whether they repent of their Sins, believe in him, or continue in
impenitency; then indeed if any should miscarry, here would be a defeating of
the Counsel and Intention of God: but seeing that as the Grace and Mercy of God
in Christ to Sinners is absolutely free; so is the Lord free to apply the
Merits of his Son's Blood to whom, and in what way, and upon what terms he in
his Wisdom thinks fit: for we must not conceive that God intended to save Man
upon any terms, or without any provision or exception at all, but to put the
World into a capacity of Salvation, by removing those grand Obstacles which
stood in the way of Mercy, and obstructed its communication to the Offender,
and to afford unto the Sons and Daughters of Men means and opportunities to
repent and believe, and consequently to be saved: so that whenever Christ is
faithfully and effectually preached to Men, and the Holy Spirit convinces Men
of Sin in order to their Salvation, God obtains his end and intent concerning
their Salvation, whether they come to be saved or no; so Christ is said, 1 John
2. 2. to be the Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World; it does not
therefore follow, that the Sins of the whole World are so actually and
completely atoned by him, that they shall never be charged against them; but
that which Christ offered in order to atoning the Sins of the whole World, is
so full of Virtue, and withal is so propounded and held forth by the Lord unto
the whole World, that if any Man's Sins remain actually unpardoned, it is
through their voluntary neglect of this Sacrifice, not from any intention on
God's part, that their Sins should not be atoned as well as others. -- Many
more such Testimonies I might add.

Dr. Holmes upon John 6. 37. page 13. says, That all the Sins of Mankind are
become venial in respect of the Price paid by Christ unto the Father, etc. But
all do not obtain actual remission of Sins, because most Offenders do not take
out nor plead their Pardon as they ought to do. And, page 15. That the Lamb of
God offering up himself (clothed with humane Nature) a Sacrifice for the Sins
of the whole World, intended by giving satisfaction sufficiently to God's
Justice, etc. to prepare a Sovereign Medicine for the Sins of the whole World,
which should be denied to none that were minded to take the Benefit thereof;
howsoever he intended not, by applying this Alsufficient Sacrifice to every one
in particular, to make it effectual unto the Salvation of all, or to procure
thereby at the hands of his Father actual Pardon for the Sins of the whole
World: he applys this only effectually to them, who make claim to the
Satisfaction by promise, suing for the Spirit, and Faith, upon other Promises,
in Prayer waiting for a gracious answer till they have it, etc. So in respect
of his Merit he may be accounted a kind of universal Cause of restoring our
Nature, as Adam was of the depraving of it. Much of the same nature, and almost
word for word, is that of Bishop Usher, quoted by Mr. Grantham in his Dialogue,
page 22. And says Hockin, on God's Decree, page 45, 46. We need not refer the
deplorable misery of the Sons of Adam to the Divine Will, as Mr. Calvin is
pleased to do, Instit. lib. 18. cap. 1. but the horrid perverseness of our own
Wills: for the highest Act of Divine Intention is to save Men, if they do not
by the wickedness of their own perverse Will frustrate the same, by refusing
the gracious Offers of Salvation by Christ, and not observing the real
Conditions upon which the Proposals of Mercy are made; for the Lord does
solemnly prove that he is not willing that any should perish, 2 Pet. 3. 9.
Therefore we cannot lay the blame upon God in any thing, but wholly upon Man,
who does voluntarily bring Death and Misery upon himself. Nay, Calvin himself
upon John 3. 16. says, That Faith in Christ is of a saving Nature to all, and
that Christ brought Life, because his Heavenly Father would not have Mankind to
perish which he loved, etc. For tho there will be nothing in the World found
worthy of the Favor of God, yet he shows himself favorable unto the whole
World, in that he calls all Men without exception to believe in Christ. Here
you may see that in the Eyes of these God may intend the Salvation of all Men
by Jesus Christ, and yet all Men may not be saved, without any prejudice in the
least, either to the Grace and Goodness of God, or to his power of working in
this behalf.


Mar. But, Philadelphus, pray consider (with respect to Christ's dying for all)
that when our Savior died as a Mediator, it was near 2000 Years from the
Creation, and there were multitudes then in the Prison of Hell, from whence
there is no redemption; and do you think that Christ died upon the Cross, and
bore such unutterable Dolours for them, to redeem them that were there? There
was need indeed that Christ should die for those Saints that were in Heaven
before he died, because they were saved upon the account of his having
undertaken as a Surety for them to make Satisfaction to the Justice of God for
their Sins; but surely it will sound very harshly in the Ears of all
Christians, that Christ should sweat drops of Blood, and bear the Curse of the
Law for them who were then in Hell when he died, 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19, 20.


Philad. The 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19, 20. is of doubtful interpretation; and by your
own grant, the doubtful ought to be expounded and tried by the Light and
Testimony of such as are more clear and evident. Now in this Text the Apostle
shows the great patience of God toward that wicked Generation; and that he
strove with them by his Spirit, and gave unto them a Preacher of Righteousness,
and a hundred years space to repent in; and doubtless the patience of God
toward them was for this end, to allure and draw them to Repentance.

But it seems you would not have any believe that Christ died for any of those
that before his coming in the Flesh had withstood the Day of Grace, and sinned
beyond the reach of Mercy: But there was need for him to die for those that
were in Heaven before he died, because they were saved upon the account of his
dying for them. Now I might show you from your own sense of Election being from
Eternity, without any consideration of Faith in Christ, how you abrogate the
Grace of God in Christ, and make his Death to be in vain, seeing that God loved
them every whit as well, and intended to do as much for them before Christ died
for them, or before their ingrafting into Christ by Faith, yea, before the
Blood of the Covenant was sprinkled upon them, as after; and therefore there
was no reason that Christ should shed his Blood to procure those things for the
Elect, which were truly and properly theirs before, in and by God's purpose in
electing of them, yea, and that without any consideration of Christ's dying for
them, or their believing in him.


Philet. Nay hold, we do not say that God intends actually to confer Remission
of Sins or Eternal Life upon the Elect, otherwise than through the Satisfaction
made by Christ for them in his Death; and tho God might intend and purpose
Salvation to the Elect, without the consideration of the Death of Christ, yet
in the execution of this his purpose, the Death of Christ is all in all; and
you ought to distinguish between God's Decrees and the execution of them.


Philad. If it was consistent with the Wisdom and Justice of God to decree
forgiveness of Sins and Salvation unto Men, without consideration of the Death
of Christ, or their believing in him, he may as well confer these things upon
them without any such consideration; and then to what purpose should Christ die?

But, Philetus, were those that were in Heaven before Christ's coming saved,
without Faith in him that was to come?


Philet. No; all that were saved before Christ's coming, were saved by
believing and embracing him that was to come, and to be a Sacrifice for their
Sins; in the belief of which they offered Sacrifices, and through which they
looked at Jesus who was to come.


Philad. Then it is sufficient to tell you that the want of that Faith in the
Christ to come, and obedience to his Will, was the cause of their destruction.

Besides, consider, Christ was the Lamb slain (virtually in the Decree or
Purpose of God) from the Foundation of the World; and it was on the account of
Christ's taking humane Nature upon him, that Man was preserved in the World
from returning to the Dust from whence he was taken: for all Men live, and
move, and have a being here, by virtue of the Lord Jesus, the Seed of the
Woman; and Believers did before Christ's coming in the Flesh, partake of the
real Virtue of his Death as if he had been already slain. So also Christ came
into the World, not to condemn the World, but that the World through him might
be saved, John 3. 17. and came to seek and to save that which was lost, to shed
his Blood, to bear unutterable dolours, not only for them that were saved, but
for those also who through their unbelief and impenitency were not saved; their
unbelieving and rejecting of Gospel Grace rendered them obnoxious to just
punishment: for says the same Apostle, the Gospel was preached to them that
were dead, 1 Pet. 4. 6. tho they had not the Letter of the Gospel preached to
them (as with us at this day) yet they had the spiritual Substance and Effect
of the Gospel preached to them; and therefore it is said, that Christ went by
his Spirit and preached to them, and their unbelief and rejection was a Sin
against the Covenant of Grace: for those before Christ, and those since Christ
came, are for the main under one and the same Covenant, yea essentially and for
substance the same, the same Christ exhibited through Types and Shadows, which we
have revealed in the Gospel with open face; and the same substantial Duties, as
Repentance, Faith and Obedience, with the same spiritual Blessings, as pardon
of Sin, Justification and Eternal Life. So that all Persons being under one
Covenant of Grace made with all Mankind in the Promised Seed; and this Covenant
the same for Substance both before and since Christ's coming; and all Persons
that were saved before Christ, being saved by a Covenant of Grace, and through
believing on him that was to come, it necessarily follows that the want of
Faith and Obedience to the Lord Jesus, according to their measure of knowing
him, and believing on him, was the cause of their condemnation; see Heb. 4. 2.
compared with Chap. 3. 18, 19. So that I cannot see how it should sound more
harshly in the Ears of all Christians, that Christ should sweat drops of Blood,
and bear the Curse of the Law for those that were in Hell (if you will have it
so) when he died, than that he should sweat drops of Blood, etc. for those that
after his coming in the Flesh shall go to Hell, notwithstanding all that Christ
has done for them: so that Christ did really intend the Good and Benefit of
those that perished through unbelief, before his coming in the Flesh, as well
as after; if not so, I know not how any could use potent Arguments to persuade
them to love and live to him.


Moderat. Come Philadelphus, the thing to be proved is this; whether Christ
died equally for all and every Man? this I suppose you will not easily grant,
for if Christ died equally for every Man, they would have equally the means of
Salvation granted to them.


Philad. This is but a lame proof that Christ died not for all Men equally,
etc. as if difference of Means vouchsafed to Men, should argue different
Intentions in God touching their Salvation. You may as well prove by this Rule
that Christ died not equally for the Elect themselves, as the other; they do
not equally alike enjoy the Means of Grace: nay by this a Man, but meanly read
in the Scriptures, may prove, that God bore more good will to many that perish,
than toward many of the Elect; for many perish under more excellent and
greater means of Salvation, than are vouchsafed to many that are saved,
stretching out his hands all the day long to a disobedient People, Isa. 65. 2.
Mat. 15. 28. and 11. 20, 21. and 8. 10. 1 Pet. 3. 20. And in Mat. 22. 3. our
Savior by that Parable holds forth to us these two things.

1. That the Death of Christ signified by the Oxen and Fatlings slain, was
provided by the King for those that never came to partake of the Feast, but
were rejected because they made light of the Invitation, and went away, one to
his Farm, etc. yet Jesus Christ, with the Blessing accruing thereby to Mankind,
was equally intended for those that perish through their unworthiness, as well
as for those that are saved; for they did neglect so great a blessing, and when
there was a prize put in their Hands, they had no heart to use it, Pro. 17. 16.
yet notwithstanding the neglect on their part, God was not wanting one his pa^
to provide good things for them. The

2d Thing observable is this, the King's Servants took more pains with those
that never came to partake of the Supper, than with those that came; for those
that rejected the Invitation, were again and again called, whenas the other
came at the first.


Philet. but if the Feast had been provided for all, and God had called them in
good earnest, they would have come, or been compelled to it, as those were that
tasted of it.


Philad. If the King had intended that those who were invited should never have
tasted of his Supper, questionless he would never have invited them; for it is
but mockage to use Arguments to persuade Persons to accept of a Feast, that was
only and wholly provided for another, with as intent to exclude those that were
invited. Thus do you make the God of Truth a mere Deluder of poor miserable
Mankind, to cause his Ministers to proclaim throughout the World the glad
tidings of Grace and Salvation prepared for all Flesh, and by the Gospel open
the Bosom of his Love to all poor Sinners, and by sweet, loving, and gracious
words, offer to them forgiveness of Sins, Life and Salvation, and yet never
intend to bestow it upon them: what is this but to represent God as
hollow-hearted?

But it is clear that in the ministry of the Word, God does as well persuade
the obstinate, and many of those that never believe, as he does those that do;
as it is said, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16. That the Lord God of their Fathers sent to
them by his Messengers, rising up betimes, and sending, because he had
compassion on his People, etc. But they mocked the Messengers, despised his
Word, and misused his Prophets, till the Wrath of the Lord rose up against
them. And thus does the Lord in this Gospel-day, being every way as serious in
his pressing the Gospel upon those that remain obdurate to the last, as upon
those that in time come to believe; as Paul preached the same Gospel (at
Athens) to those that mocked, as to those that clave to him and believed, Acts
17. 32, 34. so that difference of Means does not argue different Intention in
God touching their Salvation.

Yet it is not denied but that God does in his providential Dispensations, put
a difference between one man's spiritual Opportunities and another's; all do
not enjoy equal Conveniences and Opportunities, nor have Ministers the same
efficacy and power for conversion and edification, etc. Nor are Men equally
free from, or subject to temptations and occasions of Sin, with many such. I do
not say Christ died for all, so that all should enjoy all these equally alike;
but that God did really, truly, and cordially intend the Salvation of one Man
as well as another, considered as Men, in and by Christ's Death. What tho there
be great disparity of Means, and of Grace also (according to the Divine Will)
yet sufficient Grace is afforded to all, both to those that do not actually
believe, nor are really converted, as well as those that are, Ezekiel. 18. Pro. 1.
24. Mat. 23. 37. Luke 8. 12. for whomsoever God calls to Faith and Salvation,
he does it sincerely and with unfeigned Intentions of saving them; John 5. 34.
and 10. 20. Tit. 2. 11, 12. 2 Timothy 1. 9. 2 Cor. 5. 20. and 6. 1. From all I
conclude that Christ in dying for Man intended nothing but that which was real
and saving in the proper nature and tendency of it.

But as to your third, Moderatus, you say Christ died for all Men so far that
the Gospel might be preached unto all: Now if you mean that in the Gospel terms
of Reconciliation are offered to all poor Sinners, and that the Word preached
is by the Lord appointed an instrumental means to make Men new Creatures, and
that the Lord by sending the Gospel, and his Ministers upon the Gospel errand,
does not thereby intend the Obduration and Destruction of any, but the
Conversion and Salvation of all; if this be your meaning, I and you are no more
two but one; and I will say in the words of Abraham to Lot, Let there be no
strife between thee and me, for we are brethren. But if with Calvin in his
Institut. Lib. 3. Chap. 24. you say that God sends his Word to Reprobates
that they may be made more deaf, he sets a Light to some Men that they may
be so much the more blind, and offers them Instruction that they may be the
more ignorant, and he uses a Remedy but to the end they may not be healed. Or
what Maccour in his disputation 14. Page 11, 12. That Christ knocks at the
heart of Reprobates, who he knows neither can nor will open unto him; not
that he may enter in, but that he might upbraid them for their Impotency, and
increase their Damnation, etc. therefore did God speak to them by his Son, that
by the contempt and hatred of his Son they might procure the greater damnation.
If this be your Opinion, produce some word to evince such a Decree, and I Will
cease contending with you.


Philet. Do not the Scriptures say, Mat. 13. 13, 14. and John 12. 39, 40. in
both places you have it expressly said, that they could not believe, because
that Esaias said, he has blinded their Eyes, etc. and Deuteronomy. 29. 4. And does
not Simeon say of Christ, Luke 2. 34. that he was set for the rising and
falling of many in Israel? 2 Cor. 2. 16. Christ is there said to be the savor
of Death to some, as well as of Life to others: And our Savior in John 9. 39.
expressly says, That for Judgment am I come into the World, that they that see
not, might see; and those that see, might be made blind. Do not these
Scriptures show, that tho the Gospel is preached to all, yet for the blinding
the Eyes, and hardening the Hearts of those that believe not?


Philad. Do not we look upon the Gospel the greatest Blessing, next to Christ,
that we can enjoy or receive? But if the choicest Blessings are intended as
Snares to entrap our Souls, we have little cause to be thankful to God for
them. These Scriptures speak not of the primary and direct Intention of God in
sending Christ into the World, but of the Event, and that which many times is
effected by it through Men's voluntary Rebellion: Christ was not sent into the
World with any intent on God's part, nor came with any intention of his own, to
make those that see to become blind, but with an intent to heal the blindness
of all to their Peace and Glory; so that if any be blind, ignorant, and
foolish, it is merely accidental: and tho the glorious Light of the Gospel
should equally shine on all Men, as the natural Sun does diffuse his Beams to
all Places, yet it has not an equal effect on all alike; for the same Beams
that cause the Flowers to smell, make the Dunghils stink; yet this is but
accidentally, as it finds matter to work on, no fault being in the Sun: so in
Mat. 13. we read of several effects the Word has, not from any defect in the
Seed sown, the Seed being one and the same, but from the badness or goodness of
the Soil; it shows that some hearers of the Gospel would hear so, that their
hearing would turn to a blessed account, others would hear without reaping any
Soul benefit thereby.

So that these Scriptures speak not any thing of God's intention of sending
Christ, and so the Gospel into the World, but they show how unworthily some Men
will behave themselves toward Christ, and the tenders of Salvation by the
Gospel, and what will be the end and effects the Gospel will have upon those
that despise and reject it; for it is with the Gospel preached, and the Gifts
of Nature and Grace also, as it is with the good things of this Life, which are
by the Lord given to the Children of Men, that so his bountifulness and
goodness might lead them to repentance: but if their Table be a Snare, and
their Prosperity their Ruin, it is through their own perverseness and horrid
impieties: so if the Gospel hardens or blinds any, it is through the ill temper
of Men's Hearts, and their desperate obstinacy to refuse such means of
Salvation, and the severity of God who gives up obstinate Men to their own
hearts lust, and in his just Judgment permits them to dash against Christ, and
other means of Salvation. What says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. If our Gospel
be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, whom the God of the World has blinded
their Eyes, that are alienated from the Life of God through the ignorance that
is in them; and so give up themselves to lasciviousness, to work all
uncleanness with greediness, and despise the Light of the Gospel, cavil and
quarrel at it: no wonder then that God withdraws his Spirit from striving with
them, and gives them up to their own hearts lust: and if ever the Lord
restrains the heavenly Influences of his Spirit, and withdraws his Blessing
that usually accompanies the faithful and sincere preaching of the Gospel, a
stupid blindness must needs follow; so tho there be Preaching and Prayer and
other Ordinances, yet when the presence of God is not with them, there is no
Milk in the Breast, and to such it is all one as if there was none: nay as some
the Gospel enlightens, these it smites with blindness; as it softens some, so
it hardens these, as Isa. 6. 10. Acts 28. 26. make the Hearts of this People
fat, and make their Ears heavy; as if the Lord should have said, Go and preach
to this People, but preach them into hardness and blindness; because they
refused to hear or see, let therefore the Light make them blind; and the
Gospel, which is the joyful sound of Peace and Joy, make them deaf and stop
their Ears; persuade no longer, but make their Hearts fat, their Ears heavy,
and shut their Eyes, that they may walk in their own counsel, and fill up the
measure of their Iniquity. Woe to those that God answers thus, to leave them to
their own Hearts lust; and say as once to Ephraim, Hosea 4. Let him alone. If
God deal thus with any, they indeed shall never melt at any Sermon, so as to
awaken them out of their Sins; they will prove but deaf Adders that stop their
Ears against all Gospel-Charmers, tho never so wise.

But this God never did, nor never will do, but as the Fruit and Effect of
provoking Sin and Disobedience; for which see Psalm. 81. 11. But my People would
not hearken to my Voice; and Israel would have none of me; so I gave them up,
etc. Acts 7. 42. Romans 1. 24, 26. Hosea 4. 17. So that the ground of God's
shutting their Eyes, and hardening their Hearts, was but the effect of their
first shutting their own Eyes and Ears, Acts 28. 27. Pro. 29. 1. When Men
obstinately reject the Proposals of Mercy in the Gospel of Peace, from such God
may justly withdraw his illuminating Grace, and wholly leave them in the dark
and to themselves, to follow their unbridled natures.

Duveil upon this place, Acts 28. 27. quotes the words of Mollerus and Clemens,
who explaining the words of Christ, that seeing they should not see, and
hearing they should not hear, Mat. 13. tell us That it is not lawful to think
that ignorance was wrought in them by the Lord, but it was a prophetical
Discourse of that which was to be; and signified that they would not heed those
things that were spoken: for neither do the Prophets blind any People, nor does
God, when he causes blindness in them, do this efficaciously; but seeing he
daily shows them his Will, and moreover did many and those stupendous
Miracles, yet they despised and made a mock of them all. God was provoked with
their stubbornness, so that he withdrew himself from them, and so suffered them
to wander and perish blindfolded in their darkness, and that by his just
Judgment.


Philet. Is it not said, Deuteronomy. 29. 4. That the Lord had not given them a Heart
to perceive, and Eyes to see, and Ears to hear, to this day?


Philad. It Is said so, they once had seen the Wonders that the Lord did for
them in the Land of Egypt unto Pharaoh, etc. as verse. 3, 4. yet the Lord has
not given thee a Heart to perceive, and Eyes to see, etc. They once knew, and
did see and understand that it was the Lord that wrought deliverance for them
in Egypt, and at the Red Sea; and they sang his Praise, but soon forgot his
Works, Psalm. 106. 12. yea, rebelled and vexed his Holy Spirit; and so the Lord
took away the Light he once gave, and did not continue it to that day, which
Moses spoke to them: and indeed thus has God dealt with others, and will deal
with us if we neglect to follow the Light he affords to us, even leave us in
the dark: So the Lord has done to many to whom he once gave a Heart to
perceive, and Eyes to see, and yet he has not given them to this day. The Jews
and Jerusalemites had the things belonging to their Peace revealed to them; but
now, says Christ, they are hid from your Eyes: it is just with God many times
to turn the wisdom of the Wise to foolishness.


Philet. But what say you to 1 Pet. 2. 8. They stumbled at the Word, being
disobedient, whereunto they were appointed? And so Isa. 8. 14, 15. which is a
Prophecy of Christ, that he shall be for a Sanctuary to the Elect, but for a
stone of stumbling, and for a Rock of Offense, etc. And so Luke 2. 34. Mat. 13.
10, 11. Luke 8. 10.


Philad. Why what should I say to it? shall I say that God laid Christ in the
way, and sent his Word and Gospel into the World, with an intent that most
Persons should stumble at this Stone and be broken to pieces, or that Christ
died so far for all Men, that the Word might be preached to the whole World,
that so the greatest part might stumble, disobey, and reject Christ and the
Gospel? Should I say so, it would be a great impeachment of God's Justice and
Holiness, and would make him the Author of Sin and Disobedience, so contrary to
his Nature.

And I once again desire you not to think that the bare naming a Text, or Texts
of Scripture, enough to confirm an Opinion, but that you seriously mind the
Context, with the sense and drift of the Holy Ghost in the Text, and explain
Scripture by Scripture; otherwise we may run our selves into a thousand
Misunderstandings, contrary to the Analogy or Rule of Faith. Now if we compare
this Text with what you have in Acts 13. 47. Isa. 49. 6. Tit. 2. 11. with many
other places, you will find that neither Christ, nor the Gospel, is sent into
the World intentionally for any to stumble and disobey it, but Christ is to be
preached and held forth by Gospel Ministers for the Salvation of all in the
whole World that believe in him; as Tit. 2. 11. For the Grace of God that
brings Salvation, has appeared unto all Men, etc. or as our old Translation
renders it, For that Grace of God which brings Salvation unto all Men, has
appeared. Here you may see that this Grace in the offers of it, and in the
Intention of God, is of a saving tendency and importance to all Men, and the
savingness of it, and Salvation by it, is tendered alike to all Men: So that
Christ came not into the World to be a Rock of Offense, at which the greatest
part of Men should stumble and fall, but to shed his Blood for all Men; not
only for those that are saved, but also for those which through unbelief and
impenitency are not saved, John 3. 17.

Besides, your Texts, if read in that Spirit in which they were wrote, show
you, that they were appointed or put to the Word, and they stumbled at that,
and were disobedient to that; they stumbled at Christ and the Word out of
stubbornness and wilfulness, not for want of Light. Mr. Loveday in his
Exposition on Romans 9. page 33. says, That Dr. Hammond reads the words, That
those that are disobedient to the Gospel, and stand obstinately against Christ,
are those who are by God appointed and declared so to stumble, as to be ruined
by their obstinacy. So that disobedience to the Gospel is not to be imputed to
the God of Heaven, but the God of this World, 2 Cor. 4. Neither must we think
that Men stumbling at Christ, and being disobedient to the Word, to which they
were appointed to learn their Duty, is the Result of fatal Necessity. But
prithee, Philetus, tell me whether you be of Moderatus's mind, that Christ died
so far for all, that the Gospel, which is glad tidings, should be preached to
all; and whether the Lord by the preaching of the Gospel does not call all Men
to Faith and Repentance, promising Salvation to all that do believe?


Philet. I know Faith and Repentance are required of all, and God by the Gospel
invites all Men to believe in him, promising Salvation to all that do so
believe; yet only those will believe for whom Christ died to purchase these
things for them, and to purchase their Salvation; Ye believe not, because you
are not of my Sheep, John 10. 26.


Philad. That is, I suppose, you mean because they were not elected, and
because Christ did not die for them to purchase a Power to believe; and
therefore they could not believe, because God had decreed their unbelief: this
is plainly to charge all the unbelief of Men upon the Lord; but says Christ,
They believe not, because they were not of his Sheep: And who those are he
tells you in the next verse, They are such as hearing his Voice, follow him.
Such fallacious reasoning strikes at the Root of the Gospel of Grace and free
Love of God, and frees the Devil and wicked Men from bringing destruction on
themselves; for by such Doctrine God Almighty is the sole cause of all the
incredulity in the World, and tho he offers and invites all Men to partake of
Grace, yet he does it not really and in good earnest: and while your Ministers
call upon Persons to believe, and seem to wonder that they do not believe, and
yet hold that God has decreed they shall never believe, their Sermons are mere
dissimulations and nonsense. What would they bind Men to believe that which is
untrue, and charge them to take and receive Christ as tendered to them in the
Gospel, and to believe there is remission of Sins in Christ's Blood for them,
when he never shed it for them, and so to lay hold upon that which they had no
kind of interest in? This not only makes your Ministers false Witnesses, to
offer Salvation to those whose Damnation is absolutely determined, but also
makes God a mere deluder of miserable Man, whom he calls by the preaching of
the Gospel to partake of Salvation by his Son, and yet fully before intended
their ruin. Is not this as much as in you lies, to make God a lier? as 1 John
5. 10. for they that believe not God, make him a lier, because they believe not
the Record God gave of his Son; and what is that, namely, That whosoever
believe on him should not perish, but have Everlasting Life: not that any Man
can possibly make God a Lier; no, let God be True, and all Men Liers; but Men
by their not believing on Christ do represent God as untrue in his Word,
because they reject that as a Fable which has been spoken by the Lord himself
for a Truth; and those that preach the glad-tidings of Grace and Peace to all
Men, and every Creature, sin in preaching, in that they preach Lies to most
Men, yea and require Men to believe Lies. May we not easily see that all your
Exhortations, Chidings, your whining, and seemingly bemoaning the state of poor
Sinners, is but a dissembling Art?


Mar. O what pangs are faithful Ministers in, lest poor Souls should perish!


Philad. Yea, true Gospel Ministers may; but what Pangs your Ministers are in
that hold Reprobation without respect to actual Sins part of their Creed, I
know not; is commiseration in you a Virtue, and is not all Good originally in
God; and can I take your Ministers to be filled with more compassion than the
God of Love, or to be better than they represent God to be? For do they not
hold, that notwithstanding all the passionate wishes of the Lord, his
Exhortations and Persuasions, Reprovings, Expostulations, mourning over the
perishing state of poor Sinners; yea, tho he uses Promises to allure them, and
Threatenings to deter them, and calls all Men by the Gospel to believe on his
Son, that they may live through him, and swears that he wills not their Death:
yet has he by an eternal and uncontrolable Decree shut up the greatest part of
those to whom these Tenders are made, under Sin and Misery, that they shall
never repent and be saved? Christ never died intentionally nor really to save
them; they have thereby no more interest in him, than the fallen Angels, and
therefore there is no more reason why the Gospel should be preached to the one
more than the other; whereby it must needs follow that many Men by the Gospel
are bound in Conscience to believe that which is untrue, and by your Ministers
pressed and charged to receive that which they have nothing to do with: by this
you make the Lord guilty of the deepest dissimulation in his Promises and
tenders of Grace to all. And, pray, what are your Ministers but false
Witnesses, if they promise Salvation for all Men, when they believe there is no
Salvation for far the greatest part of Men, whom Christ never purchased by his
Blood? If they exhort Sinners to turn from their Sins to the Lord, and promise
them, that if they do so, they shall live, and tell all Men that God would not
have one of them die in their Sins, but rather turn and live, is not this
according to your Notion Lying? And do not they promise and undertake more in
the behalf of God, than God himself is willing to perform? What a bustle do
your Ministers keep, and to what purpose, unless to get Money, seeing the most
powerful Ministers and Sermons cannot in the least alter the Intention of the
Lord about the Salvation or Damnation of one Soul, Man's final and eternal
State being fixed in Heaven?

And thus do you give the Truth of God the lie, and highly impeach the glorious
Gospel, and make your Ministers teach nothing but absurdities; nay, more than
this, it overthrows not only his Goodness and Mercy, but also his Justice, that
Men before they partake of the Breath of Life, or are any ways guilty of actual
Sins, should be so rigidly condemned to perpetual Misery, yea appointed to
receive the Wages of Sin before they committed any; this is inconsistent with
common Justice and Equity amongst Men: and Shall not the Judge of all the World
do right? said good Abraham to God, Genesis 18. 25. And, says Job, shall mortal
Man be more just than God? and so our Apostle, Is there unrighteousness with
God? how then shall God judge the World? Does it not wrong the pure Justice of
God, to hold that he will judge and condemn Men for ever to lie under his Wrath
for doing that which he himself decreed them to do, or that God Almighty should
behold Mankind in the Fall, and so totally desert them without affording them a
Savior to believe in, or any power to believe, whereby they must unavoidably
perish; and yet at the same time command all Men, without exception, to believe
in his Son; Acts 17. 30. 1 John 3. 23. Mat. 16. 5. Romans 10. 16, 17. and
severely threaten all those that shall not believe on him, Mark 16. 16. John 8.
24. John 3. 36. John 16. 9.

And Jesus Christ not only commands all Men to repent and believe on him, and
threatens all with Death that refuse to believe, but also has promised Life
and Salvation to all without exception, which shall believe; John 3. 16. and
11. 25, 26. 1 Pet. 2. 6. And also by many sweet encouraging ways, labors to
induce them to believe. Sometimes he presents them with his great Love, John 3.
16. Tit. 3. 4. sometimes with his Mercy and tender Compassion, Exodus 34. 6.
Luke 1. 72. sometimes with his delight in showing Mercy, Micha 7. 18. Ezekiel. 33.
11. and with his desire after their Salvation, 1 Timothy 2. 4. At other times with
the great trouble of his Soul at their stubborn courses, and that because if
they persisted in them, it would bring destruction to them, Ezekiel. 18. 31. Jer.
44. 4. likewise showing what Glory would accrue to them, Ephesians. 1. 6, 12. Now
to think, or say, that under all these Expressions of Love and Desire to save
Mankind, he has past and sealed a firm Decree in his Eternal Counsel to the
contrary, is a great dishonor done to God, making him guilty of horrid and
notorious Hypocrisy, to destroy his Creatures under the specious pretense of
Justice and showing Mercy; and as a great The Lord Russel's Speech.
Statesman once said, To kill by Forms and Subtilties of Law, is the worst sort
of Murders. And to destroy Millions of Persons under a color of Mercy and
Good Will, is like a Cat playing with a Mouse, and making sport with other Men's
miserys, and one of the greatest Cruelties in the World; which Doctrine I am
sure is altogether inconsistent with his incomprehensible Justice.


Mar. I deny that which I hold clasheth against, or oppugneth the Justice of
God; it is true, it shows there is much of Sovereignty in God, but nothing of
Injustice; he does but leave the Dog in his Vomit, the Viper to his own Poison:
and as Philetus said before, God was not bound to bring forth a Savior for any
of fallen Mankind; nor is he obliged to give restituent Grace to fallen Man: so
that this Preterition is not a substraction of any inherent Grace, but a
suspension of Assistance, for God may do what he will with his own, and there
can be no injustice in it. May not God, who is the Supreme Lord of all, deny a
free Benefit, without wrong to his Justice? Besides, God is not bound to
restore to Man a Power to believe, because he once had it, and lost it through
his own fault.


Philad. Most of this I have answered already, and so shall say the less to it
now: I believe that the God of Heaven is not absolutely bound to any Man, but
has free liberty to dispense his Favor where and to whom he will; yet has he
engaged himself for our assistance (if we be not wanting to our selves) to let
in such spiritual strength as to enable us to perform that Duty that is
required of us: the Lord always gives strength where he gives a Command, or
else the neglect of it will not be their condemnation; if it was not so, he
would be, as the evil Servant styled him, a hard Master, reaping where he has
not sawed, etc. or like Pharaoh whom God punished as a Tyrant, to deny Straw,
and yet require the tale of Brick; to require obedience to his Divine Will, and
yet deny supernatural Grace, without which it was impossible for them to keep
it. But if your Doctrine be true, Persons are required to believe, and are
condemned for not believing, and yet God has shut them under unbelief, they
have no power to believe, and God has decreed they shall never have a power to
believe whilst they live; nay, he not only denis a Power to believe, but a
Christ to believe in: the greatest part of Men have no more part in Christ, and
the Covenant of Grace, than the Devils have; and yet the Gospel is to be
preached to all for the obedience of Faith. Is not this a piece of the highest
Blasphemy, making the great Creator as vile and treacherous as a Creature; yea,
to make the Almighty subject to the most servile Art of Flattery, pretending
one thing, when the contrary is really intended? as if the Lord designed to
sport himself ^th the ruin and destruction of miserable Man. This would be the
visible effects of injustice and guile in God; and it would be mere folly in
Man to walk in any Christian Practice.


Philet. I would not have you, Philetus, wade too deep into God's Secrets:
there are different Intentions in God in affording the Gospel, which we know
not of; and we may say, O the height, and depth, both of the Wisdom and
Knowledge of God, etc. No Creature knows the ground and reason why God in his
Wisdom does so order the Affairs of the World as he does; nor why the Gospel is
sent to one more than to another, especially the Word of his Grace to
Salvation; this only comes by Divine Counsel, Acts 13. 26. To you is the Word
of this Salvation sent.


Philad. Truly, Philetus, you are one of those that stand in need of the same
Caution as you give me, for if you did not carry it at too great a height of
confidence, you would not take liberty to speak of God's Decrees, and of the
Transactions of Heaven, as if you fully knew the Lord's Secrets: or how dare
you speak of such Decrees to be in God, which he has no where revealed in his
Word, nay which are contrary to it? and so set the Secret Will, and Revealed
Will of God, to wage W^ one with the other, and set the Decrees of God, and his
Commands, at open defiance.

I do acknowledge, that the way which God takes about the Government of the
World, and in his Wisdom, etc. as Romans 11. 33. is an unfathomable depth, and is
so unconceivable and incomprehensible, that it is above all comprehension of
Men and Angels: I also grant that it may be consistent, both with the Wisdom
and Mercy of God, to vouchsafe a greater means of Grace, Light, and Knowledge,
and of Salvation, to some more than to others.


Philet. How can Persons be saved without Faith? for whatsoever is not of
Faith, is Sin: and how shall they believe of him of whom they have not heard?
and how can any preach the Gospel as they ought, except they be sent? Some the
Word of Salvation is sent to, and not to others; you know the Apostle was
forbid to preach the Word in Asia, Acts 16. 6. and when they assayed to go into
Bithynia, the Spirit suffered them not, ver. 7.


Philad. For what reason God would not that the Gospel should at that time be
preached by Paul and Timothy in Asia, is hid from us; he might have many,
either that he would make use of their Ministry somewhere else, or that he had
appointed some others to the Work; whatsoever it was, certainly the Reason is
not to be brought from God's absolute Decree of Reprobation, as Calvin upon
this place does: for it is certain that the Gospel was at least soon after
preached, and that in this place by Paul himself; so that Demetrius the
Siver-smith did greatly lament the admirable progress of the Gospel in Asia,
Acts 19. 26. And in the 10th Verse you may see that Paul continued for the
space of two years at Ephesus, which was the Metropolis of Asia, insomuch that
it was said, That all they that dwelt in Asia heard the Word of the Lord Jesus,
both Jews and Greeks.


Mar. But all Men have not the Gospel preached to them, nor the same Light and
Means to know the Lord, and so come to believe in him: and surely if Christ
died for all Men, for the whole World, he would have sent amongst them the Word
of Life, and removed out of the way all those things which he knew would have
hindered their Salvation; and therefore I cannot think but all those Nations
which the Gospel is not sent to, are left by the Lord in the Fall, and reserved
for Eternal Punishment.


Philad. As it was in Paul's time, so it is now: the Jews prided themselves
against the Gentiles, as being the only Elect People, and the Gentiles but
Reprobates and Castaways; and so do such as you are at this day, by the Nations
which have not the Gospel Light (as I have often heard to my great grief) even
damn them by wholesale, looking upon them little better than Devils. What tho
the Lord, according to his manifold Wisdom, is pleased to vouchsafe a greater
sufficiency of means to know the Lord, and to know what God has done for them,
and by the Gospel reveals those things, which otherwise in an ordinary way
could not be known to one Nation, or one Age and Generation of Men more than
another; yet knowing, and by daily experience finding God to be infinite in
Goodness and Mercy, I cannot but believe he has effectually provided for their
Salvation as well as ours, tho the ordinary means is wanting, as at this day in
many parts of the World: for tho Faith is not now begotten in them by preaching
and hearing, as with us at this day; yet God has many ways to instruct, and
communicate his Will to Man, Job 33. yea to reveal Christ in such manner and
ways as may be available; for Jesus Christ, who took Man's Nature upon him, and
who has taken away their original Guilt, and who enlightens every Man that
comes into the World, may, by the Operation of his Spirit (how and when he
pleases) so help them to improve their single Talent of Reason, and the Light
set up in their Consciences, which may so perfect what is wanting of the
ordinary means, that many thousands, according to our Savior's words, Mat. 8.
11. shall come from the East and the West, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven, when the Children of the Visible Kingdom,
or Church, who judged themselves the sole Inheritors of it, and all the rest of
the World but Castaways, shall be shut out: and if you look Psalm. 87. you may
see that those that had their natural Birth in Rahab, Tire, Ethiopia,
Philistia, Babylon, shall be accounted as born in the Spiritual Zion, or Church
of God.

And tho the Lord in his Wisdom and Mercy, is pleased to vouchsafe a greater
measure of Grace, Light, and Knowledge, and of Salvation, unto us than unto
them; yet has not God left himself without Witness, all the common Providence
of God being given to direct Men to seek the Lord. In Romans 2. 14, 15. we read,
that the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by Nature the things, etc. That
Law which was given in two Tables of Stone, was that which was purely moral,
and imprinted in their Hearts; namely, that God is to be worshipped, that
Parents should be honored, and in a word, to do to all as they would be done
to: These were Duties written in he very Book of Nature; and, tho they have not
the Evangelical Law in the preaching of the Gospel as we have, become a Law to
themselves; and by observing the Dictates of that Light, living up to a true
informed Conscience, and to that Law which warreth against the rebellious Lusts
in their Members, have gradually so prevailed with them, as to bring them to a
good measure of conformity to the Will of God, and have quite outdone many
Christians in their practices.


Mar. What tho; yet if Christ, as Mediator, be not some-way made known to Men,
they are lost for ever; He that believes on the Son has Life, and he that
believes not on the Son has not Life. But you seem to hold, that it is not
absolutely necessary to Salvation to know Christ, and him crucified, as
Mediator, but to live up to that which God has manifested to them, and to have
some Notions of Unisersal Grace and Mercy in the Divine Essence: But I must
tell you, all that ever were saved before Christ came, were saved, not by
living up to that Light which God had given to all Men, or by living up to a
true conformity to the Law planted in their Hearts, or by believing God was
merciful and gracious, but by believing on Christ who was to come to be a
Sacrifice for their Sins; and all that are saved since our Savior's coming, do
in some measure know and believe in Jesus Christ that died without the Gates of
Jerusalem.


Philad. Have you forgot that you told me that I went too far to assert the
Salvation of all those that died in Infancy, I not being the Sovereign Lord and
Judge of all? and now are you not guilty of the same, thus to determine the
final State of all Men, both before and since Christ's coming in the Flesh, as
if none were saved but only such as distinctly knew Jesus Christ, the Seed of
the Woman, that was to break the Serpent's Head, as he that was to offer
himself a Sacrifice for Sin, seeing I believe neither you nor any other is able
to prove, that no Heathen wanting the Letter of the Gospel, and the Oral
Ministry of it, which is the ordinary Means to beget Faith, never yet believed
on God to Justification, or were accepted with him? And whereas you say, none
can be saved who diligently frame their Lives according to the Light God has
given them, or live in a true conformity to the Law written in their Hearts:
This is but your presumption; for if God has given them no other Law or Light
to walk by, it is far more safe to leave them to the Lord (who will not gather
where he has not strewed) than thus to censure them; for where much is given,
much is required.

Mr. Baxter tells us, More proof, page 95. That as the Jews had, by Promises,
Prophecies, and Types, more means to know God than other Nations; so they were
answerably obliged to more Knowledge and Faith than other Nations were that had
not or could not have their means.

Yea, Mr. Calvin, in his Epistle to the French New Testament, as quoted by Mr.
Goodwin, says, After Adam was left in such confusion, he was fruitful in his
cursed Seed, to bring forth a Generation like to himself, vicious, perverse,
void and destitute of all Good, and abounding in Evil; nevertheless the Lord of
his Mercy (who does not only love, but is himself Love and Charity) being yet
willing, by his infinite Goodness, to love that which is not worthy of Love,
has not altogether lost and overwhelmed Men as their Sins did require, but
has supported them in Sweetness and Patience, giving them time and leisure to
return to him, and set themselves to that Obedience from which they had
strayed; and tho he did suffer them to go after the desires and wishes of their
own Hearts, without Law, without Government, without any correction by his
Word, yet he has given them warning enough, which might have incited them to
seek, taste, and find him, to know and honor him as it behooves them: for he
has lifted up every where, and in all places and things, his Ensign and Arms,
that there were none could pretend ignorance of the knowledge of so Sovereign a
Lord; for that in all parts of the World, in Heaven and in Earth, he has
written and engraven the Glory of his Might, Goodness, Wisdom and Eternity. St.
Paul therefore says true, That the Lord never left himself without Witness,
even toward those to whom he has not sent the Knowledge of his Word; forasmuch
as all Creatures might be Witnesses and Messengers of his Glory unto all Men,
to draw them to seek him; and having found him, to welcome him and do him
Homage, according to the Dignity of a Lord so Good, so Powerful, so Wise and
Eternal; and also did help each other in its place to this Guest; for the Birds
singing, sung God, Beasts cried aloud to him, the Elements stood in fear of
him, Mountains reasoned with him, Rivers and Fountains cast their Eyes upon
him, Herbs and Flowers smiled upon him; although indeed there was no necessity to
seek him very far, by reason that each one might find him in his own self,
being that we are all kept up and preserved by his Virtue dwelling in us: in
the mean while, for to manifest more amply his Goodness and Infinite Clemency
among Men, he has not contented himself to instruct them all by such Documents
as we have expressed, but has especially given to understand his Voice to a
certain People. Surely here Mr. Calvin has acknowledged that God has
vouchsafed sufficient Means to all whereby to come to the knowledge of him, and
consequently to repent and believe in him.


Philet. But without Christ, and a Work of Grace upon the Heart, and Faith in
him, none can be saved; does not our Savior tell Nicodemus, John 3. 5. Except
a Man be born again of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God? That is, he cannot be saved.


Philad. Do you think our Savior did there mean the Kingdom of Glory?


Philet. Yea, doubtless.


Philad. I rather think that Christ spoke it of the Kingdom of Grace, or the
Visible Church of Christ, that none could not, or at least wise ought not come
into it without Regeneration and holy Baptism; yet may a Person be a Member of
the Universal Church, yea and be received a Member of the Triumphant Church in
Heaven, that may not be a Member of the Visible Church of Christ here on Earth:
for there are two sorts of Persons that cannot (in an ordinary way) be
regenerated and born again, which yet may and shall go to Heaven, to wit,
Children and Idiots. So tho it is a truth, that without Jesus Christ there can
be no Salvation; yet if there is no Salvation without believing on the Name of
the Lord Jesus, what then will become of these, and all dying Infants, who
neither have Faith, nor are regenerated? and yet they shall have Salvation by
him. Now as God has one way to bring Persons of Age to Heaven, and another way
to bring infants, why may not those that never had the means to know the
Mediator particularly and distinctly, have Salvation by him? Infants, and those
many millions of Heathens in some remote parts of the Earth, to whom the Gospel
was never preached, must unavoidablely and eternally perish, if God has
provided no other means of Salvation by Christ, than such a way of preaching
it, as is vouchsafed to us. We know that the Judgment of God will be according
to Equity: he knows what he has laid down, what he has given, and what to
require, and how to reward every Man according to his Works; and his Mercys are
infinitely extended over all his Works; and he is not so severe as to exact
more than frail Man is able to perform, but according to what light and
knowledge he has given him; and whosoever worship God, and do his Will,
according to the manifestation which he has given them of his Will, shall be
accepted of him, Acts 10. 34, 35. He that improves one Talent well, shall be
accepted as well as he that improves five; for surely the Almighty will never
require any more of a Man than he has given him: therefore I believe that all
those that are obedient to that Light or Law which the Lord has given them,
endeavoring according to their measure an exact conformity to the Divine Will,
shall be happy; and it would be a great piece of uncharitableness to exclude
them from all interest in Christ, and to allow none to have any saving benefit
by Christ's Death but such as own the true Orthodox Faith (as it is called by
some) we may by this damn by wholesale, not only all the Gentile Nations, but
also most other Christians who have erred in Judgment, and have unwittingly
mistaken the Truth, (...) God forbid. Tho many in our days (...) that without
hopes or sense of their ^ondition) exclude them from any part in Christ, or the
Church of God, as did the Jews of old, who reputed themselves the only Children
of the Kingdom, boasted of their Privileges, as having Abraham to their Father,
and cried the Temple of the Lord, how much soever they abused the means, and
neglected God, and reputed the Gentiles but Castaways not being circumcised,
nor brought into the visible Jewish Churchstate; yet had the Lord a regard to
them, when the Visible Church State extended it self no farther than the
Familys of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as appears by the effect which God's
Spirit had upon many others, as Job, Melchizedeck, etc. And how did the Lord
secretly teach and instruct Abimclech, Nebuchadnezzar, Cyrus, Darius, in the
Old Testament? And the Heathens have at this day, and before Christ's coming in
the flesh had some glimpse of his coming into the World, as may be seen in the
Sibyls Verses, and many others: nay, they came to enjoy in some measure the
Doctrine of Christ's coming; and has not the Gospel-sound gone through the World?
and Paul says, that the Gentiles, who did by Nature the things contained in
the Law, Romans 2. were counted the Circumcision; yea, the Law should judge those
that are circumcised in the Flesh, if they broke it: and so tho many boast of
the Word and Sacrament of the Gospel amongst them, and despise others, tho the
Means of Grace be abused, the Gospel-Call neglected, the Grace of God turned
into wantonness, and seek Gain by pretending Godliness; yet those that have
less means, and yet have obeyed them, shall be received, and others rejected;
for many are called, but few chosen.

And I beseech you all that set light by them, take heed lest you become guilty
of as great a Sin as the Heathen Nations are in worshipping false Gods, by
imputing that to the true God, which is proper only to the Devil; for it was
the saying of a very Learned Man, Mr. Withers in his Paraphrase upon the Lord's
Prayer, page 94. speaking something of the Doctrine of Reprobation without
respect to Sin, That whatsoever opinion others may have of it, I conceive that
all the Idolatries of the Heathens heretofore, in communicating to Men, Beasts
or Devils, the Honor and Attributes which are due to God only, yea and the
crucifying of Christ added thereunto, amount not to so heinous an Offense as
their Crimes who are knowingly guilty of this Sin; because it seems to me more
pardonable to ascribe to a base Creature part of that Honor which is due to
God, than to impute that unto him which is proper to none but the Devil. And in
his Parallello-Grammaton, p. 61. he says, That it is an extraordinary high
affront put upon God, and more heinous than Murder, Adultery, and all other
mere carnal Sins whatsoever, yea more heinous than those the Jews committed by
their Idolatries, killing the Prophets, and crucifying Christ in the Elesh, for
the last was but a Sin against his Humanity, and their Idolatries but the
ascribing some part of that Honor to the Creature which is due to God only;
whereas the limiting God's Universal Grace in Christ, with the concomitant
Doctrine, and the Consequences thence arising, and the imputing to God an
eternal Reprobation of the greatest part of Mankind, before they had done good
or evil, for those Sins which they blasphemously say he necessitates them to
commit, to show his Justice, and manifest his hatred to Sin, is a despoiling
him of his Divine Nature, and ascribing unto him that which belongs only to the
Devil.


Mar. That which the Gentiles receive, is but common Grace, and the improvement
of any common Gift will not save any; and should the Gospel be preached to
them, it would be of no saving use to them unless there be special Grace in the
Soul.


Philet. That Is true, the Gospel may be preached a thousand times over, and yet
without the mighty Power of God none can receive it; it is not the Power of God
to Salvation, it is but the external Offers of Grace, or the external
Dispensation of Grace by the Word.


Philad. Here Is off and one sometimes Christ died for all, that the Gospel
might be preached to all, and those that the Gospel is not sent to, you look
upon them Castaways; and yet at last whether it be sent or not, it is all one,
there is nothing in it but a dead Letter: but, pray tell me, is not the Gospel
called the Ministry of the Spirit?


Philet. Yea, in opposition to the Law.


Philad. Well then, I must tell you, that there is such a power of the Spirit
accompanying of it (where it is faithfully preached) as is sufficient for the
conversion of Sinners, or to leave them without excuse if they believe it not,
yea to judge them at the last day: tho it is true, it is but the instrumental
Means to beget Souls to God; for the original cause of our conversion is the
Love of God the Father, John 3. 16. Romans 5. 6, 8, 10. 1 Pet. 3. 18. The Blood
of Christ is the meritorious Cause, the efficient or working Cause is the Power
of God's Grace or Spirit, the Ministerial Cause is the preaching of the Gospel,
Romans 10. so tho God alone decrees it, Christ alone meriteth it, the Spirit
seals it, yet the Gospel reveals it, Faith apprehends it, and so persons
come to be justified and saved: So tho God, Christ, and the Spirit, are the
efficient Cause of Righteousness and Salvation, yet the instrumental Means of
Salvation is not to be cast away.


Philet. But there must be special Grace in the Soul before God calls any by
the Gospel, or else they could not give consent to his Call: No, there must be
a Principle of Grace infused into the Souls of Men, or they could not consent.
To say the stony Heart, dead Man, old Nature, gives consent, is very
incongruous; the Tree must first be good before it can produce good Fruit,
there must be first a Sun, then a Beam; first a Fountain, then a Stream.


Philad. It seems by what you say, a Man must be a spiritual Man before the
Lord calls him, and before he hears or receives the Word; which is a mistake,
for there is no Man but is carnal before he receives the teaching of the
Almighty, and by receiving the teachingof the Lord, becomes spiritual; for
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. Mr. Brown, in his
Scripture Redemption, says, James 1. 18. Of his own Will begat he us, by the
Word of Truth; it is a Life-Creating Word, John 6. 63. and therefore called the
Word of Life, Phil. 2. 16. because through and by the word Life is wrought in
us, John 5. 25. and Faith wrought in us, Romans 10. and is a glorious Instrument
of God's saving Power, Romans 1. 16. and called the Grace of God, Acts 13. 47.
that comes to us by his Grace. Heb. 12. 1. 1 Pet. 5. 12. and this way are we to
expect Grace from him; and where the Word of Life is preached, there and then
God seeks, and sues to us to receive his Grace; yea, and through the Spirit
bestows so much Grace upon all Men, when the Word of Faith is preached, as is
sufficient to beget Faith in them, and to carry on their saving Conversion
gradually unto the end, Mat. 11. 21. Titus 3. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 23. and 2. 9. James
1. 18. 2 Cor. 3. 6. Heb. 4. 12. observe Acts 26. 18.

Dr. Holmes upon the Golden Chain of Salvation, page 158. upon the Question,
How shall I come by the gift of Faith? Answers, That the same Gospel that
offers Christ, operates Faith; the same Spirit that inspired the Penmen of the
Holy Scriptures, does cooperate, and it operates in the Ministry of the Gospel
upon those that wait upon it. Mr. Perkins on Rev. 2. 13. says, That the
preaching of the Gospel has in it a Divine Power to beget Souls to the Lord.


Philet. I believe those that the Gospel is preached to, if they unfeignedly
repent of their Sins, believe on him, shall without all question be saved by
and through the Death of Christ; for the reason why Men are condemned, is,
because they believe not on the only begotten Son of God.


Philad. Well said, Philetus, now you have ruined your self upon these two
Points, which you have labored this day to avoid.

The first is this, That Christ died for those that miss Salvation through
unbelief; for if the Lord by the Gospel promised Salvation to all Men, without
exception, in case they do believe on Christ (which you cannot deny) it roundly
follows that Christ must needs have purchased it for them by his Blood; for
there is no Salvation without Remission of Sins, nor no Remission without
shedding of Blood: neither could their believing procure any other Salvation to
them, but only that which was fully purchased for them by the Blood of Christ,
there being no Salvation for any Man upon any Terms or Conditions whatsoever,
unless Christ has purchased it for them by his Blood. Therefore unless you do
suppose that Christ shed his Blood for all, you cannot say with any truth, that
if they believe they shall be saved: Can you imagine that their believing, or
not believing, should any ways alter the Lord's Intentions concerning them in
the Death of Christ, or cause them to be bought with his Blood, which were not
bought before? or whether does the Lord in the Gospel assure Persons of such a
Salvation which was never so much as intended to be purchased for them? This
would be to represent the Lord extremely unlike himself, which none dare affirm
that have any regard to the Honor and Glory of God.

The second is this, That those that perish through unbelief, were through
Grace put in a possibility of believing and embracing Christ as tendered to
them. God will not condemn Souls for not believing that which was impossible
for them to believe. If unbelief be the condemning Sin, and that Men are
condemned for not believing, it follows against all contradiction, that all Men
at one time or another are put into such a capacity, as that through the Grace of
God they may be saved. Thus have you in a few words pulled down with your own
hands the main building which you have in your Discourse this day labored to
make stand. But is this your usual way, to do and undo? Have you not told us,
that God gave not his Son to die for all, and yet he offers his Grace to all;
and that there is no Universal Redemption, and yet Christ is universally
tendered to all; that God decreed, not only the Suffering, but the Sins of the
Reprobates, and yet their destruction is of themselves; that Men miss Salvation
because of unbelief, yet God never gave them a power to believe, nor a Christ
to believe in; and that Men must strive to lay hold upon Christ, and come up to
the terms upon which Salvation is tendered and promised, and yet have no power
to do it, but are as passive as Stones or dead Men: How can you make these
things stand together?


Philet. I said at the first that I feared you were one of those that held the
vile Opinion of Free Will.


Philad. This term of Free Will is made use of by almost every captious Person,
and cast as Dung in the Face of many of the Lord's People; and that by many
that know not what they mean by it. I have often heard Free Will mentioned by
the Tongues, and in the Books of those of your way, yet I never, to my
knowledge, found it defined; but surely as you hold it, or suppose others to
hold it, it is some vile Opinions indeed: would any else call it cursed
Free Will; and those that they think hold it, damned Free-willers; or in their
Prayers desire that God would confound all that hold it?


Mar. Why, do you not pray that God would bring down Mystery Babylon, and all
others her Adherents? and this is one of her Masterpieces, etc. it is the Great
Dagon.


Philad. Well, but now I find Free Will as much owned by those of your way, as
by any that I know amongst us; for the Assembly of Divines, in their Confession
of Faith, Chap. 9. expressly say, God has endued the Will of Man with that
natural Liberty, that it is neither forced, nor by any absolute necessity of
Nature determined to do good or evil. And Mr. Baxter in his Preface to his Call
to the Unconverted, speaks thus, For Free Will, Origin is condemned by
Epiphanius for saying, Man had lost the Image of God: this Image is twofold;
1st. Natural, that is, Reason and Free Will. 2ly. Qualitative, that is, our
Holiness; this is lost, and by Grace restored. And he farther says, That
Austin as well as Pelagius, Calvin as well as the Arminians, the Dominicans as
well as the Jesuits, all generally maintain, that Man has Free Will. Yea, he
tells us, no Man of Brains can deny that Man has a Will naturally free, and is
a self-determining Principle, tho not freed from evil dispositions. Can you
name any amongst us that hold more than these your Brethren hold? For what can
these mean by it less than this, that the Will of Man now after the fall of
Adam in natural Actions, is as free as ever it was? for tho by the Fall of
Adam, all the Faculties of the Soul, viz. Reason, Judgment, Affections,
Understanding. Will, Power, and Freedom to act, are greatly bruised, much
weakened and dulled, yet not one of them is wholly lost; and indeed the Soul
would be a nothing if it be denied the use of its Faculties; for as the Body
without the Spirit is dead, and remains a lifeless Bulk, even so is the Soul if
it does not exert it self in the various actings and operations of its Power:
and indeed if we have not a Free Will in a sufficient Measure, to do or leave
undone, choose or refuse, then were our Faculties inferior to those of Beasts,
who do choose, or leave, such means of preservation as are set before them; and
as the Will of Man in natural Actions is free, even so it is as really free in
spiritual, when it is made so by the Spirit and Grace of God; or else how
should we run the ways of God's Commandments, if we have not the liberty of our
Souls, and will to do it?

Therefore when you curse and damn Free Will, and Free-willers at that rate as
you do, you must surely mean something else than what your Friends mean, or
what I mentioned last; pray tell me what it is.


Mar. Why, you say, Men may be saved if they will; which is so gross an Error,
that they must be very blind that cannot see it; for if it was so, Men might
have Heaven for willing, and none would go to Hell: but it is not in him that
wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows Mercy, Romans 9. 16.


Philad. That Is true, if Men might have Heaven for wishing or willing, few
would be so foolhardy as to go to Hell: Who would, but with Balaam, die the
Death of the Righteous? Who would but have all Tears wiped away from their
Eyes, and live in Bliss and Glory, if God would save Persons for their good
Wishes and Desires, and give them Heaven tho they never minded it all their
days so as to please God? they deserve to go to Hell, that would not have
Heaven upon this account, that think Heaven not worth a Wish. And as to your
Scriptures, the Apostle shows that the Jews had a Will to be saved; and the
reason why they fell short of Justification, was not for want of willing or
running, but for not willing and running in a right way; they sought it not by
Faith, but by the Works of the Law: They being ignorant of God's Righteousness,
and going about to establish their own, Romans 10. 3. so mist of Justification:
But surely this is not that Free Will you so much cry out of; for where can you
find such Free-willers that hold Heaven may be had for wishing for?


Philet. But however you hold, that you have naturally such a power and freedom
of Will, that when you would do good you can.


Philad. It Is a mistake, we do not say we have it from Nature, but from Grace;
for as we are in our depraved Nature, we can neither do nor will ought that is
acceptable and good: but as in Grace we may, for then to will is present with
us; yea, and ever since the Promise was made, that the Seed of the Woman should
bruise the Serpent's Head, the Lord does first or last enlighten every Man that
comes into the World, vouchsasing such renewing of his Will, and such a
perpetual co-assistance to perform what shall be accepted, if persons do not
wilfully, maliciously, and finally resist his Grace; so that none of our Sins
can justly be charged upon any deficiency in him: Our blessed Savior tells
them, the Word was near them, and in them; and that he was the Light that
enlightens every Man.

Yet if by Free Will you mean a single Power in the Creature to convert it
self: I know none this day in England that hold such an Opinion; however I
utterly renounce such an Opinion as vile, it being to ascribe too much to
humane Nature. It must needs be a pernicious Principle for any to believe, that
a Man by the sole power of regulating of his own Will and Reason, can obtain
Eternal Salvation; this would make the suffering of Christ altogether
fruitless: and I believe also that none has any will or power of himself,
without God, to do any thing that is good; or to attain to a supernatural End,
but by the Assistance of Divine Grace: and therefore there is an absolute
necessity of seeking and imploring the saving supernatural aid and help of the
Spirit of that God, from whom all our Abilities are derived to us. And as to
what you say we hold, that when we would do good, we can: I say, that through
the Grace of God we may avoid many more Sins than we daily do avoid, and do
more good than we do: tell me, are any of us laid under a necessity of sinning?
cannot we forbear many Sins which we daily run into? and do we really do what
God by his Grace has empowered us to do in our Duty to God and Man, and in
avoiding Sin? If you say we can do no otherwise, then is all your preaching
vain, yea ridiculous; for if an irresistible Cause overpower us, that we can do
no otherwise, no Man that is truly master of his own Reason, will ever spend
his time and strength to exhort any to repent of doing that which they could
not but do, or omitting of that which was never in their power to effect. If
you say, that by the Grace of God we may do the one or the other, you own
Free Will as much as I.

For this is the Free Will (if we may call it so) that I hold, viz. That God
Almighty has (of his Free Love and Grace) imparted a measure of himself, or
endowed Mankind with those Abilities to perform whatsoever he requires of them,
and injoins them to; God never gives a Command, but he gives a Power, or else
their Disobedience shall not be their Condemnation: if this be a vile Opinion,
then I confess I am vile; for if God requires us to believe, and yet
administers not sufficient Grace and Strength to believe, all our endeavors
are vain and fruitless; Men cannot make Brick till Srraw be given them: for the
Lord to prescribe Dutys to us, and annex Penaltys upon the nonperformance of
them, as to punish with Eternal Death all those that are disobedient to his
Will, and yet to deny his Grace and Assistance, without which it is impossible
to keep them; this is to represent the Lord (as I once said before) too much
like cruel Pharaoh, that made the Lives of his People bitter to them, by laying
heavy Burdens, in requiring the tale of Brick, and yet denying Straw, the fit
Materials; or as the evil Servant in the Parable styled him, a hard Master,
reaping where he has not sowed.


Philet. I tell you we are altogether passive in the Work of Conversion; we are
like Saws or Axes, that cannot move any otherwise than the Hand guides or
forces them.


Philad. Your comparing Persons to Saws and Axes, being altogether passive in
comparison, is a thing I do not understand; for we are not Saws or Axes without
Sense or Reason; but by God's free Gift, and his free Grace, we have received
Liberty and Ability to accept of his Love, and to accept of his Mercy when
tendered to us, and to perform those things which God requires of us in order to
our Salvation; yea, through the Lord's assisting Grace (which is never wanting
to any but those that are wanting to themselves) we have received such a Power
as to enable us to perform the Will of God, when the choice of Good and Evil is
set before us, Deuteronomy. 30. 19.


Mar. No more than the Stones in the street.


Philad. Why then Man can have no more Sin nor Righteousness in him than a
Stone: if Man in the Work of Conversion be like a Stock or Stone, merely
passive, doing nothing; then in Conversion Persons neither hear, nor repent,
nor turn from Sin to the Lord, nor believe in Christ: and how any are truly
regenerated without those, I know not; and if these are to be done in
Conversion, pray who is active in this Work, if the Party regenerated be not?

And if by God's Free Grace Man has not the least power of his Will, but is
merely passive in all; why then should the Lord so passionately complain of
Men's obstinacy? and why did Christ wonder at the unbelief of many? Mark 6. 6.
Here was not the least cause for Christ to marvel at the unbelief of any, when
it never was in their power to believe, unless Christ should wonder that Man
should act and do more than he had power to do, or more than all the Creatures
in Heaven or Earth could enable him to do. Nay, if Men be wholly as passive as
Stones, and can neither repent nor believe, by means of those Abilities
vouchsafed to them by the Lord, then can no reward nor punishment be justly
awarded to any Man for believing or not believing: for if Faith and Repentance
be wrought in Man only by the Omnipotent and Irresistible Power of God, without
Man, then cannot that Obedience be a free Obedience: and in vain is it required
of Man, when it is to be wrought by such a Force as cannot be resisted; neither
can any Man be rewarded as one truly and really obedient. And in this case we
may safely affirm, that the Lord rewards himself, and not the Man who is truly
passive, doing nothing; or if any thing, it is purely effected by the Force of
another: for what things are produced in us by God's irresistible Omnipotency
without us, cannot of right come under the name of Obedience, and therefore
cannot justly be rewarded, or judged worthy of any commendation. Remonstrants
Confession, page 148. Also Eternal Punishment is unjustly and cruelly inflicted
on him that does not repent and believe, when he had no power to do either: but
the want of it was through the alone defect of irresistible Grace; and should
the Lord punish Men for not repenting and believing, he should punish them for
not attempting to make themselves equal in Power with himself; and then, pray,
to what purpose are all the inviting Promises of Life and Glory, and all the
Dangers that Souls expose themselves to, expressed in the Scripture, and
pressed so much by your Preachers, if we through Grace have not power to obtain
the one, or escape the other?

Very well says S. Jerome, as quoted by Dr. Goodman in his Parable of the
Prodigal Son, p. 100. God bound not Man under the rigid Bonds of Necessity,
whereby he should be forcibly overruled and determined to one thing, but put
him (...) a capacity of making his own choice, to the end that being thereby
distinguished from Beasts, and more like his Maker, he might be capable of
Virtue and Reward; and that as nothing should make him miserable without his
own act and consent, so he might have the comfort and delight of cooperating
freely toward his own Good and Felicity.


Philet. If God works Conversion, not in an insuperable or irresistible way,
then he works it in a dependent way, putting Man's Will in an Aequilibrium (or
even Balance) That this is not God's way appears, because he works Conversion
in such a way as is most depressive of the Creature, and exaltive of himself.
But now by what you say, Grace only sets the Will in an Aequilibrium, and
that is all, and Free Will must do the business; this is a robbing God of his
Glory, and ascribing to our selves more than belongs to us.


Philad. It Is rather an honoring of him, by laying all the blame of our
Misdoings upon our selves, and acknowledging his free Grace, in giving us not
only time, but abilities and means to know the Lord, and to cleave to him, and
to work with God when he is pleased to be moving upon our Hearts, Wills, and
Consciences, by his Divine Grace, that so we might be curbed and restrained
from being carried headlong into destruction by the sway of our unruly Lusts.

Yea, that which I affirm is as depressive of the Creature, and as exaltive of
God's Glory as what you hold, nay more (as I shall make appear by and by) Where
have I said, that we are able to do any thing that is good, to repent, believe,
or obey the Lord, and serve him acceptably, by our own natural strength,
without the effectual assistance of Divine Grace? I say, this is not possible
now for Man in his lapsed state, tho it be generally held, that Man had at the
first a perfect liberty to stand or fall in an equal possibility of sinning, or
not sinning. If this were so, then his condition was in Aequilibrio, and it was
in the Creatures choice to turn the Scales: but long he did not stand in this
equal State, for being tempted to aspire above his place, at the very first
onset, at the first temptation he lost his Innocence, and fell into a depraved
State, and so his Will became infirm relation to its acting for Virtue and
Goodness. But now God having pity on fallen Man, in his infinite Goodness and
Wisdom found out a way to restore him to a more noble and excellent State than
Adam enjoyed, which was by the promised Seed; and what perfection the Will had
in the state of perfect Nature, is restored by the Spirit of Grace. So that a
good and real Christian may be said to enjoy as free a Will by Grace since the
Fall, as Adam had by Nature before the Fall; John 8. 36. If the Son make you
free, you shall be free indeed.


Philet. It Is Christ's work to act Faith, and God is said to give Faith and
Repentance, which are called his Gift.


Philad. I acknowledge that we are all of us, from first to last, indebted to
Divine Grace for all we do; all good and pious Actions are begun, carried on,
and perfected by the Lord; it is God that gives Power and Ability, it is he that
enables People to repent and believe, yea, makes Persons willing actually to
repent, yea, and supports them in the act of repenting and believing; and so
the whole of all Good in us is of free Love, and not of Nature. The Lord is
both the Author and Finisher of our Faith. If I be better ^n any Man, it is God
that makes me ^er; and therefore he that will glory, let him glory in the Lord,
saying with the Psalmist, Psalm. 115. 1. Not unto us, not unto us, but unto thy
Name be the praise; and therefore we stand bound to make that humble
acknowledgment, as Paul did 1 Cor. 15. 10. that by the Grace of God I am what I
am, etc. What good we do, it is not by our own natural Abilities, or the power
of natural Reason, but by the powerful influence of Divine Grace, James 1. 17.
John 15. 5. 1 Pet. 5. 10. And we may all say as Holy David did, 1 Chronicles. 29.
11, to 17. So that you may see that I am none of those that hold that we are
converted by the power of our own Freewill. Neither have we any saving Faith of
our selves, Mat. 11. 17. and 13. 11. and 16. 17. and 7. 7. John 3. 5. But it
is, as I said before, wholly to be ascribed to the Grace of God in Christ as
the principal and primary Cause.

Now as to Faith and Repentance being the Gift of God, this is a truth: God is
said to give Faith and Repentance, yea, to intend the Salvation of all Men,
when he vouchsafes a sufficiency of means. Now Faith is taken many ways;
sometimes, and very frequently, it is taken for the Gospel, Acts 6. 7. Gal. 1.
23. So it is the Gift of God, and he is said to give Faith and Repentance when
he gives the Gospel, which is the Word of Faith; and so Faith is the Gift of
God; and when any Soul is by the goodness of God led to repentance, God is said
to give Repentance. Also God gives the power or ability to repent and believe,
or else Man could do neither; yet does not God's Grace destroy our Duty, tho
God gives not only Grace necessary, but also sufficient for yielding Faith and
Obedience: yet the Act or Duty of believing is not God's Work, but Man's, Heb.
11. Romans 10. 17. James 3. 2. And the Person that is regenerate, must be so far
active in the Work, that the Work it self may be as truly and properly ascribed
unto Man, and called his, as it is ascribed to God, and called his Gift: now
this you must believe, unless you have so far forsaken your Reason, as to say,
that Christ acts the Creature's Actions, and so Jesus Christ repents, and Jesus
Christ believes, and Man does nothing. But surely we stand bound to believe,
repent, and obey the Lord if we expect Salvation; these are our own acts, and
it is impossible they should be the acts of Christ; for he that is said to act
any action, is said to do it. Now if when we are exhorted to do these Duties,
Christ should do them for us while we sit still; what sense must we make of
Scripture? must Jesus Christ break off his Sins by Repentance, and amend his
evil ways and doings? or must Christ believe in Christ, or walk in the steps of
Christ? And from hence it will infallibly follow, that Persons shall be damned,
because God did not only make them Believers by an irresistible Power, but also
act their Work too. Says Paul, Romans 8. If ye through the Spirit, not the
Spirit without you, nor ye without the Spirit; intimating that Man must be an
Agent in the Work, it must be his own act, and therefore he is not wholly
passive: neither have we ground to believe God will work these in such a way as
shall be impossible to be frustrated.


Philet. But if God works Conversion in a resistible way, still Free Grace
loses the triumph, and Free will takes the Crown: but when God works, he works
irresistibly, Men cannot resist his Will; if he works, none can hinder it.


Philad. I believe that God has and still works, and none can be able to
hinder; such are the Works of Creation and Redemption, etc. When Man was
fallen, none could hinder the Lord from setting his Love upon him, nor hinder
him from showing Mercy to him, in sending his only Son to die for them; nor
hinder the planting of his Will, and Light in their Hearts, convincing them of
Sin: Nor could the Jews of old, or any in our days, hinder or prevent God from
rising early, and sending his Prophets and Ministers to call Persons to
Repentance; nor hinder him from administering Grace and Mercy to them: nor is it
in the power of Man to frustrate God in raising up Persons from the dead in the
Resurrection, and setting the Godly with Christ in Glory, and all the Rejecters
of his Grace and Love in endless Misery.

Neither do I deny but God has, and may still if he please, convert some by an
irresistible Power; we must not care to limit the Holy One of Israel in any of
his ways: yet it is not God's usual way of working to force Persons against
their Wills to be Holy, and to accept of Life; but he is pressing by his Holy
Spirit, and by his Word and Ministers, which is the ordinary way that the Lord
takes to beget Faith, etc. and therefore Gospel Ministers are said, 2 Cor. 6.
1. to be workers together with God; that is, Ministers do cooperate with God
in order to one and the same effect; not that Ministers in their pressing and
preaching should so work with God, as to be able to do as much as God himself
does in persuading Men, but rather they work after one and the same way:
Ministers in their preaching incline and move the Heart of Men to accept of
Christ; and this he does perswadingly, without forcing or necessitating their
Wills to such or such Election: this is God's usual way of working in the
dispensation of his Divine Will.


Philet. But I tell you it is effected by the irresistible act of free Grace,
Persons are altogether passive in the work of Conversion, yea have no more
power to stir than Lazarus had when he had lain four days in the Grave. Persons
are dead in Sins and Trespasses; and what less than the almighty Power of God
can cause them to live a spiritual Life, I do not know. You ought not to
believe there is any annexed Power in the act of Conversion; does not the
Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. speak of the exceeding greatness of the Lord's
Power, wrought in them that believe, according to his mighty Power which he
wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead?


Philad. As for your urging Christ and Lazarus being both dead, to prove
Persons as unable to act in Conversion, it is impertinent: for tho the Lord in
raising up Christ did the work wholly of himself by his mighty Power, neither
was Lazarus able to act any thing in the Grave toward restoring his Life; yet
in the Work of conversion, the Lord comes to a Creature which he has by free
Grace furnished with Abilities to do what he requires of him. And Lazarus after
he heard the Voice of the Lord, and received Life, was active, and came forth;
and so when Persons hear the Voice of the Lord, and are thereby raised from a
death in Sin, or a deadly custom of Sinning, to live soberly, justly, and
godly, this is said to be a raising from the Dead, and a new Creation begotten
again, and by Faith and Repentance making new Creatures: tho the Lord bestows
Grace sufficient for the yielding to the Voice of the Lord when he calls them
by the Gospel, yet through the alone proper fault of Man it becomes unfruitful;
for the Lord does not usually come to Persons in such a mighty Whirlwind, as 1
Kings 19. 11. to force their consent, and carry them headlong to their duty,
and irresistibly compel them to embrace eternal Happiness, and show such a
Miracle of his mighty Power, as he wrought in Christ when he raised him from
the dead, or upon Lazarus when he had lain four days dead in the Grave.

Now it is true, the Power by which Christ and Lazarus were raised from the
Dead was irresistible, neither were they able to oppose it; but those ways
which the Lord usually takes to bring Men's Wills into a compliance with his
own, is not so irresistible that they cannot any ways oppose it. How very
frequently have Persons grieved the Spirit of God, and resisted the Holy Ghost,
and preferred a darling Sin, and a beloved Corruption, before the Grace of God?
but you seem to hold that no Sinner is converted without such an Omnipotent
Power put forth for his conversion as was wrought in Christ, etc. and therefore
cannot be resisted; but this is more than you can prove, either in your own
conversion or any others. Tho you sometimes tell us how passive Persons are in
Conversion, yet at other times you make Faith and Repentance two parts of
Regeneration; and how Persons can be said to have either, and yet be passive,
neither I nor you know. Besides, when those of your way give us an account of
the Conversion of others, they tell us of the frequent resisting the Lord's
striving with them, and the great wrestlings which have been between Faith and
Reason, Flesh and Spirit, and the many Prayers, Tears and Agonys Persons have
gone through before the new Birth has been completed.

Pray do but consider what Mr. Keach has written in his Travels of true
Godliness: The visits that God gave to all sorts of People, Professors and
Profane, the pains he took with them to have them open the Doors to him, and
yet could find none that would entertain him; and the bitter lamentations
Godliness makes thereupon, that he may beg, as it were, upon his bare Knees to
be entertained by them, but in vain; for they will not mind him, nor take him
in, but put him off from day to day till Death seize them: Surely if Persons
were as dead, and as unable to act in Conversion, as Lazarus that had lain four
days dead in the Grave, here was no reason for Godliness to complain, but
rather others might complain, because Godliness did not break open the Doors,
and rouse these dead Souls out of the sleep of Sin, and cause them, by an
unresistible Power, to receive him. And at last when they fully embraced him,
yet he was forced to be laborious, as you may see, page 158, 159. Yea,
Godliness puts him upon endeavoring to obtain the Blessing by his diligence
and pains in God's ways, it being the only way to be rich in God; and plainly
tells him, that unless he will stir and labor to open the Door, he shall never
come into his House; and so shows him how teachable the Moral of that Fable in
Aesop is, of a Man that was fallen into a Ditch, and lying there almost
drowned, who calling to Jupiter to help him out, received this Answer,
Endeavor to get out, and Jupiter will help thee. Surely this could not be said
to those that are altogether passive in Conversion, or to such as could not but
obey.

And indeed too often, the Lord knows, do poor frail Men make a repulse against
the Operation of God's Spirit and Grace upon their Hearts; and very seldom, if
ever, does the Lord work so omnipotently or forcibly, that Men cannot but
believe and obey him.

For he that says, God works in us to choose irresistibly, does in effect
say, he so works in us that we cannot choose but choose, which is nonsense; and
therefore consider these things.

First, He that is wrought upon by God to believe, obey, or persevere
irresistibly, cannot possibly do other wise.

Secondly, He that cannot possibly do otherwise than he does, cannot possibly
choose but do what he does.

Thirdly, He that cannot choose but do what he does, does clearly do it whether
he will or no.


Philet. The Apostle tells us, that God works in us, to will and to do of his
good pleasure, Phil. 2. 12, 13. The Lord works upon the hearts of his Children
by such overruling and prevailing force, that they cannot withstand it if they
would.


Philad. It is God that works not only to do, but to will and to do; by his
prev^ing Grace he works in them to will, and by his assisting Grace to do,
yet by neither so irresistibly, but that they must work out their Salvation
with fear and trembling too. Grace does not destroy, but strengthen, our Will.
Is our choice or liberty lost, because it is guided and enabled to do that
which is good? If I can do all things through him that strengthens me, then can
I, through him, choose the good, or refuse the evil; which would not be chose if
it was whether I would or no.


Philet. Pray what say you to Paul, was not he converted by a most miraculous
Operation, and a mighty Power?


Philad. I know and believe that Paul's Conversion was effected in a very
extraordinary way, and as miraculous as any we hear or read of; Christ himself
appearing from Heaven, and speaking by audible Voice to him: neither do I deny
but God may still, if he please, and no question does in some special Cases,
and in order to some great and special End, open the Hand of his Bounty much
wider to some in the vouchsafement of the Means of Grace and Salvation, than
ordinarily he does to others. Yet to say all Conversion is so miraculous, or
that God does as much for the Conversion of every one that is converted, as he
did for Paul, is not true; neither can you prove that Paul's Conversion was
perfected by the Vision; for it is plain he was directed to Ananias to be
farther instructed in those things that did relate to the Gospel, and what he
was farther to do. Yea, and if you will compare this with Acts 26. 19. as
powerful as this Call was, yet it did not (says Grotius) take away the power
of resisting. God will have voluntary Obedience, not forced, Isa. 50. 5. Psalm.
95. 7. Heb. 3. 7, 8, 15. and 4. 7.


Mar. Whether you really intend it or no, yet you bring all to this, That Man
meriteth his own Salvation; and he may thank himself if he be saved, because
it is his own goodness and towardliness in improving that Universal Graee which
others did not improve: so they are not saved by mere Grace, nor from any
special discriminating Grace from the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to them; and
whereas God has ordered it so that no Flesh should glory in his presence, you
lay a Foundation for pride and self-conceit, and make poor provision for
admiring free, special, discriminating Grace here, and to Eternity.


Philad. I do not find this term, discriminating Grace, in the Scripture; Grace
properly signifies Love and Kindness, Favor and friendly Acceptance: and as
for free-Love, free-Kindness, free-Favour, and free-Acceptance, there is
nothing more required, but that it be not deserved, for that is undoubtedly
free that is undeserved: so that what we do, or can do, does not in the least
oblige the Lord to bestow any Love or Favor upon us (which I have already
showed it cannot) still that of the Apostle will stand good, Ephesians. 2. 8. By
Grace you are saved, through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the Gift
of God. So that all boasting is excluded, since we cannot change our Hearts,
cannot repent of our Sins, or believe on him by virtue of our own natural
Abilities, but by the aid and assistance of Divine Grace. Man's Perfection and
Felicity is derived from God, and we live daily in a necessary dependence upon
him for his Grace, and the Aid of his Holy Spirit to repair our Strength, and
assist our Faculties, and every way to enable us to perform those Duties which
are due to so Sovereign a Lord, and as it becomes Creatures to do.

Yet still we are to remember that his assisting Grace does not destroy our
Endeavors; for as we can do nothing without God, so he will do nothing for us
without our selves; and as God works in us to will and to do, etc. so Persons
are to work out their own Salvation with fear and trembling, and not think to
sit still and take their ease, and live in a carnal state, without improving
those means that God has vouchsafed them to repent and believe, till the Lord
by an irresistible Power pluck them out of their Sins. This we are not to
expect, neither are we to thank our selves if we be saved, but God's free Love
and Bounty is to be acknowledged the sole cause of our Salvation; neither can
it be any diminution to Divine Goodness to say, that unless Man does concur
with the first Cause, the End cannot be obtained, since Faith, Repentance, and
Obedience to the Lord, is made a condition with reference to Eternal Life.
Suppose a Prince should see one that has riotously misspent his Portion in great
want, and he out of his free Bounty should profer him a Sum of Money sufficient
to supply all his Wants, discharge all his Debts, free him from all fear of
Arrestments, and enrich him for ever in this World, provided he will but come
to him, and put forth his hand to receive this Treasure, he shall have it; if
he will not, he will give it to those that will: Will any say that this was no
free act of Love, because it had such Conditions propounded with it? or if any
one should refuse so kind an Offer, tho upon such terms as these, and will not
come to him, nor put forth his hand to receive any of his Gold or Silver, but
will rather pine away or rot in a Goal, unless he will force it into his Pocket
whether he will or no; would not all People look upon this as the greatest
folly and imprudence in the World? What, be loaded with Bags of Gold and
Silver, and discharged from all Wants and Fears, and yet not so much as reach
out the hand to receive them? Well, suppose he should put forth his hand to
receive this Treasure, is it the act of receiving the Money, or the Money
received that enricheth him? surely tho his putting forth his hand was a means,
yet it was the Money received that enriched him, and he had cause for ever to be
thankful to him, and admire his Love, and Bounty, and free Gift; here would be
no cause for such a poor Wretch to pride up himself, as if by his own power and
towardliness he had merited such Grace and Favor, but rather the contrary: so
in spirituals. O here will be enough for Souls to admire, and that to Eternity,
the signal Acts of God's free Grace and Favor, in that he has provided such
effectual Means, and afforded them so powerful Aids and Assistances, in order
to make them holy, and to bring their Wills into a compliance with his own. And
I desire you to consider whether it will not be an aggravation to the damned to
think, that they might have been happy as well as others, but that they
wilfully refused Grace and Mercy when it was tendered to them.

1. Now if Conversion is to be wrought only by the irresistible and
unfrustrable Power of Grace; why is it said that some resisted the Holy Ghost,
and made void the Counsel of God against themselves, and would not hear, come,
nor obey his Voice, but closed their Ears, and hardened their Hearts? as may be
seen Acts 7. 51. Luke 7. 30. Acts 13. 46. and 7. 39. Prove. 1. 24, 25. Zac. 7.
11, 12, 13. Jer. 5. 7. and of others, that they heard the word readily, and
received it cheerfully, and obeyed it from the heart, as Acts 2. 41. and 13.
47. and 6. 7. and 17. 11. Romans 6. 17. Now how can any of these be attributed to
those who either can no ways believe and obey, it being wholly above their
power; or could not but believe and obey by the force of Grace no ways
resistible?

2. But again, if God by a strong hand of irresistible Grace works conversion
in all, then all the Exhortations, Threatenings, and Promises, made unto Sinners
in order to their repentance and believing are made in vain, yea bootless and
ridiculous. The Divine Decree does not impose any real and fatal necessity on
any, in respect of their eternal safety or ruin; for the Voice of Reason must
needs proclaim those Laws and Constitutions unjust, which plainly forbid and
prohibit that which a Man cannot possibly assume or avoid, nor can no more be
changed by our most earnest endeavors, than we can stay the course of the
Heavens, or fly in the Air. Mr. Hockins on God's Decree, p. 122.

3. If we have not a sufficiency of Means vouchsafed by the Lord to repent,
believe, and obey him, then does the Lord deal more severely with Men under the
Covenant of Grace, than under the Covenant of Works: now I say, I suppose you
will not deny, but that the Lord endued Adam with sufficient Means for the
persormance of that Covenant, and so to obtain the Reward of that Covenant; but
now if the Lord should under the Covenant of Grace require of Persons a ready
submission to his holy commands, and yet pass a Decree that they should not
move one step forward in the way of Obedience, and wholly deny his Grace to
them; does he not deal more severely with most of Adams offspring under the
Covenant of Grace by Christ, than under the Covenant of Works in Adam,
requiring only possible things in the first, and impossible things in the
latter? And says Hockins on God's Decree, page 189. If a Master should be so
severe to require as much work of his Servant when his hands are fast tied, as
when he is at liberty; this would argue an unheard of Cruelty, joined with the
greatest Severity.

4. Nay if Persons be not enabled by Grace to repent and believe the Gospel,
they are thereby laid under an absolute necessity of despising it, thereby
making themselves more the Children of Wrath and Death than before, Heb. 2. 3.
How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation? clearly implying, that if
Men by means of the Gospel, and the Grace offered to them therein, be not
brought to repentance, and forsaking of Sin, those Sins which they commit under
the Gospel, will turn to a more dreadful account to them: so that it is clear,
that in case Men be not through Grace enabled to repent and believe the Gospel,
they are in a worse condition under the Covenant of Grace, than they could have
been were there no such Covenant made or tendered to them: nay, and by this,
Persons sin by necessity; this is to make God the Author of all the Unbelief
and Sin in the World.


Mar. All we say is, that he never purposed to bestow that Grace upon them who
perish, which of his good pleasure he purposed to bestow upon others, but to
leave them to their Sins, and to Condemnation for them.


Philet. God is not the Author of Sin in any: for tho Sin will infallibly
follow this Preterition, or non-Election, with a sufpension of assisting Grace;
it follows not as an Effect from its true Cause, but as a Consequence upon its
Antecedent. Hence he is no more the Author of Sin, than the Sun is of the
Darkness which follows after its departure; for this Preterition respects Man
lying in the corrupt Mass, and God ows nothing to him but Justice; Grace comes
down from Heaven, but Sin and Iniquity grows at home in the Sinner's own Heart:
neither was God any ways obliged to give restituent Grace to fallen Man, God
may do what he will with his own; may not the Supreme Lord deny a free Benefit,
without being the Author of Sin? God indeed permits it, but he does not work
it.


Philad. I shall not trouble my self about the distinction of God's Will into
Antecedent and Consequent, (being made use of more to show Scholarship than to
Edification) yet it is likely it may be found in sundry places of Holy writ:
for Grace, and the means of Salvation, are always in the first place vouchsafed
unto Men before Salvation or Condemnation is actually conferred or inflicted
upon any. God's Antecedent Will is, that every Man should repent, that they may
not perish; it is his consequent Will that every one shall perish that will not
repent: yet is the Antecedent and consequent Will or Intention of the Lord both
equally Eternal, equally Honorable and worthy of him.

But now what you hold in this case is not so, it being contrary to right
Reason, and the tenor of God's Word; and notwithstanding your distinction, God
must become the proper and direct cause of Sin; for Sin and Disobedience must
unavoidably follow God's detaining Grace necessary for the avoiding of Sin, as
the Effect does its Cause. Now if God withhold Grace needful for the avoiding
of Sin, and knowing infallibly what will follow upon it, must needs be the true
moral Cause of Sin, for the withdrawing of Divine Grace you hold is the
Antecedent, then Sin and Impiety must needs be the Consequent: as the Sun by
withdrawing its Light, Darkness consequently follows; so if God be the chief
Cause of that which is the Cause of the Reprobates Sin (which you do not deny)
he thereby becomes the true and proper cause of their Sin, as you have it in
God's Love to Mankind, p. 115, 116. That which withholdeth a thing, which being
present would hinder an Event, is the Cause of that Event: As for Example, He
that cutteth a string in which a Stone hangs, is the cause of the falling of
that Stone; and he that withdraws a Pillar which being put to, would uphold a
House, is the true cause, in Men's account, of the falling of that House: and so
if God withholdeth from Reprobates that Power which being granted them might
keep them from falling into Sin, he does thereby become a true moral cause of
their Sins: in whose Power it is that a thing be not done, to him it is imputed
when it is done, says Tertullian.

Yea, and by this, Sin, if it was Sin, could not become worthy of Eternal
Punishment; for certainly God will not inflict Punishment upon Man for that
which he himself was Author of, and which Man could not possibly avoid, being
necessitated thereunto by a fatal Decree. I do grant you, God owes nothing to
any Man, I also grant you that Grace comes down from Heaven, Jam. 1. 17. and
that Sin and Iniquity grows at home in the Sinners own Heart; yea, the best of
Men are exceeding prone to Sin by the pravity of their Natures, yet none are
compelled to Sin from any withdrawings of Divine Grace, unless first abused;
neither does the Lord deny his Grace to any, but to those who too often and
presumptuously abuse it; neither can you prove in God's Revealed Will, that he
has either antecedently or consequently passed any Decree upon any Man
personally considered, there by excluding him from Salvation, before he
voluntarily excludes himself by such sinful miscarriages, which render him
utterly incapable thereof.

But to return to what we were upon; And,

5. If Persons be not by Grace put in a capacity to believe and obey the Lord,
they thereby become excusable if they do not obey; because the Plea of
insufficiency, or want of Power to believe, is an excuse possible: but surely
the Means and Power which through Grace the Lord has vouchsafed to Men, will
leave them without excuse, if they prove wicked and unbelievers; they will have
nothing to plead for themselves when they come to stand before the Tribunal
Seat of Christ, but will be as speechless as the Guest was without a Wedding
Garment: for if the Heathens be without excuse, in that they did not glorify
the Lord by the means vouchsafed to them, how inexcusable shall all those be,
that under greater Men's and Light shall prove wicked and ungodly? which could
not be if the Lord had not granted a power to do better. And I desire you to
consider whether you believe any Man shall be condemned for not doing of that
which was unpossible for him to do,

6. If such as die in their Sins through unbelief have not through Grace a
sufficient power to repent and believe in order to their Salvation, then does
God in his most earnest inviting them to believe, rather insult over them in
their weakness and misery, than intend any real benefit to them; which to
conceive, is most unworthy of him, and not far from blasphemy: for does not
this your Opinion represent God full of guile?

1. In his passionate Wishes, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. Psalm. 81. 11. Isa. 48. 18. Jer. 44.
4.

2. In his mournful Expostulations, Isa. 5. 3. Jer. 2. Ezekiel. 33. 11.

3. In his commiseration of poor Sinners, Hos. 11. 18. and O Jerusalem, etc.
Mat. 23.

Now thus to profess Love to Man, and be earnest with him to do that for his
safety, which he knows to be impossible for him to do, looks too much like
Guile disguised under a Mask of Candor and Goodness, which is far from him to
be guilty of.

And pray you to what end are all his Promises in Scriptures; are they not to
spur us on to a holy and pious Life? but how vain are they, when they are upon
condition of our repentance, believing and obeying the Lord, which is as
possible to perform without Grace, as to eat up a Rock? Now if God makes a
promise to give us Heaven on condition we do believe, and yet never gives us a
Christ to believe in, nor power to believe, these are Promises equal to a bare
denial: but far be it from the most High, that any of his Promises should be
either false or fraudulent; his Promises are in Christ Yea, and Amen; they are
as unchangeable as his being, they are not fair to look on (like the Apples of
Sodom) but afterward die in a mere nothing of performance.

And to conclude this Point, I must needs tell you that I look upon all those
no better than ungrateful Blasphemers and Liers, that say God has required us
to perform those things which he has not given us abilitys whereby we may
cooperate with him in doing those things which he has enjoined us to do, and
in avoiding those things he has forbidden, and yet it shall be our
Condemnation. Calvin himself acknowledges, that Man's refusing God's Grace,
evidently presupposes there is in every Man a real power to embrace it.


Philet. But do you hold that God gives special discriminating Grace to all?
you ought to make a distinction between God's Grace, for there is common Grace
and special Grace; his common Grace is given to the whole Universe, but his
special Grace only to the Elect.


Philad. I believe God gives not his Grace to all alike, but to some more, and
to others less, according to the good pleasure of his Will; yet he is wanting
to none but such as are wanting to themselves: O Israel, thy destruction is of
thy self, Hosea 13. 9. Man's destruction is of himself, for not faithfully
doing of that which God by his Grace has enabled him to perform: But, pray
what is this you call common Grace, and what discriminating Grace?


Philet. Common Grace is the single Talent of Reason and Understanding, with
the good things of this Life which all Men enjoy; and those that live under or
within the sound of the Gospel call, are under the external Offers of Grace (we
are not under the Law but under Grace, that is, the Gospel) yea and may from
thence receive common Grace, viz. Illumination, Conviction, legal Humiliation,
etc.

But special Grace is an inward Work wrought in the Hearts of the Elect by the
irresistible Power of the Spirit.


Philad. Pray tell me one thing, For what End and Use is God's Grace given to
any, let it be never so small? was it given to do Evil?


Philet. No.


Philad. What then, to do nothing withal?


Philet. No, Men that receive it are not to be idle with it.


Philad. Then doubtless it was to honor and glorify the Lord with it here on
Earth, and through Christ is sufficient to glorify him in Heaven, if he be a
faithful improver of it.

But it does appear, that those that have received one Talent, have received a
small measure of Grace; this you will not call by the name of Special Grace:
what, is not the least measure of Grace which we enjoy from God, a special
Favor? and is not Grace, as it comes from God, whether great or small, the
same in Nature? and will not the least measure of Grace, faithfully improved
through Christ, lead us to Heaven, and the non-improvement of it lay the
receiver under unpardonable guilt? for we shall be accountable to God for what
he gives, and no more. God did not require the improvement of two Talents of
him that had received but one; neither did the Lord take away the one Talent
from him that had it, till he hid it, and would not improve it.


Philet. Why, he that had received the one Talent received but common Grace;
and one reason he could not make that one Talent two, was, because he had not
special Grace to enable him to improve it: so tho he might have received so
much as to leave him without excuse, yet it was not sufficient for Salvation.


Philad. But it was not sufficient to leave him without excuse, if not
sufficient to effect that which the Lord expected from him; and still Men's not
believing or obeying the Lord, must be laid at his door; as if God would damn
Persons for not improving their Talent, that never had sufficient Means or
Power to do it. You in effect say that God requires Persons to believe and obey
him, yet he has not enabled them so to do; is not this plainly to say, God
exacts more of his Creatures than they are able to do? God grant you repentance
for these your hard sayings: Surely if he that had received the one Talent, had
not thereby received power and opportunity sufficient to improve it according
to the Lord's Will, it would not have been so provoking in the sight of the
Lord, as to cause him to pass so heavy a Doom upon him, as to be bound hand and
foot, and cast into utter Darkness. This is not like the Righteousness and
Equity of God's Proceedings with wicked and ungodly Men, to bring the Vengeance
of Eternal Fire upon the Heads of those who did not do that which was
impossible for them to do: surely we shall be accountable to the Lord for no
more than what we receive from him, according to that principle of Equity
attested by our Savior, Luke 12. 48. for unto whom much is given, of him much
shall be required; and then by the rule of contraries, unto whom but little is
given, but little shall be required. He that has one Talent, must be only
accountable for that; and he that is faithful in a little, shall be ruler over
much. And seeing you pretend very high to Grace above others, know this, God
expects suitable returns; he that improves his one Talent well, shall be
rewarded with a well done good and faithful Servant; when thou with all thy
Light and Talents, if not improved according to the Will of the Doner thereof,
shall receive the greater condemnation; and then instead of free Love, thou will meet with just Wrath, therefore fear and tremble lest gracious Favor be
abused.

But come, Philetus, let us leave this; I believe you cannot make it out, how
the Gospel should be preached to those that God has not given a Christ to
believe in, nor power to believe: You know it was the Gospel Ministers Work,
and the first thing they were to do, was to say, Peace be to this House, Luke
10. 5. But what Peace or Glad-tydings could they bring or speak to those where
God intended none?


Philet. But it is not known whom the Lord has chosen to Life, and therefore
the Word of Life is to be preached to all, tho only those will receive it whose
Hearts the Lord opens by his mighty Power; so that our Ministers preach the
general Love of God as much as you do.


Philad. I know it, they are forced so to do, or to preach themselves out of
doors; very few being so true to their Opinion as one I lately heard of, that
after he had been exhorting his Hearers a great while to Dutys, at last told
them, That he did not know whether Christ died for one Soul amongst them. And I
believe very few ever heard any of your way that have managed any Theme, but
are necessitated to assert and own it, otherwise such their Discourse would be
as inconsistent in it self, as it is far from Truth; tho many in their Sermons
speak much in their Exhortations to Holiness; and when they take a Text of
Scripture from thence, labor to prove their Notions a Truth: while they raise
their Doctrine, and give Reasons, they seemingly go on fairly, till they come to
the Applicatory part, where they knock all to pieces.


Mar. It Is true, many or most are to blame upon that account; I have plainly
told them of that my self, that in private they have been one with me, but in
public quite other Men, as much for the general Point as you are.


Philad. Tho they are professed Enemies to general Redemption, yet it is of
that use and necessity, that they are forced to argue many things upon that
account; neither can they be without the service of it in the carrying on many
of their Affairs; yea, and many times dissemble it, it is so odious in most
Christians Eyes. If we look within the Confines of our own Nation, very few of
the Church of England but own and believe Christ died for all; yea, I am
informed, that there are hardly six of your Opinion in both Universities. The
Quakers generally, not one that I hear of, but look upon it unworthy the belief
of a Christian: Not to mention any others, you your selves are greatly divided
about it, and the most zealous of those that hold it, dare not preach what they
believe to the People, lest instead of People (which you say are as passive in
Conversion as the Stones in the Walls) they should have none but Stones to
preach to.


Mar. Surely if Christ died for all, with an intent to save all, then all would
be ^ved, and how comes it to pass that any miss it? Universal Redemption must
needs procure universal Salvation; Christ's Blood must needs effect that for
which it was shed.


Philad. That Persons miss Salvation, is not for want of a Jesus, nor for want
of the free tenders of Grace, nor for want of an Advocate; none can charge
their eternal ruin upon the Lord, Hosea 13. 9. but it is their not believing on
the only begotten Son of God, their rejecting Light, and loving Darkness,
taking pleasure in Unrighteousness, and because they refuse to come at Christ's
Call, and will not open when he knocks, nor take his Counsel, nor mind those
things that make for their Everlasting Peace, but abuse the Lord's patience
waiting upon and striving with them, and so come at last to perish through
their own vile, stubborn, and wilful Obstinacy, Prove. 1. 24, to 32. 2 Pet. 2.
1, 2. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12. God does not necessitate any to be wicked,
neither does he withdraw Grace necessary, unless first abused, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.
The Lord is with you while you are with him, etc. 2 Chronicles. 24. 20. There is no
let in God that all Men may believe and be saved. Nay, what could God have done
more for Man, that he has not done? Isa. 5. 4. that is, what God in his Wisdom
thought meet to do, and which was most agreeable to those Properties and
Principles of Reason and Understanding placed in Man. For,

1. God has placed in Man an inward Witness, to wit, Conscience, which if it
be hearkened unto, will convince of Sin, and lead to Duty.

And not only so, but has discovered by his Word to Men the damning Nature of
Sin, and has plainly forewarned Persons, that if they will go on in a way of
Sin and Disobedience, they are like to suffer the Vengeance of Eternal Fire,
hereby to deter them from Evil.

And has also made many most gracious Promises to those that are faithful and
obedient to him, of infinite Glory, incomprehensible Rewards, with the
enjoyment of the infinite, good, and gracious God himself in Heaven to Eternity.

And that Man might escape Eternal Wrath, and obtain Life and Glory; God that
foresaw Man's Fall, did from the beginning purpose to provide a way to make Man
happy; and therefore in infinite Wisdom, and tender Mercy, contrived the saving
lost Man, by sending into the World, and delivering up unto Death his only Son,
that so all the Enmity that was between God and poor sinful Man might be
renewed, and Man through him might have peace with God, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. Romans
5. 1. And also the Lord stands engaged by Promise to justisy and save Sinners
if they believe in his Son, and has promised the assistance of his Infinite
Spirit, to all those that by true Faith and Love seek it of him, Luke 11.
whereby Persons may be able to repent and believe, and able to oppose Sin, and
advance forward in the Path of Righteousness, and persevere therein to the end.
Now, what could God do more than this? So that if any perish, their destruction
is of themselves, Jonah 4.

Dr. Holms, upon John 6. 37. page 17. speaking of God's freely pardoning
Sinners, and of the Bridegroom and Bride (the Church) and the Spirit, all
calling to Sinners to come, Rev. 22. 17. says, Therefore why, O ye Sons of
Men, stand you still in a damnable, mistaken, doubting condition, so as not to
come to Christ? Why will you die, you need not perish unless you will perish;
no Reason in Christ's Will, but in your own Will. You never improved the least
Gift to go forward toward Christ, but he prospered it more: What would you
have more than a Christ suffering, a Christ offering, a Christ entreating that
you may come? And in page 18. having repeated the same words, says, You have a
Christ that has suffered for you, a God that has sent him to you, a God that
invites you to him; and if you come to him, you shall not be disappointed; the
Text says, He that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. All which so
fully and freely declares the Mind of God and Christ to poor Sinners, that
nothing can be said against it, as Isa. 5. 4. Hosea 6. 4. Now, O Sinner, look
about thee, God acquits himself; therefore the fault must lie upon thee, if
thou do not improve what thou have: tho God's Will does not depend upon Man's
Will, yet God will be tied to his own Engagement, and do what he has said.


Philet. Come, forbear any farther discourse on this Point; we all hold that
Man's destruction is of himself, there is no damning to misery without relation
to sin.


Philad. Well, we will wholly break off at this time, only give me leave to ask
you, and your Friend Martha, this Question, viz. What is the reason you go
about to persuade your selves, and others, that God is so severe with the
greatest part of Mankind, as to leave them in the Fall, without giving his Son
to die for them, but leaving them to perish? is it to make your own Salvation
doubtful? for if Christ died for scarce one in a thousand, what grounds have
you to believe Christ died for you, or that you were elected and chosen to Life?


Philet. I do not question but I was beloved of God, and chosen in Christ,
before the Foundation of the World.


Philad. I suppose that you must needs have a high Opinion of your self, that
you are one of the Darlings of Heaven, one beyond all possibility of
miscarrying, one that shall never behold the angry Countenance of the Almighty;
otherwise I believe you would be glad to hear the joyful Tidings of Peace and
Reconciliation with God through Jesus Christ: for tho you represent God at so
dreadful a rate toward others, yet you would not have him appear in such Wrath
and Fury to your self; nay, your Doctrine would not be so readily embraced by
so many, if they thought they themselves were of that number, that God had by
an absolute Decree of Reprobation shut under Wrath, from all possibility of
obtaining Life and Salvation. And should the Lord awaken your Conscience under
a sense of the dread and horror of your being absolutely rejected from Grace
and Glory, from having any saving benefit by the Death of Christ, this might so
amaze you, that all Means and Arguments used to comfort you, might be of no
value; your Opinion walks Antipodes to all words of comfort.

What would it avail you then at such a time to tell you of God's great Love to
his Elect, and that he had such a Love for some few of the degenerate Sons of
Adam, that rather than they should perish, he would give his Son a Ransom for
them, and with him give them Faith and Repentance, and by a strong hand of
irresistible Grace carry them through this World to Glory; but that far the
greater number are left of the Lord to die and perish, for the manifestation of
his Justice and Displeasure against Sin? Would this fasten any comfort upon
you, when you behold the Lord's angry Countenance, only speaking Blood and Ruin
to you? Come, Philetus, this has been so dreadful to many, that they have run
some to the Sword, and others to the Halter. Now seeing that you make the
number of the Elect so small, as not one in a hundred, or one in a thousand;
how can you have any comfortable assurance that you are one of those that
Christ died for, unless you prove it by his dying for all, and so consequently
for you, including a part in the whole.


Philet. What rotten stuff have we here, at what a pitiful rate do you talk!
would you have me believe Christ died for me, because he died for the whole
World? if I had no other assurance and hopes for Heaven than this, I should be
in a miserable state; I enjoy saving Grace, there is an inward Work of God upon
my Heart, and I am really brought over to Christ; this is a better proof that I
am not one of those that are left in the Fall to perish, but one of those
Christ died for.


Philad. I own that there are Marks and Signs which may be sufficient proof of
a Person's Regeneration, and may be a good Mark of Election, and a sound
Evidence for Heaven, Romans 8. 16. the Spirit witnessing with our Spirits. But
now in this weighty concern of our Souls and Salvation, nothing ought to be
believed by any, but what they have grounds to believe from the Word of God,
and from that inward Witness, which if true, never contradicts, but is always
suitable and agreeable to the Word. Now since by your Doctrine the Death of
Christ did not extend to one of a thousand, how is it possible for you to know
that Christ died for you, unless it be revealed in the Word of God, since he
that Christ did or did not die for, must be built upon the Testimony of the
Lord? therefore, I say, show me (if you can) a proof from the Scripture, that
Christ died for you; or if you cannot do that, show me that Man now living in
the World for whom Christ did not die.


Philet. I cannot show you my Name written in the Scriptures, nor no place that
says that he died for I. S. but if I can prove my self a Believer, I can prove
that I am no Reprobate, but an Elect Person, and consequently one that Christ
died for, for believing is an infallible Fruit of Election.


Philad. But what if you mistake, and think you have true Faith when you have
not; there is a Faith which is only sancy, nay mere presumption, a Faith
besides the Word of God: it is easy for Men to deceive themselves and others
with false Appearances and deceivable Marks in this case, since all saving
Graces in the Saints have their Counterfeits in Hypocrites, yea oftener
furnished and set forth with more gaudy paint in Hypocrites than real
Christians; the Devil can show himself to be an Angel of Light. But come to
your Marks of Election, Are you the Child of believing Parents? this is not
sufficient to prove you in the Love and Favor of God; for so was Cain,
Ishmael, and Esau, yet you say they were reprobated. Have you been baptized,
and so initiated into the visible Church of Christ? so have many thousands, who
by their Conversation show themselves to be of the Synagogue of Satan.

Have you done Miracles? so did Jannes and Jambres, yet they were Cheats.

Do you outwardly partake of the Lord's Table? so do many that have no part in
him, as Judas.

Do you preach the Word to others, prophesy in Christ's Name? so may many to
whom Christ will say, Depart you cursed, and while they preach Salvation to
others, miss it themselves.


Philet. These are outward Marks which may very well stand with Hypocrisy; mine
is a supernatural, spiritual, and inward Work, the saving Effect of the
sanctifying Spirit of God. What say you to Faith, is not that a Fruit of the
Spirit?


Philad. Yea, true justifying Faith is; but what would you prove that Christ
died for you, because you are a Believer?


Philet. No, Christ did not die for me, and elect me, because I believe; but
because God elected me, and gave his Son to die for me, therefore I believe; I
being to prove that God loved me, and gave his Son to die for me, and that
Faith is a Fruit of God's electing Love.


Philad. But what if your Faith be the Faith of the Hypocrite, which will
perish? Simon Magus, Acts 8. 13. believed the Doctrine preached by Philip, and
professed his Faith publicly, by being baptized in Water according to our
Lord's Command, and yet in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity; for
his heart was not right in the sight of God. And says Duveil upon this place,
Many that are not of a right heart in the sight of God, may oftentimes excel in
the Gift of the Spirit, for neither did the perverseness and Hypocrisy of Judas
the Traitor hinder him to excel in the Gifts of the Spirit; neither had the
Gifts of the Spirit been so corrupted, 1 Cor. 14. if their hearts had been
sincere, Luke 8. 13. These are they which for a time believe, and in time of
temptation fall a way.

But we are fallen into an Age, that the practick part of Christianity is
almost destroyed by the speculative part: As if the truth of our Faith did not
stand with a course of holiness and strict walking with God. And, as Dr. Burnet
says in his Preface to the Life of God in the Soul of Man, That in more
ancient times those that wrote Apologies for the Christian Religion did appeal
to the Lives of the Christians to prove their Doctrine holy; but alas, when we
write Apologies, we must appeal from the Life to the Rule and Precepts of
Faith, which ought not to be.


Philet. But it has wrought Reformation of Life in me.


Philad. Hyprocrites have been famous for moral virtues; yea, many that you
will not own for Christians in many things, excel you at this day; Remember the
Scribes and Pharisees, read 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21, 22. where you may see, that some
that shall not escape the damnation of Hell, may notwithstanding escape the
pollutions of the World, and that through the knowledge of the Son of God.


Philet. But I see such Excellencies in Christ, that I have longings of Heart
after more intimate acquaintance with him.


Philad. Strong desires may Hypocrites have after Christ, and Heavenly things,
John 6. 34. Mat. 25. 8. Numb. 23. 10.


Philet. But the Lord has given me through the Spirit, a foretast of Heaven it
self in the First Fruits of it.


Philad. May not this be found in Apostates also, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6? So tho I do
not charge you to be a Hypocrite, to pretend to what you do not enjoy, yet this
I say, since every saving Grace in the true Christian has its counterfeit in
others, this will not be sufficient to prove Christ died for you, but must find
better grounds for it than such marks, which are as proper for Hypocrites as
true Believers: you may indeed have an opinion that Christ died for you; but
where are your grounds, seeing the certain knowledge whom Christ died for, must
not be built upon any good which we may suppose in us, but upon the Word of the
Lord: so till it be proved, beyond all Objection, that Christ died for you, and
has not decreed to leave you in the Fall, etc. all comfortable assurance of
your Eternal State will be cut off, if ever you should fall under the dread and
horror of it; and methinks, could I be got to believe that Christ died but for
a few, and no Man could prove Christ died for him but by such Marks as you talk
of, I am so conscious to the failings and deceitfulness of my own heart, that I
should despair of Mercy: but here is my support, that God would have all Men to
be saved, has redeemed all, calls all to Repentance and believing in him,
with gracious promises of Life and Salvation; and now seeing God loves all
Men, and desires their eternal good, therefore mine as well as others, if I by
true Faith apply that (through the assistance of the Spirit) to my self, which
is offered in general to all.

And how does the certain knowledge of this tend to beget honorable thoughts of
God, and fill our Hearts with precious indearedness to Christ? yea, soften our
Hearts when we sin against such Mercy and Grace, yea, make us look upon him
whom we have pierced, Zach. 12. Yea and if at any time poor Souls come to be
bowed down under the weight of Sin, and knows not how to be delivered from
their fears and dangers, but are ready with the Church, Lam. 3. 18. to sit down
and say, My hope is perished from the Lord: Now at such a time as this, when
the Love of God in Jesus Christ is set home upon the Heart, O what work will
this make upon such a one! O the dear Love that this begets in a sincere Soul
for Christ! and O, methinks what a comfort is it to Gospel Ministers that in
their declarations of the Gospel they can offer it to all, and labor with
Souls to bring them over to the Lord! But how faint and cooly must other
Ministers be in tendering of Christ to Sinners; or how can your Ministers
tender Christ to their hearers, or be earnest with them to embrace Christ, or
believe in him, when they do not know whether Christ died for one of them?

So notwithstanding all you have said to prove your Title for Heaven, and to be
one of those that Christ died for, yet since you place Salvation upon the
absolute Decree of God, and that Decree is kept secret to you, you cannot say
of your self you are one of those that Christ died for, and that you shall go
to Heaven because you at present believe; no more than you can say of any
wicked Man in the World, that he is one of those that God has left in the
Fall, without a Savior, since he that is now wicked may be called and saved;
such were some of you, 1 Cor. 6. and you may make shipwreck of Faith and a good
Conscience, fall from your first Love, and so miss Heaven.


Philet. I see you are for falling away from Grace.


Philad. No, I am not, I am against falling away.


Philet. Yea, but you hold that a true Believer, a Child of God, and in a state
of Grace, may so far fall away as to miss Heaven; you are not able to prove by
any Example in the Scripture, where any true Believer has fallen from Grace.


Philad. Suppose I cannot prove by any Example in Scripture, that any true
Believer has fallen; does it therefore follow, that no true Believer can
possibly fall? suppose no true Believers ever yet fell away, yet it is possible
they may.


Philet. How prove you that?


Philad. From 2 Pet. 2. 20. If those that have clean escaped the pollution of
the World, and that through the knowledge, etc. may fall away, then other Believers
may.


Philet. That is not the description of a true Believer.


Philad. How any one can escape the Pollutions of the World, etc. and yet not
be a Believer, I know not.


Philet. It Is meant of gross Pollutions of the World, and so a Man may be free
from the gross pollutions of this World in the midst of inward Impurities and
Hypocrisies; they were free from the gross acts of Sin, so that they did not
come into the view of the World.


Philad. That is as much as to say, their escaping was not real, they had but
seemingly escaped the pollutions of the World; they were at best but
Hypocrites, how then could the latter end of such be worse than their
beginning? Nay, what if they had put off their guise of Religion wherewith they
deceive the World, and appeared like themselves in their swinish nature, could
that make their end worse than before, seeing Hypocrites are like to meet with
the greatest condemnation? Mat. 24. 51. But how those can be said to be
Hypocrites, that have clean escaped the Pollution of the World, through the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, I cannot see, unless Hypocrisy
be no Pollution; and if it be, then were they no Hypocrites, or else they had
not clean escaped the pollution of the World, nor from them that live in Error,
ver. 18. which he affirms. But we must hasten to put an end to this days
Discourse. Now consider Heb. 6. 6. where the Author speaks of the impossibility
of renewing some by repentance in case they fall away: which plainly supposes
there is, or may be such a thing incident to Man; and it is very evident from
this Scripture, that the Author admonishes those whom he judged true and sound
Believers, for he here speaks not of ordinary and common, but of special and
excellent Grace; and yet these are under a possibility of falling away for
ever: for does not the Author give them to understand, that notwithstanding
they were most eminent Saints and Believers; yet through carelessness and carnal
Security, they might make Shipwreck of their Souls, and perish?


Philet. What, are these Characters applicable to none but true Believers?


Philad. If there be any Persons under Heaven that may be judged true
Believers, they are such as these mentioned; and if you can, show me any that
had all these Gifts, and yet were destitute of true Grace.


Philet. I cannot give you a particular Instance of all these meeting together
in one Person that was not a Believer: But can you prove that these
Qualifications are applicable to none but true Believers?


Philad. If they be applicable to any others, give me an Instance where; for I
know of none from whence we have cause to believe that true Believers may
possibly apostatize so far, as to be under an impossibility of being renewed
again by Repentance, and so perish. Again, in 1 Cor. 9. 27. you may see that
Holy Paul, after his Conversion to Christ, took great care and pains to beat
down his Body, etc. which was needless in him, if he were under no possibility
of falling.

Again, that true Believers are under a possibility of falling, appears a
truth, because the Lord by his Holy Spirit in his Prophets and Apostles does,
by many Exhortations, Promises, and Threatenings, labor to prevent apostatizing
in them, and to cause them to persevere.

But if your Doctrine be true, that there is an utter impossibility of a final
falling away; what savor of Wisdom or Sense is there in admonishing Persons
against that which there is no possibility of ever coming to pass; but that God
will by an irresistible hand of Grace and Power, preserve them in a state of
Grace and Favor, how desperately careless or wicked soever they shall be? yea,
tho they fall into ten thousand abominable Sins, yet they shall be brought to
repentance before they die: does not this make all Exhortations, Threatenings
and Promises, unnecessary? For if Men be assured they shall never perish, pray
tell me why they should labor to prevent their perishing?


Moderat. But you must understand that the Means and the End are coupled
together, and that God that has appointed the End, has appointed the Means to
attain the End; and God makes use of our own Endeavors as the Means to attain
Heaven, and prevent our Apostasy; as in the case of Noah, tho he was assured,
and that from God himself, that he should not perish by the Water, yet he was
to make the Ark: here you see that tho he knew God would save him, yet he used
the means, or else he knew he should not be saved; he did not say to himself,
God has bound himself by Covenant to save me; now if I make not the Ark, his
Word is his Word, and he will stand to it; tho I be false, yet he will be true;
tho I do not as I should, yet he will do as he has promised, and therefore
I Will spare my labor: but you see Noah is of another mind, he will not sever
God's Word from the Means; he judged that if he made not the Ark, he was to
look for no deliverance; this was his Divinity. So in Hezekiah's Case, tho God
had promised to add fifteen years to his Life, yet he was to use the means God
had appointed to sustain Life, as Meat, Drink, Rest, etc. yea, tho the Lord had
absolutely promised that he would add fifteen years to his Life, yet there was
to be a Plaster of Figs applied to his Sore in order to his recovery. So
likewise in that of Paul, Acts 27. 22. compared with 31. tho the Lord had
promised there should be no loss of any Man's Life, yet afterward Paul said to
the Centurion, and the Soldiers, Except these (to wit, the Mariners, by whose
skill the Ship should be brought nearer to Land for their safety) abide in the
Ship, ye cannot be safe. So tho Christ had assured his Disciples that they
should never perish, and none should pluck them out of his Father's Hands; yet
he bid them watch and pray, lest they fall into temptation.


Philad. I perceive you look upon these Promises, tho absolutely expressed, yet
conditionally intended; so that none of all these should perish, provided they
should obey wholesome Advice, and use all Means that in them lay for their
preservation; now do you believe this is true in Spirituals?


Moderat. Yea, doubtless.


Philad. I say so too; and dare be bold to assure, from the Word and Promise of
that God that cannot lie, that not one true Believer shall ever perish who
faithfully uses the means God has prescribed, in order to his standing. And if
Philetus be of this mind, we shall soon agree: What say you Philetus?


Philet. I believe, as God has required his Children to use the means of
Perseverance, so he has decreed they shall all of them use it accordingly; and
that he will so overpower them by his Spirit, that it shall be beyond all
possibility of miscarrying.


Philad. Pray produce such a Decree if you can.


Philet. In Jer 31. 33 to 37. you have an absolute Promise of Perseverance made
by the Lord to the Church of God.


Philad. You cannot prove by this Text, that none can fall away: this Promise
was made to the dispersed Nation of the Jews, whom the Lord in his anger had
driven into all Countries, and therefore had a respect as well to the
Unbelievers as true Believers amongst them: Compare Ezekiel. 11. 17, 18. where is
a Promise of the same import; yet in verse. 21. those that walk after their
detestable things, may bring ruin upon themselves.


Philet. John 10. 29. there you have the Omnipotent God engaging himself to
preserve the Saints or sheep of Christ, from either total or final Apostasy.


Philad. John 10. 27, 28. My Sheep hear my Voice, and I know them, and they
follow me; and I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish, etc.
Now I believe that those that are the Sheep of Christ, which hearing his Voice,
follow him perseveringly to the end, he will give unto them Eternal Life;
there is no danger of perishing so long as they remain the Sheep of Christ.


Philet. This cavil is cut off in the next Words; neither shall any pluck them
out of my hands: therefore neither Sin, the Devil, the World, nor Flesh, can by
any Temptation draw the Sheep of Christ from their Faith.


Philad. How, who told you so? I give them Eterual Life; neither shall may be
able to pluck them out of Christ's hands, when once they are landed upon the
Celestial Canaan; they may then say, Now Sin, Satan, and wicked World, do your
worst. But if you would have it respect the Saints as to this Life, yet here is
not the least show of the great power of God engaged for the compelling or
necessitating of them to continue such to the end of their days, and that they
cannot cease from following him; or any promise made to those that for the
present hear his Voice and follow him: yet if they shall quit the Faith, and
draw back from him, they shall never perish, how sinful and wicked soever they
be. Neither is it to be conceived, as if Sin, Wickedness, Looseness, and
Profaneness, could not unsaint Persons, or pluck them from under the Lord's
protection, or separate them from the Love of God; but that Sin will separate
between Men and their God, is evident from Isa. 49. 2. But this rather shows,
That those that continue following of Christ, shall be safe under the
protection and safeguard of the Lord, so as no Creature whatsoever shall be
able to separate them from God.


Martha. As God the Father looks for nothing from Man to partake of Christ; so
it is not Sin nor Evil that can debar any true Believer from a part in Christ.
It is a desperate thing in any so much as to serve a Writ of Damnation upon a
Believer, for in doing so they injure the Lord Jesus, overthrowing the fullness
of his Grace.


Philad. That God has made an assurance to any of enjoying his Love and
Favor, but upon condition of their Love and Loyalty to him, I suppose the
Scripture is wholly silent; nay such assurance is not honorable for God to
make, nor meet for a Creature to expect or desire: for who can imagine that an
infinitely wise, and righteous God, should ever engage himself to any People,
to be their God, unless they be also willing to be his People, to love and live
to him? or what ingenuous Soul, that truly loves God, does desire to be
pardoned, and protected, and delivered from eternal Misery, and enjoy all the
Blessings of his Child, and yet pay nothing of that love and reverence that is
due to him for such Mercys?

And whereas you speak as if it were not Sin and Evil that can make him that
was once a Believer less beloved of God, the Lord having once loved him, he
cannot cease to love him; this I have answered before. But such Expressions as
these cannot be short of Blasphemy, to put such a Saying as this in the Mouth
of the Lord: Tho thou addest Drunkenness to Thirst; tho thou committest
Whoredom, Adultery, Incest, Murder, and every ways cast my Commandments behind
thy back, yet shall thou be precious in my Eyes, and my heart shall be toward
thee in the greatest Love and dearest Affection for ever. And tho this may seem
harsh, yet your opinion leads directly to such horrid conceits of God.

For if Christ be not given Covenant-wise, but the Promise of Life is made
absolutely, without any condition, or proviso at all of Persons Love and
Loyalty to him, then it follows, that the obstinate and resolved Sinners, the
loosest and most debauched Persons may as well lay claim to the Promise of
Eternal Life, as the most faithful and virtuous in the World: and if you say
it is not Absolute, it follows that it is Conditional, for the wit of Man cannot
show a Medium between these two.


Philet. We do not say that no Believers can fall into Sin; fall they may,
fearfully, but not totally and finally.


Philad. Who ever said that the Elect, such that believe and persevere to the
end, ever fell away finally? I know none that say any such thing: the Question
is, Whether the Grace of God may not be so resisted, Isa. 5. 4. Acts 7. 51.
Mat. 23. 37. as to cause the Lord to take away his Holy Spirit from them, and
to suffer them to fall into a state of Perdition? I would know why our Savior
has told us, that from him that has not, shall be taken away even that which
he seems to have, if it be not for this reason, because he has lavished out
his Talent, and has rejected the Power of doing well which was offered him:
surely there is no better arguing than that Man can resist the Grace of God,
because he does; and it is a wonder that such as you are, are not confuted by
your own experience that Grace is resistible, unless you will deny your self to
be of the number of the Elect.

Surely David had Grace to have done better than he did in the matter of Vriah;
but he resisted it, and lay in his Sin a long time; which shows that the
precious Vessels of Election may fall away from Grace (whether we take it for a
gracious Life, or for the Love and Favor of God) for had he been taken away in
his Sin without Repentance, he might have perished,


Philet. Ay, but David being an elected Person, tho he did fall into Sin, God
almighty decreed that David should repent and return; neither could he die
until he had repented.


Philad. By these words you seem to hold, that had David died before he had
repented, he had perished; which he could not have done if he had not fallen
from Grace.


Mar. The Apostle John, 1 John 3. 9. says, Whosoever is born of God, cannot
commit Sin, for his Seed remains in him; and he cannot sin, because he is
born of God: he that cannot sin, cannot fall, either totally or finally.


Philad. What, cannot sin at all! what then says the same Apostle, That if we
say we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, Chap. 1. 8. And so James 3. 2. In
many things we offend all; we Apostles, that are born of God, which are
regenerate, and have the Seed of God abiding in us as much as any, yet in many
things all of us offend.


Mar. I do not say, commit no act of sin, but they sin not as wicked Men sin.


Philad. I believe the same, that Believers, considered as to that state they
are in, cannot sin as wicked Men sin, (to wit) in making a customary trade of
Sin but that they may sin with delight, yea with deliberation, yea plot, and
cast Projects for the committing of Sin, as well as the Wicked; witness David,
2 Samuel 11. But now the Question is, Whether they cannot cease to be Believers,
and then sin as other Men sin?


Mar. The Seed of God does so remain in true Believers, that they cannot but
continue such, yea they must remain Believers while the Seed of God remains in
them, for that keeps them from sinning as wicked Men sin, or from finally
falling; neither can they do any thing to occasion the Seed of God to be taken
away from them.


Philad. This word remain, signifies a present abode, a present being in him;
it does not show a continuance of being: and so it is true, that those that are
born of God, begotten by the immortal and incorruptible Seed, the Word of God,
1 Pet. 1. 23. James 1. 18. and made partakers of the Divine Nature, cannot sin
as wicked Men sin, so long as the Seed remains; but you are to prove that it
cannot but remain, as Mr. Ives says in his Dispute with Mr. Danson.


Mar. The Seed is Grace by your own grant, and it is for the substance of it
incorruptible, unperishable, 1 Pet. 1. 23. John 3. 9. and 17. 3. and 10. 28,
29. and 6. 54. 1 John 5. 13. Peter's Faith failed sadly as to the act, but the
Seed remained, etc. and he was kept by the Power of God that he did not finally
fall away.


Philad. It Is true, the Seed, or the Word of God, is in its own nature
incorruptible, tho all the Men in the whole World should reject it: it is not
called incorruptible because it cannot be forsaken, or taken from those in whom
it has a residence for the present; but because whether it be taken away or
forsaken by them or not, whether it be received or rejected, yet still it
remains in it self incorruptible and unperishable. But you seem to lay the
stress upon the word remain, to show that true Believers cannot fall away; now
the same Apostle John supposes that the same Seed or Word might not remain, by
the word if, Chap. 2. 24. If that which you have heard from the beginning,
shall remain in you, etc. you also shall continue in the Son, and in the
Father, etc. and so Chap. 2. 14. I have written to you young Men, because you
are strong, and the Word of God abides in you; yet that this was subject to be
lost, appears by ver. 28. where he exhorts the same little Children to abide in
him, that they might not be ashamed at his coming: surely the Apostle would not
admonish to that which it was impossible should fall out otherwise.

So Christ promises that the Comforter should abide with his Disciples for
ever, John 14. 6. Yet that does not suppose that it was impossible for them to
fall, for he tells them, Chap. 15. 2. That every Branch in me (mind, in me)
that hears not Fruit, he takes away: And, verse. 10. If ye keep my
Commandments, ye shall abide in my Love. Christ never said to any of his
Disciples, That the most abominable Practices you can commit, shall never
lessen my Love to you; nor is it possible you should die in your Sins, in the
midst of your Impieties; there is a Seed of Grace in you that shall keep you
from final falling away.

It Is true, so long as a Man is a true Believer, the Seed remains; but when
once a Man departs from that state, then the Seed does not abide in him; so
that the word remain, or abide, does not imply that it shall never depart: the
Scripture tells us, John 3. 36. That he that believes not, the Wrath of God
abides upon him; does it follow from hence, that it is impossible for him that
is an Unbeliever, and as such under the abiding Wrath of God, to be a Believer?

So Whoremongers, Adulterers, Idolaters, 1 Cor. 6. 10. Heb. 13. 4. are
threatened with the loss of the Kingdom of Heaven, without any mention made,
that if they repent afterward, the Punishment shall be reversed; yet would it
not be strange Divinity to affirm, That no such kind of Sinners shall enjoy
Life and Salvation upon their Repentance. So God promises Life and Salvation
to just and faithful Men, without mentioning the loss of Life and Salvation
they are like to sustain in case they turn aside; yet manifest it is in
Scripture, such are threatened with death and destruction, as Ezekiel. 18. 24, 25.
and 33. 12, 13. it being ordinary in Scripture to predict unto Men, both Future
Punishment and Reward, according to their present Ways, whether Good or Evil.


Philet. I believe many Believers fall away; but by their falling away they
plainly declare, they were never of the number of real Saints.


Philad. The Apostle speaks of some in his days that made Shipwreck of Faith,
etc.


Philet. Ay, what Faith was it? It was only a temporary Faith, or a light
believing the Gospel, such as believe for a season, and then fall away, like
the stony ground; but this differs much from true Justifying Faith.


Philad. He that received the Seed in stony ground, might be a true Believer as
well as the other; for that Faith which springs from the same Seed of the
Gospel, must needs be of one and the same nature and kind; neither does the
withering of a man's Faith in time of Temptation, prove he never had true
Faith, or that it differs in nature from that which is real and endures to the
end: the Scripture owns no such distinction that I know of; neither do I see
but that that Faith which indureth but a short time, may be as real and true in
Nature, as that which abides all a Man's days.

But if a temporary Faith, a Faith that is not accompanied with Justification
and Salvation, be the Faith that these are said to fall from; then is it such a
Faith that they are exhorted to persevere in: and surely he would not exhort
them to keep such a Faith with which they might perish, and which would
certainly fail them; neither can you possibly prove that those that made
Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, never were true Believers.

Besides, if to fall from a false hypocritical dead Faith, be the Apostasy that
the Scripture speaks of; surely it would not be a Sin of so high a provocation
to God ( Heb. 10. ult.) as the Scriptures declare it to be, and which you in
your preaching and printing declare it to be. But I must away, I shall be
thought long.


Philet. One word more, What say you to John 13. 1. Having loved his own which
were in the World, he loved them to the end?


Philad. Who questions the continuance of God's or Christ's Love to those that
continue in love, and faithful to him? The question is of the continuance of
our Love to him, John 8. 31. If ye continue in my Word, etc. John 15. 9, 10. As
the Father has loved me, so have I loved you; continue ye in my Love: And if
ye keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my Love. Now if there were no danger
of losing their Love to Christ, there were no need for Christ to exhort them to
keep his Commands, in order to their abiding in his Love. But this place shows
that Christ having loved his own, he loved them to the end of his days; it is
not said of their days, but all the time of his abode in the World: here is
nothing of the final perseverance of the Saints, how desperately wicked soever
they be: but what if the Lord should so set his Love upon these his beloved
Disciples that were given him out of the World by his Father, that maugre all
the Frailties of the Flesh, and the Temptations of the World, and the Devil,
yet none of them should be lost, but that they should be carried on through all
Difficulties to the fruition of Eternal Glory? Does it prove, that because some
shall never fall, that therefore no true Believer can fall away? Pray consider
the Parable of the Prodigal Son, the lost Groat, the lost Sheep; does it not
show that a true Believer may be lost, and being lost may be found?


Moderat. I believe God has elected a certain number to Salvation; and those
that are given out of the World to Christ, he will not fail to keep them to
himself, but will, by interposing Grace, so preserve them, that they shall
never perish: But the others that Christ died for, upon condition of their
repentance, believing and persevering therein to the end, I dare not say but
some of these may believe for a time (and that with a true Faith) believe, and
yet fall away so as to perish: these times have afforded many sad and shaking
Examples of this kind, and I am not strictly certain of my perseverance, and so
not fully or strictly certain of my own Salvation.


Philet. O what an uncomfortable Doctrine is this of falling from Grace?


Philad. This Doctrine does not destroy all Christian Comfort, but a Life of
much Christian Comfort may be had out of it, seeing it is the unchangeable
Purpose of God to give Life and Salvation to all those that shall persevere in
Faith and Holiness to the end; and that if they will but quit themselves like
Men, abstain from all foolish and hurtful Lusts, and not wilfully stab their
own Souls, nor pull Misery upon their own Heads, they shall be happy.

And what tho true Believers may be under a possibility of perishing, yet
seeing God has through his bounty vouchsafed unto them so rich, and such full
proportion of Means, thereby to prevent their perishing, and to preserve them
from Apostasy, so that they need not apostatize or perish except they
themselves please; why should it abate any of their Comforts or Hopes of
Salvation, because under a possibility of perishing?

Men may possibly fall into the Fire and be burnt, or into the Water and be
drowned, from the top of Houses and be dashed in pieces; yet no Man lives ever
a whit the more uncomfortable, because under a possibility of suffering these
Evils, because they know God has given them Reason and Understanding to
preserve them from these things. The Apostle Paul knew that he was under a
possibility of being a Castaway, 1 Cor. 9. 27. yet how cheerfully, and at what
an excellent rate of comfort did he live; I am persuaded, says he, Romans 8. 38,
39. that neither death, nor life, nor things present, nor things to come, etc.
The assurance he had, that upon a diligent use of the means which God of his
Grace had vouchsafed to him, he should prevent his being a Castaway, made him
live at that height of confidence and courage which he did.

What can no one enjoy comfortable hopes of Heaven, unless they have a full and
perfect assurance of the continuance of the Love of God to them, how loosely
and profanely soever they live; and that if they commit all manner of Sin and
Wickedness, affront Heaven, defy the Almighty, laugh Jesus and his Gospel to
scorn, yet they run no hazard of losing their Souls? Indeed such a Doctrine as
this (and such is the Doctrine of Absolute and Unconditional Perseverance)
contributes to the peace and comfort of the carnal part in Men, and indulgeth
to them a liberty of Sin; but no Child of God that has received of that Spirit
whereby it can cry, Abba Father, either wishes or desires Heaven or Salvation
but in the way of holiness, and upon that condition which the Lord Christ
enjoined it, John 15. 10. Nor is it possible that any Man should have
comfortable hopes of Heaven, or any assurance of being saved, unless he has,
through Grace, discharged those Duties to which the Blessing and Privileges are
therein promised: This is the Foundation whereupon, through Christ, to build
our Hopes and Comforts, and not that God loves us for we know not what reason,
and that we cannot possibly sin our selves out of his Love, but he will
infallibly bring us to Heaven; no, but says the Apostle, 1 John 2. 3, 5. Chap.
3. 18, 19, 20, 24. Chap. 5. 18. hereby we know and are assured that we are in
God, and that he loves us. But how comes Persons to this? why, if we love him,
and keep his commandments, which if we do, we shall never fall, 2 Pet. 1. 10.

But I must beg your excuse at this time, I cannot stay; only I desire you to
consider this one thing concerning falling from true Grace.

If we consider Faith and Regeneration in themselves, they may be lost, because
nothing in it self is unchangeable but God; it cannot be said of any but God,
that he cannot lie: and if so, then all Men may lie, and that Lie may be our
ruin for ought we know, Rev. 21. 27. And tho I do not doubt but that there is a
State of Grace attainable in this Life, from which Persons by the Grace of God
shall never fall, yet I would not have you affirm of your selves, or any
others, that you cannot fall, how wicked soever you live; but rather remember
we all stand but by Faith, and therefore ought not to be high-minded, but fear,
working out our Salvation with fear and trembling, not lest God should forsake
us, but lest we should forsake God.


FINIS.

