Vid ad Vitam.

BEING A short and sure Way to a long Life.

OR HELMONT JUSTIFIED; AND THE Excellency of Chymicall Medicaments Vindicated.

By George Starkey, a Philosopher.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Richard Hall at the Sign of the Golden
Ball in Westminster Hall. 1661.

To the Right Honorable ROBERT TICHBVRNE, Lord Mayor of the famous City of
LONDON;
George Starkey a Philosopher by the Fire, wishes all temporal and eternal
felicity.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
IT may be wondered at by many, and censured by some, that I to your Lordship so
very a stranger, should be so bold as to presume this Dedication; and your
Honor may perhaps account it as strange, if not rash, that without
pre-acquainting your Lordship, I should so venturously undertake to do it. The
wonder and censure of others I shall let pass, as not esteeming either the
applause or censure of the vulgar, which is as uncertain and as changeable as
the wind: But for your Lordships dissatisfaction, which I only imagine may be
caused by this Dedication, from him who is merely a stranger to your Honor;
for removing of that, let me only crave your Lordships patience, and I doubt
not, but to give such rational excuses of this presumption, as may reconcile
your Honors (not offended, but perhaps somewhat amused) thoughts, toward your
unknown, but cordially honoring servant.

First therefore let me assure your Lordship, that it was not my own motion,
that incited me to present your Honor with this Tractate, (although the worth
thereof may deserve an honorable Patron) for I was sensible what boldness it
might be esteemed, for me so unknown to your Honor, to dare to engage (as I
may say) your Lordship in my quarrel, by calling on your Honor to patronize a
Polemical discourse; on which ground, and for which reason I intended to let it
pass without any Dedication, till at length I was persuaded, by a good friend,
one in command at present in the Army, to do what here I undertake, be
convinced by his solid arguments of the convenience of the same.

Among which Arguments the most commanding was, when he upon his knowledge of
your Lordships inclination, having been long acquainted with your Honor,
assured me how great a lover of Ingenuity and Art he had ever known you, and by
reason of your accomplished parts, how competent and able a Judge of the same:
which was an unanswerable inducement to me, to take the boldness of presenting
this to your Lordship, as to an able person to censure the same according to
its worth and deserts.

Hereby (Right honorable Sir) I shall give a greater luster to the truth for
which I contend, when I submit and prostrate what I have done, to yours Honors
judgment for censure, and at your feet for patronage; confiding so to the
truth of what I have written, as to assure my self, and promise your Honor
such a foster child, as will never shame its Patron; and doubt not, but so
long as the Art of Medicine shall continue in esteem, which will always be, so
long as it is of use, this short discourse will live with credit, and
wherever it is preserved or kept, there it will make mention of your Honors
worth and desert, and will prove a more clear and lasting monument, then any
statue of brass or Marble. For, My Lord, I am past doubt assured, that this
small Treatise will be in esteem not in England only, but in other Nations, as
being drawn out of the fountain of most undoubted experience: in which though I
am severe in reproving common abuses, yet is it not without cause, as if your
Lordships most weighty affairs will permit you so much leisure, as to look into
the Epistle following, and the Book it self, you will see most evidently.

It Is not (my Lord) all our Doctors (but only such as are so qualified,
according to what I reprove) that I tax, and seek to reclaim; for several among
them (to my knowledge) are Chymically given, as namely Doctor Ridgely, Dr.
Gurdane, Dr. Goddard of Oxford, Dr. French, Dr. Bathursts, Dr. Currar, and many
others, who have chosen the Chemical for the true way, and would wholly reject
the other, were they but (Arcanorum Adepti) Masters of those secrets which are
taught and preparable by true Pyrotechny, after which they seek seriously and
sedulously: only some thinking all Art with them already, defend their Method,
against their knowledge and conscience.

My Lord, who can be a fitter person for this Dedication then your self? whose
office calls upon you, and whose power enables you to mind these things here
within your Honors Jurisdiction, whose vigilance and care in your place has
been already eminent in reforming several abuses in this City, which by being
so long undisturbed, could almost have claimed prescription, (were it not that
what is unrighteous cannot claim prescription) but the subject of my ensuing
discourse is a discovery not of an abuse of selling Beer, for which if a man
give a halfpenny too much, he is only so much the poorer, and that is all, but
it concerns the precious life of thousands, and their health, a thing so much
beyond estate, that skin for skin, nay all the world (if a man had it) often
times would he give for to save the same.

This as it is of high concernment to the sick, so ought it to be the principal
care of the Magistrate to see that nothing be maintained under color of Law,
that may really prejudice, and endanger the life and health of any. In vain are
men secured from injury done to their goods, estate, credit, and liberty, while
the most precious of all, their lives, are monopolized, and by color of
Patent, bought and sold. Our Doctors, (I mean the major part of them) maintain
a method of medicine, which I impugn; the Controversy concerns the way of
restoring diseases safely, speedily, and certainly, in which your Honor, as a
chief Magistrate, is nearly concerned; in vain are thieves and enemies provided
against, if a Method be by authority confirmed and defended, which is of more
dangerous consequence as to killing of many actually and immediately, of more
by not restoring such diseases, which may easily be restored, were but the
right way of Medicine allowed and encouraged.

What their Method performs is obvious to, and the byword of the veriest
rusticks in the Nation, and the reason why more cannot be expected from that
Method, is because it is erroneous and defective, dangerous and impotent,
partly lame and ridiculous, partly lamentable and desperate: To this Method as
a remedy of its defects, I have opposed the way of curing and restoring
diseases by powerful Medicaments, which are adaequate remedies to the causes of
the same, and have hazarded the cause in hand, and my reputation on the trial,
if they dare to take me up: But I expect a more churlish answer (by club, or
fist Arguments) that they will endeavor to suppress what they cannot overcome,
against which violence I humbly entreat your Honors interposition, in lieu of
whose protection, in what only is just, and Christian, I promise that if they
will contend with me, I will engage on these grounds, That whatsoever they
shall agree to give me for every Cure, I will forfeit twice as much for every
one not cured in the time agreed on; that is, in all Fevers continual, Fluxes,
and Pleuresies, in four days; in Agues (not Hyemal quartanes) in four fits, in
Hecticks and Chronical diseases in thirty (at most forty) days, (now under
continual Fevers I comprehend Calentures, small Pox, Measles, etc. which are
of that head) provided they will be upon the same lay with me in as many
Patients as I have for my share, which let them be divided by tens, they to
divde one ten, and I another, and always the divider to have the five Patients
which the chooser leaves; I will engage to perform all my cures without
bloodletting, purging by any promiscuous Purge, or vomiting by any promiscuous
Vomit, that is, which will work on all indifferently sick or no, without
Vesication, or Cautery, without making any issue, or curious rules of diet,
without Clyster or Suppository; and let them perform their cures how they can,
by choosing one or more (nomine omnium) to maintain the contest; and if I wave
the combat on these terms, let me be suspended from ever practicing as a
vainglorious boaster, and if they win of me, I will recant my opinion with the
greatest both solemnity and ignominy they can devise to enjoin me to.

This as a trial of Art or skill is the true Touchstone by which I shall stand
or fall if they please, but I fear they will not engage, some of them knowing
that by my Medicaments (besides my own practice) one in Town here cures more
annually, then any of their College, the man a known man for honesty and
Religion, and several others both in this City and the Country, whom I can
call for testimonies of the safety and efficacy of these ^e Pyrotechnical
remedies, who (...) my directions cure many ^^ely and certainly, seldom mis^^g
the final cure, ever giving ^^^^e, unless the fickleness of (...) Patient, or
his extreme ^akness before administration under the same; but I fear to (...)
too troublesome to your Lord^^ip, whose serious affairs will ^^se permit you
leisure to per(...) a tedious Dedication: which ^^ture consideration calls me
off (...) time, and commands me to ^^ke excuse for being already I fear) too
long, only I be^ch with your pardon your ac^^ptance of this small present, as
an acknowledgement of your Honors worth and virtue, and an expression of that
esteem which he has of your Lordship, who is,

My Lord, Your Honors real though undeserving Servant, Geo. Starkey

To the studious lover of Truth and sedulous searcher after Natures secrets,
George Starkey (a Philosopher by the fire) wishes all success and felicity.
THis Apologetical Discourse studious and courteous Reader, must expect to meet
with three sorts of men, and will find various entertainment from each sort of
them.

First, Some who are concerned in this quarrel, and will think themselves much
engaged by it; such are those who are by this short discourse reproved, and
will be apt to complain, that I am too invective and satirical against them.

To whom I answer, that the discourse is indeed polemical, but the first that
entered the list were themselves, whom because they bid defiance to the truth
here asserted, with heaps of reproaches on such who were eminent in this Art
(here defended) I was bold to meet, and to engage conflict withal, and let them
not complain, if they meet with shot for shot, and blow for blow. It Is true, a
mild answer puts away wrath, but that is wisdom where the wrathful party and
his anger is to be regarded, but where equal terms are, there I know no reason,
but a fool may be answered according to his folly. Paracelsus, Basilius,
Valentine, Quercetan, Suchten, Phaedro, Helmont, etc. were men for learning and
worth as eminent as any the most eminent chieftains on the adverse side; and
though of Artists I confess my self the meanest, and most unworthy to
encounter, yet so far as concerns the controversy in hand, I will not give
back an inch for the stoutest of the contrary party.

Are they Physicians by profession? so am I, educated in the Schools as well as
they, graduated as well as they, nor was my time idly spent, but in the Tongues
and course of Philosophy usually taught, in Logic and other Arts read in the
Schools, though I will not boast my self into comparison with any, yet if any
be desirous to assay what I am therein, I suppose I shall give such an account
as not to render my self the repute of an idle mis-spender of my time and years.

It Is not because I never read the usual Philosophy, that I do not embrace it,
nor because I am a stranger to the usual Method of Medicine, that I speak and
write against it, and rather choose the true Chemical way then it.

For the vulgar Logic and Philosophy, I was altogether educated in it, though
never satisfied with it; at length Aristotle's Logic I exchanged for that of
Ramus, and found my self as empty as before: and for Authors in Medicine,
Fernelius and Sennertus, were those I most chiefly applied my self to, and
Galen, Fuckslius, Avicen, and others I read, and with diligence noted, what I
could apprehend useful, and accounted this practical knowledge a great
treasure, till practical experience taught me, that what I had learned was of
no value, and then was I to seek for a new path, in which I might walk with
greater certainty, and by Gods blessing, by the tutorage of the fire, I
attained true Medicines taught obscurely by Paracelsus, but only explained by
labor and diligence in the Art of Pyrotechny.

And that I am a little severe in reproving abuses in the common way committed,
I appeal to themselves, if what I write be not rather too mild then too
invective, if so be that what I reprove be true, and that it is true all the
world knows, and my Reasons to prove my charge will stand firm, till by some of
their champions overthrown, which I doubt will never be.

I would some of their side would dare to enter into the lists and maintain (if
possible) their rotten building, their declaimed Method, to whom I shall give a
short survey of his task.

That all Diseases (in kind) are curable; that I affirm, and they deny.

That the vulgar Medicaments according as they are allowedly prepared, are not
true Medicaments, for want of a right Philosophical preparation.

That he that is a Master of true Medicaments, may cure any Disease, safely,
speedily, and certainly, without Vesications, Fontinels, Phlebotomy,
Catharticks or Emeticks.

That all Fevers continual may be cured in three days, or four at most; and
also Pleuresies; and he who cannot do that ordinarily, without bloodletting or
purging, is no Physician.

That all Agues, yea though Quartans, may be cured in three Fits, four at most,
unless that some Hectical addition be, and make the disease harder of cure, or
the extreme debility of the Patient make him not capable of so speedy recovery,
and yet so in no long time may the Disease be restored.

That salivation in the Lues or Tubbing is a dotage, and that that Disease may
be cured though old (in few weeks) without either.

That Gonorrhoea's, though virulent, may be cured by killing the venom, by
antidotary remedies, in few days, without any purgation, save by urine and a
gentle sweat.

That all Fluxes, though bloody, may be cured in three or four days, without
any Clyster, or Purge, or the like, by appeasing the enraged Archeus of the
place, which is soon done, and the peccant occasional matter, will be avoided
by urine, and ordinary siege, as also by gentle sweat insensibly.

That the true preparation of all Vegetals, takes away all the purging
virulency, and the vomitive quality of them, except only in Opium, whose
deleteriall quality is turned into a strong Diaphoretick, curing the Cough, and
all Fevers, and Agues, except of the highest graduation, which require as
powerful Arcana's, as the Hereditary Gout, or inveterate Epilepsie.

That Salt of Tartar volatized, or made into a spiritual Elixir, with any
essential oil, is an absolute corrector of all vegetal poisons (none excepted)
and is therefore a key to command the specific excellency that is in any
concrete of the whole vegetable family.

That this Elixir alone is a better remedy for any either acute or chronical
disease, then any preparable according to the common dispensatories, and
therefore that way which furnishes its sons with thousands of other Medicines,
must needs be the better way.

That though Opium corrected, after large sweat, the next day cause vomit (with
some only) yet it is not to be reckoned among the common vomits, because first
it works certainly by vomit with none: and secondly the same Medicine takes
away the vomitive quality in all other Medicines or Simples, as Elaterium,
Hellebore black or white, Cambogia, etc. as also the purgative venomes of
Scammony, Zalap, Rhabarb etc. and having corrected them loses its own vomitive
quality together with them.

That by mean of this key specific remedies may be had among the nobler
vegetals (imprisoned (as they are) under the custody of their virulency) for
all diseases in kind, though not so speedy, and as universal, as by means of
the great Arcana's, yet with care, diligence and industry, the cures may be as
certain and safe, though (in the extremest diseases) in a longer time performed.

This is a short summary of my following Treatise, which I shall maintain and
defend against the most stout adversary, that either by polemical writings, or
by actual demonstration, and he that will confute me, let him overthrow those
Aphorisms by argument and by experiment, and Phillida solus habeto.

It Is not unlikely but some captious Antagonist may censure my Aphorisms, as
ostentatory, because many of them do lay down what I promise to be the effect
of the Art by me commended, and many of them describe Medicines unknown to
their sect, and therefore such which they neither do nor willingly would
believe to be in Nature, and therefore may think to put all off with a laugh,
that I should challenge any adversary to fight on ground which for ought they
know is only imaginary, like the ground in the Moon, and against weapons, which
for ought they will believe, are as merely Romantic as the Knights Errant
enchanted spears, swords or shields.

To such a merry Antagonist, I might (as soon as he has done his laughing)
reply in the known verse, fit for the purpose: ^er risum multum facile est
cognoscere stultum.

But I shall forbear any such aggravating proverbs, and come soberly to argue
the case, and to give an account of my so doing, such as to a man rational may
be satisfactory.

Go too my friend, Is not the controverred question concerning the true Art of
curing diseases? you say your Art is the right, and the Art professed by
Paracelsus, Helmont, etc. and commended by me, is wrong: I maintain the
contrary sentence, which sentences of ours being contradictory each to other,
cannot possibly be both true; I to make it appear that I am not ignorant of
your way and method oppose your Diaeticall prescriptions as foppish, your
Bloodletting, Scarifications, Vesications, Fontinels, either by cautery, or
knife, to be cruel, needless dotages, so far are they from being the
prescriptions of true Art.

I oppose your Medicaments as dangerous, provoking nature by their venomous
virulency (as we use to say) ad restim, and forcing it to play one game for
all, hoping that possibly (for it is no necessary consequence) in this
commotion of the Archeus, by being put into such eminent danger, it may forget
its former anger, through the present fear, and in laboring to expel so
dangerous an enemy, may with it dislodge its former troublesome guest; this Art
sometimes takes effect, and often it makes quick dispatch of both disease and
life, and therefore is no more to be used according to true Reasons dictate,
then a man or woman in an Ague or fit of the Gout is to be thrown into a river,
because fear of drowning, or a sudden dangerous fright, has been known often to
cure one, and ease the other.

I have rejected your Cordials, Coolers, etc. as ridiculous, (barely
palat-pleasing) toys, and your diet-drinks, as non-sensical, fortuitous
prescripts, your Locks, Tablets, Species, Conserves of Foxlungs, etc. as only
mimical juggling feats, to multiply your Fees, and swell the Apothecaries Bills.

Had I done no more, I know you would have replied like Oyster-women, and sung
your Triumphs with contumelies and reproaches without allowance; therefore to
cut your Combs before you crow, I have propounded the true standard of being
each of us judged by, and that is by our Work, the only true way of esteeming
each workman.

For when I have spoken what I can in behalf of my way and Medicaments, and you
declamed till your lungs be weary, in commendation of your Method, this at last
will be the searching question to both of us, What is the end of my Art, and
your Method? and whether of both does most good?

The end propounded to, and promised by both, is curing and restoring diseases;
this if your Method can do better then my Medicines, it will be applauded
notwithstanding my contempt of it, and if not, it will fall, notwithstanding
your high commendation of the same.

In the comparison of way with way, and art with art, which is better, it may
be true, that both may be good, but I have proved your Method to be erroneous,
your Art untrue, and your Medicaments to be only nominally such, but really
poisons; and yet if I had done no more, you would I doubt not have
recriminated, (a poor way of answering a Charge) though without any proof.

Now because I did expect from you recrimination, I have to anticipate your
objection, rejected all Mercurial and Antimonial Medicaments, either Vomitive,
Purgative, or Salivative, as being sallets for your own Apparatus, Pigs of your
own Sow, adopted sons of your own Method, as also all Vegetals, (so long as
either Purgative or Vomitive) and their Oils, so long as Oils, and their
Salts, so long as fixed; we renounce from our mystery, and leave them to you,
finding them with you, [ut similes labris lactucas].

But if any of you shall say, that you know not any such preparations as I
mention, and therefore do not believe the commendations of them: then say I,
why do you judge and censure an Art you know not? why condemn you and reproach
Artists, while you understand not what they profess? for shame cease imitation
of the Fox, and condemn not those Hens for lean, and Grapes as sour, which are
too high out of your reach.

We knew your Art both Theorically and Practically, before ever we disliked it;
learn at least this candor from your professed Antagonist.

Therefore according to what we know, we come to your own doors, and dare you
to combat, we defy your Clysters as ridiculous, your Purges, and Vomits, and
Bloodletting, as dangerous; your Issues, Cauteries, Blistering, etc. as cruel
and needless; and in a word, your whole Method we have impugned.

Now because it may truly be replied to what I have said, That if a cure be
never so desperate, or uncertain, or cruel, yet it is good (if it may do good)
to be used, provided no better way can be had, since (not only a little blood)
but skin for skin a man would be content to give to save his life.

Therefore (and very seasonably) did I lay down the efficacy of Medicines
preparable by that Art which I commend, and have instanced in those remedies
which will perform my promise therein, which was an absolutely required task,
for the making good of my assertion.

For if my Medicines would only do what your Method would perform, as speedily
and as safely, yet it were the better, as being more simple, less chargeable,
not tying the Patient to such curiosity in diet, nor by far so cruel, as using
none of all your martyrdoms and butcheries.

But if my Medicaments will perform what your Method accounts impossible, and
therefore dare not promise, nor give hopes of, as in the cure of the Palsy,
Epilepsie, Gout, Agues, Kings-evill, etc. as also the Lues inveterate, without
Tubbing, or Salivation, in Gonorrhoea's of all sorts, without purgation or
vomiting, or detaining within doors, and will cure all acute diseases, as
Fevers, Fluxes, and Pleuresies, Calentures, Smallpox, and Measles, at the
utmost in four days, without Blouding, or Purging, without suffering the
Smallpox to fill, but by an Antidotary killing the venom, attenuating and
avoiding the peccant matter by the pores, and mortifying the venomous corruptor
of the blood, not suffering the Archeus to make any purulent matter; and in all
this performance, not tormenting the Patient with forbidding drink (a common
cruelty in the vulgar Method) but allowing good Beer, and Wine moderately, in
the most deplorable Fevers; if I say this be made good, certainly, ordinarily,
and safely, then it must follow, that your Method is but a bloody cruelty, and
a tyrannous cheat, no more to be pleaded for or defended, then Baal was to be
pleaded for by Israel, who were the people of God.

What I have said of the Medicaments commended by me, I will hazard the cause
totally upon making it good, and can give past instances if required; but if
any shall undertake to combat with me, we shall not go to rake up things past,
for to find examples, but Hic Rhodus, hic saltus esto. If the Methodists dare
to contend with me, if I do not stand contest, let me for ever be branded for a
vainglorious boaster, and till they do that, they must never expect victory.

If their Method have done and can do what I promise by true Chemical remedies,
known to me, and preparable by that Art professed by Paracelsus, Helmont, etc.
let them take up the Cudgels and come forth; or if they will only try me, let
them only give me as much for each party cured, as I will forfeit for each
uncured of a thousand in acute diseases in four days, that is, in Fevers,
Pleuresies, Smallpox, Measles, Fluxes, Calentures, and Agues in four fits, not
Hectical, or if Quartan and Hecticall, in four weeks, provided the strength be
not wasted to despair; and if I slink the proof of experiment, let me be
reputed what they please, and if I cure not six for one, I will recant what
ever I have written publicly; let them do the same if they dare.

And as for the dangerousnesse of my Medicaments, which I know they will
insinuate; that is but a mere Bugbear, by which ignorant people are frighted
without cause, or ground, as the Jesuits are reported to affright their
deluded Catholics, by telling them that the English since the casting of the
Popes Supremacy, are turned into Monsters, which those who know our Nation see
to be but an invention, to keep their people under restraint, from falling into
that Religion, which they call and account Heresy.

I before advised the Reader, that by the volatile Salt of Tartar all Vegetable
poisons are so corrected, as not to leave the least footsteps of the same, and
that without decoction, but only by digestion in a heat answerable to the heat
of the Sun, in which warmth, they in short space are turned into mere real
Salt, which will crystallize like Sugar Candy, tincted according to the
concrete, and retaining so much of its taste and odor, as the [ Magnum
oportet, or vita media] will retain.

So far then are these Medicaments from being poison, that my self will take of
Hellebore, or Elate^um (two churlish poisons) or any other Vegetal, of the most
malignant quality, a dram at a dose, and that on a fasting stomach, and fast
after it two, three, or four hours; and let any Galenist do the like, and I
will lay down the cudgels.

But I have sung long enough to deaf men, I shall have done with these captious
Readers, and shall come to speak a word to those who are better tempered, after
I have first given one word of admonition, to prevent a Critic.

And that is, if that any faults chance to escape the Press, my leisure not
permitting me to attend it, they be attributed to their true cause; one (in
perusing part of this Treatise, as it was brought me by the Stationer before
all was perfected) I observed remarkable, and that is a large Anachronism,
which I cannot tell if or no, it were an error of the Printer, or a slip of my
pen; this I am sure, it is a fault about of the bottom of the 16. page, where
in stead of (though he viz. Aristotle, in many places severely carped at Galen,
(read) be severely carped at by Galen) which was my meaning, not being ignorant
of the number of years between Aristotle, Alexanders Tutor, who was son to
Philip, the first founder of the Grecian Monarchy, and Galen who lived since
Christ, (of whom, and Moses also he wrote blasphemously enough) in the
flourishing of the Roman Empire. Other faults I observed, and some may be which
escaped by observation, where either a word or letter may be defective or
redundant, which any candid Reader may correct with his pen, by the direction
of the sense: and now I come to the second sort of Readers, to speak one word
to them.

And those are such who being indifferent on either side, are apt to incline to
that part, which has and brings the best reason, such perhaps may at first
sight blame me for too tart and Satirical: to whom I shall answer with the
Comoedian, In dicendo is opera plerumque abutitur, non qui argumentum narrat,
sed qui malevoli Poetae maledictis respondet: I do but answer their reproaches
often and betterly cast on Paracelsus, and Helmont, and many other worthy Artists
in the Chemical Mystery, which if I wipe off, and show the impartial Reader,
that they are but spots in their own eyes, which causing their sight to dazzle,
they imagine to be on other men's garments, (which how substantially it is
proved, I appeal to the Reader) then let no man wonder, if I tax their abuses
very sharply, who were wont to make faults in others, and then reproach them as
if they were real.

What I complain against in them, is no more then what several of their
Apothecaries have seriously complained of to me, with protestations how they
are tired out with their Method, the effect of Medicines being such, that an
honest Apothecary dare scarce appear with his Bills, because he so often told that
such, and such, and other things did not the least good, and yet they must
provide and administer what the Doctor prescribes, though he be ashamed after
to ask his money for it, and seldom receives it without grudging or
imprecation. On which account several conscientious Apothecaries have been
enforced through scruple of their trade, to renounce it, and live in the
Country, on my knowledge; and several have lamented unto me the languidness of
their method, and the burden that lay on their spirits in the persecution of
the same.

That Satyrically I call them sometimes Mr. Doctors, as Basilius Valentine
(Domine Doctor) is not because I am ignorant of the impropriety of the speech,
but in imitation of the vulgar, and that not impertinently, knowing the rule
sentiendum cum Philosophis, loquendum ut vulgus; and therefore whoever will be
critical let him spare his Animadversion there, since I have saved him the
pains, and prevented him.

And lastly, I expect some Readers of the Hermetick family; who will esteem
these lines, as true guides to noble Medicines, who I do not doubt will
earnestly earnestly expect to hear some tidings concerning the true preparation
of the volatile Salt of Tartar, to operate on, and to prepare Metals and
Minerals; how by it Vegetals may be prepared has been showed, which give noble
Medicaments for the restoring most diseases of all kinds, such to wit, which
are not too highly graduated, but where the case becomes too difficult for
Medicaments of this rank, there let the Sulphurs of Mineral bodies, such as
Antimony, or Bismuth, be cohobated with an essential Oil, till both be brought
over the Helm: this volatile Sulphur though foetid, turn by a due circulation
into an essential Salt, and then have you a remedy for most deplorable
diseases, which may be further specificated with noble Vegetals, as the Artist
pleases, and the strong odor of it by rectification with spirit of Wine taken
away.

Yet the Spirit of Tartar thus volatized with Oils, is the most languid of
any, (there being several ways to perform the same thing) and each way giving
more or less noble Spirits) but one is most noble, and is inferior to none, but
the Liquor Alchahest, by which Mercury is so dissolved as to be brought into a
sweet Oil or Salt, and fragrant, on which though the dissolvent be coagulated,
yet it is so noble a preparation of the same, as may be truly succedaneous to
those of the highest liquor; thus also may be made the anodynous Sulphur of
Venus, and the glorified Sulphur of Antimony, or of Regulus Martis, or of the
Metallus primus, or of any Metalline body under Luna, and yet on the perfect
bodies also, it acts by dissolution, and gets a virtue inferior to few
Arcana's; of which operations I have treated in a peculiar Treatise, entitled,
The Art of Pyrotechny explained and confirmed, etc. to which I remit the
Reader, as intending ere long to publish it: In the mean time, enjoy these
fruits of his labors, who is in all things to serve thee to his power,

Thine as his own, Geo. Starkey.
Nov. 20. 1656.
Natures Explication, and Helmont's Vindication.

The PREFACE OR INTRODUCTION.
CHAP. I.
WHen this question was put to a certain Philosopher, (...)? What is the ^est
thing? It was his Answer, as is ^eported of him, (...), that is, Light: ^n
answer in my opinion no less ^idicious then witty. Nor much un^ike hereto, was
that reply of him who being asked, wherefore he was born? made this return, Ad
videndum Solemn, to behold the Sun. For verily there is nothing comfortable, but
by reason of its participation of Light, Darkness being on the contrary a
principle of dread and horror.

Now what visible light is unto bodily eyes, the same is the light of
understanding and knowledge unto the eye of the mind.

As then there is no state so solitary and deplorable, as to defect, then the
want of light; so is there nothing more lamentable nor deserving pity, then
ignorance and blindness of mind: And of all generations as those were
anciently reputed the worst, which sprang out of the corruption of those things
which were before the best; so when the light that is in a man once turns to be
darkness, how great is that darkness!

As therefore that light is to be accounted the most desirable, and the want of
it the most miserable, which concerns the soul or mind; so of all ignorance,
that is the worst, which has reference to the most noble object; and by how
much the subject of knowledge is better and of more general use, by so much is
the deprivement of that knowledge intolerable, and not to be rested in.
Therefore as he who (not being able to intercept the ^ight) shall prevent men's
enjoyment thereof by putting out their eyes, is worthily accounted most
wretchedly scruell; so he who shall withold, or obstruct, or pervert the
means of knowledge, is no less, if not far more condemnable.

And on the contrary hand, he who shall endeavor to clear those streams of
that rubbish and trumpery which has not only mightily stopped, but also notably
pudled the waters of this fountain; as he attempts a work of more public
concernment, so if he actually perform any thing real herein, he will deserve
no less of those who are herein concerned (which all ingenuous men are, or else
ought to be) then Saul did of the Jabesh-Gileadites, who delivered them from
the insulting Tyrant, who would put out every man's right eye for a reproach
unto Israel.

Now next unto that knowledge which is indeed life eternal, namely to know God
the only true God, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ; which knowledge is of
everlasting concernment: the most noble is that which discovers the Creators
wildom in the Creatures, so as to be able to distinguish their natures and
properties, and to apply them to the use of Man, namely, to the restoring of
the defects of decaying Nature, and the overcoming of Diseases, which even unto
lamentation do waste and destroy almost in all places the poor distressed
members ^f Jesus Christ, under which many ^erish, being in extremity of depair
exposed to a sad spectacle, com^rtless to the patient, and horrible to ^he
beholders.

These diseases and miseries, the ^^uits of sin, inflicted most justly from the
righteous Judge, are yet cu^able by remedies which the Almighty has created,
for which end the ^ather of mercies and God of com^assion has also created the
Physi^an, that he being an instrument of ^ercy, in the hand of a merciful
Fa^er, might make whole and bind ^p those whom the same God with ^s hand of
justice has wounded and ^oken.

This in brief is the use of medicial knowledge, the subject whereof (...) in
the first place, the Body and Nature of man, to know it both in ^s integrity
and defects: and secondly, all Creatures without man, which are to be
considered, either more directly, as they tend to the affording of medicines,
for remedying and preventing defects; or Collaterally, a^ they serve to
elucidate the nature either of defects or remedies.

This Art or knowledge of all Sublunary seize is the highest, (...) is
the last, and brings up the Ree^ as I may say, unto all the rest; (...) that
though the Geometrician, Arithmetician, Politician, Mechanist, and the like,
are not to be despised, ye^ they fall far short of that dignit^ which is due to
the Physician, who^ object is the most worthy of Creatures, even Man (who is
made litt^ inferior to Angels, crowned with glory and honor) under whose feet
(...) things have been subjected; yet (...) for sin is laid under vanity, of
whi^ no small part are the distempers an^ maladies, which his frail life an^
weak body are subject to.

This Art or Knowledge, as it ha^ had continual, and shall have perpetual use
among men, so God has been pleased to discover it in some degree and measure
in all Ages, that in no generation there should be wanting a testimony as of
his Justice, so of his infinite and transcendent Mercy, who is ready as with
one hand to chastise and afflict, so with the other to succor and relieve
those who are chastised and corrected.

Those who have been endowed with this skill or science, God endowed also with
a Heart communicative; so that they have out of compassion unto those who are
in misery, been free in the discovering unto posterity what they understood
herein, so far to wit, as might conduce to the stirring up of the ingenuous to
a personal further inquiry, and also be a help to them in their search to
discover those secrets, which they who were before them found beneficial to the
healing of this or that distemper.

Among whom Hippocrates, one of the first and most eminent, who left any thing
to us upon record of useful experimental practice: whose seize, as they
were in reference to the rudeness of his Age, admirable; so his Candor in
discovering the same was commendable: saving that what he left sincere, has
(through the abuse of times) been much corrupted with the placits and invention
of such, who not comparable to him in reality, would yet seem to excel him in
appa^ency. The excellent virtue of this man as it was always maligned by Satan
(to whose malicious disposition it is natural to envy those things most
especially, which are o^ may be of the greatest concernment for the good of
Man, either his spiritual or temporal life) So through his policy it was soon
forgotten by posterity, and his renowned skill, for which he was not without
cause named Divine Hippocrates, after his death was so buried with him, that in
a short time there was nothing but the bare name thereof retained by his
successors.

And as nothing strikes a more fatal blow to virtue and verity, then a
glorious show thereof without any reality; so by this policy Satan, that he
might, if possible, for ever keep in oblivion this so necessary a science for
the use of man, At length about five Ages or more from the death of
Hippocrates, Galen comes in upon the Grecian stage, who as if it were his
design to rake up the glowing Embers of Hippocrates Art from under the ashes of
forgetfulness, wrote ample Tomes concerning this Art of medicine; and that the
memory thereof might be kept from future perishing, digested the same into a
Method, whereby this Art might afterward be communicated by verbal Tradition
in Scholastic Lectures and disputations.

Now had Satan brought his design unto a full head, which being once on foot,
he cease not to prosecute with all possible craft and diligence. For as his
chief aim is to sever the show from the substance, knowing that way to be of
all other the most effectual for the fatal suppressing and smothering truth: so
this empty shadow was soon had in high esteem, insomuch that being cried up in
the Schools it soon got footing all the world over, insomuch that there was no
civilized nation or people, how different soever in Laws, manners and customs,
but with one accord they all submitted to march under Galen his banner, and
counted it the glory of their studies, and the crown of their labors to
receive his Badge.

And to make this the more plausible, the Schools invented their honorary
Titles, the more to allure Students to this their profession, bestowing upon as
many as had sucked out by their studies and disputations Galens Marrow, and
learned his Method, so as to be able to read a Lecture, or make a Commentary
upon him, the title of Doctors: insomuch that they drew multitudes after them;
all, partly through ambition, and partly through pride and sloth, willingly
yielding themselves to be seduced by the common Error.

By this means the pure fountains of true learning were miserably pudled and
poisoned, insomuch that as many as drank of them being lulled into a deep
sleep, finding honor and riches in that seeming knowledge which they had drank
in, were abundantly contented.

Yea and to make their station the surer, they decreed, that upon penalty of
loss of their gradual titles of honor, no man should dare to step a step out
of the rode-way of Galen, whose Volumes being by Scholastic Authority
confirmed for Text, they left it to the judgment of acute wits to build what
they could or would upon this foundation. In the mean time Hippocrates, what of
his writings were extant, are made use of in subordination to Galen, who among
his many tedious prattles commented upon Hippocrates, drawing him in what he
could to his own placits, and where he could not he corrupted him.

Yea and the Arabian writers, both ancient and modern throughout all their
books, do all with one neck seem to draw in the yoke of Galen.

At length this noble science being degenerated into idle speculation, on which
was built an edifice looking only to gain and popular applause, first being
divided from the Truth, was afterward rent into three divisions, of which each
occupied a several station. First there was the Philosopher or contemplative
Physician. Next the Physician or practical Philosopher. And lastly, the
Surgeon or Doctors Man, who was to mind things of an inferior rank, as
namely, dressing of Wounds, setting of Bones, the cure or care of Ulcers, and
the like; while the Doctor who for reverence and profundity of skill deserved a
better office, employed himself in the contemplation of Diseases and inward
Griefs: who in the mean time promises not to be wanting to the Surgeon in
case of any Feverish distempers, which outward miseries and griefs do often
cause.

Thus at length finding this Trade to have many Clients, through the
degeneration of times, the care of medicines and their preparation is judged
too sordid a work for Master Doctor; and the Surgeon his man, taking state
upon him by little and little, waves this work as too mean, or at the least
unnecessary for him also: so between them the Apothecary is set up as the
common Shambles, to which both may resort for medicines.

The Apothecary (whose work is to be a servant both to the Master Doctor of
Physic, and his Man Doctor of Surgery, (who of a Barber and wound-dresser
which was judged too mean an employment for the Doctor) is by degrees now stepped
up even to his Masters title. The Apothecary I say, who is to serve both these
in preparing and confounding Simples according to their direction by their
bills, perceiving his custom to increase, soon waves the one half of his work,
namely, the providing of Simples; which gave being to another sort of Retainers
to this pompous magnificent Art, and those are the Druggists.

Thus this blessed Science, which in its primitive verity and uncorrupted
sincerity, was in great mercy given by a compassionate Father for the restoring
of poor Mortals, whom he in his Justice had smitten, and which ought sincerely
to be exercised with the same spirit, and for the same end, by which and to
which it was given, is contrariwise at length become the Engine of oppression,
cruelty, and butchery, the prop of pride, and ambition, covetousness and
idleness.

The Philosopher or contemplative Naturalist, who, as was before touched, was
made a Member of this Science, as he soon grew distinct both from the Doctor,
and his Man the Surgeon, yea and from his Man's ^an the Apothecary, whose
work was (as in a hopsack) to catch Nature, in some one syllogism or other of
the three Figures; so also did he ^oon outstrip both the one and the ^ther in
Academical esteem, insomuch that his employment being ^ublimed a degree higher
then Art, (...) ranked among the Liberal Sci^nces.

For the Schools being indeed the bed of sloth and idleness (yet adorned with
many glorious and painted hangings) have this perpetual Maxim, to esteem those
things most highly which are farthest removed from reality, so that soaring
into speculations, their station is evermore there, where imagination only has
its being: Medicine therefore being made too gross for them by reason of the
necessary dependency it has on practice, they sucked our the universalities of
it with the universalities of all other natural practical Arts, as Geometry,
Astronomy, Uranomancy, Geography, Arithmetic and the like, which they molded
up into one aerie lump of Natural Philisophy.

The standard bearer of this Rabble was Aristotle, who though he in many places
severely carped at Galen, yet forasmuch as they agreed in the main, namely in
point of much apparency with little or no truth, they were both accepted and
successively read, Aristotle as the Father of Philosophy, and Galen of Medicine.

Thus this mystery of iniquity had its full life and motion, being guarded and
graced with a many followers, who though in some things they seem to differ,
yet are they but like to Samsons Foxes looking several ways with their heads,
are yet tied fast by the tails.

This pomp of Physic and Philosophy, it is a wonder how far and how fast it
spread; for according to the Proverb, They must needs run whom the Devil
drives: it in short space overspread all the known world, so much of it as was
in any measure so civilized, as to employ themselves in learning. Yea and
though naturally men's ambition be very great, and the glory of being an
inventer of any new ingenuity be much thirsted after in the world, yet was this
not able to prevail with any of the succeeding ages, but all with one accord
were willing to subscribe, and gloried therein as in a notable deserving
Trophey.

By how much then any one excelled in wit or parts, he was the more engaged in
the maintaining this post with Arguments and Sophisms, also in Epitomizing,
illustrating, digesting and confirming Galens Text, which was accounted the
height of Scholastic seize.

Thus posterity being drawn along as with two Coach-horses, with the authority
of Galen and Aristotle, admiration of these was a badge of their Academical
loyalty; and whosoever should dare to swarve from these, was branded with a
note of Infamy; and so being looked upon as Heterodox, was the object of scorn
and derision, and what was most grievous of all, was hereby ipso facto,
incapable of degrees of honor and preferment, and so consequently out of the
rode-way of serving covetousness, by squeezing money out of the purses of the
afflicted, who would willingly give not only their goods, but even skin for
skin for the saving of their lives.

For from the time that this science degenerated unto the formality of a
Profession, the Schools have always used all diligence to engage the ripest
wits fastest unto them; and for the attaining this end, they have wanted no
manner of inviting allurements, as namely honor, respect, worldly esteem, and
gain.

He then who inclines to ingenuity, soon after he has some insight in the
Tongues by education at the Grammar School, he is thence transmitted to the
Academy to be further cultivated. Where he learns Logically to dispute
according to the Rules of Aristotle; and withal, exercises his Oratorial
faculty by declamations in turns; after that he proceeds to read Physiology
according to Aristotle's Doctrine, which is disputed in public pro and con with
a great deal of dexterity. Ethics are added to these studies at spare times,
with the principles of Metaphysics and the Mathematics in general, and some
things are performed in Hebrew and Greek Studies. Thus at the end of four years
upon performing of public declamations, disputations, and the like, the
initiatory title of Bachelor of Arts is bestowed as a crown of their industry;
from which time till the end of three years, they are to be employed in
epitomizing the seven Liberal Sciences, and reducing them into Systemes and
Synopses, and then with a great deal of honor they are declared Masters of the
said Sciences, and have liberty granted them to apply themselves to the
practice of any one or other of them, when ever called unto it.

And now the youth stands as a staff set up, waiting which way it will fall:
for this testimony concerning them has declared them to all the world to be
fit to profess any thing.

And (not to speak of the abuse of Divinity-profession, which is permitted upon
these terms) if the genius of this Arts master (who has drunk himself drunk
of liberal Sciences) stand toward the profession of Physic, (which he may
begin to think of when he is Bachelor in Arts) then are there public
professed Lecturers, whom he may almost daily hear declaming on that subject;
which Lectures if he then attend diligently, and shall peruse Anatomists, and
read Galen over (at least cursorily) and collect notes out of him and Avicen:
if he turn over the Herbals, and learn to know some plants by name and sight,
and in the mean time in the public Halls shall dispu^e concerning the use of
parts, the generation of man, the Elementall quality of some things, as namely,
Camphire, Quicksilver and the like, (which two simples have, after the
discharging of some hundreds, not to say thousands of Ergoes, first and last,
out of the Canons of Aristotle and Galen, more notably puzzled the Antagonists,
(who to the day know not on what side to determine) then ever the Devil was
puzzled to find the meaning of Aristotle's Entelech^ia) after I say these
notable performances, he shall be licensed a Practitioner, and dubbed a Doctor,
provided he will make a great Feast, and give store of Gloves. By which costly
attainment they make su^ of these three essential things: first, that none
shall be a Doctor who has not so much money to throw away, and they as have,
may be concluded to be fine-fingred chubs, who will be more scrupulous of
fouling their hands with coals, then careful to keep a good conscience.
Secondly, that they will not readily despise that honor as trivial, which cost
them so dear, which therefore they will readily defend what they can. And
thirdly, that upon this score they shall have fat fees, upon which their minds
are more set, then how to perform faithfully what they undertake, for gain is
the first and last of their intents. And therefore when a Physician is to be
dubbed a Doctor and admitted a Brother, the elder Brethren to help him in his
practice and skill, give him but one general Receipt, which is the only one
which they have worth communication, and that is, Accipe Donum, Take your Fees.
And as though Counsel in this were not enough, they bind them to it; and lest
they should be out in their Receipt, they assign the most convenient time for
getting the Ingredients, and that is, Accipe dum dolet, that is, Make sure of
your money while the grief is greatest.

This is part of the Mystery, but not all: For to be sure both from without and
from within, they have so far prevailed, as to monopolize the lives of men, (by
which means they know they can command their moneys) that so they might
maintain themselves, their Barbers, Apothecaries, and Druggists after a
Lord-like way.

Which Patents of Monopoly, I I conceive might hence have their Original: It
may be some of these Master Doctors have in lieu of vast Fees condescended to
be very officious about Kings, Lords, or great persons, in the time of sickness
of a Wise, Husband, Brother, Son, Father, or some near acquaintance or dear
friend, to co work with the providence of God in the quick dispatch of them in
their misery by their remedies, who perhaps otherwise might have lingered long,
and languished in extremity, or else through the strength of Nature, with
difficulty recovered that disease, to have possibly fallen into as bad or worse
some years after, both which by their medicines they for security sake
prevented.

It may be also sometimes some such great persons by the good hand of God
escape both the discase and their Doctors (yea sometimes when many of them
together have consulted by their Medicines to make them fat pasture for the
worms) and yet notwithstanding all, God has restored them from both dangers
(of which that of the Doctor is the most formidable, for he either adds load
to, or else takes away strength from foiled nature) and then the Physician
cries out with the Man, who when his following friend was struck in the face
with a Bow (that he held walking among trees) and complained of the blow, What
a blow would it have struck, quoth he, if I had not held it? So he, when he
sees his miserably enfeebled Patient after the disease is gone, What would you
have been, had not I let you blood and purged you, and made you barley water and
cooling Julips, and given you Glysters and Cordials to comfort and nourish you?
but as the Bow would but have brusht, had not the other held it and bent it,
which being held, gave a foul stroke; so the Disease would have come off with
less debilitation of the Patient, had the Physician been further off.

Thus as well by the not succeeding of their remedies, when the Patient
recovers, whom their nature is to destroy; and the success of the same when by
them a quick riddance is made, credit is gained besides large gratifications:
by this means they get favor with Princes, of which one notable improvement
has been, that they alone in the world have the privilege to murder innocent
persons, provided they do it according to a methodical way of Art.

Two main grounds of this Monopoly are, first, the preservation of their gain
and credit, which otherwise would much be imp^ired, were not this provident
course taken; for even old Wives and Farriers, Mountebanks and the like, do
with some simple or other, undertake and cure their deserted Patients, to their
deserved confusion.

But secondly, her by they shut the gate to all further search in Nature, for
as for any among themselves they are sure: for who knows not the mighty force
of education, which being once sucked in ( a teneris annis, as we use to speak)
is so lodged that it is with much difficulty eradicated; yea, and although an
opinion to an uningaged person seem never so absurd, yet to one whom education
has engaged, it appears not so, yea acuteness makes little to the discovering
the weakness of such an opinion, but rather supplies curious and specious
arguments to maintain it, and to oppose any contrary.

Besides in this mystery there is not only a prepossessing of the fantasy and
understanding, but also a preoccupation of the will, namely with things by
which the will is entangled, as honorary titles of Master Doctor, your Worship,
and the like, which together with Angels and Pieces can as powerfully hush a
muttering conscience, and salve a scrupulous breast, when it is stumbled with
the frustraneous event of the ridiculous method of medicine, as the same
medicine can loose a Lawyers tongue and make it run glib, which would else
scarce wag in his Clients cause.

Moreover, Truth is not to be caught with gaping, but with pains infatigable,
and serious meditation, which they who are engaged in many lucriferous visits,
cannot attend, they may only read of better things, and say, I would I could
see them, but they not coming with a wish, they sigh and say (Audio at vix
Credo) and as for their own unsuccessefulness they thus excuse, I proceed
according to Art, but the blessing is in Gods hand; the party was too weak to
bear the Cure, or was too old, or I was called too late, or care was not used
in following directions, or the disease was epidemically malignant, or
incurable, or some such thing or other is pretended, and so the earth covers
their defects. And because they kill not all they meddle with, God by his mercy
preventing their endeavors to some, therefore they are not discouraged with
the multitudes they either kill or suffer to die miserably under their
faithless medicines, while they by their monopolizing Patent prevent, lest any
with better medicines should shame them.

Thus I say they have the Trade wholly in their own hands, a Trade by which
they never did nor can cure any, but kill many; but whatever they have that may
do good, they have it from the accidental experiments of old wives, and good
folks, who have found or known much good done by this or that Herb or Simple,
which did more good by far when it was simply used by silly women, then when
the Doctors after had drawn it into Receipts, castrating their virtue by
confounding with many others in decoction, or otherwise according to their
Idiotism.

Whatever then they administer or advise, that does good, it does it not upon
account of any method or art of theirs, but would work the same effect if
applied by the hand of a Rustic, as prescribed by them.

Yea and often their method of compounding, decocting, and administering both in
respect to the Dose and time, do notably hinder, if not destroy the working and
prevent the good of the applied remedy, though the Doctor little mind that,
when once his Fee is in his pocket.

Even the most serious of them will confess, that all their Art consists in
experimental Receipts, which as not being minded by them, I mean the collecting
Simples in their time, the keeping of them, and ordering in administration,
exposes often a Doctor to scorn, which same Simples formerly had commended some
wellmeaning woman in curing a deserted Patient, to the Doctors disgrace.

Whose Art, I mean of feeling pulses, tossing urines, and prophesying out of
them, stirring of closestools, letting of blood, (at least commanding it to be
done) preaching on the disease, ordering of diet, prescribing purgations and
the like, is but a mere imposture, a cheat of the world, a butchering of the
sick (which is even a proverb among the vulgar, yet the Doctor minding his fees
too much, will not perceive, at least will wink at, being content to bear any
thing so he may get money) for which a dreadful account will at last be
exacted by the just Judge, of them, who pretending to take the care of the
sick, devour families, and then expect a reward for destroying them.

But this only being intended for an Introduction, and my propounded scope to
discover nature, and withal to vindicate noble Helmont from unjust reproaches,
I shall leave a while the Doctors to their Clients, and come to give a brief of
this undertaking.

First of all let me ingenuously profess, that I have no personal quarrel with
any, nor do I upon any such account write prejudicately.

Secondly, That I purpose not to disparage any thing that is good in them, to
make what is bad on my side to appear good, or what is but indifferent to seem
excellent, but shall deal as heartily with them as may be.

Thirdly, That what I write shall not be out of a principle of (Jurandi in
verba Magistri) but what I write shall be for explicution and for defense, not
for repetition sake.

Now concerning my self it will be requisite that I should speak a little, not
out of any content that I take therein, but to give the Reader some small
satisfaction, in what he may, at least as I conceive, be prejudiced.

For mine own part, I know the reward of this my labor will be Calumny, yet I
will be sure to reproach none, and though I merrily (and yet not without
aversion of spirit) carp at some things, yet before the close of this Treatise,
I shall give Reasons, I hope, satisfactory for this practice: for -- Ridentem
dicere verum,
Quis vetat. --


If any be troubled at my sporting jests now and then cast, I must needs say
there is in my Jests nothing scurrilous, immodest, or uncivil, nor any thing
bad in them, except it be that they are true, I wish heartily they were not.

CHAP. II.
AS touching the Art of Pyrotechny and Chemistry, I must seriously profess,
that of all Arts in the world it is to me most pleasing, because its principles
to an ingenious man are demonstrable by the fire.

It was not conceit, nor novelty, nor hope of gain, that allured me, but only
love and desire of truth. For I found demonstrably that the foundations of
common Philosophy were totally rotten.

The first suspicion of them was occasioned by a dispute of the possibility of
making Gold potable, which being by the Antagonist held negatively, I, what out
of Authors and what by study, did so evince the possibility of it, that my
arguments were by him unanswerable, and to my self satisfactory.

The speculation I confess pleased me well, who above all things in the world
prized health, and as my mind was naturally propense to action, I desired much
to make it; and comforting my self with the common Maxim, Dimidium facti qui
been coepit habet, He who has well begun has half done: And remembering that
in Theory there were but two parts, namely, An sit, and quomodo sit, That a
thing may be done, and how. Also that the first could not be irrefragably
proved without some knowledge at least in the latter, I collected (upon this
confidence) out of Physic and Logical Authors, what Arguments I could touching
the (...) of this subject, whereof I conceived that I fully understood the
(...). For alas I thought that the Logical heads of invention, especially
according to Ramus, would not fail to unfold to me this whole mystery.
Hereupon concluding what I had proved that the thing was fecible, I wrote a
Congest of methodical Arguments which might unfold how; and here I found my
self in a wild labyrinth, for I was soon by these studies brought to see the
rottenness both of Logic and Philosophy, and found that he who sought truth
of things there, might soon lose himself.

This put me upon desire of a more secure path, for now I apprehended (before
years and titles had engaged me) that besides what I knew in Tongues, my skill
in Logic and Philosophy was not worth contemning, yea nothing was in mine eyes
more vile.

I therefore rejected Aristotle and all his fictions, against whose fallacious
show I wrote with a pen dipped in salt and vinegar, yet without gall, a Treatise
called Organum novum Philosophiae: but before I could pitch on what way to
turn, (for knowledge I desired too too immoderately) I wandered through many
pensive hours, and waking nights, till at length I got some Chemical Authors.

Those then I perused and noted with much diligence, not so much out of desire
to rifle their Hesperion Garden, as to suck out of their principles some solid
truth; for truth I knew was uniform. Wherefore as many experiments as I could
try I tried, and took nothing upon any man's trust, so as to build any thing on
it, or to draw any conclusion from it: I invented many sorts of Furnaces,
procured what Glasses were possible, with all manner of Simples, Mineral and
Metalline especially (which I most esteemed) in these I spent my time for
several years, and I may say without boasting, that if ever any in the world
were an infatigable prosecutor of experiments, I was one.

In the mean time the Lord was pleased so far to be propitious unto my labors,
studies, and many watchings, that he let me see so much of truth, as to make it
lovely to me; for which cause (next to the glory of God) I shall prosecute the
same during my life.

Nor was this an imaginary content only, but real, for there is so great
variety of objects in Nature which are exceedingly delightful to be understood,
that the discovery of any of them (which is usually the crown of serious
searches) is more content, then finding of sought treasure can be to him who in
hopes of it digs the earth. And although the wise man by an unerring Spirit
has laid all these things under vanity, so that in much knowledge there is
much vexation of spirit, yet withal, the Scripture teaches us that the works
of God are wonderful, sought out by all that have delight in them; yea and if a
man's heart be not exceedingly out of frame, a man connot behold the
excellencies of the Creature without a contemplation of the super-transcendent
glory, power, and wisdom of the Creator, of which all things visible are but
Emblems. Yet do I not deny but that the spirit may be carried forth with too
much eagerness after things of this nature, which I have often suspected to be
mine own fault, but this is the fault of us, that so immoderately affect the
outside, as to neglect the inward glory; and so much admire the apparent glory
of things visible, as not enough to adore him who dwells in light
inaccessible, of whose beauty these are but a shadow, and of whose fire but
sparks.

There is then an unspeakable benefit may arise to a painful enquirer after the
mysteries of Nature, in reference to the spiritualizing of the affections,
since as Cicero said of Virtue, that if it were to be seen with eyes corporal
it would enamour the beholders, it may most properly be applied to this case.
For who is he who when he beholds Gods wonderful wisdom, power, goodness, etc.
which all are most obvious in the study of Nature, which is one of the Books in
which the Almighty is discovered, that will not cry out with Job, I have heard
of thee by the ear, but now mine eye sees thee: and with David, O Lord how
wonderful are thy works! the fool conceives them ^ot, nor the unwise
understands them, etc. But considering, that God has endowed us with a Body,
(...) which our Soul, which is the Di^ine Image, is caged as it were, by ^neans
of which we have our place ^ere among natural things. And ^orasmuch as our life
is laid un^er vanity, of which our diseases ^o which our body is subject, which
^re to us the Heralds of death, is no ^mall part.

Also since man being by the Crea^ors ordaining made Lord of the other
Creatures, and these are made ^o serve him; insomuch that there is ^carce a
concrete which has not its ^mmediate use applicable to man, neither for his
necessity or conveni^ency. And therefore all things are given into his hand,
that of them he may take for meat and drink what nature craveth, for raiment
what necessity and modesty and decency call for, and likewise for the repairing
the defects of decayed nature what is needful therein: God like a tender
Father having provided for man in every respect, and on every occasion. I think
it a great sottishness in them who cannot see both the nobleness and usefulness
that the contemplation of Gods works carries with it, insomuch that he who
shall neglect it, does neglect in mine opinion a great part of the task for
which he came into the world, and is not to be pityed if he fall short of the
comfort, content or benefit that he might reap in the knowledge of the same.

Now that all creatures have in them a spiritual Celestial virtue, I suppose
there is none moderately versed in Philosophy that will deny, and we shall in
its place sufficiently discover, which in concrete Bodies is more hidden, most
of all in such which are of the most exquisite composition.

This Celestial Spirit is that which is the life, excellency, and perfection of
all things in which it is, and though it have received in all specificated
subjects a determination, or bounding of its virtue, yet the Spirit it self is
free to operate upon other subjects, and its operations are received per modum
recipientis.

Now here is the grand fault or defect of those whose office it is more
peculiarly to enquire into these things, that they supinely neglect the search
of the hidden spirit, which is in all things by so much the more straightly
sealed, by how much it is in virtue more noble and excellent.

Contenting themselves with an overly view of the outside of things, although
yet they have the care of lives committed to their charge, which fault as it is
of high concernment, so it requires a most sharp reproof.

For there are in Nature most noble and powerful medicines, made by God for the
use and relief of the afflicted, which yet are neglected by such, who undertake
the care and cure of them, and all because they are not without pains and
industry attainable: But go too my good friends, has not God laid this burden
upon mankind, that in the sweat of his brow he should eat his bread? must he
toil for his daily meat, and do you thing that medicines do grow ready made to
his hand?

Or if the ground do of its own accord bring forth some fruits, as Apples,
Cherries, or the like, see you not how ready they are to grow wild if not
cultivated? Nay, is not this vanity laid upon the Universe, and does not the
earth groan under this curse, that thorns and thistles it shall bring forth,
and all to help forward this sentence which was pronounced against man, that in
labor he should eat his bread, and what is Analogical to bread, with industry
he should provide Medicaments; the one for sustaining, the other for the
restoring of nature.

I Will grant that there are many excellent things which are to be found among
Simples, but first of all their virtue is more precisely singular, one being
properly directed for one or two diseases, and the number of Simples being so
infinite, and so many of them of little virtue, so many of none medicinal, but
being destined for meat for man or beast; so many being so virulently
destructive to nature, that it is no way safe in their crude simplicity to use
them, all of them being restrained to some particular distempers, and manner of
operations, a man's life would not serve him to be half a Physician, in the use
of Simples, without preparation or correction. When it appears that the Art of
Pyrotechny is indeed most useful, necessary, and delightful, which God willing
in the ensuing discourse I shall fully discover.

And to close this Preface, I affirm and promise to make good, that by the Art
of Pyrotechny, medicines are to be made and prepared; of which one is of as
much efficacy, as all the herbs, roots, trees and Animals in the world, all put
together, used in their naked simplicity.

Which Art most commendable in it self, useful to mankind, and delightful to
the Artist, has been opposed, slandered, reproached, reviled and gainsaid by
the verbous railing Galenists.

Who yet professing themselves the only heirs of Medicinal Art, do promise that
to the world by their method, which for these many centuries of years they have
found successeless; and this notwithstanding they do continue to maintain that
by virtue of monopoly, which all ^he world discovers to be but a mere ^uggle.

What disdain and contumely have ^hey not cast upon Paracelsus and Helmont, by
traducing them and ^peaking all manner of evil concer^ing them? and this only
is the quar^el, that these come to discover to ^he World the unsufficiency of
vulgar medicines.

This true light of Nature these Night-birds cannot bear, the true ^eir these
usurpers will not endure, ^ut no sooner epsy they him, but ^hey conclude, This
is the heir, come ^et us kill him, and then the inheri^ance shall be ours.

Therefore let not any marvel, if I now a little severely carp at Errors, ^or
this is the only way that is now ^eft, all other means have been tried, they by
many have been most friend^y called upon to awake out of the dead sleep in
which they are; but it were as good to call upon posts (...) stones, for they
only rub their eye^ and reproach such who disturb them but sleep again as
soundly as eve^ it is good then to scourge and pri^ them, whom jogging will not
(...) good upon.

And because they have had (...) long time that knavish principle (...) calling
whore first, it is not a^^ sometimes to answer a fool acco^ding to his folly,
lest he be wise (...) his own conceit.

Who knows not how common it is for that Tribe to inveigh again^ Chemical
Medicines most bitterly sometimes accusing their virulency sometimes their
acuteness in oper^tion; and for proof they will bri^ all the Mountebanks,
Empiricks, a^ rash Psudo-chemists on the stag^ forgetting in the mean time that
the do as much differ from what the would make them to be, as the^ selves do
from true Philosophe^ that is as much as light does from darkness.

Nay, rather the forementioned Rabble, as also the scum of Brothels, old Wives,
Quacks, and the like, do but usher in their own train: for who knows not, that
one Apothecary or Mechanical Chemist does supply both the one and the other?

Let us not contend about words, but come to the thing it self, and we shall by
it see to which house these villainies are retainers; and when I have traced
them to their own doors, I shall express more candor then ever the Galenists in
urging this Controversy were guilty of: for although they make it their common
practice to lay this spurious offspring at the true Chemists doors, and then
to revile them as guilty of all their miscarriages, yet we shall first prove
this bastardly offspring to be a Galenical Brat, of which the Father is
(though without cause) ashamed, unless it be that they often at random hit the
distemper, which the reverend Doctor by his bleer-ey'd, purblinde method could
not do, and cure the same, though with a desperate medicine which the other
despaired of; and after the true father of this infamous generation is found,
we shall not impute the blame of the children unto the fathers, but suffer
every one to bear his own blame: which moderation of ours, I hope will for
shame-sake teach the Galenists for the future to endeavor the like, in
imitation of our candidness.

And first I beseech the impartial Reader to consider how, and wherein the
followers of Paracelsus and Helmont, and their like differ from the followers
of Galen and those who subscribe to him: is not this the main difference, nay
the only, that one is the immediate follower of Nature, and of his Author, so
far only as he does bear faithful witness to her operations: the other is the
immediate follower of him whom he makes the Captain of his Notions, to whose
placits if Nature will not comply, he will either force her or adieu.

Is not this evident in all our Academical Doctors, and has been so for
several successive Ages? Is not subscription the top stone of the Galenical
Art? Is not Galens method to this day retained and defended, according to which
all created Doctors are engaged to go; and what I pray is this Method? but by
Rules set down to find out the disease Diagnostically, to discover the danger
of it Prognostically, and to advise the cure of it according to the precepts of
Art, that is, according to the judgment of some approved Author, in which the
Doctor reads when to apply the cardinal remedies of bleeding, scarifying,
vesicating, cauterizing, purging, or the like, and when to make use of Cordials
either cooling or others.

Now the practick part is that in which the Doctor is for the most part but an
errand bungler, yet he has at command his Surgeon and Apothecary that can
indeed effect what he by his Goosequill shall appoint.

Now what Medicines soever are allowably used, they are set down plainly and
fully in the Dispensatories, with their preparations, use, and dose.

And for the regulating of ingenious men in finding out new receipts, the
Herbals are compiled, in which the form, names, places of growth, and all the
like circumstances of Herbs, Plants, Roots, and Trees are set down, with their
qualifications of temperature, virtues, preparation, and dose.

Lastly, as every practitioner is of a more happy wit, some do concinnate the
Theory, others the practick of the Art, so that the world is almost full of the
multitudes of volumes which are written concerning this Art, some showing its
Method, others its Practick, a third sort compiling volumes only stuffed with
Receipts.

Of such Books there is scarce a Language barren, so that whoever has a mind
to apply himself to the study of Physic, he need not want Authors; in whom he
may fully according to the received Doctrine, find the Anatomy of the Body
with every part of it, the Systeme of all diseases, with a particular account
of every one by it self, and that Diagnostically and Prognostically, with the
Remedies of them, corraded out of the most authentic Authors, as Sennertus,
Fernelius, Fucksius, and the like.

The true Chemist, is he who by an earnest desire of knowledge is carried on to
the search of Nature, to the discovery of its defects, and the remedies
thereof, and from an earnest desire of being profitable to those among whom he
lives, he is willing to undergo any pains, remembering the Adagy, Virtutem
posuere dii sudore parandam.

He considers with himself the sad state in which Mankind is, in respect to
distempers, of which being truly sensible, and withal remembering, that the
same God who had laid this burden upon the Earth, that thorns and thistles it
should bring forth to man all the days of his life, until he should return to
the earth from whence he was taken, who being dust was to return to dust, the
same God I say had created a Medicine out of the earth, which he that was wise
should not contemn: considering also how the mercies o^ the most High were over
all his works, whose Justice reached to the clouds, but his Mercy unto the
heavens; he concluded that God out of his infinite mercy had provided in Nature
a Remedy against all infirmities and maladies, could but we be so wise as to
find it out.

Hereupon he spares not his soul from studious search and enquiry, but by
knocking at the throne of grace in prayer, and seeking in the creatures without
weariness or precipitancy, he makes it his whole work to study and endeavor
the finding out of those Medicines, which may effectually evidence out the
possessor of them to be such whom the Lord has chosen for a Physician, and
whom he has appointed to be honored for necessity sake.

The evide^ce of his call is not his Ladies hand with a smooth tongue, which is
the usual Diploma of a Goosequill Doctor, who when he comes to visit his
patient, after a few methodical Queries, and upon them a Scholastic
Declamation extempore upon the Symptoms; calls for his pen and ink, and writes
a Bill to his Apothecary of a foot long, according as the Patient is in purse:
which being done he expects his Fee, and in the mean time is in fee with his
Apothecary, (I know what I say) who annually allows the Doctor so much for
packing in a company of dear Simples into the bill, for many of which he has
an underhand dispensation (upon the notice of a private mark) to substitute
quid pro quo and some things to leave out: this is a pretty Cheat, but very
usual in that Tribe: but I pass that.

On the other hand this true Son of Art, he considers the vast disproportion
between the Galenical promises, and their performances, and pondering the
Reason of it, he finds it can be no otherwise.

First, because of their supine neglect of Nature her self, contenting
themselves with turning over of leaves, and through laziness choosing rather ^o
subscribe, then to undergo the ^rouble and pains of search and inquiry.

Which alone defect, if it were not otherwise aggravated, were sufficient ^o
frustrate both their promises, and the patients hopes, and that in a manifold
respect.

For who is it that is but moderately versed in the principles of Nature, that
knows not that diseases new and new do daily come upon the stage? God
punishing, as I may so speak, our unheard of sins with unheard of Judgments.

Which the Doctors when they meet with, they are beyond their reading, and cry
out of a new Disease, yet content themselves with the old Method.

Nay what more common, then to have a society of Doctors, or consultation
called, of whom scarce two will agree together in the stating of the disease,
and all at their wits end as to the matter of cure.

And besides this, consider how the most of the ring leaders of the Galenical
rabble, are of different Countries, and of different Ages in which they lived,
in the which respect they can not be looked on as agreeing to those times and
places for which they are made use of. For in several climates, there is not
only a great diversity of Simples as to their nature and virtue, but also the
bodies o^ men do wonderfully alter according to the soil they live in,
according to the Adagy, Solo natura subest.

What then more absurd, then to make use of the prescription of ^ Grecian, who
lived and wrote 120^ years ago, and to apply it to an English temper?
especially since ne^ diseases have appeared since which never were before,
which once having received admittance, never are extirpated (as to their
species) but by their complication do not only aggravate, but also notably
alter diseases, so that what formerly might easier have been cured, become now
more obstinate and unmasterable.

I may here take notice of the unfaithfulness and abominable neglect committed
in the preparing of Medicines, only what I before touched, I would first more
fully illustrate, namely, that it is not an exotical medicine, that is or may
be proper for an English constitution.

And first I need not urge that God has abundantly provided for man's
wel-being, where ever he has allotted him a place of being, since that only
opposes the necessity, not the efficacy of transmarine Simples; for a man may
in any place of the world, if he please, and can get it, eat only what is of
Englands growth, though he live in Spain, but it is not necessary; so he may
use exotic Simples, although he be not bound to them: yet this I shall not
doubt to insert, that as no food, so no medicaments are so proper for our
English bodies, as those which England produces. And so in other Countries, as
France, Germany, Spain, or any other Territory, their native Simples are
sufficicient, as for the conservation of their bodies in its integrity, so for
the restoration of its defects, if so that any were so wise as to be able to
collect, and to apply the same.

But as nothing that is excellent wants its difficulty, so the attaining of the
skill of Simples is a work of no small trouble; experience has taught the
world how great a masterpiece it is to gather and order Tobacco aright, not to
speak of the vast disproportion which the difference of Climates adds to its
goodness; it is notoriously known to all that are experienced in it, that the
order^ng, manuring, gathering, and curing of it, and after the making it up and
keeping it, may with a small neg^ect, make that which otherwise would be very
good, to become little worth or quite naught. And let not any imagine, that
medicinal herbs require less care in their choice, manuring, climate, soil,
gathering, ordering and keeping, then Tobacco does. I shall not enlarge, the
example brought, if considered and applied, will convince many whom it
concerns, of gross errors committed in this particular.

Thou know, O Man, if good or bad Tobacco be brought thee, and can value
it accordingly, though it concern only an unprofitable stinking vapor; but if
any herb for thy health be to be procured, thou art in this wholly ignorant,
and such as should provide for thee herein are as ignorant as thy self, and the
Doctor that prescribes it to thee is most ignorant of all.

As for Simples, are they not collected by women, where they can find them,
without distinction of time when, and season in which they are gathered? and if
any herbs grow in gardens, how are they ordered? is not the chief care by much
watering to make them grow as rank as may be? which if for distillation, I
matter it not much, for the unprofitable phlegm only is attained by
distillation, without previous maceration by ferment, but as for dried herbs,
(the flowers set aside) how unseasonably are they gathered, (often in rainy
weather) and then how are they dried often in the Sun, until they be as dry that
they may be powdered; which drying, how much it prejudiceth the virtue, I appeal
to such as make hay, which if sear-dryed in the Sun, is half in half damnified;
but if cut in rain is much the worse; but if so the Sun be clouded and the air
moist, how ^^ft do herbs mould or must before ^hey be dried, either being laid
too ^hick for want of room, or at best done ^n a dusty floor, where they lie so
^ong until they be as dry as powder; and yet if close kept will grow musty,
(...) be tainted with worms: therefore ^any keep their herbs when dried in ^n
open place, not only to the dimi^ishing, but in short time to the de^troying of
their virtue.

Yet the Apothecary who buys them, must not straightway reject them, when
insipid, but must put them away in the first place, keeping those last which
may be preserved ^ongest.

Therefore to remedy and prevent ^any of these inconveniences, the ^tupid
Doctor, who will not stick to ^orrow his practick from a Farrier, with this
pretense, that it must be ap^lyed according to his method, learns the good
huswifes trade of Candying, Conserving, and making into Marmalet, and Syrups as
many Simples as may be, the rest he commands to be compounded into Electuaries,
Lozenges, or the like; and with these he vapors and brustles like Dametas in
his military accoutrements, vowing revenge on any disease that dare look him in
the face. And what cannot be performed by these, he has another course in
readiness for such malepert maladies, tormenting the body that dare harbor an
insolent distemper in defiance of his reverent gravity, which therefore must
suffer the martyrdom of Diagridium, Alahandal, Jalap, Euphorbium, or the like,
and be punished with Phlebotomy, Scarifications, Blisters, Fontinels, etc. and
starved with cooling Julips, barley broths, and diet drinks, till it shall at
last be contented to yield up that refractary ghost which could not be scared
aut of its extravagancy, with the vengeance of the reverent Colleagues of the
College of Doctors, in despite of which many a soul dies of no other mortal
disease but of his Doctor, who yet because he did it by Rules of Art is well
Feed for his pains, and methodical butchery.

CHAP. III.
BUt to return to our matter whence we digressed, namely to compare a true
Chemist with our modern Goosquil Doctors, to see to which the Mountebank is
nearest of kin.

First it must be granted that the whole of a real or pretended Physician, may
be referred to these two heads, namely, the knowing the Disease, and finding
out the Remedy: the latter of which is either theoretically to know the
medicine or, practically to provide and apply the same.

As for the Mountebanks Philosophy, it is usually the same with the old Wives,
or Quacks; but if it any whit excel, it is gotten out of Galenical Authors,
which are to be had in almost any language.

But let their method speak their original; is not their intent one, and their
progress one, (only differ in the means) with the Galenical Tribe?

They want the distinguishing marks of a true Physician, and therefore they
tread the same steps, though with a more rude and resolute pace.

In bloodletting, purging, vomiting, cauterizing, vesicating, making
carminatives, giving clysters, scarifying, and cordials they all agree, only
differ in the purges, vomits, etc.

And many of them use the very same things with the other Doctors, only differ
in the Dose, the one venturing the harm in hope to do good, the other for
credit sake resolving if he do no good, yet to do no hurt, which he does
notwithstanding, only he that does least hurt is most commended. What if some
of the same Tribe, finding the insufficiency of Vegetables, fly unto Minerals,
as Saul to the Witch of Endor, does this straight make them Chemists? Just as
if a rustic weary of his calling, should resolve to turn a Joyner, and
endeavor to plain his boards with a how, his intention will not make him a
Joyner.

Tell not of Empericks, that is such who prepare by the fire, for what is the
ordinary preparations made with but by the fire? do not the Apothecaries
decoct, extract, make Syrups, Conserves, Lozenges, etc. by the fire? Or if you
respect Distillation, are not waters of all sorts distilled in the common way?
Or is an Emperick he who deals in Minerals and Metals, and calcined bodies?
what are then your Steel Powder, Gold in Alchermes, Vitriol in Vomits, Antimony
in Crocus, burnt Ivory, etc. and to make up a total reconciliation betwixt
Empericks and Galenists, are not now all vulgar preparations of Minerals,
prostituted in every Apothecaries shop; and yet the Art of Medicine among our
reverent Doctors reputed the same as of old? What then? O their method! their
method! this is the hidden stone, and secret mark, which distinguishes them;
where then the same method is used, there is the same way professed: but
Mountebanks, Quacks, Old Wives, and all that rabble, use the same method in
curing. If it be objected, that they have not skill to discern when this, when
that remedy is to be applied, this accuses their sufficiency, not their
profession.

It is not then the materials used, but the preparation of the materials, so as
to be able to effect what the Physician promises, and the Patient expects,
surely, safely, and speedily, that distinguishes a true Son of Art from
pretending bunglers; of which some are more crafty and cautious, others more
ignorant and rashly venturous, yet both more distinct from true Artists, then
from one another.

If Nature had made true Medicines ready prepared to hand for every disease,
that it were no more then to pluck them as an Apple from the tree, then indeed
a distinction might be made of professors of the Art of Medicine, according to
the materials wrought upon. But contrariwise it is sadly evident, that very few
Simples are endowed with a medicinal virtue without virulency, and those also
have their excellency obstructed with the gross feculency, which grows
together with the spiritual ^incture, and as a shell does hiddenly contain the
same, so that without some previous preparations few things are worthy the name
of Medicaments.

Now what preparation is usual for vegetal Simples? only decoction, or
infusion, or conserving with Sugar, or Honey, whereby the good is not so
separated from the bad, but that several crudities remain: but of this Helmont
has at large treated, I shall not repeat.

It would be a tedious Wild-goose chase to trace their medicines, and refute
them, for that will be but to (agere actum) and I intend here an Apology, not a
charge; a defensive, not an offensive conflect: I shall come therefore to state
our Case, for till that be done it is a vain thing to contend in words.

First of all we differ from the Goosquil Tribe in the Theoretical discovery of
Diseases, and secondly in our Practical cure of them.

Now as to the Theory of Diseases, and the Philosophical contemplation of
Simples, it is not essential to a Physician; for a man may know the remedies
with which to cure all diseases, and yet err very much in the discovery of
Causes; for the remedy being to the disease as water to fire, which will
undoubtedly quench it, as a man may know certainly by water to quench fire, and
yet err in the Philosophical appreprehension of the same; so may a man by a
proper remedy, rightly, and in due proportion applied, certainly cure the
disease, and be able to distinguish the same generally, though he be not able
to find our and apprehend the manner of its original, with its occasional
causes, progress and variations.

Nor let this seem a Paradox, for it may easily be evinced against the most
snarling gainsayer: for consider the forementioned example of quenching fire by
water, and it may be made unquestionable.

What rustic that does not know that water is for the quenching of fire, and
will give a very near guess how much water will quench so much fire, and yet
how many of our School Philosophers can assign the true cause of that effect?
it is not water as water, for milk, whey, winevinegar, etc. will do the same;
nor yet as cold, for hot water, and other hot liquors will perform it as well
as cold; nor yet as moist, for oil and oleaginous moistures, being thrown on
fire in one measure increases it, and in another measure will quench it; as a
week of a candle or lamp may be drowned with too much tallow or oil. So that
in very deed the Philosophical speculation does follow practical knowledge, and
experience denominates that science, which else would be but bare opinion. But
of this I speak sufficiently in my large Treatise called Organu Philosophiae
novum, and shall not in this place repeat, what there is sufficiently proved
and confirmed.

Therefore the effects of diseases so far as they are obvious to every
observer, can instruct any who make it their work to be conversant therein,
that are of capacity, so as to be able to judge and distinguish one disease
from another, and by the Symptoms to discover if or no it do proceed in the
ordinary course of the same malady, or if by complication it does alter, and
how: this is as much as is absolutely requisite for a Physician in the
knowledge of diseases, for this knowledge does essentially conduce to the cure,
but to be able to unfold the quiddity of it, its efficient and continent
causes, the material and occasionate, with other curiosities which a
Philosopher does contemplate upon, and in which the intellect is occupied, this
adornes but does not constitute a Physician.

So then the absolute things requisite in one who would conscionably undertake
the lives of the sick, are first to know how to unlock those medicines which
the Almighty has created, and to prepare them, and after how, and when, and to
whom to apply them, and how to order and dispose the Patient so, as that he may
reap that good from them which by careful administration of them is expected.

Mistake me not, I do not deny, nay I confidently affirm, that he who is
endowed with wisdom from above, to be so curious and so diligent in his search,
as to attain the noble medicines, which the Lord has created for man's relief,
and unspeakable comfort, he, if he prove but so observant in the administration
as he was acute in the preparation, cannot but so far be enlightened from
Natures light in these observations, as to apprehend the causes of the
diseases, and their whole quiddity or being, which may by arguments (a
posteriori) be collected from their effects, as likewise he may be able to
demonstrate (a posteriori) the cause and manner of cures wrought by medicines
(a work most worthily performed by noble Helmont) which contemplation will
wonderfully delight a true Son of this Art; but yet as I said before, this does
follow and adorn, not precede and constitute a Physician.

And this I shall add, that the soul, which is a I may say ipse in homine
homo, when once an effect is apparent, and so known, as to become a mechanism,
does no farther any more reap content from it, unless it be in reference to
some deduction it gathers from it, to the finding out of some new hidden truth;
nor does the soul ever feed on it more as upon its object, originally,
directly, and in an absolute consideration, no more then in the knowing how to
make a fire, or that the fire will burn, boil, dry, etc.

Therefore justly says the wise man, that in much knowledge is much vanity and
vexation of spirit: but this only as a digression.

To return therefore, we conclude that to a true Physician is required to know
if a disease be probably curable, and if so, then how: as for instance, the
plague-tokens appearing are rightly judged mortal, and so may any such state be
reputed in which nature will admit of no remedy, nor death accept of any truce.

The careful observer of these things will by experience learn to distinguish
between dangerous and desperate cases, and so may order himself accordingly,
but in impossible cases he shall not meddle.

CHAP. IV.
ANd here me thinks I see a Galenist beginning to frame a reply, who after a
few course complements, does thus out of his wonted gravity, seek to defend his
own faction. Do not we (quoth he) the like in effect? for we by our Art
distinguish between easy, dangerous, and desperate diseases, which we
therefore undertake or leave accordingly. For if there be only a light
distemper, as foulness of the stomach, or bad humors clogging or obstructing
the liver, or the like; we then by an usual purge, or vomit, and by
bloudletting, and glysters remove the same; but if the distemper be more
violent, then by our Method we help that, for that is our mystery, which the
prating Chemists not knowing, cannot therefore do that by their medicines,
which we can by our method, which is the masterpiece of our Art; for we are
like to skilful workmen amid a number of tools, we know our work, and so can,
as cause presents, and as Symptoms do move, call in for this or that medicine,
and as occasion requires we can use external artificial helps, when Nature is
not in fit case to be provoked by a violent process. This is the good old way,
and it is the safe way. But these furnace-mongers would persuade the world,
that by medicines prepared by their Art, diseases may be cut down as it were
with a sith, which for all their boasting will not be. These with several
other things are pretended by them to conceal their ignorance in so blind
progresses. But as it is an easy thing to lie hid in the dark, the mantle of
the night hiding that which the Sun discovers, it will not be amiss to proceed
to the true course of curing diseases, and by it our adversaries will be easily
quelled. Basilius and Suchten, both noble and worthy Artists, advise as many as
have given their name to Art, to be doing, and not to contend in bare words,
for it is as impossible to convince the Galenists with words without works, as
it was for Christ and his Apostles to have convinced the Jews by preaching
without miracles; therefore I shall first give you the Character of a true
Physician: and secondly, show you what his work is.

A true Physician is he whom God has qualified with a longing desire to know
nature in her operations, her integrity and desects, and how they may be
amended. For the attainment of which he does ask, seek and knock with
diligence, patience, and constancy, till it be given and opened unto him, his
heart is not set upon gain, but out of charity to the distressed he does
persist in this pursuit of knowledge, and the merciful God hears him, and gives
him what he seeks for: then having received his talent he does not bury it in a
napkin, but does improve it, until with it he gain two, and with them five,
and with them ten talents. He knows that diseases are all in their kind
curable without exception, death only being out of the power of any man or
means, the definitive sentence being past irrevocably.

He laments the sad Catalogues of poor mortals (the distressed members of
Christ Jesus) who flying from the Lion of sickness, meet with a Bear in stead
of a true Physician, who in stead of bread gives them a stone, and in stead of
fish a serpent, and yet these are the fathers of the sick, so pretended to be,
but like old Saturn they devour and make a prey of their children.

He also that is a true Physician does not seek fame and honor so much as the
good of those he undertakes, nor does he startle at the sad catalogue of
incurable diseases which the School Doctors have most shamefully compiled,
which he by his Medicines is able to overcome as the valiant champion is
reported to have conquered the dovouring Monster.

His work is not to spend his time in turning over of leaves; but he makes use
of Authors so as not to conclude any thing upon bare reading without trial. In
a word, he so behaves himself as if his great content proposed were, whether to
be more assiduous in discovering nature, or sedulous in conquering diseases: of
which the latter is the main end he aims at in the former.

Now I shall briefly discover the objections, made by Galenists against this
way of medicine, and shall so fully answer them that there shall be no scruple
left.

First of all they accuse Chemical Medicines as virulent, too hot, and
therefore unfit to be given, as often in stead of curing increasing the disease;
they are (say they) a little too strong for our constitution, being for the
most part mineral and metalline, or else they are saline, which are very sharp
and corrosive, or of a fiery sulphurous nature, which therefore in stead of
cooling and refreshing, do inflame the body inwardly: therefore say they such
medicines are dangerous and desperate, which if they were not, they would (as
they make their patients believe) use them themselves. In such discourses you
shall have them run at random, and their aim in all is to make the sick
believe, that their medicaments only are gentle, safe and agreeable to nature,
the other forcible, violent, and desperate, which no man but a mad man would
take.

This is, to speak the truth, the only main objection which Galenists usually
produce against Chemical medicines; and this they varnish over with many
specious colors to make the patient believe, that to meddle with a Chemical
medicament, is no other then to cast out the Devil by Beelzebub, or according to
the old proverb, to cure a desperate disease by a desperate medicine.

Therefore I shall briefly, yet fully answer this cavil, and so answer it, that
it may appear to the eye of any judicious man to be but a mere Mormo which the
Galenists have invented, to scare the rude and ignorant with, as nurses use to
affright children with tales of Robin Goodfellow, Raw head and bloody bones,
and the like.

And first as to the point of Virulency, which is a very great Bugbear, and
enough to deter the most confident Patient, if once you can persuade him the
remedies he is to take to be of an exquisite virulency, for so a very small
error in the dose, will hazard the life in stead of conquering the distemper:
poison I grant is a dangerous, nay a desperate thing to deal with, nor is it
good to admit of it into the body upon any pretense, but that Chemical
Medicines are such, that is the point in controversy.

Calvin in his Preface to the King of France, in which he defends his Religion
from the foul aspersions laid on it by Papists, has this most just plea,
namely to call for his advarsaries Reasons, before he be condemned by their
Criminations; for if it be enough to accuse, who may or can expect to be found
innocent?

So say I, our Antagonists raise a great dust concerning poison, virulency and
malignity, which they pretend is in Chemical Medicaments, and with this clamor
they have filled the world, and buzzed it into the ears and hearts of as many
as by their impudent confident railing they could incline to embrace this
opinion, whose aspersions now I shall endeavor to wipe off.

And here I shall entreat the Readers candor in pondering the weight of
Arguments on both sides, before he proceed to censure: for which end I shall
mind thee of one general rule, which is in the urging of all Controversies, to
observe the interest of each party, and then you will confess, that what ever
is said on either side and not proved, savours of passion, not of Reason.

Consider that the Galenical Tribes credit, honor, reputation, and fortunes do
all depend on impugning this way of Chemical preparations: no marvel then if
you hear from them Demetrius his outcry, Great is the Diana of the Ephesians,
especially since the moving cause is the same, namely, Sirs you know that by
this Art we get our wealth, our honor, and all, and therefore it behooves to
oppose that upstart Chemistry, which will (if it once be accepted into the
world) make us to be as contemptible as common Fiddlers. Hinc illae lachrymae.
Hence it is that you hear such terrible news concerning this Art of
Pyrotechny; for this Art requires (in a sense) a new birth or regeneration: as
then it was an irresoluble riddle to Nicodemus, that a man when he was old
should enter into his mothers womb, and again be born; so is it an insufferable
task for an old Putationer, who has by prescription attained the reputation of
a skilful Doctor, to make loss of all this his imaginary skill, and to employ
his time, pains, study, and moneys, in the attaining of that which he either
neglecting o^ slighting in his youth, is in his age as capable of as an Ass is
to play on the Harp; there is therefore no way left for him to uphold his own
reputation, then by casting dirt on that Art which is so diametrically opposite
to his former way of profit.

Nor is it any thing of weight that he urges his as the old way, and condemns
the other as new; for error wants but a few hours of the Age of truth, nor was
this old way elder then error, and therefore to plead its antiquity is a
fallacious argument of its authority and verity.

Yet could I (if it made to my present purpose) trace this noble Art of true
Chemical Philosophy to a far more ancient pedigree then Galen or Hippocrates
either, although Hippocrates was as incomparably different from the other, as
truth is from error.

But as I said before, here lies the very knot of all, the Galenists have a
Trade which is supported by Garrulity, performed with ease and idleness, and
accompanied with riches, credit, esteem and honor, their work is not attended
with any pains, until they come to practice, and then that only consists in
visits, which pains is the key of their wealth.

As for the properation of Medicaments, that the Doctor little acquaints
himself with it, his Theory consisting only in turning over of leaves, and his
Practice in tossing of Pisse-pots and writing of Bills: this, O! this is their
Diana they so much admire, and propound to the credulous world to be adored.

But now a true son of Art he is not so blassed, for his interest does not hang
on such a hinge, but he propounds the workman to be judged by his work, nor can
there be too many endowed with this true skill, for in the search of nature
there are infinite secrets, and those lucriferous to the Artist, so that he
need not gape after the practice of medicine for gain, God in mercy dispensing
his gifts for the use of mankind, gives such to whom he imparts this skill, an
heart to improve it, without the sordid by-ends of gain and profit.

But admit that every Galenist were indeed a true Chemist, what disadvantage
could accrue thereby to any true Artist? for every one would have sufficient
employment, so many are the sad diseases to which mortal man is subject.

Experience shows that the Galenists envy not Chemists as Physicians, but as
Chemists; for otherwise they can with patience bear the daily swarming of their
own Tribe, so fruitful is that profession of its Clients, that it is incredible
what a number there is of them in and about London.

Now it is not to be doubted, but all or most of them get a living by their
Art, besides old Wives, Quacks, Mountebanks, Barber-surgeons and their men,
Apothecaries, etc. who all as confidently pretend to a patrimony in the Art of
Medicine, as if they were the natural sons of Galen and Hippocrates. Yet sad
experience does teach, that for all this rabble of Physicians, there is not a
third part of diseases cured, nor a tenth part by the skill of the Doctor.

If then so many get a living by pretending to that they know not, and
undertaking what they cannot perform, this livelihood would not be diminished,
but rather increased if all were helped that are undertaken, and those moreover
who in numberless swarms lie up and down in Hospitals and Spitles, and many
who languish at home in private both hopeless and helpless.

But if once true Artists were countenanced and embraced, scarce the tenth
pretender but would be thrown under the board: for true medicine is not
prostituted in formal receipts, to be prepared by the hand of any blundering
Apothecary, but it is one of the choice secrets of nature, which she has with
great care locked up, nor will she open them to any who have not the true keys.

It is not an overly reading of Fernelius, Avicen, Galen, that can entitle a
man a Son of this Art, but it requires a mental man, patient, laborious, and
one who is not niggardly in expenses, such a man must toil without
wearisomness; and although after several years searching, with the expense of
many pounds; he hit not what he aims at, yet must he still patiently proceed,
which task is more than Herculean for a lazy Pisseprophet.

CHAP. V.
BUt to come to the matter propounded, namely concerning poisons: of which
aspersion I shall acquit the right Chymicall Medicines.

Poison properly is that which by an over powering activity in the body, does
destroy the vitals, and is of diverse sorts; some are putrifactive poisons,
others corrosive, others narcotick, etc.

This in general concerning their Nature, but in particular they are all found
either in the Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral Kingdom. Not to speak of those
endemical malignant vapors, which infect the air oft-times; nor of the
virulency of the Pestilence, Leprosy, etc. which often does seat it self in the
very walls of houses, cloth, paper, etc.

But although there are several sorts of malignities, which are properly so
called poisons, yet in the common acceptance of the word, it denotes such a
thing by which either man or beast is destroyed, and that either by the eating
of it, or by its odor or touch, not to mention that poison of the Basilisk
which some authors affirm to kill with the sight. So that though a man die of
the Pestilence, or of the Leprosy, Pox or the like, which all have their
specificated poisons, yet do we not use to say that such died of poison, the
specificateness of the name of the disease swallowing up the generality of the
denomination of poison in such cases.

Of such things which are reputed poisons, some as the biting of Serpents, the
biting of mad dogs, etc. are remote from this our purpose, such poisons being
only in the power of that angry beast that inflicts it, and such venomes
usually die with the creature, according to the Adagy, Mortua bestia, moritur
venenum.

So that in vain should we get the teeth of dead Serpents, or the sting of dead
Bees or Hornets, all their virulency being then extinct.

Other poisons are which infect man and not beast, others both man and beast.

Of the first sort are Spiders and Toads, which Apes, Hens and Ducks will eat
familiarly, yet without any effect of poison: other poisons there are which
will not kill Dogs, Cats, etc. which yet will kill men, not because they are
not also mortal to beasts, but the Dog or Cat finding the operation, being able
to vomit at pleasure, escape the danger; which man wanting that faculty, falls
into. Hereto agrees that by Sallet oil given copiously in time, and vomit by it
provoked, many poisons are happi^y escaped, which otherwise would be ^ethal.

Those which are mortal poisons in their proper nature, do not cease to be
mortal, because they are sometimes accidentally escaped, but are so to be
reputed notwithstanding.

Before I proceed any farther into this discovery, I shall lay down a few
certain and infallible Rules, which may make very much to the informing of the
candid Reader, of the Truth in this controversy.

The first is,

Secondly,

Thirdly, Nothing is so poisonous but by its true Chemical preparation, does
wholly lose its virulent nature without the least footsteps o^ the same.

These three Rules, though at first they to many may appear paradoxical, yet I
shall so explain and confirm them, as that they may evidently appear true.

The first Rule at first sight may appear untrue, and may be our modern
putationers (who think they have sufficient insight even in Chemical secrets to
serve their turn and to denominate them Artists) b^ thus impugned, Do not, say
they your best Authors in the Science o^ Chemistry, Basilius, Valentinus,
Pa^racelsus, Quercetanus, and Helmon^ all confess that by the Art of Chemistry
many things in their own nature not virulent, are exalted to be come dangerous
poisons: instance i^ Aqua fortis, Aqua regis, Mercury sublimate, oil of
Vitriol, etc. which of things at least not poisonous become most dangerous, and
lethal.

To this I answer two ways, first of all, that it is a misconceit that the
forementioned things are become poisons by such a preparation: for as for Aqua
fortis, Aqua regis, Oil of Vitriol, and Spirit of Saltpeter or of common Salt,
they are not poisons, but Spirits eminent in activity, on which (being
distilled with the extreme fire of Reverberation) the fire has instamped a
more then ordinary fiery quality, which therefore if given alone, burn and
mortify where ever they touch any thing that is vital, (so far as their
activity reaches) yet mingled with wine, beer, or water, may be taken in the
same, nay a greater quantity (then alone would be mortal) without the least
effect of danger, nay rather they become wholesome and medicinal, as namely Oil
of Vitriol and Sulphur for the extinguishing the preternatural heat and drouth
in Fevers, the Spirit of Salt for the ardors of the urine is an incomparable
remedy: so Aqua fortis is not venomous but diaphoretick, if given in wine so
mingled that it may only be made acide by it: Spirit of Saltpeter is much of
the same virtue with Spirit of Vitriol, yea and Vinegar it self, may be so
rectified from its feces, as in a small dose given alone to become mortal; so
Honey, Sugar, and almost what not? But if they were really and formally
transmuted into poisons, they could not be so diffused, but though without any
taste or perceptible quality, they would certainly be mortal. It appears then
that many distilled Spirits made by a strong fire, as also many fixed Salts,
viz. Potash, etc. being strongly calcined, become really deadly, that is, by
being made corrosive, but not venomous, which therefore diffused in sufficient
liquor may without prejudice, or rather with much profit be taken, which else
would be hurtful, yea and if their activity be by any object on which they will
work satiated, they may then be taken alone, as Oil of Vitriol mixed with a
proportionable quantity of Salt of Tartar or any other Salt becomes almost
insipid, and may be taken in ten times the dose, which would be mortal in their
simplicity. So Aqu fortis if it be poured on Silver or Iron, and boiled with it
so long as its dissolving virtue lasts, then the metal precipitated, and the
liquor boiled up till the Salt be dry, it becomes a medicine, though not
comparable to many Chemical preparations, yet not so contemptible as the
Galenical drugs.

As for Mercury sublimate, which may be thought to bear the greatest show of
Reason to the contrary of this Rule, forasmuch as a whole pound of Argent vive
crude may safely be taken when as 3 or 4 grains of it sublimed is immediately
mortal.

To that I answer, that there is a great error in the experiment, which well
considered, will carry a clean distinct face from what it at first appears
withal.

For we know the nature of Argent vive to be salivative, and of a strangling
quality, affecting especially the throat, jaws and head of him that takes it;
yea though taken by dose, or by fume, or by inunction, yet it still betraies it
self by that infamous operation, taking its recourse to those parts
forementioned, yea though it be precipitated, or dulcified vulgarly, or
distilled into a Spirit or Oil according the Art of common Chemists, by which
it has some other operation, as vomitive, purgative, or sudorifick; yet as the
Devil is fabled not able to hide his cloven foot, so Mercury will still be
betraying its salivating quality.

As for the corrosiveness of Sublimate, that is to be attributed to the Saline
Spirits, which sublime up with the Mercury, by which it is not at all
intrinsecally altered, and if it have any quality of operation more then its
own, that is to be attributed to the Salts.

As for the large dose of Mercury which may be given without any danger, it is
to be understood that being a very ponderous body, and fluid, if it be given in
so great a dose, it straight passes all the bowels, and soon voids it self at
the siege, and is accounted the last remedy for the twisting of the small guts.
So that its nature in operation is not to be judged by such a cursory
experiment, for otherwise if a few grains unprepared, be mixed up in any pill
and given, or a small quantity mixed in ^n oil and applied by inunction, it
will show in a short time its own natural operation, and the same is the
operation of Mercury any other ways vulgarly prepared, only the corrosiveness
of some preparations above others are to be attributed to some Saline Spirits
that are joined with it, by which the Mercury is reduced into small atoms, and
the true operation of the Mercury is hidden under the operation of the Saline
Spirits that do accompany it.

Nor yet can Mercury by his or any other preparation whatsoever be brought to
become a real poison, for Sublimate being dissolved in water, and the Mercury
separated from the Salts with which it was sublimed by precipitation, or
revification, (as any trivial Chemist knows how) the Salt then decocted to the
consistence of Oil of Vitriol or dry if you please, is so far from poison, that
it excels the best Medicaments the Galenists have, as I shall declare in its
due place.

Hereto agrees, that the most corrosive sublimate, being resublimed with other
crude Mercury, loses its corrosive quality, and becomes Mercurius dulcis,
commonly given to the quantity of two scruples, the eighth part of which before
dulcification were suddenly mortal.

This is my first answer to the objection made against the first rule before
laid down, viz. that by no Chemical preparation that which in it self is not
poison, will become venomous: which I shall briefly sum up, and so pass to my
second and more satisfactory answer. I yield that by some preparations many
things become corrosive, but not venomous, the one by dilating in any liquor
being extinguished being no way dangerous; the other although infused with
never so much liquor, yet still is mortal notwithstanding.

But secondly, such operations forementioned, are not properly Chemical
preparations, nor the distinguishing badges of the Son of Art; for the
Galenists have ravished them into their shops, and use them as commonly as any,
nay most of all; for a true Chemist very seldom uses any of them, some of them
never; the Spirits of Salts he uses as occasion offers, as also of Sulphur,
but for any of the vulgar preparations of Mercury he abhors them. We deny not
but the Spirit of Vitriol is a noble Medicine, but not that which is sold
commonly, which is totally adulterated, which a very easy trial will discover:
for example, take of it about an ounce, less or more, and rectify it in a
glass, you shall see how much is mixed of phlegm, and that the tincture is
wholly sophisticate, which will therefore remain in the bottom of the glass and
discolor it of a black color, but all that distills over will be clear and
white like fountain water. The occasion of which adulteration, is because some
true sons of Art have used a Spirit of Vitriol which is made by cohobation, (a
work too laborious for a Renegado Chemist) which is of a pure golden tincture,
and fragrant, which being a noble Medicine, and having by proof been found more
effectual then Galenical slops, the Doctors therefore willing to get that
Spirit, have employed Mercenary Chemists, so styled, to draw both that and such
other Medicaments, foolishly conceiving, that every one that was a
furnace-monger was straight a Chemist.

These Apostates I say are no more to be accounted what they pretend, then the
Doctors themselves, because they have been dubbed in the University, are to be
accounted Doctors.

Therefore let me not be mistaken, to be thought to plead for such vulgar
preparations of Chemical Medicines, for they are no more Chemical then any
other Decoctions, Syrups, etc. that the Galenical Cooks prepare.

For as I said before, it is not the subjects wrought upon, that distinguish
true Chemists from the Goosquill tribe, for they use Minerals and Metals as
confidently as any, and I doubt not but they would scorn that any Simple,
either Animal, Vegetal, or Mineral, should be accounted alien from their Art.

CHAP. VI.
COnsider then their method of preparations of Animals and Vegetals, and then
see if the vulgar preparation of Minerals has not the same stamp.

Some Vegetables they stamp to powder and searce, and this they make into
species, as they term them, others they decoct, conserve, infuse, candy, or
make into Tablets, etc.

So Animals, as the inward of Hens Gizards, Sheep and Goose dung, Album
graecum, Fox Lungs, Cantharides, and many Insects which they use as Cochineel,
etc. some are powdered and so given, others in Electuaries, Loch Sanum, and
boles.

So Minerals, some are used in powder, as Crocus Martis, steel powder, Gold in
Alchermes, white Vitriol for vomits, Bezoar-stone, Irish-slate; others made
into unguents, as Mercury for inunctions, Cerusse, minium, etc. others beaten
up with other ingredients, as Arsenick in one Alexipharmacum, etc. others are
calcined barely, as vitrum Antimonii without Borax, burnt Ivory, etc. which is
a medium between an Animal and a Mineral: others are sublimed barely; as flores
Sulphuris, Antimonii, etc. others are distilled barely, as Spirit. Vitrioli,
Salis, Sulphuris, Saltpeter; and others are sublimed with mixture, as Mercury
sublimate, and Mercury dulcis, etc. all which operations are but analogical to
their usual preparations of Vegetals and Animals: and all this is done, and
used and prescribed in prosecution of one and the same method, with other of
their Apothecary drugs.

And as the Galenists may and do use Minerals, so we do use both Vegetables and
Animals, only we differ in our preparations, and in our intentions in
application. But of this in its place.

The second Rule may be contradicted and opposed, as for instance in the
flowers and vitrum of Antimony, the sublimate of Arsenick, etc. I answer, that
such preparations are no more to be accounted truly Chymicall, then the actions
of an Ape are to be accounted humane; for it is not every operation
indifferently made that is to be accounted Chymicall: What has the sublimation
of Antimony, Arsenick, etc. in it more then vulgar? the Arsenick is the same it
was; befides in the sublimation of Arsenick, though it become more corrosive,
yet is it not more venomous, but indeed less; for though it kill with a less
dose, yet not with that drought and swelling as it does crude; which frequent
sublimation will make more evident. But as I said, such operations are
empirical, but not truly Chemical; which I shall therefore, to avoid all
misunderstanding, define.

Chemistry is the Art of preparing Simples, Animal, Vegetal, and Mineral, so as
their crasis or virtue being sequestered from its superfluities, and its
virulency overcome, its crudities digested, it may be an apt medicine to
perform what God and nature has granted to it, and this in reference to the
healing of the infirmities of man or beast, or metals.

I add this clause of metals, because I know that it is much opposed by many,
believed by few, but understood most rarely: so that I may say of this, that
those only are heirs of this science, Quos meliore luto confinxit Jupiter etc.

The prosecution of this definition will clearly illustrate the three
forementioned Rules, and dissolve all the arguments and cavils of our envious
adversaries; I shall therefore conclude this Proeme or Introduction herewith,
intending the full discovery of our cause in our following discourse, which
shall be done so plainly and clearly that I hope all cause of reproach shall
for time to come be cut off from the envious, who, like Momus, what they cannot
imitate they will not fail to calumniate; from whose obloquie we shall clear
this Art, and make it appear to be of all humane Arts the most noble and
desirable, and to mankind most profitable.

Natures Explication, AND Helmont's Vindication.
CHAP. I. That all Diseases are in their kind curable.
WE have in our Preface touched in general the difference between a true Son
of Art, and a School Doctor, which so long as we insisted in generals, could
not so well be pondered, nor the difference weighed, for (In particularibus
demonstratur generalis Enuntiati veritas).

Now we come to the thing in particular, and by it let the cause be judged, as
by the other it was stated.

Our work at present is to explain Nature, by which we shall easily discover
which are the true witnesses of Nature, and which false, the one is a true
Artist, the other a Putationer.

For every Artist is to be judged by his work, which is the way of judging all
professions; for whatever is merely notional, I account but a vain Chymera,
unworthy for a serious man to busy his time in learning, lest he embrace a
cloud in stead of Juno.

And this is the misery of our Schools and Academies, that the one teach barely
words, the other bare notions, which indeed are nothing, and in application
prove but empty shadows; for he that seeks to apply them to practice, beyond
vain disputations can proceed no farther. But of this in my [Organum
Philosophiae] I have largely ventilated, to which I refer the Reader.

It is a noble saying of Cicero, Virtutis omnis laus in action consistit, Away
with all those foolish (though specious) curiosities, by which a man is never
the nearer any useful practical verity.

The practical end of Theosophy is living to God, of Geometry, Architecture,
Gunnery, etc. of Arithmetic, summing up of sums, etc. of Philosophy,
Agriculture and all Mechanics, for the use of Mankind as to the convenience
of life; and Medicine, which is the last and noblest of all earthly Arts, the
Physician being, as I may say, a sccond parent to a sick man, giving him under
God his life sometimes, and sometimes easing him of such griefs, which though
not mortal, or not speedily, yet make the life uncomfortable.

The nobleness of this Art may hence appear, for that all other things inasmuch
as they only serve convenience, yet this Art is of necessity.

Though Agriculture be a noble Art, so prized by the Ancients, that the
inventors of each part of it were celebrated with divine honors, yet without
any Agriculture, the Indians live as long, as contented, and as healthy as any
that abound with the variety of those rarities which that Art produces and
multiplieth. So Policy, Grammar, Rhetoric, etc. they do adorn, not constitute
mankind, they keep them in a civil decorum, but not in their being; for where
this is wanting they live, and take a great deal of pleasure from what nature
without Art affords, not grieved for the want of what they know not.

Nay rather they delight in their Barbarousness, and prefer it to the affluence
of all things, and order which civilized people enjoy.

I shall not need to insist in comparing all kinds of Arts and Sciences, with
this of medicine, which any man may do at his leisure, since it is plain, that
skin for skin often times a man will give for his life.

No Nation, no People, no Country without diseases and casualties, this being
part of the curse; and as man at last is to return to earth whence he was
taken, so he never wants the Harbingers of death, sometime one, sometimes
another sickness or casualty warning him of his mortality.

So that the most savage nations are enforced to use this Art, and wherever it
is more lamely taught and learned, the more is their misfortune; for no nation
or people in which many do not often want the most absolute helps of Nature,
for want of which they often have recourse to the Devil, to heal them of more
difficult diseases, which makes Wizards and Sorcerers in great price among the
barbarous people, and so much the more, by how much the Art of Medicine is less
known.

How great honor did the ancient Grecians and Phoenicians to Aesculapius, and
his sons, so that they after did account them as gods, and all on the account
of their dexterous science and skill in this Art.

But lest I should seem to insist too long on things not to the purpose, I
shall come to the matter: And first to speak of Medicine, what it is in
general, and then to descend a little more particularly into the enquiry of it.

Medicine is an Art by which all the defects and diseases to which man's nature
is subject, are so known as to be cured and restored.

It is I say an Art of knowing, curing, and restoring all those defects which
are accidental to man. Not that I do exclude other Animals, but because man is
the proper subject of this Art, I do name him (...), or for dignity sake.

It includes a branch of the Art of Chemistry, which being of a larger extent,
I do not yet define it by it as its genus, because that Medicine is also
employed about Simples, many of which are used without preparation, and many
are prepared with preparations not properly Chemical, yet the noblest of all
Medicines flow from this fountain; I therefore define it by the genus of Art,
and that properly, for Art contains both Theory and Practick, and the knowledge
of diseases is required to their cure, as well as the preparation of Medicines,
which knowledge does help an Artist, first in choice of Medicines, and secondly
in the administration of the same, which is more then the word Chemistry does
include.

Yea whatever it is that makes to the Art of healing diseases is properly
Medicinal, yea though it be miraculous, yet it is the gift of healing, or
medicine, or infernal and superstitious, it is a Satanical imposture in
medicine; both which I exclude from the Art of Medicine; the one as being above
Art, the other as besides Art.

But that I refer to this Art, which by a natural course does perform cures,
whether by Talismans, or by Sympathetical remedies, or by proper Medicaments,
either specifical or universal, whether simply used as Nature prepares them, or
else prepared by the Art of the Physician, and that either Chymically or
vulgarly. And yet Chemistry does also comprehend the most absolute and perfect
Medicaments, besides which nothing can be desired for any disease or defect,
either inward or outward, except those accidents which necessarily require the
work of the hand, as Fractures, and Dislocations, and pulling out of any thing
violently thrust into the body, of what kind soever it be.

So then we need not any Medicaments which Chemistry does not supply, yet the
Art requiring the administration as well as the preparation of the noblest
Medicaments; it follows that Chemistry is too narrow a Genus to comprehend the
whole of Medicine; which Art does, being equally referred to Theory and
Practick.

And yet Chemistry is larger then to be totally comprehended by the Art of
Medicine, for by it are prepared Diapasmes, (which are in a sort medicinal) and
sundry curiosities, some not at all referring to medicine, as the making of
Jemmes, malleable glass, etc. others are referred to Medicine, and also
transcend it, as the Elixir of the wise, the white respecting only riches, the
red both riches and health.

Yea and this supreme Medicine does transcend the bare Art of restoring defects
of nature; in as much as it does lengthen life wonderfully, although I know few
do believe it.

So then the Art of Medicine contains these branches, first the knowledge of
diseases, and secondly, the way of their cure. And this also contains two
parts: first the choice and preparation of Medicines: and secondly, their
administration.

Their administration includes a true knowledge of their virtue, and so a
proportionable and convenien^ application of them in reference to the cause of
the disease and the state of the Patient.

And this is universally to b^ noted, that the more languid the medicines
themselves are, the greater sagacity is required in the Theorical part, and
care joined with dexterity in the practick. I know that according to the
received Doctrine of the Schools, I should now unfold many very unprofitable
questions, but intending the reality of things, and not respecting the empty
bubbles of Aerial notions, I shall not meddle with them, I mean questions in
reference to the definition, and division and subdivision of this Art.

To proceed then to what I intend, I said that Medicine is the Art of knowing,
curing and restoring all diseases and defects to which mankind is subject to
in reference to the body, as Theosophy does the same in reference to the soul,
so that next to it, this Art has the first place.

I express knowing, curing, and restoring not without cause, as I shall by and
by explain. Knowing I say because without the knowledge o^ diseases a man may
be a Mountebank, but not a Physician; which knowledge of diseases is as it were
his line and plummet by which he works. By this he judges the facility or
improbability of the cure, for though no disease in its kind, ye^ many
particular diseases are incurable, as in my Preface I touched and explained,
nor shall I here repeat.

There also I did clearly discover what knowledge was absolute, and what
accidental to a Physician, the one constituting, the other adorning him; the
one to be required, the other to be desired in him; I shall also pass that as
already spoken fully to.

Curing is as much as to say, taking care of, and employing diligence about
them; nor any diligence i^ not enough or any care promiscuously, for the nurse
and cook, etc. do carefully attend the sick party; but by cure or care, (which
is all one, being but the English of the La^ine word Cura) of the Physician is
that which is intended to the recovery of the Patient, and that with as much
speed and safety as may be.

I add restoring, as the grand mark of a real and true son of Art, it is his
diploma by which he appears to be one created of God, and not by the Schools;
for their creatures they adorn with titles, God graceth his with real abilities.

His knowledge is not such as he sucks from the Schools, but such as is
applicable to action, the other being but empty shadows of which in its place.

His cure and care is not consisting only in reiterated Visits, feeling of
Pulses, and tossing of urines, Stirring of Close-stooles, and appointing
Purges, Vomits, Bleeding, Fonsinels, Blisters, Scarifications, Leeches, and
such enfeebling Martyrdoms, nor prescribing Syrups, distilled Waters of green
Herbs, Lozenges, Electuaries, and such fooleries, and what is more sordid, he
does not oversee the Kitchen, to make this Gelly, or that Broth, or this
Glyster or the like, but like a valiant Achilles or Hercules, he assayles the
Disease with powerful and prevailing Medicines, and for the Diet he is not so
precise, provided always meat be not taken immoderately of any sort, and that
diet he approves for a sick stomach which is of easiest concoction: but of this
by the way, we shall insist larger on it in its place.

He does not cowardly sum up a Catalogue of incurable diseases, so that as the
ignorant Academians of old had their (Graecum est, nec potes^ legi) so the
School Doctors have a very large roll of maladies over which they only put this
inscription (Incurabilia sunt) and so leave them with a sad recommendation to
God. But as the valiant Hercules fought, against Giants and Monsters and
overcame them, so a true Son of Art makes it appear that all diseases are in
their kind curable.

And now my Reverend Doctors, who perhaps some of you have read Galen, at least
cursorily, and some have read Hippocrates, but never understood him; some have
turned over Fernelius, Sennertus, Avicen and others both ancient and modern
writers, to you I speak.

The Art that you think your selves masters of, so that you would persuade your
selves to be the very natural Sons of Aesculapius, what is your Art? let us
weigh it in the balance, let us consider it and compare it with this Art which
we commend and admire; and I doubt not but as a shadow before the Sun, so your
appearing Art before true Art will pass away.

Can you cure the Gout? some perhaps of you will find impudence enough to
affirm it, to whom I shall only object, Fiat experimentum. The people deny it
according to the Adagy, Nescit nodosam medicus curare podagram.

How then? You can cure you will say the running Gout, speak softly I pray,
lest some of your patients hear you, and object this: And why then did you not
cure me? 'Twill be a^ serious check.

But I suppose you much mistake the name and nature of the running Gout, the
Gout properly and truly is an Arthritical pain affecting the joints
immediately, and some nerves sometimes by a Deuteropatheia, and according to
the situation it is called Podagra, Cheiragra, and Ischiatica* to these I shall
add two other species, to wit Cephalalgia, and Odontalgia, which are real
branches of the same disease: the Headache affecting the Meninges of the brain,
and the Toothache the Roots of the teeth, which are in these two griefs
equivalent to joints.

The Headache if tedious and durable is called commonly a Megrim, the Toothache
retains always its name.

Now all these kinds of griefs are either habitual or accidental, habitual
either hereditary, or gotten by some disorder or other.

The Accidental sorts of these griefs are of their own nature transient, as
having no fixed root, and are caused by unusual cold, or falls, or strokes, or
strains ill healed, or dislocations ill set and restored, or fractures ill
conglutinated, or else through some or other intemperance in meat or drink.

For the Remedy of the Toothache if it come to extremity there is one only
capital remedy of pulling them out, which often proves but an insufficient,
always a lame remedy, but our age has found the way of counterfeiting the
teeth, which makes the loss appear the less. For the Toothache there are a
thousand (not to say more) applications and tricks used to heat and abate the
present pain, and those sometimes effectual, sometimes not at all, for they are
only topical, and therefore at the best do but ease for the time; others use
Spells, Charms and Magical enchantmens for this end, and yet for all this how
many thousands there are who in their youth have their Teeth most rotted out
and corrupted with this grief, and all for want of help?

Well and what says the Doctor to this? In very deed he is as contemptible as
a Bag-piper, every old woman and nurse has as many and as good Medicines for
it as he. Fie on your worship good Doctor, with reverence to your gravity be it
spoken, are you not ashamed of your own craft, which know not how radically to
cure the Toothache?

You will say it is a thing too mean for your gravity, which therefore you
leave to every Barber, he being the only man when all is done; for what with
oil of Cloves, Origanum, Peper, Vitriol, etc. he cannot mend, with his
instrument he can end.

But good Mr. Doctor, why is your worship so squeamish, and yet it is not below
your worth to toss a piss-pot for a groat, and to tell the Patient a long tale
of you know not what your self, when perhaps the grief is far of less
concernment then the Toothache?

What then? Even this is the Reason, here the cause is apparent, every one
knows it as well as your self, here is no room to juggle, but you must come to
action, which you are as willing to as Hocus pocus is to act a Puppet-play with
the curtain drawn open. In cases that are not evident, you can advise them to
bring their water, and this you will view as a Fortune Tellers the palm of ones
hand, and then you have your tale as ready as a Jugler that shows his sights in
Bartholomew-fair, and a Bill to the Apothecary you can give them if need be, or
they desire it, or some good counsel you have in readiness, which if the case
were your own, you would think on it twice ere you would take it once. But in
such cases which often experience has made as notorious to others as to you,
there the Urinal must be thrown aside, and then you are at your wits ends,
according to the Adagy, Stercus and urina medicorum fercula prima.

How then? Marry thus, The Academies have dubbed you, and declared you Doctors,
which though at the first admission you know to be but a formal empty show, yet
you had the knavery to dissemble it, and the title bringing honor you are
willing to accept it; and that you may not make your selves ridiculous, are apt
and ready confidently to pretend what you know you have not, that is, skill.
And as a liar by often telling a lie does at last come almost to believe it
himself; so at last after a long profession, you claim prescription, which that
you may not expose to derision, you will undertake any thing, and be as busy
about any sick man as Davus in the Comedy, he shall scarce piss, but you will
toss it; nor go to stool, but you will put your nose to it and stir it; nor
have a mess of broth dressed, but you will have a finger in its direction; and as
though you scorned Nature should stand cheek by joul with you, if the patient
be sleepy (as often times) he must be kept waking (yea and that on pain of death)
Massanelloes commands right: if his stomach be indifferent, he must be curbed
in his diet; if he be droughty and thirsty, you will forbid him drink; in a
word, you are of Caesar's mind in that, Aut viam inveniam, aut faciam, so you,
Aut morbum inveniam, aut faciam. If his appetite be to any thing more then
other, be sure that he must be restrained of and bound precisely to your
Broths, your Julips, your Barley-waters, Gellies, etc. In a word, if the
disease by too soon drawing to a period prevent you not, you will use all the
Electuaries, distilled Waters, Julips, Diet-drink, Potions, Tablets, Species,
and Cordials, as you call them; all the Herbs, Flowers, Seeds, and Roots which
you can probably conjecture may chance to do good, o^ at least you hope will do
no hurt.

But if you prevail not here, then as the Poet by degrees came to his,
Sicelides musae paulo majora canamus.

And from them to his Arma virumque cano --

So if your Diaeticall Cookery prevail not, as seldom it does (though
sometimes, for Reasons hereafter to be shown) then you go a step higher, to
gentle Purges and Vomits, as you call them, and if those fail, then by Issues,
or Bleeding, or Scarification or the like: and lastly, if all fail, then you
resolve to cure a desperate disease with a desperate medicine, singing with the
Poet this Palinode.

Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo. Then must poisons be used in
good earnest, Helleboro purgandum Caput, is an ancient Adagy, Hellebore and
Euforbium must do what Cochipils will not: Opium must do what Lettice posset
will not; but first it must be mixed up into a ridiculous Laudanum; Colocyntida
and Scammony must effect what Manna, Seen and Rhubarb will not: O brave
Doctors! O capita Helleboro digna! yet you are the men that cry out against
poisons.

As though Scammony, Colocyntida, Elaterium, Esula, Euphorbium, Ialapium,
Bryony, Asarum, Aaron, Hellebore, and such like, as Cambogia, etc. were not
absolute Poisons. O but they are tempered by the Art of the skilful Doctor.
Good words cost no money, I wish it prove so. But I pray Mr. Doctor if it be
so, what means the bleating of the sheep? I mean, what is the reason your
Medicaments retain their vomiting quality with convulsions of the stomach which
have Hellebore mixed, and their purging quality with gripings and such
symptoms that have Scammony mixed: thus you use to correct poisons, thus you
intend to cure diseases. Minervam crassissimam!

But as a Jugler when his feats are discovered, so you by this means become
ridiculous: you know the serious check the Frog in Aesop received, who as you
do, would pretend to be a Doctor, Cur tibi ipsi labra livida non curas?

Coughs, Colds, Murres, Hoarsenesses, Headaches, Tooth-aches, and the like;
nay oft-times the simple Itch and Scab, does reproach you at home, and outdare
you abroad, and what is your excuse? they are trivial cases.

By which it appears, that if other diseases should become as common as these,
they would all be too mean for the Doctors reverence; and good reason, because
they are above his abilities.

Though you name Mountebanks with contempt, yet you differ from them chiefly
herein: They pretend skill in notorious diseases, chiefly there where they are
least or not at all known; You in a place where you are most known, are most
desirous to deal in hidden unknown maladies.

How often shall a man find the Doctors worship himself tormented and at his
wits end with the Toothach, or Headache, muffled up for a Hoarsness, often
coughing at every breath? to whom if you object the common Proverb, Physician
heal thy self, he will thank you heartily as much as if he did, but he knows
he cannot do it, but it must wear away, he will take perhaps some old wives
Medicine; and what is the cause? If another come to him for the same grief, he
is straight at his rules of Art, the Cough, says he, is caused by a Catharr,
and therefore first you must purge, and then make an issue, and use Conserves
of Foxlungs and such like remedies; why does he not use these tricks himself?
this is the reason, he knows it is a folly, for these remedies are invalid, yet
be it as it will, he that has money, shall have his counsel which he will not
take himself, because he wants some body to pay him for it, and other good he
expects none, but the Patients confidence he hopes will help out the
insufficiency of the Medicament, which therefore he will confidently prescribe,
and count this his Counsel worth a Fee to another, which to himself would not
be worth taking.

Well, be it so, that according to the Proverb, Aquila non capit muscas, the
Doctor is above these petty employments, which are too vulgar, which might be
the better believed if he were free from them himself, yet I then desire to be
informed, what they say to the forementioned Gout, is not that a disease worthy
their care and cure?

Yes without doubt, for it is a disease that often follows great men, and
Heroes, whom it so affects, that he should not be unrewarded and that highly,
that could perform that, here the Doctor has proved his skill and method (ad
nauseam) and at last he concludes it to be incurable.

Perhaps upon some disorder of the body by sudden heat and cold, there may be
caused a running and very sharp pain, which as I said before is accidental, and
therefore transient; the Doctor is advised and consulted with, he advises
fomentations, unguents, plasters, searcloths and scarifications, then he
purges the body once or again as the fancy takes him, perhaps he will cause
blisters to be drawn, and after them cause issues to be made; then he
prescribes a Dietory, and perhaps causes him to sweat, the pain goes away
sometimes, he uses bathing of the part in hot Bathes, either wet or dry; then
the Doctor strokes his beard, and persuades himself he has cured the running
Gout. Ne saevi magne sacerdos. Often times a good old woman sweating a party so
taken soundly with Carduus and Camomileflowers, and bathing the place affected
with Brandy Wine warm, has performed the like: Ampla spolia!

This, O this is the Doctors Method, this is the Art they so magnify, in
respect of which a Chemical Physician in contempt is by them termed an
Emperick, and a Mountebank, and what not?

We have seen their mystery in common maladies, which are too vulgar for them,
a gallant excuse, and in more difficult cases in which being convinced by daily
experience, and opportunity of being more fully convinced, still presenting it
self, has extorted a confession of their impotency herein, yet palliated with
a shameless falsehood, that such diseases are incurable, which censure they give
on a multitude of other diseases, as the Phthisick, Consumption, Strangury,
Palsy, Epilepsie, and many others, which it would be tedious to relate and
name.

But a true Physician acknowledges none of those shameful distinctions, of
trivial and considerable diseases, nor that false distinction of curable and
incurable; but by his Art with Gods blessing he is able to cure and restore to
their integrity all distempers of what kind soever, which I shall briefly yet
fully clear up and demonstrate.

This task may seem to some very difficult, especially to a Pisse-Prophet, who
I suppose are very desirous to hear it demonstrated.

I doubt not but many of the Goosquill Tribe hope the contrary, having this
confidence, that what ever is beyond their capacity is beyond possibility, whom
therefore I shall principally assail in this demonstration.

If any of you desire to know how I prove all diseases to be curable, who am so
confident to affirm it, I shall ask you how you prove any diseases to be
incurable, which you so confidently affirm to be so.

I know that what ever you will answer, though by much circumlocution it will
all tend to this, because you never could certainly cure such diseases,
therefore you so judge them. In very truth Gentlemen, if you from negative
experience are so bold to collect a positive Maxim, and confidently pronounce
that incurable which you cannot cure: I hope you will give the like liberty to
a Son of Art, to affirm those diseases to be curable, which he has often and
certainly restored.

Worth derision was that of an Idiot, who being asked how many seven and seven
was, he counted it on his fingers and could tell the number; being asked how
many four times seven was, his finger Arithmetic failing, he could not tell;
but being asked how many seven times seven was, he said, No man could tell: he
thought some men might possibly count up 4 times 7, but 7 times 7 God only
knew. So you, some diseases you think you can cure; others though you cannot,
yet some more experienced in your Art can, but the knotted Gout, Stone,
Strangury, Epilepsie, etc. God only can cure. This is your sentence; somethings
often succeed in our hands, and some, though rarely, yet sometimes, therefore
they are curable; others never succeed, therefore they are incurable.

This Logic would make almost all Mechanics to be impossible, if what ever
you cannot do must straight be unfecible. Can any of you, or all your College
together, make the Tyrian Purple? Can you make that refined Copper which in
Ezra is spoken of, and is as precious as Gold, yet both are not only fecible,
but the Art was formerly known as appears by the Authority of the Scripture.
But what need I propound such hard Cases to you? Can any of you make a Sword,
or a pair of handsome Schooes? I hope you will not therefore conclude it
impossible.

Is all wisdom with you? Is nature limited to your knowledge? Shall that skill
not be accounted true which you have not? Fie on all such arrogance, and fie on
all positive conclusions drawn from negative experience, which is indeed but
ignorance; for what is negative experience but want of experience, and what is
that but ignorance? It is a true saying, Qui ad pauca respicit facile
pronunciat. Tell me seriously, why should you account that incurable which you
cannot cure? What have you tried, for to give such a resolute sentence? Do you
know all natural things, with all their preparations, and the virtue of them
both in their simplicity, and what they may be advanced to by a due
preparation? Or do you think that this is needless for a Physician to know? Do
you think that diseases will be scared into conformity by the vengeance of your
gravity? Or what is the matter? for shame confess the truth, and say, it is a
refuge only for your ignorance and laziness that you have compiled that
Catalogue of incurable maladies, and if you be not past all grace and shame,
attend to him who offers to inform you better. If the cure of the sick be your
aim, and the good of mankind, do not envy a profitable truth because it is
fallen out of your lot, which you might have shared in, had you been
industrious in your time and youth. But then being too slothful to learn, and
now too proud to confess your ignorance; I cannot expect but you will be like
Momi and Zoili snarling at what you cannot imitate, verifying the Adagy,
Inscius quae non capit ea carpit
Doctus and tanta mysteria ridet
Ambo sic pergam, fatuus at unus
Invidus alter.


The truth is, what you affirm to be impossible that I will yield to be very
difficult, which difficulty respects not the cure, (for all diseases are alike
to a noble Medicine) but the preparation of the Medicines but you know the
proverb, Difficilia sunt quae pulchra.

But though they be difficult, yet they are not to be despaired of, according
to the Poet, Nil tam difficile est quod non solertia vincat.

Do you think that Science and Art will drop down on you without pains and
diligence, as Diana is fabled to have fell from Jupiter, or to be inspired
miraculously, as Danae was fabled to be impregnated by Jupiter coming down into
her lap in a shower of Gold? know you not that vendidere dii sudoribus Arts?

It is not reading of Aristotle that will make a Philosopher, or of Galen,
Hippocrates, Avicen, Mesue, or Fernelius, Sennertus or the like, that will make
a Physician. It is not the reading over of Herbals, or learning the form and
history of plants that will make a true Son of Art. No verily, it requires a
far greater diligence. There are Medicines to be made that will cure all
diseases, none excepted, which if the health of men and conscionable performing
of your duty were a thing you made conscience of, you would seriously attend,
and not suffer so many to languish and perish hopeless, and helpless when God
has appointed means abundantly for their recovery.

You will say, if we could be sure that there were such remedies, we would not
spare for any cost to attain them, but we cannot believe any such thing.

But why cannot we believe it? Does not the Scripture say, that Gods mercy is
above all his works: it is a great diffiding in Gods mercy, to think that there
are so many diseases left incurable, and yet this is one of Christ's Attributes,
that he took our infirmities and bare our griefs, he went about doing good and
curing all manner of diseases among the people, therefore it is a good thing,
that all diseases should be cured, and is any good thing impossible?

The saddest affliction of all that befalls mankind, as to this life, and the
most deplorable, God has not left without a remedy, viz. the possessing of the
body by the Devil, which being a preternatural affliction, has a supernatural
remedy, which is prayer and fasting. And is it likely that he has left any
natural malady destitute of a remedy.

Again, does not the Lord protest that he does not willing grieve nor afflict
the children of men, which would be a paradox to believe, if there were no
remedy for such and such diseases, when the Lord by the most deplorable
diseases would se^ set out the saddest afflicted State o^ the Church for their
sins sake, asks this question, Is there no balm in Gi^^ lead? is there no
Physician there (...) it were a very unapt similitude, i^ there were such a
catalogue of sore for which there is no balm, and suc^ a roll of diseases for
which there i^ no Physician.

Tell me, did you never read of a medicine created out of earth, which he that
was wise should not despise: But according to your Doctrine, if this wise man
were either afflicted with the Gout, Strangury, Palsy, Epilepsie, or the like,
he should despise that Medicine and that justly, if it would do him no good for
his distempers. It must needs follow, that that which no wise man should
despise, that is, unless he would discover folly in so despising, must needs be
of virtue to cure all diseases or any, or else if a wise man may be subject to
any disease which that Medicine could not cure, he could not without folly but
despise it in reference to his own behalf.

Did you never read that the sick have need of a Physician? To what end I pray
thee? to entreat God for him, and to prove one of Jobs comforters, that is to
tell him that his sickness was incurable, if then the sick indifferently (not
this sick man and that sick man excluding such and such) need a Physician, it
must needs be that the Physician has or should have remedies to help such an
one, or else he has little need of him to take his money and to torment him
with his Rules of Art; which are to no purpose, if he be incurable.

Did you never read that God had created the Physician for necessity, and
appointed him to be honored for necessity sake; either then such cases which
you shamelesly account uncurable, are cases of necessity, and so the Physician
is created of God in such cases, or no: what honor think you is Physician like
to receive, that when he is called to some Patient, has this shameful
subterfuge (it is not to be done)?

Nor do there want examples sufficient to convince the truth of this, if you
were but as careful to mind true Artists, and to encourage them, as you are to
hearken out all the vagabond and apostate Chemists and Empericks to make use of
their ignorant rash adventures, to the reproaching of true sons of Art.

Basilius Valentinus cures are beyond your cavils notorious, so that he dared
all the Doctors of his time to the field (as I may say) nor was he so
contemptible a man, to have exposed his credit so to derision, in making such a
challenge, had not his cures been notorious.

Suchten, a man of no obscure family, and Georgius Phaedro, did both promise
and perform the cure of diseases counted incurable.

Count Trevisan in his Treatise de Miraculo Chemico, reckons up all incurable
diseases, which by his Medicine he affirmed that he had cured.

Paracelsus to the admiration of all Germany, did both promise and perform the
like, as is beyond denial testified of him by an honorable Prince of Germany,
in an honouble Epitaph for that end set upon his Tomb.

Quercetan after him did effect most mavelous cures by this true Art, whose
testimony the quality of the man may make Authentical. Yea so far was he from
studying parties, that his design was to supply the defects of Art in the
common Apothecaries shops, which he endeavored in his Pharmacopoea Dogmaticorum
restituta, in which he did (ex ungue Leonem) by those commoner things of
Chemistry, yet far surpassing the ordinary drugs, do what he could to incite
those who were diligent and judicious to a more serious search after secrets,
which because he would not prostitute, he declared covertly, yet nevertheless
to a son of Aat plain enough.

And in our Age the noble Helmont did perform the same to admiration, and has
so satisfactorily written of the whole Art in his large volume every where
extant, that though many snarl and bark at him, yet hitherto none has appeared
that durst take up the buckler against him.

What can you say to these men good Mr. Doctors, are their testimonies true or
no? I suppose this question will prove to you as Christ's in the like case did
to the Pharisees and Scribes, concerning the Baptism of John, when he asked
them if it were of heaven, or of men. If you confess it to be true, then I ask
you why you do not follow them, why do you not believe them, why do you
reproach the Art so signally testified? If you say it is not true, the people
will condemn you, your own Chieftains will convince you, Sennertus, Fernelius,
and many others have been forced to confess that of this Art in its
commendation, which would make your ears glow to hear it in English.

And to deal in good sadness, How come you to know any thing concerning the Art
of Medicine? Have you it not from testimony? Are not Authors authorities your
main pillars? suppose your selves to be as you were before you had any
practice, yet you were dubbed Doctors; and what was all your skill then but on
credit? are not the Herbals but so many collections of the Judgments of such
Authors as have written on the subject? And are the opinions of some men that
you fancy, to be believed before the absolute testimony of others? What
partiality is this? What had Galen to induce credit more then Paracelsus,
Helmont, Count Trevisan, Valentinus, Quercetan, and those of his Art, whose
persons were noble, whose learning not contemptible, and who wrote not their
placits, but their experiences; not what they thought, but what they had done,
and could do. Is a negation to be accounted as an oracle before a positive
affirmation? Away with this madness! If you would desire a reason for the
curableness of all diseases, I answer, the effect is to be the proof of the
cause: I suppose you are so good Logicians as to know that cause and effect do
mutually argue each other. If then all diseases in kind have been, are, and
may be cured, then they are curable. The assumption is proved by testimonies
sufficient, by experience, and no obscure grounds from the Scripture.

CHAP. II. The insufficiency of vulgar Medicines is the cause why many Diseases
are judged incurable.
BY the Catalogue of incurable Diseases it may appear what and how many
diseases there be which the Doctor confesses are without the reach of his
medicines and method. We shall take them at their word, who grant indeed that
they cannot cure them, but that they are not therefore cureable, that we have
upon good ground denied.

Now let us consider the efficacy of their method and medicines in other cases,
which they do account curable, and examine what they do perform there.

But first I shall add a word or two of serious reproof to them in reference
to the former number of incurable maladies, in that they to me seem not a
little culpable.

If they would heartily wave the cure of such griefs, and deal ingenuously with
the fick Patient, it were commendable in them as honesty, although they should
much diminish their reputation thereby.

But yet though they (I mean the ablest of the sect) do confess their
unsufficiency to cure such and such maladies, yet this notwithstanding, if any
through ignorance of their abilities come to them, in any such case, they will
not turn him away; verifying therein the sordid saying of an unworthy Emperor,
Dulcis door lucri ex re qualibet.

And yet for this they want not a shift, and a poor one too, Although say they
we know not certainly to cure it, yet we know the causes of it, what breeds it,
and what feeds it, these we cannot totally remove, but we can so diminish bad
humors which is as fuel to it, that it shall not be so dangerous, nor so
troublesome as else it would be, also we can apply remedies to abate Symptoms,
and this Art will do.

These are good words, which if they knew not how to give, it is pity but they
had been turned to plough when they had been first sent to the School. But as
good words alone will never satisfy a hungry belly, so will it less profit in
so difficult a case.

What our Doctors can do in abating the Symptoms of the Gout, the Stone, the
Epilepsie, the Palsy, I desire to know and learn, nay in a less case then
those mentioned, in the Quartan Fever.

I confess, that in the time of misery the Patient often times will admit of any
help real or only promised, according to that old saying, A drowning man will
catch at a straw. But the Doctors ready affording to them their help and
counsel when called, in such and other the like cases, and performing nothing
in lieu of great fees, does make them justly at last ridiculous, so that the
name of a Doctor is as contemptible to many of the most vulgar, as a
Puppet-player; and justly, for who sees not how sordidly in these cases he
behaves himself? Let a poor man be taken Paralytical, or Epileptical, or
Leprous, or with a Cancer, Lupus, or the like, they will very friendly advise
them not to spend their money, for it is in vain; nay Hospitals are not to
entertain such persons as being out of hope of cure; and yet if a great Hero
be taken with any of the like cases, no Ravens will fly more greedily to
carrion then they to him, in this acting very impudently and dishonestly.

It is not my purpose here to descend to the particulars of diseases, this
being only an Apology, I haing elsewhere largely insisted upon many diseases in
particular, such to wit which are more common and truculent, which I did, that
ingenious men which have not the happiness to attain to the greater arcanaes,
may yet have a Succedaneum to them, which being of a more precise nature, are
to be used in some cases only, not so commonly, and universally in all.

To return therefore to the thing proposed, namely to consider and take a view
of the Doctors performances in other cases which they count curable, namely
Fevers, Fluxes, Pleurisies, etc.

And first to begin with the Fever; is that I pray you certainly by you cured?
No verily, nay the contrary. Truth, there are very great varieties of Fevers,
some are diary, and of their own accord end in a fit for the most part, here
perhaps the Doctor is called, and prescribes a ridiculous medicine with a
severe diet, and the party recovers of the disease, which of its own accord
would have ceased, or at most nature being helped by a Sage or a Carduus
posset, and sweat provoked thereby.

The cause of these Fevers being a light error in the first digestion, and not
affecting the spermatical membrane of the stomach with any malignant
impression, is easily avoided by one, and that often no tedious fit, and not
rarely is expelled by vomit, and looseness, but most often by sweat.

When the Doctor comes to such a Patient, finding him very ill at stomach,
restless, and often with much pain in the head, very thirsty, and with a thick
pulse, he for the time appoints him some cooling Julip, and perhaps some simple
Cordial, and by this means hindering natures indication, the party who after a
sound sweat would the next day be pretty well, is like a sea-sick man, though
the rigor of the former day be abated, yet he is untoward, with a dejected
appetite, and somewhat Feverish; then the Doctor prescribes a purge, to carry
away (as he says) the peccant matter, and in a word handles the case so
artificially, that he will make a fortnights cure of it, sometimes twice as
long.

This then he accounts a great cure, and to make it the more esteemed, he will
make it costly enough, the Apothecaries Bills often times in such cases rising to
five, sometimes to ten pounds, and the Doctors Fees to as much, when as the
disease at the first taking in hand was but a plain Diary, though before the
Doctors making an end, it be by his rules of Art changed into a Synochus.

Nor may this seem a false imputation, for I have known the like done where no
Fever has been before, yet the Doctor by his Art of preventing diseases, has
not only caused disease, but also promoted it so far, that by it all future
maladies have been certainly prevented, and the grave has covered his error.

A Gentleman of my acquaintance in London, some three years past, in the
Autumn, was asking me what I would advise him for the purging of his body to
prevent diseases, (malignant Fevers being th^n common) I demanded of him what
moved him to desire Physic; he told me indeed he found no disorder in his
body, but thought it were good to use Physic notwithstanding for ^revention
sake. I told him that Christ's rule therein was not to be ^ontemned, viz. That
the whole ^eed not a Physician, but such who ^re sick; and advised him if he
were well, to keep himself well; but he would needs take the advice of a
Doctor, and some gentle thing to cleanse his body, hoping by it to be the less
subject to the disease of the time.

He advised with one, without exception of as great fame and note as any in
London, who has heaped up riches out of the ruins of several persons and
families, and for doing it with a grace, has with them gotten a name: he
advises him to a gentle Purge, which being taken, wrought little or not at
all; whereupon the next day finding himself little the better, the Doctor
prescribed him a Purge somewhat stronger; for, said he, the humor is
melancholic, and so not easily removed: this purge wrought thoroughly so that
at night he had little rest, and the next day was Feverish, which the Doctor
handled so well, that i^ ten days he rid him both of his Fever and his life.

Another Doctor of no less note, about two years since, came to a Gentlewoman
of good quality, who had sormerly been his Patient, and was at that time in
good health, only desirous for prevention sake to purge, which he directed her
to do, prescribing a Purge, which working not at all, he advised another of
greater force; this wrought about 16 or 20 stools, and in the night began to
work afresh, nor ceased (the Doctors skill notwithstanding) till in three days
it fully cured her of all infirmities present and to come. No marvel then since
they are so dextrous in causing diseases where none were, and managing them
till by them is made an end of all worldly miseries, if they being called to a
diary can artificially turn it into a Synochus, according to the Adagy,
Facilius inventis additur, quam uova inveniuntur.

If I were minded here to insist on instances, I might spend more time then
this Apology will admit; I shall therefore pass on to the^ matter in hand,
namely that the Doctor with all his medicaments which the Apothecaries shops
afford, and his so much adored method to boot, is not confident of the cure of
any one disease, nor can be assure his Patient thereof.

So then if there be any accidental distemper befallen a strong man, or woman,
there he will tamper like a tinker, who seldom mends a hole till he makes it
twice or thrice as big, that so he may account so many the more nails; so the
Doctor will not spare to play booty between Nature and the disease, till it be
aggravated to what height it is possible for nature to bear, and then he
withdrawes his hand, and expects the Critical day, to wit, to see what end
nature will make, in the mean time to the disturbance of her as much as he can,
he forbids all meat and drink but his cookery, every day peeping in the urinal,
and feeling the pulse, and prescribing this or that slop for a Cordial; if the
Patient die, then he takes himself excused, for he proceeded according to the
Rules of Art, if he recover (as God in mercy does recover many, though far less
then otherwise through the Doctors help) then he reckons this for a cure, and
prides himself herein, whose folly we shall discover fully to the Impartial
Reader.

It Is a shameful excuse that Doctors usually make when many die under their
hands, that they proceed according to the Rules of Art, if this Art be worse
then the Art of a Tinker or a Cobbler: For let any of these be called to do any
job of work that is in their Trade, they will tell you straight, if or no it be
to be done, and undertaking will perform it, only the Doctor if called to a
sick patient, will in lieu of a large Fee tell you what the disease is (at
least what comes into his mind at the time, which he thinks will satisfy an
ignorant patient) and what is this? The sick man needs a Physician, not a
witness of his misery. Well, ask him concerning the cure, he will tell you
that he can promise nothing, for the blessing is only in Gods hand, but he will
do his endeavor. A religious Answer, and as he will garnish it, to the vulgar
specious, but it is is but a visard to hide a grievous imposture.

For as our life, so all our actions are in the hand of God; it is he that
builds the house, else in vain is the work of the workman. The husband-mans
breaking up his ground, sowing his seed, and managing his ground: even this
says the Prophet) is of the Lord; He teaches him, and helps him, else he
could do nothing. So in God we live, move, and have our being: and when we
speak of ordinary natural things, to be so cautious in speaking as not to
promise any thing without mentioning God, is not discommendable, but the
contrary; yet as it may be used, or rather misused, this may seem not only
ridiculous, but in a manner an affected taking Gods name in vain: as for
instance, if a man being desired to make a garment, should promise not
absolutely, but with proviso, if God permit, and give life, it is
Christian-like; but if he desire Gods blessing as to the effect, the causes
being granted, that is ridiculous; as if he should say, I cannot promise to
make you a garment, but I will use all the skill I have and my endeavors, but it
is in Gods hand whether it shall become a garment or no. So if a servant should
be bidden to kindle a fire, should say he could not promise to do that, but he
would do his endeavor, but Gods blessing must give the success; how ridiculous
were this? but much more if for fuel he should take stones, and for fire
something of a different nature, and excuse himself, as having done what was on
his part, but Gods blessing not concurring, the effect did not succeed
according to desire.

Not unlike is it in this case: a Doctor is called to a Patient taken with a
Fever, and first orders him to be let blood, then purged either upward or
downward, or both ways; the disease yet increasing he gives his cooling
Julips, pectoral Electuaries, Conserves and Syrups, withal he prescribes
Clysters, or Suppositers, Lotions for the mouth, and such fooleries; if
notwithstanding the disease continue, and grow more violent, he then expects
the crisis of Nature, only he will perhaps apply pigeons or the like to the
feet, or vesicate the external members for revulsion sake, and yet if the
Patient die, he holds himself excused, as having followed the rules of Art, and
done what was to be done, only the success, as he says, being in Gods hand, he
therefore could not help it, if God did not see good to make the medicines
applied, effectual for the man's recovery.

But as it is a sad thing that the grace of God pretended, should be used as a
pander unto wantonness, so it is no less hateful, that the providence of God
should be misapplied as a cover-slut of idleness, ignorance, and
unconscionableness: for who knows not that our life is so in Gods hand, as it
is ordinarily preserved or lost by the use or want of things proper thereto?
even hunger it self would be certainly mortal, if not appeased by meat
appropriated thereto by the appointment of God. And if stones were used for
food, no man would doubt to impute death in that case to the want of food, as
the immediate cause subordinate to the providence of God: so is it in this
case. And in truth God can, but rarely does work miracles; a man rarely is
starved to death amidst variety of victuals, nor pined for thirst where drink
is plenty, much less where he both may, and does eat and drink at pleasure. So
then as to the starving of a man is required want of meat and drink, or either
of them, so to the perishing of a man under a Fever is required the defect of
a true medicine, or want of timely application.

It is not every ridiculous slop that is a Medicine, nor any promiscuous care
of the sick that is the true Art of cure; that is a Medicine indeed, and the
Art of cure indeed, which has a power to perform what the Physician promises,
or the Patient expects. So then the Art and Medicines which are required for
cure, and not for pretense, are to be related unto actual recovery as a
sufficient cause to the effect, which is certainly effectual.

It Is as natural and certain for a right Medicine to cure a disease, as it is
for fire to inflame combustible things, for the Sun to give light, for water to
quench fire, and the contrary would be supernatural, yea I am bold to affirm,
that it would be as strange for a true Medicine rightly applied to miss the
cure of a natural disease, as for the flame not to consume a combustible object.

So that for Doctors to pretend that they use the means, and that according to
the rules of Art, but Gods blessing not concurring, the effect did not answer
expectation; is as much as if they should say, that God to render their labor
and care frustrate, does work miracles daily, in denying the natural effect to
an adequate cause.

And if so, they may justly fear themselves to be highly out of Gods favor, if
he will cross and pervert the ordinary course of nature, and that daily and
commonly to frustrate their endeavors; or else they must confess the truth as
it is namely, that their method and medicines are not to be esteemed as an
adequate cause to the effect of cure of diseases; and then what is their Art,
but a shameful imposture and cheat of the world?

I would gladly any of the Galenical Tribe would salve this Argument, by
resolving the world to what diseases their Art, Method, and Medicaments, are
adequated causes in respect of cure and reference to recovery, if to any, then
in such diseases they may as confidently warrant the effect, as a Gunner to
fire a Gun that is charged with good powder, and he with a lighted linstock in
his hand; nor is it presumption in the one more then in the other, but alas is
it not evident, that if a Doctor be called to a sick man, though at the
beginning of the disease, and in his full strength, yet he can promise nothing
but to do his endeavor, as the man does who according to the Proverb, thresheth
in his cloak? whence it appears, that when ever any one recovers he does it
only through Natures benignity, and not by any art of the Doctor, who could not
warrant the cure, much less how soon it would be effected.

Fie on that Art, which alone of all Arts in the world can not, dare not, will
not warrant to perform what it undertakes, when as the most hazardable Art of
all Agriculture, and the Mariners Art, are usually warranted, yet we know that
the winds which are the directors and accomplishers under God of the Mariners
design, blow where they list, rarely trade, and the crop of the husbandman (if
the early and latter rains do but fail, either impared, or else quite
frustrated, yet both one and the other are warranted by the undertakers, on
penalty of loss of all their labor and cost, at the least, and often times a
voyage by Sea is warranted by Merchants for a small inconsiderable gain to be
paid to them at adventure, in lieu of which they will repay the whole if lost,
only the Doctor is of another mind, for he will be paid at adventure, nor will
he warrant any thing in lieu of his payment, but to do his endeavor, which is a
ridiculous cheat of the sick, both of their money and lives.

If a Tailor when cloth is brought him, should demand, pay at a venture, and
yet not promise to perform his work, but only to do his endeavor, even the
Doctor himself would think him as well deserving his wages, as they in
Lubberland deserve twelve pence by the day for sleeping, but especially if such
a Tailor should spoil the cloth so brought him by cutting it into shreds, in
stead of making it into a garment, and do thus ten times for once making a
garment, and yet exact his pay, how like a knave would this acting be, and yet
how like a Doctor, who never does otherwise.

Contrariwise a Son of Art, he confidently undertaketh a disease and as
certainly performs what he undertaketh; he comes armed with powerful
Medicaments, and not with a simple impotent method, which are as effectual to
the person that is sick for his recovery, as water would be for the quenching
of fire; not that he attempts any thing without the blessing of God, for he
acknowledges it a great mercy of him, first to have provided such Medicines in
Nature for such maladies, and secondly, in revealing them to him for the help
of mankind: and lastly, in bringing him to those who find help by him, for
otherwise where God intends a disease shall be fatal to any, he withholds the
means from him, either totally, or so long till it be too late to recover him.

For although the consequent which is drawn from the cause to the effect be
certain and undeniable, yet the cause may accidentally be frustrated of its
effect, by accident, yet so that the cause does not cease to be a cause
notwithstanding. I might instance in all generations, which by accident may be
hindered: the fire may not burn what is combustible, if by accident that be made
too wet; so water will not quench fire, if the quantity be too little; so a man
cannot be cured by a medicine, if already death be possessed of the principal
parts, or if the party be not sensible and so will not take it, otherwise it
cannot be but that a medicine indeed must work its effect, else it is no
Medicine.

But here it will not be amiss to answer a cavil, I doubt not but some
adversaries will object to me as of old was objected to Paracelsus: Do you cure
all? Do none die of your Patients? To these I shall answer, that indeed all do
not recover, and yet the truth of what I say nothing infringed; for against all
diseases there is a remedy, but against death none, that only is out of the
reach of all medicines. Now if God has numbered a man's days, and finished
them, it is not to be objected to the disgrace of a Medicine, that it cannot
prevail against the irerecoverable decree.

If that were all that were to be objected against the Galenists method and
practice, we should never find fault with them; for it is appointed to all men
once to die, and all our days are numbered, every man is not to live ad aetatem
decre^itam.

But with all this we say, that though our Medicines cannot triumph over death;
yet against the miseries of life. They will prevail over the disease even there
where recovery of life is impossible: and therefore a true febrifuge will
refresh, abate Symptoms, compose, and bring to quiet, even there where the
seat of life is possessed by death, which is a (levamen) though not a
(restauratio).

Sometimes the stroke of death deludes with the face of a disease, at least
showing some of the common usual symptoms of a Fever, not easily to be
discerned, and that because it is as we say (preter spem) Not hoped for, and so
not so easily believed according to the Adagy, (Facile speramus quae fieri
volumus, facilius quod speramus credimus).

And so on the other hand what a man would not have, he is not apt to believe.
Add to this the commiseration we have to those that are afflicted and in
sickness, which would make us desire to be instrumental in any thing which is
for their recovery. And lastly, if a man do doubt the worst, yet it is not good
to affright the Patient with his jealousies, which leave a deep impression on
his spirit, and make the hope (if any were) often times desperate. To conclude,
as nothing is without a cause, and therefore diseases are curable because
Medicines are endowed by God with such a virtue, so that some particular
diseases are excepted from the rule of the generals there are particular
causes, of which it is most true, Faelix qui poterit rerum dignoscere causas.

Yet a Son of Art by his Medicines is able to cure what is curable, (which all
diseases are in their kind) though sometimes the disease being heightened
almost to its utmost period before he is called, so that death having conquered
the chief places, will not accept of any truce; sometimes the party is struck
with deaths stroke at first, which causing a commotion of the Archeus,
disda^ning to be so overmastered by its adversary, does appear like unto an
ordinary acute disease, yet without possibility of cure, unless by his power
who can raise the dead; sometimes the patient has undergone so much of the
Galenical Tribes methodical Butchery, that he has not strength left to help
the Physicians Medicines, nature having been so exhausted, that for want of
strength it faints under its load; nor has it strength sufficient left to
co-work with the Medicine, and sometimes the defect of the highest Arcana,
which every true son of Art cannot command, does make many hereditary diseases,
and some chronical, which are raised to a more then usual height, to be out of
his Medicaments reach, which otherwise would be cured by a powerful Arcanum.

And here is the goodness of the most High, that no man can truly boast himself
to be a real son of Art, but he has at command Medicines to cure the most
common and truculent diseases, as for instance, Fevers, Pleurisies, Flixes of
all sort, Agues of all sort, small Pox and Measles which are indeed but a
branch of Fevers, Calentures, also which belong to the same head, the
Jaundies, Headaches, Tooth-aches, with all running pains, Hypochondriacal
Colicks, affections of the Mother, and obstructions of all sorts causing
indigestion, Palpitations, Syncopes, Convulsions, Vertigoes, etc. which a true
son of art can confidently undertake and cure: and though some are past
recovery of life as is before said, yet even to such his Medicaments will be
effectual for ease and comfort, and abating of raging Symptoms, which is an
effect not to be despised, where more cannot be attained.

That therefore may well and truly be account a Febrifuge, which ordinarily,
speedily and powerfully cures Fevers of all sorts, at first or second dose often
times, but never exceeds four days in continual Fevers, if administered in the
beginning, and Agues often at one fit, never misseth in three or four at most,
perfectly to cure: and although some Fevers which have been neglected too long
ere remedy be sought, do miscarry, yet of such not one of five, of those that
are taken in time not one in a hundred, which does not disprove the virtue or
efficacy of the medicine.

I know what will be said in calumny against me, though not in answer to me,
namely, that I am an Emperick, and by an Emperick they usually would have
understood, one who practices by fortuitous receipts, without the knowledge of
the cause of the disease, or nature of what he administers, and therefore
shoots his shafts at random.

This has been an old reproach of Paracelsus, Helmont, Quercetan, and all
Chemical Physicians, and therefore I shall not wonder if it be cast upon me.
But as a worthy friend of mine, when a great Doctor of the Galenical Tribe,
very passionately reproached me to him as an Emperick, and Mountebank, asked
him the difference between such a one and a dubbed Doctor? The Galenist
answered, the one shot at random, the other wrought according to Art and
Method: to which my friend replied that to his knowledge I cured not only
speedily, but certainly, and constantly, those diseases (namely Agues) which
the other Doctors always failed in curing, now if this were the difference
between an Emperick and a Colleague of the College, that the first at random
(as he objected) never or very seldom missed, but such as himself by Art never
or very seldom hit the cure, he had rather have an Empirical certain constant
and safe cure, then an artificial missing of the same.

It is known to the most vulgar and ignorant, that not only Chronical diseases
are out of the Doctors reach, but all acute diseases also, which nature does
not of his own accord cure, which may appear by the effect; How many Fevers do
they cure? certainly none, if we judge that for a cure which is indeed so to be
judged, where the Crisis is prevented by the efficacy of the Medicine; but how
many in a year out live the Crisis many days through the strength of Nature,
and yet die merely through the Doctors taking part against nature by
phlebotomy, purging, etc. who is hired by the patient to oppose the disease,
against which their Medicines are as effectual as the Priests holy water is
against the Devil, or the ringing of Bells, and mumbling a Paternoster on their
heads; to both of whom I may say that of the Satyrist, Ah pecus insipidum,
nullo non scommate dignum!
Siccine vos decuit fieri ludibria vulgi?


I have often seriously wondered how it should come to pass that these silly
Juglers should so long shuffle out, since there is scarce one in the whole
Nation that ever made use of them, who in health has not a flout ready in his
bag to throw in a Galenists dish, and yet in sickness they deifie in a manner
those very men whom in health they scorned: and I cannot but ascribe it to the
justice and wisdom of God, who is pouring forth his plagues all the world over
(I mean among Christians) by which the third part of the world shall perish,
and I think in my conscience, that few less perish by the Doctors craft. It Is a
sad consideration, that Christians only swarm with these Caterpillars, the
Heathens not knowing, nor owning nor following their method; witness the Turks,
Moors, etc. And then began it to grow to this head of esteem, when the
apostasy of Christians provoked God to the pouring forth of his plagues, of
which the most truculent of all, is the Doctors Art. The sword and all diseases
put together destroy not so many as they, namely such as by Natures strength
would recover, but are destroyed by the Doctors Art. Without these the Romans
flourished 500 years, nor found any want of them. Now Italy and Rome swarms
with them, and never did diseases reign there as now; and of all places where
are the yearly burials comparable to those places where Doctors are most
numerous? How do they swarm in London? and yet not a year in which many
thousands dye not of curable diseases. It Is sad it should be so, and yet who
sees it not? Let a disease be but epidemical, the Doctor calls it a new disease,
although no other then an epidemical Fever, and here he is the byword of
every water bearer. In Agues, especially Autumnal and popular, who more
ridiculous, and yet the people though they see and know this, nevertheless
submit to them, and adore them in necessity, to the cheating them of their
money, and the loss of their lives.

By all which it is most most evident that their Medicines are but ridiculous,
so named, a medendo, as Lucus a lucendo (quod minime medeantur) which may
scarcely pass as metaphors to true Medicines, nor can any good be predicated of
them without an Irony.

If we should take a particular survey of all their Medicines, we shall find
them all partly ridiculous, and partly desperate, universally answering to
their denomination; as the rude painters draughts of old did the things they
represented, under which if it were not written, this is a Dog, this is a Cow,
this is a Stag, this a Man, this a Cock, etc. no man by the draught could tell
what the picture represented; so if those were not called Medicines, a man
should never by the effect know that they were so. First, are their Catharticks
and Emeticks, next their Diaphoreticks, then their Diuretics, then their
Carminatives, and next their Cordials, which are either Hypnotick, or Pectoral,
or Bezoardical, or cooling. These are indeed magnificent names, let the things
be what they will. And here I cannot but take notice of their artificial
imposition of names, in that they call their laxative Medicines which are of
milder operation Lenitives, those of stronger (...), Catharticks, which is
usually rendered in other tongues, verbatim, purgatio in Latin, a purge in
English, as of old the Romans called an enemy Peregrinus, that is, a stranger,
Urbanitate seu lenitate nominis rei atrocitatem sive odium mitigante, as Cicero
has it, so they, by sugared denominations would hide the malignity of the
things so denominated, according to the Adagy, A man that has a bad name is
half hanged, and on the contrary he that has a good name may lie a bed till
noon, intimating the levity of the vulgar, who will easily be induced to
embrace a promising name, both for name and thing also.

Now of this sort some work precisely one way, others work both ways, both
upward and downward; of the latter sort are, Elaterium Cambogia, otherwise
called Gutta, Gummi, Centian, Housleck, and many others; of the first sort, are
Rhubarb, Scammony, Colocynthis, Jalapium, etc.

Vomitories, because they hear but ill in English, they likewise call by a
Greek name Emeticks, which the common sort not so well understanding, do think
that in the name some reverend mystery is contained; and truly so there is, for
as a Thief, or Seminary (with us) to avoid taking, has a new name for a
refuge, so these having deserved but ill under the name of Vomits, be changed
into Emeticks, and will get entertainment under that name, which would be
abhorred under their own denomination.

So that if a Patient say, Oh good Doctor give me not a Vomit, for such a time
I took one which had nigh killed me; no says he straight, I will only give you
an Emetick out not a Vomit: if the party reply, And what do you call an
Emetick? says he, a Medicine that works very gently, perhaps once or twice
if need be, and thus the Patient accepts of an Emetick who abhorred a Vomit.

And the like cause gave Scammony, Colocynthida and Combogia, the surnames of
Diagridium, Alahandal, and Gutta Gummi, as having by their churlishness
deserved ill so often, that they are ashamed of them. So Succus cucumeris
agrest is, is surnamed Elaterium.

But to leave the names, and come to the thing, what are all these Medicaments
but poisons? if any be desirous to make experiment, let it be on himself first
or none, let him I say but treble the Doctors Dose to himself, and I dare
almost warrant him death.

But you will say they are corrected by the Apothecaries Art according to the
Doctors prescription, if so, let the effect speak.

The wild Cucumer is to be sliced with a bone knife when green, and the juice
to be received in a clean platter, which precipitates a light sedimen, this is
to be severed from the other juice by decantation and dried, which is their
Eleaterium, and is then fit to enter their compositions. Can any thing be more
ridiculous? in the juice indeed is the whole virtue or Crasis, and the most
eminent in that part which stils out of it self from the Apple being cut in
slices by degrees over a dish, so far they are right: so Opium is the best
which distills out from the escape of the Poppy so wounded, and may resemble the
blood of the vegetable.

But why the juice when clarified (by precipitating the powder that is light
and feculent) should be cast away, and the dregs (themselves call it a fecula)
be only saved, I see no reason, but because the true sincere juice would be too
strong, a gallant correction. So Hellebore, Hyoscyam, Aconitum, and all may be
corrected, if being stamped green, and strained, and then filtred, that only be
saved which remains behind in the filtring bag, or if dry, macerated by
decoction, and then strained and filtred, and the light fecula saved. The gross
apple is rejected, as being too gross a feces, the subtle juice also, as being
too efficacious a poison, only the light fecula (which being not washed retains
a little of the virtue of the juice) is saved, and it is a proper corrected
Medicine for a Galenist, and yet of this half a scruple would be as effectual
as a two penny halter.

But why sliced with a bone knife? It is a good proviso for the Apothecaries
Wife, and younger Apprentice, the one a weak woman, the other a knavish boy,
very apt both to cut their fingers, and the Doctor not knowing what work the
juice of these Cucumers would make in a cut finger, provides for them as a
nurse for a child with a bone knife. So Colocyntida is corrected by hanging
two years or three in the air on a string. If loss of virtue may be called
correction, I am sure Tobacco that is of as strong a composition as
Colocyntida, by the same Art may may be corrected firly for the dung^ hill,
which before was of value; so Colocyntida, Briony, Hellebore, Asarum Roots,
Aconitum, Aaron, etc. by this Art become fit drugs for a Galenist, because
scarce fit for ough^ else but the dunghill.

As for the confection of poyson^ in Receipts, because many simpl^ people
believe, that this composition of the Apothecaries by the Doctor^ direction is
a correction of venomes, so as to alter their name and nature into medicine, it
is a mere deceit; for they only compound them with honey or sugar, and confound
them with other things in such a proportion, that a dose shall comain of the
poison a less quantity then may prove mortal, which they might as well
administer alone, nor with so much pains confound those things in composition
which are of themselves of little or no virtue.

Thus Opium is confounded with a many Simples into a ridiculous Ladanum, of
which let be given as much as does contain 6 grains of the Opium, and see if
the effect be not the same or worse then if so much crude Opium were given.
These tricks then are but toys barely to confound Simples by beating them
together with honey or sugar, into an Electuary or a Confection, without
previous preparation and separation of the good from the bad.

Medicine is a serious, and hidden thing, I had almost said sacred, nor does it
come to the knowledge of any, but by the special gift of the most high. It is
he that has created the Physician and has set him up to be honored for
necessity sake. Nor is it to be thought that the abstruse mysteries of this Art
lie prostituted in every Apothecaries shop, according to the Adagy, Vix gemmae
in trivio.

Those who were the first Heroes of this Art, did hide the secrets of it so
from the conusance of the vulgar, that they had a Divinity ascribed unto
themselves in reference to their hidden and secret skill; only Galen to get a
name, made a great noise about the world, taking upon him to unveil Medicine,
and expose her naked to the eye of the most unworthily sordid, covetous
practitioner of the Art: but as he who did but dare to gaze upon Diana naked,
was crowned with horns, and made a prey unto his dogs; so he who assayed such
violence to this chaste and most retired Nymph, is worthily rewarded with Midas
purchase, viz. a pair of Asses ears.

Those who know and see, how studiously any of their own sect does hide any one
Receipt or Medicine which the find singular, so that many of them have never
revealed it dying, who would imagine them to be such Animals, that whatever
they read they should straight believe (provided the Author have but had the
luck to die famous) and straightway to draw it into their Dispensatory, to be
put in practice by the Apothecary. As though many who do write, (aiming at pomp
and applause) do not write merely conjectures which they account rational.

Add to this Natures simplicity, which does that with one or two things duly
prepared and applied, which would not be done by all the Doctors pompous
receipts, which by hap some or other lighting of either by conference with some
good old woman, or having by fuccess found the reality of the thing, which the
Doctor willing to advance by his method of extracting, candying, or conserving,
or compounding; he finds it to answer his expectation worse in composition,
then in its simplicity, with a due preparation, which therefore he keeps to
himself as a secret, and perhaps gets much credit by it, (for that is the
Doctors craft, that what a good old woman shall do by natures simplicity, shall
be judged not worth thanks, yet the same done by him shall be enhanced within a
degree of a miracle) two or three such trivial experiments, yet more effectual
then the ordinary slops perhaps he accounts his mystery, which he will not
discover, till at last dying he is won to impart them to the world, which he
knowing to be so simple, that if told sincerely, would be received with this of
the Poet, Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici?

He therefore garnishes out the naked simple truth with addition of many
things, which he hopes or thinks will be but as herb John in Pottage, of which
some by reason of their dearness, some for the hardness of procurement may
raise a reverend esteem of that secret so much esteemed in his life, and which
he fears (if nakedly declared) would be contemptible after death: and thus what
to him was effectual, being by his direction clogged and perverted with a
fortuitous medley, becomes frustrate; hence it is that so many things which
were famous to the Inventor, are at this day but contemptible slops.

Thus the Countess of Kents Powder is since her death brought into usual
receipts, which I rather suppose is a spurious Receipt forged by others, then
left by her; yet in that she wanted not her costly additions, which added to
the price, but diminished the virtue of the Simples: the like may be said of
Gascoines Powder, which is by some accounted the ground of the other.

But what I particularise these things for I do to this end, that it may appear
how sottishly Doctors take for granted what ever they read in a book written by
any man who was famous in his life, which must needs be believed, and taken
thus on credit, is so transmitted unto the Apothecaries to be accordingly
prepared, when as their secrets which they so esteemed, they concealed in their
life what they could, and might have many reasons not to leave heartily written
after death. Partly lest the naked simplicity of them should bring them into
contempt, but it may be chiefly because perhaps to some friends under color of
friendship they have enviously given wrong Receipts, which they must not alter
at death lest they should brand themselves with a black note of infamy by so
doing, or for other reasons, which it is not my design to reckon up or to
endeavor to conjecture; only the grand reason I doubt not, is because when a
Doctor gets such a secret, how simple soever it be, he values it to the Patient
richer then if made of Gold and Jems, which therefore when ever published to
the world, must have some costly additions, to make his price seem
conscionable, lest after his death by his own confession, all that ever have
used his Medicines should judge him an unconscionable cheat, and so posterity
falsely attributed the singularity of the virtue of the Medicine to the most
costly ingredients, come at last to leave out or neglect at least the due care
and choice of the most effectual ingredient.

Not that I do judge, or think, or contend for, that a Physician is to sell his
Medicines at the rate they cost him, allowing such or such gain for his pains
as a Merchant or Shopkeeper takes. No verily, for first Medicines are not every
man's money, the whole need them not, and for their own use (so long as healthy)
would not value that at twenty pence which might cost twenty pound. The sick
only needs them, and to such they are precious, if effectual and applied in
season. As then I do not value Ambergreece the less, because it is often found by
chance, and seldom costs the finder more then his pains to take it up, (the
like may be said of Jems in their first finding) so I do not value a Medicine
by what it costs, but by what it will do, and according to the party to whom it
is applied. As then a poor man's credit is as dear to him as rich man's, yet a
defamation which to one may not be valued at six pence, may to another be
valued at six hundred pound; so a Medicine which will cure both rich and poor,
though given to the poor for nothing, yet does not argue that it cost the maker
of it nothing; and though the making of it cost not above five shillings, yet
this does not hinder but it may be valued to a rich man at five pound, if it
really do him more advantage then perhaps he would be without for five hundred
pound.

A Physician then is bound only to the rules of true Charity, and being given
of God to help and relieve the lives of many that are endangered, he may, and
that piously, so take of the rich, as to be able to help the poor freely, and
yet as cordially and as truly affording to them his best help and remedies,
for nothing, as he does to the rich for a reward.

Yet is it not fit that any reward should be accounted due where the disease is
not cured; for the Patient does not want a Doctor for to tell him a tale of his
disease, nor yet to pray God for his recovery, but to administer to his
disease, what may be effectual: a Saylor though he take never so much pains,
yet is not paid that performs not his voyage; yea and all callings whatever
are paid for their pains, only with proviso, that they do what they undertake;
only a Doctor is paid for his pains though never so little to the purpose,
which is unconscionable; I confess that if the Patient find him to be careful
and diligent he may order him some reward for his good will where he wanted in
skill; but this the Doctor cannot challenge. The Doctor on the Patients trial
(where his remedy is frustraneous) learns (if he be honest) not too confidently
to trust that Medicine in that case again; but what gets the Patient but only
his labor for his pains in taking it? and this hurt at the least, that so much
time is lost and his cure never the nearer (if not the farther off by the
diseases having had so long the more time on him) for which it is most
unreasonable, that he should be accounted in the Doctors debt.

I must ingenuously confess, that as I always reckoned a Doctors Art not to be
bound to the ordinary rules of merchandise, because it respected the lives of
men not to be bought or sold for money, so I could not but always judge it
unreasonable for a reward to be there demanded where no good is done: for the
Art of Medicine is a mystery in which the common people have no skill, and when
they are ill they want not a Doctor for his reverent looks, nor do they desire
any thing promiscuously for a Medicine, much less any dear thing, but only what
may be good for the disease. If they knew a thing were not good for their
malady, or that it were appointed only at a wild random, they would be loath
to buy it for themselves, though they might have it for half the worth of it,
much less would they give ten times the price for it that the Apothecary gives
for it at first hand, which is the usual profit which some Apothecaries (on my
knowledge) make of some, nay many of their slops).

Are they the fathers of the sick? And do they when the child wants and asks
bread, give a stone; when fish, a serpent; and over and besides sell these
preposterous intrusions at ten, nay often at twenty times the rate they are
worth? The God of mercy deliver all honest men from the hands of such devouring
Caterpillars!

When I first gave my self to Medicinal practice, I confess I was ashamed to
ask a price for a Medicine I had not tried, how ever commended by Authors. I
knew it either must answer the patients expectation or no. If so, it then
deserved a gratuity above its price; if not, the Patient could not in
conscience be charged for that, which might have been equalled, if not
excelled, by the advice of some old wife gratis. My usual word then to them
was, that they should prove the effect in the first place, and then as the
operation did succeed to be thankful.

And I must protest, that mine ears were soon dulled with the usual palinode
of, It did me no good, notwithstanding all the promises of Authors, and their
method of cheating, their allowed Dispensatories.

So that I was (as Helmont formerly) almost quite out of conceit of the Art of
Medicine, accounting it and judging it to be but a cruel cheat, but at last I
found that God had reserved to himself a number who had not bowed the knee to
the Baal of profit, covetousness; idleness, and ambition, whom therefore I
seriously studied, and gave my self in imitation of them to the studious search
of Nature.

At last God was pleased so to bless my studies, and hear my prayers, as to
grant me the true keys of Chemical preparations, who gives to whom he pleases,
and withholds where he lists, to him be glory for ever.

Then I could not but contemn the usual vulgar preparations, as being grossly
foolish, their compositions ridiculous, their corrections Ironical, in a word,
the whole Art of vulgar Medicine, I found to be as if it had been invented by
some Timon, or Misanthropos, on purpose to the destruction of Mankind.

They who desire to read more particularly concerning the folly and futility of
vulgar Medicaments, I recommend them to the noble Helmont his Pharmacopolium ac
Dispensatorium modernum, where this subject is handled ad nauseam usque. I
shall not enlarge hereon, lest I should seem but to echo to him, whom my
intent is only to defend and vindicate.

This I shall only say, that it is an unworthy thing that a Doctor should
administer things which he knows not by sight, and yet bless himself that he
has the knowledge of them, when what ever he knows of them it is but upon
credit by reading, the Author perhaps being a Grecian, Italian, Frenchman, or
Spaniard, and yet he as confidently applying his direction to men in England
(where both Simples and constitutions o^ men are notably altered) as if no
difference at all between place and persons were.

It Is an abuse likewise worthy the most biting and sharpest Satyr, that a
Doctor should undertake the cur^ of lives, and yet commit the preparation of
Medicaments to an Apothecary, and he to his Apprentice not considering into
what hazard they cast, and in what dangers they involve the Patient by this
course for who is so stupid as to think, tha^ it is the Doctors name that will
scar^ a disease into conformity? no ver^ly, it must be the Medicine that mu^
effect the cure, in the preparation o^ which consists the greatest secret, an^
in it a small neglect is of fatal consequence: now what can be expected from an
Apothecary, whose skill for the most part is no more then what an apprentiship
has gotten him, it is to me I confess ingenuously a thing of serious
consideration. This I know, that the care of preparation ought not to be
lightly set by; yet what Mechanist is there, who prepares venal drugs, that can
be confided in, but that he will either buy the cheapest and most rascal
ingredients, or substitute quid pro quo, with a thousand deceits, besides the
neglect of his apprentice, to whom in the conclusion, the care of the
preparation is committed.

Thus I have not very largely, yet I hope fully Apologized for the Art of
Pyrotechny: and supposing a Galenist for Moderator, I conceive that I hear him
discharging me with a [Satisfecisti officio tuo] supposing an unprejudiced and
judicious Reader, me thinks I hear him desiring after this Apology, a discovery
of such Medicaments, which may actually convince and maintain, what is here
argumentally proved and asserted. The desire to me seems reasonable, and my
spirit to answer the same is much inclined, which God willing shall be
performed in an ensuing Disecourse, which shall fully and faithfully discover
the more secret preparations of Medicinal Arcana's with their true keys, in
which I shall be so candid as to leave nothing undisclosed which a Son of Art
may desire, yet so as not to transgress the laws of Nature, and to prostitute
her mysterious and secret operations to the eye of every Reader, but premising
studious search and diligent inquiry, I shall be a faithful guide to such as by
God are elected hereunto, but to the rest I shall be obscure enough.

CHAP. III. A description of the true method of Medicine, and a discovery of
such Medicaments as may evince the possessor of them to be a Physician created
of God and not of the Schools.
HAving in the two foregoing Chapters, on good grounds rejected the vulgar way
of Medicine, and convinced it (notwithstanding the brags of our Goosequil
Doctors concerning it) to be insufficient and dangerous, intended against (in
stead of the disease) the life of the patient, in its Purgatives, Phlebotomy,
Vesications, Scarifications, Fontinels, and starving Julips, and barley Broths,
under the pretense of cooling the Body, and giving but ridiculous hope of cure
in its Dietical prescriptions and Cordials so called, made of costly things
ridiculously blended together, their Clysters, Conserves, Syrups, Lochsana's,
distilled waters, etc. which is so notorious as to become a Proverb to the
vulgar all the world over, although this foolish method be embraced and hugged
by our Methodists (as they call themselves, or more truly, Goosquil
Pisse-prophets) who by long juggling have gotten reputation, which they have
improved to what height is possible for the getting of money, without regard to
either Religion, conscience, or honesty.

It will now be convenient to come to the discovery of true Medicaments, which
may perform that for the cure of those diseases to which man's frail nature is
subject, which notwithstanding the boasts of the Galenical Tribe they could
never perform, and yet to see how craftily they have imposed for mnny ages upon
the credulous world, (not in trifles, but in great and vast sums of money, and
their lives often times to boot) would amaze any judicious observer of the same.

Yea so confident are they in this their Art of juggling, as to glory therein,
as in a notably deserving achievement: insomuch that a Gentleman of my
acquaintance, of accomplished learning, and of so much conscience therewith,
that he has for nigh sixteen years through great difficulties, lived in
defiance of the vulgar way of practice, to the purchasing of the ill will and
reproach of all or most of his friends, and consequently to the involving of
himself in many pinching straights, which yet he cheerfully underwent, and
undergoes, rather then to get a living by an Art, which he plainly discovered
to be a frivolous cheat, though a cruel butchery to the sick; he then fearing
the judgment to come, (although, without exception, a man of as able learning
as the most cried up Goosquil Piss-prophet in London) refused utterly the
practice of Medicine in the vulgar way, although for a livelihood, and although
as absolutely accomplished for the practice of the same, as the ablest of them
for learning, (and whom the deaths of two or three hundred men would have
brought to the same experience with them) nor was he then a Master of nobler
secrets, and therefore rather chose an absolute contemplative life, then to be
employed in such a barbarous butcherlike practice. This man one day happening to
discourse with one of the Colleagues of our London College, whom he reported
to me, that he found a vain empty bladder, puffed only with wind, and who besides
his Hocus pocus Rhetorique applicable to his Art of juggling was a mere insipid
nothing; their conference being concerning Astral Medicines, a thing so unknown
to our reverend Doctor, that the name seemed to him to sound like the title of
an Exorcism; he therefore able to say nothing to him either in way of
opposition or for confutation, but that he neither knew nor believed any such
thing; at last (lest he might seem able to say nothing to the purpose)
concludes his discourse with this Rhodomontado, that he was able to get fifteen
hundred pounds a year by his way of practice, tacitly quipping the other, in
that he by his Astral Medicines (commended) was not able then to get one
hundred pounds per annum. To whom this Gentleman by way of reply objected, But
how many Patients do you cure for this money? was snapt up with a frowning
check, as though that were an impertinent question to be demanded of him that
could and did get money, which according to the Logic of that Tribe is to be
the measure of men's seize and abilities.

And that it may not seem beyond belief, how so much money may be distilled out
of men's purses in lieu of a smooth tale; the same Gentleman told me, that a
Kinsman of his (an Alderman of this City, and his Lady) had both told him, the
one by way of complaint, the other by way of boasting, that in short time his
Apothecaries Bill came to three hundred pounds, (to whom this fifteen hundred
pound Doctor had been and still is Physician) and this in short time, and in
the mean season no considerable distemper having taken either himself, or Lady,
or any of his family: now by the Apothecaries Bills, few men but can judge
shrewdly at the Doctors Fees, and if he be not a verier idiot then many of his
brethren, one of them three hundred pounds will come into his pocket, which his
Bills well deserve for a trick that he both knows, and probably practices, to
my knowledge some of his brethren do, and I know the trick likewise, and have
hinted it elsewhere, and therefore shall leave it now.

And we shall come to the true Art and method of Medicine, which although
(through the ingratefulness of the time and this Age to true discoveries of
Nature) it prove not so lucriferous as the other, yet is it such an Art, which
is followed with wealth sufficient for a Son of Art.

True, the highest of a Son of Arts ambition and desire is, to be able to
attend future searches, and in the mean while to live as becomes a Philosopher
in mediocrity, (not superfluity) and this without distraction: whereas a
Goosquil Doctor, (accounting himself only a fit companion for Ladies) must go
arrayed in choice silk, plush, and velvet, with a Ladies hand, and his Coach to
attend him, if he but stir out of doors, and therefore must have larger incomes
to maintain this pomp.

Yet I know that although I consume and spend whatever moneys I can borrow from
my bare necessity, or at utmost my most absolute convenience, in Furnaces,
Coals, and Glasses, with the Be making Honey, but not for my self, yet the
experience, which through Gods blessing this industry has brought, does and
will bring me, will make my name live, when the names of hundreds, that bark
and snarl at me, and load me with unworthy reproaches, shall lie buried in
perpetual oblivion.

Let not then any think to scare me with the Rhodomontado of our forementioned
fifteen hundred pound Doctor (per annum) for when both we shall come to give up
our accounts to the great Judge, I know it will not be objected there as a
crime to me, that I cure in a year almost, (if not altogether) as many Patients
that are poor gratis, as he has for his fifteen hundred pounds; that to others
that are rich, I give both Medicines and counsel, asking nothing till the cure
is performed, and then by some put off with little, and by some with nothing,
because my Medicaments are but little in quantity, and the cure (beyond
expectation) speedily effected, and yet what ever I do get I lay out in future
discoveries, and all to do good to an ungrateful generation: often times running
in debt for conveniences, and necessaries, and sparing out of my belly to
find out new experiments in Medicine; and yet for all this getting on one hand
hatred and opposition, and on the other hand, contempt for performing cures so
soon and cheap: yet I know that my reward will be a good name when I am gone,
and from God hereafter, whereas they that expect no reward beyond their Fees,
it is no marvel if they be so sordid in raking them out of even the bowels of
their distressed clients, in lieu of which they give them only smooth and
fallacious language, and yet are highly esteemed because they cheat them with a
grace, and put a high price upon their butcheries: This! O this! cries them up
for brave fellows, and makes them admired and adored by the simpler sort.

And to say the truth, there is one thing which as ordered by them, and made
use of to their advantage, they blind the eyes of the common people withal,
and ascribe very much to themselves on that score: and that is in Fevers,
which disease, dangerously threatening the life, being indeed mortal to very
many, and sadly afflictive to all that are visited therewith, being accompanied
with many sad and perplexing accidents, very grievous and troublesome to be
undergone, as violent thirst, a tormenting heat and burning of the body causing
restlesness, with pain or lightness in the head, an oppression at the stomach,
with a dej^cted appetite, and a loathing of all meats, a disrelish both of
meats and drinks, with many other troublesome and dangerous symptoms, rendering
the life wearisome to the Patient, and in great hazard to the beholders.

These Symptoms though not alike troublesome to each affected party, are
scarce in the course of ordinary providence mortal to the third sick feverish
man, since two in three Fevers, if wholly let alone, and the party attended
only with carefulness, would after the Crisis, end usually in health, though
accompanied with much debilitation; but because that this disease is not to be
trusted, proving each year really mortal to many, by its exceeding troublesome
symptoms threatens death unto all, and therefore (because experience has
taught the world for many Ages that there is cure for diseases attainable by
Art) each sick party taken ill in places where Doctors may be had, consulteth
with them, in hope of cure, though in the Country Villages, with far greater
success, they give parties that are taken ill, either a Rosemary, or a Carduus
Posset, and so provoke sweat, yea and in Cities, the poorer sort, who cannot
reach unto a Doctors Fee use the same course, by which means many Fevers very
violent in symptoms, though not so deeply rooted, are speedily extinguished,
but where the disease with this old wives Medicine will not be abated nor
cured, there the party, if possible, will make any shift, to get one of the
more conscionable Doctors, that is one who being of less note and practice,
will be content with less Fees, rather then not be employed, who going in the
same rode with his cried up Brethren, will be tampering with Cordials as he
calls them, and cooling Julips; by Phlebotomy, Vesications, Scarifications,
Frications, or the like, till he make many Fevers prove mortal by his Art,
which otherwise attended only with care to keep them from the cold, and giving
orderly meats and drink in season, would be extinguished of their own accord
after the Crisis, and those few Fevers, which by all these devices are not
enraged even to death, nor yet by their cruel forbidding of Beer, and almost
all drink, whereby the disease wastes the radical humidity for want of due
moisture, yet are they made so dangerous that death is often expected each hour,
not only at the first crisis, but after, even to the twentieth, many times to
the thirtieth day; during which time, the mouth being very foul, and often sore,
the tongue black, the breath nidorous, the visage representing rather a ghost
then a man ordained to life; the Doctor is attendant (if a rich Patient) twice,
at least once every day, and each time with an affected pensiveness appointing
this or that Syrup, or Lotion, or Julip, or Cordial, or Lenitive, or what else
his fantasy dictates, and in the pitch of extremity sl^ced Pigeons or
Herrings are laid to the soles of the feet, and a precise diet commanded upon
signs of mending: thus maugre the disease and the Doctor, through the good hand
of God; and the benignity of nature, the party escapes death, yet scare able to
go boldly abroad in two, three, or four months, and perhaps through this
ordering in cure, for an epilogue of his Fever, contracts a Chronick disease,
which leaves him not during life; this then is a cried up, and a very notable
cure, for which perhaps the Doctors (if a rich man) many being called to
consultation, share an hundred or two pounds of his money, and the Apothecaries
Bill amounting to half as much.

Of such a reputed cure as this (of which had they any grace, they ought to be
as ashamed as a Schoolboy of playing the trewant) they will boast much, and
oppose themselves by way of contempt against any Artist, as never having any
such cure.

Truth, I grant that I never had any such cure, and am therefore bound to give
eternal thanks to God, who has chosen me to another, then that sordid,
ungodly, unconscionable, butcher-like practice, by which I certainly, and
safely, and speedily cure that disease, with the Pleurisy, and all Agues, even
Quartan, and Autumnal, yea Hyemal, without bloodletting, or purging, without
forbidding drink, nay allowing both strong Beer and Wine with moderation in
Fevers of all sorts, in Agues and in Pleurisies, with small curiosity in
ordering the diet, and yet my patients soundly cured, without danger of
relapse, often at a dose or two, most of all in three or four days; Pleurisies
perfectly cured as soon; and Agues in one, two or three fits, in the spring and
summer; and in the autumn or winter seldom exceeding five or six fits, and
through Gods blessing the cure never missing, unless the Patient prove unruly
and not submit to, or fickle and so not abide in my directions.

Yet can I confidently affirm and make good, that I yearly cure more Fevers,
Agues, and Pleurisies, then any one in the Galenical way have in nigh twice the
time; but my cures are too contemptible for the rich, Counsel and Medicine in
almost two thirds of my cures scarce exceeding, sometimes not amounting to a
Crown, not one in forty rising to above an Angel.

For many hundreds know and can testify for me, that besides my own cures,
many both in City and Country practice by my medicines, to the cure and relief
of some thousands yearly, mine own practice in some years reaching to nigh two
hundred Agues, as I can make appear, with many more Fevers, Pleurisies,
Fluxes, and vomitings, of all which scarce five in a year not perfectly cured,
and those only such who hearing of the sudden effect of my medicines, send for
some of them, and without observing the difference of season of the year,
expect the same speed in cure with others, and not finding the cure perfect,
(although notably abated) are discouraged, and leave off, whose error herein is
not to be charged upon the Medicine.

Nor is it any thing to me of moment, or ought it to be to any judicious man,
that Galenists rashly and impudently rail and cry out against Chymicall
Medicaments, and yet the most desperate of all in that Art preparable, they
have ravished into their Apothecaries Shops, and have accepted, and do own
them, as sworn servants to their method.

Which charge if they deny, Turbith Minerale, Mercurius dulcis, vitae,
praecipitate several ways, Crocus metallorum, Antimonium Diaphoreticum,
Stibium, etc. shall be summoned in, to give testimony to their very faces,
which are medicines unfit for an honest man to use, all save Antimonium
Diaphoreticum, which is a trifle, being so often burnt with Salt Peter, till it
become an insipid Calx, of very little virtue, in comparison to wit, of that
eminent virtue, and noble excellency which we boast of in Antimony.

Therefore, courteous Reader, do not think, that we in commending the noble
true Chymicall Medicines, do mean these rascal, virulent, horrible
Medicaments, but leave them to the Galenicall Tribe, (ut similes labris
lactucas) that with them they may fill up the measure of their iniquity, and do
here attest the supreme Judge of Heaven and Earth, that we both abhor the use
of them, and dehort all that are wise to beware of them, as dangerous poisons.

For we intend here absolute ingenuity, to speak of Professors, and of
Medicines as they are, and not to plead for this spurious venomous Brat,
because it may seem to be a Chymicall Bastard, but we disown it wholly, as an
offspring of Renegado, and fugitive Apostate Chemists, Mimicks and Apes to
true Philosophy, but not her legitimate Sons, the disgrace of Art, and
therefore fit to be marked with a black note o^ infamy.

O foolish Doctors! who has bewitched you, that you will not see, nor abide
the truth? O silly and blind followers of these perverse blind guides! how long
will you be deceived? attend I pray you for your own good, to him who is ready
to teach you better.

Strange! Certainly a deep sleep from God has besotted the understanding of
our wise men, since our Princes of Zoan in this one thing are fools, though in
other things acute enough, whom so many lost lives as yet cannot make wise,
sufficiently to distinguish between reality of truth and an Imposture.

Woe is me, that I am and must be in this thing a Son of Contention, and must
contend with almost all the earth: sure it is not for my inward ease and
contentment, but it is even as a fire to my bowels; although since it is truth
that is to be defended, to betray which in a cause of so high concernment (as
the lives of thousands) were so high an ingratitude to God, who has discovered
the mysteries of nature to me, blessed be his name) that I might ^ustly fear
not only the deprivement of this Talent, but the other doom of the unprofitable
Servant, the dread of whose exemplary punishment does compel me thus to bring
my Talent ^n to the Bank, and expose what God has discovered to me, to the
^iew and censure of a captious generation, of whom I expect reproach, disdain
and contumely full measure, and heaped, yet is there a certain ^umber of the
sons of Wisdom, ^^om whom I shall receive both ^hanks and encouragement.

For whose information and instruction sake, we shall in a brief discourse, so
clucidate the nature of ^^ue medicine, as to make it appear to any one whom
passion or folly, o^ self-conceitednesse has not blinded to be a most safe,
speedy and certai^ way of curing diseases, which thre^ things are required in
all Medicines promised to be in the Galenicall an^ Pseudochemicall, but to be
foun^ only in the true Pyrotechnicall secrets.

So then, by this our art of med^cine, which we commend, we know and promise
the cure of all disease accidental to the body of man speedily, safely, and
certainly, an^ do affirm our Medicines to have a^ adaequate virtue in them to
this en^ which we shall make good, and pe^mit in the mean time our adversari^
in opposition to snarle till they cra^^ their spleen.

And for the Readers informatio^. I must give him an account, that (...)
purpose is here to give things as (...) a small Map, and to represent the^ as
it were in a Land-skip, very ca^didly, though concisely, very lively, though as
at a little distance.

First then let no man expect from me linear receipts, for that would be
foolish in me to perform, and therefore fond in them to expect; for I shall not
write of trifles, but of commanding Arcanaes, which require to be discovered in
the language of the Magi, lest fools and Mechanists, bring these so noble
secrets into common Shops, to be adulterated as all their Chemical fopperies
are.

Which pitiful hotch-potch had its original from rare secrets of Art, although
through ignorance and misapprehension of dull, lazy heads, and searchers, they
are under the same names with those renowned secrets of Theophrastus
Paracelsus, become rascally venomous dangerous slops as they are adulterately,
and knavishly prepared for sale, and according to the allowed Receipts of
vulgar Tyrocinists and Pharmacopaea's, they are at the best either dangerous,
as having only a mock (in stead of a due and true) preparation, as the
vomitive, Salivative, and purgative preparations of Mercury and Antimonie, or
trivial, as the commonly venall spirits of Salts, the Alcalies, waters and Oils
of Concretes vegetall: to which may be added the newfound silly dotages of some
particular Sophisters, as the Ignis vitae of one, the universal Medicine of
another idle Sciolist; the one, the product of Soot, the other of Men's bones
rotted, whose rash ventosities and aerie promises we reject as apostate Renegado
cheats in Art, under the visard or mask of Chemistry, as Allen the notable
Thief, is reported to have robbed in a Coach with his Accomplices, under the
disguise of a Bishop with his Attendants.

Of this I have given caution, and spoken sufficiently, in a Treatise
concerning this Art of Medicine, entitled, The Art and mystery of Pyrotechny,
taught, and illustrated. Then which Tractate the world never yet saw a plainer,
and only written from the fountain of experience, which I purpose to bestow as
a Legacy upon the Sons of this Art, as I find this gets acceptance, and
therefore I shall not repeat here what is fully delivered and made plain there.

However as I hinted, our commonly venal Mercurius dulcis, is a Fairy
changeling intruded upon the world, for the sweet oil or Ladanum of Mercury,
fixed as gold, and sweet as honey (in its first fixation) which corollated, is
Paracelsus Arcanum Corallinum, otherwise called Mercurius praecipitatus dulcis,
which by cohobation with the fire of Hell, (that is, the Alchahest) becomes
volatile, and sweet like honey; and withal being anodynous, is called Ladanum
Mercurii, and not seldom Mercurius dulcis, which can never be revived to
Mercury again, but by the same Art which would revive gold, and discover its
central Mercurial profundity.

I need not instance in other mock mimical preparations falsely obtruded upon
the world, for Paracelsus never sufficiently to be commended Secrets, as
Mercurius vitae, Aurum vitae, Magisteries of Pearls and Jemmes, their
quintessences of Antimony, etc. of which comparing their either desperate
efficacy, or ridiculous languidness, with the promise of Paracelsus and
Helmont, concerning their Arcanaes of those names, he may say with the Poet,
Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici^ Being a true emblem of the Mountains
travel, or the shearing of hogs, the one after infinite expectation, producing
a silly mouse, the others after the Proverb, making a foul squeaking for a
little wool.

I know that the Galenical Tribe will whine and hone pitifully, rather then
lose to be reputed Chemists; nay if we may believe them, they have prepared for
them the choicest of Chemical preparations, and some pretend to very great
share in the skill of this Art themselves. If so, I am glad, for to such I may
address my self, as a Brother, and without vanity let me speak it, such a one
of whom the best accomplished in that way of Pyrotechny, may not be ashamed of:
for though I am low and vile sufficiently in my own eyes, yet when I must give
a true testimony concerning my industry, my searches, and my seize, to
the glory of God may it be spoken, I have learned practically to understand
both Paracelsus, and Helmont, and know what they write to be true; and though I
am an unworthy nothing, yet when the Galenists come to vie their mock
Chemistry, with that which God has made me to understand by the reading of
Helmont and Paracelsus, through the tutorage, and under the ferula of the fire,
then as Paul when contesting with the false Brethren and Pseudo-apostles, would
not give way to them one jot; no more shall I, forasmuch as I do contend and
stand up for truth it self, and do not fight nor am engaged in any personal
quarrel.

Thanks be to God then, that I fall not short in mine understanding of ought of
the Arcanaes of Paracelsus and Helmont, through the blessing of him who chose
me before many who excel me far in parts in the Gal^nical Tribe: in which
respect, not transgressing the bounds of modesty, confessing what ever I have
received to have been from above, I shall yet be more confident, and do affirm
that the Chemistry of the Galenical Tribe is a ridiculous partly, and partly
dangerous Empericism, in stead of so commendable a Method, and Art, as they
with confidence and impudence sufficient boast it to be; and though I am of my
self a weak and unworthy person, to combat with such an army of Philistims,
yet as they once fell before Jonathan and his Armourbearer, so shall as many as
oppose me, fall before the truth which I stand up for, but they have forsaken,
and now persecute and resist. When it was first told me that very many of our
College Doctors did pretend to Chemistry and to Furnaces, think you that I
envied them for my own sake? No verily, but I did then, and do now wish, that
not only some, but all of them might equal, nay exceed both Paracelsus and
Helmont, so would much good be done, yet would not I be the Author of bringing
such a thing into practice, far be it from me (even to think so) for God will
be the dispenser of these Talents to the worlds end, nor has he left my spirit
free but absolutely bound up in this particular, whereby I know that yet these
things shall be hid, and that concerning these things between me and the
Galenists, will be many sharp conflicts, but I shall and must prevail, and shall
both by argument and experiment, batter down not only their old way, of which I
spoke in my Apologetical part sufficiently, but also this new way of Mimical
Chemistry, which they presume (being added to the other) may prove to their
safe standing, as an high wall about a Castle or Town, I shall lay flat to the
ground, and the ruin of this rotten (though patcht up, and gaudily garnished)
fabric will be great.

The various providence of God and dispensations toward me, are a^ sure
earnest to me, and confirmation of my spirit that I am reserved to, and
preserved for more then ordinary employment in this particular.

Let us come then to the true Art of healing, which is the right and only test
for comparing, and trying our skill, it being the best way, to have the work
man judged by his work.

How long will the world hang between two opinions? If the Galenical way be the
truth, let it be established, if not, let it fall, and be brought to ruin.

Some mightily addicted to the common way, and withal, my very good friends,
have spoken to me from the dictates of some Galenists, how easily my way might
be reconciled to the other, to the making up between both, that which is
defective in each, my Medicines, to wit, with an able Galenists Method, being
judged a mixture convenient to make up a most admirable Art of Medicine.

This has been spoken aloud to me by many who were cordial friends to me, as a
wise course to be taken; which counsel proceeded (as I said) from some
Ga^enists, or rather of the Tribe of Goosquil Pissprophets, who finding my
Cures beyond cavil, and my Medicaments so safe, as to admit of no jealousy
concerning them, used this as a crafty way of lessening my repute, to make as
though they had an Art, by which they in their method (as they call it) could
do much more then I did or could do, with the same things, as for want of
method being to seek of the most safe and effectual use of my own Medicines,
which without Art, were accidental with me (as sometimes choice secrets may be
found with old women). This opinion having fastened upon the spirits of my
immovably favoring friends, to others they pretend no difference between my
medicines and theirs, but that theirs are the safer and better, or at least
that my Medicines are no others then such as all of them know, and use.

So then they who (where they cannot allow me less) will only allow me (habnab)
experimental receipts, casually gotten, without Art, for methodical applying
the same, they to others will allow me nothing but what may be common to any
Mountebank, or Emperick, and so they confidently, and (would seem to think)
conscionably style me.

Let us therefore come to take a brief view or survey of Diseases in their
right way of natural cures, that so we may opportunely make an orderly essay of
Medicines, such to wit, which deserve that name, and are not Ironically, or
Antiphrastically named so.

And as for the Galenists (so cried up) Method, we shall discover it to be a
mere Chimera, a groundless opinion, which to the cost of many thousand lives
has gotten reputation in the world, through the just judgment of God, and the
penal blindness in this particular of most (if not all) of the wise men in all
Nations, and civilized (especially Christian) Countries.

For Medicine is so named ( a medondo, from healing) and imports as much as
that it is an Art showing Medicaments that have sufficient efficacy for the
subduing and taking away any disease or distemper to which the life of mortal
man is subject, though the Galenists tacitly confessing their inabilities, have
since the invention of the cheat of their (every where declaimed) Method,
changed the name ( medendi, of healing by Medicines) to the notion ( curandi,
of taking care of the sick, or using their trifling diligence) by their Method.

I shall therefore boldly set foot to foot, and fairly come to Cornish hug with
the Goosquil champions, and let us see whether of us two will be the strongest,
nor doubt I before I have done to give them a fair fall.

Is our Art (as I have declared) in its primitive verity, and reality,
Medicinae Ars, the Art of healing, non curationis, not of taking care only of
the sick? (as our modern Doctors have found out a new word) then let us see how
each of us perform this, and this we shall instance first in the most common
and spontaneously transient, and then in the more unusual Chronick diseases:

And first for the Fever in its several kinds, of which I gave even now a
brief touch, and shall here more largely insist, and yet in as few lines as may
be, because I intend this only as a small map of many things, to represent them
together here in a brief Chapter, which in distinct Treatises I have handled
severally, and largely enough in several Chapters elsewhere; all which
Tractates, (being troublesome enough to me to digest into that method they are
in, but more troublesome, nay toylsom and chargeable to me to get that
experience out of which I then wrote, and do here write) I shall God permitting
make public, for the benefit of such who have given up their names to Art, so
soon as I shall find what entertainment this little Tractate shall find in
the world: For after this Apologetical Discourse has brought me word what
reception it finds, I resolve ((...)) to send out several Essays upon Helmonts
discoveries, and in particular upon that concerning Fevers, the Gout, and the
Dropsy, that so the common whine may be taken away from the Galenists, (viz.)
that the Helmontian Sect only beat down, but do not build up; labor what they
can to ruin the old way, never taking care to introduce a better.

To proceed at present with our begun discourse concerning the Fever, a sad,
comfortless, truculent disease, then which there is none more mortal, insomuch
that according to the common Adagy, Nemo sine febri moritur: which to my
understanding, is a position more subtle then true; yet it speaks aloud, the
sad universal afflictive nature of that disease; of which it is truly said,
that it is an epidemical disease, no Nation in which yearly (at all seasons of
the year) there are not sad examples of its mortal rigor and severity, and
therefore ought much to employ the studies of such who have given up their
names to Medicine, to find out certain remedies for the same.

The saddest of all Fevers, the Pestilence (called by a general name, the
Plague among us) as being reputed, and not without cause, the saddest of
temporal plagues: that I shall pass over at present in silence, as never
having (to my knowledge) experience in that disease, though of Fevers commonly
known by the name of pestilential Fevers, and judged to be a degree of the
Pestilence it self, I have known and cured many, and those with as much ease,
speed and certainty as any other malignant Fever; ^or should I doubt, if it
should seem good to God to visit us with that washing calamity, (which my daily
prayers shall be against) but to restore it speedily, certainly and safely,
provided the disease had not prevailed unto despair before I took it in hand.
But from the opportunity of trial what my Medicines will do in this particular,
I desire God would still be pleased to keep me, yet so confident I am in such
medicines that I know I should not fear (if occasion were) to adventure the
visitation of as many as I could possibly relieve by my presence and help.

Next to the pestilence under this head of Fevers may be reckoned the small
Pox, which are indeed no other then a very malignant sort of Fever, so
reckoned by Fernelius as able a Doctor as ever the Academies afforded, and
Sennertus also of no less fame and repute.

This kind of Fever so baffles Physicians, that Nurses and Midwives are more
generally consulted with and relied upon in this case then Doctors, and they
when ever consulted herein, become at the best ridiculous, and deservedly; nor
are they often made use of in such cases, unless where the beauty of some young
Nymph or Adonis lies at stake, there is the Doctor advised, though able to
perform less then an ordinary Nurse, which common people know, and therefore
never trouble the Doctor in such cases.

Bloodletting, and purging in this condition are desperate dotages, and
seldom expiated with ought but death, on which score Sir Theodore Mayberne is
reported unwittingly to have killed his Son-in-law intended, a just reward for
a butcherlike Phlebotomist.

Several upon my knowledge, being blouded by the Doctors command in the
beginning of this disease (being mistaken by them for an ordinary Fever) have
paid the price of the Doctors folly with their lives.

And as for purgatives, the Glyster-pipe family themselves dare not not
prescribe them after two or three days in any violent continual Fever, till
the febrile matter be digested, that is, till nature has overcome the disease,
and then they come after all with the Irishman to kill a man by cutting off
his legs, because his head was cut off before; but as for the case of the small
Pox, it is so commonly known to every Midwife and Nurse, that a lask is therein
lethal, that upon the appearing thereof, they do give over the party for lost,
unless by restrictives, the looseness may be stopped, and unless that be
performed, (if the party affected be full of those variolae, which the Pox
sends forth) certain death follows. The same in pestilential Fevers is
evident, where phlebotomy and purgatives are very dangerous, nay desperate, by
which it may be strongly concluded, that if in the Plague, the Small pox, and
Pestilential Fevers, phlebotomy, a loose belly, and cooling drinks are of very
bad consequence, so to wit, as to cause death in many, to endanger life in all,
that then the same things can not in reason be of good effect in any Fever,
which brings me by the hand to the discovery of my method and Medicines for the
cure of this disease, the better to compare it with the way commonly practiced,
by which both of them the better may be judged of, and censured.

For Fevers are of sundry sorts, either continual or intermittent. The
continual are various, of which the saddest is the Plague, next the Smalpox,
next the pestilential Fever, next the malignant, which is scarlet, purple,
etc. to which may be reckoned the Pleurisy, which is a real sort of Fever,
more violent by reason of an Apostemated matter threatened in the side, of which
it has its denomination, this accompanied with a cough, and spitting of blood,
with a tormenting pain, is thought incurable without Phlebotomy, and so the
vulgar are persuaded by Doctors and Surgeons, though very falsely.

Intermittent Fevers are of several sorts, either Ephemerial, or Tertian, or
Quartan, of which the two last sorts are either single or duplicate: and lastly
there is the Erratick intermittent Fever, called by Paracelsus (Febris
extranea) of all which are so many appearances, that it would require a large
Treatise to describe all the kinds of this disease.

But as for the cure, (or rather the way and means of restoring this kind of
disease) therein the Galenical Tribe and I differ very much, we only agree in
the names and symptoms of the same, concerning which, let it not be objected
that I leave out the names of Fevers Hemitritean, etc. since it is not my
design in this place to make a curious Anatomy of that disease, in its kinds,
according to its various Symptoms (performed both learnedly, and acurately by
many Galenists, as Fernelius and others, who being professed Methodists, were
yet honourers of Chemical Medicaments as their writings do testify) which were
a work of a peculiar Tractate to perform.

And to say truth, the disease is sufficiently known, being so common and so
truculent, that not only a Doctor, but each ordinary Nurse can tell when a man
or woman is Feverish, although to know certainly the kind of each Fever is a
task sometimes too hard for a professed Doctor, and yet that may be known and
the disease as far from cure as before; therefore well said he who sang thus:
Non opus est morbi testibus, at medico.

To the certain, safe, and speedy cure of which malady I shall now come, and
that not perhaps without great expectation, which I shall do my endeavor to
answer to the ingenuous readers satisfaction.

In order to which task, I shall premise some positions by way of Aphorism very
true and certain, however contrary to the commonly practiced way of the Schools.

1. That the heat which appears in some, nay most Fevers, is not originally
from the nature of the Fever.

This appears first in intermittent Fevers, (commonly known by the name of
Agues among us) in which the cold fit in each access, is of the most afflictive
part of the distemper, and torments with a violent thirst, yet without any
sensible heat. But nextly, all malignant Fevers, (some more, some less) begin
with a sensible internal cold, and a quivering or shaking withal, after which
follows burning.

Thirdly, Castrensian or Camp Fevers (a kind of Fever but late^y known among
mankind) from ^he beginning of them to the end of their Tragedy, are without
either thirst or heat, and yet as truculent as any malignant Fever whatever.

Add to this, that all Fevers when they draw toward a conclusion abate of
their heat, although the disease be more violent then as drawing nearer to
death.

To which agrees that the Fevers of old persons, and such who are of very weak
decayed bodies, manifest far less heat and burning, then far milder Fevers do
in strong vigorous bodies, and lusty constitutions, and that leads me to the
second conclusion or Aphorism.

2. That the more sensible the party affected is of heat, and burning, the more
strength he may bejudged to have, and the better probability of his recovery.

For it is the Archeus of the life whence this rage proceeds, being provoked by
some accidental matter, whence the first offense do^^ arise, or from some Ideal
characte^ instamped upon the seat of life, or some near adjoining sympathizing
part, either by mean of a virulent endemical fume, or exhalation, or of some
passion of the mind, which by its tyrannical impression does disturb the seat
of life, that is its own original habitation, (the soul and life being
originally seated in one and the same part) whence is caused this or that
disease, according as the passive part does receive the injury.

For it is not necessary that a Fever should find always an occasional matter
ready prepared, since it is evident, that grief, fear, etc. have power to give
original being to this disease, and so an eminent cold (especially after being
thoroughly warm) which without controversy only inrage the Archeus, by
instamping an unusual Character on its place of habitation, and so consequently
follow febrile excrements, which had not being before.

The vital Archeus, is that Vulcan in man, which does stir up and feed that
heat of life, which from the first hour of life till death goes never out,
which in health is orderly and regular, but being provoked, rages according to
the known rule, Idem agens laesus edit actiones laesas, qui sanus, edit
actiones sanas.

Proportionable therefore to the provision for life, is the virtue and strength
of the Archeus, whose rage in burning in Fevers, is nothing else but a
gathering together its forces to expel its adversary, that is, to blot out
that character, which either cold or virulent fumes, or passions of the mind
have instamped on its place of habitation, and so proportionable to the
strength of nature is the burning in such cases, and this leads me to my third
conclusion.

3. That bloodletting and purgations, and cooling drinks, are unreasonable
ways to be used by him that pretends to cure Fevers.

For Nature only is the immediate helper both of Fevers and all diseases,
which assail the life primarily and in their first intention, now if the
provision for life, be the subject cause of heat in Fevers, what ever is
intended primarily against heat, must impugn the subject principle of life, and
this is the masterpiece of the Galenists method, namely to take part against
nature to whose help alone they are called by the sick Patient.

That the life is in the blood is most certain, and by how much of it is taken
away, by so much is the vital Balsam wasted, and therefore very unwisely taken
away, if the disease may be cured without: and that leads me to the fourth
Conclusion.

4. That all Fevers, Agues, and Pluresies, may be cured without Phlebotomy.

In the Plague, Small Pox, and pestilential Fevers, the question by our
Antagonists will be yielded, every year affording sad presidents of Galenists
dotages in this kind, as I instanced before in that great Doctor Sir Theodore
Mayherne, and could instance in above forty, that my self have known and
observed, and that very lately, but in the Pleuresie it will be a great
controversy, because without bloodletting that disease is commonly reputed
deadly without hope or help, although that opinion be altogether groundless and
false.

Truth, the Pleuresie is a most dangerous Fever, with a Spasmus or Convulsion
of the side (especially the left) among the ribs, a little below the heart,
this accompanied with the Cough, does make a forcible dilaceration in that
place, and that causes extravenate blood, and that threatening apostemation,
indangers the suffocation of the party affected, without a speedy remedy,
forasmuch as extravenate blood in such a heat, will not be long uncorrupted,
but that the proper, speedy and adequate remedy of this grief is bloodletting
that I deny.

That by bleeding in the beginning this disease finds mitigation by mean of
the revulsion or diversion made thereby I grant, and yet this notwithstanding
phlebotomy is a dangerous often, desperate sometimes, always a prejudicial
prescription (be the prescriber who he will) which has its absolute
inseparable inconveniences annexed to it, and following it, on which score it
is not a remedy for an honest man to apply or prescribe.

That an eminent fright will take away not only Agues, but other more deeply
rooted and Chronick diseases, is a thing very well known to many, and would be
believed by more, yet the practice of that way of cure hitherto has not, and I
presume never will prevail in the world.

At that sad fire by Gunpowder in Tower-street, I heard of many cured of
rigorous maladies, by being put in a sudden fright to run for their lives, and
many on the fright sickned, and there first took the beginnings of those
diseases which after proved mortal to them, and many mothers miscarried, and
many women fell into uterine (and those terrible) passions: the like in other
frights may be instanced, as in taking of Cities and Towns, unexpected alarms,
etc. in which cases, many have risen from their sick beds, and come from their
sick chambers, and fought stoutly for their lives, and lost their disease they
knew not how, others contracted diseases of which they never before were
sensible, and of which afterward they have never been rid.

For to say truth, a disease is most of all the fury of the indignation of the
Archeus, which finding a preterusual character impressed on its place of
habitation, straight rages, and acts in its fury beyond all rule and measure
(this is the disease) whereas that fury being pacified, the product Nature can
find ways to evacuate with ease, and the character impressed (being but
transient) would abide but a short time (as the smell of garlic in the breath
of him that eats it) only the Archeus growing mad, as conceiving its habitation
unfit to be endured with that odious Idea, sets all on fire, producing a real
misery (from it self effectively) on apprehension of a conceived injury so
verifying the Proverb, Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso.

Now the life dwelling in the blood, and the balsam of life being contained
therein, the taking of this away does threaten ruin to the life, and so
consequently to the Arch^us, which is but its immediate servant, by which fear
it is often taken from its fury, to the abatement of Symptoms speedily, after
which sometimes the Archeus repents of its former fury and madness, and so by
accident this evil of the losing blood produces health, sometimes when the
danger threatened by loss of blood is over, the Archeus returns to its former
fury, and afflicts, though not altogether with its former rigor, (the principle
of life being wasted) yet so as to delude afterward the vain Art of the Doctor,
and for its Epilogue ends in a Tabes, according to Galen, who lays down for a
maxim, Pleuretici nisi restaurentur intra quadragenarium fiunt Tabifici.

But admit the cure were certain, by bleeding (as it is not) yet is it not to
be practiced by an ingenuous man, since at the best it cures only by accident,
and that by fear of greater danger, drawing or rather forcing the Archeus out
of its rage and fury, by which means the thread of life is cut shorter, by
wasting its subject in which it is kept, and by which it is maintained,
especially if it may be certainly, speedily, and safely cured and the blood
preserved, which is a thing promised by Paracelsus, Helmont, etc. and
performable by medicines that are preparable by the Art of Pyrotechny, of which
I shall by and by give an account to the studiour and judicious Reader. I shall
have don in this place with Phlebotomy, because elsewhere I shall have occasion
to ventilate it, only this I shall say, that it is an inhumane barbarous
butchery, because so much blood as is taken away, so much is cut off from the
thread of life, and so the Doctor becomes Journeyman to Atropos; cutting short
the life of many by the rules of his Art, or at least impairing their strength,
which art so magnified is at the best but a dotage, because that where ever it
is used with show of good success, and color of necessity, there I know the
cure may be performed without loss of one drop of blood, and so I come to
examine purgatives; concerning which I shall propound a fifth Conclusion.

5. That no purge ( quatenus purging) is an intentional remedy against a
Fever, or Pleuresie, nor Vomiting (as a vomit).

For Purges (properly so called, or rather improperly) are absolute venomes
confounded by the Art, (sometimes with a little knavery together) of the
Apothecary, and so prescribed ignorantly by the Doctor, and taken
unsuccessefully by the Patient.

These in the Plague, Small Pox, and malignant Fevers, after the appearing of
Symptoms with rigor, are like fiends that must be conjured down till another
season, that is, till the matter be digested, or rather in other words, till
nature has foiled the distemper, then comes the Doctor to play both the fool
and knave with his rules of Art, and prescribes his lenitives, and gentle
purges, for fear lest the party should seem to recover without his help, and
before this (while purges are too desperate) he devises a Clyster, which trade
almost every old wife has got from him, who now a days, can prescribe
Clysters as confidently, and as well as the Doctor.

Here the Apothecary, who in this case is groom of the close stool, is as busy
as a cut purse, on which score I heard of one, who had his holiday face and
band spoiled by one of his Patients, for want of a better retentive faculty in
his hinder parts: I could wish all posterior-fumblers so served, to teach them
a little more wit, while they pretend to so much judgment and skill.

Purges then (and justly) we reject as dangerous febrile medicaments, at some
times, or rather desperate, always (as purges) intended to the destruction,
rather of the man, then of his disease, of which not without cause said the
noble Helmont, Reus sim coram Deo, nisi prorsus suasero a purgantibus
abstinendum.

And as for Clysters, they are the silly Non plus ultra's of our
Bumprognosticators, a dotage that it is enough to name it, when to wit, the
Doctor by his information, finds a distemper in the head, stomach, spleen, or
kidneys, of the sick or ill affected Patient, he by his profound Art finds out
this remedy: The Apothecary is ordered to make a caudle for the Arse-gut, this
lukewarm is tied up in a bladder, not without some superstition, for fear some
wind be tied up with the liquor, and so through a small pipe it is conveyed up
at the fundament, with promise in some cases of wonderful effects. O brave
Doctors! O sweet Method! This, O this! is one of the main pillars of your
adored method, and as universal a prescription as any next to diet, to which it
is is not inferior for its common and general application, whence you may
worthily be styled the Glyster-pipe family or tribe.

In defense of Purgatives, I know much may and will be said, and that partly
from experience, and partly from the writing of the Adepti; I shall therefore
not pass over that, because many ingenious men may be concerned in the
Resolution of it.

And first for the Arcanum Corallinum, which is Paracelsus Diaceltatesson, and
is Mercury precipitated by mean of the Liquor Alchahest, and corallated by the
water of whites of Eggs, and is purgative by siege, and a most certain cure
for all Fevers, Agues, Pleuresies, etc. yea the Hectique it perfectly
restores, as also Dropsies, with all Ulcers inward and outward, and the
venereal distemper, with the Gout, etc. and its operation is purgative, and
that certainly and constantly, so long only as the patient is ill, and no
longer.

To which I answer, that first it cures not ( q^atenus purging by siege) for
the Horizontal gold, which is the same essentially with the Mercury corallated,
cures all the forementioned distempers yet without purgation by stool, and the
same does the Ladanum or sweet oil of Mercury (which is Helmont and Paracelsus
true Ladanum without Opium) which is only Mercury cohobated so often and long by
that fiery liquor, till it be all made volatile, and then the sweet oil or
tincture of the Sulphur separated from the central Mercury, is the Ladanum of
Mercury curing universally all diseases (in tono unisono) as Helmont speaks,
yet without purging by siege. So then this purgative virtue that is in this,
(Corallatum Mercurii) is a specific power given to it from God, by which it
loses the belly, not promiscuously, but only to sick parties, and that only
so long as the disease remains, but it is not on that score that it cures the
Gout, Pox, etc. but by virtue of its resolutive power, by which it penetrates
all the digestions which are capable of excrements, and resolves all
preternatural Coagulation, in what place soever it is, as also all extravenated
blood, which after by a peculiar privilege, it causes to be expelled by
stool, and sometimes by vomit, which is accidental to the cure.

The same may be said of an Antimonial Panacaea, which I know and is a certain
cure for Agues, Fevers, and Pleuresie, and is only purgative by siege; for
obtaining which, many that I am acquainted with have been long courting Nature
in vain, the effect of curing such and such diseases is not to be attributed to
the purgative quality, but that is an acdent following the effect of cure, not
necessarily as its cause; for the purgative virtue may be taken away in this
Panacaea, and it made an insensible Diaphoretick with no less success, (rather
greater) then while it had a solutive virtue.

Yet here by the way take notice of a true or right Purge, it is not like to
Scammony, Colocynthida, Jalap, etc. which (intuitu veneni) work promiscuously
on all that shall take them (diseased or no) for a true Purge, of which a Son
of Art need not be ashamed, will never purge ought from a sound body, but work
only on such as are diseased, and that only so long as the disease lasts; such
is the Diaceltatesson of Paracelsus, and such is this Panacaea of Antimony of
which I now speak.

Now as concerning the purging vegetable poisons, commonly known by the name of
Purges, their name contains a mere imposture, and their manner of working
deceives many (and those learned and ingenious) men.

For they by their fermental virulency do infect the bowels, which being
sensible of their hostility, do weep forth their nutritive moisture, together
with the Latex (always at command on such an occasion) which receiving the
venomous impression, are by the heat of the body cadaverated, and cast forth in
various colors, according as the nature of the poison is. This with gripings
of the bowels, and a nauseous sickness at the stomach, is the effect of the
commonly named purges, or rather poisons (for so they are indeed) and this is a
main pillar of the pompous fabric of the Galenists so adored Method.

For it is natural, not only to the bowels, but to all the exquisitely sensible
parts, if offended to weep forth a large quantity of moisture, to wash away
that character or impression made, as the eyes by smoke, the nose by
sternutatories, the mouth by Pellitory, and so the stomach and bowels by
Asarum, Colocynthida, Jalap, etc. which moisture is partly the Latex (ready at
call) and partly the alimentary humor of the part offended, and the judgment
given upon the excrements so rejected, is as sottish as if a man should throw
pepper or salt into a man's eyes, and then bless himself to see how they water,
which if let alone would have been well enough.

So that the matter cast forth by excrement, is not what was before in the
body, but what was at the time made by the poison; and if ought chance to be
avoided which was before excrementitious, it is by mere accident, it being the
nature of the poison given, to work only on what is vital, with which if ought
that was offensive be cast out, let not the Doctor boast of that, for being but
accidental, and so hazardable, so great mischief as is threatened by giving
poison into the body, is not to be adventured, in hopes of a casual good.

But moreover I shall give the studious Reader to understand, that in many
vegetable Simples under the mask of virulency, great and noble virtues are
hidden, which are kept by the poisonous appearance from rash hands, as the
apples of the Hesperides were feigned to be kept by a watchful Dragon; or as
the passage to the Tree of life, was guarded by a flaming sword in the hand of
Cherubims.

Thus in Hellebore under the churlish vomitive poison caused with convulsion
both of stomach and nerves, is hidden a most noble remedy against Hypocondriack
melancholy, the Gout, Epilepsie, Convulsions, and quartain or third day Ague,
which so baffles Physicians, that it is grown to a proverb, Quartanam nescit
medicus propellere febrim.

So in Colocynthida under the laxative venom is hidden an excellent febrifuge:
so in Asarum roots, a gentle remedy for slow lingering Fevers; and so I could
instance in Opium and many other Simples.

But he that thinks that the vomitive, laxative, or deleterial qualities in
these simples, are the effective causes of the good done by them, is mistaken,
but they are only as a clog to a mastiffe, or as a sheath to a sharp sword, by
which their excellency is not only held back, but also notably perverted by
this dangerous companion, insomuch that nature abhorring the malignant
virulency, does not admit often times of the remedy although sometimes in strong
constitutions, where the poison cannot make that impression, which in weaker
bodies it would, the virtue of the concrete through the cloud of its venom,
does yield some irradiation of its specific benignity, to the extinguishing a
disease, which through Gods mercy sometimes falls out, but little to the Doctors
credit, who gives the bad with the good, being penally blinded with ignorance,
only by means of pride and sloth.

What is said of purges or laxatives, may in their kind be said of Vomits,
which (quatenus talia) intend only a violence to nature, which sensible of
their hostility, rages and calls for help as I may say, from its neighbors
(that is the Latex, and the alimentary humor of the part affected) which are
often time prodigally spent, sometimes by vomit, sometimes by siege, sometimes
both ways, to wash away that odious character impressed, mangre which
diligence of the Archeus, the impression sometimes perseveres till death, which
is effectively caused by this Medicine (falsely so called, being truly the real
poison) while the poor butchered Patient thinking to have a disease only purged
away, loses his life, either by an obstinate vomiting, or an unconquerable
looseness.

Thus the other day I heard of one in Fleetstreet a lusty man, who for some
distemper took a purge, which (when it was thought it had done working) had
left such a venomous tincture in the bowels, as was not washed away with fewer
then about three hundred stools, in about three days time, and so he had like
to paid for the Doctors folly with the price of his life, besides his money.
Yet this must be a brave Art, and he that cannot do thus in conscience, must
(ipso facto) be termed an Emperick and Mountebank.

To conclude this venomous vomi^ing and laxative subject, we yield, that vomits
and purges (as such) may by accident remove a distemper, inasmuch as they
inrage the Archeus, by their venom, which growing mad by reason of so odious a
guest, rages to and fro without order or reason, falling out with what ever
comes in the way, and (as in case of a fire in the City, the Pipes are broke
up) so here the next alimentary moisture is made use of to blot out this
^incture of venom, the stomach turned up and down, the bowels torn and griped
for mo^sture, and in this general ^urly burly, perhaps something that before
was offensive, is cast out, and thus is the devil cast out as it were by
Beelzebub, or as if a man should rid his breath of the smell of Onions by
eating garlic: this is the mystery of the Galenists, which is little better
then the mystery of iniquity.

A Patient is troubled perhaps with an Ague, and the Doctor in the first place
(some I am sure do) orders bloodletting, that is, by striking a terror into
the Archeus, through loss of the blood, which threatens, and strikes at the
root of life, endeavoring to cause it to leave its rage, (which sometimes it
does on the score of terrefaction) but if this prevail not, then is either a
vomitive or laxative poison given inwardly (under the imposed name of a
medicine) and by this the Archeus is brought as we may say (adrestim) and
enforforced to play one game for life and all, hoping that in this commotion
that is made, the Archeus with the poison, may cast out what before enraged it,
and by being put into a greater danger, may forget or neglect what before
provoked it to fury; as a man in imminent danger of his life, will forget or
neglect the loss of his goods, which otherwise would trouble him sufficiently.
I appeal to all ingenious men, if this be not a notable performance, and yet it
is the whole of the Doctors craft; besides which he has nothing but Juleps,
and Lozenges, and such trinkets, of which every Confectioner and curious
huswife is better stored then he.

Whose method waves still from one extreme to another their potions, and doses
(which they call Physic) being so cursedly loathsome, as if they were made to
poison Cerberus, insomuch that the sight of many purging potions is enough to
make most men and women vomit, to sweeten which, their method stores them with
cordial fopperies, of which may truly be said that of the Poet, Spectatum
admissi risum teneatis amici?

Syrups of Clove gelly-flowers, with all sorts of Conserves, and Preserves,
Marmalads, Quiddenies, and the like are of this list, which with Diascordium,
Methridate, Alchermes, and Theriacle, distilled waters, and the like, serve (if
to nothing else) yet to multiply the Doctors Fees, and to enlarge the
Apothecaries Bills, and that is enough for them who care for nothing else.

Well then, if this be not the way of curing diseases, what is? may a studious
and ingenious Reader ask of me: I have hinted it before, and shall more fully
insist upon it: I say adaequate remedies are to be studied for the cure of
diseases, and by study they are to be found, such I mean, which will be to the
extinguishing a disease, as water will quench fire.

And this I shall be bold to add, that all the tricks that are used by the
Galenists, (as they say according to their Method) viz. Bleeding, Vesications,
Scarifications, Fontinels, Cauteries, Diaetical prescriptions, etc. are but
silly poor shifts analogical to Adams fig leaves to hide his nakedness:
childish fopperies to deceive their abused Patients, and to make themselves
appear diligent (curando) while they want adaequate remedies that might be
(morbum medendo:) therefore my brethren, as many of you as will be (medici) and
not (curatores) study and you will attain such Medicines as will get you both
credit and honor, as also gain, and honest rewards from your Patients. God has
not been wanting in bounty, if you will not be wanting in diligence: all his
works are mercy and truth, and according to these attributes are the Medicines
by him created and appointed, they are merciful remedies, which will restore,
not cruel drugs, which will only torment the body, and rob the sick party of
their money, and sometimes their lives, they are true Medicines, which will
actually perform what the Patient expects, and the Physician promises, and not
faithless remedies, which are only like a broken staff not only to cause him
that leans on it to fall, but also to hurt him with its splinters, this is the
difference between those which I commend, and the common medicines.

And as I instanced in the Fever, so in this discovery of Medicines, I shall
have eye to that instance, which is indeed a true touchstone to try any
Physician by, continual Fevers being analogical to the most violent
spontaneously transient disease, and the Quartan being analogical to the most
obstinate Chronical disease, (especially if Autumnal, and Hyemal) insomuch that
a medicine that will cure all Fevers, continual and intermittent, at all
seasons of the year, even in the weakest constitutions, yea although Hectical,
will with the like ease cure all Chronick diseases.

Such affinity is between the Fever and the Gout, that the latter is never
without the former, a sensible Febricula either preceding or accompanying any
rigorous Paroxysme of the Gout; and few malignant Fevers, without pain in the
head, back, or limbs, which is analologicall to the pain of the Gout.

And indeed what are all diseases, but so many and distinct furies of one and
the same Archeus, which is variously provoked, according to the varieties of
the occasionate peccant matter, or impressed Ideall character, on any of the
viscera, from whence by irradiation of the anger of the Archeus, various parts
are variously tormented, as the accidental occasionate matter shall give
distinction.

Therefore the highest and noblest way of medicine, is by pacifying the
Archeus, to bring it to absolute quiet and rest, whereby it neglects that
provocation by which it was incensed, and so the furious Idea being totally
blotted out, it repents (as it were) of its former madness, and so Nature
disposes of the excrementitious product insensibly.

The preserving therefore in health, consists not in taking of poison, to the
end the Archeus, being another way more enraged, by an eminent danger
immediately threatening the life, may be put into a hurly burly, in hopes that
its fury, with the poison taken, it may throw out what ever was peccant before,
but in keeping it from fury and rage if not already provoked, or otherwise
appeasing it. And I appeal to all ingenious men, which of the two is the better
method.

But this is the height of medicine, and is performable by the glorified,
spirituated, and perfected Sulphurs, which by their eminent purity and
perfection, and by their fermentall irradiation, at once mortify whatever is
malignant in the body, by which the Archeus finding such powerful assistance,
begins to repent of its madness, that it should so disquiet it self and its
whole habitation, about a thing so quickly mastered, and with the joy and
jubilee conceived upon its sp^edy help found, it cheers up all its parts, which
seem revived, as the earth when after winter it begins to smile with buddes and
flowers, and so the strength that a while before seemed decayed, appears in
short time renewed, this is the noble effect of these (truly Astral) medicines.

But to such who cannot attain to this height of Art, (as truly all are not
elected hereto) I shall advise other (more easily attainable) medicines, lest I
should seem only to desire to Tantalize, and not really to benefit and profit
the Reader.

The noble Helmont on such a question propounded, that if by purgations and by
vomits, cures are not to be expected, how then they may be performed; makes
this answer to his own question, to wit, that the ends are to be promoted. If
says he, any filth be in the first rooms or places of digestion, then
Abstersives only are to be used, Nature easily and very safely performing the
rest. But if any filth be lodged more deeply, then volatile Alcalies are to be
used, which cleanse the the body thoroughly, just as Soap cleanses Linen. The
same advice I give to such as would become true Sons of Art.

There are noble Arcana's in Nature preparable by the great Dissolvent, the
liquor Alchahest, which are not for every one to command; although the liquor
when prepared be of infinite virtue, yet would (...) not advise a young Artist
so to dote on that search, as to neglect more easily attainable secrets,
especially, fince by succedaneous secrets the same diseases may be restored,
although not with the same speed or universality, (one of the grand Arcana's
curing equally all diseases) yet in a little more time, and with greater care,
as certainly.

I shall therefore here not speak of any Alchahesticall preparations, that
liquor being difficult to prepare, and rarely possessed, but shall come to the
succedaneous Keys of this Art, which any ingenious man may with industry (with
Gods blessing) easily attain.

Although I must ingenuously profess that my mind was so fired with eagerness
after that secret, that I did for nigh ten years make it my main search, which
so soon as I knew, and could prepare, my spirit was straightway so satisfied
with the knowledge thereof, that I never hitherto prepared it.

For the way as I made it was very tedious, and it in making and using subject
to chances, so that although it be (when made) incorruptible, yet the breaking
of one Glass will lose that which otherwise is immortal, nor can it well be
used without accurate furnaces both for digestion and distillation, which
required to the preparation of medicaments which are to be obtained thereby.

Of this Subject I have spoken largely in a peculiar Treatise on that only
Liquor, and in another Treatise, entitled, The Art of Pyrotechny opened and
discovered; and in a Treatise entitled, Truth asserted and maintained, or a
Chymicall and Philosophical resolution of certain questions sent me by one
veyling himself under the name of Philalethes Zeteticus. All which Tractates I
purpose speedily to send abroad, so soon as I find what entertainment this
Tractate will find in the World.

To which Arcanum if you cannot attain, learn says Helmont to make Alcalies
volatile, that by mean of them you may perfect or make your solutions of Bodies.

For fixed Alcalies according to Helmont's Doctrine are of wonderful virtues,
insomuch that he equals them in virtue to the great Arcana's, as being so
penetrative, that wherever they will not reach, nothing else will: whose
Doctrine I shall not repeat, but rather illustrate.

Nor shall I here speak but only briefly of this Subject, having in a peculiar
Treatise entitled, de mysteriis Alcalium, spoken largely of the same, to which
(as which I intend speedily to make public) I shall remit the studious Reader
for full satisfaction.

However I shall in this place discover so much (though very briefly) as may
serve for direction to him that is industrious, by what he shall find here, to
unlock many secrets of Nature, and those very noble as to the Philosophy of
them, and useful as to the application of them unto mankind.

Know then that Alcalyes are the the fixed Salts of combustible Concretes, fixed
by the activity of the fire, which were (before burning) volatile, and merely
fixed in this act of conflagration. In these Salts the seminal virtue is
totally extinct, (which is the proper operation of the fire, on whatsoever it
can master and overcome) so that they have only a Saline, Diuretic and
abstersive virtue, which withal from the fire borrowes a fiery corrosive
quality, in which respect it contains a little hostility and reluctance toward
the stomach.

Truth, I know many Chemists according to the sentence of Quercetan, do hold
that the seminal principles are kept and preserved incorrupt in the fire, but I
rather lean to the contrary judgment of Helmont, which experience has often
and satisfactority convinced me of.

I grant that Alcalies do differ one from the other (per genera and species)
since the operation of each Agent is received by the Patient (per modum
recipientis) and so the uniform Act of burning in stones produces one sort of
Calx or Alcaly, in Oyster-shells another, in Trees another, in Herbs etc.
another, and yet this distinction does not lie in the formal, seminal,
Balsamic qualities of the Concrete, but in another quality, or other
qualities, which are determined by the specificated forms, although themselves
in this act of determination expire, and leave the Salt, as to the first
Alcalizate intention of kin to all other Salts, that are made effectively by
Vulcan, yet distinguished from all others according to the capability of
reception of the Agents activity in the Patient, whose specificated form gave
the Alcaly a certain distinction in determination, although to its own
extinguishment.

All then that remains in the Alcali of the former Concrete, is but a very
slight modicum of the magnumoportet, and so Alcalies do differ each from
other, although all of them in their primary intention, are of one and the same
nature and qualities. Hence it is that the Alcaly of Tartar has deserved and
gotten the name of Respub. Alcalium; since whatever virtue is to be found in
any Alcaly, may be found in and demonstrated from the Alcali of Tartar.

For the fire having no seminal power, it makes what proceeds from it
effectively, though not efficiently, for the Salt to speak Philosophically,
does in this act of Vulcan's fury, lay hold on its neighboring Sulphur, and
both being before volatile, they of their own accord melt together into a Salt,
and so fix themselves into an Alcalizate Body.

Hence it is that Alcalies are easily volatized, since their generation
proceeds not from seminal beginnings, but is a spontaneous Larva, which part of
the Salt and Sulphur of the Concrete assume, the better to withstand Vulcans
fury, as Mercury by bare circulation in the fire, will spontaneously assume the
larva of a red (and somewhat fixed) Precipitate.

This is the process of this Anomalous Generation; yet is the product very
noble, if especially this fixed body be by art brought back again to a volatile
substance.

Which is to be done very successefully by mean of vegetable essential
Sulphurs (that is distilled Oils) to which Alcalies have a very near, nay an
intimate affinity, which may appear first, by the unctuous slipperinesse of
Alcalies. Secondly, by their ready mixture with any expressed Oil, between both
which is made a Soap, being a neuter from both. Thirdly, by the greedy mixture
of them with Sulphurs mineral, which are known to be unctuous, and of near kin
to Oils.

Alcalies being thus volatized, become noble medicines, and of excellent use
both in their own nature, and to the making of other preparations, of which I
shall touch briefly, and so draw toward a conclusion.

Concerning this operation, Helmont has given more light then any that went
before him, yet has he written darkly enough, (although wondrous
Philosophically) which as many as understand him with me, will confess.

I must seriously profess, that for nigh seven years I made about two thousand
experiments to this intent, but was always unsuccessefull, till pondering the
words of that old Philosopher concerning this Subject, I found my errors and
the truth likewise.

And I do suppose that scarce the hundredth Artist will attain this secret,
unless it be from him only who is the giver of every good and perfect gift, to
whom alone be all glory and everlasting benediction.

For it is a rare thing to have any of these secrets communicated in form of
receipts, or if communicated, yet so that much be left out in the direction,
which, without pains, study, and sedulity will never be attained, so I did, and
so all have done, who have been masters of secrets, and so I advice each
desirous student in this Art to do. And for the help of such, I shall be as
candid, as the Laws of this art will permit and allow.

Now forasmuch as I have undertaken the vindication of noble Helmont, and the
explication of Nature according to those principles which eperience in the fire
had taught him, I shall from my own experience also further illustrate what was
obscurely laid down by him, in reference to the preparation of noble
medicaments.

And as the fire taught Helmont to understand Paracelsus, so it has also
taught me to understand them both, and by it must every one that would
understand Nature truly, and not notionally, have his Philosophy regenerated.

Concerning Alcalies, the noble Helmont says, that being volatized, they
equal the virtue of the most noble Arcana's, inasmuch as being endued with an
abstersive and resolutive virtue, they pass even to the fourth digestion, and
resolve all preternaturall excrements and coagulations in all the Vessels. That
they take away all filthy residence, which is in any of the veins, and that
they do resolve all (though never so obstinate) obstructions, and so cut off
the material cause of all apostemations, and ulcers both within and without.
That their spirit is so penetrative, and efficacious, that whithersoever it
will not reach, nothing else will. And in a word, that as Soap cleanses
linen, so they cleanse the whole body, and cut off, and cleanse away the
material cause of all diseases.

Their spirit is of an admirable dissolving quality, insomuch that it will
dissolve any simple Concrete Body, and dissolving will be coagulated upon it,
and borrow from the dissolved Body a specificated virtue, which having entrance
into the Body, will actually cure deplorable and chronick diseases, as well as
all Fevers.

This is the sum of his Doctrine concerning Alcalies, which is very true, and
in which I can be a faithful witness with him, that he has born true
testimony unto Nature.

Of which operation be gives some hints in two or thee places, one, where
speaking of the Oil of Cinnamon, how it may be made into Salt, he says, that if
that Oil be mixed with its own Alcali, without any water, being circulated
three months with an occult and secret circulation, it is wholly turned into a
volatile Salt; of which elsewhere he says, that it is a noble remedy for the
Palsy, Epilepsy, etc.

And in another place, where he teaches (in defect of the Alchahesticall
preparation) to sever the Sulphur from Paracelsus Metallus masculus (that is
Spelter, and is the Sulphur Glaure Augurelli) and to cohobate it with Oil of
Mace, Anise, or Therebinth, till it all come over the Helm in a fetid Oil, and
then to circulate it with an Alcali (as it ought to be) till it be turned into
an Elixir of volatile Salt, and after to take away its fetor by rectifying it
with good Spirit of Wine, this he commends, and justly, for a cure of very many
(if not most, or all) chronicall diseases.

For explication of which Doctrine, let me admonish the Reader, that Salt of
Tartar, or any Alcali, may be made several ways volatile, and each way
yielding noble medicaments, yet one way far nobler then other.

Now of all ways, that is the most inferior, which is done by Oils, as
Helmont well notes, that of all Salts, those are most languid which contain the
vita media of Sulphurs, which he calls (Sulphurum ^rosapiam) cap. 3. de
Duelech, and therefore these Elixirs do follow the name of the Oil by which
they are made, and are called Sal volatile, or Elixir volatile, Cinamoni,
Macis, Nucis Myristicae, Therebinthinae, etc. according as the Oils are by
which the Alcali is made fugitive, and though they are noble medicines, yet are
they Specificks subordinate much to universal Arcana's, to which Helmont
equals, and that justly the Spirits of Salt of Tartar, which are by a far more
secret Ar^ preparable.

Such are the volatile Salts made of Cephalike Herbs, as Rosemary Sage, etc.
which are commended by that Philosopher only, as particular remedies in
Fevers, yet such that if given in due time before the fit, in intermittents,
on a fasting stomach, or at any time in continua^ Fevers, and sweat be
provoked they will never put a faithful Physician to derision.

Therefore I give all ingenuou^ Artists to understand, that Alcalie are noble
Bodies, ordained by God for great uses to mankind, and may be handled as the
artist pleases.

Many simple Mechanists know ^o take Oil expressed, and with the ^ixivium of
Alcalies to boil it into (...) Soap, which is a (Tertium neurum) from both the
Oil and the Alcali. But when they have done ^his, they know not how to proceed
further with it, nor do our mo^ern Philosophers, although they ^hink themselves
wise men.

This is the lowest and most infe^our way of preparing Salts, viz. ^ith expressed
Oils which contain ^uch heterogeneity in them, and ^re full of fuliginous
vapors, (as ^ay appear by their speedy growing ^ancid, especially if once
heated) yet ^otwithstanding, in their union with Alcalies, there may be much of
^hilosophy learned, if it were but ^uly considered, and the effect pon^ered
with its causes. Yet this I must say, that though the making of Soap be the
utmost of the Sope-boylers work, it is but the first step of the Philosophers
work, and indeed is but an Abortive in Philosophy, caused by violent decoction,
by which the Oil and the Salt enter each other in some measure, but do not
radically penetrate each others profundity, as I shall by instance make to
appear.

For let the best Soap be distilled, with an acute water stinking of an
Empyreum, will distill of an high colored fetid Oil, of a greenish ceruleous
color to view in a glass. The Caput mortuum being elixated by warm water will
give an Alcali, fixed as before (though giving an high colored Lixivium) but
the quantity both of Salt and Oil, less then what was taken to make the Soap,
and therefore considerable part of both, in this decoction into Soap, are
turned into an Aqueous Liquor, which being redistilled, according to Helmont's
prescription, from a fixed body, becomes insipid like to elemen all water,
leaving the volatile Salt that was in the Spirit coagulated upon the fixed Body.

By which it is evident that the Oil and Salt had not ingresse to each others
profundity, and therefore part of each are separable from the other, the Salt
in its Alcalizate, and the Oil in its unctuous nature: by which may be
concluded, that a centrall ingression was not made of each into other.

But as for essential or distilled Oils, as of Therebinth, Mace, Nutmeg, etc.
they by reason of their volatility, not abiding decoction, are with difficulty
made into a Sapo, although by Cohobation upon a Lixivium, they will yield a
Collostrum like to Tar in color, which will have the whole taste and smell
of the Concrete, and the Oil that distills over will be of little virtue, being
thus robbed of its specific odor and taste, this Collostrum will dissolve (in
part) either in water or spirit of Wine, leaving part that will not dissolve,
much like to Shoo-makers wax: of this operation some make a secret, but it is
only trivial, for though by it dissolved in Spirit of Wine, a good medicine
may be made against wind in the stomach, yet it is not the Elixir of volatile
Tartar, but a certain substance of the Oil made by the fretting of the Lixivium
in decoction, and swims upon the Lixivium, nor will be made by any industry to
mix with it; the Lixivium then is highly tincted, and possibly by long
cohobation there might be made an union, but my patience would never suffer me
to persist to see the utmost of that operation, especially when I knew a better
way.

For to be ingenuous, I tried several ways in pursuance of volatile Alcalies,
which upon Helmont's commendation, and Paracelsus also, I highly valued, and
next to the great Dissolvent made them my search, which I assayed to make
several ways, which would be tedious here to tell of.

It Is enough for the Reader, that he know that it is not sufficient for him to
be able to make a Sapo with Salts and Oils, for that is easy in expressed,
harder in distilled Oils, and at the best but trivial, forasmuch as the best
Sapo, being distilled by a graduall fire, will give, besides a Spirit smelling
of an Empyreum, an Oil of a strong sent, and a Salt (in the caput mortuum)
Alcalizate and fixed, which shows that this operation is but an abortive birth
in Philosophy, nor is the spirit thus got by distillation that noble spirit of
Tartar, of which Helmont and Paracelsus glory, but it is a spirit, in which is
very little of the nature of the Alcali, and that but very languid, the nobler
parts of both Oil and Salts, being for want of union each with other, separable
in their former nature, and qualities.

There is therefore a way far more secret, by which is made not a Sapo, but a
Salt in form of Sugarcandy, liquable in water or Wine, and volatile, in which
are these notable and very remarkable things.

First, that one part of Alcali will turn two or three parts of Oil into mere
Salt, without any the least oleaginity, save only a very small portion of the
Oil will be turned into a resinous gum, distinct from that which is
salificate.

2. This dissolves in a liquor, not as Soap, which makes a troubled suddy
water, but as any other Salt.

3. This being boiled to a Cuticle, will shoot like to any other Salt, tincted
according to the Concretes color.

4. The sharpness of the Salt is totally mortified, and it becomes so mild, as
not to offend the mouth, though taken alone.

5. The Oils, though hot and of a very acute taste, yet they retain only so
much taste and smell, as is inseparable from the vita media, so that the
medicine is temperate, di^retick, and insensibly Diaphoretick.

6. This Salt thus made is totally volatile, without leaving any fixed Salt in
the Caput mortuum.

7. This may be done perfectly in ten weeks or less, in very great quantity,
provided it be according to Helmont's order, done (sine aqua, occulta and
artificiosa circulatione) or to speak plainly, that the digestion be made (in
centro profunditatis mater^ae.)

8. The heat required ought never to exceed the heat of the Sun in the
Spring, that is according to the manner of Helmont's Essences, in which heat
alone, by Art, the Salt receives a fermentall determination from the Oils, and
they on the other hand receive the same from the Salt, and so is made of both a
volatile temperate Salt, of the virtue of each parent. For from the Alcali, it
receives a virtue Diuretic and abstersive, and from the Oil a Balsamic
Nature, by which it reaches even unto our Constitutive principles, and in the
way resolves whatever preternaturall coagulation it meets withal.

9. This Salt thus elixerate is volatile so, as that it may be dissolved in
water, and boiled up again without loss of virtue, in manner of Cremor
Tartari, Sal Ammoniack, Sugar, Sugar Candy, etc.

10. By this means the Sulphur of any metal or mineral (that may be separated
from the Mercuriality and distilled with Oils essential over the helm) may be
made into the form of an essential Salt; and that by being rectified with
spirit of Wine (or with clean water) will lose its strong odor, and thus may be
obtained a Medicine for most (or all) Chronicall diseases.

11. This Elixir thus made, contains a communicable ferment to any other Herb,
which being digested with it (dissolved in Wine) is by it turned into a
volatile Salt, (except only the Faeces of the true virtue of the Concrete.)

12. This Elixir is an absolute Corrector of the venom in all vegetables,
which it mortifies immediately, insomuch that Hellebore, Aconitum, Hyosciam,
Elaterium, etc. by bare mixing with this Elixir of volatile Tartar, become
gentle suddenly, and this done, without any heat stronger then for the hatching
of an Egg, and by this Elixir in a short (but very artificial) decoction may
be made volatile Salts of such Herbs, which will not yield an Oil by distilling
with water, that is an essential Oil, such as Hellebore, Jalap, Briony, Enula
Campana, etc. which are noble Medicines thus corrected, having besides their
own excellency the united virtue of the Elixit, which alone is a balsamicall
Ens of admirable efficacy in deplorable cases.

Whoever then thou art that would be a true Son of Art, learn to use Salts
according to the true Philosophical preparation of them, not as the foolish
sort of Chemists do, by giving them as they are extracted out of their ashes,
thinking no other work to belong to them, then by repeated filtration to make
them as crystalline and pure as may be; for although they are noble Subjects,
yet their Lixiviate Acrimony is somewhat hostile, and besides this they are
unable in their fixed corporeous nature to pass beyond the Vessels of the
second digestion, and are cast forth by siege partly, but chiefly by urine.

But being volatized, they become balsamical tinctures, and familiar to our
natures, and so are easily admitted to have entrance even to our constitutive
principles, (according to the nature of the Concrete, whose Crasis in its
volatility it does contain) and in their passage they clear the Organs of all
offensive excrements, and by their grateful odor they refresh the veins, and
blot out all forain Idea's that are impressed on any of the viscera.

Now among all fixed Salts, there is none of greater virtue then Salt of
Tartar, whence it has deserved to be called Alcalium Respublica, and among all
Oils there is none for its abstersive nature excells Oil of Therebinth, which
is a limpid Oil, exquisitely quisitely penetrative, and of its own nature
eminently diuretic.

By means of this Oil the Salt of Tartar is made into a volatile Elixir,
Crystalline, very pure, and temperate, retaining so much taste and odor of the
Therebinth as does follow necessarily the vita media, so as that it may be
barely distinguished, and that by an acute palate, this Elixir is mild without
sharpness, crystallizing like to any other Salt.

And note, that in making this or any other Salt of an essential Oil, when the
digestion is complete, and the Salt without the least oleaginity, will dissolve
in water, that then the water which is first drawn off will seem a notable
spirit, which yet is not the spirit of volatile Tartar; for that water being
saved so long as the eminent taste remains, and when the Salt is nigh dry, put
on it again, leaves all its taste behind, and is left insipid, and so at last
distilled away without taste, then is that Salt to be distilled or sublimed for
the obtaining of Helmont's noble spirit, by him and Paracelsus so highly
commended.

And thus courteous Reader, imagining your self to be Master of these
elixerated Oils, and essencificated Salts (for all are made by one rule, and
therefore learn one and learn all) you may desire to know what excellency is to
be found in these beyond what is and may be seen in common medicines.

To answer; first, the way of making the Salts is rather a common place then a
single receipt, for make one, and make all the sorts of Essential Salts, so
that thus you may commend Salt of Cinnamon, Mace, Nutmeg, Cloves, etc. for the
curing of the Palsy, Epilepsie, Convulsions, and many other rigorous and
Chronick diseases.

But by first cohobating Sulphurs of Antimony, metallus masculus, etc. with an
Oil, till they come over the Helm, and then circulating these Oils with an
Alcali into an essential Salt, will behad Medicines truly succedaneous to
Alchahesticall Arcana's.

And thirdly, thus have you a Key by which you may enter the Closet of the most
noble vegetable, suspending its virulency, digesting its crudity, besides which
there is no preparation comparable to that of the Liquor Alchahest, to which
this is truly and may be adjudged succedaneous.

But that is most solemn, to wit, when the whole Concrete is totally and
perfectly reduced into a liquid form, with distinction of all its
Heterogeneities, in their several colors, among which is always one liquor,
eminently distinguishable from the rest in color, which is in substance but
little, yet contains perfectly the very Crasis of the Concrete: this is the
highest of vegetable preparations, especially where the body is resolved in a
gentle tepidity, and the Oil (in such Concretes which yield Oil) separated from
the Mercuriall liquor, and both from the Dissolvent, and be after in the same
heat decocted into a Salt, which is their first Ens. However, this preparation
made by means of elixerated Salts and Oils, although as to the Crasis of the
vegetable, it advance it not to the dignity of that Essence which is made by
mean of the Alchahest, yet the medicaments thus made are no whit inferior in
virtue, excelling them in generality of Energy. For the liquor Alchahest in its
preparations is separated from the body dissolved, and so the Medicament
expresses only the virtue of the Concrete whence it was taken, which is more
precise and singular, but here the Elixir of volatile Alcali, together with the
Balsamic tincture of the volatizing Oil, is united with the Essence of the
added Vegetable, (as for instance, Hellebore, black or white, Asarum, Opium,
Zalap, etc.) whereby it is not only endowed with the specific endowments of
the additionall Concrete, but also is ennobled by the admirable Abstersive, and
in a manner universal power of the aforesaid Elixir, by which it is enriched
with most excellent medicinal qualities, and becomes penetrative and ingressive
as Balsamic and volatile, abstersive, resolutive, and diuretic, and gently
Diaphoretick, as saline and Alcalizate, and besides this specifically intended
and directed according to the particular virtues of its other compounded
simple, (out of which it forms a real Salt, void of all virulency, without any
loss of virtue) by and from which it receives a more peculiar determination.

For between the Oils essential and Salts Alcalizate, there is a fermentall
appetite, whereby they close each with other radically and in the Centrall
profundity each of other, which give not a Sapo, nor a Collostrum, (which are
the trivial products of erring operators) but a real Salt, mild without
Corrosivenesse of the Alcali; and temperate without the heat of the Oil, which
then being of kin to Vegetalls, and thus fitted to them, becomes a due and
proper Agent to salifie or bring to a Sacharine Salt any Vegetall with which it
is mixed and Philosophically decocted, that is in a Solar heat or rather an
animal warmth, wherein in about ten days or more as the quantity is, the
whole substance will be transmuted into a real Crystallizing Salt, in which
the media vita of the Concrete only remains, retaining the whole Crasis or
virtue not in the least diminished, and so the efficacy of the Species or
Concrete contracts an intimate union with the Salt or Elixir of Tartar
volatile, and both conspire to the performing of really wonderful Cures.

These tincted Crystalls if you put into pure spirit of Wine, and digest them
in a gentle heat, the spirit by reaffusion, and pouring off, as often as it is
tincted, will extract the whole tincture of the Vegetable, leaving the Salt
behind robbed of the tincture, by which it may be gathered that the Salt and
the tincture are centrally distinct, though they have centrally wrought each on
other, yet not so as to contract an union each with other.

The spirit of Wine then distilled off in a gentle heat, the tincture will
remain, and is the whole Crasis of the Concrete, which is a noble preparation
for such Concretes, which are Balsamicall and odoriferous, where the tincture
is desired free from the mixture of the Salts, as to wit, in such cases, where
bare refreshment without Abstersion is desired and required.

Thus is made the most noble Aroph of Helmont out of Satyrion, and may be used
either the tincture alone, separated from the Salt by extraction with spirit of
Wine, or mixed with the Elixir, which I rather approve and choose, unless in
case where the Back is to be strengthened in women afflicted with wasting,
otherwise the Abstersivenesse of the Saline Elixir promotes the cure for the
Nephritis and Stone, or gravel of the bladder, wonderfully.

And now my decocting Apothecaries, where are you? Come in upon the Stage with
your decoctions, Syrups, Electuaries, Lochsana's, Boles, and the rest of your
Trinkets, and bring your Masters the Doctors with you to plead your cause and
to mantain and defend you.

The Doctors say of me that I am a Mountebank, and want method, and I say of
them, that they are Methodists, and want Medicaments. Not that you want drugges
or slops, you are confessed by all to have more then enough, but yet for all
that, in comparison to true Medicaments, you have nothing that truly deserves
to be named so.

Blessed be God that I am ignorant when it is a fit time to let blood to
preserve health, when to take it away to restore health, when to give poisons
to purge, in expectation that Nature being forced to play a desperate game, and
reduced to a forced put, may win that by adventure, which you by all your Art
cannot ascertain her with safe and speedy remedies. But this I know, namely, to
cure those diseases by most certain, speedy, and safe Medicaments, which you by
your method despair of.

Your method only teaches you when your medicaments are put to a Nonplus, to
have recourse to such things which my judgment disapproves, and therefore my
Conscience abhorres: my method teaches me what diseases such and such
Medicines will restore, and where the disease is more deeply rooted and
obstinate, it furnishes me with more commanding Arcana's.

If the peccant occasional matter be only in the Concave of the first Vessels,
as the stomach, Pylorus, Duodenum, etc. although the Symptoms be never so
violent, yet with Abstersive things I undertake the Cure, and perform it; such
is the forenamed Elixir, either per se, or specificated with any Abstersive
Simple.

The most Abstersive Simple that I ever knew among the whole number of
Vegetalls, is Opium, which of it self is a Narcotick deleteriall venom, but by
means of this elixerated Salt it loses all those odious qualities, and is a
most powerful sudorifick, anodynous eminently and cures all Fevers though
never so acute, and all Agues, yea, although Quartans and Autumnall, which it
helps by continued taking, in no long time.

In the correction of which it is observable, that only a feculent sediment is
separated, and the rest is totally turned into a volatile Salt, which is not to
be excelled in the whole vegetable Family. So corrected, it is most safely
administered to the quantity of 20 grains, and is so far from causing sleep
compulsively, that it withholds from sleep, especially where the party affected
is troubled with a Cough, but against a Cough it is so powerful, that very
well wrote Helmont concerning it. Felicem illum Medicum qui novit lethalia ab
Opi^ separare cum retenta potestate agendi in Duumviratum. Happy is that
Physician who knows how to separate the deadly qualities which are in Opium,
so as that it may retain its virtue of acting upon the Duumviratus.

For this Simple thus corrected, by its innate specificated quality does work
on the seat of life, pacifying the Archeus without the least stupefaction, but
rather keeping the Patient awake, and provoking sweat either moderate or more
strong, as the strength of the party is, and the malignity of the disease.

Thus it extinguisheth all defluxions (called catarhs) and on that score is a
certain remedy for fluxes, either bloody, or not, all Coughs (not brought to
their highest exasperation, or most intimate rooting) in a word, it resolves by
sweat and urine the cause of many diseases, which are not too deeply fixed, and
where it will not reach, only a great Arcanum will.

To be brief, many diseases, carrying the face of an Ague, or the like
distemper, may sometimes be beyond this Medicines cure, yet even in such it
will give ease, and where it will not thoroughly extinguish the malady, there
let higher Arcana's be used.

Of all Vegetable remedies corrected, this only that I know works by vomit,
which (with some only) it causes the next day after its taking, I usually
advising it after a very light supper to bedward last, (because it is
Diaphoretick) and the next morning it causes a spontaneous vomit, with little
sickness or nauseousnesse.

It binds the body for most part, and so not at all times to be administered,
but with other advise added, to supply what is defective in it, it is splenetick
in operation, and an admirable remedy against wind in the stomach or bowels, as
also against Hypochondriatick melancholy.

The same way Hellebore corrected is a noble remedy against lingering Quartans,
and so I could instance in very many Simples, but that time will not permit my
enlargement here.

Only this for a close I shall admonish, that this Key being had, the noble
Energy of all Vegetables will be at command without the least footsteps of
virulency, and so a man may be his own experience (with very much safety) try
and satisfy himself, of what my experience will not permit me to write, nor
will my time allotted allow me to mention so far as my experience has gone.

And by the way as an admonition to our wise Masters of this science, I shall
mind them, that in the whole Vegetable Family there is not a simple comparably
so Diaphoretick as Opium, which they account of all Vegetables the most cold,
in which let them learn from me, that the Narcotick virulency may be
separarated, without altering the specific virtue in the least, and then it is
anodynous with much pleasure to the Patient, and a help for great maladies,
giving ease and comfort in most, but prejudicial in none, (save only an
obstinate costivenesse) it being the specific quality of that medicine to bind
the belly, which it does in most, yet so as to appear like a purge to some, but
those very rarely.

In Zalap, Rhabarb, and all purgative Medicines so called (or rather vegetall
poisons) it takes away the virulency totally, without the least remain of the
same, and is then either Diaphoretick or Diuretic, or rather both, without any
molestation to the Patient, and thus a certain remedy for all acute, and many
Chronicall (not too highly graduated) maladies.

If any then demand of me an account of my mystery and method, I answer: By the
Symptoms I judge of the disease, and according to the strength of the Patient,
and the rigor of the distemper I order my medicines accordingly.

Acute diseases, and many Chronicall not too highly graduated I cure by the
Elixir of volatile Tartar alone, given in Wine, or else specificated with some
Vegetable, as I see occasion. And with the blessing of God can promise the
Patient cure to teir comfort, and perform it to my own credit.

But where either the disease i^ ^oo high, or Nature too succumbent, there I
volatize Sulphurs by essential Oils, and make them into Elixirs, and after
give them a specification from restorative aromatic Balsoms.

And yet beyond this there is a way to make such a spirit of Tartar which is
second to none but the great Dissolvent, of which I shall not speak here,
having already transgressed the bounds prefixed to this Treatise, and besides in
my other Treatise concerning the Art of Pyrotechny, it is fully handled, and
with as much candor as can be expected.

I shall at present conclude, adising the Captious Reader either to mend what I
have done, or to forbear his censure; and the studious Artist I shall advise to
go on in ^is begun task with cheerfulness and diligence; for true Medicine is
a s^rious and weighty matter, according to the Poet, -- Facillo descensus
Averni,
Sed -- superas evadere ad auras
Hic labor hoc opus est. --


FINIS.
Lector vive, vale; and si quid scis rectius istis
Candidus imperti; si non, his utere mecum


