The State of PARTIES, and of the PUBLIC; as influenced by those Parties, in
this Conjuncture, offered to ENGLISH MEN.
IT IS a miserable Circumstance, and the General Ruin of prosperous States,
when Parties out of Separate Interests and Passions pursue different Ends of
their own, without regard to the Public, although the chief Interest of each:
But it is a Circumstance beyond common Misery, a Propensity to ruin more than
natural, and a Fatality over Mankind, greater than has been ever observed,
perhaps, in any Country or Set of Men, that they should be divided into Parties
from the Public Interest, when there is not so much as any real particular
Interest, in effect, carrying on in any of those different Parties; not any of
these discriminating Interests so laid, or so pursued, as that, by all the
violent Steps taken by the Engagers, they are any ways advanced: So that
although Violence be done, and still doing perpetually to the Public; though
all contend for the Promotion of that Interest or Party under which they only
look for any Happiness; Yet for all this, not one of these Interests receive
any Advantage; not one of these Parties are likely to procure or come any thing
near their End.

Our Nation must be allowed to be in a most complete way to Misery, if this be
proved their Case.

That there are Parties is well known. The first great Division is between King
William and King James; which takes in all our present active Men: For as for
Commonwealth's-men, which some would have to be a third Distinction; besides
the Turn it serves at Court, it has no meaning; unless the quiet Part of
England, those tired with Revolutions, and farther Engagements with Men of
these Days, or those that are divided in their Thoughts upon the Interests of
either King, as they stand to England; unless, I say, these be they called
Commonwealth's-men, however absurd it be.

Of these two Interests, that of King James's does properly make but one Party,
though the other two. Those, I say, make but one Party, as they act in the
Public: for they having in Prospect only, and as the End of all their
Agitations, the Government of King James; they are not now divided, nor can be
yet, whilst unprevailing, in any Dispute or Difference considerable about
Administration, as how, by whom, or in what Methods, favoring one or other
Party, that Government shall be carried on. The side, then, of the
now-governing King being divided into Whig and Tory, there are but three
Parties that pull different ways, or with any noted Force in the Public
Affairs.

The meaning of all these Men, if they have their main Interest, their Stake,
Estate and Friends, in England, is and must be to preserve England, though not
from perfect Monarchy, and absolute Power of a Crown at home, (which some
approve of, and like the best, whatever Name of Tyranny or Slavery it has
heretofore gone by) yet to preserve us, at least from the Yoke of Foreign
Power, from being overgrown by States that are about us, and coming down from
being the Principal in Power and Riches, to be the last of Europe, or but once
inferior to any of these neighboring ones, which will turn to as much, since
it necessarily subjects us to the Miseries of those Invasions we endured of
old, as then the Common Prey of all the World, and every rising Nation. This
surely, whatever else may be his Interest, is the Interest of every individual
Englishman, in all these Parties, to prevent: But if this be what is least
done; if this not only be not prevented, but be the only thing that every
Party, every Side, though not intentionally, yet really, does draw on, advance,
promote, and nothing else, no not their Party-Interest, not any valuable
Victory or Triumph that one may gain above another, so much as gratifying a
Passion; Then are we in that State I mentioned; in the fairest, most miraculous
way that can be thought on to every thing that can be called Ruin or
Destruction to a Country.

That when we lose our Strength, we are more miserable than any other People,
the surest Seat of the most various, sharp and lasting War, Experience the most
remarkable that ever was, has taught us, from the highest Remembrance of our
selves through Romans, Danes, Saxons, and many Nations more (though less
remarked) down to the last Normans, and that concluding Conquest which by the
Power of the Conqueror abroad, and the Continuance of his Line here,
established us on our own Bottom. And that this was not mere Misfortune, but
that it is a Fate peculiar to us, I mean, that it is a natural Evil to us more
than any Country, when we are low, who ever studies our Situation, and the
Growths of Nations on the Continent, will know, that such a Country as this is
more disputable than any other: that the Dominion of it cannot be so fixed, and
the immediate Masters of it, however powerful on the Continent, not able to
insure to themselves the Possession of it, by holding it out against Strangers,
or guarding it from their Enemy, so well as of other Places: that this is, in
that Sense, as a Frontier Country; with this Difference, that those that are
really Frontier Countries, though they are so this Day, may have the luck not
to be so a little while after; but that this Country has always the Nature of a
Frontier, ever to maintain War in it, and to be the Subject and Place of
Contention amongst those that are stronger than it self; whenever such there
are. In fine; That as we are an Island, and have the Sea round us; so by being
Masters of that, (which is, in short, by being in the Practice of it most, and
can be no otherwise) we must of Consequence be the strongest in the World, as
the World is now turned to Navigation, and each Country by Degrees at length
brought to depend absolutely on Trade, by wanting many Necessaries from foreign
Places, which once they could live without perhaps, but since cannot; nor can
defend themselves without: this being the Change that the improved Art of
Navigation has made in the World; tying Countries to a reciprocal Dependency on
one another for their Growths, and obliging them to some sort of
Correspondency. But on the other side, that as we are the strongest in
Situation by being an Island, the Dominion of the Sea supposed to be with us:
so that being lost to us, in any other Hands, or divided amongst others, we are
of all the most and worst exposed.

This being granted, it follows, that whatever Circumstances of ours admit
other Nations, Foreigners, whatsoever to grow, (though at the same time we were
granted to grow too) so, as in Proportion, above us in Navigation and Trade;
this necessarily subjects us to all the Miseries before pointed at, and is the
direct way leading to a Consequence that is no ways to be evaded: for when that
Work is done, and the Advantage once given up; what ever Party do (as they
think) their Work; it is altogether vain to imagine that any such Party, or any
Party whatsoever prevailing in this Nation, or all of them united in one, can
call it back, or by any Means, Arts of State, Treaties or Engagements
whatsoever, to be able to turn off that inevitable Evil that must light on All
at once. And if this be the Consequence of all the Actings of every one of
these Parties at present; if in the seeking of their own Ends they are likely
not so much to prevail either of them over another, as to reduce us into this
State, this irrecoverable Consumption and Debility, with all the Consequences
proved; then will it be found that in the Methods now taken they act constantly
against, but for no Interest that can be called their own.

All Men naturally follow their Good: and it might be well objected that it
were only a Notion, and in effect impossible, that Men should act thus, as I
say, were it not through Ignorance; such as is indeed in our Case, the Want of
a sufficient Conception and real Sense at Heart, of what is the sole Safeguard
and Support of our Country; the want of truly considering how Matters stand, as
to that, and how amidst all, that is likely to be affected, which must (as I
have said) affect us, at last, above every thing else. And such a Blindness as
this it is that Men are kept in by their Passions, by the Heat of Party, and
the Animosity of personal Quarrels, or so that by the Resentment of some
present Uneasinesses, Men are hindered from thinking on greater Evils at some
Distance off, and not yet absolutely felt, though just impending.

Now to charge every Party singly, according to what I have said, and the
Imputation of Inconsistency that I lay on them; I instance first in those, as
to the Generality, who carry on King James's Interest in their Endeavors, and
make his Party.

First, then suppose that 'twere a Service to his Interest to have us weak at
Sea, sunk in our Trade, in Loss of Seamen, Ships, Builders, and all Materials
and Arts-men belonging; what would it avail to his Friends, (if Englishmen,
and to no others do I speak) to have him here fixed in his Government, nay
fixed even with every one's Consent here at home; if suddenly we found our
selves thus low? How should we e're regain this Loss? how e're come up again
with other Nations? Will they stand idle; see us take Breath, and let us rise;
or will they stay for us, and stop so long as till we grow again into our Place
above them? If not; how shall we avoid the Consequences above set down, and
taken (I suppose) for granted; viz. that if we lose the Practice of the Sea, we
are then revolved again into our old State, mere Naked Britains; his that can
take us; and (according to the natural and constant Practice of the Sea, we are
then revolved again into our old State, mere Naked Britains; his that can take
us; and (according to the natural and constant Practice of Mankind) by their
Station about us, and their then readier Access to us than any other Place, by
lying so fair, and so on all sides open; the assured common Prize that every
Nation fights for, when aiming above others, or when but in the slightest
Quarrel?

When once the Stroke is given that brings on this Condition; when once our
Naval Sinews are cut; How is it that King James shall be fixed here? How is it
that either His or any Government shall be said to be fixed here with us; when
we our selves, as a People, should then belong to others, or lie at Power to
belong to them: which, as Mankind and States are constituted, is not far
different; since Power to take, and taking, are in those Cases never far
asunder: and since Parties are now easily made within a Nation considerable
enough to serve a turn, and for any Invaders to ground upon: and that all
Invasions, though as perfectly so, as those of Goths or Vandales, can be
colored, now, with Reasons of Religion and Justice, and as though even for the
very Benefit of the invaded People? For no Countries hardly now are ever
conquered but by a Force (as Manifesto's and Declarations set forth) intended
for their Relief and just Establishment: And the Name of Conquest, that comes
to be established after full Success, is found to have been preceded by, and
owe its Production to the very Names, however dissonant, of Assistance or
Deliverance.

In short; if once we are exhausted in a War, so as that our Navigating Art and
all the means of it be shared amongst Foreigners, and the Current of our Trade
drawn into other Channels; which by no Art can be retrieved, nor any Change of
Fortune; but by a turn that may give us the Advantage that we gave, and when
all else are fighting, give us Peace; an Accident the hardliest to imagined;
since, when once weak, we are above all others the surest to feel every
Dispute, and often like to be the chiefest Subject. If this come ever to be our
Condition, as it is endeavored to be now made; let any Nation whatsoever give
us, or return us a King; if this be the Terms of such a Gift, (whatever other
Terms be made); if this be that that is to bring it about; any Englishman will
have but a sorry Bargain, and such a King will be of little worth to us, or we
to him. Grant that the Nation we receive him from be not, in the end, upon the
account of the Lowness we shall be reduced to, left Masters at Sea of all the
World; and grant that they were not near so by Land either; Yet of what benefit
will this be to us? If any Benefit, it will be this; That that Way 'twill not
be determined whose we shall be; the other Way it will: the one Way we are a
Province, and must serve immediately; the other Way we remain to be fought for,
and the Dispute must be in our own Land, perhaps by more than two at once.

If this be right, then not only they who serve this Court in the Present Way,
serve England ill, but they too who serve King James in such a way as is sure
to sink us; set any other Neighbors over us in Navigation, and do our work as
to that business: They, in effect, I say, do nothing for themselves as English
Men, nothing for King James as an English King.

But then that these Sort are doubly mistaken, appears by this: For that it is
not the likeliest way to introduce King James (unless for England to be
absolutely conquered by another Nation, be the easiest way; and such a Throne,
so gained to him, be thought most valuable, and most a Throne.) Because that
if, by the Nation's Choice, he would come in, it can be only when they find an
Evil in this Government greater than they felt in that they changed from; or
that they think they would feel by his return; and then only, when the dread of
that Power, that now supports him, hangs less upon them, and that they can be
freed from their Jealousy of the King of France's governing by King James. Now,
whilst we are losing every day at Sea; whilst the King of France's Fleets, and
Privateers grow, and the Terror of this spreads; there can be nothing left to
give a more absolute Horror of King James than this; and when an Invasion
comes, to drive the body of the People from an Easiness and Vnconcernedness,
(which otherwise they would be in toward any such Revolution carrying on) into
a very Desperation; which will produce the uttermost Resistance, when it may be
expected they should be forced to yield.

The Hint that I have given may show, I think, how much the Common Jacobites
are besides their Interest, and how well they know to wish as well for their
King's particular Interest, as for the general Interest of their Country; and
what Mighty Service they do King James, and Dis-service to King William, by
their common way of Talking about the Force of France at Sea, and their
Endeavors to give still greater Grounds for such Terror.

But to come now to the Behavior of the other two Parties that are shut up
within that of K. William's.

Every Body knows there are two Sorts of Men; in each of which, there are such
as are engaged to K. William's Interest, as absolutely and without reserve, as
he has required of them, or can require of them, in any prostitute Sense: and
yet these Two are perpetually opposing one another, and make two Sides, which
are commonly distinguished by the Names of Whig and Tory. According to the too
good Success that the Courtier has had; we see that, notwithstanding any
Interest that the Patriots (as many as there are) can make; and notwithstanding
that Odium which so many of the Court-Followers have incurred, yet there is
still this Fatality, that Those continue the mainly prevalent in each; those
move the Herd of both these Parties; those have, in effect the sway, that are
with all that Latitude I have said, engaged in the Interest of this Court: For
whoever calls this Court in question; whoever doubts its good Intention to
English Men, to English Liberties and Government; whoever quotes past
Declarations, or instances a present Grievance; nay, or that in Discourse is
but lukewarm toward the State; a Way is found (and it seldom fails) to make
that Man ill thought of by the Herd, suspected by the Vulgar of his Party, and
shunned as a Deserter: For with one Party he is insur'd a Commonwealth's Man,
and with the other, a Plain Jacobite. For what else should he be, that acts
against this Government? Thus with one short Question, and that equivocal Term
of Government, as it is put there, the Courtier does his business.

This shows what is understood here by Whig and Tory, meaningly as the Court is
prevalent over both those Parties. And as thus, let us consider how they act:
whether as likely to obtain their common End in the support of this Government,
in the manner it is suffered to be carried on by them; or whether, when that is
done, as likely to obtain either of them their separate End, (in prospect of
which they so assist, and court this Government) and as likely to carry their
expected Advantage over their opposite Party.

The Tories have it for their End to see the Church established in as high
Power as ever; to see it freed from the Eyesore of Dissenters and Fanatics:
to remove the ill Precedent of Scotland: to set up Episcopacy in such strength
as is required by the Clergymen themselves, to put them out of fear of every
thing; and to have a King governing with as large a Prerogative as may be; but
still by the Means, and under the Tuition of such a Church. The Whigs dread
such a Power in the Church, and are so disatisfied with what it has of that
kind already, fearing what may come, that they expect a greater Security than
is given them at present, that those who are Dissenters from, or under the Mark
of the Church for being ill Friends to it, may never see It in a condition to
take its Revenge, or give them any Disturbance. These Men exclaim generally
against all Arbitrary Bower, but more especially That which the Church would
introduce, and that their Enemies would most profit by.

Neither of these two Parties, toward the Satisfaction they desire, go now
about the making of any new Laws, or attempt any Alteration in the Present
Settlement: But their Labor is, the gaining of the King, and the getting those
of their Fraternity (whatever otherwise they be) into the Government. This is
the only Means by which they, at this time, think to serve their Interest. This
is the only Pledge they now ask for the Success of their respective Parties;
Each promising to themselves that within a little, or whenever his Majesty has
made an end of his Enemies, He will declare for them, and for the future employ
only the Men of their Stamp. Now, though all this while, according to the
Methods kept up between these two Parties, the Government were like to stand,
yet it is ridiculous and foolish what either of these Men expect.

We may, I think, be satisfied that (whatever we may expect from any other)
this Court is not likely to be at a stand, and rest contented with the allotted
Revenue and Prerogative; much less to agree to a Diminution of either; though
there be a considerable Party in England that think, and will still think,
(which will cost the Court some Opposition) that the Prerogative is at a height
in some Points very prejudicial to England, and likely to overturn the Ancient
Government of it, one time or other; especially, since the Nobility is now so
sunk from what it formerly ever was. It must therefore be supposed, that when
this general Victory is obtained, and King William is established, either he
will be immediately Absolute, and have it in his Power to act as he fancies, or
he will be as he now is, under the Restraint of Laws, and Parliaments to be
struggled with. If it be the First; What is it that will move his Fancy toward
the Churchmen, when under no Obligation, to reverse all the Scotish-Affairs;
act contrary to the Principle of Holland, and all his Protestant Calvinist
Acquaintance and Relations abroad, and exasperate so great a Body as the
Dissenters and Whigs here? The Churchmen must be wonderfully conceited, and
have a strange good Opinion of themselves, or a very wrong one of the King's
Principle and Conscience, to think He would be thus serviceable to them out of
Affection merely. On the other side; If the Court be not (by being fully
Absolute) freed from these Restraints, but be to work its way through, and that
the Prerogative be in a craving State, and wants to gain upon the People, What
can more satisfy it than the present Construction of Whig and Tory in
Parliament? Is there any thing that the Court cannot carry? Whereas, if one
Party were declared for, it would not be so. As to the Whigs, the thing is the
same. This Balance that the Court has got is too useful, and shall never be
departed from, (so as that the Whigs shall be a jot more advanced) whilst the
Court must use a Parliament: and if that time once come to be over, though it
is not to be thought that the Court will ever act for the zealous Churchmen
according to their Expectations, as above mentioned; yet on the other side, to
think that then any thing will be done more for the Whigs, for the Advancement
of their Persons, or in favor of their Principles, is what the least of all
can be imagined, and is the most absurd.

Thus, as a Party, not either of them are likely to obtain their Ends: but
their Contention to be still improved against themselves, and they made
Accessaries in their own private Loss; as subject to all the Inconveniences of
such a constant Feud, without prevailing any thing by it: And, as Englishmen,
instead of profiting themselves, they are only like to be made Accessaries also
in the general Public Loss, which we shall suffer as a free People, by losing
all our Privileges; and as a People, by falling, at length, under Foreign
Subjection, and all the Miseries that make even that State worse to us than
other Countries.

But to know this last; Why this Government cannot stand upon its present Basis
(which it is so unlikely to change;) nor the Methods succeeds that the Parties
take to support us by this Court against our Enemies; why even this is truly
impracticable; so as that they will prove in the very utmost disappointed: We
must consider what it is that the Court Does, and intends to do; and what means
the Parties approve, or admit of, in the Court, to carry on this War, in order
to subdue the Enemy, obtain the Peace required, and settle Europe, so as that
we, with the other States of Europe, may not fear one common Enemy; nor we,
singly here, an Enemy either secret or open, that may undermine or ruin us
alone.

The purpose of this Government, the Conditions on which it rose, and the Ends
for which it was erected, are known to be; For the rescuing us from a Power in
the Crown, advanced by evil Ministers and corrupt Judges, to be Superior to all
our Laws; To secure us from such an Insatiableness of Prerogative as would
swallow Liberty and Property, and take away the Privileges of the Subject; To
free us even from such a Disposition of a Court as could not but tend to this
Effect, and from such a Ministry as nothing else could be expected under, at
any time: And lastly, To remove that under which all Laws and Constitutions can
make but a ridiculous Safety for us; to remove, I say, a standing Army. This
being so; I say it is impossible to think how this Government can stand, if
these Ends are not answered; except it fix it self here by absolute Conquest;
which cannot be but with a Foreign Help: and that reduces the thing to this;
That we must be a Province to that Prince or State that is in the greatest
Power abroad; however we may please our selves with calling this our own
Government, or our King that then shall govern us.

I say, though this Government could free it self from the Enemy it is now
engaged with; yet, not answering its Ends, as abovementioned; but directly on
the contrary, pursuing those others it was set up in opposition to, and so (as
I may call it) subverting its own Foundation, it cannot stand: For if the
Foreign Force and Power of a dreaded Neighbor be no longer on foot, so as to
fright Men (as at present) into the support of this Government at any rate or
prospect; nor that a Foreign Force, in the hands of these Governors, overpower
and conquer us; It Is not to be thought, that the Spirit and Principle that
brought in this Government, through all the Impediments of a then so heightened
Prerogative, and of Passive-Obedience Principles, that are so much levelled
since that time; It Is scarce to be imagined, I say, that that Spirit of
Impatience against a Government, setting up the enslaving Attempts and
Ministers, should be so sunk, against that comes, (when it has had, all this
while, such Means of growing) as that it could not make its way toward a new
Change, and act another Revolution; when the same Need, with an additional
Resentment and Shame for having been abused, together with a readier Means, and
the Way so much facilitated by the foregoing Precedent, invites them to it. Or,
if by themselves the Party for Liberty and the Discontented would not be able;
yet whilst there was any of the excluded Branch remaining, they would by that
means make an Effort which would perpetually shake, if not quickly overturn,
this Government.

But that we may prove, how that but to get through their present Enemies, and
reduce the Power of France, is a Work but vainly expected from this Government
in the Posture that Affairs are in; let us consider how this War is managed;
How our Administration stands in respect of it; and whether, at our rate, we
can so much as continue a defensive War.

Let us compute what are the Expenses of the Nation in this War: What are the
Losses and Charges we suffer by it; and what are the Reparations we make our
selves, by the Prejudice drawn from thence to the Enemy.

Our Losses are, the exhausting of the Wealth, the Stock of the Nation, in the
vast Sums drawn out from thence, for the Use of Foreign Countries, and the
numerous Troops paid in those Countries: And at the same time that our
Sustinence goes out, it is hindered from coming in to us; We losing every day in
Trade; the Profit of that still cut from us; and that of it which remains
amongst us, turning, in a manner, against us; it being the Importation of
Foreign Commodities that now chiefly drives it; and our own Part begun to be
managed by Foreigners: by which means, we abandon to others what we are every
day losing in the Navigating Practice, and the breed of Sailors and other
Arts-Men belonging, that should be raising amongst us here. And this must needs
be so, since the French, to all Effects, in prejudice of us, remain, in
reality, the Masters of the Sea, notwithstanding that Advantage which another
Providence than that of Men, gave us over them: A Providence which turned that
into a Victory on our side; which (according to the surest Consequences of
Humane Affairs, by the whole Disposition of Matters, and the Grounds, and Form
of that Enterprise on foot) should have proved the Interception and Ruin of a
great part of our Fleet, and the Execution of a Descent which then surely would
have made it self been felt. Now, if with such an Assistance of Fortune, so far
from being ever to be hoped again, we are not able to maintain the Sea for
English Ships to stir without being taken; that French Squadrons still,
Mounsieur Du-Bart, and all the other numerous Privateers, with Vessels some of
50 Guns and upwards, lie in our Channel, from off Ireland, and round our Coast,
do what they please, take us whole Fleets of Merchantmen together, supply
their King largely with what they take of ours, make Fortunes for themselves
considerable, and enrich the Seaport Towns of their Country, that flourish
now, and grow prodigiously with our Spoils; If this, by our Management, be now
so, and not prevented; If it be thus now, this very Season, after what has
happened for us, How will it be henceforward? How are we like to put a stop to
this? And if we do not put a stop to what already is of this kind, (though it
should grow no more upon us) where must we be within a little?

Here then we see our Losses, and where our Wasting is. And as to what
Reparations it may be expected we should make our selves; we are so far from
aiming at the Ruin of our Enemy, or the offending of him in this way, that we
are not so much as in any prospect of being in a Condition of preventing that
Ruin which comes in upon our selves this Way; though it be properly our chief
and only Ruin that comes thus.

If this Way, then, we do no good; How, in what manner is it, that, in bearing
all this, and by what we pay so deeply for, we are to make even with our Enemy,
and more than so? How is he to be made come off at length the greatest
Sufferer, in order to oblige him to yield? Where, if not here, are we to make
the Impression upon him that must give him the worst in the War?

There are none except those who dream of a Descent; (which though but for the
same Reasons that made it last Year unsuccessful, cannot be expected but to
prove so this next, and is likely to prove more fatal to us, if so;) there are
none, I say, except those that under such Councils, such Ministers entrusted,
and such an Administration as ours, do flatter themselves that a Descent shall
be able to be made and be supported, so as to turn to the Enemy's Ruin and not
our own; there are none besides this sort of Men, that go about confidently to
give any Hopes of Matters to be done by making an Impression any where on
France with our Land-Armies. Which notwithstanding, let us examine, since it is
what we rely on. For being not in a way so much as to preserve our selves at
Sea; much less are we in the Design of ruining our Enemy that way, destroying
his Trade, and cutting off his Supply of Riches by which he bears up in the
War: although indeed, those very Riches come only into him by his Shipping, and
the Exportations that way of his Country's Products: the Money that he gets for
them in a Land-Trade, with any Country joining to him, being in comparison very
inconsiderable, and much over-ballanc'd by the Charge he is at, in those
Countries, for many Necessities of his own, (especially in War;) and by the
vast Sums of Money continually distributed there in Pensions; as by considering
only Switzerland, will plainly appear. But we, I say, do not apply our selves
this way toward the Reduction of France. To ruin him in his West India Trade,
and cut him off his Seamen; To shut up his Commerce Northwards, through our
own Seas; To spoil him (as might be) some of his chief Harbors and Seaport
Towns; destroy the rest of his Ships of Force, and ruin his Trading even in
the Mediterranean: This is what we either think not of at all, or think is
insignificant, or not so noble (nor so saving, or of dispatch, it may be) as
the Campaining Method at Land: Or as being less suitable to the Genius of our
Prince, so also less suitable to that of our Nation: Which, besides, will be
raised to high Esteem and Power, and have its Liberties best guarded by the
Establishment of a Noble Army of its own, thus trained up; by that time they,
joined with the Foreigners, Dependents on our King, have made us victorious
over the Enemy, and brought on for us our so wished for Peace, which then their
Interest will endure.

The Sea therefore we leave as it is; and our Work being not to be done, or not
convenient to our Present Court it should be done, that way; our Dependence is
upon another. Now to know how this Other is like to succeed with us; let us
consider in what Places of France it is that we may expect to make the
Impression at Land.

The Hopes of Savoy are over. The ill Success which that Attempt had at a time
so advantageous, leaves indeed little to hope for any future time, after that
this Baffle has given the French so great Security, cut off our Expectation
from an Assistance of Protestants there, and given the occasion to the French
to put themselves in another posture on that side, strengthen their Frontier,
and secure those Passages: and to do, at least, so much for themselves there;
although it were not likely that they should be found to carry in a War this
Summer into Piedmont, that shall oblige that Prince to make his Terms.

It is not on the Rhine surely, that we expect our Enemy should be Sufferer;
when, instead of being put to use the Strength he has provided for his Defense
there, he can every Year raise Contributions on that side sufficient to
maintain the Armies he imploys there; and take, with Countries, whole Regiments
at a time; so as the Duke of Wirtemberg and his Troops, were taken, lately,
without so much as fighting, and about 3000 of the best German Horse taken.

We do not expect, I suppose, that an Army from Spain will enter France, or
that that Nation is in a Condition to make an offensive War against France. So
that the stress of all lies now in Flanders. And do we expect to see ever any
better Armies there, more numerous, more united, or more animated than they
have been these last Campaigns? The Confederacy may soon be lesser; But what
can make it greater?

Are we to find any other Generals of that Confederacy than what we have? Or
will these come to be abler, and out-grow the French ones at length by
Experience? If it be an Absurdity to think thus; is it not a great one to think
we shall have other Success than what we have had? And what has that been? At
Flerus we receive a Rout, where we lose a good Part of an Army. Another Year,
if we are not beat in the Campaign time, we are charged in the Rear, and a Mark
given us at going off. Mons is taken one Year, and Namur the next; (with what
Attendance is notorious.) So that if our strongest Towns, we see, go off before
our strongest Armies; what are we to expect will be the Fate of the other Towns
that are as yet remaining with us, and are the last that keep the Barrier? They
too, if not immediately, must in a Campaign or two more, go the same way of
course: though at the closing of our Campaigns (which cannot keep us up but a
defensive War) we endeavor to take a kind of Revenge by attacquing the French
with as much Advantage and Success as we did now lately at Steinkirk. But can
we think, notwithstanding this, that by recruiting our wasted Troops, and by
raising other n^w ones, proportionable to what France raises, we shall prevent
all this; and not only so, but after having retaken Namur and Mons, with what
else we have lost, be able to pierce into France through treble Ranks of
Garrisons, by taking of them one by one, or all at once, or leaving 'em behind,
and marching through 'em? Surely Men of thought will stick at this.

But notwithstanding all this; The Engagers with the Court, carrying a Majority
in this Parliament with 'em, are giving the Government this ineffectual
Assistance, and are drawing from us vast Sums to supply Confederate Armies, and
Armies of our own abroad: As if this were really to do us good, would avail any
thing, and were our proper Method of securing our selves; Whilst our
Sea-Practice ( whence should be drawn the French's Ruin, but whence our own is
now) lies in the shamefullest Condition that can be. What signifies it, that we
have a number of huge Ships to sail about together a Month or two in the
Summer; if still the French keep all they have in the West Indies, and the
Means that they have there (if not taken from 'em) of breeding Seamen, above
all the World besides; if here, in our Seas, they breed vast Numbers, and set
out numerous and mighty Ships out of the spoil of us and our Ships? If Trading
be not safe for us; our Seas being to us shut up, and Sweeds, Danes, Portugees,
and other Nations to whom the Sea is free, growing into Trade, and carrying all
Supplies (which thus we cannot hinder) into France.

It Is plain, that if we cannot after this, we certainly must sink. It Is against
this, that we should turn all our Power, our Riches; which would not then be
doubly lost in being given amongst Foreigners, from England, never to return
thither; and being given besides, in vain. It Is toward this we should turn all
our Care and Counsels; and therefore, if the good Genius of England has not
Power enough, by Patriots within it, to alter this Administration, all is in
vain, and we must fall.

That, in this respect, we do now every thing so improperly, every thing so
wastfully that we pretend to do; and that there is so little a Part aimed at or
intended, of what might farther be done by us than is attempted under the
present Management; there is indeed no wonder. When of all Parts of our
Government, there is not any more loose, more inconsistent, more corrupt, than
that Part which regards our Sea-Affair. We have no Council, no Committee for
Trade established, nothing of any Office instituted, or Officers properly
qualified and empowered to inspect our Trade, to report the Condition of it,
and propose the Regulations necessary, to our Parliament; insomuch, that that
Assembly is forced, upon Occasions, to have recourse to the Merchants
themselves, to be instructed, and are often at a loss, and (as in the
East India Business) in a likelihood of ruining Trade, by having their only
Information in those nice Matters from such as are surely interested one way or
there. Our Offices of Admiralty and the like, are disposed of in Gifts to Men of
Intrigue: and (as the World has now sufficiently remarked) he that by his Skill
can work a Party, delay or bring on a Business in the Parliament, and has the
House-Craft, is recommended to the steering of a Fleet, and the ordering of our
Naval Force. All is of a piece; and throughout all the Places, any ways
relating to this great Trust, down to the very inferior Officers, in single
Ships, Bribery and Cabal does every thing.

If this go on, as has been shown, England sinks, whoever rises; We are exposed
to the last Misery, and a Foundation, at this rate, is laying for such a State
as was before represented. And now, at this present time, if the House of
Commons carry not what they have begun upon the Admiralty, to a real thorough
Reformation in all those Affairs, however the others are suffered to lie; if
our Force at Sea, and the natural Strength that way, which we have yet left
amongst us, be not by their ordering otherwise exerted; other-guess
Encouragements set up for Seamen; the Sea Souldiering, the very Vocation it
self, by a better Usage of those that follow it, made more advantageous than as
it now stands, that it may draw in more than any other, and not be, as it is,
the most justly declinable, and ready to be abandoned by those that are already
in; if there be not an other-guess rewarding of those that serve well; the
proper Methods set up to clear us of the French-Cruisers, and their Privateers;
fit Ships, with right Regulation, applied to that Work; The Dealing with them
not left (so as it now is) as an ungrateful Work only, but the Reducing of them
made (by Rewards fitted to such Service, as well for Privateers and Adventurers
of our own, as for the Ships of the Public) an Employment most advantageous,
and which may be heartily undertaken by those that so expose themselves; In
short, whatever ill Performance, Unskilfulness and Corruption be suffered in
any other Part of our Government; However Matters may go in Westminster Hall;
however the Chancery be filled, or any Offices in the Nation that are to do
Right amongst Particulars of that Body; however any other Part of the Ministry
stand, according to whatsoever Party; If our Parliament do not now right our
Country in this Concern; do not redress and assure this part of our
Administration, in Hands they can entrust, and shall have Power over to make
Faithful; and by their own Management (for it will be by no other) save thus
what we are losing not only to the French, but to all other Foreigners that use
the Sea; If they do not thus much, and suddenly set us in another Course to
regain what is past, and do our utmost here; However great these Armies and
Confederacies sound, that fill so many Heads at present; whatever Pomp and
Grandeur in this Government hinders them from dreaming any Insecurity in it; I
fear they will not long be Possessors of the Power that accompanies them now in
their Seats at Westminster, nor be the Masters long of those Estates that give
them now the Places they have there. Their giving Millions so liberally, will
but hasten the Business: though many give their Concurrence to this most
unprovident way of giving, and to the Methods proportionable, of raising what
is thus given: not as unsensible of Mismanagement; but out of mere Fear of
being overrun. But it is ordinary to see Men in their Fears run more directly
upon their Ruin; when terrified they strive most earnestly to avoid it. Yet if
they would act rationally, according to what they fear, why is not the Fleet
first secured? why is not that Money first found out, secured on the best
Funds, and well appropriated, that the Money really given to that may not least
serve that purpose; that it may not run a common risk with the other Money
expected to be raised; nor the necessary Charge of our Navy run the same Danger
of being unsupplied, as any of those exorbitant and unnecessary Charges we are
to be at besides? What if there be found Stops and Difficulties; if the Money
fails for these latter Expenses, must it fail too for our Great and perhaps
only necessary Expense, that of our Ships and Seamen?

Whatever be, this must be looked to. And (to join all to what I have shown
before) he that is an Englishman in any Party, and forgets this, knows not
that he is drawing-on his own and Countries Ruin, in the Prospect of
establishing his Country by means of that Party, or together with that Party's
Interest which he follows: for though a Peace should be concluded at last,
according to the Scope of K. James's Party, by which that King should be made
to be acknowledged; or though the Adherents to K. William that are supporting
him his Way, should see him prevailing with his Landforces, and France reduced
to such a Peace as should cause the Acknowledgment of King William here; yet at
the end of all this, if by that time, the Work that is now doing apace be
brought to its effect, and we left Inferiors at Sea, cheated and beaten out of
our Trade, and perished in our Naval Power, with nothing but a Power at Land to
defend us: All the Advantage that the Party of English Men then prevailing will
obtain, besides their Triumph, or their Revenge over their Adversaries, will be
to hold a Government under the Force of a Foreigner, and which can be held no
otherwise; and to give us ever after for a Government, that which shall be
enforced by the Nation, or Prince left with the strongest Force abroad,
together with the Honor of being thenceforward constantly the Test of Power
and Precedence to the contending States of Europe, by falling always to their
Lot who can force others hence, and place themselves.

Now if there be any Englishman in these Parties, that will thoroughly think;
I appeal to him, if what we do all-together in Parliament, or what each Party
drives at singly, is like to bring any Happiness to one, whose Country is
England. If the removing one Ministry for another; the getting Men, or keeping
Men in place for only Party-Merits: The driving in the common Manner, for the
Interest of this Court or that; for the Court now undermost, by endeavoring to
embroil our Sea-Affairs, bring us Loss of Trade and Ruin of Shipping, that by
such Misery the People may (as those think) be induced to abandon this
Government: And for the Interest of the Present Court; by complying with any
sort of Methods it takes, however censured at other times; by advancing
Prerogative at a time which is the only Ever to be hoped for to bring it down
from its Encroachments, and to confirm the Rights of the People, which are
hardly supportable under the Weight yet left in some Fundamental Points: By
gaining Acts for multiplying of Treasons, instead of securing us from the Power
that the Crown now has of making Treason too easily out of anything: By the
justifying any Commitments as well as Trials; the setting on foot (to a
vexatious End, and no other) needless severe Oaths, so extensive and generally
to be enforced, for the Punishment only of Men's Consciences, or the taking away
of all Conscience, so as to lose the Benefit of all Oaths in any Case; a Thing
so destructive to all Government, and (to our great Misery) begun already to be
felt amongst us, and increasing daily by the Commonness that Oaths are exposed
to, in serving every Turn. In fine, By the giving away all our Wealth to the
Managers of the Court in prodigious Sums; such as, if possible, would suffice
their Greediness, and surmount their Lavishment; whilst still the Matters of
our Ocean (that Ocean that should be ours) stand (...)


