IMPRIMATUR,

Rob. Grove R. P. Dno Episc. Land. a Sac Dom.
A Plain Discourse UPON UPRIGHTNESS.

SHOWING THE Properties and Privileges OF AN Upright Man.

By Richard Steel, M. A. and Minister of the Gospel.

John 1. 47. Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and says of him. Behold an
Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile. The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for E. Calvert, and are to be sold by John Williamson, at the
Sun and Bible in the New Buildings on London Bridge. 1672.

The Epistle to the READER.
Friendly Reader,

THis small Book hopes for thy Acceptance, merely for its Honesty and
Plainness, which I have chiefly studied all along; a plain discourse being
fittest upon plainness of Heart. I am not ignorant of the various and excellent
Tractates upon this Subject; unto which Matter and Variation of Method is super
added, which I hope you will find in this piece in hand.

Moreover there are such swarms of litigious Books of Controversies, which
scorch up all true Love and Zeal, and greatly grieve such as love Peace, that
may perhaps make such Discourses as this concerning the Vitals of genuine
Piety, to be very necessary. For certainly if our ends were Right, and our
Hearts Upright with our God; if Christian Magistrates, Ministers, and People
were plainly and truly bent to promote the Honor, Love and Fear of God, and
the indubitable ways of Holiness, we should soon agree, or else charitably
indulge one another in these lesser things; It Is Hypocrites on all sides that
make our wound incurable. Surely where the Mind is sound, and the Heart sincere
in the Main, grains of allowance should be granted for some Errors of the
understanding and Failings in the Conversation; lest we deal with others, as we
would be loath to be dealt with, either by God or Men. The Consideration
hereof, as also of the scarcity of sincere Christians, to the plenty of
Hypocrites in the world, may make some Tolerable Apology for this small Tract;
which I do most earnestly recommend, first to the blessing of the Lord, and
then to your diligent perusal. Read and think, and read and pray, and then
through his Grace it shall be useful to you. And I beseech you for the Lord
Jesus sake, and for the love of the Spirit, strive together with me, in your
prayers to God for me a miserable sinner, that I may be Upright and Useful till
I dye, whereby you will abundantly recompense these Endeavors of

Your Servant in the Gospel R. S.

October. 1. 1670.

The Contents.
CHAP. I.
OF the Uprightness of Man. Sect. 1. The Context. Page 1. Sect. 2. The Text
opened. 4 Sect. 3. Doctrine. Where God does find an upright man, he shows
himself an upright God. 8 Sect. 4. What is uprightness. 9 Its Scripture Names.
1. Truth. ibid. 2. Sincerity. 10 3. Singleness of heart. 11 4. Integrity. 12


Sect. 5. Uprightness distinguished into 1. Uprightness of heart, where 14 1.
The Ground of it. 15 1. Total receiving of Christ. ibid. 2. Total resigning to
Christ. 17


Sect. 6. 2. The Nature of it. 20 1. Single without Division. ibid. 2. Sound
without Rottenn^. 21 3. Pure without Mixture. 23 4 Perfect without Reservation
25 5. Plainness without Guile. 26

Sect. 7. 3. The Object about which it is conversant. 28 1. Inward Religion.
ibid. 1. Obtaining invisible Graces. 29 2. Performing invisible Duties. 31 3.
Avoiding invisible Sins. 32

Sect. 8. 2. Universal Religion. 33 1. Hating all Sin. 34 2. Loving all Duty. 35

Sect. 9. 3. Constant Religion. He walks 39 1. Before God. 43 2. With God. 44
3. After God. ibid. 4. Like God. 45

Sect. 10. An Inference, viz. The necessity of Regeneration. 46 Sect. 11. II.
Uprightness of Life, where 1. Necessity of it. 49

Sect. 12. 2. Description of it. 1. In Simplicity. 52 2. In Purity. 53 3. In
Perfection. 55 4. In Plainness. 56

Sect. 13. 3. The Object of it. 1. In words, being Opposite 58 1. To
Flattering. 59 2. To Lying. 60 3. To Equivocations. 61 4. To Promise-breaking.
63


Sect. 14. 2. In Deeds, being Opposite 65 1. To Craftiness. 67 2. To
Time-serving. 68 3. To Defrauding. 70 4. To All injustice. 72

Sect. 15. An Inference, viz. the Paucity of Upright men. 75
CHAP. II.
OF the Uprightness of God. 78 Sect. 1. God shows himself upright. 1. Why. Its
agreeable to his 1. Nature. ibid. 2. Method. ibid. 3. Honor. 79 4. Promise.
ibid.

2. How. 1. Overlooking their Infirmities. 80

Sect. 2. 2. Defending their Persons. 84 Sect. 3. 3. Strengthening their Graces.
89 Sect. 4. 4. Hearing their Prayers. 93 Sect. 5. 5. Comforting them in their
straits. 98 Sect. 6. 6. Directing them in their doubts. 103 Sect. 7. 7.
Clearing their Integrity. 106 Sect. 8. 8. Stablishing them to the end. 110
Sect. 9. 9. Bestowing outward Blessings. 114 Sect. 10. 10. Crowning their
Integrity, 1. With Internal Peace. 118 2. With Eternal Glory. 120


CHAP. III.
THe Application. 123 Sect. 1. Use (...). Information. 1. The Equity of God.
ibid. 2. The Misery of Hypocrites. 124
Hypocrites Pleas answered. 1. General Approbation. 127 2. Singular Obedience.
128 3. Quiet of Conscience. 129


Sect. 2. Use 2. Repr. 1. Those that Distrust an upright God. 2. Those that
Distaste an upright man. 133 Sect. 3. Use 3. Exam. 1. The necessity of Trial.
137 Sect. 4. 2. The marks for Trial. An upright man, 1. Really approves himself
to God. 141 2. Chiefly Loves God. 143 3. Willingly Obeys God. 145 4.
Judiciously Appeals to God. 146 5. Trades not in presumptuous sins. 148 6.
Keeps himself from his Iniquity. 150


Sect. 5. Use 4. Exhortation. 1. To the upright, 1. Praise the Lord. 152 2.
Proceed in your Integrity. 153


Sect. 6. 2. To such as doubt of their Uprightness. 1. Sit not down quiet in
this uncertainty. 155 2. Set about the means of assurance. 156

Sect. 7. 3. To those that want uprightness. Labor for it. 1. Motives. 1. Its
Amiable. 158 2. It^ Comfortable. 159 3. Its Necessary. 160 1. To good Duties
here. ibid. 2. To Salvation hereafter. ibid.


Sect. 8. 2. Means. 1. Study Humility. 161 2. Be faithful in Self-examination.
162 3. Get an hatred to Hypocrisy, and a love to Uprightness. 163 4. Attend a
scarching Ministry. 164 5. Be instant in Prayer. 166

Sect. 9. Use 5. Consol. of the upright. Their doubts resolved. 1. From
Allegations of Satan. 168 2. From the Censures of men. 169 3. From the Cry of
Conscience. 170 4. From sad Experience. 171 1. Of Dryness in secret Duties.
ibid 2. Of Decays. 172 3. Of Inconstancy. 173
5. From the deceitfulness of the Heart. 175


A Plain Discourse UPON UPRIGHTNESS.
Psalm. 18. 25. -- With an Upright Man thou will show thy self Upright.
CHAPTER I. Of the Uprightness of Man.
SECTION I.
HE that would be Wise, let him read the Proverbs; he that Sect. 1. The context
and coherence.
would be Holy, let him read the Psalms. Every line in this Book breaths
peculiar Sanctity.

This Psalm, though placed among the ^rst, was penned among the last, (as the
^reface assures us) and is left as the Epi^me of the General history of David's
life. It is twice recorded in the Scripture, (2 Samuel 22. and in this Book of
Psalms) for the Excellency and Sweetness thereof; surely that we should take
double notice of it.

Holy David, being near the shore, here looks on his former Dangers and
Deliverances with a thankful heart, and writes this Psalm to bless the Lord: As
if each of you that are grown into years, should review your lives, and observe
the wonderful Goodness and Providence of God, toward you; and then sit down,
and write a modest Memorial of his most remarkable mercies, for the comfort of
your selves and your posterity. An excellent practice: What a comfort would it
be for you to read how good your God was to your Father, or Grandfather, that
are dead and gone? So would your children rejoice in the Lord, upon the reading
of his Goodness to you, and you cannot have a better pattern for this, than
holy David who wrote this Psalm, when he was threescore and seven years old:
when he had outlived most of his troubles, and almost ready for his journey to
his Father in heaven, he resolves to leave this good Report of him upon Earth.

And I pray mark how he begins; he set^ not up Trophies to himself, but
Triumphs in his God. I will love thee, O Lord my strength. As the love Of God
is the beginning of all our mercies, so love To God should be the end and
effect of them all. As the stream leads us to the spring, so all the gifts of
God must lead us to the giver of them. Lord, thou have saved me from sickness,
I will love thee; from Death and Hell, I will love thee; on me thou have
bestowed Grace and comfort, I will love thee, O Lord my strength. And after he
had heaped on God all the sweet names he could devise, verse. 2. As a true Saint
thinks he can never speak too well of God, or too ill of himself, then he
begins his Narrative.

I. Of his Dangers, verse 4, 5. Snares of death, Floods of ungodly men, Sorrows
of Hell. Hell and Earth are combined against each Holy man, and will trouble
him sufficiently in this World, if they cannot keep him out of a better.

II. Of his retreat, and that was earnest prayer to God, verse 6. I called upon
the Lord, and cried unto my God. [When our Prayers are Cries ardent and
importunate then they speed] my Cry came before him, ^ven into his ears. The
mother trifles, while the child whimpers, but when he raises his note, strains
every nerve, and tries every vein, then she throws all aside, and gives him his
desire. While our Prayers are only Whispers, our God can take his rest, but
when we fall to crying, now will I arise, says the Lord.

III. Of his Rescue, verse 7. to 20. By the powerful and terrible Arm of the
Lord, who is in a lofty strain, brought in to his servants help, as if he would
mingle Heaven and Earth together, rather than leave his Child in the Lions paws.

IV. Of the Reason of this gracious dealing of God with him, verse 20, etc. He
was a righteous Person, and he had a righteous Cause. And thereupon he turns to
God, saying, Thou have dealt with me just as thou art wont to do; For with the
merciful, thou will show thy self merciful; and with the upright man thou will
show thy self upright.

SECTION II.
ANd so we are arrived at the Text itself, Sect. 2. The Text opened.
which being resolved, is an entire Proposition, containing 1. A Subject, a^
Upright man. 2. A Predicate, or what is spoke of him; to or with him, God will
show himself upright. For Explication With] or, before him, unto him.

An Upright.] The same word is often translated Perfect, hec's good throughout,
though not thoroughly; not one that personates Religion, but that is a Religious
Person. He is perfect, because he would be so. So Noah is termed, Genesis 6. 9.
Noah was a just man, and perfect (i. e. upright) in his Generation: he was a
good man in a bad Age. He was like a glowing spark of fire in a Sea of Water,
which is perfect goodness: and therefore the Holy Ghost does so hang upon his
Name, as if he could not give over. It is an excellent Preachers observation,
verse 8. But Noah was a just man, and perfect in his Generations, and Noah
walked with God. And Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord. These are the
Generations of Noah. Noah begat three Sons: Noah, Noah, Noah, I love the sound
of thy name, and so are all your names precious to God, though hated by men, if
the Name of God be dear and sweet to you.

It Is also sometimes translated Plain, Genesis 25. 27. Jacob was (...), a plain,
that is, an upright man dwelling in Tents. Esau was a cunning hunter, but Jacob
was a plain man without welt or guard: you might know his heart by his tongue,
save once when Rebeccah put a cunning trick into his head, otherwise he was a
most upright, downright man. And the plain meaning of it is, a simple cordial,
unfeig^d and exact man, this is the man we are looking for.

Man] This Substantive the Hebrews use to drown in the Adjective, but here the
Holy Ghost exhibits a word, and a choice one too, signifying a Strong Valiant
man; the same word, Psalm. 45. 3. O mighty man! that is meant of our Lord Christ,
who was a most strong and valiant man, that could meet the wrath of God, the
malice of the Devil, and the sin of man in the face, and come off with triumph.
And so the Dutch translate this clause in 2 Samuel 22. With the right valiant
person, thou behavest thy self upright.

In short, if the words were literally translated, they run thus [a man of
uprightnesses] that is, every way you behold him, an upright man: like an even
Dye, cast him which way you will, he will be found square and right. A stiff
and strong man to tread down both lusts within, and temptations without. An
Athanasius contra mundum, A Luther contra Romam; this is a man of an an
excellent spirit, and such is our upright man.

Thou will show thy self upright] or, wilt be upright with him, for one word in
the Hebrew makes all these six, thou will upright it with him. If men will deal
plainly with God, he will deal plainly with them. He that is upright in
performing his duty, shall find God upright in performing his Promises. It is
Gods way to carry to men, as they carry to him. If thou have a Design to please
him, he will have a Design to please thee; if thou will Echo to him, when he
calls, he will Echo to thee, when thou call'st: On the other side, if a man will
wrestle with God, he will wrestle with him; if thou will be fast and loose with
him, and walk frowardly toward him, thou shall have as good as thou bring;
if thou will provoke him with never-ending sins, he will pursue thee with
never-ending torments: if thou will sin in Tuo Eterno, thou must suffer in Suo
Eterno; and every man shall find like for like.

SECT. III.
ANd now it is time to be gathering Sect. 3 The Doctrine.
something for our instruction, and let this be the Lesson hence to be learned
namely,

Doctrine. Where God does find an upright man, he shows himself an upright God.

True, he finds none but whom he makes, he finds them of his own making; but
wherever such a man is found, on the Throne, or in a Prison, or on a
Dunghill, he shall find a God of his own, that will deal uprightly with him.
However, he is an upright God, let men be what they will; whatever contrary
motions the lower spheres have, yet the Primum mobile keeps its even and
constant motion, and is never diverted out of its course at all: so is it with
our God, let vain hypocrites walk never so crookedly, yet the holy God will be
justified when he speaks, and clear when he judges. He will be upright with
you in executing his threatenings, if you hinder the current of his uprightness
in performing Promises. The filthy Dunghill cannot infect the glorious Sun that
shinesall day upon it, nor can any man's Evil, cause him to cease from being
Good. But the meaning of the Point is, to the upright man he shows himself a
graciously upright God; a true-hearted man on earth, shall find a true-hearted
God in Heaven.

The most proper and profitable way I ^an think of, for the handling of this
Doctrine, within the intended limits is, (...). By showing wherein stands the
upright^ess of a man. 2. By declaring how God ^hews himself an upright God. 3.
By draw^ng out some inferences and uses thereof. And first, of the first.

SECTION IV.
THere are Four words (especially) Sect. 4. The names of Uprightness.
whereby Uprightness is expressed (...) Scripture, which being considered, will
give us some view of this Orient ^ewel.

1. It is called Truth, 1 Samuel 12. 24. -- Serve him in truth. Now Truth moral
is ^he conformity of the mind and heart, to things said and done; when
therefore the ^eart prays with the tongue, when the ^eart obeys with the hand,
when we do ^he things of God heartily as to the Lord. ^his is to serve him in
truth and up^ightly.

And this sure is the sense of that, Heb. ^0. 22. Let us draw near with a true
heart. ^t is our sin and folly to keep at distance from God, both in and out of
his service, afraid, or loath to come up. It is Gods w^ that we should draw
near, and nearer ye^ and that with a true heart: a true-hearte^ man at a Prayer
does the work, when many of great appearances do but beat t^ Air.

So when we come to men, 1 John 3. 1^ Let us not love in word, or in tongue
[only but in deed and in truth; having a Princip of unfeigned love in our
hearts to ever^ body, and thence producing words an^ deeds of pure Charity.
This is an uprig^ man, whose heart within does not give t^ lie to his word and
actions. Survey h^ duties to God and men, they are pious, ju^ and charitable;
open his heart, Piety, Rig^ teousness, and Love are written there Like him that
professed, if he might ha^ had the molding of himself, Light shou^ have been
his Body, and Truth should ha^ been his Soul.

2. Another word for this is Sincerity. (...) word taken from Pure Honey, that
is, si^ cera, without wax, unmingled. When the New man has as little as may be
of the Old man mingled with him. This word (...) used Phil. 1. 10. That ye may
be sincere. The Greek word there signifies, that which (...) Sun-proof (as
wares, that can abide to (...) tried between you and the Sun) su^ (...) an
upright man, bring him to the Scripture he is sound; bring him to any solid
^arks, he can stand before them; put ^im into the scales, he is weight, however
he is right Gold, though he may want some grains of allowance. He is of a right
Eagle breed, though happily young or weak, yet he can look at the Sun, and not be
daunted. An hypocrite can ^ook men in the face, but an upright man, ^he can
look God in the face. As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousnoss. This
^one but a righteous upright man can ^do.

3. There is another word of this import, and that is, Singleness of heart,
Acts 2. 46. They did eat their meat with gladness, and singleness of heart,
that is, with a cordial cheerfulness and bounty: And to this referrs that, Luke
11. 34. When thine eye is single (when thy heart is singly bent to honor and
serve God, then the whole life will relish of that principle) the whole body
will be full of light: but if the heart double with God, the life will be no
way uniform with men. And this is taken to be the meaning of the Oneness of
heart promised, Ezekiel. 11. 19. whereas the hypocrite has an heart, and an
heart, and an heart, and an heart, for every lust an heart. A double minded man
is unstable in all his ways. He is unresolved in the end he drives at, and so
unfixed in his desires and actions that tend thereunto. Now the upright man's
heart is one, he goes all one way, he is what he seems, one intention, one
delight, one face, one tongue; in a word, he is all but one man, Psalm 103. 1.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and ALL that is within me praise his holy Name.

And to this purpose is the fourth word, that signifies uprightness and that is
Integrity, 1 Kings 9. 4. And if thou will walk before me, as David walked, in
Integrity of heart and in uprightness. -- And that is when all the soul in
every faculty is resolved, and bent for God and his glory. In an hypocrite the
Judgment is against the Will, the Conscience against the Affection, the Reason
against the Appetite, but in the upright, all the faculties agree, and combine
within themselves, and the opposition is only outward, against a common enemy.
He is a whole man, for the whole will of God.

So then you see an upright man is a True hearted, a sincere-hearted, a
singlehearted, and a whole-hearted man.

SECT. V.
THis Uprightness 1. Respects God. 2. Respects Sect. 5. Uprightness described
and distinguished.
Man. The former may be called Uprightness of heart; the latter Uprightness of
Life; and both these must be explained, and where they meet, there we find an
upright man.

Concerning uprightness of heart, we must assert, that it is not so much a
distinct Grace, a grace by its self, as it is all Grace, it is that which stamps
a Reality on every other grace: Without it, Nec amanda est ipsa Charitas, nec
ipsi Fidei fidendum, nec been sperandum de ipsa spe. We cannot believe our
Faith, nor love our Love, nor hope well of our Hope it self.

Uprightness and Watchfulness are Catholic graces, of a general necessity; the
former, to wit, Uprightness, to the Being and Truth of Grace, and the latter,
to wit, Watchfulness, to the Preservation and Exercise of Grace. And belike on
that account, sincerity is called a Girdle, Ephesians. 6. 14. having your loins
girt about with truth. Religion is to many as a Cloak, (though it will prove
the dearest Cloak that ever was worn) which they can put on abroad, when it
serves their purposes, and put off at home when it troubles them in their
lusts; but now sincerity is like a Girdle, that ties it close to us. This makes
all our Garments sit close to us, and to be ungirt here is to be unblest. And
may be thus described.

Uprightness of heart is that Grace, or gracious temper, whereby the soul is
unreservedly resigned to God, and heartily bent to walk with him without guile.
In short, when one is A man after Gods own heart: for Truth is nothing but an
agreement of things with their first Principles, so that the Heart agreeing
plainly with the Heart and Will of God, is an upright heart.

The same thing is meant by an Honest heart, Luke 8. 15. that is resolved to
carry squarely toward God; as there in the hearing of Gods Word, when the
heart is clearly carried with the stream of Gods will, without Exception or
Dissimulation. As you know an honest man is ruled and swayed by Reason and
Equity in a business, without squinting at his own opinions and ends, even so
an upright heart honestly yields his Reason and Will captive to the Will of
God, though it cross his own conceits and ends. And thus he is a man after Gods
own heart, is as like him (humane frailty considered) as ever he can look. Now
this blessed Uprightness may be considered,

1. In the Grounds of it. 2. In the Nature of it. 3. In the Object of it.
I. The Ground and root of Uprightness of Heart, stands in the total Receiving
of Christ by the Heart, and the total Resigning of the Heart unto him. This
done, and there is a good foundation laid for sincerity of soul.

1. There must be a total Receiving of Jesus Christ tendered in the Gospel,
when you do take hold of the Lord Jesus, and cleave to him with purpose of
heart. As Barnabas pressed them at Antioch, Acts 11. 23. Many have a months mind
of Christ, some velleities and wouldings, but will thou have him, and cleave to
him, and that with purpose of heart? this is sincerity, to receive a whole
Christ with a whole heart. Not Christ the Savior or Refuge only, so most would
be willing; but Christ the Prince and Portion also in the land of the living.
So David could say, Psalm. 142. 5. O Lord, I said thou art my refuge, and my
portion in the land of the living. How many would fain have the Lord Jesus
Christ for their Refuge, when Conscience pinches, affliction presses, or death
stares them in the face, but how few will choose him for their portion and
happiness in the midst of their outward comforts? the Hypocrite dare not dye
without him, the upright Saint cannot live without him. Cant. 1. 4. The upright
love the, and love cannot live contentedly without fruition.

To be content of a Christ, because of some present need of him is one thing,
is nothing, if that be all: but to choose him as the fairest of ten thousand,
and that with an entire heart; to have Mind, Will, Conscience and Affection,
all of a mind, and this mind to be set on Christ's yoke as well as his Crown,
his Spirit as well as his Merit, his Rule as well as his Righteousness, here
goes the upright heart: whereas an hypocrite he has some fancy for Jesus
Christ, but will not have him, this pleases him, but that likes him not, and so
he dodges endlesly, and parles with him through the window, but bolts the door,
and keeps him out for ever. O that ever an holy, just, and offended God, should
follow such miserable sinners with a bleeding Christ in his arms and that ever
such wretches should put a refusal upon him.

2. There must be a total Resignation of the heart unto the Lord Jesus Christ,
wherein you do cordially, deliberately, and freely give up your souls and
bodies to him and to his service; which is called Ingageing the heart to
approach to the Lord, Jer. 30. 21. Who is this that engaged his heart to
approach unto me, says the Lord? And thereupon that happy Covenant is drawn in
the next verse; ye shall be my people, and I will be your God. Who is this,
says God? Who in the World? Who in this Congregation? Who in this Family? Who
in this Seat? Where Is the Man? the Woman? the Child? O let each answer quickly,
it is I. But you must engage, not only hanker, incline, desire, purpose, but
engage; it is not bidding but buying, will make this Pearl your own. Alas it is
the ordinary guise of people to stand off and treat only; but Sirs, will ye
engage, is it a bargain, and will ye stick to it, get or lose by Christ you will
have him? and then it is the engagement of the heart, you did subscribe your
hands in Baptism, this very Covenant was sealed in your name and behalf, when
you were children little, and your not revoking it, does assert it; but now we
come for your hearts thereunto. Where Is the Mind, the Conscience, the Will? O
where is the Will that submits, resolves, and ingages to be the Lords? Happy
this day, this word, and happy you, if hereupon, one shall say, I am the Lords,
and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and another shall
subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the name of
Israel, Isa. 44. 5. You are the Lords by your Christian names already, O when
will you be his by your surname also.

This is the Gospels great design, this is our errand here, we come for you and
are loath to go without you. We beseech you by the mercies of God, to make a
present of your selves, as a living sacrifice to God. Poor sinners are like
Rebels besieged, whom Christ Jesus will either win, or starve. His Ordinance is
mounted, and it batters. A breach is made in the Judgment, but the sinner will
not yield; another in the Conscience, yet is he loath to yield; the white flag
of mercy is set up, but of a long time the sturdy sinner will not treat: the
red flag is hung out, divine wrath is on the march, and a storm is preparing.
The Ordinance of God replanted again, and now if it hit right, and a breach be
made upon the will, then Christ is victor, the City is won, and the sinner
yields. And then his note is changed, Psalm. 116. 16. O Lord, truly I am thy
servant, I am thy servant: Mark how the Psalmist redoubles it, I am, I am,
truly I am. Redoubled refusals call for redoubled submissions. I will neither
be my own master, nor my own servant. I here make a Deed of Gift of my whole
self to thee, without Reservation, and without Power of Revocation. It is not
enough to say this in a pang of kindness, or in a complement, as we do to men:
What Is more common with us, than Your servant Sir? but its a servant without
service, and such servants has God a great many, his Servants, but their own
Masters; but holy David was not such a man, I am thy servant, truly I am thy
servant, I am resigned to thee, I am resolved for thee, thou have boar'd my
ears, Psalm. 40. 6. and obliged me to thee for ever. I will be thine both
Totally and Finally. When you thus give your Own selves to the Lord, 2 Cor. 8.
5. This is the ground and root of Uprightness.

SECT. VI.
II. THe Nature of this Uprightness of. 6. The nature of Uprightness.
Heart, is best discerned by those expressions used by the Holy Ghost
concerning it, which have been partly observed already, and shall be reduced to
these five following. It is

1. Single without Division. 2. Sound without Rottenness. 3. Pure without
Mixture. 4. Perfect without Reservation. 5. Plain without Guile.
1. An Upright heart is Single without Division. Unto an hypocrite, there be
Gods many, and Lords many, and he must have a heart for each: but to the
upright there is but one God the Father, and one Lord Jesus Christ, and one
heart will serve them both. He that fixes his heart upon the Creatures, for
every Creature he must have an heart, and the dividing of his heart destroys
him, Hos. 10. 2. worldly profits knock at door, he must have an heart for them;
carnal pleasures present themselves, he must have an heart for them also;
sinful preferments appear, they must have an heart too; Necessariorum numerus
parvus, opinionum nullus. Of necessary objects, the number is few, of needless
vanities, the number is endless: The upright man has made choice of God and
has enough.

A single Christ is enough for a single heart; hence holy David prays, Psalm.
86. 11. Unite my heart to fear thy Name, Let me have but one heart and mind,
and let that be thine. As there are thousands of Beams and Rays, yet they all
meet and center in the Sun; so an upright man, though he has a thousand
thoughts, yet they all (by his good will) meet in God. Subordinate ends, he
has many, to procure a livelihood, to preserve his credit, to provide for his
children, but Supreme end he has none, but God alone. Hence, that Steadiness
in his Resolutions, that Undistractedness in his holy duties, that Consistency
in his Actions, and that Evenness in the frame of his Heart, which miserable
hypocrites cannot attain.

2. An Upright Heart is Sound without Rottenness, Psalm. 119. 80. Let my heart
be sound in thy statutes, that I may not be ashamed. The more sincerity the
less shame. Integrity is the great author of confidence. Every frost shakes an
unsound body, and every trial shakes an unsound soul. An upright man has not
always so pure a color as an hypocrite may have, but his color is natural,
it is his own, it is not painted, his constitution is firm. The hypocrites
beauty is borrowed, the fire of trial will melt it off.

An Upright man has his infirmities, his diseases, but his new nature works
them out, for he is sound within. A leprosy overspreads the hypocrite, but he
hides it, Psalm. 36. 2. He flattereth himself in his own eyes, until his
iniquity be found to be hateful. He endeavors to hide himself from God, more
from men, most from himself; he would fain be in with himself howsoever, and
this trade he drives, till his iniquity be found to be hateful. But now an
Upright man, he is always sifting and trying himself; am I sound? am I right?
are my services rightly done? are my infirmities consistent with integrity? and
the like. An upright Saint is like an apple with rotten specks, but an
hypocrite is like the apple with a rotten core. The sincere Christian has here
a speck of passion, and there of worldliness, and there of pride; but cut him
up, anatomize him, he is sound at heart, there Christ and Christianity live and
reign. Now an hypocrite is like an apple that is smooth and lovely on the
outside, but rotten within: His words exact, his duties devout, his life
blameless, but look within, and his heart is the sty of sin, the den of Satan.

3. An Upright heart is Pure without Mixture. Not absolutely pure, that
happiness is reserved for heaven, but compared with that pollution and base
mixture, that constitutes an hypocrite. Though his hand cannot do all that God
bids, yet his heart is sincere in all he does. His soul is bent for perfect
purity, and so he has his name from that, Mat. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in
heart. In his words he sometimes fails, and so in his thoughts and deeds; but
open his heart and there is a love, a desire, a design and an endeavor after
real and absolute purity. Not legally pure, that is, free from all sin; but
Evangelically pure, free from the reign of all sin, especially of hypocrisy,
which is so flatly contrary to the Covenant of Grace. And in this sense the
upright man is the Scripture Puritan, and so (...) further from hypocrisy than
any other man. He is really glad that God is the searcher of hearts, for then
he knows, that he will find his name and nature in his own.

And yet, the most upright man in the world has some hypocrisy in him, Prove.
20. 9. Who can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? but this
he detects, resists, and hates, and so it cannot denominate him an hypocrite in
this world, nor damn him for one in another. His ends are generally purely at
the glory of God, his frame of heart and thoughts pure, and generally better
than his outside; the farther you trace him the better he is. Pure from
dishonesty in his dealings, purer yet in his family from all appearance of
evil, purer still in his closet, and purest in his heart: though there be sin
there, yet there is also there an antipathy against it, that it mingles not
with it.

The hypocrite chooses sin, the upright man would have no sin if he could
choose. The Traveller (its true) meets with dirt in his way, but he keeps it
off as well as he can, mingles not with it, and if he be soiled, he rubs it off
as soon as may be: but the swine delights in it, cannot be well without it.
It Is just so between the upright man and the hypocrite. The most upright Saint
on earth, is bemir'd with sin sometimes, but he did not design it in the
morning, nor sleeps he with it at night; but an hypocrite he designs it, he
delights in it, he is never so well contented as in sin. In a word, the
hypocrite may avoid sin, but no man can abhor sin save the upright man.

4. An Upright man is Perfect and entire without Reservation, Psalm. 37. 37.
Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, you may see them both at once.
His heart is entirely devoted to the will and ways of God. The hypocrite he
has ever some exceptions and reservations. Such a sin I must not leave, such a
grace I cannot love, such a duty I will not practice; thus far I will yield but
no farther, thus far I will go, it is consistent with my carnal ends, but all
the world shall not persuade me farther. The Judgment of the hypocrite will
drive beyond his Will, his Conscience beyond his Affections, he is not entire,
his heart is parted, and so he is off and on. The Upright man has but one
Happiness, and that is the enjoyment of God; but one Rule, and that is his holy
Will; but one Work, and that is to please his Maker; and thereupon he is entire
and certain in his choice, in his desires, in his ways, and contrivances. And
though there may be some demurs in his prosecution of his main business, yet
there is no hesitancy and wavering between two objects, for he is entirely fixed
and resolved therein, and so may be said to be perfect and entire, wanting
nothing.

There is in every hypocrite some one Fort, or strong hold, that has never
yielded to the sovereignty and empire of Gods will: Some lust castles it self
in the will, but where integrity enters, it brings every thought into captivity
to the obedience of Christ. Lord, says he, I am wholly thine, do what thou will with me, say what thou will to me, write what thou will upon me, Other
Lords have had dominion over me, but by thee only will I make mention of thy
name, Isa. 26. 13. here is the upright man.

5. An Upright heart is Plain without Guile, Psalm. 32. 2. Blessed is the man to
whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no Guile.
Here is a blessed word indeed. Alas! we have great and many iniquities, were it
not happy for us to be as if we had never sinned? why; non-imputation will be
as well for us, as if there had been no transgression; sins remitted are as if
they had not been committed: The debtbook crossed as good as if never entered. But
who is this blessed man? In whose spirit there is no Guile, that is, 1. no
fundamental guile; that has not deceitfully covenanted with his God. 2. That
has no approved guile, to approve and yield to any way of wickedness; that
does not juggle with God or men, or with his own Conscience; that hides not his
Idols under him, when God is searching his Tent, but as it follows there verse
5. acknowledges, and hates, and leaves his sin.

When the Upright man confesses his sin, his heart aches and he is deeply
troubled for it, he dissembles not: the hypocrite proclaims open war, but
maintains secret intelligence with his lusts. When the upright man prays for
any grace, he earnestly desires it, and he takes pains to compass it too, for
he is in good earnest, and dissembles not: The hypocrite is afraid in his
prayers to be taken at his word, for he loves not the image, or grace of God at
all. And so in every thing else, there is nothing but guile in him, he that
will dissemble with God, will dissemble with any man in the world. See the wide
difference between Saul and David. Saul is charged with a fault, 1 Samuel 15. 14.
lie denies it, the charge is renewed, verse 17. still he minces the matter,
looks for fig leaves to cover all. But plain-hearted David is another man; he
is charged and he yields, one prick opens a vein of sorrow in his heart, he
tells all, he makes a Psalm of it, and therein concludes this, Psalm. 51. 6.
Behold thou desire truth in the inward parts. The plain-hearted man, says
God, is for me, with the upright man I will show my self upright.

SECT. VII.
III. ANd thus you have the Nature. 7. The object of an Upright heart, viz.
Inward Religion.
of uprightness a little opened; and now let us consider the Object about which
this uprightness is conversant. And the great business of the upright heart is
about, 1. Inward Religion. 2. Universal 3. Constant

1. He is a Student and Practitioner of Inward Religion. Diligent he is in the
outward acts of it also, but that he has common with the hypocrite, but his
greatest study is to be good within, Romans 2. 28, 29. For he is not a Jew, which
is one outwardly, [that is, he is no Jew as to the esteem and acceptance of
God, or as to the spiritual privileges of the Covenant] neither is that
Circumcision which is outward in the flesh, [to wit, that is not the
Circumcision, which God chiefly looks at, and which a man is chiefly advantaged
by] But he is a Jew which is one inwardly, [that is, a Saint in soul] and
Circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit and not in the letter. It is
not water on the face, but blood on the heart which makes a saveable Christian.
O Sirs, what change has there been on your spirits? what fear, and love, and
sanctity is there in your hearts? look to this, or else you will break like
bubbles. And then it follows, Whose praise is not of men, but of God, that is,
whose aim, and whose honor it is not to be praised of men, but of God. The
Upright man trades in Invisible things.

1. The upright man studies to obtain invisible Graces. Psalm. 45. 13. The Kings
daughter is glorious within. In the hidden man of the heart, is the beauty of
an upright man. To be dressed with the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, with
a composed and serious spirit, with a penitent and believing spirit. Ah
beloved! how like are many of us to the River which Athenaeus mentions, whose
upper waters are sweet, but brackish at the bottom; like fine clothes, silk
without and canvas within: a smooth carriage, and an unpolished uncircumsised
heart; the upright man would not be so. He looks not at things that are seen,
but at things that are not seen. Grace and Glory are the study and ambition of
the inward Christian. The hypocrite may be forward for unsanctified Gifts.
Simon Magus would give money for such, O the time, and cost and strength that
many men spend to attain the gift of Knowledge, of Prudence, of Language, of
Elocution, of memory, and such like, that never spend a serious thought, to
attain the grace of Repentance, Faith, Self-denial, sincere love to God and
godliness! but this is the great design in the upright heart, O that I may be
stored with the saving knowledge of my God, and of my self! Here Is an
Ordinance, O that I may have my faith increased, my love inflamed, the back of
my patience strengthened by this holy Duty! These are the Pearls our Merchant
seeks for.

2. The Upright man studies to perform invisible Duties. There is an Outside
and an Inside in Religion. The bended knee, that is the outside in prayer; The
broken heart that is the inside: To hear Gods word, that is the outside; To
meditate of it, that is the inside: To read each day two or three Chapters in
the Bible, that is the outside; to feel the efficacy of it that is the inside; To
reprove another that is the outside; but to watch over thine own heart, that is
the inside: To draw out thy purse to a poor man, that is the outside; but to
draw out thy heart in pity to him, that is the inside of the duty. The
hypocrite may, and often does excel in the former, the upright man is diligent
and careful in the latter. He can pray in secret, and is no stranger to Self
examination, Meditation, Ejaculations, and Soliloquies these retired acts of
Religion, nay in these is his Excellency; he is a Saint in secret, the holiest
alone, a busy man in an Ordinance. He wrestles as well as makes supplication,
and sweats at that which others sleep at. The Pharisee, Luke 18. had the larger
Oration, but the Publican had the more penitent heart. The Scribe might have
more dealing with the Law, but the Apostle delighted in it, in the inward man,
Romans 7. 22. and so does every upright man. His best wares are within out of
sight. As you know its the Tradesmans custom, all his wares shall be vendible
and good, but behind in his Warehouse and Closet are his choicest things: Even
so the upright man, he will be exact and diligent in all his ordinary and
visible duties, but his Masterpieces they are within. He performs invisible
Duties.

3. The upright man studies to conquer invisible Sins: Those that he might go
to his grave with, and no body aware of them; yet these he labors to rout
Horse and Man. An hypocrite on the contrary prunes off the sins that will shame
him, but nourishes the sins that will damn him. Open drunkenness, uncleanness,
oppression, profaneness, these an hypocrite disdains; but mean while he lives
perhaps in some of these secretly, or at least he takes no pains to subdue
proud, wanton, envious, and other inward motions that do as much war against
the soul, as other sins. The hypocrite shaves the hair, but the upright man
plucks it up by the roots, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of Flesh and Spirit. There is a filthiness of the Spirit, which he
that would perfect holiness will be cleansing himself from; such as the habits
of unbelief, impenitency, hardness of heart, pride of spirit, dullness in Gods
service, and such as Atheistical, loose, impertinent thoughts, wandering in the
worship of God, envy at his neighbors riches or reputation, and carnal
contrivances to satisfy the lusts of the flesh; these cost him warm water,
break his sleep, and fill his prayers, which never cost the hypocrite, nor
secure world; one penitent thought. It was Tertullians cry, Ad leonem extra,
potius quam ad leonem intra. The upright man knows, that as the filthiness of
the flesh will may make him a beast, so the filthiness of the spirit will make
him a Devil, and therefore he assaults his invisible sins.

SECT. VIII.
2. AN upright man endeavors after universal Religion. There is a counterpane
of the will of God in his heart; that agrees with the Scripture in every thing.

1. He hates All sin, with an hatred of Abomination, of Aversation, of
Opposition. Dress it with what disguises you will, and press it with what
motives, ends or advantages you can, the upright man hates it in his heart,
Psalm. 119. 1, 2. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, they walk in the Law of
the Lord. They also (they for their part) do no iniquity, they walk in his way.
There is a party in him that would be tampering with it, but he likes it not.
O, says God, do not this abominable thing that I hate, Jer. 44. 4. No, Lord,
says he, for I hate it as well as thou. His heart is on Gods side against Sin:
And particularly against his own iniquity, Psalm. 18. 23. I was also upright
before him, and I kept my self from mine iniquity. Mine iniquity; Every man
has some sin of his own, which he is most inclinable to, least able to resist,
and lothest to leave. Thus he drags each prayer before God, and cries, Lord, if
thou love me, strike here. This sin he prosecutes with prayers and tears, and
all good means beside, forelaies it in cool blood, and with continual
preventing contrivances disappoints, crosses, intercepts, and by degrees
starves it to death.

And as no sin is so dear as to ingratiate with him, so no sin so small, but
his stomach rises at it; and hence it is that the upright man has not so wide
a swallow, as other men of large and strained Consciences, and so meets with
many an hypocrite in his dish; because he would hate the Appearance of Evil, as
he hates the Appearance of the Devil, but still he hates his own sins more than
others, and those as much as any, which no body sees but himself.

2. He loves All his Duty, he is neither afraid to know, nor ashamed to own all
his duty: By this the Lord measures Integrity 1 King. 9. 4. And if thou will
walk before me, as David thy Father walked, in integrity of heart and in
uprightness, to do according to all that I have commanded thee. Here Is the just
Standard of sincerity. For can the holy, wise, and just God appoint any thing
unreasonable or uncomfortable for his own creature, his dear child to perform?
Alas! All his ways are mercy and truth, and all his Laws tend to his servants
good. What harsher Law in appearance than that Matthew. 5. 29. If thy right eye,
if thy right hand offend thee, pluck it out, cut it off. And yet if any of you
had an eye that were always leading you into pits and precipices, to drown and
destroy you, would not you have it out? if you had an hand that were always
running into the fire, and you could not keep it out, would not you hack it
off? why, it is no other eye or hand, the Gospel has a quarrel with, but those
that would lead into ruin, run you into hell: and how reasonable and necessary
is it to be rid of such? The upright man is convinced of this, and so he knows
nothing in Religion but what he likes. Some things may grate upon his carnal
appetite, yet he loves them dearly. Now an hypocrite is quite another man, like
a sorry Scholar in a hard Chapter, he skips over the hard words, and makes
nothing of them; whereas the well taught Scholar, will spell, and labor at
them, and rather venture a whipping, than skip over them: So is it between the
hypocrite and the upright in the duties of Christianity. An hypocrite runs
smoothly on in diverse Religious exercises, till he meets with some costly,
hard, or hidden duties, and there he stands stock-still; he considers that
there is no credit or profit, but only pains or peril, to be got, and presently
skips over these hard words, and neither loves nor obeyes: whereas the upright
man finding his duty, bides by it, dwells upon it, and will deny himself ere he
will deny his duty. If God will have me love mine enemies, I will love them:
V^niet verbum Domini and submittem^s ^i sexcenta sinobis essent colla. baldaz.
ad Oecolampadium.
If he will have me forsake this company or course that I am taken with, I will
freely leave them: If he will have me pray, yea and fast too, no duty shall be
so hard, but I will do it; no sin so sweet, but I will leave it, with my whole
heart and my whole soul. We have both these in that trying verse, Psalm. 119.
128. Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right, and
I hate every false way. Each word is a sacred touchstone. [Therefore] It is
said, ver. 126. Wicked men make void the Law. That Is so far from carrying the
upright man down the stream, that therefore he loves it the more: he knows it
cannot but be excellent, that such men hate. Is the Sabbath generally broken?
he is stricter in observing it. Are oaths more frequent? he abhors them the
more. Is true Piety hated and hist out of the world? his heart and house shall
more thoroughly embrace it. [I esteem] I cannot observe thy precepts as I would,
but I do dearly value them. The least of thy Laws is more unto me, than
thousands of Gold and Silver. [I esteem thy precepts] I do not only esteem the
Truths of the Bible, the Histories in the Bible, the Promises of the Bible, but
I esteem thy Precepts, those that cut out my work, as well as those that hold
out my Reward. (And all these) those that are against my nature and interest
and custom, as well as those that are agreeable to my nature and custom and
subservient to my interest. They are all wise, holy and good. Thy word is very
pure: therefore thy servant loves it. And I esteem all thy precepts (concerning
all things to be right) Those precepts that give rules for my bargains, as well
as for my hearing; that control me at my meat, as well as those that direct
me in my prayers; they are all right and good. (And I hate every false way.) I
do not say, I escape and miss them all (happy if I could) but I hate them, and
he that hates sin, will avoid it as much as he can. And that every (false way)
I see they are false ways, neither directed by my God, nor leading to him, and
therefore I hate them all. And this is an upright man, he is Universally
Religious.

SECT. IX.
3. AN upright man labors after Constant Religion. His sanctity is a. 9.
Constant Religion.
second Nature in him, now that which is natural is constant; There is great
difference between the natural heat of an healthy man, and the praeternatural
heat of an Ague; such is the difference between the true Saint and the
hypocrite. An hypocrite may have some fits of Piety, but they are adventitious,
they flow from some outward cause, and accordingly they last but for a while;
and when that cause cease, (suppose some sharp judgment feared or felt, some
qualm of Conscience, or shallow Sermon-sickness) then a cold fit follows, as
bad or worse than before: alas, it is praeternatural, it was no habit, but the
upright man has a constant heat, he fears always and maintains constant duty,
though he cannot keep equal heat therein.

And here is the difference between the inconstancy of an upright man and of an
hypocrite; the inconstancy of the hypocrite is in the Substance of the duty it
self; one while he prays, another while he restrains prayer; one while he is
strict and cautious; and shortly loose and careless; whereas the upright man
keeps on in the course of his duty, though he cannot do it always alike; he
prays, and would not b^ hired from it, though the thread of his prayers be
uneven: there may be remisness in it, but not an intermission of it: there is
constant Religion, though not equal Religion. The hypocrite makes a Cloak of
his Religion, which he puts on, and off, as it serves his purpose; the upright
man wears it as his every day clothes, and puts not off his integrity, till he
dye. There may be some Parentheses in his holy course, wherein vanity and sin
may be written, (too many of these God knows in the best man's heart and life)
but still the sentence runs current; the sense and scope of his heart runs
Heavenward: whereas on the contrary, the full sense of an hypocrites heart is
to please or promote himself; though there may be some parentheses of Religion,
no part of the scope of his soul: you have their character, Psalm. 78. 36, 37.
Nevertheless they did statter him with their mouth, and they lied to him with
their tongues: for their heart was not right with him, neither were they
steadfast in his Covenant. No greater sign of a rotten heart, than a
fundamental unstedfastness in the Covenant of God, when a man is ruled by times
and companies to show good or evil, this man's heart is not right with God.

Its true, a tempest may bend the boughs of a living tree, or perhaps the tree
it self, if the storm be great; but they return to their straightness, they
come to themselves, but the rotten sticks and branches are broken and
overturned; just so, some strong temptation may drive an upright man out of his
honest way, but he soon returns, and by mending his pace, makes amends for his
stumbling. Three Scriptures give the upright man his character, concerning this
matter. Proverbs 28. 14. Happy is the man that fears always. To be always
afraid looks like a miserable life among men; but to have a waking eye, and
careful heart for fear of sin, is no more a misery, than to walk, or ride, with
a vigilant regard to prevent a fall. This fear is not troublesome or vexatious
at all, he is an happy man that uses it, and no wise man will count the other
hapy for going, running, riding without fear or wit in danger every moment to
break his bones. Again, Hos. 12. 6. Keep mercy and judgment, and wait upon thy
God continually. The whole life of a sincere Saint is a continual waiting upon
God; whatever his work be, whoever his company, wherever he goes, whenever he
eats or drinks, yet in all these he waits upon his God, and serves the will of
his heavenly Father. And agreeable to this is the other passage, Prove. 23. 17.
Be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long. Most emphaticall both for the
duty commanded, and for the term of the duty, both most apposite to set out an
upright man. The fear of the Lord, that is universal Religion, be thou in the,
more than if he had said, let the fear of the Lord be in thee; be surrounded
with it, swallowed up in it. And then, this all the day long, not only a fit of
Religion at thy prayers in the morning and another at night, but work and walk,
eat and drink in it all the day long, yea all thy life long, which is but a
long day.

The Religion of an hypocrite is like a tireing horse, which may go apace in
the morning, and show much metal for a while; but the upright man, though more
soberly, yet goes more constantly; and in this sense that is most true, Prove.
10. 9. He that walks uprightly, walks surely. You shall find this man with
savoury thoughts in his heart at noon, with Ejaculations at his work, and there
is a coherence between his duties and his life. In a word, and so I Will end this
point, the Upright man has four Walks toward God, which will set him forth to
the life.

1. The upright man walks Before God. Genesis 17. 1. Walk before me, and be thou
perfect, or upright. And that is whereby the upright man habitually always,
and actually as much as in him lies, Sets the Lord always before him; and
still thinks, and speaks, and acts, as if he looked on, weighing not only the
matter but the manner, and motives of his ways, acquitting himself still to
his God, 2 Cor. 2. 17. As of sincerity as of God, in the sight of God speak we
in Christ. Happy for ever that Minister, that can call God to record on his
soul, that as no errors corrupt his Doctrine, so no base ends corrupt his
heart; but that he preaches Christ's will sincerely, as if the Lord himself
looked on.

2. The upright man walks with God. So Enoch, Genesis 5. 22. And Enoch walked with
God. That is, so to live, as if the Holy God were in person walking with you on
Earth, or as if you were walking with him in Heaven. If God should visibly walk
with you on earth, as he was a while with Abraham, O with what humility,
sanctity, watchfulness, love, and fear would you continually live? what an
humble and serious regard would you have toward him? much more if you were to
walk a while with him in Heaven: what a frame would you there be in? why this
sense has walking with God, which no man has skill in save the upright man;
he is constantly religious.

3. The upright man walks After God, Deuteronomy. 13. 4. Ye shall walk after the Lord
your God, and fear him, and keep his Commandments, and obey his voice. Where he
can see his God walk before him, like a dutiful child, he will, though not
aequis passibus, walk after him as fast as he can. This was the praise of
Caleb, Numbers 14. 24. that he followed God fully. That word I am the Lord thy
God, makes every Thou shall of his, and every Thou shall not, acceptable to an
upright man. Come says God, here is a work I must have done, here thou must
give, here forgive, here is a Saint must be loved for his own sake, here is a
sinner must thou love and pity for my sake. Ready (Lord) says the upright man,
by thy Grace it shall be done, this is to follow God fully, this is to walk
after God.

4. The upright man walks Like God, 1 John 2. 6. He that says he abides in
him, ought himself also so to walk, even as he walked. Now, how did our Lord,
Jesus walk when he was upon earth? why, a mirror and pattern of all humility,
justice, charity, meekness, self-denial. Think often when you are eating, how
did Christ order his meals? do I give thanks like him? discourse at table like
him? think often when you are hearing and praying; did he hear and pray in such
a manner as I do? How would he carry himself among such neighbors? how would
he instruct and guide this Family? how would he bear and improve these
reproaches, wants and troubles? how would he appear for God is in such company?
how would he sanctisie the Sabbath? how would he deal with such parents, such
children, if he were in my place? how quiet, when provoked? how chaste, when
tempted? how just and true in his dealings? how cautious of others names, and
how content with his own estate? Put him often into your case and remember, if
ever you will live with him, you must live like him. And by this fruitful and
good life you show, that God is upright, and that there is no unrighteousness
in him, Psalm. 29. last:

SECTION. X.
ANd thus I have opened in some poor. 10. An Infe^ence con^erning Regenera^on.
measure an upright heart. By all which (dearly Beloved) you may see the
Absolute necessity of Regeneration: I mean, the through change of the heart,
from the state of nature to the state of grace. For certainly man's heart by
nature is false, and far from this uprightness described. How can the soul
receive Christ Jesus as he is offered in his Gospel, or resign it self to him
without Regeneration; how can the heart of a sinful child of Adam, be either
single, or sound, or pure, or perfect, or plain without Regeneration? what man
will study, or practice Inward, Universal and constant Religion till he be
Regenerated? Who will walk Before God, With God, After God, Like God, before
his heart be changed? Alas these things are neither conceived by the mind, nor
received by the will of a natural man: He is ignorant in them and an enemy to
them. O Sirs, you must be new creatures, else all our treaty stands for
nothing: we must still begin here, and can parley no further with you, unless
you yield in this. Will ye be renewed in the Spirit of your mind? Would you
give all the world for a new Heart? till then you are but rotten at the heart,
you walk in a vain show: for all your talk against hypocrites, you are errand
hypocrites, and shall be condemned as such, when those you have so reproached,
shall be your judges and openly honored before Angels and men. Those poor
Mordecaies shall be royally arrayed, and you like proud Haman shall see it to
the breaking of your hearts.

To prevent this, O learn this one Lesson, Sound Conversion, which is but
restoring that image you lost in Adam. Your bones were all put out of joint by
that fall, this is the painful pluck that puts them in joint again. Would not
any man abide a painful pluck to set one bone in joint? O Sirs, abide one pluck
to bring all your soul into frame again: you must be new men, else you cannot
be upright men; you must be in Christ before you can walk like him. Your
Religion is but skin deep till the Holy Ghost has made an holy change.

And therefore, for the Lords sake, and for your souls sake, study this point
into practice. Give no sound sleep to your eyes while you are such near
neighbors to Hell; your temperate, just, and honest behavior may make your
fall the softer, but without holiness you must never see the Lord; and a carnal
heart can never be holy and upright without Regeneration. And so far concerning
the first part of uprightness, which respects God, uprightness of heart.

SECT. XI.
THe second part of Uprightness respects Man, which is Uprightness of life;
which

1. Must be with the former; else the. 11. Uprightness of Life; Its Necessity.
other is but like a candle in a dark lanthorn, which burns away to no purpose.
This is the very Sinew of humane Society, and makes men happy in one another.
It is such an excellent thing that they who never practice it, yet always
pretend to it. The veriest knaves abhor to be so called, and would be reputed
and styled honest and upright men. And that must needs be amiable which all men
commend, and necessary which no society can subsist without: So that there
abides a Crown of honor for a Downright Heathen, as well as a Crown of glory
for an Upright Christian: and there will be an easier punishment for those (I
may call them) Christian-Pagans, than for abundance of our Pagan Christians.

2. This Uprightness of life is not sufficient without the former. It Is good
but not good enough. To be a fast friend to men, and a broken bow to God, will
yield you little comfort. Yet how many sit down here, and think themselves
well? would not steal a shoe latchet from their neighbor for a world, and yet
make no Conscience of stealing from God his Honor and his Day. That would not
wrong their Brethrens Name by any reproach for a world, and yet make no bones
of wronging the Name of the great God, and take it in vain day by day. The
squareness of your actions may crown you with reputation; but the rottenness of
your hearts will leave you in condemnation, by that God that tries the hearts
and reins. As in the Law, without blood there was no remission, so in the
Gospel, without Oil there is no admission into the Kindome of Heaven. Civility
and Sanctity are two things.

3. This uprightness of life cannot be without that uprightness of heart. It
loses in truth its name and nature for want of a principle. For that which is
truly good must have all its causes, which this wants. It is a common
experiment, that water will not ascend above its spring without a violence upon
nature; and it is as true, that no man's actions can carry a higher level than
the fountain of them; so that to make the life upright, you must begin at the
heart, and first make the Tree good and then the fruit will be good also.

Now this Uprightness of Life is the exact agreement of a man's words and
actions with an honest and upright heart. When the life is the picture of the
heart, and there is a blessed harmony between the frame of the soul within, and
the course of the life without; when a man does not frame his life, to gratify
the company, or serve the times he lives in, or the corrupt humors of other,
or any carnal ends of his own, but his heart is sincere, and so are his words
and deeds. Not that we expect an absolute exactness here; the uprightest man on
earth has enough to humble and afflict him; but for the main, there is no
known ordinary and willing swerving of his course from his frame within, or of
that from the holy will of God. And herein also we shall consider, 1. Its
Essence. 2. Its Object.

SECT. XII.
I. THe Nature or Being of Uprightness. 12. The Nature of Upright^ess of Life.
of life shines

1. In Simplicity. Prove. 28. 6. 18. Better is the poor that walks in his
Integrity, than he that is perverse in his ways, though rich. The word for
ways in both places is Dual, and intimates two ways. An hypocrite is a man
with two ways. The one he goes in, the other he seems to go in. The poor
upright man has but one way, and that is better than them both. 2 Cor. 1. 12.
For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity
and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have
had our Conversation in the world. When this Apostle was traduced by men, yet
this afforded him not only content, but joy, to wit, the testimony of his
Conscience. An hypocrite may have quiet in his Conscience, but an upright man
has a Testimony in his Conscience: He carries every where Letters Testimonial
in his bosom. And why all this joy? that we have had our conversation in
simplicity. As our ends have been single in preaching the Gospel, so our Lives
have not been double: The drift of our preaching and lives has been the same:
Happy that Preacher that can here subscribe his hand.

This Simplicity of an upright man, makes him sometimes the Subject of loss,
and sometimes the Object of scorn. Job 12. 4. The just upright man is laughed
to scorn, and many a Simpleton he is called; yet he goes on and carries it in
the end. His great consideration is, What is my duty, according to that Prove.
4. 25. Let thine eyes look straight on, and let thine eyelids look straight
before thee. That is, without squinting at events, or how it will please, or
whom it will lose, he is resolved to live and dye in his duty. Mistake me not,
as if Prudence and Integrity could not dwell together; certainly they may and
ought. His simplicity only excludes the subtlety of the Fox, which stands in
being cunning to do mischief, not the wisdom of the Serpent, which stands in
carefully avoiding it.

2. Uprightness of Life stands in Purity. Prove. 16. 17. The highway of the
Upright, is to depart from evil. His usual road is as far from the broad way as
ever he can: and his care herein sometimes carries him rather too far, upon
which account his Conscience breeds more scruples then other men's, that can
swallow any thing that comes to hand: but his integrity in other things
apologizeth for him to all wise men, and at least brings him off with peace and
comfort. And this very thing has brought upon very many of these upright men,
the badge of a Puritan, which is by too many applied to subvert sincere
holiness, and to cast an odium on downright Christianity, and the practice of
that we all profess. Sure I am, the Scripture opens Heavens gates to none, but
those whose lives are pure and holy, Psalm. 24. 4. Who shall ascend into the
hill of the Lord? and who shall stand in his holy place? He that has clean
hands and a pure heart, etc. Hence, the upright man dare not mingle with those
vain fooleries, vicious excesses or suspicious recreations that men of devasted
Consciences are drowned in; nor can all the good nature that is in him, nor
importunity of neighbors, or kindred, draw him to such company, or courses
that would sting his Conscience when he should sleep; except God leaves him to
himself sometimes, to try and humble him.

3. This Uprightness of Life, shines in the perfection of his Life. Understand
a Perfection of parts; each part of him is sincere. See that, Isa. 33. 14.
Fearfulness has surprised the hypocrite: who among us shall dwell with
devouring fire? Who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnnings? that is,
stand before the holy just and upright Jehovah: who can approach him, when he
executes judgments here, or passes final sentance hereafter? when all
hypocrites shall be in a fright, when their cobweb-coverings shall fall off,
and they must stand naked, (like so many cheats on a pillory) before God,
Angels and Men: who then shall stand with comfort and confidence? Mark verse
15. He that walks righteously, (his feet walk uprightly) and speaks
uprightly, (carries an upright tongue) despises the gain of oppressions (keeps
an upright heart in him) that shakes his hands from holdding bribes, (both his
hands are upright too) that stops his ears from hearing of blood) his ears are
tipped with integrity) and shuts his eyes from seeing evil, (he looks with an
upright eye.) Thus you see he is upright all over. Let him deal with friends or
enemies, with godly or ungodly, with wise or foolish, you may trust him, for he
stands in awe of his God, and of Himself. He has not one heart for his
Religion, and another for his bargains and calling: but studies the Scripture
and drives his life into it, as near as he can. This is to obey Gods voice
Indeed. Exo. 19. 5.
And from this perfection flows an excellent evenness of conversation, so that
Queen Elizabeth's motto well becomes his life, Semper eadem, Still the same.

2. This Uprightness shines in the Plainness of his life. There are few
Criticisms in the life of an upright man. He Is plain and that is his prayer,
Psalm. 27. 11. Lord lead me in a plain path, that is my desire. He has no
quirks, or tricks of legerdemain. If he cannot stand by plain dealing, he will
fall by it: when he trades and bargains, though he be discreet and careful, yet
he is plain: When he reproves a fault or advises, he is sober, wise and
affectionate, but still he is plain: his discourse and Sermons though
elaborate, yet still plain. Among his very enemies though he be cautious and
considerate, yet there he is plain also: Lead me in a plain path because of
mine enemies. He is like Him, that wished his body were made of Crystal, that
his sincerity might be transparent. Such was that Martyr, whom the persecutors
required to discover his companion, whom they were prosecuting, promising to
him his own life for the discovery, and so either by denying his knowledge of
the place of his friends abode, or by betraying it, he might have saved his own
life; after a little pause, breaks out into these words, Mentiri non possum,
prodere nolo, I cannot lie, and I will not betray him; and so laid down his
life, to save one of the Brethren. Here was an upright man, that would not tell
a lie to save a life, that had rather dye than lie. He will be plain, though he
suffer for it. But how generally is this plainness banished out of the world?
every man almost walking in a vain show, disguizing their intentions, looking
one way and rowing another, that the Tropicks are not more distant, than most
men's intentions are from their Actions. And so I come to the Object about which
this uprightness of life is conversant.

SECT. XIII.
II. THe Object of an Upright life follows, which is

1. Words. 2. Deeds or Actions.
1. The Upright man is sincere in his words,. 13. The object of an upright Life
viz. Words.
Ps. 15. 2. He walks uprightly and speaks the truth in his heart. His heart
is inditing a good matter, and thereof his tongue is the pen of a ready writer.
And indeed that is the genuine use of words, to be the interpreters of the
heart and mind. And therefore that is a black brand set on our Neighbor
Nation, that they use not to sing as they prick, nor to read as they write, nor
to speak as they think; which if true, would render their society more
intolerable, than the brutes themselves. The upright man perhaps cannot speak
elegantly but he can speak truly; he cannot flourish his letters, but he can
write a plain Secretary; and his words you may believe, more than others
oaths. If you would see a fuller view of him as who would not delight in such
asight? these Foyles will set him off.

1. An upright man is a greater hater of Flattery. He cannot abide to be either
active or passive in it. He rather desires to know the worst of himself than to
hear the best; for that open rebuke is better than secret love, and he knows
that unjust praises are more dangerous than unjust slanders. And then for
others, if he might get all the Town by it, he cannot give flattering Titles to
any man, or extol any thing in any body, for his own ends. How fair an
opportunity had Micaiah, to have gained his liberty, and the favor of two
potent Kings, if he could have soothed Ahab in his vanity? but prison or no
prison, he could not flatter. How easily might Paul have come off before
Foelix, with a smooth oration, if he had learned to have courted him and his
Drusilla with a Panegyric of praise? but he rather chose to speak of
Temperance, Righteousness and Judgment to come; so to save them, rather than
sooth them in their sins.

It Is true, he loses many an one by this plain dealing, whom he might have kept
by his flattery; but these are better lost, than kept, Job 32. 22. I know not,
says Elihu, to give flattering titles, in so doing my Maker would soon take me
away. These acts are below a man, much more below a Christian; and generally
there is unsoundness in the heart, or baseness in the ends of those that use
them. Its true, a man may without any breach in his uprightness, give another
his due praises, when there is just occasion so to do; but to exceed bounds
herein, and that out of any base design, of procuring the like again, or for
worldly profit, is very far from true sincerity. A false heart and a flattering
tongue usually go together. Prove. 26. 23. Burning lips and a wicked heart, are
like a potsheard covered over with silver dross. No man so likely to have a
tongue, and a tongue, as he that has an heart, and an heart.

2. An upright man is a great hater of Lying. A sin that is directly contrary
to the nature of sincerity. I may not enlarge upon the kinds or aggravations of
this sin: whole Sermons, yea Volumes are little enough to overthrow it, it is
so common and so dangerous. If a lie will save their credit, few will lose it;
if a lie will gain any thing, few will sit down by loss; if a lie will shelter
one from another anger, thousands will venture the displeasure of the Eternal
God, before that of a silly worm; and choose to have their Head broken, that
their Helmet may be spared. O the woeful havoc of men's Consciences by this sin!
now an upright man abhors a lie, he knows that the God of truth desires truth
in the inward parts, and has in him a particular Antipathy to this sin. Dress
it in what clothes you will, call it a jesting lie, an officious lie, what lie
you will; he likes it not, his heart rises against it, Psalm. 119. 163. I hate
and abhor lying, two words for failing, to show his great hatred of this sin.
Be it with him or against him, the upright man will speak the truth. Whereas an
hypocrite as he is nothing else but a Lie, so he can swallow them as fast as
occasion serves. Poor man! thou would not speak it, if the man that stands by
thee saw into thy heart, and how dare thou speak it, when the holy and true
God sees into thy heart, and can choke thee with thy dissembling words?

3. An upright man hates all Equivocations and mental Reservations. That is, he
speaks his words in a sense that he would have them construed in, and keeps no
part of a sentence in his mind, to contradict what he pronounced with his
mouth, especially with an intent to injure another. Such was that juggling trick
we read of Cydias, that being betrusted by Archetimus with a sum of money,
afterward flatly denies it. There being no witness to prove the truth, Cydias
is summoned to his Oath before the Altar, and a great Assembly; he quilts the
money in his staff, and going to take his Oath, gives Archetimus his staff to
hold the while, and then confidently swears he had given him back his money:
But this deceit lasted not long, for Archetimus seeing his perjury, in a rage
throws down his staff; it breaks and the fraud is found. And such is the usual
issue of such Equivocations. The upright man has no skill at this; he knows if
the plain truth will not bear him out, these cunning shifts never can. My
brethren, it beseems not the plain-heartedness of a Christian to speak like the
Delphian Oracle, to be understood in two contrary sentences.

The Romans themselves would not so much as hear those Ambassadors that were
painted, saying, how shall we believe them whose very face and looks do lie? An
upright man if he do not speak all his heart, yet will speak according to his
heart. He loves not to walk with a dark lanthorn, much less to deal with false
lights but plain genuine are his expressions without, and fair and candid is
his heart within.

4. An upright man greatly hates promise breaking, whether it be to God or men.
A great note of integrity in Jephthah, Judge. 11. 35. I have opened my mouth to
the Lord, and I cannot go back It was a rash vow, but conscience of the
obligation brake all other considerations, which in his case might have been
many, and he chose rather to have his very heart broken, than his word. It is
enough for a subtle Politician, to have Distinctions and Evasions ready to
help himself out of the straightest bonds, the upright man delights not after
vows to make inquiry.

Well advised every man should be, before he binds himself in any thing to the
Lord, but when his soul is fast, let him be very well advised, how he releases
himself: for there is nothing does more prostitute the Conscience, and utterly
undo men, than being fast and loose with God in sacred vows and promises.

The same abhorrence has the upright man of breaking his word with men; and
thereupon his word is as good as his bond. If he bids so much for a commodity,
he seldom shrinks but gives it; if he bargain to his prejudice, yet he changes
not: the scarceness of the thing, the rising of the market cannot prevail with
him, to rescind his punctual agreement; whether he gain or lose, he will not
lose his honesty nor his reputation. O what a Golden age would return unto us,
if men were but plain in their dealing, and punctual in their performances? and
unworthy is it for a man, a Christian man to be so vile, that no body can
believe him, nor trust him. How will that Atilius Regulus rise up in judgment
and condemn this generation, who being prisoner at Carthage, and assured of his
own death, if he failed in his negotiation; was set at liberty to effect a
peace at Rome, upon the single security of his own word, to return if he failed
to procure it: but such was his public spirit, that he effectually dissuaded
his Countrymen from a peace, assuring them of a certain conquest; and such the
integrity of his spirit, that after this, he fairly returned and accepted of a
cruel death, rather than infringe his word. Ten thousand pities such heroic
acts should be lost, for want of a right principle; and ten thousand shames,
that Christians should break their word for a groat, while Pagans will not do
it for their lives.

SECT. XIV.
SEcondly, An upright man is sincere in. 14. Uprightness in Actions,
his Deeds or Actions, Isa. 33. 15. He walks righteously, as well as speaks
uprightly. As his words are a true Commentary upon his heart, so his actions
are a true Exposition upon his words. Whatsoever Office or Relation he stands
in, he adorns it with integrity. The upright Judge, when he puts on his Robes,
puts off his worldly relations. The upright Justice of the Peace disdaining to
be drawn by favor, or driven by fear besides his duty. The upright Counselor
will not plead, when his Tongue is confuted by his Conscience. The upright
Juror, without all by respects, esteems the least grain of Evidence more
weighty than a Talent of Ophirs Gold The upright Attorney, when he perceives
the cause to be a drop blown up by malice into a bubble, sounds a retreat to
his Client, though he lose thereby. The upright Physician will rather go with
an empty purse, than torture either the body or purse of his Patient without
cause. The upright Tradesman will be upright in his words, upright in his
weights, and upright (in his wares, and upright in his rates) And the upright
Minister will put on his Thummim, (that is, uprightness, a word derived from
that in my Text) as well as Urim, and rather lose the love of ten by his plain
dealing, than the soul of one by dissimulation and unfaithfulness.

Thus uprightness like a silver thread is drawn through the whole course of the
sincere Christian: and he that is upright, is upright every where: And that I
may set out this holy course by its most proper Opposites,

1. An upright man is a great enemy to Craftiness or Subtlety. Though he
studies to be Wise, yet he delights not in Cunning. Craft is wisdom
degenerated, it is wisdom divested of honesty. A tang of this was in that
practice of Rebecca, Genesis 37. 35. to procure the blessing for Jacob by a wile.
But it cost him many a sweating day, and many a frosty night: Guile and guilt
go hand in hand, Job 15. 5. Thy mouth utters thy iniquity, and thou choosest
the tongue of the crafty. Carnal policy was never friend to inward piety;
Concilia callida prim^ specie laeta, tractatu dura, ev^ntu tristia. Live.
though it sometimes wears Lambs wool without, yet it is always lined within
with the Foxes furre: But the true and holy God disappoints the devices of the
crafty, and drives the counsels of the froward headlong, Job 5. 12. An upright
man is clear in his thoughts, and though discreet, yet candid and fair in his
dealings. And I doubt not to affirm, there is no lawful calling under Heaven,
but may be managed without this sinful craftiness. Away then with that idle
pretense, that without it few Tradesmen can subsist. Cursed is that trade that
cannot stand without sin, says worthy Mr. Capel. Better beg than sin, better
starve than damn. Well fare the integrity of those noble Athenians, who in
their war against the rest of Greece, were told Plutarch in Arist.
by Themistocles, that he had a Stratagem against their enemies, but it was not
to be told publicly: so they wished him to tell it to Aristides. He tells him
it was to set the Arsenal on fire, where all the Ships of the Grecians lay.
Aristides presently told the people, his design was indeed Profitable, but not
Just; and thereupon it was exploded by them all. Certainly the greatest wisdom
in the World is to be a right honest man.

2. An upright man is a great enemy to Time-serving. There is a wise and
faultless observing the times; the men of Issachar it should seem were good at
it, 2 Chronicles. 12. 32. they had understanding of the times to know what Israel
ought to do. Not only meant of weather-wisdom by rural observations; but also
that by Deduction from former, they could make Directions for future times: and
so he is compared to an Ass, Genesis 49. 14. for the strength of his back, not the
stupidity of his head. A point of great wisdom to know what to do, according to
the will of God, in every turn of Providence, or change of condition, and in
every company we come in.

But there is a culpable Temporizing when a man has so mastered his
Conscience, and reduced it to that ready Like Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria,
who was named Euripus for his ebbing and flowing in matters of Religion: for a
Bishopric he would swear to the Nicene Council, and then to keep it, he would
for swear it again.
flexibleness, that for worldly ends he can think, and speak, and act, one way,
this day, this month, this year, and next day, next month, next year another
way; can set his sails to every wind, please every body, to profit or preserve
himself: Can turn, return, overturn, any turn to serve his own turn. And this
temper is directly opposite to that uprightness we are describing. The upright
man is deliberate in choosing and settling his principles, but a thousand worlds
shall not alter him without clear evidence in his Conscience. He is not a
twining Willow, but a sturdy Oak; and whether the point he differ in, be small
or great, if a matter of Conscience, though he will not be factious,
troublesome, or uncharitable; yet all the Rhetoric or Rigor on Earth, will
not remove an upright man from his course, till God do make the business clear
upon his Conscience.

How far the blast of temptation may, for a time, bend or bow a sincere
Christian, or how long, no man can determine: the best are frail enough, and
they who are most censorious of others warpings, would perhaps fall more
foully, if they lived under their temptations: but this base obsequiousness is
no part of the man's uprightness, when the snare is broken, the sincere man will
come to himself, and there abide.

3. An upright man is a great enemy to Defrauding of others. He that studies
that most righteous Law, Mat. 7. 12. Whatsoever ye would that men should do to
you, do ye also to them, and has it written in his very heart, as that Heathen
Emperor had it written in each room Al^x. S^verus.
of his house, will abominate this most wretched practice. For which of you
would be cheated, or defrauded by another? Would you think it well to have a
cracked estate offered to you? an unsound beast, or unproveable wares, imposed
upon you? a blear-eyed Leah instead of a beautiful Rachel put upon you? you
would condemn and dislike it. Open the book of your own Consciences, they will
tell you that it is hateful therefore, to deal so with another. The upright man
considers, that he is not born only to promote his own profit; that he should
love his neighbor as himself; that all his bargains and doings in the world,
will be tried again, and therefore let others do as they will, so will not he
because of the fear of God, Neh. 5. 15. He is one that has laid this Law upon
himself, rather to suffer the greatest injury, than to do the least: and that
because he sees more evil in the least sin, than in the greatest suffering.
Besides the remembrance he has, and the dread of that 1 These. 4. 6. That no
man go beyond or defraud his brother in any matter, because the Lord is the
avenger of all such. The Conscience of his duty, and rooted liking of truth and
equity, does above all things steer him in these matters. He knows that there
is as much honesty in stealing the money out of his purse, or robbing him by
the way, as in a wilful cheating or defrauding him, and therefore he will not
do it in any matter.

That God who will stay for his own worship, till a man has undone his injury,
Mat. 5. 23, 24^ Leave thy gift at the Altar, etc. will never accept our most
zealous service while we sleep with such unjust gain. Alas! estates so raised
are like that Eagles nest, that was consumed with fire, by the coal that came
with the meat she stole from the Altar; there is a fatal curse comes with such
gain, that at length destroys all the rest of a man's well-gotten goods. Now
uprightness stands in a direct opposition to such indirect courses. He knows
that he who has clean hands, shall be stronger and stronger, Job 17. 9. when
on the other side (to use a great Statesmans Proverb) Frost and Fraud shall end
in Foul.

4. An upright man (to finish the rude Draught of this Divine portrait) is an
enemy to all manner of Injustice: whether in respect of Distributive, or
Commutative Righteousness. If the Lord place him in Authority, he is the
greatest hater of bribes, and the least respecter of persons, Isa. 33. 15. He
shakes his hands from holding of bribes, as if he were afraid to be burnt in
the hand with them. He will never revenge his Private injury by the Public
execution, nor heed the merit of the Pers^ against the merit of the Cause. It
was the Encomium of Fabricius that famous Roman, that one might persuade the
Sun from its course, as soon as divert him from his upright and honest dealing.
Such is our upright man in office, blind to faces, deaf to cries, and dead to
threats and promises.

And then for Commutative justice and dealing between man and man, you have his
character before; he endeavors to cleave an hair, and does exercise himself to
have always a Conscience void of offense, toward all men, Acts 24. 16. And so
he raises an estate slowly, but he builds surely, as he goes, and the
generation of the upright after him shall be blessed.

And thus you see his Profession and his Practice are in the same tale. God
helps him to spin an even thread throughout. He is the same in the camp below,
for the main, as in the mount above, and there is a looking-glass in his words
and actions, through which you may see his heart. Its true, this unbyassed and
steadfast course occasions him often much trouble in the world, and he goes for
a singular, a precise, an obstinate man with them that know him not. And
because he will humor none, he is often box't on both sides, and finds Livies
observation true, Media via nec parit amicos, nec tollit inimicos; his
impartial honesty neither finds friends, nor abates his enemies; [the
uprightest Arbitrators please neither party,] yet for all this, the comfort of
his Conscience feasts him, and before the scene be taken down, he shall lose
nothing by his integrity, Psalm. 37. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the
upright: for the end of that man is peace. Mark heedfully this man, I but how
can we know him? Uprightness is a character written out of man's sight and
reading; why thus, where ever you find a man's words and ways upright, you are
bound to think his heart is upright also. This is the Law of Charity, this is
the Law of Equity. But what will be the end of him? The End of that man is
peace. He may meet with disquiets in his beginning, and troubles in the middle,
but the End of that man is Peace: yea there is no end of that man's peace. For
that God that will not, that cannot lie, has said it, with the upright man
will I show my self upright.

And thus at length you see wherein stands the uprightness of a man.

SECT. XV.
ANd, now Sirs, if all this goes. 15. An Interence concerning the paucity of
upright men.
to make an upright man, what shall I say! where dwell these upright men? how
very few is the number of them! The wise man was in the right, Prove. 20 6, 7.
Most men will proclaim every one his own goodness: but a faithful man who can
find? It is a general course for most men to blow their own Trumpet, and fetch
about most of their stories and discourses to end in themselves, and to set out
their own goodness; but a faithful true right man, who can find? The next verse
will show him you, The just man walking in his integrity. That Is the man in the
Bible, if we could match him in the World. I doubt not but there are many such
in the World, but verily there are few such in comparison; so resigned to God,
resolved for God, such single-hearted, sound-hearted, sincere-hearted,
whole-hearted, plain-hearted men; such inward, universal and constant
Christians; Persons of that Simplicity, Purity, Perfection, and Plainness of
Life and Conversation; such enemies to Flattery, Lying, Equivocation,
Promise-breaking, Craftiness, Time-serving, Defrauding and Injustice. Good
Lord! how rare are these on Earth in this Age. We are fallen into an Age of
Atheists, Scorners, Brutes, Hypocrites, and we may sadly say with the Prophet,
Mic. 7. 4. The best of them is a bryar, the most upright is sharper than a
thorn hedge. Innocent Religion, and Sober Piety is hooted out of the world; and
upright men derided, who if they were thoroughly known, would rather almost be
adored. My Brethren, there are but few folks that bid likely for Heaven, if
this be an upright man. The judgment of Charity is one thing, but when Gods
judgment of Verity comes, the case will alter. Very, very few will hold weight
by this balance, and as I need not, so I know not that I have made more ado
than needs, or cut the way to Heaven narrower than it is. It is reported of
Pachomius the famous Abbot among the Ancients, that the 1300 Monks he governed,
he divided according to the Greek letters into four and twenty classes or
ranks, and sorted each to that letter that hinted his condition, as under Iota
the plain single-hearted person, and under Xi the close intricate person, etc.
If we should rank Christians thus, how many would be crowded under the last
letter, and how few under the first! and what need then (trow you) had we to
mourn for the fewness of upright men, and to judge our selves exactly, lest we
should be found to be none of them. And thus we are brought to the second Point
to be handled, and that is, How God shows himself an upright God to such a man.

CHAP. II. Of the Uprightness of God.
THat with an upright man, God will show himself upright, is evident, For

1. It is agreeable to his Nature, Psalm. 25. 8. Good and upright is the Lord.
He is an upright God, and therefore loves Uprightness. How can he choose then
but show himself upright to an upright man? Simplicity is Gods first Attribute,
and Simplicity is the upright man's chief Property; there must needs therefore
be a singular kindness between these two.

2. It is agreeable to his Method. All stories Divine and Humane show thi^ to
be his usual way. Witness Noah, he was upright in a rotten Age, and the Lord
was not behind with him: Witness Abraham, who walked before him and was
upright, and God though he was long, yet he was sure in rewarding him; So to
Caleb, so to Job, so to David, to all: no man can come out, and charge God with
neglect, or unfaithfulness toward him herein.

3. It is agreeable to his Honor and Interest. It is a Princes Honor and
Interest to stick to his faithful and upright servants, or else he will quickly
have none such about him. He would rather lose a World than lose his Honor;
and therefore in this Psalm he is brought in, overturning the earth rather than
leave upright David to his Enemies. If fidelity and kindness will win him
servants, Satan shall have but a few. He can boldly implead all the world, much
more his people, Mic. 6. 3. O my people what have I done unto thee? testify
against me. He would scorn to deal by his servants as Satan does, drive them
into a snare, and there leave them; promise them a World, and pay them with an
Hell.

4. It is agreeable to his Promise, Psalm. 97. 11. Light is sown for the
righteous, and joy for the upright in heart. However this seedness may be wet
and sad, yet they shall have a joyful harvest. If any man on earth can lay
claim to the promises, it is the upright man. What an unspeakable comfort is
this, to lay the finger of faith on any promise in the Bible, and say
confidently this is mine? say no more I am weak and useless and sinful, Art
thou upright? his word is past, and there is an end, all the promises in this
blessed Bible are in travail to be delivered into thy heart. To the upright man
he will show himself upright. And that in these particulars.

SECT. I.
I. IN over-looking his Infirmities. This was Hezekiahs prayer at that famous.
1. Overlooking his infirmities.
Passover, 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19, 20. The good Lord pardon every one that has
prepared his heart to seek God, though he be not cleansed according to the
purification of the Sanctuary. And the Lord hearkened to Hezekiah. There were
diverse really upright, yet not rightly and fully purified as you may see, 2 Chronicles. 29. 34. For the Levites were more upright in heart to sanctify
themselves, than the Priests. Here were upright Levites, yet not sufficiently
purified, but Hezekiah obtained for them a pardon of course, for they had done
what they could, and the Lord had mercy on them. A very great comfort for
Ministers or People, that through straits of time, or any unavoidable
hindrance, are not rightly sitt^d and furnished for their respective duties;
and are afraid to come, and more afraid to stay away; The good Lord will pardon
such a one, it was an oversight, the heart was sound at the bottom, and God
will never break with any of his for an infirmity. Compare Saul and David, Saul
had foolishly (at most covetously) spared Agag, and a prey, and he is cast off
for it and loses his kingdom. David defiles the Wife, and then kills the
Husband, and he is spared: he is, its true, sorely beaten, but not turned out
of doors. Again, take Peter and Judas. Judas through covetousness betrays his
Master, and Peter through fear denies and forswears him. Judas is sent by the
Gallows into Hell, and Peter is received into mercy. And why this different
dealing? why, David was in the bent of his heart upright before God, and Saul
in the bottom of his heart was for himself; Peter resolved to lose his life
before he would forsake his Savior, and Judas never followed him but for the
bag. And therefore the Lord graciously pardons the unwilling infirmities of his
people, for he sees the integrity of their hearts. As a faithful Husband is
more satisfied with the bewailed failings of his poor Wife, than with the
studied observances of an adulteress; so the Lord our God he can better connive
at, and bear with the mourned for infirmities of his dear children, than with
the feigned compliance of rotten hypocrites.

And what a treasure of comfort is this for you that fear God? and let none
else meddle with it; your infirmities are many, and your fear great, lest they
should sink you for ever: you have such raging passions, brutish lusts,
frequent distractions, base distrust, un-heavenliness of heart out of
ordinances, and dullness in them; these are your burden, these your fear: now
all these are within the Grant of pardon made in the Cov^nant of Grace, and you
that are upright in heart, if any in the world, have an undoubted interest
therein; and so are forgiven in Heaven, and will be forgiven in your
Consciences, so far as is good for you, and shall be forgiven at the last day.
And you have Gods word for it, Psalm. 32. 1, 2. Blessed is the man whose
iniquity is forgiven, whose sin (...) covered. But who is he that may claim
this blessing? Verse 2. In whose spirit there is no Guile, that is an upright
man, that is no hypocrite. When therefore you have fallen into sin, do not sit
poring and questioning your eternal state, but speedily and seriously set about
the work of repentance and faith in the blood of Christ, that you may be made
whole.

Indeed after some great fall, or extraordinary fit of spiritual slumber, it is
not amiss to clear and resettle the ground work, (so far may the building be
decayed, that it may be easier to build anew, than to repair the old.) But it
is neither wisdom nor duty upon every slip to condemn your state, or to
conclude, that because you are wounded or sick, therefore you are dead.
Question your act, but not your state, condemn your acts of sin, but do not
condemn your state of grace, nor brew more tears than you need to drink. For
supposing you to be true men to God, resigned to him, resolved for him, and
walking with him, to your power, he has graciously promised to pardon
iniquity, transgression and sin, sins of all sorts and sizes of them that fear
him and hope in his mercy.

And mark it for your comfort, that it belongs to Gods Truth and Uprightness to
pardon such a sinner. 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our sins, he is Faithful and
Just, to forgive (...) our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. It
is happy for us that we can plead mercy to God for pardon, but when we do
uprightly confess and forsake our sins, we may plead his justice and
faithfulness. O Lord, as thou art just and faithful, bestow a pardon on me, I
beg it in the uprightness of my heart, bestow it in the uprightness of thy
word. For thou have said, with the upright man I will show my self upright.

SECT. II.
II. THe Lord will show himself upright to an upright man, in Defending. 2.
Defending his Person.
his Person. He is made sometimes the Butt of malice. Hell and earth conspire
against him, as in this Psalm, verse. 4, 5. Snares of death, floods of ungodly
men, sorrows of Hell all bent against him. A plain argument of the sad
de^eneracy of mankind, to be so desperately set against the Image of God in
man, and hate those that never did them wrong, and that for his sake that
always does them good; yet so is the case, the most innocent man cannot escape
by them unto Heaven, without many onsets; they bend their bow and lay their
snares, can hardly sleep for rage. Wrongs and Scorns, and Fines and Prisons are
their usual Charity; he that departs from evil, ever makes himself a prey. The
generality of the world are alienated from the life of God, and enemies in
their minds to all that live it; and O that I could speak and write it in tears
of grief and compassion! A Drunkard, a Swearer, a Whoremonger may live quietly
by them. He that never read the Scriptures, that never prays with his Family,
shall have all their good will, and go quietly by them into destruction: but if
a man's Conscience be once awakened, if he retrive his course, and fall to
earnest prayer, change his company and sinful courses, dare not profane the
Sabbath, or take Gods Name in vain, or swear as before, then up do all his
neighbors rise against him, watch him, censure him, malign him, and (if
possible) ins^are him; while he (poor heart) thinks them no hurt, prays for
them, and only strives to save his own soul, and others if he can.

But here you may rest safoly, Prove. He is a Buckler to them that walk
uprightly! The Buckler covers the Soldier, and God cove^ the upright man. They
must shoot through God, that can wound you to your (...). They hit him in the
eye, that aim at you; and they that will encounter him, meddle not with their
match, Exodus 19. 4. I bear you on Eagles wings. Other Fowls bear their young in
their claws, so that the Fowler may kill the young, and the old one be safe;
but the Eagle carrie^ her young on her wings; so that who wounds the young,
must shoot through the dam: so does God carry his upright ones; God will suffer
before them, the Lord will suffer with them, Deu^. 32. 11. As the Eagle --
spreads abroad her wings, takes her young and bears them on her wings; So
the Lord, etc. That is a sweet word, Psalm. 7. 10. My defense is of God, which
saves the upright in heart. Thou have perhaps no great friend to shelter thee,
nor great estate to ranso^e thee, but thou have a great God for thy defense,
whose work and care it is to save the upright in heart. I am thy shield, says
God to Abraham, fear not: if Omniscience be able to see, and Omnipotence able
to help, thou art sure enough. And therefore fear not thou worm Jacob, and ye
men of Israel: I will help thee, says the Lord, Isa. 41. 14. A worm is a poor
creature that few love, and none fear, so are the seed of Jacob persons that
few love, and none fear, and such are most obnoxious to dangers; yet says God,
fear not thou werm. A worm in the hand of God can withstand a world; and the
Gates (the utmost power and policy) of Hell shall not prevail against one
upright man, Prove. 13. 6. Righte^ness keeps him that is upright in the way?
His inno^ence is his shi^ld, And the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout
the whole earth, to show himself strong, in the behalf of them whose heart is
perfect toward him. His all-seeing eye, his all-ruling providence is employed
in finding out all the designs of your enemies, to frustrate them or overrule
them, and to secure you whose hearts are perfect or upright before him. How
secure would you be against a subject by such a word from a King? and may you
not rest more on his word, who is the King of Kings? If you have his Pass you
may go safe enough, even through Armies of Aliens.

Observable is that story in Josephus, of Gods special Providence this way. The
Emperor Caligula commands Petronius, his Deputy in Judea, to set up his Image
in the Temple. The Jews (ever since their Captivity, ^een against Idolatry) b^g
and crave, and at length offer their necks and lives to him, rather than admit
such a profanation. Petronius pities their condition, and forbears to execute
his Masters command. But the Emperor is enraged, and sends his Deputy a Letter
to slay himself, the usual doom of such persons. But Caligula shortly dies, and
his Letter meeting with some delay, was not brought unto Petronius, till just
after he had received the news of his death; and thus he escaped. Behold the
admirable Providence of God to those that stand upright.

Go forth therefore in your might, consider your duty and faithfully do it.
Take no sollicitous care what shall befall you. Study not events, but study
your work; not what man or Devils will do, but what you ought to do, and not an
hair of your head must fall to the ground. Wickedness proceeds from the wicked,
but with the upright man he will show himself upright.

SECT. III.
III. THe Lord will show himself upright. 3. Strengthening his Graces.
to this man, in Strengthening his graces, and prospering him in his soul. His
Graces are weak, his bones dried, his soul is poor and needy. He is poring a
whole week by times to find one plain evidence, one evident Grace of God; but
having an upright heart, and being a plant of Gods planting, they shall
increase and grow up as the calves of the stall. The Child painted on the wall,
that grows not, unless it grows more dim; but the Child in the bosom, that
has a principle of life; though it cries it grows; though sick sometimes yet
grows, and at length grows a strong and lusty man: so in this case, the painted
hypocrite has no cubit added to his stature; no, he grows worse and worse, his
varnish wears off, and nothing remains at length but a sepulcher without paint.
But an upright man though he groan he grows; though he have some qualms, and
doubts, and troubles, yet he gets ground, and (though insensibly) gathers
strength.

It cannot be, but that a sincere heart who is diligent in the means of Grace,
must be changed from glory to glory, Mic. 2. 7. Do not my words do good to him
that walks uprightly? certainly they do; He receives good, though he perceive
it not. As a living man, that feeds heartily, must needs gather strength,
unless he have some predominant disease upon him; though perhaps he perceive
not at every meal renewed strength: So an upright man, being truly alive to
God through Jesus Christ, and careful in the use of all Gods Ordinances, must
needs increase his spiritual strength, though perhaps he sees no present profit
by this prayer, or that Sermon, unless he lie under the tyranny of some
imperious sin for a time, Prove. 10. 29. The way of the Lord is Strength to the
Upright; which most properly may dignifie, that Religion secures an upright
man, according to the last Point; but it is most true in this sense, the ways
of God and Godliness are strength, and bring strength to the upright. He that
is planted in the house of the Lord, shall still bring forth fruit. -- To show
that the Lord is upright, Psa. 92. 13, 14. It is one thing to be placed in the
house of the Lord, so many a carnal Gospoller is, has a seat there and appears
there from one years end to another; but it is another thing to be planted
there, to have a root of Knowledge, Repentance, and Uprightness, and such must
needs grow, and go from strength to strength.

Be not therefore discouraged, O ye of upright heart, for your grain of
mustard seed will become a Tree; though your graces seem weak, they shall be
strong: To him that has shall be given, and he shall have abundance. You have
a little faith and love, Habenti dabitur. God has said it, you shall have
abundance: Despise not the day of small things, ply your Oars, the Ship is
passing though you think it stands still, and you will be at the shore ere you
be aware, Ephesians. 6. 24. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ
in sincerity. Here Is that blessing that reaches even you. [Grace] All Grace, of
all sorts and sizes, [be with] it may be with you, though it appear not to you,
[with all] in all ages of the Church, and in all places of the World, [that
love our Lord Jesus Christ] perhaps thou can not preach for Christ, write,
nor consult, nor fight for Christ, nor but thou can love Jesus Christ. Thou
can love him as a Lord to Rule thee, as a Jesus to Save thee, as a Christ to
teach thee: why, here is Grace in the promise, in the blessing for thee. But
Christ must be loved (in sincerity) Jesus Christ, himself, and Jesus Christ for
himself. And then be assured that Grace shall be multiplied to such a soul. As
it is Gods judicial method when men are resolved to go on in sin, to give them
up, Rev. 22. 11. He that is filthy let him be filthy still: So when a man is
uprightly bent to serve him, he spurs them on with his word and spirit, saying,
He that is righteous let him be righteous still, and thus herein to the upright
man, he shows himself upright.

SECT. IV.
IV. THe Lord shows himself upright. 4. Hearing his Prayers.
to the upright man, In hearing his prayers, Prove. 15. 8. The Sacrifice of the
wicked is an abomination to the Lord: But the Prayer of the upright is his
delight. No music so sweet to men, as sincere prayers are to God. The upright
man delights to pray, and the upright God delights to hear. How pleasant is the
child's first language to the father? he had rather hear it than an elegant
Oration; and the reason is, first, it is his own child, and secondly, it speaks
(poor thing) as it thinks; there is no color upon its words, nor dissimulation
in them: Even so the prayers of the upright man are most welcome to God his
heavenly Father, for the child is his own, and then his prayer is the
counterpane of his heart. He cries against his sin, and also he hates it: he
sues for Grace, and he does heartily long and endeavor for it: and Hearts can
come into Heaven, when Words must stand at door. He gets out of the hearing of
many a starch't Oration, but Psalm. 145. 18. He gets nigh to them that call upon
him, to them that call upon him in Truth. O when confessions are the sad note
of a bleeding heart; when supplications are the real breath of an hungry soul,
the Lord listens to such melody.

There is a vast difference between the formal note of a young beggar, and the
sensible cries of him that is half starved: we neglect the former, and are
ready to serve him only with reproof; but when the other cries that begs in
truth, his face cries, his rags cry, his tears cry, the whole beggar cries,
then we draw out our heart and hand unto him; even so does our gracious God, he
slights and hates affected words, coming from an unaffected heart; but when the
heart comes up with them, then he comes, and brings his alms with him, and his
reward before him. O what encouragement should this give to an upright heart!
Thou have an ear for God, and he has an ear for thee. Thou art ready and quick
in thy obedience, he is as quick and ready in his audience; thou art punctual
to yield to him in any thing, he is punctual to yield in any thing unto thee.
In a word, thou art resolved to do his will, he is resolved to do thine. Hence
L^ther boldly, Fiat voluntas mea quia tua est, Let my will be done, because its
thine. Thine are broken prayers, but they are upright prayers. There is no
Rhetoric in them, ^but there is Logic in them, there are arguments that will
conquer God himself. Qui palma militat lentius pugnat, qui pug^o ferit, palmam
fert. Dr. Arro.
There is no argument on earth like Integrity, nor in Heaven like the Blood of
Christ.

Object. Ah, but then I fear my state, and doubt of my sincerity, in that I
have prayed long for such a child, for a better memory, for strength against
some sins, and have received no answer; and so may conclude my self a very
hypocrite.

Answ. 1. God often delights in prayer, The Ly^ness leaves her young, till they
have almost killed themselves with roaring, and returns to them at last gasp,
to teach them courage.
when he seems to deny it, and never denies his servants but when the deni^ is
better then a grant. You must distinguish between delaying and denying: our God
delays, to try us, not to deny us, to make us cry the louder; so he put off
Jacob to whet him on the more; seemed to be weary of his company, but he would
not pass so; lames him, yet he will pray, and wrestle on one leg rather then give
out: So the woman of Canaan. Drink is more welcome, when very thirsty; and when
the Lord sees you cannot be without a mercy, you shall have it. And then the
Greatness of the mercy, shall pay for the length of its stay; and like money at
Interest, so your pray^s which have been long on the file, shall bring the
greater increase back again.

Answ. 2. God often hears our Prayers, when we perceive it not. In this sense
he speaks once and twice, yet man perceives it not, Psalm. 138. 3. In the Day
when I cried, thou answeredst me, and strengthenedst me with strength in my
soul. On the same Day that his letter was sent, he had an answer, and what was
it? Why, he was strengthened with strength in his soul. If he were not answered
in the Letter, yet he was answered in the Better. He often gives Gold, when we
ask for Silver. If he denied Abraham for Ismael, he gave him Isaac. He denies
Moses Canaan, but gave him Heaven.

Sometimes our thirst for more, makes us think we have received none. As rich
covetous people never have enough, because their desires are insatiable. When
you are arrived at Heaven, you shall see that the Lord did book every Petition
and answer it, in the best manner for you. It may be you are denied for one
child, but God gives it you for another; or perhaps the Grandchild reaps the
prayers that you sowed for the Father. The Lord gives you not a stronger
memory, but yet bestows on you a softer heart; you discern no strength against
some sins, yet you have deeper throws of repentance for them. Still this is a
truth inviolable, that the upright man's Prayer, when it is put up in Christ's
name, for things agreeable to Gods will, is graciously heard and answered in
mercy.

Let not therefore your Fathers seeming denials trouble you; for our wise God
sometimes yields to the suits of Satan himself, while he demurrs upon the
supplications of his own Servants, I had almost said of his own Son. Compare
Job 2. 5. and Luke 8. 32. with Genesis 17. 18. and Mat. 26. 39. But then his
Grants to Satan are for his greater Confusion, and his Denials to his Children
are for their greater Consolation.

SECT. V.
V. THe Lord shows himself upright to the upright man, In comforting. 5.
Comforting him in his straits.
him in his straits, Psalm. 116. 6. The Lord preserves the simple, (that is,
the upright) I was brought low and he helped me. His integrity freeth him not
from the common infirmities of mankind, as wants, sickness, prisons, losses,
crosses, unkindnesses, and death it self at last: but his God takes special
care to support and comfort him, and at length deliver him. In all these storms
he is sure of Sunshine, and you know the Sunbeams when it shines, do guild
every drop that the clouds pour down, and make the storm as a calm: So the face
and favor of God, does refresh the upright in heart, for Psalm. 11. 7. The
righteous Lord loves righteousness, his countenance does behold the Upright.
And unworthy is that man of Heavens Glory, that prefers not the sharpest
sickness, the darkest prison, the heaviest cross with the light of Gods
countenance, before the riches of Egypt with his frowns.

This made Paul and Silas sing in prison, when Foelix trembled on the Throne:
And they say, the Apostle James was so cheerful at his Martyrdom, that one that
drew him to the Tribunal, was converted by it. For Death that King of terrors,
that dismounts the proudest spirits, the most effectual refuter of all
Atheists, and Surprizer of Hypocrites, is disarmed of all its terribleness by
an upright heart. Isa. 57. 2. He shall enter into peace, they shall rest in
their beds, each one walking in their uprightness. The Bed of an hypocrite is a
Grave, wherein he lies rotting in his sins; the Grave of an upright man is a
Bed of spices, wherein his body is at rest, whose soul has walked before God
in his Uprightness.

O be of good cheer then all ye single-hearted ones: The handkerchief of Gods
love shall wipe away your tears, his cordials shall stay your faintings. The
Lions shall roar, and the young Lions suffer hunger, but they that fear the
Lord shall want no good thing. If wants be good for you, look for them; if
sickness be good for you, be content with it; if prisons, if losses, if crosses
come, they shall do you no hurt: A summo Bono nil nisi Bonum. Every stream of
Providence, how fierce soever, is turned through that Promise, All things shall
work together for good to them that love God. His Properties, his Promises, his
Providence do all smile on the true-hearted man. Poor men, your straits may be
great; Poor women, your pangs may be sharp; but All Is for good, yea for the
best. God is with you, the great, wise, and holy God. And is this nothing? Are
the Consolations of God small with you? If he give quietness, who then can make
trouble? Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. The
story always ends well to the sincere-hearted man, Psalm. 112. 4. Unto the
upright arises light in the darkness. Dark providence may well be born, when
clear promises are sealed upon the heart. This was noble Hezekiahs comfort,
when all forsook him, Isa. 38. 3. Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I
have walked before thee in Truth, and with a perfect heart. I have done
uprightly with thee, now deal uprightly with me; now remember, and the Lord
has too good a memory to forget such a man in his needs; he gives him a Lease
gratis of fifteen years both of Life and Kingdom.

Who would not entirely love and serve such a God? The poor man's Friend, the
sick man's Doctor, yea and Bed-maker, the prisoners Companion, the true-hearted,
the unwearied, the everlasting God, a very present help in trouble. Name that
strait, wherein God has not supported or relieved his people Ask thy Fathers
and they shall tell thee, how in six troubles and in seven he has been with
them. All the Patriarchs can prove this, Abraham, and Job, and Daniel. Speak we
only with David, was he not very poor, when he sent to crave of Nabal? God gave
him Content, and at last Plenty: Was he not in dreadful hazard in Keilah, in
Gath, in Mahanaim? but he came off well, and dyed in his bed: Was he not upon a
time very sick, so that some said, An evil disease did cleave to him? yet God
remembered him, and made him safe and sound. All the Saints will bear witness
for God, that he is no flincher of his friends; yea at last all men shall say,
Psalm. 58. 11. Verily there is a reward for the righteous; verily he is a God
that judges in the earth. Though things seem to go cross with his poor
children, yet take one thing with another, he deals very uprightly with them.
In very faithfulness thou have afflicted me. If they want a fuller table, yet
they have a lighter heart; if they have not such costly clothes, yet they have
more healthful constitutions; if they reach not such vast treasures, yet they
can enjoy the light of Gods countenance, which is far better.

Artabazus thought himself wronged, when Cyrus gave him a Golden cup at a
feast, and to Chrysantas only a kiss of Respect; deeming thereby, that he had a
lesser portion of kindness, than the other: and shall not we much more value
his glorious smiles, above the greatest earthly gifts? Let him kiss me with the
kisses of his mouth: For his love is better than Wine. Though you be not
delivered from your straits, yet being upheld in them, you are well. It was all
one to the three Worthies to be kept in the fire, as to be kept out of it. One
way or other light shall spring to the righteous, and joy to the upright in
heart.

SECT. VI.
VI. THe Lord shows himself upright. 6. Directing him in his Doubts.
to the upright man, In directing him in his doubts, Prove. 11. 3. The integrity
of the upright shall guide them. Many an upright man is under great doubts, and
knows not what to believe or what to do. Arguments and pleas on both hands,
Great men on one side, and Good men on another, (for seldom are they both on a
side) likely reasons court his Assent either way. The commands of men sometimes
countermanded by his Conscience, and he wants parts, learning, and judgment to
cleave an hair, and state the case exactly, either of Faith or Fact. Now in
this case, when he has used the means of resolution, that he is capable of,
the integrity of the upright shall guide him. His plain honest heart is neither
suspicious of more evil to be in men, or things, then evidently appears; nor on
the other side, does he study extricating Salvo's, or subtle evasions to sleep
with a whole skin, and salute the upper party: but according to his best
knowledge, he fixes his faith and orders his actions by the Rule of Gods Word,
which he knows will best bear him out.

An upright man sometimes meets with Doubts in matters of Faith; but herein he
stands fairest for that promise, which Christ has made, to lead his into all
truth. Though his integrity may not secure him from Error, that it will not;
yet 'twill secure him from being an Heretic.

He has Doubts sometimes about things to be done; toward God in his Worship,
toward men in his Life. In the former, he studies the will of God in his Word,
knowing that nothing which is offered to him, will please him, unless directed
by him. And for Men, he is relieved in most of his doubts by that golden Rule,
Mat. 7. 12. What soever ye would that men should do to you, do ye to them.

And lastly, he is perplexed with some Doubts about the Love of God, and the
salvation of his Soul; but here also his Integrity so guides him, that he is
far from presuming, though he be loath to despair, and the Lord gives him
Comfort from his Sincerity, though he want the joys from Assurance. And is not
uprightness a choice Jewel to lay claim to this guidance? Psalm. 25. 8. Good and
upright is the Lord, therefore will he teach sinners in the way. This
conducting a poor sinner in the way, flows from his Goodness and Uprightness,
and therefore as long as there is a drop of goodness, or a dram of uprightness
in God, the penitent sinner shall never lack a guide. And to this refers that
promise, Isa. 30. 21. Of a voice behind you saying, this is the way, walk ye in
it, when ye turn to the right hand or to the left; alluding (as some think) to
a Schoolmaster prompting his Scholar over the shoulder, how he should pronounce
his words, when he (poor child) is puzzled and knows not what to say: even so
will God lead his upright ones in the way that he shall choose, when they are in
the dark; and you shall find that Scripture true, Prove. 13. 6. Righteousness
keeps him that is upright in the way: But wickedness overthrows the sinner.

Resolve then in such cases, after you have used the means of illumination, as
Jehoshaphat in another, O Lord, I know not what to do, but mine eyes are unto
thee. I perceive the blindness of my eyes, but thou see the uprightness of my
heart, I would do thy will if I knew it; teach me thy way, and I will walk in
thy truth: consider my weakness, and neither leave me in perplexing doubts, nor
suffer me to err from thy will. And be sure God will not forsake thee, for it
is plain that many an honest heart is preserved in the way of truth, when many
of great, but unsanctified parts, have fallen into damning errors: With the
upright man he is used to show himself upright.

SECT. VII.
VII. GOds uprightness will yet appear,. 7. Clearing his Integrity.
In clearing his integrity. Sincerity has the sweetest visage, but bad men put
on it often the foulest vizard, and many a dear Saint wears the note of an
hypocrite to his grave. Though you see that no man is so far from hypocrisy as
this man, no sin he hates more, yet this character is usually fastened on our
plain-hearted man.

It is the subtlety of Satan to charge the Saints with those sins whereof he is
sure they can hardly clear themselves till the day of judgment: And those are
commonly these two, 1. Covetousness. 2. Hypocrisy. Both which, for the nature
of them, lie so within, that it is almost impossible to refell his charge.
Hence the Apostle is driven in the former to make his appeal to God, 1 These. 2.
5. For neither at any time used we flattering words, as ye know, [for this you
can clear us] nor a cloak of Covetousness, God is witness, [herein God only can
purge us.] And the like the latter, Romans 1. 9. For the Lord is my witness, whom
I serve with my spirit, etc. And the upright Lord will clear up these men's
integrity, first or last. Holy David lay under many heavy charges, and that for
a long time. How long will ye turn my glory into shame? Naught he was, not fit
to live in his own native Country, he hatched treason against Saul, and
undermined his Government, and Religion he had none, but at length his
Righteousness did shine as the noonday; Saul himself was convinc^d of his
integrity, and acquitted him, though thereby he condemned himself. So upright
Job past for a notorious hypocrite among his enemies, for he was accounted no
other by his friends, but the Lord brought out his Justice, as a Lamp that
burns.

And what is more common in the World, than to brand every one for an
hypocrite, that is but serious in his Religion? If any man do humbly and
conscientiously endeavor to live according to his Covenant in Baptism, do set
himself against the world, the flesh, and the devil, and deny the pomps and
vanities, wherein the generality of men do wallow; presently his envious and
carnal neighbors, when they can tax him with nothing, condemn him for an
hypocrite: his outside is smooth, but inwardly he is an arrand hypocrite: but
his upright God, that knows his heart, will clear him sooner or later; at
furthest at that great day of setting things at right. The Lord Jesus will come
with his thousands of Saints, Jude verse. 15. to convince the ungodly world of
all their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. See
here you implacable wretches, this is the man, this the woman, whom you
condemned for hypocrites; they were praying for you, while you were cursing
them; I knew their uprightness and will now declare it, Thus shall it be done
to those I delight to honor, and you must go with a curse into eternal
torments.

Rejoice in the Lord therefore, O ye Righteous, and be glad all ye of upright
heart. Be not dismayed at men's rebukes, these Reproaches do but add to your
Crown: And God permits them, to make you search your hearts the more. Though
these be poor commodities, yet you may make a trade of them, and live the
better for them. They charge you with the Foxes pranks, and you have the Foxes
Nature. They charge you with one fault, and thereby you find out another; they
write Hypocrite, and you subscribe Formal, Dead, Secure, and chief of Sinners.
And know for your comfort, that your names shall have a Resurrection as well as
your bodies; and you shall shine in glory, when your enemies shall only shine
in flames. And even in this world your God does justify you in their
Consciences; the most of them could wish their souls in your souls stead, for
all their talk; at least when pale death stares them in the face, then O let me
dye the death of the Righteous, and let my latter end be like his. It is not
often that an hypocrite goes undiscovered to his grave; nor very often that an
upright man dies without the testimony of the Centurion, even from men;
Certainly this man was a dear child of God.

SECT. VIII.
VIII. THe Lord shows himself an. 8. Stablishing him to the End.
upright God to the upright man, In Stablishing him to the end: its elementary
fire that goes out, the Celestial ever burns, Prove. 10. 29. The way of the
Lord is strength to the upright. He only is the persevering man. The fixed
Stars appear but small, the blazing Star looks far greater; but the former
abide from age to age, and the latter being but exhalations, compounded of
corruptible matter, are spent and consumed to nothing; they had perhaps more
eyes fixed on them than on the others, but they waste away: Even so an
hypocrite may make a greater blaze in his profession, may be more admired and
talked of in the world; but the real Saint is fixed, he abides, no tempest can
shake him, he is built on a Rock and abides for ever. The way of the Lord is
strength to the uprighs: Every prayer strengthens him, every Sermon strengthens
him, yea every temptation (like the wind to a wellrooted tree) causes his
roots to spread, and stand the stronger: moved he may be, but not removed, fall
he may, but not fall away: and yet an upright tree (you know) falls not so soon
as that which leans. An upright man never makes a right Apostate, Psalm. 25. 21.
Let integrity and uprightness preserve me: for I wait on thee. Two good props
to a weak Christian. He may say, Lord, I have but weak graces to preserve me, I
have no parts or learning, I have few friends to hold me up in thy ways; But I
have (thou know) a sincere desire to please and serve thee; O let integrity
and uprightness preserve me, and the rather for that I wait on thee: I wait in
the use of the means of perseverance, and I wait by faith upon thy promise. If
sincerity will not hold me up, I must fall.

He that walks in a narrow way, must not reel; if he reel he is in danger to
fall. The true Christian goes in such a way, leaning is next to falling. The
upright man walks uprightly, and therefore surely. He has lived to see great
Scholars, great Professors, and great Preachers, dwindle to nothing, but by
Grace he stand. Sirs, this is a great comfort, and security to a poor soul; my
stock is small, yet I hope I shall never break. I drive but a mean trade, but I
perceive I go not backward: better (...) be a mean Saint, than a great
hypocrite: my heart is sound, I have no secret reserves, I know nothing by my
self. I cannot run so fast as others, but I am in the way, that will certainly
bring me to Gods holy hill, Job 27. 5. Till I dye I will not remove my
integrity from me. My righteousness I hold fast, my heart shall not reproach me
as long as I live.

Among the many needless fears of the servants of God, this is one that
disquiets the soul, when God stands only looking on; namely, shall I hold out?
I am a very weak creature, the fall of one tree shakes another, I have seen
great Cedars fall; they were once as confident as I, if trials come, what will
become of me? Study and believe that excellent Scripture, Jer. 32. 40, 41. I
will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn from them to
do them good. Make a stand here poor soul. The eternal true and upright God is
entered with thee, even with the weakest and youngest believer, into an
everlasting Covenant, that for his part notwithstanding all thy infirmities, he
will never (mark) never turn away from doing thy soul good. O but my fear is,
(says many an upright heart) that I shall forsake him, and turn from him,
there is my fear. Mark what follows then, But I will put my fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me. So then as God will not turn from
thee, so thou shall not depart from him, and how then should thou fall away!
and all this is in his everlasting Covenant, that cannot be disannulled.

When therefore your fears come cold upon your hearts, concerning your
Perseverance, plead this Scripture with God, fasten it on your souls, fear not
your falling off with a fear of Dissidence; you are allowed a fear of Caution,
that will make you stand the faster, but beware of a fear of Dissidence, that
will make you fall the sooner. Look you to the rise, root, and beginning of
your Religion, and God will look to the end of it. Though thy grace was but
like a grain of Mustard Seed, yet it shall come to be a great Tree. Job 8. 6,
7. If thou were pure and upright -- Though thy beginning was small, yet thy
latter end shall greatly increase. He that has taken root in Christ, can never
wholly wither.

SECT. IX.
IX. GOd will show himself upright to the upright man, In bestowing. 9.
Bestowing outward blessings on him.
outward blessings upon him, Prove. 28. 20. A faithful man shall abound with
blessings. To these he can make the clearest claim; of these (...) has the
truest tenure: Always provided that they be for his good. Prove. 14. 11. The
house of the wicked shall be overthrown; but the tabernacle of the upright
shall flourish. The eyes of the Lord are upon him and his house to do him good,
From the beginning of the year, to the end of the year. Health, wealth, peace,
and full contentment shall be heaped on him; so far as they are good for him.
That upright Caleb, whose Title of honor it was, that he followed God fully,
Numb. 14. 24. had a double portion (so the Learned say) in the Land of Canaan.

He that has the sovereignty over the world, and all that therein is, loves
them; and he that loves gives, and that liberally, Prove. 15: 6. In the house of
the righteous is much treasure. We count our Friends tokens among our treasure:
Every loaf of bread, every shilling in his purse, every corn, yea every
grass-pile in the field is a friends token to the upright man, so that in his
house there is a world of treasure. The upright God does (in effect) say to his
Angels every day, Recommend me to such a child this morning, and carry him from
me his daily bread, this or that mercy that is good for him. Hence that ample
promise, Psalm. 84. 11. For the Lord God is a Sun and Shield: The Lord will give
Grace and Glory: No good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly.
O blessed promise! Do thou want Direction? He is a Sun: Do thou want
Protection? He (...) a Shield: Do thou want Grace? He will give Grace:
Would thou have Glory? He will give that also: Have thou ^eed of other good
things for thy comfort in this life? No good thing will he withold from them
that walk upright^y. Sit down now and think, what thou ^anst wish or need that
is not here promised. And this from that God that cannot deceive, able and
resolved to make good his word. Put all the worldlings Lands, and Palaces, and
Bonds, and Bags unto one scale, and this one verse into the other, and try
whether will weigh down: you will quickly discern they are lighter than vanity,
and this one verse of more weight, than the whole world. Rest your weary hearts
in this, if health were good for me, I know I should have it: if riches were
good for me, I should have them: for I have my upright God in a bond, that he
will withold no^ good thing from me. Nay once more see^ Psalm. 112. 2, 3. The
Generation of the upright shall be blessed: wealth and riche^ shall be in his
house, and his righteousness endures for ever. Thy great care and fea^ is
about thy posterity; lo, here is a promise for them also: the generation of the
upright shall be blessed. Though we cannot certainly be assured of this to
every upright man's child, yet this promise gives the upright man more ground o^
hope, than any hypocrite or wicked man in the world has.

There is a Stock of your prayers going in Heaven, and there is a Stock of God
promises in the Bible, why then should you distrust? sooner or later your
post^rity will certainly reap them, either i^ temporal or spiritual mercies; he
man be long, but he will be sure; the Cove^nant is made with you and yours, an^
the generation to come shall fare the better for your integrity. Abraham he
hardly enjoyed one foot of that land, which fell to him for his
trueheartedness, but his posterity had it all. And many an upright man lives
and dies but with an ordinary estate, for he dare not do wrong to grow rich,
but the Lord remembers his posterity, and his seed shall be mighty in the
earth, the generation of the upright shall be blessed.

Hold on therefore in your integrity, you are in the way of preferment, Prove.
21. 21. He that follows after righteousness finds life, righteousness and
honor; he finds more than he looked for: It Is true, the vilest men may be
exalted, and the posterity of evil men may be both great and good; but they
have no such promise for it, as you have. They may have fairer houses, finer
fare, costlier clothing, but they have a curse with it, and a sad reckoning to
come. O therefore for your healths sake, for your estate sake, for your
posterities sake, but above all for your souls sake, for an upright Gods sake
study integrity: be true-hearted, sincere-hearted, and whole-hearted men for
God.

SECT. X.
X. GOd will show himself upright to. 10. Crowning their Integrity.
his upright ones, in Crowning their integrity; 1. With Internal Peace:
Melchizedek was first the King of Righteousness, and then King of Salem, King
of Peace; and where Christ has engraven Sincerity, which is the true
Righteousness, then follows Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost. There Is no Rest
but in Religion, nor any sound Peace but in Piety. Others may have Quiet of
Conscience, but the upright man has the Testimony of his Conscience, that is
quite another thing. Theirs is but a truce, a days sickness will break it. The
hypocrite has a Conscience Pacified, but what is this without a Conscience Puri
fied? It is Righteousness and Peace that only will kiss each other. The quie^
of most men's Consciences, is from their Blindness, not from their Goodness;
thus the beasts are well, because they know n^ better, fear no worse: Thus
millions ly^ still and dye like Lambs. If these had more knowledge, they would
have less quiet. They are like the malefactor in a dungeon, that sees not his
misery, or as the bird busy at the chaff, when the Net's unseen: One
thundering threat set on by the spirit of bondage, will spoil all their mirth.
There can be no true peace, where sin is suffered in quiet. It were well for
such as you to be frighted; Cries were your best Music, and Tears the best
Nectar you could drink: you must be let blood or dye, such is your disease that
you must be lanc'd or lost. But now, when true grace comes in, after that
spiritual conflict that breaks the heart of sin, the Conscience has a sweet
peace, or at least ground for it. The Law charges, the Devil charges,
Conscience in Christ's blood, that discharges. He that makes Conscience of sin,
has his Conscience quit from sin. Now I can eat and sleep and go in the dark,
my Conscience bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost, though the earth be
removed, and the Mountains carried into the midst of the sea, yet here is
tranquillity. In the world ye shall have Tribulation, but in me, says Christ,
ye shall have peace; and this is the fruit of uprightness, Isa. 32. 17. And the
work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness,
quietness and assurance for ever. While Francis Spira kept on in his upright
way, he had a heaven of peace; but after his sinful compliance, he had not one
day or hour of quiet in his soul. And it is recorded that Cicero, when dying
and reflecting on his warping and temporizing, he cried out, O me miserum, O me
nunquam felicem, etc. Sincerity and Serenity live and dye together.

And 2. With Eternal Glory. There he pays home the upright man for all. When
his God leads him into the Land of Uprightness, Psalm. 143. 10. there he shall
meet with all Gods hidden ones, of whom the world was not worthy. Ah poor
hypocrite! he knows not what to do, when he dies; each step he takes is toward
Hell; the longer he lives, the nearer his destruction, Job 27. 8. For what is
the hope of the hypocrite though he has gained (wealth, repute, etc.) when God
has taken away his soul? Their very hope, which is all the comfort that is left
them, will flee away and leave them in the briars. But then the upright man
shall be some body. Here he is a Prince unknown, there he enters his kingdom.
Here he is under a cloud, there the righteous shall shine as the Sun for ever
and ever. As he that has an Estate in Reversion, though he live poor a while,
yet the Estate will fall, An inheritance uncorruptible and undefiled that
fades not away; and this as sure as God is in Heaven, and thy name in the
Bible, Genes. Ibi nec malitia nec militia, nec poena nec poenitentia, nec
peccatum nec perditio. Ibi Rex veritas, Lex charitas, Possessi^ Eternitas,
Sermo non valet exprimere, experimento opus est. Prosper.
17. 1. Walk before me, and be perfect: I will be thy exceeding great reward.
Who can desire more than him that is Alt? It will be merry, when the upright
God and the upright Man, do meet. Art thou he that received my dear Son, and
resigned thy heart so freely to him? Art thou he that gave inward, universal,
and constant obedience to my will? Art thou he that stuck to me in such and
such times and trials? Art thou he that walked righteously, and spoke the truth
in thy heart? Come up hither, Angels put on his Crown, sing an Authem ye sons
of the morning at my upright servants coming home. Come enter thou into the joy
of the Lord. Here live, and love, and rejoice for ever. Psalm. 140. 13. Surely
the righteous shall give thanks to thy name: the upright shall dwell in thy
presence. Now many a poor upright heart has hardly a house to cover his head,
scarce a bed to rest on, here he must not dwell, and there he must not dwell;
but there is but one life between him, and a glorious Palace, whereof the
spangled firmament is but the floor. He has an house paved with Rubies, and
filled with Saints and Angels, like so many Suns, and there he shall dwell and
sing among them world without end. Into that Corporation all upright men may
come, and their greatest enemies will never follow them. Seeming Saints will be
in the Church, none but Sincere Saints must come into Heaven. Mat. 5. 8.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

Rejoice therefore in the Lord, O ye Righteous, and shout for joy all ye that
are upright in heart. O what a shout will there be in Heaven, when all this
blessed Tribe meet together, and have Christ among them? and then you shall
see, how the righteous Lord loves righteousness, and his countenance does
behold the upright. Then shall you be paid for every drop of blood, for every
drop of tears, for every step, for every thought that you have laid out for his
Name.

And thus you have the second general Point, in my poor manner opened to you,
namely, Wherein God shows himself upright to the upright man.

CHAP. III. The Application.
SECT. I.
THe third thing follows, which is the Application: what may we gather hence
for the bettering of our Minds or Manners? To inform the former,. 1.
Information.
and to reform the latter.

Use Information. For the former.

1. This Doctrine proclaims the Equity of God. To an upright man he will show
himself upright; why then his ways are equal. Though clouds and darkness be
round about him, [his ways be hidden] yet Judgment and Righteousness are the
habitation of his Throne, [they are always holy, just and equal.] Psalm. 97. 2.
He that has a cause to be tried for Land or Life, counts it a privilege that
he shall have justice; and that at least, every man may expect from God. His
ways are equal, though our ways be unequal, Psalm. 99. 4. The Kings strength
(and who is that but God?) loves judgment, thou do establish equity. So he
does by his Rule and by his Example. Conclude therefore whatever his dealing is
with you or others, that he is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his
works.

The Subject cannot always see the Reason of his Princes method, no nor a
child his fathers; but when they come to the knowledge of them, they magnify
what before they were ready to misconstrue: Even so perhaps you understand not
the ways of God toward you or his Church; but be silent before him, for you
shall see at the long run, that with righteousness does he judge the world, and
the people with equity.

2. This Doctrine pronounces the Misery of all hypocrites. For it follows by
the Rule of contraries, that with such froward pieces, God will show himself
froward. He that walks contrary to God, shall have God to walk contrary to him.
The way of hypocrisy, as well as of impenitency, is a way of contrariety to
God, whose holy Law the hypocrite casts behind his back; it is a way of
contrariety to Jesus Christ, his Prophetical Chair, his Priestly Cross, and his
Kingly Throne; and certainly God will walk contrarily unto them. He will
out-wit the subtlest, and overthrow the stubbornest hypocrite on earth. He
takes the wise in their own craftiness, and the counsel of the Job 5. 13
froward is carried headlong. He that will wrestle with God, shall feel it
first or last.

The vain hypocrite hopes to overreach God, to carry his contrivance cleanly;
but let him not be deceived, for God is not mocked: as a man sows, so shall he
reap, Job 8. 14. His hope shall be cut off, and his trust shall be a spiders
web. You see a spiders web to be a very curious work, but its original is from
a spiders bowels, and its design to catch poor flies; and though she be as
secure in it as in a castle, yet when the Broom comes, down they go. The thread
that an hypocrite spins is very fine, but it has no higher principle than
Self, nor greater end than to deceive. And though he bless himself in his
heart, and sit like a Queen in the web that he has spun, yet when Gods besome
comes, down he falls into Hell, and great is the fall of him.

Quest. But you will say, who or what i^ an hypocrite?

Answ. He is one that has no Affection to the Nature of Religion, and yet has
an Affectation of the Name, and Reputation of Religion: That professes the
hatred of sin, and yet cordially loves it: That pretends to love piety, and yet
inwardly distasts it; this is an hypocrite and woe be to him. The keenest
Scriptures, the sharpest Judgments, the hottest Torments are the portion of his
cup. The very next verse is enough to overwhelm him, With the froward thou will
show thy self froward. When infinite Patience grows froward, there will be
infinite frowardness. None so true a Friend, and none so fierce an Enemy. Proud
men, Atheists, and Hypocrites, God has a peculiar quarrel with, and they shall
feel the weight of his indignation. Alas! Sirs, you drive the maddest trade on
earth: your Profession of piety hazards the losing of this World, and your
Practice of hypocrisy loses you the other; and thus you lose Two Worlds for
want of One Upright heart. Repent therefore quickly of this your wickedness,
and change your course. If holiness be bad, why do you pretend it? If it be
good, why do you abhor it? What man of reason will put on the shape of one he
hates, when thereby he gets only the applause of a few, and loses the love of
many? Alas! you lose the respect of the most on earth by your outside, and of
the best in Heaven by your inside. O therefore cleanse your hands ye sinners,
and purify your hearts ye doubleminded. Abominate that course, that besides
its own vileness, loses both God and Men, and your selves at last.

But as when cheats are looked after^ they slip away and hide themselves in the
throng, so the hypocrite when threatened, will not be convict, and therefore
alleges these things.

Object. 1. General Approbation. I am well esteemed, and that among the best:
If I were rotten, sure they would find me out. I love good people, and they
love me, and how can I then be an hypocrite? They that make the Queen believe
that I counterfeit with her, cannot make God believe that I counterfeit with
him. Earl of Essex to Sr (...). B^con.


Answ. They judge of thee by the judgment of Charity, but God will judge thee
with the judgment of Verity: They neither can, nor will, nor dare be
censorious; but do guess thee to be sound within, because thou art smooth
without. Their great work lies in assuring their own salvation, and not in
questioning others; and so thou may go by them to hell unsuspected as Judas
did by the Disciples; they never dreamed of his hypocrisy, but rather
suspected themselves, but this made not his case the safer.

And then that you love the people of God, will be difficult to be proved. You
like their company (perhaps) for some natural, moral, or acquired excellencies
in them; they are well tempered, civil, learned, intelligent, or perhaps of
some use or stead for you; but alas! you hate their holiness, and least like
them when they are in their most religious frame. You care not for their talk
of Heaven, when you are pleased with their news or discourses upon things on
earth. He that loves an holy man for his Sanctity, loves them all as far as
they are holy, and so the holier the person is, the better you will love him.

Object. 2. Singular Obedience. I have performed abundance of Duties, and have
forgone diverse Sins, and have continued so to do a great while, and can an
hypocrite do so?

Answ. Is there no known Duty that lies by you undischarged? and do you delight
in the duties you perform, as well as do them? do the Precepts of the Law
please you, as well as the Promises of the Gospel? And do you live in no known
sin with purpose, pleasure and perseverance? its true, an hypocrite will not
always call upon God, but its hard to say how long he may; certainly, while
any of his base ends draw him on. Indeed when sharp troubles come for Religion,
then generally such are weary of it, and utterly deny that which they never
delighted in. Can thou now say in the midst of thy multiplied duties, that
thou had rather do them, than not do them? Do thou only use prayer, or
choose prayer? Do thou only avoid sin, or abhor sin? That is something, or
else that Pharisee, Luke 18. shall be justified, as soon as thou.

Object. 3. Quiet of Conscience: My own heart condemns me not, that is most
privy to my own estate, and would be (surely) most faithful to me in this
weighty case; nay, it is more against an hypocrite, than any other sinner.

Answ. Remember that a Conscience pacified, is not always a sign of a
Conscience purified. If Conscience be not blinded, it will see; if it be not
bribed, it will speak; if it be not brawny, it will feel: but if it have been
curbed and silenced, and sinned against, it may let you alone (even as God
does) and never bark till it bite, and make its teeth to meet. There are that
deceive others, until at length Like that P^rk Warbeck who counterfeited to be
one of K. Ed. 4. Sons, so long that at length he really believed he was the
Duke.
they be deceived themselves: that have deceived their own hearts so long, till
a deceived heart has turned them aside, that they cannot deliver their souls,
nor say, is there not a lie in my right hand, Isa. 44. 20.

And yet if one should refer it to thee, Do thou think in thy very
Conscience, that thou art an upright Saint, and a sincere servant of Jesus
Christ? Do thou not know that by thy self, which is inconsistent with
integrity of heart? what is that which makes thee tremble at death? in a fright
at thunder, in pain at a searching Sermon? afraid at the reading or hearing of
any sisting marks or signs? And then for bearing a great hatred to hypocrites,
that is nothing, for one proud man may hate another for standing in his light,
and rotten hearts are usually most suspicious and censorious of others. Thy
best evidence would be to loath thy self; and thy only cure, to be pricked at
the heart.

SECT. II.
II. Use. THe second Improvement of this Point is for Reprehension:. 2. Reproof.


1. Of those that Disturst an upright God. 2. Of those that Distaste an upright
Man.
1. That Distrust an upright God. No greater trouble to an upright man, than to
be suspected and distrusted, to have his word questioned, and his ways
misconstrued. Good and upright is the Lord, and he cannot endure to be called
in question. They that know him will take his word, for more than this world is
worth, Psalm. 9. 10. They that know thy Name, will put their trust in thee. But
alas! how few are these? if we run over those very particulars wherein he shows
himself upright, you shall find much distrust in the world, yea in the very
best. If we be in Danger, how sew can quiet themselves in Gods promise of
succor? If we have fallen into Temptation, how long ere we can heartily
believe our pardon sealed in the blood of Christ? when we begin to Pray, which
of us believes, that as sure as we ask, we shall receive? how difficult to
rely upon the grace of God for perseverance, or on the promise of God for all
good things in this life, and for a Crown of glory in another? O the wretched
distrust of man's heart! whence else do men run to unworthy means, to attain
their desires every day; and lean no more on him, or on his word, than on a
weak staff, that we dare not trust? you can trust a man when he has money in
his hand, you should trust God when he gives money in the Promise. The World
should know we serve a God, whom we dare trust. The promise is ever as good, as
the thing promised. He is no flincher with whom you deal. To distrust him, is
to divest him, and that of his dearest Attribute, his Truth. When we distrust
God, we make him man; when we trust in man, we make him God.

How many experiments have you read, nay how many experiments have you had of
his uprightness to you? and must they all stand for nothing? What man can come
out and say, I was under such a promise, but I never had the benefit of it? I
trusted Jacobs God in vain? And must you be the first instances of his
unfaithfulness? God forbid. To instance; what disquieting thoughts have we,
sometimes, about provision for our Children? they will be left succourless, and
quite forsaken, (and unworthy courses are sometimes taken to prevent it) and
yet we know they will fall Wards to God, and that the Generation of the upright
shall be blessed. And because here perhaps you may reply, that herein you do
not so much question Gods uprightness, as your own, therefore see in another
Instance, what perplexities are Gods servants in for his Church, when it is
rent with schisms, eclipsed with errors, oppressed with troubles? And yet he
has undertaken to rule the world for his Churches good, and that the Gates of
Hell (stronger than arms on earth) shall never prevail against her. O silence
then and charm down your unbelief, and credit this word, To the upright man, he
will show himself upright.

2. This Reproves those that Distaste an upright man. He that is unlike God,
cannot but dislike both him and his likeness. Semper ^liena virt^s form^ dolosa
(...)
Wonder of wickedness, that ever any reasonable creature should hate his Makers
picture; dislike the men that are after Gods own heart, and the better the man,
the worse to hate him. It was so in the beginning, is now, and will be world
without end. 1 Samuel 29. 6. Surely (says Achish to David) as the Lord lives,
thou have been upright; nevertheless the Lord favors thee not. Let a man be
never so honest, charitable, unblameable, yet if he discover his integrity by
reproving sin, by a strict watch over his words, by a peaceable demurring at a
thing he is unsatisfied in: there is some of you though you never saw him, were
never disobliged by him, yet out of an inveteracy against God (it can be
nothing else) you dislike and declaim against him. If this man have an hundred
excellent qualities, and but one defect or fault, all his good qualities are
buried, and he goes with you under the notion of his single sin. But on the
other hand, let a man be never so ignorant, unclean, swearer, drunkard,
Atheistical; yet diverse of you can embrace him, delight in his company, or at
least he shall live quietly by you, and (if he do not personally affront you)
no Magistrate shall ever be informed of him, that he might reform him. And (to
see your equity) if this man have an hundred ill conditions, and but some one
good quality, as perhaps of an obliging carriage, all his faults are silenced,
and he obtains a favorable character from this single virtue; which shows
clearly, that your spite is at the good man, as he is good, or else you would
cry down other men's faults as well as his, and lend to them a mantle as well as
to others.

If pride be bad, or covetousness, or passion, why do you not blame them,
wherever you find them?

Object. Perhaps you will say, they are bad (its true) in any, but they are
intolerable in one that professes more Sanctity than others.

Answ. His sanctity or profession are neither faults nor faulty, but these you
have an aching tooth at: and though they do aggravate his Sins before God, yet I
hope with men he may pass better, that has but one or two faults, than he that
has an hundred. And if you be not haters of God, you ought to love him better
that has a few errors, and those bewailed, (for so all upright men do, though
you see them not) than him that abounds in them, and rather glories in them,
than mourns over them

Object. I know your usual saying, you dislike none but hypocrites, an upright
man you could love in your heart.

Answ. Can you prove all them hypocrites, whom you distaste? and can you
justify your suspicion, where you can make no proof? I think there is no
greater a sign of an hypocrite, than easily to judge others so. But for all
your professions, I am persuaded, if Christ himself were now on earth, and
should be so severe in his life, as never to laugh; so impartial in reproof, as
to spare neither Prince nor Priest; so heavenly in his discourse, as always to
draw it to some spiritual matter; abundance of Christians would utterly O
qua^tus est in populo Christian ho^or Christi, ubi Religio ignobilem facit and
mali coguntur ^obiles (...) viles habeantur. Salv.
dislike him, never consort with him, but pursue him to his cross again. Alas!
it is integrity and honesty you hate, and the affront is to God more than to
men herein. And is not this hatred without a cause? Is not this to rage at
Beauty, and to have an Aversion to Innocence it self? Are not these men (such
as I have described) the best husbands, the best parents, the best children,
the best servants, the best subjects, public Goods, Prove. 11. By the blessing
of the upright the City is exalted: but it is overthrown by the mouth of the
wicked. O relent toward them, and let your love and pity run in the stream
with Gods. Carry your selves to them, as you think David, Paul, or Christ would
do if they were here; and judge in your own Consciences, whether they would
sort with vile swearers in an Alehouse, or with upright mourners in a Chamber:
you cannot have a better copy than Him in the Text, and therefore with the
upright man, show you your selves upright.

SECT. III.
THe third Use of this Doctrine leads. 3. Examination.
unto Trial and Examination of our own selves. I report me to your own
Consciences, how needful this is. Needful for your comfort here, needful for
your salvation hereafter. And pray be exact and serious herein.

1. Because man's heart by Nature is false and froward. Deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked, Jer. 17. 9. The Nature of God, the Love of
Christ, and the Heart of man, are things inscrutable. Its true, Eccl. 7. 29.
God made man upright at first. Our faces were directly upon God, our hearts
uniform, but we got a fall, and now the whole man is turned quite another way.
He that says, I have ever had a good heart, that man never had a good heart:
we are estranged from the womb from our God, and from our best selves. No cheat
so cunning as the heart of man, 'twill cry out as the Pharisee, I thank God I
am not as other hearts are, when seven abominations are therein. And not only
false but froward; in other diseases the diseased party is called the Patient,
and patient they are to abide the Physicians order, but here the Patient is the
greatest Disease. Quid miserius misero non miserante seipsum? What greater
misery than a miserable man not commiserating himself? Having to do therefore
with such a Piece, what need have you of the strictest care, that you may not
be bankrupt, before you feel your decay, and broken for want of bruising?

2. A man may proceed very far, and yet prove rotten at the heart. He may go
nineteen steps, and for want of going one other step, fall short of Heaven,
Mat. 19. 20, 21. That young man had gone far in keeping six commandments: where
is the young man that can come forth and truly say the like? yet one thing was
lacking, and that lost all the rest. Consider well how many changes may pass
upon the heart without a through saving change. A moral change from debauchery
to civility, a formal change to the profession of Godliness, a partial change,
a temporary change; but uprightness of heart lies in a hairs breadth; you may
hit the Butt, and yet miss the Mark, and by considering how far Herod, Saul,
Judas, and others of our acquaintance have gone, and yet fallen away, we see
need to sift our selves to the bran, and put our Integrity to the trial.

3. A man may verily think he is upright, and yet not be right, Prove. 30. 12.
There is a generation [that is, abundance in all Ages] that are pure in their
own eyes, [shine illustriously, as the Hebrew word signifies, in their own
opinions and judgments] and yet are not cleansed from their filthiness: were
never truly regenerate. That River of God, the blood of Christ, never run
through their hearts: you have heard, he that long deceives others, at last
deceives himself, Deceiving and being deceived. Plain in the foolish Virgins,
Mat. 25. who thought their case was good, till the gate was shut. A dreadful
case! to be damned just at Heaven gates, and to feel a Hell, before we fear it:
How blank would a man look, that has a sum of money to pay, and when it comes
to the touch, it proves all Counters, all his money Counters? even so will many
a formal hypocrite look at the last day, when all his graces prove spurious;
(...) name to live, but dead at heart. When the great Judge of Heaven and earth
shall come with his Mean Tekel, etc. put this glistring Professor into the
Balance, alas he is too light; weigh that man's Faith, then his Repentance, then
his Love in the Balance, they are all too light. Alas! thy kingdom is departed
from thee, thou art (...) lost man world without end.

Now I say, if a man may verily think he is upright, and yet prove naught, it is
high time to come to trial. And though the Description which you have had, wi^
much supersede this work; and that when all is said, a man that is really
upright may most clearly by reflection, and spiritual sensation, find and feel
the integrity of his heart, as the mother knows she i^ with child, when she
feels it leaping i^ her womb; yet for your further assistanc^ I shall here with
much plainness and br^vity (the which I study) give you some clear characters
of uprightness, and s^ hasten to an end; with this Advertisement, that if you
can lay a sound claim to any one of them, though you should labor to find them
all, you may rest with comfort in the safety of your condition, though at
present you may not discern the rest; for that, where there is one Integra^
member of the new man, there is the whole, though not apparent. But let not one
Character pass your eye, without a faithful trial; Is it thus with me? that you
may know your own selves, that Jesus Christ is in you, and then you are not
reprobates.

SECT. IV.
I. THe first Character of an upright. 4. Characters of an Upright man.
man is, He really approves himself to God, 2 Timothy 2. 15. Study to show thy
self approved to God. This is the care and business of every upright man. In
all business and companies, his chiefest care is, that the words of his mouth,
and Psalm. 19.
the thoughts of his heart may be pleasing to him. Famous is that story of
Bernard, who after a curious Sermon, among the general applause, was found
dejected and in his dumps: and after a more sincere plain discourse, the day
following exceeding cheerful; told one of his friends, that inquired the
reason, Heri Bernardum, hodie Jesum Christum praedicavi, yesterday I preached
Bernard, but to day I have preached Jesus Christ. When you can say, Lord,
others know my actions, but thou know my ends; others may lift me up too
high, or cast me down too low; but I am satisfied, if thou art pleased with me:
For not he that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord commends. And
this is to walk worthy of the Lord, in all Pleasing: When a man's great aim is
at God, and not to please, or exalt himself or others.

Whereas an hypocrite he is quite another man, Mat. 23. 5. For all their works
they do to be seen of men: and therefore they chose Trumpets to distribute
their alms with, and corners of Streets (Streets would not serve, but corners
of Streets) that so two full Streets might view them in their prayers: and so
(poor creatures) they paid themselves before the great Payday, Verily, I say
unto you, they have their reward. Their thought is, how will this or that man
like this word or action? If such and such commend me and applaud me, I have
enough. But the upright man looks at God, and a smile from him gives him
content. He may endeavor to compass the good opinion of men, but he will serve
God first, and hate any base courses to procure the praise of men. Its part of
his Character, Romans 2. 29. Whose praise is not of men, but of God.

II. The second mark of an upright man is, He chiefly loves God. To love the
Lord our God with all the heart, with all the soul, with all the strength, is
an infallible Character of an upright man. When it comes to be a disputable
case between God and Mammon, God and the Belly, God and Relations, God and a
right Eye or Hand; if thou cannot find (at least for the most part) thy soul
determining for God, overruling the case in his behalf, and that thy love to
him can make thee contemn the world, and all that is in it; fear nothing, thou
have an upright heart. Try now, do you use the World to enjoy God, or do you
make use of God to enjoy the World? He love^ thee little, O Lord, that loves
any thing with thee, which he loves not for thee Aug.
Do you love him for himself, do you love him like himself, in every thing,
above every thing?

Object. But how should I know I love him best?

Answ. Has he, if not the most, yet the heartiest of your thoughts? When your
ends are raffled to the bottom, do they end at him, or self? Luther at a signal
mercy writes on the wall, Tambach (the place where then he was) est mea phanuel
ibi apparuit mihi D^minus.
do you love the hours and duties that tend toward him? Are not you troubled
that you can love him no more? is not Heaven it self desirable to you on this
account, because there you will love him and hate sin, perfectly, and
eternally? can you delight in your mercies, when you fear they come not in
love? can you live contentedly, under the sense or fear of his absence or
displeasure? in a word, does that please you best, that tends and ends in his
honor, though it shame your persons, or cross your other designs? do you
dearly affect his blessed word, and those parts thereof that have nothing to
commend them to you, but their holiness? not only the Histories of the Bible,
but the Doctrine, the Precepts of the Bible: Can you taste more sweetness in a
Sermon of Christ, an Epistle of Paul, the hundred and nineteenth Psalm, than in
any human writings in the world? Does the remembrance of your communion with
God, and communication from him, more refresh you than the review of other
delights? Cant. 1. 4. We will remember thy love more than wine, the upright
love thee. That is a sign of love, this is a sign of uprightness.

III. A third sign of an upright man is, He willingly obeys God. 1 Chronicles. 28.
9. And thou Solomon my Son, serve thou the God of thy Fathers, with a perfect
heart, and a willing mind. What he does, his will is in it. He will do what he
can, yea more than he can. An hypocrite does more than he would. He acts not,
but is acted by profit, credit, and the like; and when this wind blows not, he
stands as the Windmill, stock still. Love to God oils the wheel of obedience,
and then a man runs the way of his Commandments, when the Lord has enlarged
his heart, Psalm. 119 32. Amor meus, pondus mcum. Happy for ever that man, whose
principle of motion is within. An hypocrite he has no hearty good will to the
very duties he performs; he prays, but he has no good will to prayer; he
gives, but his will is another way, his obedience is against his mind; his
interest draws him one way, his mind goes another; and what a wretched life
must he live, the generality of whose visible actions go against the frame of
his mind, and so neither God, nor himself has pleasure in them? 2 Cor. 8. 12.
If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to what a man has
and does. Try your selves therefore; do you find that your wills are pressed for
God? do you obey your Master, as your servants should obey you, with good will,
doing service as to the Lord, and not to men? It Is true, you will find another
Law, another will drawing the other way, but if you can say with Paul, Romans 7.
22. I delight in the Law of God after the inward man, your hearts are upright:
you grieve for your unwillingness, you bring your wills to every ordinance, and
use the means to make them better; and cordially desire to do his will on
earth, as it is done in Heaven. The crossness of your will is your greatest
burden; and you are getting ground herein, are you not? then your case is good.

IV. The fourth Character of an upright man is, He can Judiciously appeal to
God. I call God to record on my soul, says Holy Paul. And this not only in a
crowd, and before others, but in secret in his closet. After consideration of
the Law of God, and after the survey of his own heart, an upright man (if there
be no eclipse upon his spirit) can appeal to the all-searching God, in his
closet, concerning the uprightness of his heart; and this I think few
hypocrites can reach to do. Thus Peter could say, John 21. 17. Lord thou that
know all things, thou know I love thee. I appeal from Satan and the World
to thee, whether I do not love thee above all the world, and above my self; if
my heart were opened, whether thou would not find Jehova, and Jesus, and
Holiness to the Lord, written there. The just man dare appeal to the severest
Judge, and a sincere Saint to an allseeing God. Psalm. 139. 23, 24. Search me, O
Lord, and know my heart, try me and know my thoughts; And see if there be any
wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. So if you can say, Lord,
look at me every way, try me by the light of thy word, search me to the quick,
I appeal to thee, thou know I am Gold, not Gilded, I am thine, thy Name is
on me, and thy Nature is in me, thou that know all things, know I love
thee: No plainer sign of a cheat, than unwillingness to come to trial; but he
that dare bring his heart to the most trying Books, to the most searching
Ministers, to the all-searching God, is sound at heart, and a Saint within. I
should have named no more, but that I find two more signs within the ^ken of my
Text, with which I shall con^lude this Use.

V. The fifth mark of an upright man is, He trades not in Presumptuous sins.
Psalm. 19. 13. Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins, let them not have
dominion over me. Then shall I be upright -- The Tyranny of sin is one thing,
the Dominion of sin is another. It is the opinion of Divines, that though a
child of God may have a Darling sin, one sin to which he is more inclined then
another; yet he has not a Reigning sin, that is, (I suppose they mean) no sin
has the absolute command of the whole soul: no, there is a seed of God in a
sanctified heart, that cannot so yield to sin. So that the difference between
the sin of an upright man and another, lies not so much in the nature and kind
of the sin committed, as it lies in the heart of a sinner. That may be an
Infirmity in one, that is a grosser sin in another. A less sin chosen, is worse
than a greater sin fallen into without choice: a less allowed, than a greater
disallowed.

The presumptuous sinner adds the contempt of God to his sin, and so is said to
si^ with an high hand, Numb. 15. 30. (the first place (I take it) that speaks
of such) But the soul that does presumptuously, r^proacheth the Lord, and shall
be utterly o^ off, and no sacrifice admitted for him: which interprets that,
Heb. 10. 26. If we sin wilfully, after we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin. And both opposed to sinning
ignorantly, n^d yet not every sin of knowledge, a presumptuous sin: but when a
man knows it, but cares not, heeds not God, or his will, but lifts up an high
hand against him, and will venture. Sin is never said to be done with an high
hand, but when there is a full convincement a fie^ consent, and absolute
allowance, and this never after Conversion. Mr. Capel.
It is one thing to sin willingly, another thing to sin wilfully. There is of
the will in most sins, but not the whole will. There is a predominant motion of
the will toward it, but there is in it an habitual hatred of it. Romans 7. 20.
Now if I do what I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells
in me. There is in every sin an interpretative contempt of God; but I conceive
to create a Presumptuous sin, there must be actual presumption and contempt of
God; whereof certainly that man was guilty, that was stoned to death for
gathering sticks on the Sabbath day; and thereupon his Tragedy is related
immediately upon the Law against presumptuous sinners, Numb. 15. An upright man
has a radical hatred of sin, and he that hates sin, can scarce sin
presumptuously.

VI. The sixth and last Character of an upright man is, He keeps himself from
his own iniquity. You have this in the next verse but one before the Text. I
also was upright before him: -- prove it -- I kept my self from mine iniquity.
Every man has some sin of his own. We are capable of every sin, but we are not
inclined to every sin. Our constitutions usually do choose our darling sin, our
condition of life or calling may nurse it up. This Sin is the trial of our
sincerity. An hypocrite chides it before folks, but keeps it under his tongue,
cordially favors it, and so makes provision for it; in effect prefers it
before Christ and Heaven. It Is this sin that sends most men to hell. They Will
part with many; but skin for skin, yea soul and all will a man give for the
life of this. And there is no wickedness too great to wade through to the
fruition of it.

Now an upright man, had at his Conversion, the deepest prick in this vein. The
dearer the sin, the dearer it costs in Repentance: and thereupon he keeps a
jealous eye upon it, and is whetted also with an holy revenge against it, for
displeasing such a God as now he finds him to be, and for hindering so much the
comfort of his soul; that he mainly hates this sin, and endeavors to prevent
and crucify it. He most hates it, though he can least vanquish it. And
thereupon he faithfully makes use of all the means he knows to mortify it, and
carefully avoids all occasions that may further it, he grieves bitterly for his
relapses into it, and gives no rest to his God, or his soul, till he see the
funerals of it; he is resolved to dye in the conflict, before he will make a
peace.

Now feel your Pulse for the Lords sake, and deceive not your own souls. These
signs will state your case, if you will but prove your own selves. The
explication of them is ours, the application of them is yours. Do not shut the
book, till you have opened your hearts, and found either the name of a Saint,
or an Hypocrite. Why do you retreat? It is not your enemy, but your Physician
that is at door. To try your case can do no hurt. If all be right, you may have
the comfort; if all be naught, yet you may have a cure. Rush not blindfold into
Hell. Put us not to our best skill in describing Characters, and then let them
alone as you found them, for want of pains. If this work not, remember we have
told you that the clearest sign of an hypocrite is, he dare not come to trial.

SECT. V.
THe Fourth Use is by way of Exhortation: Have you made a faithful. 5.
Exhortation to the Upright.
scrutiny? Then upon trial, either you find the Characters of sincerity, or
else you find them not, or else you hang in doubt, whether you be upright or
no. And accordingly I shall direct my Exhortation three ways. First, to those
that are upright with God; and you I exhort,

1. To praise the Lord, and be thankful. Psalm. 33. 1. Rejoice in the Lord ye
righteous: for praise is comely for the upright. You of all men have cause to
be merry; Praise becomes no bodies mouth but yours. Be cheerful in your selves,
and thankful to the Lord. What a^les you to be lean from day to day, that are
Kings Sons? Who can lay any thing to your charge? It is God that justifies.
What can dishearten you, seeing the root of the matter is found in you? Turn
your plaints into praises. Stand still and admire the distinguishing mercy of
God to you, that among so many Heathens the Lord should ma^e you Christians;
that among so many Hypocrites, the Lord should make you upright. Adore
Electing, admire Converting Grace; say, Lord, who am I? naturally a very Pagan,
an errand hypocrite, that thou should crown me with Truth in the inward parts
-- And then kneel down and offer him an Hecatombe of praises, charm up all the
daughters of music, thy best affections, and tune up thy note with Angels,
Blessing and Honor and Immortality be given to him that sits on the Throne,
and to the Lamb for evermore. And let heart, and lip, and life keep tune; and
where thy words fail, let thy deeds extol his holy Name. O Lord, do but tell me
which way I may honor thee, and thou shall see, thy Grace assisting, that no
service shall be too hard for such a wretch to such a God.

2. Proceed and walk on in your upright way. Hear David, Psalm. 26. 1. O Lord, I
have walked in mine integrity -- Ay, but are not you weary on it, David! O no;
hear him, verse 11. But as for me, I will walk in my integrity; I have don't,
and I will do it again. It is enough for sinners, to be weary of their ways:
but as for me, I will walk in my integrity. Improve in your uprightness. Job
17. 9. The righteous also shall hold on their way, and he that has clean
hands, shall grow stronger and stronger. Get ground of your hypocrisy, and
weed it out of your hearts and duties day by day. A little sin is a great
burden to him that has a great deal of grace, as a little spot is to a very
cleanly man. Purge out therefore the old leaven, and keep the feast with that
daint^ fare, the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. Let nothing byas
those honest hearts of yours. Answer your temptations, that you can do any
thing but lie, and temporize, and sin against God; that Crowns cannot see you
to betray Christ, or wound your Consciences; that you fear no body but God, and
nothing in the world but sin. A man of uprightness must be a man of strength.

The more uprightness, the more communion with God; the more uprightness, the
more confidence with men; the more uprightness, the more comfort in your own
souls. 1 Chronicles. 29. 17. I know also my God, that thou tryest the heart, and
have pleasure in uprightness. O do him a pleasure then by walking in your
integrity, and resolve with that upright Champion, Job 27. 5, 6. Till I dye, I
will not remove my integrity from me, -- My heart shall not reproach me so long
as I live.

SECT. VI.
SEcondly, To those that are in Doubt,. 6. Exhortation to the Doubtful.
whether they be upright or no. It is better indeed to doubt with a cause, than
to be confident without a cause: and better to begin in doubts, and end in
certainties, The road to Resolution lies by doubt: The next way home's the
farthest way about.
than to begin in certainties, and end in doubts. But take advice;

1. Sit not down quiet in this uncertainty. Who that is charged with forgery,
will be quiet till he be cleared? In the Authority of Gods unerring word, I
charge all men by nature with rottenness, corruption, Quarles.
and hypocrisy. If you be true men, clear your selves, and hang not (as the
Papists place One of their small friends) between Heaven and Hell. Who that is
going a journey would be content, whilst he is ignorant whether in the way or
out? you are going a long journey, quite to eternity; for your own comfort sake
be at a point whether you be in the way to the Holy, or to the Miserable
eternity. You Will be at cost to clear and settle your outward estate. O be not
worse to your souls, than you are to your lands: you cannot imagine how far you
might go in this work in one Months time, nay in the spare hours of one
Months time. It is a sad case that is threatened, Deuteronomy. 28. 66. And thy life
shall hang in doubt before thee, and thou shall fear day and night. O but what
is it then, to have everlasting life hang in doubt before a man, the soul daily
taking wings, and you know not whither! O sit not down quiet with this
uncertainty.

2. Set about the means to clear up your condition. Knock at each Ministers
door that is near you, and borrow light from the Wise. When you have a doubtful
distemper, you run to the Physician; when you have a knot in your deed, you run
to the Lawyer: you are at a demur concerning the state of your souls, O run to
the Minister. Put on boldness and fear not; he deserves not the name of a
Preacher, that is not gladder of your company, than of the greatest Mammonist
within his charge. Open your mind freely, Sir, I am in a great dismay about the
state of this my soul; this I can say for my self, and this against my self:
Deal truly with me, and give out a perfect lot.

Be take your selves to the most searching Books, try your selves by the
abovenamed marks; but above all, to the Law, and to the Testimony. But be not
hasty to conclude upon the reading any of these, either for or against your
selves, without good advice; lest you rush on the Rock of Presumption, or be
swallowed up in the Rever^ Dr. Rob. Harris in days of his strictest
Examination, used to set down his evidences for Salvation in writing: now in
Propositions from the Scripture, now in Syllogisms; these he often subscribed in
a Book, kept for that purpose. In vita.
Quicksand of Despair. Get into the right method, and then spare not for a
little pains. He must give diligence, that will make his calling and election
sure. This course has been found useful to some, namely, single out some
trying Scripture, as for Instance, that Psalm. 119. 140. and spend your spare
minutes in one day, or week, to know the True meaning of it: the next day or
week compare your selves by it, with all faithfulness: spend another day or
week in urging all such objections you can justly find against your plea: and a
fourth day or week in a sound Reply unto them. And then lay them before God,
and join your earnest prayer, to the searcher of all hearts, to clear and
settle you. And when this is done, try another, and a third. The comfort will
pay the trouble. The answer of a good Conscience is worth some serious
thoughts, or else it is worth nothing.

SECT. VII.
THirdly, The Exhortation runs to. 7. Exhortation to those that want
uprightness.
them that want it, Labor for uprightness: Buy this truth and sell it not. For
the love of God be not hypocrites. Consider three things.

1. Uprightness is Amiable. 1. In the eye of God; you see that in 1 Chronicles. 29.
17. He has pleasure in uprightness. You that displease him by your
Infirmities, had need to please him by your Integrity; Cant. 4. 7. Thou art
fair, my love, says Christ, there is no spot in thee. This makes you all fair
in his eyes. All the beauty of Heaven and Earth does not please God as an
upright man: no creature like the New creature. And on the contrary, no sight
so odious P^ssima creaturarum visibilium est Homo degener; pessimus hominum
pseudo-Christianus; Christianorum vero pessimus est nequam Verbi minister, Dr.
Arrows.
to him as an hypocrite. He that counterfeits the Kings coin, dies the same
death with a Rebel. A lukewarm Christian makes Christ's stomach to rise, Rev. 3.
16. And

2. Uprightness is amiable to men. Where enmity to God has not quite razed out
all relics of Reason and Honesty, every man seems to be pleased with
integrity; and will speak for such as they think in their Consciences mean and
speak uprightly. Few would hurt us, if we could more sincerely be followers of
that which is good. But an hypocrite is odious to all men, like those
Proto-hypocrites, 1 These. 2. 15. They please not God, and are contrary to all
men. He makes an ill choice that embraces a course, that God and man are agreed
to abhor.

2. Uprightness is Comfortable. A sound upright good Conscience, is a continual
feast. In troubles, reproaches, sickness, death, no comfort like an upright
heart. This will support the spirits, supply with new spirits the
weather-beaten Christian, and make him sing in prison, when his enemies shall
tremble on the Throne. This gave the Apostle Paul that boldness before Princes,
that he lived in all good Conscience. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have
respect to all thy righteous judgments. And on the contrary, a man has no
comfort from hypocrisy, none at all. What joy can a man have, when he knows
his heart is rotten? What comfort in a velvet patch, when it only covers a
filthy ulcer? What content, when a man dare not commune with himself? he that
is not welcome unto his own Conscience, can be merry no where in the world.

3. Uprightness is Necessary.

1. To every good duty here. Without it, Preaching is but a tinkling Cymbal,
Prayer but as the howling of a Dog, Religious discourse but the prating of a
Parrot. Nothing acceptable without it, Goats-hair a rich present with it. A
sincere sigh of him that joins, more worth than the fained eloquence of him
that makes the Prayer. The two mites of the good Widow, more valuable than the
great sums cast in by Pharisees. Our duties are not numbered, but weighed; they
are not measured by their length or breadth, but by their prosundity. If they
be hearty, sincere, the right stamp upon them, they are current in Heaven, or
else they are but the cutting off a dogs neck, the offering of swines flesh,
and God abhors them.

2. Necessary to our eternal-Salvation hereafter, Psalm. 24. 4. Who shall ascend
into the hill of the Lord? He that has clean hands and a pure heart. A man may
go to Heaven without Parts, without Riches, without Gifts, but there is no
coming there without uprightness; that is, the land of uprightness, it is there
all in fashion. The great question at those Gates will be, Man, Woman, where is
thy oil? Though men may be deceived, God will not be mocked. He that sowes the
wind, shall reap the, whirlwind. In the darkest corner of Hell there lie the
hypocrites. O the rage, horror and torment of an hypocrite in Hell! when his
hope is like the giving up the Ghost. O the confusion and shame that will cover
him, when his fellow-Professors shall see him so unexpectedly packt into Hell!
And what brutish madness is it to make others believe, that thou art going
toward Heaven, and that while thou steal into Hell! O sinner, it is absolutely
necessary to salvation, that thou be upright. And therefore in the Name of God,
inquire the means to obtain it, and set about them. -- Well, will you
faithfully use them? Then they are these.

SECT. VIII.
I. STudy Humility, Hab. 2. 4. Behold. 8. Means for the attaining of
uprightness.
his soul which is lifted up, is not upright in him. Pride has a great
influence into hypocrisy, and humility into uprightness. He that takes a pride
in being counted Great or Good, no wonde^ that he will put on the vizard of
more goodness than he has. And on the other side, he that is content of an
ordinary Reputation, will study to be sound, and not play the white Devil, to
get applause. The humble man concludes, I am a very weak creature, and I am a
very great sinner, and what care I for a golden name, and know I have but a
leaden heart. Do but study the pure Law of God, and then study thy impure
heart, and be proud if thou can: where a truer heart than in Paul? yet he for
his part is of Saints the least, of sinners the chief, although the Lord
reckoned him greater than the greatest of the former, and less than the least
of the latter. Humility and Integrity are born and dye together.

II. Be faithful in Self-examination. Psalm. 77. 6. I communed with my heart,
and my spirit made diligent search. And for this end, let your Consciences be
heard; for the spirit of man is the candle of the Lord, to search the innermost
parts of the belly. You think all is right, but when matters come to trial you will
find all is naught. While the Sun is under the cloud, you can see no motes in
the room; but when its beams shine in, you may see thousands. How do young
people live in the dark, and little feel or fear the plague that is upon them?
but when once the light of saving knowledge, Self-knowledge breaks in, then
Ephraim bemoans himself, and Paul cries out, O wretched man that I am! For
shame, live not so long strangers at home. If a man do not know himself, he
knows nothing. Commune with your own hearts, and be still. You commune with God
in religious Duties, you commune with men in your civil Callings, but when do
you commune with your selves? Go to the Law, try your selves by every command.
Luther going about this, and beginning at I am the Lord thy God, professed that
he was so overwhelmed thereby, that he could go no further. Alas! your
Confidence flows from your Ignorance; one saving sight of your woeful state,
would go far in your our. O lose not your souls, for want of one serious
thought.

III. Get an hatred to hypocrisy; and a love of uprightness: Behold them both
in their own colors. Read Mat. 23. That glass will show you the face of the
one, and Psalm. 119. will show you the features of the other. If you would put
the worst badge in the world upon a man, you call him Hypocrite: if you would
give any man the most advantageous title, you write him an honest man, an
upright man. And when once you hate Hypocrisy, you will flee it: when once you
really love uprightness, you will take pains to procure it. Shall I yield to that
my soul hates? dwell in an house that I abhor? I Will never do it. May so rare a
Jewel as Sincerity be had, and shall I live without it? shall it be offered me
and I deny it? No, whatever it cost me I will not live or dye an hypocrite.
Shall I be a Dunghill covered with Snow? how odious shall I be, when my
snow-white mantle will be stripped off? Speak man of Reason; is Simulation
lovely? Is Dissimulation amiable? Why will thou wear that ugly vizard? For a
Name in this World, lose a Soul in another? For a Shadow of Religion, lose the
Substance of Salvation? A serious hatred of Hypocrisy, is not only a means to
conquer it, but is a conquest of it. A hearty love to integrity, is Integrity.

IV. Attend a searching Ministry, 1 Pet. 2. 2. Desire the sincere milk of the
Word. He that would attain Sincerity, must desire Gods sincere Word. A
searching Ministry will make a sound Professor; a plain Minister, will make a
plain Christian. Lay your naked heart under the naked truth of God, and let him
write on that blank paper, what he pleases. For the word of the Lord is quick
and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the
dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a
discerner of the thoughts, and intents of the heart. Such a Sword rightly
welded will cleave an hair, and give a man as little rest in formality, as in
profaneness. The word of truth, is the way to create the grace of truth; the
sincere word, a sincere heart. The babe draws spirits with the milk, and that
nourishes. And in the word truly dispensed, the spirit is conveyed; and if the
spirit of truth step in with the word of truth, then the work is done, Psalm.
143. 10. Thy spirit is good, lead me into the land of Uprightness. This good
spirit will take you by the hand, and not only show you, but bring you into the
land of uprightness. And go not so much to judge the Minister, as to be judged
by the Sermon. Let the most of your severity be employed upon your selves, and
the largest of your charity upon the Preacher. The humble sincere hearer does
mostly go home with the benefit, when the censorious person goes away with the
talk. And remember this; that as it requires more grace to hear and profit by a
weak or offensive Preacher, so a warm and serious spirit will infuse heat and
vigor into the most cold general Sermon, if not into the Minister.

V. Be instant in prayer. Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above,
and comes down from the Father of lights. This is a good and perfect gift, O
seek it from the Father of lights. The Matter of such a prayer pleases him,
and the Mediator pleases him, and so nothing can frustrate it, but the Man or
the Matter. Add faith and forveney, and the manner is sure. And then let not
your suit fall for your own fault, nor lose a prayer for up. rightness, for
want of an honest heart. Beg also the prayers of others: he may hear Job, that
will not hear his friends. Pray and wrestle till this blessing come. O Lord, I
have heard such a Character of uprightness, that I misdoubt my self, I seel
much amiss, I fear all is amiss, I tremble at my condition: I am a Christian by
profession, but I am an hypocrite by nature; thy word has found me out, and I
am lost. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right upright spirit
within me. And know that the God of Heaven will give grace more freely, than an
earthly Father will bread. Good and upright is the Lord, therefore will he
teach sinners in the way.

And thus you have the Means, and do you mean to use them? what are directions,
if you will not be directed by them? O let not these words stand here to be
your accusers, but your monitors; and remember that Practice is the End, the
Crown of Preaching.

SECT. IX.
V. THe Fifth and last Use is for Consolation. 9. Consolation.
to all upright ones. You are blessed men in the mouth both of Law and Gospel,
Psalm. 119. 1. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, that walk in the Law of the
Lord. Mat. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. You may
be crossed by men, but you shall be blessed by God: you may not see the desire of
your hearts in this life, but you shall see God in life everlasting: you may
live poor, but you shall dye rich. Prove. 19. 1. Better is the poor, that
walks in his integrity; than he that is perverse in his lips, and is a fool.
He that is poor in his wealth, but rich in his integrity, has coin that will
pass in the other world. Uprightness and Blessedness are inseparable companions.

O but Sir, that is my fear, that my heart is rotten at the core, my ways
crooked; and your discourse has increased my doubts, that I fear I have not
one dram of sincerity. And my fears are increased upon such grounds as these.

Doubt. 1. The Allegations of Satan. See, says he, thy rottenness after such a
Duty, in such a temptation, thou have but a show: and these accusations he
follows with fears and terrors in my spirit, that my soul is sometimes weary
of my life.

Resol. 1. There are roots of hypocrisy in the sincerest heart; as of all
other sins, so of this. That Is remarkable, Luke 12. 1. Jesus began to say to
his Disciples first of all, take heed and beware of hypocrisy. Christ's own
Disciples were in danger of this leaven. All the stock below the grass is
perfect Crab-tree. This you may grant with grief, and yet retain your integrity
with comfort.

2 Satan's Bills are void in Law, for he is the Accuser of the Brethren right or
wrong: he had a face to accuse upright Job, that had his Maker for his
compurgator. Satan tempts to sin, and then tempts for sin. Sed Christus
Diabolnm vicit, and pro te vicit, and in te vicit. Aug.
And then the accusation of a condemned person is no proof, in any Court of
Record; yea his terrors may be your evidences, for he seldom or never troubles
his own house: while his prisoners are quiet, he holds his peace; but when they
are broken from him, he shakes his chain after them. But then hold up a
crucified Christ before his very face, (with worthy Gesner) and say, Huic
offendi non tibi, vince hunc and me vinces; It Is this Christ that I have
offended, (thou fiend of Hell) I never sinned against thee; conquer him and
then thou conquerest me.

Doubt. 2. The Censures of men: my Scutum conscienti^ contra gladium linguae.
We may hear that by way of reproach from an enemy, that was but faintly
whispered by a friend. Sir Fr. Bacon.
Friends whisper it, my Foes proclaim it, and the Minister meets me in every
Sermon. I may be partial to my self, but others will speak plain.

Resol. 1. The censures of others should make us more severe in trying our
selves. To doubt of sincerity, is one thing; to try it, is another. When they
charge the State of hypocrisy upon us, we should mourn for the Habits of
hypocrisy in us; and bless God that their opinion for substance is not true;
they do but say what you might have been. And when your estate is questioned
never so unjustly, it is a good way to pass a Fine upon it, and make it surer.
And so you will be gainers not losers by such surmises.

2. While your heart is right with God, heed not the censures of men. Who more
upright than Job? yet hypocrisy was his charge, an hypocrite was his badge; so
David, so our dear Lord Jesus himself. The malicious world will be sure (as was
said) to charge those faults on you, whereof there is no clearing in this life.
Resolve with Paul, 1 Cor. 4. 3. But with me it is a very small thing, that I
should be judged of you, or of man's judgment, but he that judges me is the
Lord. We shall at last fall to an equal sentence, and till then we have reason
to rejoice, that we are counted worthy to suffer this reproach for his Names
sake. Nazianzen says, we must be dung'd with reproaches, that we may be more
fruitful.

Doubt. 3. The cry of my own Conscience: And if a man's heart condemn him, who
can acquit him? this has always been my fear, and who can clear him that is
condemned of himself?

Resol. 1. You must distinguish between Hypocrisy dwelling, and Hypocrisy
reigning: where it only dwells, it is as gr^vel in the shoe, as the mote in the
eye, as the Soldier in his Quarters, you are weary of it, it makes you halt,
you give it no rest, you are very sick of it: where it reigns you cannot endure
to be touched or search^d, and it orders your life and actions; your main
design is, to cloak with God, and to cheat the world.

2. Conscience rightly informed may go far in this decision: But Conscience is
not Regula regulans, but Regula regulata. Its like the Dial that must be set by
the Sun of Gods word, and rightly determines only by virtue of that. And
sometimes, such pangs and terrors overwhelm the Conscience, that then it is not
a competent Judge of the cause. If every man whose Conscience pricks him, were
an hypocrite; God help the greatest part of Conscientious Christians!

Doubt 4. My sad Experience, 1. of my Dryness in secret Duties. I am better in
the assembly, than in my family, better in my family, than in my closet, and
there an upright man is best. He that is enlarged and enlivened with others,
and straightened in his own bowels, cannot be upright.

Resol. 1. The more company we have in Ordinances, the more enlargement we may
expect, and yet upright withal. Our Savior himself when he saw the
multitudes, it opened his mouth, Mat. 5. 1. and we read but few such Sermons
from him as that was: for besides, that the numerousness and seriousness of
others, is a rational means to quicken us that are about the same work; we may
expect more of the manifestations of the Divine Presence, where the persons and
graces of so many are, that are dear to God.

2. But yet every upright man will be serious and hearty in secret, and earnest
withal. He would not be hired out of his secret devotions: and a little truth
and zeal in a closet, is more than the larger expressions of them with a
multitude; what is done in secret, provided you do it of choice and in
Conscience to God, has more genuine features of real integrity; than much more
in public, for that must needs proceed from the love of God and of his service.

O but 2. I have experience of Decays in my soul, and no growth. The path of
the just is like the shining light, that shines more and more to the perfect
day. I ^eel my self rather worse every way, but not better.

Resol. 1. It is not easy to determine of spiritual growth or decays; For its
object is various: some grow more visibly in zeal, others in knowledge, others
in stability, some more in the roots, some more in the bulk, some more in
fruit. And then to discern growth, is a work of time: our progress in grace, is
not so discernable as our entrance; for the change here is specifical, there
only gradual; and the younger children are, the more is Dr. The. Goodwin.
their growth discerned.

2. A sensible sight of your decays, is a true sign of growth; the clearer the
sight, the less motes are discerned, when there We are like benumbed limbs,
sometime^ have life in us, but feel it not. Mr. Cap^l.
is joined withal a grief for our defects. Descendendo ascendimus, we grow
higher in Gods esteem, by growing lower in our own. Corruption does not usually
discover corruption; nor decays, decays. If therefore you find, that you hate
sin as heartily, and can wisely prevent it, that you can be fully as serious
and spiritual in your duties, as wise in reproofs, though perhaps not so
frequent as heretofore; you have no just cause to charge your self with
decays, much less with dissembling in Religion.

Yea, but 3. I have experience of Inconstancy; my soul is in a perpetual Ague,
one while burning hot, another while key-cold; unconstant in avoiding evil, and
more unconstant in the performance of what is good; and this is an hypocrites
temper, and this is mine.

Resol. 1. A perfect setledness is not to be expected in this life. Our day
will have a night; our Sunshine will have eclipses; suavis hora, brevis mora,
has been an old complaint. Grace that dwells in such a soul, a soul that
dwells in such a body, a man that dwells among such variety of business, In a
perfect soul there is no interest but Gods, in a sincere his interest is
highest. Mr. ^ax.
companies and temptations, cannot escape much variableness and daily
alterations. Though thou art upright in the way, yet thou art but in the way,
viator not comprehensor. Heaven is the only state of invariable holiness and
happiness.

2. The inconstancy of an hypocrite i^ about the choice of the end, about the
very object of the soul; whether he shall chus^ Christ or Corruption, God or
Mammon. The upright man is fully resolved in this, and his inconstancy is only
in the use of means; not whether he should pray or not pray, meditate or no,
but he has not always the same degree of love to them, heat and delight in
them, and comfort from them. And this must be mourned for here, but can be
cured only in Heaven.

Doubt. 5. The Deceitfulness of the hear; this is so great, that after all my
trial I may be mistaken; there are lamps that may delude a man even to the
gates of Heaven. And I am sure my heart is one of the worst of the kind, and so
most likely to deceive and be deceived.

Resol. 1. Though the Heart be deceitful in its self, yet it is discernable by
the help of Gods spirit. Jer. 17. 10. I the Lord search the heart; and he can
and will lead every diligent self-searcher into the darkest corners thereof.
God and man together may find out it. Indeed a carnal careless eye sees it not,
but he that would know himself, shall know himself. No man is deceived herein,
but he that is willing to be deceived.

2. Your holy jealousy as it is a good Sign of uprightness, so it is a good
Antidote against hypocrisy. He that detects a cheat, is not then of his party;
and he that knows he has a Proteus to deal with, will be vigilant over him. He
that hates and bewails hypocrisy, and most in himself, will never dye an
hypocrite.

And therefore be of good comfort ye upright ones. Your matter shall stand,
your tenure is good, notwithstanding the suits commenced against it. These
shaking fits do but confirm your health. The greatest tempest hurts not the
tree that is well rooted, its roots will spread the more. The pinching trying
Frosts strengthen the sound man, and every thing does good to him that is good
and upright in his heart. However you may be reputed or used in this world,
whatever condition concludes you here; yet in Life, in Death, in Judgment, and
in Eternity, Integrity will be a Cordial.

FINIS.

