A BRIEF Examination and Censure OF Several Medicines, of late years Extolled
for Universal remedies, and Arcana's of the highest preparation;

BEING Indeed some of them trivial toys, by mistake cried up for what they are
not, others dangerous virulent venoms faslely commended for rare wonder-working
mysteries;

Namely, Lockyers pill, Hughes powder, Constantines Spirit of Salt, with
several other of that kind, by which the Art of Pyrotechny is in danger of
being brought into Reproach and Contempt.

From the injury of which pretenders true Chemistry is vindicated, and the
disguise plucked off from Counterfeit Artists, who are discovered to be a pack
of ignorant Sciolists; and vainglorious Boasters of what they know not, nor
can perform.

By George Starkey, who is a Philosopher by the Fire.

Licensed September the 30. 1664.

LONDON, Printed for the Author 1664.

A BRIEF Examination and Censure OF Several Medicines of late years Extolled
for Universal remedies, and Arcana's of the Highest preparation.
IN the year 1651. and continuing from that time till 1655. I began publicly
to use in my Medicinal practice, several succedaneous remedies for the Cure of
Diseases, (acute especially) of which in my Natures explication, and Helmonts
vindication, as also in my Pyrotechny asserted and illustrated, I gave a
faithful account, and my Medicines were grown famous without Bills or Books,
both in City and Country; at last one Mr. Mathews prevailed with me so far, as
to impart unto him my middle way for preparation and correction of Vegetables,
in defect of he great Dissolvent of Helmont and Para^elsus, namely by
alcalizate Salts and oils essential united together by a long digestion, and
reiterated imbibitions.

This way of preparation although a true natural way, yet at the best and
highest, is but a succedaneous or middle process to that of the great
Circulate, and this by me communicated, the most inferior of its kind, as I
have elsewhere more fully declared: For first it was wholly Vegetable, whereas
by the same way Mineral Sulphurs might be extracted, Corrected and Exalted, and
joined with the Vegetable composition, by which it would have been improved in
virtue an hundred fold. But secondly, it was not by far the noblest Vegetable
preparation, which that way leads unto; For, I have upon occasion, not only
made an union of the Salt and oil, but also circulated them into a true
volatile Spirit, and with them extracted Aromatic and Balsamic tinctures,
which being truly essentificated, are by Paracelsus called Vina essata, of
which in my Pyrotechny asserted I have discoursed fully and plainly, which
Helmont speaks of in his Book of Fevers, in these words. He that knows how to
turn the oil of Cinnamon, Cloves, etc. into the nature of a volatile Saline
Spirit, has at command a powerful Medicine, for the Asthma Consumption;
Palsy, Apoplexy, and inveterat Vertigo, or swimming of the head, etc. which
will perform as much as can be expected from any Vegetable remedy.

However, as I elsewhere have written more at large, that way of preparation is
a true natural way, and of very general use in the practice of Physic, for
(frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora) multitudes of truculent
diseases very violent and acute, are by effectual abstersives safely, speedily
and pleasantly taken away, without danger of relapse. But where the disease
respects the Spirits chiefly, or where in acute diseases the Spirits are
oppressed, or violently enraged (the vital spirits I mean) there such purely
defecated remedies are required, that may insinuate themselves into, and
relieve the languishing fountain of life.

Otherwise a powerful abstersive, (especially if it have a pacative virtue mixed
with it to pacify the enraged Archeus) will perform the desires of both
Patient and Physician in Surfeits, Colds, Coughs, Fluxes, Fevers, Pleurisies,
tormenting gripes of wind in the Stomach or Bowels, running pains in the joints
or limbs, oppression of the Stomach, want of Appetite Digestion, Rest, or the
like. And so far my pill communicated to Mr. Mathews is of general use, that
almost in any distemper, that ordinarily afflicts the body, it may be given
with credit to the Physician, and Comfort to the Patient, as in my vindication
of this Pill from the unlearned Alchymist, and all other pretenders, I have
sufficiently declared; to which I remit the Reader, as also to my Pyrotechny,
and Natures Explication for larger, yea, full satisfaction.

My Pill then which Mr Mathews challenged for many years, is a true Correction
of the lethal qualities of Opium, in which is not only an eminent pacative
virtue, but experience shows it to be admirably abstersive, by both sweat, and
urine, which abstersive quality is heightened and advanced by the Oils and Salt,
as also by the addition of some or other abstersive simples as Hellebore, black
or white, Asarum, Briony etc. which are also by the aforesaid Corrector of Oil
and Salt totally stripped of all their malignity, whose virtues being joined
together make an excellent Febrifuge, and a singular remedy for Coughs and
Fluxes.

Which preparation by much experience in these nine years (since I taught Mr.
Mathews to make it) I have amended and advanced beyond credit, yet the
unlearned Alchymist making use of the press, has made his more ordinary Pill
so famous in City and Country, that the repute of the Author is swallowed up
in the larger stream of his Credit and Fame, Yea, although those who know me,
and deal with me, find so great difference in goodness between mine and his,
that they would scarce buy of that sort from me at any rate, yet I find that
as long as they that learned of him, and his Widow, print every day Bills and
Books, and by advertisements in the News-book give notice far and near of their
preparations, if I be silent, I shall spend my time in obscurity, by which
means people who never read my Books, nor heard of me, will not know me to be
the Author, so I shall lose the credit of my Secret, nor perhaps will ever
understand how much I have mended this preparation, and in more difficult
cases, how far exceeding remedies I do and can prepare: but thinking this to be
the best that can be had (the unlearned Alchymist foolishly boasting it beyond
its limits of virtue) will sit down either content with this inferior sort,
when far nobler may be had, or hearken out after some other things which of
late are grown famous, but are indeed dangerous venoms, as I shall by and by
more at large set forth.

At the least this medicine being now fallen into many hands, will as all
things do of the like nature, grow daily worse and worse, which as it will be a
great loss to those that are concerned in the need of it, so it will fall as an
inevitable disgrace upon the Art, and redound to my both damage and discredit.

For Mr. Mathews was by me taught my most common way then in use, which he did
not follow with that Candor as he should, and might, but grasping at a vast
trade, did too shamefully prevaricate in the direction he had from me, as Mr.
Kendall, Mr. Andrews, Mr. Luddington, and Mrs. Marden know, by which neglect
his Pills bind the body obstinately, and cause the next day giddiness, great
drought, faintings, dejected appetite, suspension of wind, fottish drowsiness,
etc. for want of the closing hand of a true Artist, which he, hasty to get a
trade, neglected at first, to advise with me concerning, and having wronged me
in using my secret as his own, in his own name, had not the face afterward to
address himself to me to learn to mend, so that although much good be done by
his pill, yet far less then might be done thereby, if those symptoms had been
by full and complete preparation taken away, which affright some from meddling
with them, and dishearten others so as to make them weary of, and leave using
them.

Therefore I did according to the dictate of reason, and impulsion of necessity
in a short Tractate vindicate that preparation from all pretenders, and have
pitched upon one general Pill or powder, which will be more efficacious then
that of Mr. Mathews, or any other publicly made by many degrees, and have
given a short Index or Catalogue of other secrets, with description of the
virtue, and directions for the use of this and them, the time, dose, and manner
of ordering the patient in applying them, and in what cases they are chiefly
effectual.

For the necessity of that vindication, and Catalogue, this Apology I hope will
be satisfactory to rational persons, and for others I shall take little notice
whether they are pleased or discontented. As for the shortness of that Tractate
I shall say no more, but that it is a necessary direction of such whom it
concerns, what is to be had for recovering their health and where, and how to
make use of what is directed, for which end, short and plain advice is
requisite, and sufficient. They that would have the Philosophy and reason of
things at large, for satisfying their judgments, I commend them to my writings
already extant, and I shall God willing hereafter send forth what other
Tractates I have promised, which the studious in the Art of Pyrotechny expect,
and have for some years desired, but shall not be long delayed for future.

Thus having made a fair and friendly end with the unlearned Alchymist and his
followers, I meet a many headed Chemical Monster, which I must encounter, or
else the Art of Pyrotechny will be in danger of Contempt, scorn, and reproach,
which I shall not willingly suffer to be cast upon it, at least, with color of
reason, and appearing just grounds.

For of late years the formerly contemned Art of Pyrotechny, begins to have
many favorers, and I may without boasting say, at least ten for one. Since I
sent forth my Apology for Helmont, and his way of Medicine, which was seconded
by my Pyrotechny asserted, etc. and now a man would bless himself to think what
a number of Coleburners there are, and how they daily multiply, many of whom
one could scarce imagine of any other extraction, but that they grew out of
some dunghill: such heteroclyte pieces of Mortality, as Weavers, Tailors,
Botchers, Cobblers, and who not, of late have thrown aside their bodkin and
thimble, last, awle, and shuttle, and are become (Asini ad lyram) like so many
Apes in a Carpenters workroom, Philosophers of the date of Jonas Gourd, which
sprung up in a night, flourished for a day, was smitten the next night, and the
second day withered, and became scarce fit for the fire.

A man might persuade himself that the world were lately drowned in ignorance,
as the Poets fable it was once with waters, in Deucalions time, after which
Cataclysm he and his wife Pyrrha, were taught to throw stones over their backs,
which soon after became men and women, and so repeopled the universe, in
imitation of whom some Chemist or other surely has lately cast loggs of wood
over his back, from whence have sprung up such stupid, blockish Philosophers,
as are or may be the scorn and derision of Art and ingenuity it self.

These Mushroms in Philosophy dream of themselves that they are tall Cedars in
Chemistry, and from the Dark bosom of Nothing, they straightway soar to the
pitch of Universality in Medicine. It is enough for them to get a Catalogue of
diseases, which though they can scarce spell in true Orthography, yet will
promise to cure them certainly, with an etc. That if any more diseases either
are, or hereafter happen to be, woe be to them at all adventure, they have a
wonderdoing trifle, that shall destroy them as soon as they appear. I long
debated with my self whether or no I should meddle with this generation of
boasting bubbles, and their baubles, or let them go unregarded, as not worth
the notice taking of a true son of Art, and though the latter course more
pleased me, and suited my genius, rather to scorn and neglect them, then do
them so much honor and credit, as to examine and refute them; yet at last I
resolved not to pass them over in silence, among many other, for these special
reasons.

1. First because I having publicly Vindicated the Excellency of Chemistry
from its real adversaries, and professed enemies, and my Books being taken notice
of in the world (I may say with modesty) not without approbation of many that
are learned and judicious, not in this Nation only, but in foreign Countries
and Kingdoms, it may be justly expected, that I who have defended this Art from
the injuries of open adversaries, should not suffer it to be reproached by the
absurd pretenses of seeming Friends. For if on the one hand trifles be cried up
with the Elogies of powerful Arcana's, and on the other hand dangerous Venomes
boasted to the world for true universal remedies, what a door will by this
means be opened to Calumny, there is none so blind, but may easily perceive.

2. Secondly, I having promised to the world in my last published Tractate of
Pyrotechny, that I would expose to public sale true Chemical medicines, with
large description of their virtues, and full directions for their use, and the
performance of this my promise having been delayed, for these several years, in
the mean time this spurious offspring coming abroad, with glorious titles, and
golden promises abusing and deceiving the simple and unwary. What may people
think, or can they imagine, but that these medicines are indeed such as were by
me commended, or that I know and approve them to be of that virtue and
Excellency which the Books written of them do boast in their praise; or at
least that I know no other that are better? There can be in reason no other
conjecture made of my silence, in case I should let pass without animadversion
these Chemical mockeries: and well it were, if that were all, for some of them
are so virulently malignant, and dangerously venomous, that I cannot but concur
in the censure of noble Helmont concerning them, to wit, that Antimony so long
as it causes vomits, and Mercury while it may be revived (and that it will
easily be so long as its infamous salivative Venom remains uncorrected) are
not remedies fit for an honest man to use.

3. Thirdly, Since it has been known that I was Author of that Pill for which
Mr. Mathews was famous for many years, it is now the judgment of many that I
am either Author of, or have a hand in, whatever Chemical medicine is cried up,
and has a name in City and Country, and consequently whatever infamy they
shall deserve for future, either upon the score of their insufficiency, for
what they are commended, or villainy in operation, will in the opinion of many
blemish my reputation, unless I publicly disown and protest against them.

4. The Art it self will be in hazard of contempt and being rejected, if not of
hatred and being abhorred, when people shall observe partly the ridiculous
effect of some trivial toys, and partly the desperate operation of some other
churlish venoms, which yet both the one, and the other, are highly extolled for
true universal secrets in medicine, and rare efficacious mysteries in nature,
by pitiful ignorant Sciolists, who are masters of nothing but ignorant
confidence.

5. It would confirm the old scandal, that has been from the beginning thrown
upon Chemical medicines, to wit, that they are full of Danger, and quickly
either Kill or Cure. Now it behooves him that would be a Champion for Pyrotechny
to meet with these reproaches betime, and nip them in the Bud.

Frustra Medicina paratur Cum malaper longas invaluere moras.
6. Unless this remedy of disclaiming such Chemical fooleries be seasonably
(that is, speedily applied) the abused people finding their expectation (once
and again) deluded by such quacking Empericks, will in a short time come to
suspect all Chemical preparations, for such as they, or others, with little or
no profit, perhaps to their Cost, and Extreme hazard have Experienced. They
will at last startle at the very name of a Chemical medicine, as at the
appearance of some ghastly Ghost or spectrum. Away will one cry with your
Chemistry, for such a time I took an universal Pill or Powder, and escaped very
narrowly of being sent by it on a fools errand out of the world: besides such a
person took it, who in few days, or perhaps not many hours, was so perfectly
cured thereby of all diseases, as to lie covered with a Tombestone. Such true
reports of the pernicious effects of some Catholic venom, will stick as an
indelible blot of infamy, to blemish true and real Chemical medicines, unless
the disguise be plucked off from such counterfeit preparations, under which they
march with the greatest confidence imaginable, promising wonders, though upon
no ground, and without the least truth, to the disgrace of Pyrotechny, and its
true Adept sons, except the Cheat of them be discovered and laid open to the
world.

7. And lastly, I have been almost wearied with solicitations, both by word of
mouth, and letters from several persons here in Town, and living in diverse
parts of the Country, to know what my judgment is concerning such and such
(highly extolled) medicines. Whom not to undeceive and disabuse, lying in my
power to do it, would in effect be the same as to abuse them. Qui non prohibet
malum (quod potest) jubet.

And so I come at length to answer the importunities of such who have requested
my opinion and Censure of the forementioned perparations, and shall begin with
that known by the name of

Lockyers Pill, or Pillula extracta Radiis solis.
Concerning which I have seen and read a Tractate Written, likewise Tables on a
board exposed commending it without either Reaon or measure. Who was first
Godfather to the Pill, I know not, but its name at the Beginning was as
absolute an Abortive in Grammar, as the Pill it self was in Philosophy, and
Pyrotechny, and was called Pilluradii Extractus solus, the interpretation of
which would puzzle a Synod of Grammarians, though since the Pill has learned
so much true Latin, as to proclaim its name Pillula radiis solis extracta,
which was the meaning of the former barbarous denomination, as might be
collected from its gaping, rather then speaking.

By which licking of its name till it had some tolerable shape, as Bears are
said to lick their whelps, and by other manifest symptoms, it appears that the
Book in commendation of this new bawble, was midwif't into the world by some of
the forlorn hope of the Schools of learning, in reading which with seriousness,
I was surprised with a double admiration. First, That any man of common
discretion, should run into such Extravagant sesquipedantick Rodomontadoes in
praise of a preparation, which is (absit invidia dictis) one of the poorest,
meanest, and most vulgar, that is or can be made of Antimony by the fire.
Secondly, That such a pitiful toy, and more pitiful Scribble in praise of it,
should among any that pretend to reason find other acceptance then derision,
his brags concerning it appearing at first view so palpably gross, as to try
the faith of a Solifidian, for confirmation of which wonderful effects, to have
nothing but the (ipse dixit) of one, who in his too lavish boastings would
outdo a professed Mountebanck, and yet to find so much credit as to become
famous, speaks the levity and madness of the people advanced to such a degree
and height, as to incur the censure of Orestes himself, when most distracted.

Those expressions which I findused in its commendation, viz. that it is the
best thing which ever he met with or desires, may in some sense be true, and we
have an English proverb fit to the purpose, Give a fool or a child a bawble,
and he will not leave it for a noble. Gold it self may be, and often is
overvalued by a wise man, no marvel then if a butterfly or a play-toy be
overprized by a Schoolboy. And a pretty play-toy I must confess this is, if
that were all, nor should I ever censure it, if it did not play with the skins
and lives of mankind.

I shall not say of this Pill that it is preparatio insulsa, having in it a
double Salt, to wit, common and Saltpeter, but this I shall confidently affirm
of it, and the Charcoal in it will confirm my sentence, that it is Nigro
carbone notanda.

He that shall commend this, or any other preparation like unto this so highly
as I find that to be, if his breast assents to the truth of what he writes with
his pen, deserves to be sent from the School of Vulcan to pick Sallets with
Nebuchadnezzar, till the dew of Heaven have cooled his overheated noddle, so as
to understand himself, and his operations a little better then he does.

The preparation is at best but a Crocus of Antimony, and so much more churlish
then the common made as the Apothecaries prepare it by flushing with ana of
Saltpetre, by how much the nearer it comes glass, or vitrum of Antimony. For
the Charcoal, and Sea Salt which are mixed in the composition, give it an easier
fluxibility in the fire, which quickens and makes more active, does no way
extinguish, correct or diminish the virulency of Antimony. As for instance, Let
one part of Antimony be calcined with three parts of Saltpetre, the Calx (if
the work be well done) will be very white, from which the saltness being
separated by hot water, and the powder dried, it is then called Antimonium
Diaphoreticum, which may be given from ten to 30. grains, without any vomitive
effect ordinarily, but if this powder before the Salt be washed from it, be
melted in a Crucible by a strong fire, then poured forth, and dulcified with
warm water, and after dried, it gives a powder in color rather whiter then the
forementioned Antimonium Diaphoreticum, but in its churlish vomitive quality
equal either to Crocus or vitrum it self. So it is proportionably in this
mock-preparation disguised under the name of Panacaea Aurea, or Pillula radiis
solis extracta, which two preparations (I would have the reader take notice)
are the same and Synonymous, and do really excel^^ ordinary Crocus in their
venoms rigor, and this is the highest attainment (after infinice brags and
boastings) of these bungling Sophisters, whose idle rhapsodies deserve rather a
satirical derision, then any other kind of Confutation.

Let no man bless himself with hopes of the Pills excellency, by reason of the
small dose in which it is administered, for since its natural, ordinary, and
proper effect is forcibly to provoke vomit, the lesser the dose is, the greater
and quicker malignity it argues in that which is administered. As for the great
cures that are noised about, and attributed to this Pill, I doubt not but these
reports (upon moderate enquiry) will be found to be like to the shearing of
hogs, where the squeaking far exceeds the wool. I would not be understood as
though I deny a possibility of great and unexpected cures by this means but
say, that they are adventured on with danger and hazard, by reason of
deficiency in the Antimonies correction. Nor a hundredth part so notable and
certain cures, as may be made by Antimony totally corrected, exalted, glorified
and perfected, besided the absolute safety joined with soverain Excellency in
such true preparations, which in these uncorrected venoms is not to be
expected. But lastly, compare this with other preparations of Antimony, which
were once famous, till their desperate danger, (that is inseparable from the
virtue of such false operations) brought them at last to become deservedly
infamous, and see if there be any thing new in this, transcending them; nay, if
there be any odds, it is, that this not so effectual and safe as some of them.

For there are several processes in Antimony, the products of which, at their
first coming upon the stage have been extolled to the the Heavens, yet wanting
real worth to confirm and make good their commendations, they have in short
time been laid aside, like a cracked Bagpipe, or instrument out of tune, though
their first appearance in public was ussherd in with as large a Catalogue of
Cures, as this is or can be. For (as Basilius Valentine truly says, The
virtues of Antimony are so great, and inexplicable, that no mortal man can ever
be able to search out the bottom of its secrets and mysteries. Even crude as it
comes out of the earth it is of great virtue. Howbeit it is nothing so
powerful, penetrative, abstersive, and renovative in its gross substance, nor
in any preparation that does not extinguish its venom, as it is when its
central profundity is by art manifested, and its Arcanum made to appear. Of
which I shall Godwilling write more fully in a peculiar tractate concerning the
mysteries of Antimony. Here I shall only compare this new invention, with
other old ones of the like kind, to see if we can find any thing peculiar
herein, that excels the others; and upon serious and sober enquiry, I find no
such thing. The relief that the sick may expect hence, is no other, then that
which a man half starved may receive from a loaf of Bread fastened to the point
of a sharp spear, and darted at him, the loaf may refresh his hunger-pincht
stomach, and save his life, but the deadly spear threatens as much or more
danger, then the bread promises relief. The tree of life is guarded with armed
and angry Cherubims, whose flaming sword is to be taken away by the true
Artist, that so the restoring fruit may be enjoyed with profit and safety, but
trust me this Absaloms pillar will perfom no such thing. Yet it may answer
expectation in keeping up the name and memory. Erostratus who burnt Diana's
Temple Eternized his memory, when the builders of it lie buried in oblivion. A
famous Quack will be longer remembered then a skilful Doctor of ordinary
practice, but the memory of one and the other differs exceedingly. Thais of
Corinth has outlived the remembrance of all the noble Matrons, and honest
women, that were coetaneous with her, and so Lockyers Pill may be more durable
then a Gravestone, but so as to be contemned, derided, and become the byword
of every Practitioner, when the remembrance of its formet credit and esteem,
will add to its present and future infamy. Such a name I would not envy.

With what applause did the Antimonial cup court the world, and that of late
years? of which an Ancient Divine, published a book in its praise, boasting of
as many cures done by it, as might serve for a prologue on a Mountebanks stage
at Tower Hill or Smithfield. Besides, the writings of most profound
Philosophers, were tortured upon the Rack of that Authors Ingeny, to make them
confess that all the excellency which in their most deep and mysterious
sentences, they boast to be in their hidden Elixars and Mercury is true of this
Chemical toy. And I dare affirm on my Credit, nor do I doubt but my experience
in the Art of Pyrotechny, will be believed by those that know me, sufficient to
allow me for a competent judge in this case, that the effects of the Antimonial
Cup equal at least, if they exceed not the effects of this (so called) Golden
Panacaea, or Pills extracted by the Solar rays, of which I may say truly, It
is tituli magniloqui trufa, at the best an Ape clad in a jacket of tissue,
where the gay clothing does only add to the beasts deformity. But let all
sons of Art know, that diseases are not to be chased away with swelling titles,
and bombast names.

What need I mind the Reader of the fame which once the Crocus of Antimony had
in the world, the infusion whereof was by Rulandus an eminent German Doctor
entitled (aqua benedicta) to which he attributes many Centuries of cures,
prodigiously admirable, yea almost incredible. Nor has the vitrum of Antimony
wanted both its favorers and admirers, as I could name several Authors both
famous and learned. So also Mercurius vitae, reckoned by Bilichius as the Apex
of Chemical preparations, though he erroneously ascribes that offspring to the
parent Mercury (from whom also it has its name) yet it is indeed wholly the
product of Antimony, as experience may make it appear to any that is ingenious
in the School of Vulcan, by ocular demonstration, beyond denial or doubt.

All these and many other preparations of Antimony, (too tedious here to name)
had their time of being extolled almost for working of Miracles, yet because of
their malignant virulency, have at length been laid aside as so many dangerous
fiends, not to be conjured up in Medicine, without the help, Art, and advice of
a very skilful Exorcist, or Doctor.

Such a Devil in a new dress, is this lately invented Pill, as by an ordinary
flux may be made to appear in a quarter of an hour, by which means these Pills
will quickly and easily give at least a third part of their weight in Regulus,
to the inexcusable disgrace of him that prepares and commends them, who very
disingeniously, and without the least truth (as I am informed) denies them to
be at all Antimonial, of which nevertheless they are the most contemptible
preparation.

As for the Sunbeams which the title page, and the very name of the Pill
promise, or seem to promise, I am confident the Master of the Pill cannot tell
what he understands himself, or would have others to understand by the
Periphrasis. Whether they be extracted, prepared, and maturated by the
Sunbeams, as the Grammar sense carries it, or they are brought to perfection
by the influence of Gold, figuratively called the Sun by Philosophers, or at
least have the quality, nature and virtue, and do that in the Microcosm, which
the Sun does in the Macrocosm, let what will be the Reason of that title, if
they be not made by the beams or heat of the Sun, or dried up, and brought to a
Consistence thereby, it is a groundless insipid denomination. It is a new name
signifying just nothing. Men are said to be judged by the names they give to
their Children, sure I am, Philosophers may be judged by the titles they give
to their secrets. Here is a secret of whose name and title we may say, as the
Angel once said of his name to Manoah, It is wonderful! Wonderful to me, what
affinity Charcoal, Sea Salt, Saltpetre, and Antimony have with the Sunbeams?
what the Crucible the mixture is melted in? the fire that melts it? the water
that dulcifies it? the Sugar, Gums, etc. that make the powder into a Pill, any
of these, or all put together, he that can make out to my understanding, how
they denote the Solar rays, either really or analogically, shall be my
Oedipus: till then my wonder will and must continue.

Howbeit as I before hinted out of Basilius Valentine, in Antimony are most
noble arcana's hidden, but not to be prepared by the hand of every ignorant
Sciolist, concerning which this caution of Helmont is universally true, and not
to be neglected, that Antimony, while it causes vomit, and while Salivative
are not medicaments fit for an honest man to use.

If any shall object that Lockyers Pill works with some scarce perceptibly, I
answer, so will the Antimonial Cup, Crocus, or vitrum of Antimony, in a full
dose with some robust natures; but this universal Pill, or rather poison, is
given in so small dose at first and gradually increased, that scarce Arsenick,
Orpiment, or Realgar would prove lethally dangerous, if given in the same
quantity, which beguiling nature with an insufficient dose, and gradual
administration, is a pernicious prevarication against the sure rules of the
true Art of Medicine, which prescribe, that whatever noxious is given
internally, be given with great caution in respect of the parties strength,
age, and other circumstances, yet in a sufficient quantity to work it self out,
lest by this means of imposing on natures discretion, with a virulent venom
given in a too small dose, an enemy be lodged within, ready upon occasion to
work an inevitable mischief, when nature beguiled by the small dose of an
absolute poison shall be least aware of it, and not able to prevent, or remedy
it, for where the Archeus of the stomach is not sufficiently provoked to vomit,
nor the pylorus, mesaraicks, and bowels to an artificial dysentery, or purging,
(as it has fallaciously got a name) there at least provident nature involves
the offensive powder (or Pill) in a phlegmatic enclosure (as a spider does a
fly in its web) and so gradually as more is taken in it covers it, till with
the heat of the stomach and continuance, this secondine break or dissolve, then
follow continual vomitings, and looseness with Syncope's, deliquia's, and other
tragical symptoms, and perhaps the life of the Patient pays for the folly of
the ignorant Artist; at least an indelible malignant Character is imprinted
upon the bowels, and viscera, which by no Art perhaps is after to be remedied,
or with extreme difficulty. Hence arise continual palpitations of the heart,
involuntary sighings, oppression of the vitals, with most difficult breathing,
as durable as the life, to the amazement and horror of beholders. And truly it
was to gratify the importunate requests of several, who from Bristol,
Lincolnshire, Oxfordshire, Kent, Surry, Sussex, etc. have solicited my opinion
of these Pills, with reciting several apparent, undeniable, inexcusable
tragedies ensuing after, and caused by the taking of them, that caused me thus
far to travel in the Anatomy of them, and discovering their true nature,
virtue, and danger, that a record may be for future in behalf of Pyrotechny,
that the Philosopher by the fire has publicly protested against them, and
given caution to that purpose.

No less Dangerous is that Mercurial preparation not more famous about the Town
and in the Country, for its monstrous price, then infamous for its salivative
quality, of which an ounce of fine gold is but the purchase of eight grains,
and that quantity exceeds a single dose but one grain. This powder is only
Bradshaw revived with a double value set upon the medicine by his successor. It
is an odd and old folly of the vulgar, to value the goodness and excellency of
a thing according to its price, so that it is become a proverb, far fetched, and
dear bought is for Ladies: but if it were truly known how little this powder
in virtue exceeds common and ordinary precipitate, men would hardly be
persuaded to give after the rate of two hundred and forty pounds an ounce for
it, and might have the common that wants little or nothing of its goodness for
less then a shilling.

Yet if the detrimnet of the purse were all the mischief that attended this old
new invention, I could be content to let it pass; and suffer the people to be
lasht for the itch of their curiosity with a silver whip. But when that comes
to be hazarded by it, that is so far better then estate, (even the life of man
kind,) for which to redeem it from the pit, man would willingly give, not only
all that he enjoys, but skin for skin besides; in such a case I cannot let it
pass without notice and censure, that if men will be foolish, and hazard their
lives, and health to extreme danger, by adventuring on unfaithful remedies; it
may be on their own score, and not be imputed to the insufficiency of the Art,
which is properly the fault of ignorant, yet confident Artists.

The preparation is only a precipitate of, and if any Gold be added in
precipitation, if the precipitation be made with a Corrosive, it is at best a
delusion, for what dissolves meddles not with Gold, nor will aqua regia that
dissolves gold, work on it alike, when mixed with, or if they were corroded
together, or by bare digestion precipitated, without a corrosive, so long as
there is no alteration, nor union of their natures, the product is
inconsiderable, the is not in the least amended of its salivative venom, nor is
the body of in the least opened or altered, but as to all medicinal virtue is
dead; as it was before precipitation; so that it is a clog (if any thing) to
the; but gold reducible as before: for trial, let this powder be put in a small
crucible, in a heat of fusion for, or a smaller degree, the goes away in a
white smoke, and if a piece of gold be held over the fume in a pair of tongs,
the straightway cleaves to it, and whitens it, and stands in a pearly dew of
crude, if any part abide, that may be gold or silver; but because it is
corporally metalline, (as it was before) it adds nothing of medicinal virtue to
the. I deny not but in Corrosive dissolutions, the Corroded metal or, may and
does give a determination of efficacy to the coagulated salt of the dissolving
spirit, as it is in the Lunar Pills, of which the honorable Robert Boil Esquire
has written much in their commendation. But where is dissolved by a Corosive,
the product becomes too churlish to be given (almost in any dose) without
washing away the Corrosive salts by warm water, and when at the sweetest (that
water can bring it too) the still impresses on those atoms of salt which remain
its odious quality of salivation, and tormenting the the Intestines and
viscera; that often times the tragical operation thereof, becomes a spectacle of
horror and astonishment. And though may have many, and those excellent virtues,
in its own nature, (as the Elogy of John Woodall a famous Surgeon testifies
in its praise) yet till a true Philosophical preparation thereof be made, it is
attended with so manay infamous qualities, and dangerous symptoms, as justly
to brand the unadvised user thereof, with a mark of ignorance at best, if not
of unfaithfulness and dishonesty.

The ground of mistake in those that work both on and, is the Commendation that
is truly given by the sons of Art to the Arcana's that by the labor of
wisdom, are to be prepared out of both, such are the Corrallatum or Precipiolum
of Paracelsus, which is his Diaceltatesson, (of which I have written in my
Catalogue and Index of medicines by me prepared, with directions for their use
etc.) which cures radically the Gout, and Lues, all Fevers, the Dropsey, and
Ulcers of the Lungs, Kidneys and Bladder, the Horizontal gold also, which is
truly universal, the Sacharine Ens, or Ladanum of the Lily of, the stone of
the fire of Basilius Valentine, with other of the like nature, which mundify,
cleanse and restore nature, so as to renew the hair, the skin, and teeth, and
powerfully extirpate all diseases radically. After which secrets rash ignorant
pretenders seeking long in vain, fall at last to actual imposture, and boast of
trivial preparations in which the form of is only disguised, as if they were
indeed these noble mysteries, when as they are only unfaithfully prepared,
incorrected poisons, such (as pests in a Common wealth) deserve a black mark,
that they may not be a real scandal and reproach to true sons of Art. To pluck
off whose disguise is the end of this tractate. To undeceive also as many as I
can who have been seduced by their boastings, and swelling words of vanity, to
run too great a hazard of both life and health in trying their unfaithful
remedies. For whose satisfactory information, let such learn from me, that the
vomitive quality of, and the salivative of, do betray both their natures, as
the Devil is reported to be betrayed by his cloven foot, that however they may
be disguised, yet their form is not changed, but by an easy art, and in a
little time, both may be returned to their pristine form, the to running
quicksilver, and the to regulus. No marvel then if the hopes of such as make
use of them be deluded to the unexcusable disgrace of the preparers and
extollers of such dangerous secrets, whose rashness will, I hope, lie no longer
as a blemish on true Pyrotechny, and its Adept Sons.

Besides, these who deal in and prepared with trivial mock preparations yet
extolling their products to universality in medicine, there is another sort of
Chemists, who like Whifflers in a show of Pageantry, serve only to make the Art
of Pyrotechny appear ridiculous, some having gotten a knack by mistake esteem
it for what it is not, and confidently so report of it, and give out concerning
it both by word and writing, others lighting upon some specificks, which may be
useful, and prescribed with credit to themselves, and the Art, in such cases
for which they are peculiar, do by undue boasting and unreasonable
commendations thereof, much bring their own judgment and the credit of the Art
they profess, into suspicion and question. Of the first sort are they who cry
up a spirit of Salt with the highest Elogy due to the best of its kind, which
is truly made and prepared, yet instead of it, sell a pitiful rascal Phlegm of
Salt, which has truly none of the virtues which are duly ascribed to that
which is faithfully prepared. Of the true spirit of Salt Helmonts testimony is
to be understood, that it has not its peer or fellow for extinguishing the
thirst that afflicts feverish persons, as also against the burning sharpness of
urine, yea where the bladder is actually oppressed with a stone, as also in the
stranguries of old persons, that it gradually diminsheth, and pleasantly brings
away nephritical gravel and stones; It is also a most excellent Diuretic, and
so very helpful in Hydropick, and Scorbutic Cases, cleansing and amending the
blood by its balsamic quality. But let the Reader consider what spirit of Salt
performs all this. It is that which is distilled from Spanish Salt, first
decrepited, then melted in a Crucible, after dissolved among slices of Radish
roots, then dried again, and mixed with calcined Potters clay, and distilled by
degrees of fire at first, and urged at last with the extreme fire of
reverberation, and so continued till the Spirits be wholly drawn off. This
Spirit is of a pleasant sent, very volatile, ponderous, tincted, and
exquisitely crid, yet will not corrode common quicksilver, though in sharpness
it equal the most rectified oil of Vitriol, and in weight, and is so volatile
that you can no sooner open the glass, but the fumes in form of a smoke will
soon fill the room. Whereas this spirit which lately is cried up in City and
Country, is made of white Salt, not so much as dried from its moisture, which
by lying in the air it contracts. The invention of drawing it, as to the
instrument was Glaubers, which being of earth lets out all the subtle spirits,
giving only the phlegm, which a small trial will demonstrate to any that is
ingenious, for let that spirit be rectified with a very gentle fire, and all
that is insipid thrown away (for it is worth nothing else) the residue of a
whole pound will be so incredibly little, that a man who has once made the
experiment, would wonder at his own levity and vanity, to be deluded by so
palpable a trifle, in a thing that concerns not his purse only, but his health
and life also, for by relying on this broken staff for help, opportunity of
seeking out elsewhere is lost, never to be recovered again, and this damage at
least is got by promised help, where the thing on which the Patient relies for
performance of what he expects, and the Doctor promises, cannot perform what
it gives hopes of. Such may well be called cruel promises, where the life is
engaged, and the effect in an ordinary way cannot, nor will answer expectation.
Of this sort are several Chemical preparations, as namely Elixir proprietatis,
the tincture of Corals, the Magistery of Pearls, etc. which have only the name
of Paracelsus and Helmonts secrets, but are not the things themselves. Such is
the potable gold boasted of by some, in which is nothing of remark, but the
cheat of it, and disapointment of expectation in him that uses it. Of this
sort of potable gold that testimony of Gideon Harvey may be very true, that it
has no admirable virtue in it, but by reason of its Corrosive spirits (with
which it is prepared) it has to his knowledge caused dysenteries etc. which is
no more then Helmont said before him, to wit, that in his Tyrociny he could by
Corrosives make gold appear in the disguises of oil, Vitriol, and a spirit, yet
he could never find in those preparations such virtues which the Adept
Philosophers ascribe to the preparations of Gold extolled by them, nay rather
he found better effect in the decoction of some simple then herein. But at last
he perceived that gold without its true proper Corrosive is dead; till (I say)
it be radically penetrated by its Corrosive, which as Paracelsus says, is
truly more noble then the gold it self. Nor is it impossible, but Dr. Harvey
may hereafter come to find another far more secret potable gold, then any he
has seen yet, which may have other virtues then that which he mentions with
such deserved contempt. Then he may have a far better est eem of Helmont then
at present he manifests; when the whimsies of his natural Theology (little
better then Scripture Atheism or Ethnic Divinity) his Graphical descriptions
of the several divisions of the Chaos, his Metaphysical Dog-Cat, with other
pretty Chimera's about fire, and the Elements, shall by riper years be worm'd
out of his brain, then he may fall into a more serious consideration of his
latter end, set forth to him by the Emblems of his Deathshead and flower-pot,
and at last perhaps prove a Sober Philosopher. Till then I leave him for
answer, to what he has vomited up in disgrace of Helmont, to his further and
more judicious reading of him; his Exceptions being so empty and weak, as to
deserve no further answer, and his Book of Archeology so pitifully idle, as
that it has not the good luck of those Tractates which have of all others the
worst fortune, to contein so much in it of real value, as to requite the
Readers time that he spends in reading it.

But to leave Dr. Harvey, and his potable gold, and come to what we further
intend, namely, to discover the abuses under which the Art of Pyrotechny
groans, and to disabuse the people who have been, and are deluded by such empty
bubbles, in which besides a swelling outside there is nothing but air and
vanity. I shall in brief resume what I have said before, and so conclude this
my censure of unfaithful Chemical remedies, they are all of them mistakes in
art, imposed on the credulous world for what they are not, of which some are
truculent, and lethally dangerous, where, to wit, dangerous subjects are
wrought upon, and the true preparation not understood by such Tyro's as too
rashly adventure upon the work, yet they extol the products to the heavens for
the true secrets of the Adepti, when indeed they are only false names of rare
Arcana's put upon real venoms, where the preparation is not true, nor the
product safe, such are Lockyers Pill, Hugh's powder, Mercurius vitae, commonly
now known by that name, Aurum vitae, etc. with twenty several impostures of
the like nature. Others are safe, being of subjects in which lies no danger,
but for want of a due preparation, trivial and sophisticate. Such is
Constantines Phlegm of Salt, the common spirit of vitriol, the common Elixir
proprietatis, Tincture of Coral, Oil of Amber, yea what spirit or oil is there,
that for gain sake is not adulterated, or the preparation shuffled over, where
the true way of doing it is troublesome and difficult, or perhaps not known.
Every Tyro at his first entrance on the art of Chemistry, boasts himself
straightway for a Colossus in Pyrotechny, and will adventure upon the most
hidden mysteries, who knows not the keys by which natures Cabinet is unlocked.
Hence it is, that while many boast of high Arcana's, and yet they and their
secrets become at last deservedly contemptible, others who have some particular
remedy not usual, with which more real good is done, then with these great
mysteries (whose cruel danger makes them at last suspected by all, and abhorred
by them, who know and have tried them) they take this opportunity of extolling
this rarity of theirs for the Apex of Chemical preparations. Thus spirit of
Hartshorn with some, spirit of Soot with others, (called by the name of ignis
vitae) spirit of Dead men's bones with a third sort, are ignorantly and
unadvisedly commended as true Panpharmaca, and so used by many, whereas they
are only urinous spirits, and so abstersive, of which that of Hartshorn is the
best, but nothing comparable to that spirit made of it, by the circulated salt
of Helmont and Paracelsus; by which Hartshorn is turned into a lacteous spirit,
and will reach the principles of our constitution, by which means such notable
spirits do strengthen the balsom of life, and are powerfully renovative and
restoring decayed strength, and the drooping vital spirits. Of this sort are
Crabs eyes, Pearl, and the stones of vegetables, and animals, the shells also of
Crabs, and fishes, yet so as that there are kinds and degrees of goodness among
them, but their preparation must be performed by a true Key or agent, and not
according to the slender skill of an illiterate Tyro, or ignorant Sciolist. In
doing which, the concrets must be resolved by a spontaneous retrograde
solution, and the primitive lactiform liquor separated totally from the
dissolvent, which is the highest advancement those concretes can be brought to,
in which are wonderful excellencies hidden, for such who have an inclination to
nephritick Coaagulations of gravel, and stranguretical muccous viscidities in
the bladder, which inclination though old and obstinate, such Arcana's remove,
and by a restoring virtue confirm the Kidneys and bladder in their pacified
state, to the infinite comfort of the patient and credit of the Physician. Of
these and many other true secrets, I shall God willing put forth a discourse
entitled, Helmont revived, as a forerunner to which it was necessary to send
forth this tractate, to undeceive the world, who have long been abused with
adulterate rascal preparations, instead of true Chemical Arcana's and
medicines, to the injury of deluded patients, and disgrace of the Art, which
reproach I doubt not but these lines of mine will for the future wipe off, and
remove.

A Conclusion to the Sons of Art and all Ingenious Readers.
THis for the honor of the Art of Pyrotechny, in vindicating its reputation
from the reproach cast on it, by Pseudochymists, I thought necessary to send
into the world as a forerunner of other plain, full, and faithful tractates,
which shall be only didacticall, and instructive, of which the first which I
intend, shall follow this, is a discovery of the two Keys of Pyrotechny, Viz
the Liquor Alchahest, and its succedaneum, the true Spirit of Salt of Tartar,
to which I shall add by way of appendix, the Anatomies of Amber, Antimony,
Mercury, and Saturn, by way of short essays, not to anticipate or prejudice my
Pyrotechny Triumphing, which is a large Volume. Thus at present, Reader, I
shall take leave of thee, and recommend both my own and thy study, and pains
to his blessing who only can make successful what we enterprise, and discover,
truth to the studious and serious searcher after Natures secrets; and shall
subscribe myself thy faithful friend, Monitor, Instructor and Brother,

George Starkey, known by the title of Philosopher by the fire.

FINIS.

