A SERMON To bring to Remembrance GOD's Wonderful Mercies at the BOYN; PREACHED
On the Second Day of July, 1699, At St. Nicholas within, DUBLIN:

By John Stearne, D. D.

DUBLIN, Printed by Joseph Ray, and are to be Sold at his Shop in Skinner-Row,
over against the Tholsel. 1699.

To Their EXCELLENCIES CHARLES Duke of Bolton, HENRY Earl of Gallway, And
NARCISSUS Lord Archbishop of Dublin,
LORDS JUSTICES OF IRELAND.
This SERMON (Preached and Published in Remembrance of God's Wonderful Mercies
at the Boyn.) Is humbly Dedicated by

Their Excellencies Most obedient Servant John Stearne.

A SERMON Preached the Second Day of July, 1699; ON The 24th. and 25th. Verses
of the XXXVI. Chap. of Job.
Remember that thou magnify his Work which Men behold:
Every Man may see It, Man may behold It a far off.

THrough the merciful Providence of Almighty God, We are All, this Day (to the
great Disappointment of our Enemies) in the Land of the Living: and this very
Day, nine Years are completed since We were assured of our Deliverance from
the threatening Powers of France, and the bloody Hopes of Rome: for, tho the
First of July will be long observable in Story, for that Glorious Victory with
which Heaven was pleased to bless the Forces of our Mighty Deliverer, KING
WILLIAM, at the Boyn; yet, in what Melancholy Thoughts, what fearful
Expectations, and what restless Distraction, that doubtful Day was spent, many
of this City cannot easily forget. But on the Second of this Month, on this
memorable Day, did We joyfully behold the prevailing Fears of our Enemies
prevent the Execution of their own cruel Designs.

This Day, instead of being buried in the Ruins of our City, or of seeing it
in Flames and Ashes round about Us, did We (tho still with some Remainder of
our Fears, as the Sea continues disturbed and rough, for some time after the
stormy Winds are laid) this Day, I say, did We look out from our Consinement,
and see our Enemies in their disorderly Flight: as if they could not make too
much Haste from an advancing Army, whose Hearts and Hands they had lately known
to their Loss and Sorrow. For, tho they are a sort of Men that allow their
Senses to be Dull and Deceitful in the Church; yet, in the Field they are very
Quick and Faithful: and in Our Great Day of Battle all their Catholic Faith
could not hinder their Senses from doing their proper Office: they soon felt
the Blows and Shot of our Army, and believed them Real; They saw their own
Party Substantially beaten, and did not conceit that they were knocked down by
Accidents. In short, they were too sensible that Our Army was a Body of Men too
Brave and Daring for them to rally against and engage; and, therefore, with all
the Expedition of Fear, they turned their Backs, ran away, and spurred on, as
if a winged, commissioned Angel had pursued their dismayed, flying Camp, to
execute the Vengeance of the Lord of Hosts. And since on this Day, We saw Our
Enemies scattered, and those that hated us (like well disciplined Soldiers
following their Leader) fly before Us; shall not We this Day, shall not Our
Posterity for ever, magnify this mavelous Work of God which We beheld, that
God may never upbraid Us, as He did his People, with this heavy Charge; They
remembered not God's Hand, nor the Day when He delivered them from the Enemy?

We must, not only magnify God, for his Eminent Works of Mercy, while they are
New, and can hardly be forgotten, but allow them a constant Place in our
Remembrance; and that vast Debt of Gratitude which We our selves cannot wholly
discharge, must be entailed upon our late Posterity. In a due Sense of this,
did the Jews, upon the sudden Disappointment of Haman's bloody Conspiracy, set
a part the Days of Purim, as Days of Feasting and Gladness, in Commemoration of
so signal a Deliverance. They ordained that those Days should be kept through
every Generation, every Province, every City and every Family; that the Memory
of them might not perish from the Jews, nor from their Seed for ever. This
their Religious Decree must condemn us all, unless We faithfully record Our
Deliverances, for the Generations to come; that the Children which are yet
unborn may praise the Lord. If the Deliverance of any People upon the Face of
the Earth, has deserved a stated Day of Anniversary Thanksgiving, surely Ours,
(as at this Time) may justly expect It: and I wish that the want of an Act of
Parliament for celebrating the First of July, as well as the Twenty Ninth of
May, or the Twenty Third of October, may not be numbered among those National
Sins which provoke the Jealous God to visit Us again, with a more heavy Hand.
Should We or Our Posterity ever suffer God's Great and Compendious Mercy at the
Boyn to grow into neglect, the Astonished World may justly tell us (in the
Psalmist's Words) that We have sinned with our Fathers, who regarded not God's
Wonders in Egypt, neither kept his great Goodness in Remembrance, but were
disobedient at the Sea, even at the Red Sea. Even the most important Blessings
We are too prone to forget: and, therefore, wise and grateful Antiquity
contrived various Ways to renew and strengthen our Memories. And our Blessed
Savior, considering how often the thronging Concerns of this present Life
thrust Him and All his Benefits out of our Minds, very kindly left us a most
indispensible Command for the frequent Celebration, of the Holy Eucharist,
saying, Do this in Remembrance, (or (...), for a Memorial) of Me. And that the
People of God might never want an Evidence of His exceeding Goodness toward
them, in destroying Amalek, with the Sword of Joshua, God enjoined Moses to
write It in a Book: and for a standing Monument of so glorious a Defeat, Moses
built an Altar, and called the Name of It, JEHOUA-nissi, The Lord my Banner.
And surely We are not less obliged to convey, by every kind of Tradition, the
wonderful Works of Divine Mercy, to the coming Generations; that God's Name may
be exalted in every succeding Age, to the Consummation of all Things: when all
Holy Souls shall join with the celestial Choir, in more refined and sprightly
Hallelujahs; and keep one great Day of Thanksgiving that shall never know a
Night.

And if this be our Duty, (as most certainly It is) Wonder and Pity must, by
Turns, employ a serious Person, when He Duly reflects on our National Mercies,
and our general Ingratitude. For, How can He but be filled with Admiration, to
consider the many and great Deliverances, which a most gracious Providence has
vouchsas'd to give Us, notwithstanding all our provoking Impieties? And how can
He but look down, with a sorrowful Eye, upon the unhappy Condition of such Men
as (by their continued Course of Wickedness) seem obstinately resolved to
disappoint all the obliging Methods of Divine Goodness and Love? Tho the Lord
has done great Things for Us already, and so done them that they ought to be
had in Remembrance; Yet, (so unanswerable is our Return) We hourly magnify our
own Ingratitude more than his mavelous Works. Our numerous Transgressions
have made our Unthankfulness so prodigiously Great, that, in this one Respect,
It is like the Wonderful Work of God in the seasonable Deliverance of our
Church and State; every One may see It, Man may behold It a far off.

It was thought very unreasonable by our Blessed LORD, that, of the Ten that
were cleans'd, but One returned to give Glory unto GOD for his saving Mercy;
and yet our Unthankfulness is more unequal; for, of the many Thousands in this
Populous City, which was surpised with a Deliverance from a consuming Fire and
an undistinguishing Sword, not One in an Hundred daily offers unto GOD the
Public Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving for so desirable a Mercy. The
Devotions of our Church are, generally, so neglected, that many may be thought
to be sorry for GOD's Goodness toward them in restoring our Temples, (abused
by Superstitious and Idolatrous Worship) to their Pure and Reasonable Service,
because this Religious Turn of Providence dos take away all Excuse for their
Ingratitude, in not constantly Magnifying GOD, in His House of Prayer. Every
slighted Opportunity of Thanksgiving dos but heighten their Guilt: So that it
had been better for them to have suffered the utmost Severities of Popery, than
to live ungrateful for such an exceeding Blessing as the Continuation of the
Protestant Religion: And it would be a very Just Judgment, should GOD (in His
Anger) once more, and for ever, give our Churches into the Hands of our Enemies
(who would make them Dens of Thieves that rob the silly People of their Money
and their Souls together) since We our selves too seldom make any Good or
Religious use of such Holy Places. One Special Reason, why GOD dos often delay
the granting of choicest temporal Mercies to a People, is, their own
unpreparedness for them; and when He has at length, answered the earnest desire
of Their Hearts, Their not Magnifying, in a becoming manner, His Signal
Providential Dispensations, or not faithfully improving them to the Glory of
His Name, and the Salvation of Their own Souls, dos frequently provoke, Him, to
vindicate His Honor, and to bring Them unto a better understanding both of Him
and of Themselves, by a Sensible Abatement, or a Total Removal of His abused
Favors.

To prevent such an heavy Fate, let us come unto a closer and more distinct
Consideration of Four weighty Duties which this compendious Term, MAGNIFY, dos
impart and enjoin, as the special, solemn Business of every grateful Soul, in
reference to the Eminent, Merciful, Providential Works of GOD. For, 1 st. In
order to our Magnifying such Works of GOD, We must freely own His overruling
Hand in all, acknowledging Him for the Fountain from which all our Blessings,
like so many refreshing and wholesome Streams, are derived unto us. 2 dly. We
must carefully observe those more Material and Signal Circumstances which
render any national Work of Divine Providence more considerable and obliging. 3
dly. To the utmost of our Power, and with the profoundest Humility, must We pay
all that Honor, Reverence, and Adoration unto GOD, for His extraordinary Works
of Providence, which They most justly challenge from Us. And Lastly, It must be
our constant Endeavor to answer (by a sincere Practical Reformation) the just
Expectation of GOD in His merciful Works of Providence.


The First Duty required (in our Method) unto a more respectful Magnifying of
GOD's Eminent Works of Mercy, is, a free owning of His overruling Hand in All,
and acknowledging Him for the Fountain of all our Blessings.

'Tho We were blessed with a King of such Undaunted Courage, such Prudent
Conduct, and such Constant Devotion, that He seemed, at the Boyn, to design, at
once the Conquest of Heaven and Earth, or taking them Both, by the united Force
of Arms and Prayer; tho We were favored with a General, deservedly famed through
more than the Christian World, for His glorious Exploits in War; and who, as
if, with such a King, He had been too great a Blessing for us, like another
Moses, only saw that Good and Promised Land which He was not suffered to go
over the River and possess: 'Tho Our dreadful Host was, On the First of July,
led forth to Battle, by so Experienced and so Wary a Commander; and 'tho such a
King be yet, 'thro all the long Toils, and bold hazardous Attempts of War, through
many treacherous Plots, both at Home and Abroad, mercifully continued to Us,
yet all the Success of Our Armies, all the Glory of Our Campagnes, and all Our
present Blessings under His gentle and easy Scepter, must be ascribed unto the
Supreme Governor of all Things, whose Power no Creature is able to resist. He,
and He only, gives Salvation unto Kings; He, and He only, at the Immortal Boyn,
delivered William His Servant, from the hurtful Cannon. An Horse is counted but
a vain Thing to save a Man; nor shall He deliver any by his great Strength: It
may be prepared for the Day of Battle, but still Victory is of the LORD. Could
a Man be saved by the Multitude of an Host, The (...), the Great Schomberg,
might have enjoyed, as well as promoted, Our Deliverance: But how is the Mighty
Man fallen? He expired, as He had lived, in the Arms of Victory: For, 'tho He
lost His Life, He won The Day.

There may be, and often is a lucky Hit of second Causes, very observable in
compassing the general Happiness of a Nation; in delivering the Inhabitants
from the complicated Designs of Romish Agents, from Superstion and Idolatry,
from Oppression, and Slavery, from Fire and Sword, from the most cruel
Tortures, Jesuitical Racks and Inquisition; yet such a grateful Deliverance is
the Work of that Alwise and Almighty GOD, who, for the Honor of His Name, in
the Defense of His injured Cause, goes forth with the Armies of His Anointed.
He only can, at His Pleasure, scatter the People that delight in Blood; and
Strike Their Hearts with such a distracting Fear, that They Fly when no Man
Pursues; and (taking every Leaf that is moved with the Wind, for the shaking of
a Spear) run with a Strong natural Biass, unto Their own Boggs and Woods, as to
a more sure Defense against the Strange Engines of War, than all the
Auxiliaries of France and Rome, with the long implored Assistance of Their
Queen of Heaven.

I do not much wonder at the Inglorious Flight of a vast Army upon the close
Advance of Our Jehoshaphat at the Brook, when I remember (and He must be very
unworthy of a Deliverance that forgets) those Instruments of GOD, those Men of
War whose Names might have been as dreadful to our Enemies, as Epaminondas was
unto the Lacedaemonians, and Scanderbeg unto the Turks; Hannibal unto the
Romans, and the Black-Prince unto the French; and who should therefore, live
among the Sons of Fame, in something more lasting than Brass or Marble. Let not
Envy or Ingratitude rob those Heroes that have slain their Thousands, or put
Ten Thousand to Flight, of the Honor due unto Their worthy Achievements; but
let not us so wholly fix Our Thoughts and Admiration upon the Happiness We
enjoy, or the great Instruments of GOD in effecting It, as to render our selves
careless in acknowledging the uncontrouled Hand of that GOD, whose Battles They
Fought with so much Bravery and so great Success. David could not believe that
Joab, His General, and all His Host could answer His Desires with Victory;
thus, therefore, dos He Question and thus Pray; Who will lead Me into the
Strong City? Who will bring Me into Edom? Wilt not Thou O GOD? Give Us Help
from Trouble; for vain is the Help of Man: Through GOD We shall do valiantly, for
it is He that shall tread down Our Enemies. The Battle is not always to the
Strong, but GOD, in His Infinite Wisdom and by His Almighty Arm, puts down
One King, and sets up Another; that the Living may know that the most High
rules, in the Kingdom of Men, and that he gives It to whomsoever He will. In
such a surprising wonderful manner dos GOD often deliver His People, that They
must be very Blind if They do not see, or very ungrateful if They do not own,
that They are saved by the LORD Their GOD. Such is HIs Might that He can
(according to His own Will) make the most inconsiderable Instrument, One no
bigger than David's Pebble, Powerful enough to over-match the Strength of a
Weaver's Beam, and to lay the most Insulting Enemy in the Dust. His Command is
as wide as his Creation; so that He can, at any time, summon Heaven and Earth,
Angels and Men, Sun Moon, and Stars, the Sea and all that is therein, to join
in Battle, and execute His Just and Heavy Vengeance upon all such as worship
Deaf and Helpless Gods; and to give Salvation unto those that sincerely call
upon His Name. Let not us then, be guilty of so much Atheism, as not to
acknowledge a Supreme Being, in all the Great Changes of the World. When We
behold Lightnings or Inundations, a sudden Earthquake or a devouring
Pestilence, depopulating the most delightful, spacious, and frequented Cities,
let us employ Our selves (not so much in curiously searching out Natural
Causes, as) in eyeing the Hand of God, in such general Calamities. And when We
see a Kingdom, by the destructive Principles, and prodigious Unskilfulness of
One, almost shaken in Pieces, and, at length, through the Care of Another more
wise Master Builder, settling upon its Old Firm and Lasting Foundation, let Us
(in a thankful Acknowledgement of such a Providential Work) say (with the
Psalmist,) not unto Us, O Lord, not unto Us, but unto Thy Name, be all the
Glory. And that We may be the more disposed to do so, We must,

In the Second Place, carefully observe those more Material and Signal
Circumstances, which render any National Work of Divine Providence more
considerable and obliging.

So curious a Thing is the Work of Providence, that to a diligent Observer,
every Part of It will appear full of Wisdom and Beauty: and the more heedfully
We survey Its various Circumstances, the more will It excite Our Praise and
Admiration. As therefore, true Penitents pathetically charge and load their
Confessions with all those Aggravations which may heighten their Detestation
and Sorrow; so the grateful Soul dos critically remark those many and great
Circumstances which set off Gods Work, and more advantagiously recommend It to
Us. Several Acts of Providence, at the first transient view, may seem to offer
but little Matter of Importance; yet, upon a repeated Observation, We find them
very considerable. In our Present Reformation or Deliverance from Popery, many
Circumstances might be taken notice of to raise our Acknowledgements; but
several Pens having obliged the Nation with a full Account of the most
Remarkable Ones, I shall briefly observe at this time, only some few
Particulars that well disposed Our Neighboring Kingdom for that Blessed
Change; and the Seasonableness of such a Revolution to the miserable
Inhabitants of this.

All the late Fears and Jealousies in England; all the solemnly made, and as
often solemnly broken Promises of a King; all the Intrigues managed with an Old
Prince abroad, to set up a pretended Young Prince at Home; all the base,
mercenary Compliances of many Civil and Ecclesiastical Ministers; dissolving
Charters, and authorizing Mass in Colleges; advising a general Toleration, and
advancing an unlimited dispensing Power; laboring to repeal the Penal Laws and
Test, setting up a New High Commission, and Committing the Right Reverend
Bishops to the Tower, for not acting against Law and Conscience; turning out
good Protestants, and promoting professed Papists to the most considerable
Civil and Military Places of Profit and Honor; All these Things, and many more
(too many either to have been done by any King that would not follow
Dioclesian, or to be repeated by me now) did strongly incline the Nation to a
quicker Apprehension of the growing Evils of Popery; and bring them to a more
easy Compliance with the Methods of God's Wonderful Work.

And how seasonable the happy Consequences of all such Proceedings were to Us
of this Kingdom, our whole Lives will be too short duly to consider. If the
well timing of a Mercy dos make It the more valuable, surely Our Deliverance
must be highly recommended to Us by the Seasonableness of It. To what shall I,
for This, compare so great a Mercy? The Coming of our King was like that of the
Angel of God to Isaac, when the Hand was lifted up for the Fatal Stroke: Poor
Ireland's Relief was like the refreshing Well of Water to the disconsolate
Hagar, when she had given up Her self to Sorrow, and Her Son to Death: in a
Word, the Generous Resolution of King WILLIAM to visit this distressed Nation,
was as Opportune as the Night-thoughts of King Ahasuerus (kept awake by the
special Providence of God) to reward the Good, recorded service of Mordecai;
just at a time when the Ambitious and Revengeful Haman's Plot, for an utter
Exterpation of the Jews, was ripe for Execution.

And what shall we render unto the Lord for all the Benefits comprehended in so
seasonable a Mercy? I will magnify thee, O Lord, because Thou have set me up,
and not made my Foes to triumph over me: O praise the Lord with me, and let Us
magnify His Name together. The Dead praise not Thee, O Lord, neither All they
that go down into silence. The Living, the Living, they shall praise Thee as We
do this Day: the Father: to the Children shall make known thy Work. Thou Lord
wast ready to save; therefore will We sing of Thy Praise without ceasing; O my
God! I will give thanks unto Thee for ever.

The grateful Resolution of Two Pious Princes, ( David, and Hezekiah) in these
Words, which I have applied unto Our own case, cannot but mind you of

The Third propounded Particular, viz. That We must to the utmost of Our Power,
and with the profoundest Humility, pay all that Honor, Reverence, and
Adoration, unto God, for His more Eminent and Extraordinary Works of
Providence, which they most justly challenge from Us.

God is known by the Mercies He bestows, as well as by the Judgme^ which He
executes, upon a Nation. Sometimes the merciful Work of Providence comes so
recommended to Us, by the Image and Superscription of a God, bearing such clear
and legible Characters of the Divine Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, that upon the
First serious View, We cannot but conclude that It is the Lord's Doing. And the
more conspicuous and remarkable the Appearances of a God are, in any of His
Works of Providence (in raising a Nation that was almost as much without Hope
(tho not so free from Misery and Sorrow) as those that lie in the Grave, with
the Speed of a Resurrection, unto a comfortable State of Affairs; the more
signal, I say, the Hand of an Omnipotent God is, in any such Providential
Dispensations) still the more Public and Extraordinary Expressions of Respect
and Gratitude, do they justly command from all that share in such gracious
Manifestations of His Goodness. And should not Man spread abroad the Praises of
His Great Creator and Preserver, his very fellow creatures that want, not only
Reason, but Sense, would condemn his ungrateful Silence. Even The Heavens
declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows His Handiwork. As
constantly as Day and Night do follow one another, they instruct the World
concerning the Wisdom and other Attributes of God, which most illustriously
appear in their appointed Course and orderly Succession: and their Voice is
understood by every Nation under Heaven; as if every Man heard them speak in
his own Tongue, the Wonderful Works of God. And, as every Return of Day renews
the bright demonstrations of God's Glory, so Day by Day our Souls should
magnify the Lord. When senseless Creatures do thus (according to Ability)
manifest unto the World the Glory of their Maker, surely a much greater
Obligation must lie upon Man, to join in that universal Work, and to perform It
in a more noble Manner; in a way most suitable to the Excellency of his own
Rational and Immortal Soul. Since the Glory of Gods eminent Works of Mercy is
so conspicuously Great, that Man may behold It a far off, and yet can never
come near their surpassing Excellency, in the most sublime Acknowledgments of a
grateful Spirit; since the Dignity of any Person dos command a proportionable
Respect; and We greatly honor Kings for their Transcendent Majesty, how can We
sufficiently reverence and admire the infinitely Glorious Lord GOD, whose
Perfections have been so wonderfully displayed in the Works of Wisdom, Power,
and Love to this undeserving Nation? Or (in the wise Ben-Sirach's full
Expression) Who can magnify Him, as He is? Admiration is the Gazing or Fixing
of the Understanding upon an Object that is too big for It: and since there is
such a Discovery of God's Excellencies in His late signal Providence toward
Us, that We cannot comprehend all the Glory which shines in them, well may We,
in an humble and awful Respect join with the Saints in the Revelation, saying,
Great and Mavelous are Thy Works, Lord GOD Almighty! Just and true are Thy
Ways, Thou King of Saints! who shall not fear Thee, O Lord, and magnify Thy
Name? And for your better Instruction in this important Duty, you may, at your
Leisure, consult Moses's Song of Thanksgiving in the 15th. Chap. of Exodus. In
that, you hear him solemnly blessing the Lord for the dreadful Overthrow of
Pharaoh and his mighty Host, at the Red Sea: in that, you may easily observe
with what Affection and Reverence, he magnifieth the Hand of God in completing
that Wonderful Deliverance of His People. So far is Moses from letting the
Merciful Works of God pass by unregarded, and from concealing them in his own
Breast; that, in the most lofty Strain, he openly declares his noble Deeds, and
labors in provoking others unto a joint acknowledgment of Gods Glorious
Attributes in so strange a Dispensation of his ever-watchful Providence. And,
following so fair a Pattern, after such a Manner, must We celebrate and record
the adorable Perfections of our God, most illustriously appearing in His
Special Providence toward Us, as may most excite (not only the present
Generation, but) future Ages of the World, unto all possible Returns of
Gratitude, for the seasonable Preservation of Our Liberties, Our Lives, Our
King, and Our Religion, to the Almighty Defender of them All. God dos often
permit the Enemies of His People to oppress and triumph over them, with the
most intolerable Insolency; as the Protestants, in this City, were abused,
plundered, crushed, and trampled on, by the Jacobite Party, before the Arm of
God and Man restrained their fierce Malice at the Boyn: He frequently sees his
Own brought into extreme Distress, into a Strait like that of the Children of
Israel in the Wilderness, (having Rocks and Mountains on the right Hand, and on
the left a strong Garrison of the Egyptians, an unpassable Sea before, and
behind a mighty pursuing Host; He suffers This,) before His Hand is stretched
out in any appointed Instrument which, like Moses's Rod, must open a Way for
their Deliverance. And this Method He is pleased to take (not only for an
Improvement of their Graces, which come more pure and bright out of the fiery
Trial but also) to magnify the more His own Attributes in the Strangeness and
Seasonableness of their Salvation. His own Glory is the End of all His Actions:
And That is in a more visible manner displayed in such opportune Acts of
Providence. And shall not a Delivered People answer GOD's Great Design, by
exalting, in the most public way, His Glorious Name, for such well-tim'd
Expressions of His Care and Goodness. If when the LORD turned Our Captivity,
They said even among Our Enemies, (as before them, the Egyptians once did in
the Day of Their Distress) Let Us Fly for the LORD Fights for them; if Our
Enemies, said then (as the Babylonians did on another great Deliverance of
GOD's People) The LORD has done Great Things for Them; surely it would be very
base and unworthy in Us not to take up and thus gratefully improve Their
Acknowledgment, Yea the LORD has done Great Things for Us already. O that Men
would therefore Praise the LORD for His Goodness, and Declare the Wonders He
has done for (Us) the Children of Men: That They would offer unto Him the
Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and tell out His Works with Gladness. And if by
performing These and the foregoing Duties, We expect any Advantage, it must be,

In the Fourth and last Place, our constant Endeavor, to answer, by a sincere
practical Reformation, the just Expectation of GOD in His Merciful Works of
Providence.

Tho GOD cannot receive any Addition to His own Essential Perfections, from Our
most exact Performances, yet, it must be highly reasonable to answer the
Expectation of such an infinite Being, in conferring any special Favors on Us,
by conforming our Lives unto His Holy Commandments. It Is a Damnable Hypocrisy
to own GOD with our Lips, by the most solemn Returns of Praise in His Holy
House; and to deny Him by an unsuitable Conversation. And yet, there is too
much Reason to believe, that GOD is not so much Magnified by all the Time many
allow unto Their public Devotions, as dishonored by Their spending losely and
in the most abominable Impieties, the Remainder and much greater Portion of
Their Days. But how unbecoming is such an Abuse of God's Favors? How provoking
must it be to sin thus against the Mercies of Heaven? What can We considently
depend upon either for Eternal or Temporal Salvation, but the infinite Mercies
of God the Father, and the equal Merits of His Son Christ Jesus? But a Course
of Life unanswerable to those Deliverances God has been pleased to give Us,
cuts off all reasonable claim to Both: and if Mercy It self be disobliged, what
can save Us? Seeing that our GOD has given Us such a Deliverance as this, which
We this Day, (and which We for ever ought to) magnify, should We again break
His Commandments, would He not be angry with Us, till He has consumed Us, so
that there should be no Remnant nor Escaping. Thou art inexcusable, O Man,
whosoever thou art, that despisest the Riches, of God's Goodness, Forbearance,
and Longsuffering, not considering that the Goodness of GOD should lead thee to
Repentance. God seems to have repented of those threatening Evils which We had
long feared, because We most righteously had deserved: and by His own Example
(in an Ancient Writer's if not Tertullian's Phrase) dedicavit Poenitentiam, has
consecrated Repentance for our Imitation. And if this His Goodness dos not so
far prevail as to make Us repent too, notwithstanding all that has been done
for Us, We are miserable: for He will repent, at last, even of His own
Kindnesses to such an ungrateful People. And what Revenge more hot than that of
abused Love? Because the Children of Israel (whom God by a mighty Hand, and a
stretoh'dout Arm brought up from the Land of Egypt,) had forgotten GOD their
Savior and lightly esteemed the Rock of their Salvation, therefore, thus said
the Lord unto them, by the Prophet Amos; You only have I known, (or favored in
a more signal Manner,) of all the Families of the Earth; therefore I will
punish (more severely punish) you for all your Iniquities. And the Psalmist
assures Us, that when GOD brought forth His People with Joy, and His Chosen
with Gladness, His Great and Just Expectation was, That they might keep His
Statutes and observe His Laws. And do not the extraordinary Mercies We enjoy
oblige Us unto a like answerable Return? Did you not make large Promises unto
God, in the Day of Trouble? Did you not then pray and resolve with David;
Deliver me, O Lord, from the Oppression of Men, and so will I keep thy
Precepts? And are all our Promises, all our Resolutions like the hasty Vows of
some endangered Passengers at Sea? Are they all forgotten now the Storm is, in
a great Measure, rebuked and laid? To be freed from out late Oppressions, (of
which too many that took timely shelter in another Kingdom, from that violent
Tempest which almost overturned all in This, are not truly sensible,) what
would We have done for Our Deliverer? And yet, how strangely, how unworthily do
too many, now, requite a most Generous Monarch for all his Royal Favors, by
provoking God with their bold Impieties, to infatuate his Councils, and to
destroy his Armies that have so successfully advanced in Our Preservation! Let
not any wicked Man be so vain as to boast of his great Affection to the Church
of England, and Loyalty to his Prince; or of what mighty Things he would
attempt for the Honor and Safety of a King, that is the Dread of France, the
Delight of the Protestant World, and the Special Favorite of Heaven; that
appeared, at once, a Moses and a Joshua, boldly charging his Enemy in the
Field, and boldly praying unto Heaven for Success; Let not, I say; any Man
whose Life is not answerable to those great Blessings which such a King has,
under God, conveyed unto Us, talk at so extravagant a Rate; for He that
unsheaths his Sword against our King in Battle, dos not so much shake his
Throne as a debauched WILLIAMITE: and after all is considered that can be
feared from the Dissenters, He will be found to be the most dangerous
Nonconformist, whose persevering wicked Life contradict's Our established
Liturgy, in calling for Plague, Pestilence, and Famine, Battle, and Murder and
sudden Death.

If there be any Gentlemen of the Sword present, let them know that it nearly
concern's them to remember and duly ponder these Things: and, more
particularly, I leave unto their sober Meditations, that pertinent Injunction
in the 23. Chap. of Deuteronomy. When the Host goes forth against thine Enemy, then
keep thee from every wicked Thing. Observing diligently this Law of God, tho
they fall in the day of Battle, they may, at last, stand in Glory with those
renowned Worthies of God ( Joshua, Gedeon, Barak, Samson, and David) who,
through Faith, so much prevailed with Heaven, that they subdued Kingdoms,
escaped the Edge of the Sword, were made strong, waxed valiant in Fight, and
turned to flight the Arms of the Aliens.

And such Persons as are favored with a more easy worldly Fortune, and are not
engaged in the Fatigues of War, must be told, that being delivered from the
Hands of their Enemies (who had, by the most illegal Methods, seized their
Purchases and Inheritances,) if they reasonably expect to keep their Estates,
they must keep the Commandments of their God too: Without such Obedience never
let them hope to enjoy them with the Blessing of Heaven.

In a Word, let all such as (through the common Calamities of War) are fallen
from a plentiful, to a mean Condition in the World, gratefully remember that
God has already, and lately, as on this very Morning, made Our Day of Light and
Joy break when the Night was darkest; that His Arm never casts down His People
lower, than It can reach to lift them up; that, tho Enemies, as bad as the
Chaldaean Bands, have destroyed their Substance in the Land, fallen upon their
Cattle and driven them away, and slain their Servants with the Edge of the
Sword; Yet God can be as bountiful unto them, as he was to Job, and bless their
latter End more than their Beginning. Many, out of the Abundance of their
thankful Hearts, will readily acknowledge, that Providence has restored them,
in a very considerable Measure, unto that flourishing State which they enjoyed
before, and which they were deprived of in, the last Reign. And the
Consideration of this should encourage such as have not yet recovered their
former Prosperity, to apply unto themselves those Words of the Temanite in the
22th. Chap. of Job, (according to the usual Limitations of Temporal Promises
under the Gospel,) If thou return to the Almighty, thou shall be built up; The
Almighty shall be thy Defense, and thou shall deliver the Island of the
Innocent.

And when We are all from the Highest to the Lowest, Rich and Poor (even in
Gratitude to God for his past Mercies) thus sincerely reformed, We may boldly
address unto the Throne of Grace, for a continued, for a more complete
Deliverance: that every day may be as the First of July unto our King, and as
the Second unto Us All.

On this Day particularly (for a Close of the whole Discourse) let all
true-hearted Protestants, that love their Country and their Religion, jointly
petition for Him, in that joyful and comprehensive Acclamation of the Clergy
and People, at the splendid Inauguration of Charles the Great, (Emperor of the
West) GULIELMO Magno, Piissimo, Augusto, a DEO Coronato, Vita and Victoria. To
WILLIAM the Great, most Pious, August, and crowned by GOD, long Life and
Victory. Amen.

FINIS.

