George Starkeys PILL VINDICATED From the unlearned Alchymist and all other
pretenders, With a brief account of other excellent specific Remedies of
Extraordinary virtue, for the honor and vindication of pyrotechny.
THat the ^ill of Mr. Richard Matthews, was in truth mine, and that he had the
receipt from me, as it is really so, and known to very many, so it is
acknowledged by Mr Andrews, Mr Kendall, and others, as in the Appendix to the
unlearned Alchymist may be seen, to which I also added an Epistle, owning, and
avowing the same.

The universality of it, was but a mistake in the unlearned Alchy^^^^; rather a
shift he was driven to, for the secret being rather a Mystery of preparation,
then a bare receipt, was looked on by me as a storehouse or Common place from
which various compositions might flow, for the Corrector (as Mr. Matthews calls
it) is a means by which all vegetall malignity is totally extinguished, and is
a true natural means to prepare vegetable concretes by, which being made of
salts alcaliz^^e and oils essential united, might be advanced with oil of
Cynamon, Mace, Cloves etc. or any other sort at pleasure, and might be farther
enriched with any spirit or tincture made by spirits, besides the alterations
to be made by various concretes, in which (as need requires) the latitude of
that Pill extends it self to all the Herbs, Seeds, Roots, Gums, Flowers, etc.
in the world, as also to all oils, and salts (volatile and fixed) of Herbs all
spirits, and tinctures also may be made use of, in their time, and place, to
alter and vary this preparation as occasion required.

Now Mr. Matthews being no scholar, nor daring to profess giving advice as a
Physician, was necessitated to take this course, to pitch upon one more general
composition whose latitude of virtue was larger then other specifications are,
where Opium is either wholly lest out, or added in small quantity, and cry it up
for universal, least if he should have given expectation of any variation of
the Pill, as need required, he should be compelled to use judgment, in
advising when and where, and how to make his alterations, which being a task
beyond his abilities, he avoided by commending the Pill beyond its proper
limits, a profitable, but disingenuous trick.

He that has read or shall read my Books sent out, to wit Natures Explication
and Helmonts Vindication, and Pyrotechny asserted, shall find the ground of
these and far nobler preparations; and that these Pills, and such other
specific remedies, are only succed^^eous to greater secrets yet sufficient
for the full cure of many diseases, which need no other, and where the effect
may be attained by an inferior, what need a more rare and secret remedy be
sought? I shall therefore say no more by preamble, but come to the business
intended, and shall give the virtues and manner of use of several medicines
made, and publicly exposed to sale by me. And first,

My Diaphoretick Diuretic and Anodynous Elixir.
Its opperation is by sweat, and urine, asswaging pains or any ordinary violent
disturbance in the body, it pacifies the Archeus, and by a resolutive faculty
opens obstructions very powerfully and pleasantly, it is a medicine deserves
great commendation, and has been (in Mr. Matthews his name) very famous all
England over, and in neighboring Countries.

This of mine exceeds his beyond comparison, as I shall appeal to any man's
experience, For his was my way used in my younger years, from 1651 till 1655.
when I communicated it to him, since when I have so far exceeded my
preparations therein, that it is below me to make them as formerly, and those
that deal with me will not buy them, besides he did not come up to the height
of that preparation as I taught him, as Mr. Kendal and others, whom I taught
the same process, know who make that common preparation far better then Mr.
Matthews, for his Pill wanting the closing part of an Artist, is fain to
begiven with Cautions of lying so many hours, to wit fourteen at least; and yet
it makes giddy, suspends the urine, and causes great drought, and burning
heats, with costiveness, the symptoms of a defect in the opperation, which I
would not after teach Master Matthews to mend because he had dealt ill by me,
but Mr. Kendal Mris. Marden, and Mr. Luddinton, Mr. Andrews and others do mend
that fault, and find the difference beyond credit. But my Pills are far higher
graduated then any of theirs, as may be tried in Autumnal, and winter Agues,
old Coughs, old Pains, old Gonorrhaea's, and old inveterate venereall maladies,
old obstinate uterine obstructions, and the like, in which Cases experience
will soon discover the excellency of mine beyond any of theirs, so as not to
admit a paraled, nor comparison.

The preparations is opiate, and he that doubts the safety of that when
corrected, let him consider, that there is scarce any Antidote or Theriacle,
without it, and the virtues of such opiate Compositions, were by the Ancients
held in great esteem, of which sort of preparations he that pleases may read
at large in Scroderus, and Mirepsus Of Opium says the noble Helmont: happy is
that sick party, whose Physician knows how to correct the deadly quality of
Opium etc. and instances in the Cough, how great effects it has had in one
nights time, Yea experience confirms this daily in hundreds of examples, in
acute diseases especially, or in acute paroxismes of Chronical distempers, so
that where such a cloud of witnesses appear, to deny or doubt a thing, is so to
run mad in malice, as to incur the Censure of Crestes: In my Pyrotechny
asserted, as also in natures application, I have demonstrated the safety, and
excellency of these preparations so clearly and fully, that I need but send the
Reader thither for satisfaction, and shall briefly give directions, when, and
how to administer this Pill, and in what cases especially it is most effectual.

In continual Fevers, such as are common upon surfets, or colds, it is a very
effectual and speedy remedy, in such cases, give of it an ordinary dose at a
time, and let the party be attended so as to sweat soundly, giving him drink in
his sweat, if he desires it, but let it be warm, and in each draught of drink
he desires, give him five or six drops of true spirit of Salt, (not that
rascal phlegm, which is of late cried up about town) which true spirit is
ponderous, tincted, and eminently acid, this spirit helps both to promote
sweat, and to take away all the foulness in the tongue, throat, and mouth of
the stomach, and so after sweating cools the body and howels, exceedingly, to
the great ease, comfort, and refreshing of the patient.

You may either give the medicine in form of a Pill, and let the party drink a
draught of warm Ale or posset drink after it or dissolve it in warm Ale or
burnt wine, and let him drink it, but lie so, as to promote sweat by and by
after the taking of it.

But where the weakness of the party is great, or the age very young, let a dose
convenient be dissolved in some pleasant liquor, and give it gradually at 4, 5,
or 6, times, allowing two hours between each time, and so nature finds help
insensibly, and revives ostentimes beyond expectation.

The ordinary dose for a man is to 20 or 24 grains, sometimes to 30, but in
Fevers twenty grains are as large a dose as is needful, and let it be repeated
once in twelve, or sixteen, or 20 hours according as the disease is violent.
The same dose and observation in Plurisies, Calentures, Measels, Purples etc.
or any acute disease that threatens life most eminently.

Where the party is young or weak, 10 or 8 grains is a dose, to children very
young 3 or 4 grains sufficient, and may be repeated as occasion requires, till
recovery, which with Gods blessing will be in 3 or 4 days, sometimes in one
dose, or two at most, the party so recovers as to need no more.

In Coughs, and Flixes it is an excellent remedy, taken to bedward either
dissolved or in Pill, and drink a good draught of warm wine after it. The dose
here is as in Fevers, only the time to bedwards, but where the disease
prevails so as to make the party keep his bed, give the medicine at any time,
forbearing to eat an hour or two after it, and repeat it oftener till recovery,
but where the party walks abroad, take it last at evening, and lie so as to
favor sweat, and repeat it only every night, for 3 or 4 nights together, then
forbear 2 or 3 days, and take of true Ens veneris 6 or 8 grains, morning and
evening, then take this Pill, again 3 or 4 evenings, then Ens veneris for 2 or
3 days, so continue both till recovery of perfect health, which will with Go^s
blessing be in a short time.

In Agues give this Pill 20, 24, or 30 grains at a dose, about 2 hours before
the fit be expected, either dissolved, or in Pill, and drink a good draught of
warm Ale, or burnt wine after it, lie down and keep warm, the cold fit will not
at all be felt, and the hot fit will be changed into a sweat: The intermittent
day or days take Ens veneris morning and evening eight or ten grains at a dose.

In acute torturing tormenting pains, this is an admirable remedy, restoring
them if not very deeply fixed, or if fixed, easing the horror and rage of the
paroxysme wonderfully, there give it every evening to bedward, and Ens veneris
in the morning, and if the pain cause feverishness, and that drought, give of
spirit of Salt 5 or 6 drops in beer, as often as thirst calls for it And it is to
be observed, that if in Chronical cases recovery be not in 30 or 40 days, o^ so
notable progress in recovery, as to give the party hopes, and encouragement to
expect a final cure by these means, he then seeks out for higher remedies, of
which I shall give notice by way of Advertisement at the end of this Schedul of
directions for more ordinary, and generally useful specific preparations.

In hystericall eases this proparation is effectual, such to wit as are not
graduated, and so in scorbuticall dissempers, but where an highly graduated or
deeply rooted uterine exorbitancy is, or an inveterate Scorbute, there Salt of
Steel truly ma^e, and sweet, or the Salt of Amber, or the volatile tincture of
Red Coral equal in such cases, the highest Arcana's, which where need is, I
shall furnish the desirous with all, with full directions for their use time,
and dose.

And let the ingenuous Reader note, that this Pill is a very general remedy as
to ordinary use, and seldom fails in acute cases, The small Pox by this given
in time, repeated duly and orderly, and the party kept in a sweating frame, do
so wast gradually, as not to fill, yea I have often seen where the feverishnese
of the sick party, his dry burning, idle talking, and the like symptoms, have
threatened very much rigor, and the spots have so fully appeared, that the
Flocks have been feared, yet by taking this medicine, and repeating it once in
12 hours, for the first 4 or 5 days, and sweat being promoted, they have so
wasted, as that scarce 20 or 30 have come to maturity, all the body over, so
sew, as only to let the party know what danger he had escaped and that has
been all.

But observe that when the small Pox have filled, before the Physician is
called, there give cooling absterfive remedies, as spirit of salt and Ens
veneris, and now and then give of this Pill to send out the malignity, but keep
not party in a swerting temper then, being unseasonable.

Now to speak a word or two Concerning the Lues that modern monster, the sour
sawee of bewitching venery, it is a loathsome disease, an sopportune punishment
for a filthy loathsome sin. The unlearned Alchymist looked on his medicine with
an unreasonable muistiplying glass, when he would teach the cure of it thereby.
It is an obstinate disease, which appears at first either in a sore between the
Glandula, and praepuce, or in the running of the reins, the former is the more
dangerous, for that soon infects the body with scabs, Buboes, aches, eating
ulcers in the nose, and throat, nodes in the shines etc. and those cause
horrible nocturnal pains, oftentimes palsies, palpitations, dangerous Coughs
etc. the other to wit the Gonorrhaea if old and of long standing, especially if
it be the second, third, fourth, or fifth, the party has had, it becomes each
time more and more obstinate, for it seizes the Radical humidity and though
cured, yet leaves its odious relic^s behind, which transplant into posterity,
Scrophulus, scirrous, strumous, Apostematicall, seeds, hence proceed Chronical
distempers, which every day grow worse and worse, hence also appear each year
new obstinate diseases to the amazing of Physicians.

The milder sort of Gonorrhaea's are cured by this Pill given every night, and
Ens veneris in the morning for about 10 or 12 ays together, sometimes continued
for three weeks, so as every fourth day a Pill of Diaceltatesson be given,
omitting the other, and then repeat it again. In case of an ulcer, the sweet
oil of Colchotar of vitriol, or the true Basamus fuligi is of Helmont and
Paracelsus will perform perfectly the external cure, and the Pill with Ens
veneris, and my Diaceltatesson will complete what is required internally.

But where this disease is come to its height, there my Diaceltatesson must be
given often, every day at first, for about a week, then every other day as
long, then every third day, and so continue till the cure be complete, and when
the Diaceltatesson is intermitted, give of this Pill at evening, and Ens
veneris in the morning, causing the patient to sweat soundly after the Pill.

A brief Index or Catalogue of other remedies admirable in specific cases,
made by George Starkey who is a Philosopher by fire.
I may say confidently that I was the first that made this in England (that is
known) in the year 1^52 I prepared it, Ens veneris or Elementum ignis veneris.
for the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire one of the Royal society, who has wrote of
its excellency, as his extant Treatise thereof can testify. Of this Helmont
truly says, nothing works more powerfully on the radical humidity then it, it
is most excellent in feminine disease, especially menstrual stoppages, rickets
of children, lingering fevers, obstructions of the spleen and mesaraicks, but
especially for women after childbed, taking away after pains to admiration,
helping their cleansings so kindly, and without violence, as is admirable, and
hindering all feverish symptoms to which many women after travel are subject,
to the incredible ease and comfort of them, but this I must assure those that
are concerned, that what I made in 16^1, for the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire and
and is by him commended, is so inferior a preparation to that as is made by me
now, that the former deserves not the same name with this latter, which is
yellow as the purest gold, and in taste rich of the Venus, so that it exceeds
the other beyond all comparison, and nearer approaches the Element of fire of
Venus. This I add not to discommend the former, but to show the difference
between that and this.

This is a higher gradation of the former preparation by separating the sulpher
from the white metal of Copper, which will abide fusion hammer and test, and is
white as Luna, though yet differing from it, and totally dulcifying the saline
nature from the sulsur, The sweet an^^ynous fixed Sulfur or true Elem^nt o^
fire of Venus.
by which it was prepared, advanced, and perfected. This is the Nepenthes verum
of the Philosophers, the true Ladanum without Opium, lengthening the life by
Gods permission, and conquering powerfully monstrous tragical maladies, such as
the Epilepsie, A poplexy, Palsy, Coma, Vertigo, madness Hypocondriack
melancholy, and uterine ^rensies, with several other like diseases to the
stupefaction of nature, of this and Mercury, is made the Horizontal Gold that
is truly and perfectly universal.

In the Belgic Edition of Helmonts works under the itle of preparation of
medicines, mention is made of a middle Diaceltatesson, which is Antimonial, A
double dia^eltatesson, first the media via of it a cording to Helmont.
and purges only, this I call my Diaceltatesson Commune, and it is excellent
in Chtonick diseases to give every third day or every other day to the quantity
of 30 or 24 grains in two Pills, and my sweating Pill the other day at eve^ing
with Ens venesis in the morning, the party may go abroad in the afternoon
avoiding intemperancy if the day be clear when he takes it.

The other Dinceltaresson is my true Corallatum, curing radically the Gout, The
true diaceltatess on or Coralatum of Paracelsus and Helmont.
Lues, and all ulcers in the throat, lungs, bladder, and kidneys, as also it
roots out all Agues; and hectical fevers (though never so inveterate* where the
^ill and Ens veneris fail, this given every day, or other, or third day with an
inferior abstresive medicine between, will cure the most deplorable maladies,
and is a true Arcanum, though not so highly excel lent as the Horizontal God etc

There are also volatile Spirits of Alcalays, especially of Tartar, and
Tobacco, Vibatile Alcaly of Tactar etc.
which as Helm^nt says truly, do cleanse all obstructious in the veins, and
cut off the occasional causes, of most diseases, especially if coagulated upon
dissolved Concrets, of these the Elogy of Paracelsus and H^lm^n is true, that
where that reaches no other thing that is more powerful will reach, it cures
then by an universal absttesion, and mundifying the vessels, and performs the
desire of a careful Physician, to the great comfort of the patient, the dose is
from 10 to 20 or 30 drops, in whitewine or Ale fasting.

In Histerical distempers there is great variety, The esience of Amber, Salt of
Steel, and v^^atile ^^^ct^re of red Coral.
for the uterus in the feminine sex is not unfitly called by Physicians (animal
furio^um) for it is in its extravagant exorbitancies strangely operative in
women causing all sorts of diseases, as palpitations, vertignes, Epilep^i^s
palsies, with other distempers, and is exasperated by love, anger, grief,
frights and all passions, in these cases the Salt of Steel (I mean the
magisterial Salt of it) in which the whole substance of steel is by an
Alchachestical preparation resolved into a Magistery, so a so the Essence of
Amber, and the volatile tincture of red Coral are appropriated specisicks,
that equal the grand Arcana, the dose of Salt of steel is 20 grains, of Note
this is not the oylof Amber but the whole Amber ^^duced to a magisterial ess nt
all salt, only that ph^oyme^se era^ed an^ this w^^hout em^yrheume by the
C^rcula^^m maius of Helmont and paracelsus.
Essence of Amber from 8 to 16 grains, of the volatile Tincture of Coral ^0
drops, and they are also admirable Scorbutic Splenetick, and pulmoniack
remedies in both sexes.

These with several other specific abstersives, as spirit of salt, spirit of
Sulphur vive, the essential sulphurous spirit of vitriol of Venus, Antimony,
and other bodies, with the Magistery and spirit of Saturn, are truly prepared
by Geo^g^ Stark^y, and as occasion offers are to be had of him with larger
direction, for the use

But my Pill and true Ens venesis being of the most large and general use, I
resolve to expose them to public sale, and they may be had at the Authors near
the Exchange in Bartholomew lane, by the Excise Office, at Mr. Dasarnes an
Accomptant, and at Mr. Samuel Watsons at the Coffee house at Ave Mary lane on
Ludgate hill, and at Mr. S^on^s a Cossee house hext door to the Whalchone in
Lothbury, and at Mr. Livewell Chapman. Stationer in Exchange Alley near
Cornhill, and at the sign of Mara the great, a Coffee house in Exchange All^^
and at Mr. Needle^s on Tower wharfe

Postscript.
Courteous Reader, I desire thy Candor in ^udgment, not to imagine that I write
here notionall conceits, and apprehensions, but really what I have done, can
do, and have at Command the true keys to effects and perform, the
Horizontall ^old I shall be master of Ere long, with other Arcanas as the
Tinctura L^li, the Metallus Masculus, its Tincture reduced to a Vinum Vitae,
the milk or Element of Pearl, but I must make things successively, and every
true Arcanum is truly tedious in preparation, those therefore I shall at
present only dispose of myself, leaving the two forementioned Medicines of my
true pill, and sincerely prepared Ens veneris at the places above mentioned,
for they are the most general in virtue and to be made in greatest quanti^y,
Other specificks, which in Cases to which they are appropriated, Equal the
A^cana, as Tincture of Coral, the Magisteriall salt of Amber etc. in women's
distempers, and in anxie^es of the spleen in both sexes, as also in scorbutic
C^ses, and inueterate Jaundies, so the lacteous liqvor of Cra^se^es for
lingering ^abid fevers, the afterpains of Women in Child bed, etc. with several
other specificks which paper and time will not give me leave to instance by
name, shall be disposed only by myself, because in them there is a choice,
where several belong to the same Cases, which my experience of them will
enable me better to inform such as would use them to make choice of
accordingly, then they can advise themselves, Therefore in cases where the pill
and Ens veneris Either fail, or promote the Cure but slowly, upon notice by
writing I shall Conce^ling the name of both pa^ient and Doctor Heartily, give
my advice and counsel in public writing, and shall upon such Emergencyes,
have occasion of advising, restrayning altering or otherwise varying the
administ ation of specific remedies, according as by eighteen years practice
both in the fire, and in the Art of Medicine I have been instructed, and where
the Extremity of disease cuts of all hopes of specificks, there I shall advise
and supply true universal, of the highest gradation, and not otherwise, they
being difficult and tedious to prepare, and Frustra^per plura fit, quod fieri
potest per pauciora nor will scarce the sortreth disease, that shall be met
with in practice require any other remedy; then my pill, Ens veneris and
diaceltatesson, which last will rarely be absolutely needed, but where it is, I
shall (and am provided to) supply such as desire it.

George Starkey, An add^t^ional a^^^^^iser ^nt of (...).
known by the title of Philosopher by the fire.

Also for the stone is to be had the Ludus of Helm^^^ truly prepared, by the
same George S^a^k^, of whose virtues none that has Read Helm^^t but is
instructed, the dose 20 drop, which cures it radically, both in the Kidneys and
bladder, and takes away all suture inclinations thereto.

(...).


