The State-Prodigal his Return; Containing a true State of the Nation. In a
Letter to a Friend.
SIR,
I Am not ashamed to own I am a Convert, when the Arguments are so plain and
convincing to which I have submitted my Judgment: For I must tell you, freely,
I see little or nothing performed of what was promised us, but worse things
done than those that offended us; and I know not how to persuade my self, that
a Gentleman, of your Sincerity and good Sense, can resist the Authorities I
shall bring for my Conversion.

I need not tell you what my hopes were of the good Effects of the coming of
the Prince of Orange; what an Idea I had framed to my self of England's
happiness upon it and what pains I took to quiet some, and engage others into
the same Sentiments and Expectation with my self: I say, I need not tell you
this, since it is what you every Day reproach me with, when you seem to wonder
I am now of another Opinion. That which is the business of this Letter, is to
satisfy you in the reason of my Change, and that I am in the Right, as they
must always be, whose Judgments are governed more by Things than Men.

First, Sir, It is plain the Prince of Orange has now made himself King; and it
is as plain he never pretended to the Crown. Under this the Nation has
labored, still does, and is like to do, you see; for it brings heavy burdens
upon our Backs, besides the strokes of our own Consciences. It is a pernicious
and fatal hardship he puts upon us, and which had no necessary relation to the
Security of the Protestant Religion; on the contrary, it has raised Objections
upon us, that we are not able to Answer. You know how sullenly he refused to be
Regent, or that his Wife should have Succeeded to the Crown; which was yet
farther than any True Son of our Church ever intended by his coming hither, or
he was promised, or had the Confidence to propose: For all we aimed at, Was to
secure our Religion, settle good Alliances, and follow him to France, that we
might be safe from Popery, and Europe from War: Not to thrust out our King, set
by his Children, and be King in his room. So that to be free with you Sir, I
take the very Foundation of this New Fabric to be Rotten; therefore look you
well to your hits, for such a Building cannot stand long.

2. But, Sir. As Monstrous and Unnatural as the thing it self looks to a just
Eye, the Methods taken to accomplish it, have something Blacker in them. I will
begin, if you please, with that which was the Beginning of the Business, that
is, the Corrupting the King's Servants and Officers from their Truth and Duty
to him, as their Master and King. I need not prove to you that Treachery has in
all Times, and Places, been reputed the most infamous of Crimes; but of that
also there is degrees, and this. if I fail not is of the foulest sort, whether
we consider the Instruments, or those that set them to work. The first were
such as he had created (for so Divines speak; When a thing is made out of
nothing.) They owed the very Being of their Fortune to King Jam^s, yet carried
away their Homage to a Stranger: They Revealed his Secrets, advised his Errors,
and betrayed his Arms. Thus much, and much too little too, for those
Instruments of this happy Change. Now, Sir, for the Employers, I could wish
they came from a far Country, and a Barbarous People, such as have never read
the Ten Commandment, nor been taught the Gospel, or, at least, that they had
been some injured Strangers, who had owed no Duty to our Blood: But alas, Sir!
It was a Nephew against his Uncle; Daughters against their Father; Sisters
against their Brother; and at last, a Husband against his Wife. Are there
nearer Relations? Are there stronger Ties? And have not these been publicly
violated, and that with Solemnity? what trust, Sir, can there be in those to
whom such Obligations are no longer Sacred? It lessens, though it can never
excuse the Guilt of the Accessaries, that they had such Principals, according
to the Poet travest'd; If Tom such Curses have,
What shall they that make the Knave?
In the mean time, the pretended Preservation of the Protestant Religion, has
already lost us Two of the Commandments, whilst we have not only Coveted what
was our Neighbors, But what was our Fathers too, and that in a manner the most
Dishonorable: Surely this cannot be the way to live long in the Land that they
have taken away from him, unless it be, because, It is not the Land the Lord
their God has given them. So far for Corruption and Treachery.

3. The next Artifice which was made use of, to bring this Business about, was,
you may remember, several vile Things charged upon the King; such as the
Murder of his Brother, and my Lord of Essex; A League with France, and a false
Child; these were industriously spread to dissolve the Affections and Duty of
the People, and prepare them for a New Master. But the Accusers have not only
waved the Proof, but think it unreasonable in us to expect it at their hands,
when themselves never believed it; and laugh at us that we did not understand
them soever. As for the Murders they are neglected by the worst of his
Enemies, not to say opposed: They think the pretended Evidence too gross for
them to hope they can ever dress it into any sort of probability. The League,
so much hated and spoken of, and which we were told the Prince of Orange had in
his keeping, and had shown to Colonel Strangewayes of Dorsetshire, at
Sherbourn-Castle, was doubtless left by the way; for we have heard nothing of
it since. But this puts me in mind of what a Gentleman told us, since this
Revolution upon this Subject, viz. That the King was not only not in a League
with France, but refused to be so, when invited by that King, and rejected the
Aids he offered him by Sea and Land in August last was a Year, against this
very Design; not giving Credit to C. d' Avaux's advises to Mr. Barillon about
the Preparations of the Prince of Orange, as thinking it too Barbarous a Thing
for the Prince to be guilty of, and but a Trick of d' Avaux to draw him into
his Masters Interest and Quarrel against the Empire. And this some challenge
the present Objectors upon, and will prove it unto the Wo^^^^, if they may be
allowed to do it, without injury to themselves. Which shows us he had a little
more Charity for his Son-in-Law, than he has found from him; for it is evident
he lost his Crown for want of that very League, which some Men pretend (...)
for a Reason to deprive him. Nor can he ev^^^ now be said to be in the Interest
of France, but France generously in his* and what understanding there is
between them, we are to thank our selves for: (...) drove him to it, and he
could do no lessed But (...). have owed his return wholly to the Arms of
France, it is not improbable but he might have been here long since; but that
seems an Honor, chiefly, reserved by him to the Valor and Justice of his own
Subjects. And as for the false Child, you know as well as I, it was the Town
talk that the Prince had brought over the True Mother; but for what we yet see,
she is run away with the League, the one being as invisible as the other.
However, Sir let me say, that to pretend to come hither to Preserve the
Succession of his Wife against a false Prince of Wales, and neither show us he
is so, nor suffer his Princess to come in his Place, but thrust himself in the
room of that very Prince of Wales, and take the Crown and so break that
Succession, he pretended, he came to Preserve inviolable has something in it
that raises Horror in the Minds of Men of Honor and Principles; having thereby
done what he pretended to come on purpose to hinder. This Story were hardly
credible of a Reformer, but by a just reflection upon former Actions and
Morals, especially the Battle of St. Dennis, fought with the Articles of Peace
signed in his Pocket; the Murder of the de Wits, with the Pardon and Rewards
of those that Assassinated them; and the present State of the Liberties of Poor
Holland. This, Sir, whatever you think, is said to be the true Character of
your renowned Reformer. They that can bring themselves to swallow this, to
palliate this, and set up with this, have passed the Rubicon, to whom there is
nothing more to be said, Then God have Mercy upon their Souls.

4. But as these Slanders were used to Blacken the King, and Dissolve our
Affections first, and then our Allegiance to him, the same Gentlemen, out of
their plentiful Mint, have sent forth many other Stories with as little Truth,
and not much less Calumny, to render the Change Welcome, and the Authors of it
as so many Saviors to the Nation. Such was the Ship-load of New-fashioned
Knives, opportunely taken by the Prince of Orange when he landed in the West,
and brought out of the French Forge to cut our Throats; but by some accident or
other were never seen since. Next, The Protestant Bridles, for such to wear as
would not turn Papist. Then the Clerkenrvel Gridivons, to carbanado, or broyl
Protestants, discovered by an especial providence, though at last they proved,
to be nothing but Casements for Windows. The Irish Burning the Towns, and
M^sstering the People was a Profitable Invention, for it worked Wonders. How
industriously this Story was spread all over the Nation, and with what
contrivance, every one remembers, since there was not a Town of any Note in the
Kingdom that was not Alarmed by Sham Letters, with the same News, at almost one
and the same time. The same Report was in Ireland, and put the Foolish English
there upon Practices, that brought them under the stroke'of the Government, and
consequently into all the Inconveniences that have attended them ever since.
One would have thought that these Impostures had been a sufficient caution for
the future: but Experience tells us, that Lies are Bails, we never re^use.
Therefore to keep us from looking back, and prevent our returning to our King,
he must be Dead, ay that he was, and a certain Captain was to say, He saw him
laid in his Coffin too. After that he was Mad, and another gave a Guin^^ to see
him Rave, through a keyhole at St. Germains, all which it is plain, was to
b^ssl the World about the belief of his being Landed in Ireland, lest his
Peoples Hearts should melt, and they come back to their Duty and run to him.

Shall I add Mackay's great Victory; the London derry Diverse; the invincible
Boom, and then no Boom; the Seventy odd thousand Irish men killed before
Londonderry, which were Three times more than ever were there; the Irish
Protestants surprising Dublin, the Duels between the French and Irish; their
killing the French Officers at the head of the Camp by Dublin, and Fourteen
Thousand of them deserting the King thereupon: That Admiral Herbert had taken
King-sale; and the King was gone for Limrick, in order to abdicate and run away
for France: And last of all, the repeated Wonders of the Inniskilling-men,
beyond Bevis of Northampton, or the Stories of the Giants, or any thing else
but Honest Doctor Walker's Legend of Londonderry. It will not be very improper
to mention here the Disingenious Practices of the State News Writers, and that
in diverse respects. First, In diminishing of Things against them, as in the
Case of the Viscount of Dundee, that he had but Twenty Men when he had Five
hundred, that he had but a few Hundreds, and in vain endeavored to raise the
Highlanders, when the next day he was allowed to have Six thousand, because he
had beaten Mackay, when in Truth he had not Two thousand Men, and Mackay had
above Four thousand: And then that Mackay came to Sterling with Fifteen hundred
Men in very good Order, who did not bring Six with him, nor himself in any good
Order; a more complete Victory having never been obtained, the odds and number
considered. You are as happy in concealing. We are to know nothing of the
baffle we received from the French at Bantry-bay, where your great Herbert run
away from the French Admiral, just as your great Mackay did from my Lord
Dundee. You will not let us know of one Ship that is taken by the French,
though the most pitiful Vessel we take from them is to have a place in the
Gazene. Yet it is certain we have lost Four hundred Sail of Ships, which are
worth a Million, and Four thousand Seamen, which cannot be valued, and that in
spite of your Admiral Herbert with his Fleet, that has cost you a Million and a
half to guard the Channel and and preserve the Trade of the Kingdom. Nor are we
to have one Word of the Sickness of our Fleet, by which we have lost about Six
thousand more, which is more then Two Dutch Wars used to cost us. Neither are
we to have, On pain of Death, one tittle of Truth from Ireland, for upon no
less terms are any of Schomberg's Camp to write News: But since the Birds of
the Air have told us the illand perishing Condition of that Camp and that the
Town began to believe it, more Inniskilling Victories were contrived, as was
after the Scotch Battle, to drown Truth, and divert the People from reflecting
on the miserable Condition they are brought into. But after all, those Heroes
are, in good English, but a pack of Cow-stealers, whose Valor consisted in
killing the Unarmed Owners, the Poor Country People: An Action that would have
been called a M^ssacre in the Irish; to Steal first, and then Murder to keep
the Prize. To speak freely, Sir, inventing of Stories, together with disguising
and concealing Truth, seems to me to be the Master Talents of your New
Government; and, no doubt, came from the same Climate that did your Deliverer.
By these honest Methods it was you laid your lawful King aside, brought another
in, and have supported him against your Allegiance and Religion.

5. The next thing that has induced me to change my Opinion, (as you are
pleased to call it) is th^^ Train of Mischiefs that appears to follow this
Revolotion. First we are like to loose our Government, not only by defacing the
Beauty of our Ancient Fabric, but by breaking the very Constitution. Our
Monarchs were ever Sovereign and Imperial, but we plainly see by almost every
Motion that is made by a prevailing Party, we are to Dance after the Pipe of a
Commonwealth, and our Kings to dwindle into Dukes of Venice; the mere Puppets
of the People, and of a giddy one too which may bring us to change Governments
as fast as we do Fashions, or as we did after Cromwell's death.

But, Sir, That I confess which sticks most with me is the Scandal and Change
it brings to our Church. Of the Scandal I need only say, that too many of her
pretended Sons have served their turn of her Credit to satisfy their unjust
Ambition and which would make you blush; they are the Pillars of your
Reformation that are the Monuments of Ingratitude. A Cause cannot be blessed in
the hands of such Instruments. Look over the Sticklers in the Change, and you
will find they have the largest part of it that were of our Church, and owed
the King the greatest Obligations. In the Fleet, Herbert, Russel and Berkley.
In the Army, Churchill, Duglas, Kirk, and Forty more; not to forget those civil
French Hugonets that he so Charitably relieved here, and are now gone to
requite him in Ireland, under the greatful Schomberg, who began and advanced
his Fortunes in France by his Favor. In the Church, we have the Archbishop of
York, the Bishops of Winckester and St. Asaph. the last of which was promoted
by an Interest, now out of Credit, and so early acquainted with the Invasion
and the present Revolution that so soon as he was out of the Tower, he foretold
it, tho, perhaps, his Pretentions to Proplietick Studies, or Enthusiasm rather,
might give a Man of his Gravity another Prospect. Sir, these are Blots in our
^^^tclieons, Spots in our Feasts; our reproach with all Mankind. They cannot
pretend Religion for such Immorality, nor Conscience, but for want of it. It
is, in short, a Scandal that deserves the public censure, as well as the
dislike of the Church. For my part because I am a Protestant, I hate to
prostitute the Profession to a Faction, and make it a civil Tool for Rebellion.

And for the Change that is like to happen amongst you, you hear I suppose of a
Commission to several Bishops and other Clergymen to alter our Worship, and
for ought I know, our Creed; and indeed it is but necessary, since the present
practices of some are not reconcilable with what our Church has all along
professed. A Comprehension is the least we must expect, and of those, who will
not add much Sweetness to our Blood. Contrary humors in the same Body are
dangerous, nor can our Church live long under a contradiction to her own Being.
Sir, in this I am the more earnest with you, because of what has happened to
the Church of Scotland, and had like to have befallen ours the last Session;
and I am told is to be a good part of the business of this. We must be more
Presbyterian, and our Sacramental Test must be abrogated, For all those
Religious to enter into the Government, that will not enter into our Churches!
Popery only excepted; A strange way to maintain the Church of England in all
her Rights and Privileges. Poor King James could not be so happily understood.
The Devil certainly owed these Men a spite, that turned out King James for
doing that which they, honest Men, have already far out done. This for our
Souls.

Our Bodies are, for ought I see, like to be in as bad a Plight; for after all
our excessive hopes of happy times, We are both drained of the Money we had,
and denied the means of getting more, which must, in a little time, ruin us
all, and which are the unavoidable consequences of the War you have drawn upon
the Nation, to gratify your Lust after a New King. I say, Sir, we are drained
of what we have, for there is already given him to begin the the World with,
but Four Taxes; viz. The Poll Money, Land Tax, Twelve Pence in the Pound, and
the Additional Excise, which amounts to 2000000 for this Year, besides the
Ordinary Revenue, that is improved to about Two Millions more, in all 4000000
an extraordinary Sum for for the first Year. But which is yet more piercing, I
hear, you are 1200000 l. in debt; nor is this all you desire, or the Parliament
is called to give. You must have, if I am well informed, besides the Common
Revenue, and this Debt, A Million more then you had the last Year, because of
your increasing your Forces, and that your Customs, etc. will fall by the decay
of Trade: which mounts the Charge of the following Year to Four Millions,
besides the Common Revenue over and above what I have mentioned toward this,
there is lately granted a new Tax of 2 s in the Pound, and since that an
Addition of 1 s in the Pound and some other Funds they are finding out for the
support of this unnatural quarrel for the next Year; and yet all this is not
enough for our Debt and our next Years charge, by Two Millions; though we are
not to be told so presently, least the Kingdom fling off the Yoke at once; but
to be dipped and engaged grandually, till it may be out of of our Power to save
our selves.

In the second place, Sir, that we are hindered from getting more Money is not
less evident; for whilst we lie under an Embargo at home, or which is as bad,
our Men are pressed to Man our Fleet to fight the Dutch Quarred against our own
King, at Double Charges. The Dutch have sent mighty Fleets, well Convoyed, to
all Parts of the World, to engross the Trade of it; and they that understand
Commerce do know, That when Trade is once diverted from its usual Channel, it
is not easy for a Country to recover it. But that we should give them 600000
l. for the Perjury and Poverty we have brought upon our selves for their sakes
(as they have now the ingenuity to confess) is selling us a Dutch Bargain with
a Vengeance. It is true, some say, 400000 l. of it belongs to the Prince of
Orange, but that does not mend our Market, or Reputation, to pay him so dear
for coming hither to be a King, he might have been had at Cheaper rates, as I
have been told. But this puts me in mind of one reason, besides Ill Conduct,
and Parliament Pensions, for want of Money; they say ^enting has sent his
Masters 400000 l. with a Lump of his own for Holland, for fear of the worst.
However it be, let us never after this ridicule the Irish Genius, or the French
Liberty; but confess our selves the most Foolish, Base and Inconstant, of all
People. And yet believe me, Sir, we see but much the better side of our Misery
neither; for before the next Summer is over, though King James and the French
King should not visit us in England (which is more then I dare ensure at any
rate) the Cries and Rage of the numerous Poor, of almost all Trades, will be
too many for our New Politicians; and the Rabble will every where Reign over
others when they have nothing of their own to quiet them. Work or Plunder is
the best of their Case: No Work where there is no vent for it, and Starve they
will not whilst others have it: The Consequence is obvious, and needs no
comment. This is a way of Beating us without Fighting; for this beats our
Pockets, which should support our Arms to beat our Enemies: And this Year has
given us such melancholy Proofs of their Skill and Power this way, that the
increase of their Strength by the Conjuction of the Algireens? which they will
bring into our Channel very speedily, together with the vast Naval Preparations
now in France; the Bountiful Gift of both Seculars and Regulars in King James's
Favor, without one negative, being near Four millions and a half of our Money;
the inclinations of the present Pope; his Influences on the Confederacy; their
known Poverty; the disposition of diverse Princes and States ought to increase
our fears to a despair of ever seeing a quiet State in England till the King
(as the Song has it) Enjoys his Own again.

But if we had reason to think better of our Case, we have seen enough to tell
us we are like to be governed by a Strange Army, as well as a Strange King; for
French, Dutch, Danes, or any Thing that is Foreign, has the Preference to
Englishmen. They must not be employed, and when they are, we see how little
they are trusted, or paid at home or abroad: So that it is plain, King William
will not confide in the Men that have quitted their Allegiance to advance him:
Is it that we have lost our Integrity, or that he sees we begin to have the
Grace to repent? God grant it before it is too late! Shall I tell you here of
the cries of the Country under the burden of your Dutch Soldiers, or Saviors,
if you please? They take what they will, and pay what they will, with Oaths and
Blows into the bargain. The Army of King James, in his whole Reign, never
committed so many Riots, Batteries and base Murders, and your Dutchmen in a
Years time. Among the rest, think upon that Action of running their Swords
through a poor Child in a Cradle, to be revenged of the Mother, for hindering
them from Killing the Father.

So the Danes lately in the North, in a drunken sit, murdered their Officer,
taking him for their Landlord. Their other Ri^^s are so frequent and
extravagant, that the nature of our Saviors shows us what sort of Salvation we
are to hope for, or what are the means and instruments, our Great Savior makes
use of for our deliverance.

Sir, You will see that we have lost our Country with our King: For the Man
that you have put in his Place, will very quickly put Foreigners into yours;
they shall Rule over you.

And to let you see I do not speak without Book. I am very well affor'd there
are 20000 Foreigners more gone for, which will make up an (...) 40000
Strangers, there are also 24 Sail of D^nes and Swe^ds Men of War, hired into
the Service of this Government, which with Sixty Sail of Dutch (...) not War,
are to be the Navy that must Guard the Rights and C^r^re^^^ of the People of
England next Year; for our E^^^^^, Seamen are Su^p^^^ed with this Prince, as
the (...), and for that reason, are to be sent (...) on Service of leser trust
and moment; but the true meaning and consequence of this is we (...), for He
shall call them in for your Service, as he will tell you, but he still keep
them here for his own: And in (...) become a Conquest to him in a short time,
if you receive not your King again.

And here spare me a Word or two in point of Prudence. Is not King James at the
Head of a great Army, such an one as your Schomberg dare not Fight, for all he
was to be Master of all Ireland by Michaelmas, day? Has he not now a better
Fleet than yours to wait upon him to distress Schomberg, and to bring him where
he pleases to attack you here, leaving your Trade to the care of his Privateers
and Algireens And is it not as evident that Scotland is his upon a small Succor
the moment he sends it; and England to a great degree, by Taxes, loss of Trade,
a ruinous War and your intestine Faction and Animosities? Could not the most
valourous Army, and best Disciplined in Europe, commanded by Diligent, Cunning
and Stout Men, as ever Usurped a Throne, keep out King Charles the Second, That
had no Army, or Navy to help him, and can you imagine this Slow and Vnactive
Creature will be able to do it, that wants Qualifications, as well as Title to
quiet and settle the Kingdom, and secure his Abbettors? Open your Eyes, I
beseech you, and see what your Deliverer has done for you! even he who was to
Conquer France by last Midsummer, has got no farther yet then Hampton Court and
New Market. And instead of beating the French, They, even they, the hated, the
despised French, rid Almiral over us in our own Seas: Such a Revenge of your
Scorns as makes you truly contemptible. That a Nation that hardly ever made a
Balance between you and the Dutch in any War, which you never feared but under
your own King, and slighted under this Enchanted Knight, should become your
Match and Terror, and the Dutch of your sides too. Where are your Heads, or
your Hearts? What Conduct, what Valor is this? A fine Summers Expedition! An
admirable Account for the Parliament, and to the Kingdom for their Money!
Behold the Fruit of your Experiment, the Fortune of your Change, the Success of
your New King, and your Gain by his Skill and Arms! I say your Interest lies,
Two to One, on the side of your Duty, and you must be Mad, as well impious to
continue your Disallegiance. To conclude, Sir, let it move you and your Friends
a little, to consider how cruelly you have used your Poor King; what
Difficulties you give him; And for what, and for whom you do it: and save him
all further trouble; which may prevent Blood, obtain Grace, and perhaps give
Peace to Europe, to be sure return Trade and Strength to England. This your
Country your Children, your Consciences (if you will but hear them) call aloud
for. Hear them therefore, better late than never; and pray, let it not be too
late for the Public, nor for your Self.

Thus, Sir, you see. I have been very free with you, as a Man of Conscience
ought to be, when so good an Occasion is offered, as you were pleased to give
me in our last Discourse; and I with withal my Heart, that these reasons may
have the same effect upon you they have had with me, that while you can for
believe me time grows very precious) you may return to the Duty you owe your
King, who after all the d^^mal Stories some Men's Interest makes them tell us of
his condition, will find a Fatted Calf, with which to Feast all his returning
Prodigals.

I am Sir, Y^^r^. and.

FINIS.

