Liquor Alchahest, OR A DISCOURSE Of that Immortal Dissolvent OF Paracelsus and
Helmont.

It being one of those two Wonders of ART and NATURE, which radically dissolves
all Animals, Vegitables and Minerals into their principles, without being in
the least altered, either in weight or activity, after a Thousand Dissolutions,
etc.

Published by J.A. PYROPHILVS.

Quicunque ergo Medicinae operam datis summo studio id adniti debetis ut
Alchaest praeparare discatis propter aversionem multorum morborum qui ab
Haepate oriuntur etc.

Paracels. Archidox lib. de viribus membrorum cap. 6. de viribus Hae^atis.
LONDON, Printed by T. R. and N. T. for W. Cademan at the Pope's Head in the
Lower Walk of the New-Exchange, 1675.

To the truly Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Esquire
SIR,
THAT I have made choice of your Honor to Patronize this Posthume Tract, will
appear no wonder to such that have been acquainted with your knowledge in this
more occult Philosophy of the Adeptists, as well as with your Candor to
encourage such who have been but pretenders to Pyrotechny. I know well, you
affect not Flattery; and for me to speak much, would but lessen, the World
having been (by so many) acquainted with your worth. All the excuse I make your
Honor is, That the present Treatise is yours by Right, the Author having in
his Pyrotechny Asserted, begun this Discourse, so that I only surrender what is
your own. If the Nobleness of the Subject be not sufficient to plead my excuse
for this Dedication, I hope your wonted Charity to forgive others, will not be
straightened to me, since I had no other Ambition in the Publication thereof, then
the promoting the public good, by inspiriting others to do the like, and
giving this further testimony of my self, that I am

Your Honors Obliged Humble Servant J. ASTELL.
From the Golden Globe against Strand-Bridge.



THE PREFACE.
AFter a long debate with my self, I found I was obliged to put forth this
little Tractate, not only to show my justness to the Dead, but my desires of
gratifying the living; for in an Age wherein this kind of Philosophy receives
such great encouragement (having acquired many eminent Practitioners as well as
Patrons) and by the happy discovery of diligent searchers, has made so large
an improvement: I thought I could do no less then communicate this Essay
concerning the Immortal Liquor Alchahest, that being the great Key which
unlocks Natures choicest Secrets; and which at present is so diligently sought
after. The Author of it was a person so industriously laborious in the
searching after natures choicest mysteries, that he spared not for pains nor
costs in the hunting after the true knowledge of the most abstruce Philosophy.
That his acquirements were great, is not unknown to the World, especially to
those who had any intimate familiarity with him, his Writings testify his
ability in the Philosophy, or learning of the Schools, as well as in that of
Nature, his discoveries having truly entitled him Philosophus per Ignem. It
was his misfortune to justify Truth in an Age when Chemistry had few Friends
that durst appear to justify her, yet so great an effect had his Writings,
backed with Truth, that the Eyes of many were opened, and occasioned several to
become Proselytes to Pyrotechny. It would not, I believe, lessen the esteem of
some eminent Practitioners, should they acknowledge with me, that they had from
him those true fundamentals of Art that has rendered them thus famous. So that
this present Age reaps the benefit of his more early Studies. Had he not met
with many Crosses and Troubles, doubtless his discoveries had been greater; and
had not he been cut off by that raging Pestilence, 1666. When he was just
rising out of those Clouds which Eclipsed his worth, it would quickly have
appeared to the World, notwithstanding the malice of his Enemies, That he was a
true follower of Nature. Pyrotechny has not had a bolder Champion; and I
verily believe, many of his Enemies will now confess, they are convinced of the
inefficacy of Vulgar Medicaments; and that there is an absolute necessity for a
new method of Physic, as to the Pharmalentick part: for daily such
encroachments are made upon this noble faculty, that if not speedily prevented,
it will be of little or no esteem. The Common method of Physic being passed
into the hands of all kind of unlettered People; and the chief remedy that is
left, would be a diligent inquiry after noble Medicines, such that are
agreeable to Nature, which the Author of this Tract heartily did not only hint
at, but discover as plainly as it was fit, without incurring the same
inconveniences as did attend the making public the Common method of Physics
which faults are not only to be taken notice of on the Gallenical part, but
likewise those abuses are to be considered which have sprung from Chemistry. It
being common in this latter Age, for many to cry up themselves for great
Chemists, who (ignorantly decrying all others) have hardly known well the
Names, (much less the uses of Chemical Vessels) these Men have had the
impudence to impose on the World Trifles, for Universal Remedies; many of which
undiscreetly administered, have truly cured all Diseases; by giving the unwary
Patients their Pasports into another World. But I shall pass them over, as
being unworthy my time to particularize their Cheats, which I have not patience
to think of, nor can any true Son of Art consider without resentment, the
abuses that are daily committed by this Farrago of Impostors, that have been,
and will ever be, a dishonor to the honest Professors of Pyrotechny. The only
expedient in this Case, wherein the good of Mankind is concerned, the Lives of
Persons being more to be valued, then all other worldly consideraoions, is
this; for some well experienced Artists, to put to sale to the World, such true
Remedies, with their uses, as may be benificial for the eradicating of
Diseases, Medicines that have been known to be successful by reiterated
experiments, not those duly made, not conjectural. By this means the honor of
that most noble faculty of Physic will be recovered and advanced, and the
truth of Chemical Remedies will be manifested, notwithstanding the reproaches
of malicious gainsayers. This the noble Helmont did; and by this way will it
soon appear, whether or no those refined Chemical Medicaments, are not more
safe, more easy, and more effectual for eradicating of Diseases, then the
Common Gallenical apparatus of Medicine. But such Artists, whoever they be that
will thus expose any thing for the good of Mankind, I am sure will be more
ingenious then those undiscreet pretenders to Chemistry, as to make the World
believe, That an universality of healing Diseases, can any way be expected from
any one particular Medicine; it being impossible, were they Masters of the
Grand Elixar, with that to cure all Diseases. I come now to speak something
concerning the Author of this Tract, who was Dr. George Starkey, (my very good
Friend) a Man whose Writings spoke him more to the World then his Person or
Discourse; Natures Explication, and Helmonts Vindication. Pyrotechny Asserted.
whose moral failings I dare no more justify, but he was a Man, and as such,
the best of us are subject to err, which consideration should engage our
Charity to forget. When employed in Pyrotechnies School, Nature had not a more
diligent Scholar; and who, to my own knowledge (not in vain) wrought for many
years upon this Subject he discourses of.

I must confess, I never could get a sight of the Alchahest perfected by him,
whether occasioned by the importunities of Patients for Remedies, whose
condition would not admit the tarrying for Medicines of so high a preparation,
or his want of conveniences, being hurried from place to place, I know not,
yet have I seen and known him, possessor of several Magisteries, and not many
Months before his death, I knew him Master of a mercurial Medicine, whose
effects were such, That it merited the name of an Arcanum. Had he lived, I know
not what greater proofs he might have given of the certainty of such an
universal Solvent. His Arguments deduced from those hints the most noble
Helmont gives are considerable, if duly weighed; and the true searchers after
Truth may receive no small Light from him; for my own part, I have no reason to
repent my Labors, and time spent in this Study, Nature being very Grateful to
her diligent followers. From this Fountain have I gained a Salt, which
dissolved in Rain Water, arsenic being amalgam'd with another Metal, this being
caused to boil in a Sand Furnace for the space of two hours the Amalgame was
dissolved into a Liquor, with as much ease as Sugar dissolves in Water. This I
did in the presence of two Friends, no mean Artists. Therefore not to be
imposed upon, with which Medicine, my Menstruum being separated from it, and
further operated on, I cured deploracle Poxes, etc. I shall forbear to
discourse any further, what other medioaments I have made by the help of good
Dissolvents, resolving, if God spare me life, to put forth Pyrotechny
Triumphant, which the Author, had he lived, intended to do, which will be an
Explanation of his Pyrotechny Asserted, and Explication of the History of
Nature, comprehended in those Subjects.

Liquor Alchahest, etc.
I am come now to the discovery of the great Circulate, or immortal disolvent
of Paracelsus, and Helmont, not laying here the foundation of its Use and
Excellency, which I presume is sufficiently believed in the World already, who
had rather now hear tidings how it may be attained, then be tantaliz'd with a
large Encomium of its worth and value. I elsewhere taught its Nature, Nativity
and Efficacy, although briefly I shall here come to a more large handling of
it, yet with caution as well as candor. It is (as I said) a Spiritual Salt, or
Saline Spirit, which by reason of its transcendent purity, cannot be
corruptively dissipated, and not finding any body so noble (at least more
noble) then it self; disdains to be wedded unto any, nor is it capable of a
diverse ferment from it self, and so not liable to transmutation: the knowledge
and preparation of it, is the work of most abstruce Philosophy, the hope and
crown of the adepti. O immortal Ens or Liquour! which penetrates all bodies,
and perfectly reduces them to their first Ens or matter, without any loss of
virtue, or pondus, but remains in number, weight, and measure, the same after a
1000 times acting upon bodily concretes; only one conquers and subjugates it,
and is in it self destroyed in its destruction. It is vile and yet precious, it
costs nothing, every man has it, the poor as well as the rich; Adam carried it
with him out of Paradise, it is most secret in Microcosme, most potent in the
Macrocosme; it destroys and conquers all bodies, and subjugates the most
rebellious nature. It Is the product of Urine, then which nothing more common to
come by, nothing more difficult to work on, well therefore said Helmont, that
its preparation was most tedious: And most truly wrote he of such as contemn so
vile and sordid a thing, and disdain to learn by the fire what its contents
are, That true Wisdom does and will despise them. For the plainer unfolding the
mystery of its nativity and preparation, I shall recite my own broileries, how
I hunted after it, and how after many years search, and and infinite errors, I
at length attained it, if there be any thing deserving imitation in my example,
follow it, and perhaps (God blessing your studies, labors and watchings) you
may at last attain your desires, as I, through the undeserved mercy of God, at
last attained mine. I had not been long conversant in the writings of that
noble Philosopher; but I soon (from some of his expressions) gathered a strong
presumption, that Urine was the subject. Especially from that place in his
Trac. de Lith. where he thus speaks, Est in Natura universi, etc. There is in
the whole nature of the Universe, but only one fire, (which is our consuming
Vulcan) and so likewise there is but one only Liquor which is of power to
dissolve all solid bodies into their first matter, without being its self in
the least changed or weakened in its virtue; which those that are adept know and
can testify. But in the activity of other Spirits, the dissolvable bodies can
never radically mix themselves with the dissolving Liquor; and therefore,
though they are corroded, yet is not this to be esteemed an entire dissolution,
for every acid Spirit (being corrosive) by corroding another body, is
coagulated, and in a manner fixed, and becomes transmuted into the form of a
condensed Salt, not that the body, which (without alteration) endured what the
pontick Spirit could work upon it, acts any thing toward its coagulation, but
it self by its proper corrosive activity, is Coagulated of its own accord. Thus
far Helmont in that place, who elsewhere speaking of his examination of all
Salts, by way of Analyzing them, found by all trials possible, that their
Spirits were still acid, except only Alcalizate Salts, and those of the
Essential Sulphurs of vegetals. The Spirit of Man's Urine, notwithstanding, was
neither Acid nor Alcalizate, but merely Saline, also the Spirit of the Urine of
Beasts. Hence I concluded, that in one of these two the Immortal Liquor must
find its primitive original, having on good reason, excluded all acid Spirits;
(and by consequence the Spirits of all other Salts in the World) Nor was the
controversy long deciding between Alcalizate and Urinous Salts, considering
the words of Helmont: when (says he) I distinguished between the ies, and the
Salts and {sulphur}s of Concretes, by an analytical resolution of them, I
wondered at the sluggish, inactive nature of the ial compared to the dignity and
excellent activity of the other two principles (to wit Sulphurous and Saline)
Moreover I found, says he, those Salts more dull and languid, which partaked
of the nature of {sulphur}, but of Acalizate Spirits, and those of Essential
vegitable Sulphurs, he says definitively, that their saline Acrimony is fat
and Sulphuerous, nor easily or speedily reducible into Salt, unless by a
tedious inversion of their whole substance; whence I observed, that Alcalyes
were not to be volatized (duly and truly) but by means of essential vegetable
Oils or {sulphur}s. Secondly, That being volatized, they retained their
Sulphurous fatness a long time, till by a tedious inversion of the whole
substance, the Sulphurous nature was turned into a Saline. Thirdly, Yet (even
then) those saline Alcalizate spirits could not give the immortal Liquor,
because Meretriciously addicted to wed any subject, and by dissolution thereof,
to be reduced into a Coagulative volatile Salt, as Helmont expressly teaches in
his Tract. de Feb. as also in his Tract. de potest Medicam, his words are
these, If, says he, you cannot attain to the Arcanum of our Fire, learn ( as a
succedaneum thereto) to make Alcalyes volatile, and with their Spirits perform
your dissolutions; which, although they leave their dissolved Bodies (when
digested in our Stomachs) yet have they by their Dissolution of, and
Coagulation upon them, borrowed so much of their virtue, as by it to be able to
overcome most Diseases. And in another place he says, If Spirit of Salt of
Tartar dissolve Quicksilver, Silver, Unicorns Horn, Crabs Eyes, or any other
simple; it will cure (not only all Feavours) but most Diseases indifferently.
And without making distinction; not that I expect the Quicksilver, Silver,
etc. should pass with the Spirit into the Veins; but it is sufficient that the
Alcalizate Spirit is by means of these Bodies, reduced into the nature of a
Volatile and Coagulable Salt; and in the Stomach being first digested, (as
other Meats are) it it passes into the Meseraicks, being carried thither by
the Urine; and in its passage resolves and loosneth whatever obstructing filth
it meets with, by virtue of its Exotic qualities, borrowed in dissolution,
from the bodies whereon it was coagulated. And in his Tract. de potest Med.
speaking of Alcalyes, I perceived or felt (says he) that they are utterly void
of all seminal power, or properties, and have only a Saponary, Abstersive, and
resolving nature, wherewith they are contented; except they be made volatile,
and then I was sensible that they reassumed Balsamic seminal Virtues, and the
radical principles of these concretes (by whose volatile {sulphur}s they were
revived and made volatile.) But adds, I was sensible how easily these volatile
Alcalyes are transmuted into new and various forms, since they unite most
readily to any Bodies, and wed therewith: acting according to the native
disposition of the Bodies, to which they are thus conjunctively associated. By
these testimonies of this noble and most acute Philosopher, whom I felt
understandingly, having first often read him, and seriously considered his
words, I was wholly confirmed in my opinion concerning Urine, as the only
subject in which this secret Liquor was to be sought and attained. Which
opinion of mine was daily more and more strengthened by several expressions of
his concerning this subject, one of which I recited before, namely, That Wisdom
did (and for ever will) despise all such who think scorn to learn by the fire
what the contents, nature, and properties of Urine are, how sordid and
contemptible a thing soever it seem and appear to be. Therefore in his Tract.
concerning the six digestions in man, he uses this expression concerning the
Salt of Man's Urine, that in the whole systeme of the Universe it had not its
fellow or peer. Neither Sea nor Fountain Salt, Salt Peter or Gemme; In a word,
not any natural Salt whatsoever, nor yet the Salt of the Urine of Beasts, was
comparable to it. The same he affirms in his Tract de Lith. And instances in
the Urine of a Horse, which he found far to fall short of the dignity of Man's
Urine, not having in it, or by any preparation, yielding that noble Spirit,
which in Man's Urine was to be found, which Coagulated Spirit of Urine in an
instant, not into a fixed body, but an Aetherical subtle, spiritual Salt, then
which nature has not a more spiritual penetrative Creature; of the Salt of
Urine he before said, That he knew not if or no the whole World afforded any
thing of a more subtle nature: comparing which with that Paragraph concerning
the Immortal dissolvent in his Tract. de Medicam potest: he calls it the
highest and most noble of Salts, which has attained its utmost pitch in nature
of subtilty and purity, penetrating all things, and is the only agent in the
World, which acting upon Bodies, remains always immutable, and with ease
resolves all things, and brings them into ready obedience, liquefying and (at
the same time) volatizing them, as Snow is melted in warm water. I observed, I
say, in the works of this Philosopher, the Liquor Alchahest, and the Circulated
Salt of Paracelsus, otherwise called the greater Circulate, were Synonimous,
and indifferently used to signify this fire of Hell, or immutable dissolvent;
and where is it to be found but in that subject whose Spirit is even saline,
never Acid or Alcalizate? Not without cause therefore (by way of encouragement)
he thus allureth the studious searchers of truth; seek (my Brethren) and as
many of you as are sedulous and diligent shall find truth ready to meet you
with open arms, to embrace you, and crown your searches with unspeakable joy.
First learn to dissolve the Duelech, or Stone of the Bladder or Reins, or the
Gravel of either, in a Glass with a Tepid Liquor, inoffensive to either Stomach
or Bladder, rejoice, for you are near the great secret, then learn to dissolve
the Ludus, and reduce it into a volatile Salt, etc. Now this Spirit or Liquor
which will thus resolve the Duelech, is the second, which is drawn from Urine
(putrified by long digestion.) The former Coagulating Spirit (of Aquae Vitae
rectified) being some days before taken away by distillation. From the
testimonies of this most acute and truly adept Philosopher by the fire, I set
my mind to consider the thing it self, and found it a subject of great wonder.
My Experience convinced me, that it was an Anomalous Coagulum, which being it
self a most subtle Spirit, was yet the Coagulation of other (and none but)
Spirits, and those only vinous, for although it seems to Coagulate, it destroys
utterly all acid Spirits, and returns them into Water insipid, or rather the
acid Spirit, attempting by its Corrosiveness, to destroy this tender Spirit,
which is most exquisitely volatile and flying: It the better to defend it self,
assumes the form of a coagulated Body (as Water to withstand the active force
of the Cold which would turn it into a Gas, crusts it self by its own action,
into an Ice) And so this most fugacious penetrative Spirit, plays under the
Mask of a far more fixed (yet totally volatile) Body of Salarmoniack, while
the Spirit (to avoid whose tyranny it thus disguised it self) is by its own
fretting activity totally destroyed from what it was, and becomes a mere
elemental Water: That this Coagulation, and disguised fixation, with a total
suspension of the acute Urinary odor and taste, i^ from it self, and not the
acid Spirit (effectively.) I demonstrate, first in that upon any Acidity, fixed
or volatile, it will do the same thing, and become the same Salt, and so the
acid Calcinate of Vitriol, as well as its acid volatile Spirit will cause the
same saline product. But Secondly, were the Urinous Spirit coagulated
passively, it would be really and actually transmuted, and become another
thing, whereas the same Urinous Spirit (identically and numerically) is (in
this action) but veiled under a Larva, or masked under the disguise of a more
fixed body (as Water still remaining the same, counterfeits a body of appearing
Glass, being indeed but the same water identically, in the disguise of Ice.)
And this the affusion of a Lixivium of Salt of Tartar, or any other Alcaly,
will easily discover, when in the twinkling of an eye, or the space of the same
quickest thought, the same Spirit of Urine, in the same pondus and qualities,
and with the same formal properties, will distill over as before, re-assuming
the same subtlety of odor, fieryness of taste, being equally Volatile,
coagulating also Spirit of Wine, speedily, powerfully, and solemnly, as if it
had never been coagulated. Whereas the acid Spirit is turned into an insipid
Water; having spent it self in vain upon this disguised Body of Sal Armoniack.
And Thirdly, were the coagulation and semifixation actively from the Corrosive
Spirit, which is most fiery, and in its tumultuous action, causes a sensible
insufferable heat to the touch, it could not upon a Spirit most exquisitely hot
and fiery, actually imprint that Lunar Blas, which is apparent in Sal
Armoniack: For it being in nature and quality hot, and materially and really
(although hiddenly) containing the most fiery Spirit of Urine, of which a drop
in an instant will vesitate the Tongue or Lips, as powerfully and speedily as
the most fiery potential cautery; and the Spirit by its most acute sharp odor
(arguing the most exquisite heat of it when rectified) being so volatile and
penetrative, scarce any stopple can keep it confined to the Vessel which
contains it; and so piercingly acute, that no humane, or other Animals Organs
of smelling can long endure its odor, without a threatened Syncope, if not an
Apoplexy for the time does yet so powerfully operate by a Lunar Blas, that if
Sal Armoniack be put in an Urinal, or other thick Glass, and water poured on
it, straightway it causes such an extremity of Cold, as will actually freeze
Water on the outside of the Urinal, yea although antimony, or {sulphur}, or, be
sublimed with it, which are of a hot fiery Nature; And this Lunar Blas is
insperable from it as long as it appears in the form of a more fixed Body of
Salt, where observe by the by, that Cold is a real positive Ens or Being, and
not a bare privation of heat, as the Schools most coldly teach. (It is I say) a
Being which in the twinkling of an eye, can by the irradiating Blas of moistened
Sal Armoniack be sent through the impervious sides of a strong Glass, so as in
an instant to produce Cold in its glaciating extreme, which was not so the
moment before. Therefore Secondly, this cannot be an impression stamped upon the
most fiery Corrosive; but is done by the activity of the Urinous Spirit upon it
self, which it is so solicited too by the excitation of the Corrosive Spirit,
as Water actually crust it self with Ice, by the Irritation of extreme Cold,
which otherwise threatens ruin to its present form of Existence. And Thirdly,
By a peculiar privilege the Creaator has given this Spirit, the most Cold
Lunar Blas, marries it self to this (naturally hot in quality) subject, which
it influentially imprints on whatsoever it touches; so soon as moisture (over
which the cold Moon by its Light is president) is poured on its Body; that the
Atoms of Water and Salt do embrace each other. Fourthly, no marvel, since the
Lunar influence (having dominion over moisture) is the main instrument of
reducing things to their first matter (as is evident in Ink, Broth, Jellies,
Flesh, or Fish, once thoroughly Frozen) that the acid Corrosive Spirits, (which
acting their fury upon Bodies, are variously coagulated into fixed coagulated
Salts, of times very Corrosive) are in this action, by a retrograde reduction,
brought into mere insipid Elemental Water: For let the Corrosive Spirit be of
what kind soever, Acetous, Vitriolate, Nitrous of Salt Gemme, Sea Salt, or any
other acidity, the product of Sal Armoniack is still the same, as also the
Lunar Blas inhering in it, if not appearing with the same countenance at first
coagulation, yet by sublimation of the coagulated Salt, the identity is soon
perceptible; and the same reduction of the Corrosive Spirit to insipid Water,
is as well the end of one acidity as another; By which the action of the Spirit
upon it self, (not suffering a passive coagulation from the acid Corrosive) is
beyond dispute, and out of question.

So then this is the original and production of Sal Armoniack the most subtle
acute penetrative Urinous Spirit, meeting with an acid Corrosive; this s^^eks
(by a furious assault, to destroy that; which to prevent, the Urinous Spirit,
counterfeits a Body by a spontaneus Coagulation, which (as more permanent) it
opposes to the fury of the Corrosive spiritual Acidity. Into this Body the
Lunar Blas concenteates, and joins it self, dwelling in it invisibly, yet
acting visibly.

The acid Spirit, fretting it self in vain upon this wonderful body, receiving
a determination from its Cold Lunar Blas, ends in the total extinction of its
saline seminal virtue, and that which in other actings, receives from various
bodies, various coagulations, into diverse forms of Salts fixed from this
counterfeit body (guarded by a Lunar Blas (or influence) receives its final
destruction, and b^comes insipid) Elemental water; thus that the Spirit through
itr own activity is exantlated (by a frustaneous acting on this larvated body)
is from it self; But that the end of this fury, and excandescence, should be
the total extinction of its saline life, or being, is wholly to be attributed
to the Lunar Blas, which is intimately and inseparately wedded to the form of
Sal Armoniack; whose coagulation into that disguise of a body, is by its own
action, on it self, according to an unerring instinct by which the wise Creator
has enjoined it to act.

This I have described the more at large, that the studious might lay this true
relation of this anomalous Generation, as a sure foundation to work upon in the
most seeret discovery of what only a true mental man will intellectually
apprehend, and intuitively behold, with the clear sight of the Soul or mind.
For as there is a Sal Armoniack Vulgar, which scarce any Fool but knows; so is
there also a Sal Armoniack of Philosophers, which only true elect Sons of
Learning know: In the circulation of which, is the perfection of the hope of
all true adept Brothers of Art, so far as concerns this sire of Hell, which is
Fire and yet Water, Water, and yet no Water, Air, and yet condensible, not
Corrosive, yet the most sharp and perpetual Corrosive: A choice Medicine,
cleansing and purifying Nature, yet the destroyer and conqueror of Bodies. But
vinous Spirits are actually and actively coagulated by Spirit of Urine, and it
self is actually con-coagulated with them, of which coagulation Helmont gives
not an unlike Elogium, to that of the Immortal Liquor it self; namely, That it
is not made by a bare association of parts, but a marrying of each to other in
the bond of indissolveable unity, a production of a new Ens, which is a
neutral, most subtle, spiritual body, distinct from either parent. Here is a
spiritual body arising from two, yet without any diversity of ferment, for a
vinous Spirit is intimate, and centrally one with the Spirit of Man's Urine, by
virtue and efficacy of which, it coagulates Spirit of Wine, and is coagulated
it self, which cannot happen to any Urinous Spirit, unless by the influential
power of a vinous; which is the only coagulable object (primarily) of Spirit of
Urine. With which, if it meet with any other volatile Spirit, essentially
united, it coagulates it self therewith, so the Oils of Spices, and odoriferous
Vegetables, being first intimately associated to a Urinous Spirit, are with it
coagulated together into one spiritual body by rectified Spirit of Urine; and
truly, upon serious consideration, the universallity of the nature and energy
of Urine in its Spirit, cannot sufficiently be admired. For (mediately at the
least) there is nothing in the whole universe (except the central heart of, and
one thing which alone is its compere, the one destroying it, the other untoucht
by its activity) which is not either by it transmuted into its own nature, or
else absolutely destroyed, and reduced into clear and elemental water.

For demonstrating this, it will not be amiss to take an exact survey, at least
briefly of all sublimary Concrete Bodies. In the Mineral Kingdom, the central
heart of, (as was abovesaid) excepted, all Sulphurs, mettaline and mineral, yea
even of,, and themselves, are by reiterate cohobations, turned into saline
Liquors, or Spirits, and they at last return to insipid elemental Water; so all
Stones not calcinable by this sire of Hell, are made into Salts, which by often
circulating or cohobating with this Liquor, are volatiz'd, and by addition
return a^ last into Water. All calcinable stones and shells, yield an Alcaly,
which being by essential Oils volatized, unite with rectified Spirit of Wine,
and are concoagulated by an Urinous Spirit; which subtle Coagulum, being by a
convenient acidity made into a more abiding bodily Salt, and sublimed, whatever
will not formally abide therewith, is separated straightway in form of an
Heterogeneous Liquor, and by an easy art is robbed of its seminal Crasis, and
returns to insipid water. All Animals, their Flesh, Blood, and Bones, besides a
Mercurial Liquor (which is soon turned to elementary water) give a fat Sulphur,
and an urinary Salt, if not by immediate distillation, yet by a previous
maceration by ferment and putrefaction. The Caput Mort becomes by the
cohobation of our Circulated Salt, a mere Salt, and at last becomes Water, as
all Earths, Stones, or the like, the Urinary Salts being purified by
rectification, and semifixed into a more permanent body by proper Acidities,
become a Sal Armoniack; which in sublimation (losing its Heterogeneityes)
arises univocally the same with other of the same kind. The fat by distillation
is volatized, and by an Alcaly becomes susceptible of union with Spirit of
Wine, and consequently of con-coagulation by an Urinous Spirit, and by
acidityes proper is made a Sal Armoniack.

The Urine of all Creatures giving a Spirit, is by an acidity made a tractable
body of Salt, and by subliming with other Sal Armoniack; what is not made one
identically therewith, is separated as Heterogeneus, and by an easy art
totally destroyed. All horns and hoofs, either immediately, or being before
buried, yield an Oil, and an Urinous Salt; and may be handled, as I said
before, in the like case, of the same products of Flesh, Blood, and Bones. All
Trees by burning, give a fixed Alcalid Mercurial Liquor, a volatile Sulphur, and
a volatile Salt in the soot, which is plainly and truly Urinous; some Spices,
Flowers, Seeds, Barks and Roots of Trees, give an Essential Oil, others
expressed Oil: at least, all expressed Oils by reiterate distillations, being
rectified and cohobated with Alcalyes, become capable of union with Spirit of
Wine, and consequently of coagulation by, and subjugation too, Urinous Spirits;
which with whatever will not hold coagulation and sublimation, is separated as
Heterogeneall, and easily reducible to insipid Water. The destruction of all
acid Spirits (by urinous) I taught before. In a word, whatever in the World is
(beside the cential Nut of arsenic) is either fixed or volatile, the fixed,
either saline or not, what is not saline, by art is made so, and both (by art
and pains) become volatile; and being volatized, are soon reduced to Elemental
Water, robbed of all seminal virtue; fixed Alcalyes are volatized, married with
vinous Spirits; and coagulable (together with them) by means of Urinous: Oils
become Salts Volatile, and so commiscible with Spirits of Wine, and so
transmutable by Urinous: Vinous Spirits are most universal, all Herbs, Roots,
Barks, Fruits, Honey, Suggar, Leaves, Grainseeds, Flowers, etc. yielding (by
fermentation) a true vinous Spirit, which (by reiterate rectifications) loosing
the qualities of the (media vita) of its concrete, is not discernable from
others, and is (pari jure) coagulable in Spirit of Urine, (exquisitely
deflegmed) which being then reduced to a more fixed Sal Armoniack, if not by it
self, yet by subliming (together) with that which is the product of humane
Urine, becomes one (homogeneally) with it, and whatever (with it) abides the
test of sublimation, in that more fixed bodily form, is ever after univocally,
homogeneally, and identically the same, has the same Lunar Blas, and being
revived with an (Alcaly, or otherwise) gives the same coagulating Spirit, which
will coagulate Spirit of Wine. Behold here the admirable nature of the Spirit
of Man's Urine, how it plays its part among all other Concretes, Spirits,
Acetous, Oleagenous, Vinous, Alcalizate, and Urinous; As Aarons Rod did with
the Rods of Pharaohs Inchanters, it devoured them all, either assimulating them
to it self in matter and form, or destroying and reducing them (at last) to
mere insipid Elemental Water. Here you have a body at last of an admirable
product (not Vulgar but Philosophical Sal Armoniack) concerning which, I have
very much yet to write, howbeit, my writings will be more knotty then Apollo's
Oracles, till you learn to distinguish between Sal Armoniack Vulgar and
Philosophical.

The unheard of Heteroclyte Doctrine of Sal Armoniack, both Vulgar and
Philosophical.
IN my Pyrotechny Asserted and Illustrated, which contains the Second and Third
part, accounting my vindication of Helmont, and Explication of Nature for the
first part, being originally in Latin wrote together, and making with my other
Writings but one Volume, I writing of the Immortal Liquor, or Fire, did
paraphrastically interpret that place of Helmont. Ars indagando sollicita est
Corpori, quod tantae puritatis Symphonia colluderet nobiscum, ut a corrumpente
nequirent dissipaeri, ac tandem stupefacta est Religio, reperta latice, etc. To
which place, I shall remit the Reader, for what is there spoken too, not
intending here a repetition, but a further illustration of things more briefly
or obscurely discoursed of there. I observed it to be a Body, which Art was so
inquisitively sollicitous to find, but such a one, as might play with us or
make us sport (colluderet) by its harmony of so great purity, as not to be
capable of dissipation, by means of any corruptive agent or instrument; such
play or sport is more pleasant to a true Artist, then the Lords of the
Philistines could have expected from Sampson, yet this pulls down, and destroys
as he did, (not Houses) but the most solid compact bodies; and Champion like
maintains its ground, although very few Gallants and Ladies have that happyness
to see the prizes played by this Anomalous Combatant. This body I there forbore
to discover, except mystically and parabolically; but here I shall plainly
enough, to a Son of Art, discover the same, It is as I said, a Body of a
Spiritual indestructible Salt, in plain terms, it is the Salt of Humane Urine,
or Sal Armoniack, not Vulgar (the product of Urine, Soot, and Sea Salt) but
Philosophical, to which the Vulgar is related, as Vulgar, is to the of the
Philosophers. The question now will be how this Sal Armoniack Philosophical is
made, which I think I have sufficiently declared to a Son of Art; but I shall
be a little more plainer and candid in my discovery, That most acute subtle
penetrative Spirit of Man's Urine, by the help of another medium, not of a
diverse ferment from it self, but centrally one I say with it, must be united
to an Acidum, not Corrosive, sed naturae suae gratissimum. This Acidum must be
equally volatile with the Salt of Urine, before it can be Married or United
intimately with it. Then by often Circulations it attains that height of purity
to be entitled Ens salium, summum salium and falicissimum. After all this, I
must conclude with that saying of the most excellent Helmont in another case,
Chap. de Feb. speaking there concerning the Aurum Horizontale, Tametsi paucis
absolvi secretum quod medicum nobilitat istudque parasse pro primo vice
ingentis operis est pendetque directio a manu ejus qui dator est omnium donorum
bonorum. So I may well say in this, although I have discovered the matter more
plainly then any other, yet when attained, the way of working with it, is not
easy, but depends from his teaching who is the giver of every perfect gift; to
whose Tutoridge I leave the honest inquirer and searcher after Truth.

Carbones emunt atque vitra,
Dii vero suderibus vendunt Arts.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. r. in the Microcosme, p. 9. r. Sulphurous, idem p. 10. p. 17. for
Urine r: Wine, idem for Aetherical r. Aetherial, p. 19. for even r. sver, p.
20. for the r. he, p. 32. for saeks r. seeks, p. 39. for sublimary r.
sublunary, p. 43. for Alcalid r. Alcaly.


