AN APOLOGY FOR THE LAWS Ecclesiastical ESTABLISHED, That command our Public
exercise in RELIGION; AND, A serious Enquiry, whether PENALTIES Be reasonably
determined against RECUSANCY.

By WILLIAM STARKEY, D.D. Rector of Pulham in Norfolk.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Henry Brom at the Gun West end of St. Paul's
Church, 1675

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, PETER, Lord Bishop of ELY.
My LORD,
THere be two Idols set up among our Brainsick People, which must be broken
down, viz. LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE and TOLERATION. Under the Name and Color of
the first, many set up their misled Persuasion for a Law, and so sin without
possibility of any sense of Guilt or Conviction.

Secondly, Under the Name of Gospel meekness, gentleness and peacableness, they
cry up TOLERATION and IMPUNITY, and so are without fear to add sin to sin, when
in no danger of a subsequent punishment.

These, if suffered and countenanced, will in time overthrow RELIGION and
GOVERNMENT, which are the pillars and support of Order and Peace, both in
Church and Kingdom.

To encounter and remove these two great obstacles of our Happiness, my design
has been in this little Treatise to assert and prove two things; 1. That there
must be just Laws established in every Society, to limit the Conscience of the
Christian and Rational man, and that whosoever transgresses those Laws is
guilty of sin, notwithstanding any plea of Conscience, which can give no
license for any man to sin. 2. That Punishments, by Gospel Rules, are
necessarily inflicted upon obstinate Offenders, and that Toleration and
Impunity are of dangerous consequence to our King, Church, and whole Nation.

The Reasons are many that induced me to dedicate these weak Meditations to
Your protection, my good Pious Lord, as that I might lay hold on the first
opportunity of manifesting that just Observance Your worth and dignity, as well
as your favor, have challenged and extracted from me. And, because honored
with the Title of being Your Son, I accounted my self in duty obliged to give
you some assurance of the soundness of my Judgment, and stedfastness of my
Faith and Conscience, firmly assenting and adhering to the right exercise of
the best Religion, and the best Government under Heaven, which must tend not
only to my own credit, but Your content and satisfaction. And my Ambition is to
give Testimony of some resemblance to be in me to such a Father, whose zeal and
ability to defend the Church and Government is eminently known to a great part
of the World. And verily, it is but common prudence for my own security to
provide such a Patron as You are, to assist me in defending a Noble Argument,
which though full of Truth, Loyalty and Necessity, fit to be published, yet in
probability can no sooner be drawn out but it must expect to meet with much
opposition.

Yet this gives me encouragement, that while under your Banners though I expect
many Gainsayers, yet I can fear no Confuters. If I should fall it will be
honorably, yet I dare promise my self to come off victoriously. And under Your
conduct I cannot but assume fresh Courage, if called upon farther, to maintain
the Faith of the Gospel, the uniform Worship of God, the Government both in
Laws and Penalties justly fixed and executed against Recusancy, which will
certainly advance the order, peace and welfare of our whole Society.

My prayers and endeavors are intent upon these things, and so long as I
continue steadfast in those Designs and Attempts, I hope You will not account me
unworthy to profess my self, as the Churches, so

Your Lordships most obedient Son, and Humble Servant, W. STARKEY.

Four PROPOSITIONS offered to Consideration.
I. The Laws of our English Government, that command every Believing Subjects
Uniformity in the public exercise of Religion, are established according to
the Law of Nature, and Rules of the Gospel. II. The wilful Omission, or
Recusancy, of any Baptized Subjects Conformity to such Laws, is an open Sin,
and a dangerous Disobedience. III. The threatening and determining of
Punishments, to be inflicted upon wilful Transgressors of such Laws, are
according to the dictates of Human Reason, and the constant practice of the
Church of God. IV. The inflicting of Punishments, as determined, is just and
necessary for the safety and welfare of our Nation.
Proposition I.
Chap. I. Governors are to be appointed over every Believing Society, by the
Laws of Nature and Rules of the Gospel, and our Governors are so appointed
especially.
Section, I. What is conceived must be meant by the Law of Nature. Section, II.
What we are to understand by the Rules of the Gospel. Section, III. By both
these, Governors are to be appointed over every Believing Society. Section,
IV. Our Governors are thus appointed over as especially.
A Serious Apology FOR THE LAWS Established in the Exercise of RELIGION.
SECT. I.
1. GOD Almighty, who of his infinite wisdom, in decent and comely sort has
sweetly ordered and disposed all his works in number, measure, and weight, has
given to every of them a principle, form and measure of working to moderate and
limit their force and power, fit, suitable and correspondent to their designed
end to some Canon, Rule, or Law; A Law which they cannot pass naturally, but
moving by that Law according to their several conditions they may come to that
acquiescency and content, that may render them happy according to their several
capacities.

If they be Inanimate Creatures, that move unwittingly, and yet constantly, as
the Heavens and Elements. The Sun knows its rising, and the Moon its going
down: The Stars keep their courses, the Orbs their Rotations, according to
Gods Ordinance or Decree they all move, as the Divine wisdom orders them.

If they be Animate Creatures, that have, though weak, yet some understanding,
they move from the most perfect principle they have, to seek their content and
satisfaction; To gratify their senses is their utmost aim.

And if they be voluntary Agents, that clearly apprehend what they do, yet kept
they are as inclined in one constant tenure and course of working, according to
the establishment of Natures law. And this innate obedience to the law of
Nature, as God has ordered, is the stay, the ballast of the whole World, that
Gods Creatures cannot naturally or ordinarily do otherwise, than to show
themselves apt and inclineable to this innate Obedience.

Now MAN, that has a Rational and immortal Soul, and so a more noble
Principle, and has more excellent endowments and perfections than the rest of
visible Creatures, must aim at nobler Ends, attainable by those faculties and
abilities with which God of his goodness has extraordinarily blessed him. So,
that to gratify the sense cannot be his utmost aim, but to content the Spirit,
which is attainable by light of Reason, and her improvements, directing him to
those Actions that may conduct and lead him the readiest way to the enjoying
that Happiness which is intended.

So that Man acts most naturally when he acts most rationally; when, by that
noble principle of humane actions, his Spirit, he inquires, searches,
discerns, judges and elects fit and suitable Means directly tending to that
ultimate End, viz. his content and acquiescency, unto which he aspires and
inclines. So the Spirit of Man is the Candle of the Lord set up in his
Superior part, to direct Man's goings in the night of this World, and to guide
his feet in the way of peace. So, upon discursive Reasoning, to choose and
approve of the most plain way, and most direct means, to conduct him to his
designed end of content, must be granted to be the Nature of Man.

And the Laws of Men's Natures are the results and last conclusions of the
Spirits practical Reasoning. The dictates of the Intellective part prudentially
limiting, directing and ordering man's Actions, as they most probably move in a
straight tendency to their ultimate End, are the Laws of Nature in Men. Now Man
is to consider himself in a double respect, privately, singly or distinct from
company, and rationally is to mind his actions for his particular peace; or
publicly, as interessed in humane Society, and to order things rationally for
its general good.

For internal, secret Actions, that tend to every single man's particular
content, a man's own Reason may be supreme Judge, and give Laws and Rules for
his direction. In such cases we allow every man the judgment of his own
Discretion. But for open and external Action in our Conversations, as relating
to Society, for regulating them every man is not a competent Judge. That Is
Natural, Quod convenit cum natura sociali and rationali. It Is natural for Man
related to a Society, to submit to the just determinations of his Governors,
whose wisdom knows to order what is best and most conducing to Public peace,
which by reason in this last Circumstance he is bound to preserve and maintain.
And yet, then also private Men move naturally in a direct tendency to their own
particular happiness, when they discharge those duties of Charity and Kindness
that preserve peace to their Neighbors, to which they are obliged; and they by
it create a content and delight in their own Spirits which naturally must be
satisfied.

They err dangerously that think, and say, That because they have a Law from
their Reason, within their selves, for their own private and secret Opinions,
that their own Reason may give directions for public Actions that concern
their Neighbors.

The Laws therefore of Man's nature, that direct men's external Actions to
promote the peace and welfare of Humane society, are not Men's private
particular Judgments, but Governors sober and deliberate determinations.

For if every Man's particular Judgment were his natural Law in Public
Concerns, what could be expected, but from different and contrary Judgments,
there would be different and contrary Affections and Actions, a renting into
Divisions and Dissensions, and an irreparable breach there would be of peace,
which is the main end of Government and Society.

So that if Subjects will move naturally and rationally in a settled Society,
they are to account the just and sober Constitutions of their wise Governors
to be the Laws of their Natures to direct them for Peace, to which they are
bound naturally to conform. Just Constitutions, I say. For neither power,
greatness nor multitude, countenancing or maintaining disordered Actions, can
make them natural to men, but only their consonancy to Reason, and tendency to
a good End. And so it is not, what has been done, or what is generally done
through sense, passion or custom; but, what ought, may and has been done upon
sober, deliberate Reason, is to be accounted natural to man.

And, if we consider, we must acknowledge that very often prejudice, education,
passion, custom and interest, has perverted the Reason of Governors, but
these things ought not to be thrown as a reproach upon Humane Nature. He says
true that says, Honey is sweet, though sick men think it not so. It is not to
be reputed the Nature of men, but corruption of Nature, when numbers of men
choose or determine any thing impious or unjust. It is not Humane Reason, but
the depravation of it that dictates and concludes practically of any thing that
is filthy or dishonest. For they act not rationally that erect not proper
means, nor humanely that fix not in a right end, that is, the public good of
the Community in which they are interessed and concerned.

From our paper Hectors and whifflers for Humane Reason, although I hear much
of the noise, I can see very little of the thing in them; For not aiming at the
end of Society they cease to be humane, and not choosing the Means and Rules to
the End, which is the right ordering of public Actions, they cease to be
rational and prudential.

So the dictates and conclusions of the sober discursive Reason of Governors,
deliberately directing and choosing fit means to compass the designed End of
Societies peace and full content, are to be concluded the Laws of Men's Nature
in relation to their Societies, by Governors to be established, and by
Subjects naturally to be submitted unto.

And thus also we must determine, if we will considerately be directed by the
Rules of the Gospel.

SECT. II.
2. GOD, who made Man, of his free Grace, the perfectest of all visible
Creatures, and capable of greater Happiness, has given him greater endowment
and ability by which that Happiness might be attainable. And therefore has
ordered and placed the Intellective faculty, as the Sun, in the heavenly part
of that Microcosme, by whose clear dictates, as so many radiant emanations of
light, Man may walk safely and guide himself. But, by the unlucky interposition
of Earthly delight, Sense, Passion or Custom, this glorious Light of Heaven,
from time to time, has suffered Eclipses; and Men too frequently, like Beasts
in a Wilderness, have wandered out of the Way, and have found no full content to
rest in.

But evident it is, Our Gracious God, who knew not to take off utterly his
Loving kindness from man, nor suffered his Care of him to fail, out of a tender
regard to his safety, has, at sundry times and in diverse manners, given Men
the light of his Word, and has openly from time to time declared, That he
would have Man come to the knowledge of Truth and be saved. And therefore he,
who out of his great love, spoke to our Fathers by his Prophets, has in these
last days spoken to us by his Son, whom he sent from his bosom to reveal this
good Will of his, to transform Mankind by renewing the Spirits of their minds,
while they approved the good and acceptable Will of God; and this is rightly
called the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

So, the Will of God in this last dispensation, revealed and published by
Christ and his Apostles, is that which we understand by the Gospel; and this is
no more than the good News of a possible Happiness for Man, and the Rules to be
observed by which that Happiness is attainable.

Now this, I humbly conceive, is the best and most warrantable Notion we can
have of the Gospel, That it is a form of Government which Christ has left to
the World, for those that would be of his Church and People, That by agreement
of submission to those Rules prescribed, a Company of faithful Professors might
perfectly join themselves together into a comfortable Society and Communion.

For Man is (...), a Creature given to Society, fitted by nature, and by his
ingenious disposition is inclined to it. Now every Company or Society which is
necessary for the well-being of Man, must, for that end, have a frame of
Polity, a model of Government from just Laws, deliberately agreed upon, and
wisely constituted and set over it. And these things which are in every wise
Government, are eminently conspicuous in the Gospel, which is undoubtedly the
best frame of Government in the World.

So were those Inspired Authors persuaded, that wrote the Canonical Epistles to
the several Churches after Christ's Ascension, and it is clearly apparent in that
profound Epistle written to the Hebrews at Jerusalem. For at that time when
that Epistle was written, there were two famous Governments that stood in
Competition for precedence in that place: The Old Law, or Jewish Polity,
delivered by Moses to the Israelites; and the New Law, which is the Gospel
given by Christ unto Believers. And our Holy Author in that Epistle, makes it
his business to prove, That the Gospel delivered by Christ was justly to be
preferred before the Law, delivered by Moses; and that, as Christ, so did his
Gospel in all things deserve the pre-eminence.

The Church then is a Society of the Faithful, and the Gospel is to be looked
upon as the model of Government which Christ left his Church. Every Believer
then must not only look on the Privileges and Mercies, promised and exhibited
in the Gospel, as the ground of his confidence; but on the Laws enjoined in the
Gospel, as just and wise Rules, directive of his obedience. And we cannot but
observe, that the Promises of the Gospel are not absolute but conditional, upon
our Faith and Obedience to the Rules prescribed, if we love him and keep his
Commandments. Which, till we do heed and observe, we will be too favorable to
the spawn of the Gnostics, those Libertines that multiply and thrive in the
midst of us, who looking on the Gospel as a Promise of Merey, and not as a Rule
of Duty, turn the Grace of God into wantonness, and continue in sin securcly,
because Grace abounds, which God forbid. When Christ is the Author of eternal
Salvation to all them that obey the Gospel, Heb. 5.9. And they that walk
according to this Rule, they may look for that mercy and peace which is
promised to the Israel of God. Gal. 6.

So the Will of God under this last dispensation manifested and published by
Christ and his Apostles, is, that which we understand by the Gospel.

Now of things thus manifested some are supernatural, great mysteries of
Godliness, that Angels desred to peep into, those perspicacious intelligences
were glad to behold; Things the Wise men of this World did not know, flesh and
blood could not discover, but contrived they were by the manifold wisdom of
God, and published of his infinite goodness by his Son, who has kept nothing
secret of the Counsel of his Will, but has declared what is necessary for us
and our Salvation. And unto these Objects, Supernatural, we are to make our
application by Faith and Hope. And from the Objects, I suppose, our applying
our selves by believing and relying on them, are called and accounted
supernatural also. Although certainly, we have reason enough to assent to these
things as true, and rely on them, and rejoice in them as good, which our
gracious God, who is truth and cannot lie, of infallible veracity has clearly
manifested by his Son, and his immense goodness inclined him, to reveal by him
what he saw was necessary for our Salvation, and we are to apply our selves in
reason to them accordingly.

But some things are Natural, such as by disquisition of Reason may be
discerned and concluded; as, That God, the first infinite Being, is a Spirit,
that he is but One, and to be worshipped, etc. That our Neighbor is to be
loved, edified, comforted, and what we would that others, etc. And Christ came
not to destroy this Law, but to fulfill it.

These Rules, Natural and Rational, are afresh established by Christ in his
last dispensation, and by a new publication revived for Morality, and men's
comfortable Conversations. These are reasonably called the Rules of the Gospel.

Now the Gospel, as well as our Treatise, respects not only single persons but
Societies, and several directions are given by Christ and his Apostles, for
ordering men's Conversations in Societies for public good.

To show that Governors by these Rules must be appointed over Societies, is
the next considerable.

SECT. III.
3. NO sooner could Mankind multiply unto that number that might admit of
Society or Communion, but had they continued in a state of Innocence,
Superiority and Inferiority, Dominion and Subjection would have been found
amongst them.

Adam, the first Father of all Mankind, from priority of Nature and Existence,
from power, wisdom and experience that was eminently in him, from the
protection his Posterity had from him, and their dependence upon him, had been
absolute Monarch, Ruler and Judge over all that descended from him. And with
this Authority of Rule Cain was invested, when Abels desires were to be toward
him, and Cain was to Rule over him. And when in every Family there is a Guide,
one Father, one Master to be honored and obeyed. That in many Families united
in Society there should be one supreme Moderator to Rule, is natural and
necessary.

And that cannot be unlawful among Men on Earth, which God has revealed to be
among the Angels in Heaven, where there are Thrones, Principalities, Powers and
Dominions. The highest in the Order ruling subordinately under God, without
Tyrannical insulting, and the lowest Subject, without murmuring or opposing.
Regere and Regi necessarium est, To Govern and be Governed is necessary and
natural. Neither beauty nor being of this Glorious Universe could subsist or
continue without Order, unless some part did Rule and some Obey, unless one
were Chief to Command others that belong to it.

Consider that the God of Nature has thus ordered every thing. In our Bodies,
One head over the members; In our Souls, One understanding over the other
faculties. In the visible Heavens, One Sun in the Firmament over all the Stars.
Over the whole systeme of Creatures, Heaven and Earth, visible and invisible,
One GOD rules over all.

And if no Superiority were settled over a Company associated by Heirship or
Descent, of necessity there must be Rulers elected and Judges appointed to
determine Controversies, and preserve Peace, without which the happiness and
welfare of the Society could never be promoted. For if every man's Opinion or
Will were suffered arbitrarily to be his Law, when every man from the pride of
his heart, and ambition of Precedence, is inclined pertinaciously to adhere,
and unyieldingly to maintain his misled Persuasion, and is prone by all means
to bring others to submit unto him. If none were appointed (whose wisdom were
not to be doubted, nor goodness nor justice suspected, nor Authority to be
opposed or gainsayed) by whose determination, judgment and order, the People
were to abide by, what could follow from Contrariety of Persuasions but
divisions, what could succeed but a dissolution of that Peace and Unity which
is the sure wall of defense, to support and maintain the whole superstructure
of additional Comforts, which are necessary for the welfare of the whole
Society, what can be expected but rending into several Parties and Factions,
and there must unluckily succeed a disorderly Chaos and confusion, and every
evil work.

Rulers then must of necessity be appointed, to prevent Controversy and settle
Peace.

And as Judges and Rulers must be appointed over every Society for Peace sake,
so must such also be appointed for Righteousness sake.

Distributive Justice is the glory, exaltation, the stay, the preservation of
any Nation.

Now distributive Justice is, to render to every man according to the merit of
his Work; that he that does well might have encouragement by due Reward, and he
that does ill might be discouraged by proportionable Punishments: That there be
a right Sentence, and care of a due Execution.

Now if no third Person, or Order of men unconcerned, were agreed upon and
constituted as supreme Judges to determine the merit and quality of Private
men's Actions, and the measure of Rewards and Punishments that did in equity
belong to them; We see how every man for himself, if he has done well, is
ready to overvalue his Merit, and extend the measure of Reward to himself
beyond a due proportion; and if he has done ill, to extenuate if not excuse
his own Irregularity, and to mitigate if not exempt his Punishment. And for his
Neighbor, every man is ready to extenuate his Merit and lessen his Reward, to
heighten his Crime and aggravate his Punishment. So it is very improbable,
either for himself or others, that according to distributive Justice men should
pass a right Sentence or due Execution.

This being clear to every man's Reason, That a parity is not to be allowed, but
Rulers and Judges must be appointed over every Society, as well to preserve
Peace as to maintain Righteousness.

And to the conviction of this Truth by their practice, all Nations that have
associated, have subscribed and have declared their Assent to the convenience
and necessity of it, by the management of their Concerns: And, Generalis
consuetudo declarat institutum Naturae; For never any City or People,
associated, but constituted their Governors, and some as Supreme; nor sent
abroad an Army but appointed their General. The thriving Aristocracy of the
Romans were never in any notable straight, but Trepidi ad Dictatorem
confugiunt, as their chief Remedy and Security. And never was there any
tumultuous Rabble of seditious Persons, united upon wicked designs, that could
in reason suppose they could subsist in carrying on their wicked undertakings,
in acting for a lawless Liberty or Licentiousness, but they always appointed a
Captain or Leader, to whose Command and Conduct they did always submit, when
they had made Choice of him to be Supreme in any Enterprise that they desired
to be successful; and owned him to be so.

To Conclude this point then, let it stand as unquestionable, That every man
that loves his Life, desires it may be Comfortable, and seeks his preservation
and welfare. And a Comfortable life to prevent evil and promote good, is to be
maintained by Society, which cannot be compassed by singularity or separation.
Neither could I ever read or hear, that ever any Society did in reason think or
conclude to subsist and pass a quiet and comfortable Life, without the
appointment of Governors among them.

Thus by light of Reason and her Dictates, by Nature and her Laws, it is
manifest that the appointing of Governors over every Society is both necessary
and convenient, and this will be more fully cleared and illustrated, when we
consider it is approved by the Revealed Will of God.

Moses was a King over Israel, and a Judge deputed by God, by whom Kings did
reign, and Princes did decree justice. And where no Governors were there the
People did fall into confusion, as Israel did at that time when they had no
King, but every man did what was right in his own eyes. And in the last
dispensation, Caesar's Authority was owned by Christ, and Tribute paid to him.
And so Pontius Pilate, Power was given him from above. They might abuse their
Power, but their Authority was of God. And in St. Paul's time, Magistracy was
Gods Ordinance, Powers were appointed of God, Rulers were Ministers of God set
over the People for good. Prayers were to be made unto God for them, and
account was to be given unto God by them. And Humane Ordinances were to be
submitted unto for the Lords sake. And this yet more evident from the Spirit of
Christ, which was to be with his Church to the end of the World, when it was
and is the declared Sentence and Faith of all particular Churches, that
Governors are appointed by God.

And now, how can we but stand amazed at the impudence of some perverse
Spirits, ungoverned, unnatural Tempers that are to be found in the midst of
this crooked generation, such as neither will Lead nor Drive, neither Command
nor Obey, but make it their business to despise Dominions, and speak evil of
Dignity. That dare speak and think, that Superiority in any man is unnatural,
hellish, Antichristian. That Rule and Government is but the unlucky issue of
Pride, Arrogance, and Ambition, assumed by Usurpation. When from the premises,
it must be concluded as Natural, and the Ordinance of God.

Certainly, it is but just and reasonable that such men should suffer the
punishments of their own Choice, and be taught to see the madness of their own
delusions, by abjuring the Realm, and banished from partaking the Privileges
of a well-governed Society. Sure a City is not so fit for such Persons as a
Prison or a Wilderness, who have espoused such wild unnatural principles, that
are not owned by the Beasts that perish.

And it is yet more strange, that any such Tempers should be found in our
Nation, where it is most apparent that our Governors are appointed and
approved by God especially.

SECT. IV. Our Governors appointed and allowed by God especially.
4. A Midst our Governors we have one Supreme, Chief and Head over all. And
this Supremacy and Headship rightly belongs to him by his legitimate Heirship
and succession, being descended from a long series of Royal Ancestors, that had
this Power successively committed unto them: Minori discrimine Princeps sumitur
quam queritur. And when we seriously consider the Conspiracies, Tumults,
Factions, Divisions, experimentally, that attend upon our Election, we have
reason to think him most likely to be a Blessing that comes in Peace to be set
over us by a rightful Succession.

But if any will wilfully still oppose, that likes Election better than
Succession, let such remember, There was a time when all the Tribes met (and
every Tacit Consent was then included) to choose Him, and to make our David,
King. That he was not more Eminently born, than made Chief Ruler among us: And,
that by Election as well as Succession, Supremacy does justly belong unto him.
And Chosen HE was, prudently, freely, and by universal Consent.

But other Governors we have, Inferior and Subordinate, appointed and allowed
of by Him, which (because the Church is in the Kingdom) must be of two sorts,
Ecclesiastical and Civil, that the People may live quietly, in godliness and
honesty.

The Chief of both sorts of these subordinate Governors, He that is Supreme
convenes to his assistance, deliberately to consult, and advise, and determine,
both in making Laws and Execution. And by this Determination and Concurrence of
our Governors, no Person can justly fear to suffer by a precipitate Rage or
Tumult of a Popular Fury, or the unreasonable Impositions of an arbitrary
Tyranny. So if soberly it be considered, If any Governors can be said in all
the World, certainly ours of England must be acknowledged to be set over us,
and appointed by God. And, were the Learned Hugo Grotius that Master of Reason
alive, he would conclude the Government of England, both in Church and State,
the best in all the World.

And if any Governors under Heaven can be said, to be allowed and approved of
by God over any Society, ours or England must in reason be concluded to be so
undoubtedly; not only from their reasonable Constitution, which is most
convenient, but from that extraordinary care and love that God has declared
toward them from their Miraculous Restitution, which, if we consider, cannot
be said to be done by the power of Man, but by the overruling Spirit of God.

Gods love and liking of Persons and Nations, is more seen by deliverance of
them, than by their continued preservation. He was more eminently known to be
Isreal's God, by bringing them out of Egypts Bondage, and the Babylonish
Captivity, than by bringing them into the Land of Canaan. The turning again the
Captivity of Zion, must force the Heathen to say, The Lord has done great
things for them, and taken great care of them.

And for us, that have felt the misery of Old, and seen of late the Deliverance
and Restitution of our Zion, the Heathen would rise up in Judgment against us,
if we should not say, It was the Lords doing. It is his mind and purpose,
declared by this Miraculous Restitution, That this People of England, should be
led like Sheep by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

Thus Governors are appointed over every Society, and ours of England over us
especially, by the dictates of Reason, and appointment of God.

CHAP. II. That Governors thus appointed, are to ai^ and contrive for the good
of the Society, and deliberately to determine and publish Laws. And Subjects
are obliged to submit to those Laws accordingly.
Section, I. Governors are to contrive for the Public good and welfare.
Section, II. To promote Public good they must take care to establish Laws.
Section, III. Laws must have their Rectitude, and oblige to what is Just.
Section, IV. Deliberation is requisite before determination of Laws. Section,
V. After Deliberation, there must be a Publication. Section, VI. To Governors
Laws thus Established, Subjects ought to submit with willingness, and Ours of
England ought to submit especially.
SECT. I.
1. GOD, in whom we live, move, and have our being, has so sweetly and wisely
disposed of this Systeme of Creatures to his own Glory, that every Creature
has a natural inclination and propensity to the preservation and welfare of
its Fellow Creatures; and out of that love and propensity they freely
communicate, according to their ability, what is good and beneficial. And this
Communicative Love is diffused as an active principle to cement, compact and
uphold every part of this admirable Structure in that glorious frame and order
in which now it stands, so as every Creature seems to loose of its own nature,
when it cease to incline to this Natural operation. For who so blind but must
perceive, that amidst Inanimate Creatures, freely and cheerfully, the Sun
imparts its light, the Heavens their kindly influence, the Clouds their
refreshing Rain, the Fire its warmth, the Earth its increase. In Sensitive
Creatures, Birds and Beasts are gracious and helpful to their fellow Creatures
of the same species, and join in Company and Bodies to that end, and call their
Fellows to the same common food, and affright them from open snare and danger.

But this inclination in the Creatures, receives the measure and limits of its
activity according to the different principles, faculties and endowments they
have to operate withal: So every Creature, the more perfect it is, and the more
it has of Gods likeness, the more it discovers this propensity of activity and
readiness, to communicate what is comfortable and suitable to the nature of its
Fellow Creatures.

Man therefore, that has most of Gods likeness has the greatest propensity to
this goodness, and is naturally addicted to show it, by communicating of what
is most beneficial to them most willingly, who are like God and himself, and
are in greatest Capacity to receive, and disposed to make the best improvements
of this Communication.

Now among Men it is to be supposed, That Governors are, or should be most
like God, who fills the Earth with his goodness, he opens his hand, and fills
all things living with plenteousness. As Gods Deputies, they ought to be most
ready and active, from an heavenly providence, to impart what is beneficial to
them that are under them. They are not set up aloft like liveless, dead Idols,
for men to gaze on, to admire and Idolize, and yet continue useless, neither
see nor hear, nor regard nor contrive for the good and comfort of others. But,
as living Images, of that benificent God whom they represent, out of a gracious
providence they are to be contriving, directing and acting for the good of them
under them: praesunt ut prosint, above and over others to benefit others, not
minding their private advantage, but are elevated to have the more Heavenly
influence for the public good of the Community over which they are placed, Non
Dominandi cupiditate imperant, sed efficio consulendi, Their office, like
Shepherds, is not barely to fleece, but to feed the Flock; Patres patriae, not
only to defend and maintain the People, but are to direct and order them.
Ministers of God for good, Romans 13.4. For complete good, being to watch over
their Souls for good, while they carefully endeavor that the People under them
may lead contented lives, full of all peace, in all godliness and honesty.

If any such be known, who watch for their own private gain more than public
good, let such modestly be desired, either to lay down their Honor, or take up
their Office. For its evident by Reason and Scripture, That it is every good
Rulers duty, not only to hinder the Evil, but to promote the Public welfare of
the Society over which he is placed.

SECT. II. To promote Public good Governors must take care to establish Laws.
OF necessity there must be Laws constituted about every Company of Man that
are knit into one Body; for if not restrained and limited, many Persons that
have more Sense than Reason, would wildly break out into exorbitant excursions,
and mislead others, extravagantly, into dangerous Irregularities. A City had
better be without Walls than Laws, its safety depends more upon the latter than
the former. For without Laws Men would be like Beasts, the strongest would
devour the weakest, and savagely tear and devour one another without control.
The Sword would be the Rule of Justice, and the strongest Arm would have the
best Cause, Men would regard Power more than Right. So that Law in a Society is
like a Soul in a Body, without which the Body is corrupted and dissolved
immediately.

And as Laws must be of necessity to uphold the being, so must they be to
preserve the welfare of any Society: For they afford direction and guidance for
humane actions; And as good take the Sun out of the Firmament as Laws out of a
Nation, without which, as in a perpetual Night, men would stumble (if not fall)
and dash continually one upon another, and offensively. Another has it, Laws
are as Eyes to the Commonwealth, that give beauty to the Face, and direction to
the whole Body. But to set forth the usefulness of Laws, sure I cannot do it
better than to compare them to Nerves and Sinews, ligaments of the Body
politic, not only to compact and knit the several Joints into one Body, but to
convey life and spirits unto every part as is convenient, that they may all
agree in the same regular motion as they are adapted, and every part may move
for the safety and welfare of the whole. Neither being nor welfare of a Society
can be preserved without Laws. But, Who are to make and appoint Laws? There Is
the Question.

He that ordered Kings to Reign, has ordained Princes to decree Justice. The
first duty and work in Magistrates is to ordain and constitute Laws. This is
the Rulers Province. It was rightly determined by the Schoolmen, Non cujuslibet
Ratio facere potuit Legem: Every man is not wise enough to make a Law. And if
he had a Head to contrive, yet he has no Authority to establish. And there is
no reason to think, That any public Law should be of a Private man's
constitution. For every man of the same Condition may challenge the same
Liberty: So that there being contrary Judgments and determinations, there might
be contrary Laws, and so there would follow contrary Actions, inevitable
distraction and opposition, which will not only destroy the welfare, but the
being of the Society. For private Persons to make Rules and Laws for their own
private Actions, who can hinder them.

But our gracious God has appointed Governors as his Deputies, by a wise
Providence, to direct and order the public Actions of men, for the public
good of the Society in which they are interessed; As, God, the World, and
Christ his Church; so are good Governors to Rule over their People by
constituting just Laws that promote their Happiness.

SECT. III.
LAWS must be established, and the nature of a Law is, that it does oblige ad
id quod rectum. It is the first thing required to the Constitution of a Law by
the Schoolmen, Rectitudo, Right. A tendency to the End: A Law, a Canon, a Rule,
is a notified boundary to confine and limit men's Actions, that they may not be
loose and extravagant, but they may be directed in a straight Line or tendency
to the prize aimed at, viz. The Comfort and Content of the Society to which
such Laws are composed and published.

The word (...), is often used by St. Paul in his Epistle to the Grecian
Churches, and often he alludes to their Agonistical concertations in their
Istmian Games, especially that of Running: And beside, the Barriers from whence
the Coursers started or Ieaped, and the Prize or Crown to which they tended,
they had their (...), a white Line which marked out the Path, bounded the Race;
and whatever the heat or activity of the Racers, ran they never so swiftly or
vigorously, if they transgressed or ran over the Line, this was not (...), 2 Timothy 1.5. to strive Legally; and consequentially they lost the prize.

A Christians Conversation amidst Believers is a Race from the first exertion
of Reason, whereby he leaps into Society: He stretches forth, and aims at an
incorruptible Crown that God holds forth unto him. Whatever the Christians heat
or agility is, if he will so run as he may obtain, he must observe that (...),
that Rule that is given him, and not transgress those limits that are
prescribed him. All aberration, all extravagancy must be declined, he must keep
close exactly to the line and limits prescribed, that he may move in a direct
tendency to the End proposed.

Now Rulers and Governors are to intend the public good and welfare of the
Society. To compass this they Establish Laws, and these Laws are directive
Rules of humane Actions, tending ad bonum publicum. They are to think and
consider, and if Reason rightly deliberates, she will conclude and determine
only of such things as are true, honest, just, pure, lovely, of good report, if
there be any virtue, if there be any praise, they will think and determine only
of such things. Injust then and dishonest Commands cannot be called rightly
Laws, because they tend to the hurt, not the good of the Public. For Rulers to
Command without control, and to set no bounds to their lawless Will, and
inconsiderately to enjoin what is unjust, illegal, and what tends not to good,
is the Vice of Superiority and Power, not the virtue of Ruling by a Law. For
nothing can be called a Law but must oblige to what is Just, and tend to a good
End. The End must be Peace, the Means must be Righteousness; for the effect of
Righteousness is Peace: And, where Glory dwells in a Land, Mercy and Truth meet
together, Righteousness and Peace kiss each other. And as such Commands cannot
be called Laws, if injust, so, when imposed, they are not binding nor obliging.
It was not more stout and valiant than reareasonable and honest, that pious
Apology made by the Father for the poor persecuted Christians to the Emperor,
who commanded them irreligiously to sacrifice to Idols, Da veniam Imperator,
etc. major est, etc. Give pardon, Oh Emperor, we cannot obey thy Commands in
this thing; for he that is greater than thou art, Commands the contrary. And
when Commands are contrary from two Powers, supreme and subordinate, greater
and lesser, it is beyond dispute which we ought to obey. To obey the
Subordinate powers Commands, when the Supreme forbids, is downright Rebellion;
but to obey the Supreme powers Commands, although the Subordinate power
Commands the contrary, is honest and reasonable Obedience. And the Supreme,
holy God, who Commands only what is Just, is to be obeyed before the Emperor,
when he is Subordinate, when he commands things injust and unwarrantable.
Therefore with the Three Children, We are not careful to answer the King in
this matter. It Is better to obey God than Man. This then we conclude, That Laws
of Rulers must be Just, and tend to a good End.

Some Laws are Natural of things or actions Natural; some Positive, of things
or actions Indifferent. Those that are Natural have, Intrinsecam vim
obligatoriam, from their Equity they have an obliging virtue, if no public
position or Constitution. These are of things or actions of their own nature
either good or bad, and would be followed or avoided by Reasonable Man, and
would be approved or disallowed of a Just God, if he had neither commanded nor
forbidden them.

Now, besides the Ten Words God gave to Jacob, there were Statutes and
Ordinances that God gave to Israel, when particularly he undertook the
Government of them, some Voluntary Laws, some Ceremonial, some Judicial things
enjoined, that were of their own nature neither good nor bad. But, Praecipiendo
debita, vetando Deus illicita fecit, Gods Authority being uncontrollable, and
his Wisdom unquestionable, they were to be followed or avoided as most
convenient for that People in that present condition. What was intrinsecally
lawful was universally binding, Christ came not to destroy that Law, but to
fulfill it; Heaven and Earth may pass away, but not one tittle of that Law was
not to pass away, but ought to be fulfilled. But what was positive, particular
and voluntary, were Changable, and these had their period, some of them at
Christ's Passion, more of them at the dissolution of the Nation.

Now, as it was with God and his Israel, so is it with godly Rulers and their
People. There are certain Rules and Statutes rationally agreed upon and
published, as the most Just and best directions, conducing most to the good of
the Community where divulged; among which some are Natural, that are of their
own nature intrinsecally good, and have an obliging nature, and would be
binding as Laws of God, if no position, if no Constitution from Man, such as
necessarily indispensible, neither are they to be abrogated or nulled by man,
that cannot be made unjust by God himself. But, other Laws among them are
positive and voluntary, which have their position from Man only, and so may be
called Humane Ordinances, Laws of Convenience, such Constitutions as are
established upon deliberation as most convenient, pro hic and nunc, in the
Judgment of Grave and sober Persons, chosen and appointed for determination of
such things, for the peace and good of the Community wherein they live: And,
Sufficit Ratio Vniversalis, we are to abide by it. That a thing or action
suitable, and in Reason tending to the peace and good of the Society, should be
determined, and when determined should be obliging. To Conclude then this
particular, Lex est ordinatio Rationis ad bonum publicum ab eo, qui curam habet
Communitatis promulgata: When so it is, that a Law is a right order and
appointment of Reason for Public good, published from him that has the care
of the Society. And, fith some Laws are natural, immutable, indispensable, and
are fixed and determined eternally before any Constitution of Governors; but
others are voluntary, temporary, mutable, that have their Constitution and
Establishment from. Governors determination upon convenience. These latter
determinations of indifferent things are properly called Laws of Governors.
Laws and Determinations of Natural things, the Governors do but revive and
invigorate them; but the Laws and Determinations of Indifferent things, the
Governor animates them, gives them being and establishes them. So these
positive Laws, Constitutions of Indifferent things, to prevent division and
settle peace, these are properly the Laws of Governors; and it is natural and
necessary for them, to take care of such Determinations in their respective
Societies; They are Reasonable and Just because of things not unlawful: They
are necessary because they tend to Peace.

Thus it is clear, to any sober Reason, That Governors ought to determine and
establish Laws, for the good of the Society in which concerned.

SECT. IV.
4. DEliberation is requisite to be previous before the Determination of such
Laws: For, when a Law is the ultimate dictate or conclusion of the Governors
practical Reasoning, this cannot be supposed without previous discurse, without
considering and perpending seriously the legality or illegality, the
convenience or inconvenience of the Action, and so by public Authority it is
decreed to be done, or forborne, accordingly.

Imperious Commands of the Greatest persons, that are imposed suddenly or
precipitately, lose much of their Authority and influence upon the Subject,
being entertained but faintly, when liable to be suspected as the issue of
pride, ambition, fancy, or passion: But when the morality and convenience of
the Action commanded or forbidden is fully debated and weighed, before decreed,
all prejudice is quite abandoned, when it clearly appears the Decree is the
result of a sound Judgment, and the product of a sober Reasoning. Though many
Laws of Governors, fixing and constituting, are called Voluntary Laws, yet
they are not rashly, but discursively established: For Governors are Gods
Deputies, and like him determine Rules, (...), by the Counsel of his Will.
Deliberandum est diu quod Statuendum est semel. Determination of things are not
warrantably done but in every Counsel, as in the first, (...), much debate and
disquisition being made, the Decree was fixed accordingly.

To Command therefore, arbitrarily any thing or action out of a listful
appetite, rashly or unadvisedly, in the heat of a Passion, is an Impulse
sensual, found in Beasts, and cannot be proper to men. For when the Sun of
Reason goes down in the night of Passion, Men, like Beasts, run headlong into
Pitfalls, Snares and Gins, and give, too hastily, place to the Destroyer. That
cannot be a binding Rule to Rational Creatures, and entertained as a Law, that
comes without Deliberation. Nebuchadnezar's Commands by Sheriffs, Dan. 3. for
all People to fall down and worship the Image of Gold, was not a Law though it
had Publication; for it wanted two things required to constitute a Command a
Law: 1. It wanted Rectitude, it was not Just. 2. It wanted Deliberation. But
when Consideration is antecedaneous to the Decrees of Rulers, it gives the
Subject great satisfaction, and inclines them cheerfully to submit and conform
to such Rules established, if they think soberly, and esteem the Ruler wiser
than themselves. And what is the Justice of our Laws established, in this
required particular? what is the reasonableness of our Submission is clearly
apparent among us, when there is nothing enacted or established among us, but
upon long discussion and serious deliberation, and that by sober and wise
Persons, suffecti, substituted and deputed by us beyond all question and
exception. If Laws established by such Persons be not received thankfully, and
be not submitted unto heartily, the perverse Transgressor sins without excuse.

It is certainly evident in the Constitution of our Laws, what is required in
every good Law, That they are determined upon Deliberation.

SECT. V.
5. LAWS, when deliberately determined by Rulers, are to be published to the
Society, that they may oblige the Subject, ad eorum qui Legi subjiciuntur
notitiam deduci oportet, The. Aquinas. They that are to be brought to the
subjection of the Law, are to be brought to the knowledge of the Law.

Natural Laws there be, and necessary it is they should be published; for,
although such Laws are written in men's hearts, yet by evil Custom, Compliance,
Passion and prevalency of Temptations, and men sensually yielding to them,
these Laws are blurred and almost obliterated, and necessary it is, that by
repeated impercussions, there should be endeavored a new impression by a new
impunction.

Necessary it is that Rulers, by a new inculcating, should give a fresh beauty,
vigor and obligation to them, and by annexing a weight of Punishments and a
spring of Reward, should set Subjects in a constant motion to observe and keep
them; for, if concealed in silence, they would be passed by Carelessly, and that
men may be awakened to keep them, and observe them diligently, they must be
published.

That being warrantable and commendable to be done by Rulers, Gods Deputies,
that was done by God and his Prophets, and by Christ and his Apostles, who in
several dispensations of those very Rules made a new publication. And for Rules
of Actions in their nature, Indifferent, no man can question but they must be
determined, to avoid Controversies and settle Peace; and when so determined, it
is but reasonable there should be an open promulgation. When by so doing, the
Subject, from the declared Judgment of his Governors who is set over him for
good, must certainly be inclined to a ready Obedience.

Transgression of Laws Natural, published, being a double Transgression, when
the Offender, Audet non tantum malum, sed malum vetitum Committere. He is
impudent that neglects and rebels, and left without excuse; for if the Laws had
been concealed they might have pleaded ignorance, but being promulged and
openly known, the Transgressor is inexcusable, and therefore his sin remains.
Let any indifferent man then be Judge, if the Refractory Disobedience of some
unperswasible Tempers amidst us be not absolutely inexcusable, when in our Laws
nothing Injust is enjoined; nothing determined but was deliberated, nothing
established but was promulged.

Certainly, as it is the Governors, or Rulers duty, for the good of the
Society, thus to fix and establish Laws; so it is the Subjects duty, to submit
willingly to those Laws thus fixed accordingly.

SECT. VI.
6. Governors are to be submitted unto by the Subjects of that Society over
which they are Constituted; for Governors and Subjects are Relatives, Mutuo se
ponunt, etc. They come both to their Relations by the same Constitution, and
what appoints some of the Society to command and direct, appoints others in the
same Society to submit and obey; and very rarely can any Government be
instanced, but Oaths were given and Subscriptions taken, and men several ways
obliged themselves to consent and submit to their Governors, in their
Administration, and to acquiess in their Determinations and Constitutions. So
that Submission is not an outward honor and reverence to their Persons in
Offices and Dignity, but conformity to Directions of Governors, and obedience
to their lawful Commands, and just Rules delivered by them for Public good.

And as St. Paul, so St. Peter to his dispersed Hebrews, least they should be
prejudiced from a specious pretense of Liberty, and cast off all yokes of
Service, and break off all bonds of Obedience, Authoritatively commands them,
to show the honesty of their Conversation by a cheerful submission to the Just
Commands of Lawful Governors, as 1 Pet. 2.13. when he enjoins them to submit
to every Ordinance of man, for the Lords sake. Just Commands I advisedly put
in, for that is (...), what is just and reasonable, and tends directly to the
designed End that is Humane, and to such an Ordinance they are to submit for
the Lords sake.

Now Commands and Actions of Governors are of things and actions of two sorts,
either Natural or Indifferent.

Natural would be binding if no Constitution; but Rulers seeing men's averseness
and backwardness to what is apparently good, out of love and care to their
Peoples welfare put a new life, and revive even those Laws by a new
publication, to stir up the Peoples attention to them, and observance of them;
by which course their Obligation is not remitted but intended. And no Subject
but shows his perverse and rebellious Temper that dare think and say, That
those Rules are less lawful, or less binding, because a Lawful Authority has
revived them, and upon the forementioned necessity and Reasons has afresh
enjoined them.

Other Actions are of an Indifferent nature, neither good nor bad of
themselves, yet must be determined by Governors, to prevent Dissension, and
settle Peace, the ground and foundation of all Temporal blessings, that make
men's lives comfortable in any Society. And soberly let it be considered, and
the morality of the fifth Commandment, the Rulers Authority and Subjects
Obedience is plainly discovered, by his voluntary Submission to Commands and
Ordinances of this nature, and determinations of things in their own nature
indifferent. For if the matter be unlawful that is unlawful by Commands of
Superiors, then Daniel's Vetitum est is sufficient, We are not careful -- It
is better to obey God than Man. If the thing be profitable, thou servest thy
own turn, thy own Interest, rather than obeyest thy Ruler. If the thing be
intrinsecally Just, thou art obliged to do that although not enjoined it. So
the truth is, the Rulers Authority, and Subjects sincere Submission, is chiefly
seen by his Obedience to those Commands which enjoin things that are of their
own nature Indifferent. Where neither the Nature of the thing, nor the Subjects
Reason or Profit is convincing, nor any other by-Respect induces him to
Obedience. And thy submission to those things is the clearest evidence of thy
subjection to Higher Powers, which is undoubtedly according to the Law of
Nature, and Will of Christ.

And if thou do not abide according to thy former Consent to such
Determinations of thy Rulers, and submit to them, it is a plain discovery of
some prejudice and disaffection to thy Ruler, that thou think meanly of his
wisdom, or suspectest his goodness, or despisest his Authority: That thou
esteemest thy self wiser, better and Greater than he that is set over thee:
When thou dare in prejudice, wilfully oppose thy own misguided Persuasion
against the sober, well-grounded Determination of thy Governor, which was
fixed to minister to Peace. And now consider, what thou do that thou may
enjoy thy own obstinate Persuasion, thou will lose thy Peace; and certainly,
thy gratisying thy Humor will not countervail the loss of thy Peace, besides
the gauling Guilt of thy wilful Disobedience, when by the Light of Nature, as
well as by the Will of Christ, thou art obliged to submit to the Ordinance of
Man for the Lords sake; whether of the King, as supreme, etc. Thou art from thy
heart to be subject to their Determinations not only for wrath, but for
Conscience sake; for though the Law or Ordinance be Humane, yet thy obligation
is Divine.

The Law may be positive, and voluntary of things in their own nature
Indifferent, yet thy Submission must be natural to just Determinations, and
according to the Law of Nature and Rules of Christ, as certainly as there is
any Morality in the fifth Commandment, or that Peter was an Apostle and wrote
the Will of Christ, who bids us submit to every humane Ordinance for the Lords
sake.

When but two sorts of Laws, some Natural, that are predetermined, but are
enlivened and further confirmed, others Voluntary or Positive, that when not
unjust, receive their being, constituting, and ratifying, from their
promulgation by Governors. To both these Subjects are to submit, not only for
wrath, but for Conscience sake. And for us of this Nation, when God has
manifested his approbation and good-liking to our Governors and Government by
his wonderful Restoration, it were unworthy to think such Ingratitude could be
taxed, That either the Governors should be remiss in fixing Just Laws for
right Ruling, or that Reasonable Subjects should be backward in ready Obeying.

Conclude we then this Point as to our selves, That our Governors of England
being appointed for the good of the Nation, and having established and
published Laws, Our Subjects are bound to submit to those Laws accordingly.

CHAP. III. The first care of Governors should be, by Laws, to oblige their
Subjects generally, to a Public exercise of Religion.
Section,

I. The first care and main end of Governors should be, to instill and imprint
an esteem, love and care of Religion in their People. II. Governors are to
endeavor among their Subjects, to promote the outward exercise of Religion.
III. Governors are to take care, that the exercise of Religion among their
Subjects be Public and Universal.
SECT. I. The first care and main end of Governors should be, to instill and
imprint an esteem, love and care of Religion in their People.
1. FOR it being sufficiently proved, That Governors in their Offices are
chiefly to aim at, and contrive for the general good of the People under them,
that they may live peaceably and happily, and because the means nearest to that
end must be Religion, their next care (to compass this End) must be to imprint
in the minds of the People, an esteem and love of Religion, as the directest
way to their Happiness.

That naturally every man has a sense of a Deity, is beyond Controversy. He
sees and observes himself, and all things visible, to be made and upheld by an
Invisible Power, and governed and disposed by a more excellent wisdom and
discretion. From the Creation and Order of things that are made, men by natural
Reason may come to the knowledge of a Being not made and independent: That He
is a Spirit, Supreme, Infinite, Omnipotent, necessarily Eternal,
All-sufficient, and incomprehensibly transcendent in all Perfections, from the
light of Reason (if not clouded) He must be acknowledged, and being thus
acknowledged he must be worshipped. It was not only at Athens but all the World
over, That the God that Made the World ought to be worshipped; That this
Infinite Being may not be offended but pleased; and that his poor Creatures may
escape the dreadful and intolerable effects of his Anger who is Almighty, and
gain all the ineffable contentments of his Love who is All-sufficient, must be
the main design of Rational men.

Now to compass this End, certainly Religion and the worship of GOD must be the
way. And, what is Religion? It is a respectful observance of that Majesty which
is to be reverently adored; A due respect of the rational Creature to the
Supreme Being. This Respect consists in three things:

1. In high apprehensions and estimation of Gods infinite Excellencies and
Perfections. To think highly and honorably of God, is the beginning of Piety
and Religion. Aug.

2. In suitable Affections. Having rightly esteemed God as the best and
greatest of Beings, that we fear him as the Greatest, and love him as the Best,
is another part of that Respect we owe to him.

3. In a suitable signification of both. Man being created for Society, and
naturally inclining to join himself to others, and seeing in the state we are
in, we cannot comfortably hold any Communion but by a sensible signification of
our Apprehensions and Affections; That we give Attestation of these things must
needs be natural and necessary.

And these Sentiments of the necessity and benefit of Religion all People have
had from the beginning. All Nations were ever persuaded, that they should be
most Prosperous who were most Religious. No People so Barbarous, but they gave
jointly their significations of observance, and piety and respect to him they
accounted Supreme. Hence they made some testifications and acknowledgments by
Sacrifices, and other Religious Rites, to appease and make that Deity they
adored propitious and gracious. And though all Nations and People had
originally and naturally received these impressions and persuasions of the
necessity and commodiousness of Religion, yet we never read nor heard of any
Famous Governors, but they have revived and cleared these Old Impressions by
new Laws and Injunctions.

And whereas this care of implanting Religion in the minds of the People for
their good, is to be found in all Governors that improve their Reason to right
Ends in the discharge of their Offices, yet this Care ought to be chiefly and
eminently in those Governors, that, besides the light of Reason, have from the
publication of the Gospel a most clear discovery of the infinite Excellencies
and Perfections of God, and of that true Religion which ties men to God, which
teaches whom, and how we ought to worship. For if to have God Infinite appeased
to us, and pleased with us, be man's ultimate End, and this End is no otherwise
attainable than by Religion, most easily attainable by the best and truest, and
that is the Religion prescribed to us in the Gospel; certainly, that our Rulers
should command an observance of that Religion of the Gospel is very agreeable
to the end of their Constitution, and to their Profession of being Christians.

The first design of a Ruler, set over the People for their good, is to take
care for what is best; and the care of Religion is the best Care men can have
in this World. Hear, O ye Kings, understand and learn ye that are Judges of the
Earth. Men must give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's; and Caesar
himself must give unto God the things that are Gods. The Jewish Kings had the
Book of the Law delivered to them, and our Kings the Book of the Gospel, at
their Inauguration.

If we consider the effects of Religion, the sweet fruits of it in our own
private condition, or more public relation, that Blessedness which at all
times and every where does accompany her, we cannot wonder, that it should be
our own, and the Rulers care to promote and advance Religion. There is a
delight and great content that arises from all holy employments, and a
blessedness inseparable from all holy affections. Light is sown for the
righteous, and joy for them that are true of heart. Poverty of spirit entitles
to the Kingdom of Heaven, mourning to comfort, hungring and thirsting after
righteousness attended with satisfaction and fullness; the pure in heart are
nearer to the fight of God. Piety brings the best contentment, and the surest
gain; Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. It is
this, without which we cannot be fit for any Society: He cannot truly love his
Neighbor, that does not honor and love God; he cannot be faithful and honest,
he cannot be sweet and kind, and easy to others.

And now be your own Judges, you the profane and irreligious men of these
Times, whose wit (the thing you so much pretend to) shows it self in nothing
but in scoffing at Religion, and in making it a trick of State to preserve
Peace and Order. Is it not just and reasonable, that you should suffer the
results of your own Judgment, be banished out of all Society, be excluded from
the protection of a well-ordered Government; seeing you would laugh that out of
the World which your selves confess unawares to be so conducive to the
preservation of it?

SECT. II. Governors are to endeavor amongst their Subjects, to promote the
outward exercise of Religion.
THE outward exercise of Religion is natural to us, while we are conversant on
Earth: For, as it is natural to worship and serve God (who discerns the
thoughts, intentions and affections) with our Spirits; so it is Natural, to
give some external and sensible demonstrations of that inward Devotion, that,
while we Converse with men, we may give them satisfaction and evidence of our
being Religious. And, among men, the Ruler ought before all to be satisfied,
that he may with cheerfulness and pleasure administer his office, and give up
his account with joy, as having not watched for the good of his People in vain.

Now, the thoughts of the Subject are not under the Rulers cognizance; He can
judge only by the outward acts. God alone knows effects by causes; We no
otherwise know Causes than by Effects, Fire by heat, the Sun by light, and Life
by motion, Religion by exercise, and Affection by outward significations. And
we are to make these sensible Demonstrations, not only for the satisfaction of
others, but also for the glory of God; whom as we are to glorify with all the
faculties of our Souls, to know and consider his Excellencies with our
understandings, to submit to, and obey him in our Wills; so we are to worship
him with our Bodies, our hands to be lifted up to him, our Eyes to wait on him,
our Ears to hear him, and our Tongues to praise him.

The necessity of this outward exercise of Religion appears farther, from our
being made not to be alone but for Society: And no Society can be maintained
without an outward Communication. The acknowledgment of this we may by a very
easy consequence force from those Men, that profess to be so much against it;
who assemble together, and in their Assemblies use long Prayers, and prolixe
Preachings, without which exercises and visible attendances, they think they
cannot evidence themselves Religious, with satisfaction either to themselves or
others.

Were we indeed in the state of Angels, and able to communicate our thoughts by
invisible species, and by our bare volitions; then (and not till then) we might
upon the pretense of a true heart, and a good disposition of mind content our
selves and our Neighbors. In the mean time, it is natural in all things, to
give some sensible indication of our thoughts, and to signify to others, how
we are affected within: Bodies and Souls, whilst united together, must needs
have an influence upon one another; A distracted mind has a lowering brow, and a
merry heart has a cheerful countenance. By this outward exercise of Religion we
raise an esteem and love of Religion, in our selves, and in others.

1. In our selves. For we grow into a love of, and delight in that thing we
daily converse with; it becomes easy and familiar to us. Acts become Habits,
and are rooted fast by a frequent repetition. Strength is increased by use, and
love of Religion by exercise.

2. In others. For man is prone to Imitation, and hastily follows Example. We
do many things for no other reason, but because others do them.

And here we must needs be amazed at the unreasonable speeches of Quakers, and
others, who, because God is a Spirit, and the Gospel requires a worship in
spirit, will have God to disregard externals, and not to think himself
glorified by outward Services. Wild principles, mad delusions, fitted to
destroy all Government, and to make all Christian Conversation unnecessary.
For, if God accept not external actions, when agreeable to the Law, and be not
displeased with them, when disagreeable; if God himself be so unconcerned, we
have little reason to take any care in our Actions. But we are to remember,
that the Laws of the Gospel are of two sorts; some relating to the intentions
and affections, and actions spiritual and internal; these Laws tend to the
private peace of a man, and his happiness within himself. Other Laws respecting
the outward words and actions, and designing to make a man happy in Society and
Conversation, and to fit him to do things to the edification and comfort of
others, and to the honor of Christianity.

SECT. III. Governors are to take care, that the exercise of Religion among
their Subjects be Public and Universal.
1. PVblick. Only of things done in Public can the Governor take cognizance
of; and certainly, no wise Magistrate did ever make a Law concerning those
things, which he could have no knowledge of afterward, whether they were done
or no. The Worship of God (excepting times of Persecution, and such
necessities) was ever public, since there was any at all. Hence all people had
their Altars or Groves, their Mountains or Valleys, their Orbs, Tabernacles or
Temples, where they all met at set times, and their fixed Sacrifices, Prayers,
and Religious performances, wherein they all joined at their meetings. And
therefore, as this exercise of Religion must be Public, so must it be,

2. Universal. The Father naturally cares for the welfare of every Child; Gods
Providence is over all his Creatures for their good; And it is the care of his
Deputies, to provide for the welfare and happiness of all their Subjects.

Now if Religion be the only thing that can make men happy (as it is proved)
the Governor cannot compass his End (which is, to procure the happiness of his
Subjects) but by enjoining the Exercise of Religion to be Universal.

CHAP. IV. Our Governors of our Church of England have done well to enjoin
every Believing Subject, an open Profession of his Faith in his respective
Congregation.
The particulars incident to this Head are Four.

I. We are to consider and agree what FAITH is. II. That of that Faith there
ought to be Profession. III. That Profession ought to be made by every
Believer. IV. This is to be done in respective Congregations.
SECT. I.
1. OUr Governors are not only as Gods Deputies, under the Law of Nature, to
enjoin their Subjects the Care of Religion, but as Deputies of Christ under a
more perfect Law, revealed by him in this last dispensation, to enjoin their
Subjects the right Exercise of true Religion prescribed in the Gospel, which he
published to fulfill the Law of Nature, that man might come to that Happiness
for which he was created and designed. And this I understand to be the most
proper Notion of Faith, viz. The true Religion well ordered, and rightly
modified by Gospel Rules, by the right Exercise whereof we worship and serve
God acceptably; so that whatsoever is not of Faith is sin, and without Faith it
is impossible to please God.

For being Baptized into the obedience of the Gospel, of which obedience
Baptism represents our Profession, we ought to have a firm Persuasion of the
goodness and reasonableness, not only of the Duties in the Gospel prescribed,
but of our conformity to those Prescriptions, for the carrying on that true and
undefiled Religion wherewith God is well pleased.

So that Faith is the Gospel grace, that teaches us to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and to live holily, righteously and soberly in this present
world. And Believing is a comprehensive Duty, and signifies not only a tacit
assent to Evangelical Rules, as true and warrantable, as a barren act of the
Understanding; but a firm election and persuasion of these Rules as good and
comfortable, and implies a firm purposing and resolving of a total Gospel
Obedience.

I heartily pity and bewail, the differences and distances that are to be seen
among Professed Believers in this Nation; and, upon serious Consideration, I
fully persuade my self, there is nothing contributes more to the being and
continuance of our Division, than a general rashness and injudiciousness; When
men run away with some sudden partial Notions, and slight Apprehensions of
things of great necessity, and deserved esteem in the World; and do not
seriously and discursively make a right Judgment, and agree of the full sense
and meaning of them as they import.

To instance in some few particulars, which is easy for any to observe.

The Gospel, most say, they highly esteem; and yet we cannot but observe, that
most snatch and run away with it as a promise of Mercy, but never regard it as
a rule of Duty, and direction of an holy life.

The two Sacraments are Seals of the Covenant betwixt God and us; and most men
are very heedful at Receiving them, that God may seal to them Remission of
sins, and never regard that at the same time they covenant under Seal, to yield
Obedience to God.

The Blood of Christ is precious, and its shedding to be had in everlasting
remembrance; but when most men most solemnly remember it, this Consideration
contents them, That Christ's Blood was shed for our Redemption, for remission of
sins, to reconcile God to man, etc. When we should think how this
Bloodshedding was, That men might be reconciled to God, and be redeemed from
an unclean conversation, and by this sprinkling be sanctified and purged from
dead works to serve the living God, Heb. 9.13, 14.

Graces and gifts of the Spirit we justly value and admire; but is it not too
apparent men are taken up with gifts of Edification, and pass by gifts and true
grace of Sanctification; so that if a man be but ready in a Scripture phrase,
has gotten a voluble Tongue, a round expression, etc. he gets the name and
repute of a Saint immediately. But the exercise of Piety and Charity, which are
the certain evidences of true Sanctity; These things stand by neglected and
despised.

I might instance in several things that we frame the same Consideration of. If
we give God but a piece of a Duty, we think a maimed and imperfect sacrifice
will content him, and expiate and satisfy him, and excuse all our defects and
enormities; and with gross mistakes we see evidently men delude and deceive
themselves in this untoward generation.

And although in many things our mistakes of these sorts hasten our irreligious
miscarriages, yet in nothing are they more manifest than in the nature of
Faith. From all Christians that make any profession of the true Religion, we
shall hear these pretenses, That they live by Faith, walk by Faith, are
justified by Faith, are saved by Faith, etc. And yet for all this noise we hear
of these things, we can see but few that make a true judgment, or have a right
understanding of the full meaning of the real Faith in Christ, or Faith of the
Gospel.

Its undeniably true, that without believing that supernatural Truth of Christ's
Merits for our pardon and remission of sins, there can be no peace for men, but
they must die and consume in the guilt of their Transgressions. It is certainly
true, that Christ our High Priest put away sins by the sacrifice of himself:
but when Christ our designed Mediator was King and Prophet as well as Priest.
It is not barely a fruitless relying, or a lazy recumbency on Christ's Merits,
as our Priest only; but our believing his Laws and Directions he left his
Church, as a King: the observing his Counsels and Injunctions he gave as a
Prophet, is necessary to make up that Faith, which will bring us to the end of
our Hope, which is the salvation of our souls.

It Is undeniably true, that in the Gospel are given exceeding great and
precious Promises of Mercies and Salvation, upon which God has caused ^he to
hope; yet when these Promises are not absolute but conditional, upon our
conformity to those Rules of Duty that are prescribed, unless we be carried on
to the practice of those things required, that pertain to life and godliness,
we cannot be rationally concluded to have that Faith in the Gospel in us, which
will certainly bring us to that happiness which we openly design and expect.

And, upon a serious inquiry, we cannot conclude any of the Theological Graces
to be truly infused into any man, unless they discover themselves by their
operations. Love is practical, and works, where seated, a care of keeping
Commandments. Hope is purifying; He that has hope of heaven is heavenly, and
purifieth himself as God is pure: And Faith it self works by Love, and Love by
Obedience.

This then is that precious Faith we should contend for, as becomes Saints. In
this we should strive to continue in, grounded and settled, and not be moved
away from the Hope of the Gospel.

All these things are premised, that the Reader may easily conclude, what we
plainly understand by that Faith which the Ruler has religiously enjoined, and
the Subject is bound willingly to maintain, namely, a sincere and a firm
purpose of mind, of adhering and conforming to the Rules of the Gospel, by a
total Obedience.

He that Believes thus shall not be ashamed, when Faith makes him have respect
to all Evangelical Commandments.

SECT. II. Of this Faith there must be Profession.
NAturally we are to look of our selves as related to Society, so that of our
internal Piety there must be an external signification, intending not only Gods
glory by settling our private Peace, but by promoting our Neighbors good and
edification. So that as care must be had by us of Religion, so of its Exercise;
and as of Faith, so of Profession of Faith. And this is required by the Gospel
evidently, when it is enjoined, That Christ be confessed before men; that all
that by Baptism are consecrated to the obedience of the Gospel, hold fast the
Profession of their faith without wavering.

(...) is sometimes rendered Confession, sometimes Profession, in that they
agree either of them, it is frankly and openly to declare what we hold in
matters of Religion, to justify and bear witness to any Truth of the Gospel,
be they either supernatural or natural Privileges or Mercies promised, or
Services or Duties enjoined; yea, the offering the sacrifice of Praise to God
continually, that is, the fruit of our Lips, is explained by an Holy Author to
be (...), Heb. 13.15. a giving thanks, or confessing to his Name.

Profession of Faith we understand to be, a voluntary and open declaring
(amidst the Society in which incorporated) of our free and full consent in
believing the Gospel, not only the Mercies promised, but Duties enjoined, and
that we assent to them all, not only as true and infallible, but also as good
and comfortable; and a declaring of our desires, study and care to observe them
accordingly.

An express signifying of Profession of Faith, is, a declaring of our
resolution of Evangelical Obedience, our assenting and adhering to the right
Exercise of true Religion as prescribed in the Gospel.

The work of Faith and Religion is not wholly to be done within, but many
externals are necessary and essential, for constituting a visible Church, she
is to be a light upon an Hill.

Every Believer is to shine as lights in the World, in the midst of a crooked
and perverse generation, and that can only discern Externals. Therefore the
Believers outward carriage and deportment, and converse must be so ordered like
lights, to the inlightning and warming the blind and benumbed World.

Outwardly we are to manage our selves, as we may direct, strengthen, and
comfort our Neighbor, Poverty of spirit, hungring and thirsting after
Righteousness, Purity of heart, etc. These are Duties of the first rank, and
primarily to be taken care of, to present our selves so as to be approved by
our God. These ought ye to have done, and not to have left the other undone.

For there be many external Duties necessary for Communion, amidst the society
of the Faithful, that must not be omitted and refused, as Preaching and hearing
the Word; Administering and receiving the Sacraments; meeting and assembling
together in those Assemblies; mutual exhortations and provocation to good
Works; confession of Sins, of Thanks; declared resolutions as well as desires
of Holiness, and other Duties; all comprehended in profession of Faith. These
are all External, yea, are all Gospel Duties, and have been, and will be used
in the Church of Christ.

Thus the Church of God among the Jews, that met at the Ark and Temple in
Jerusalem, The Tribes went up, for the Testimony of Israel, to give thanks to
the Name of the Lord; and these were External.

Thus the Church of Christ, united under the faith of the Gospel, had their
Praying, preaching the new Law, singing of Hymns; while Christ continued on
Earth amongst them: And when gone up to Heaven, they continued in Assembling,
and breaking of Bread, and Prayers. They had their Liturgies and public
Administrations, not only in works of Charity but works of Piety. They had
their sacrifices of Praise, the fruit of their lips, and giving thanks to the
Name of the Lord. They had their prophesying at Church at Corinth, and what was
to be done by the Church on Earth. They had Visions of the Examples to lead
them, from the Angels both in Earth and Heaven. Neither can a visible Church or
Society think to be continued without open profession and declaration.

And in the Gospel; They that worshipped God in their spirits, were ready to
bow their knees to him. They that knew God, made their acknowledgment. They
that believed in their heart, for their Righteousness, made confession with
their mouths, to help on their own and others salvation.

Thus by Presidents of Saints on Earth, and Angels in Heaven, the Gospel of
Christ does lead his Church as the Law of Nature directs it, not only to
Religion but its exercise, nor the Gospel only to Faith, but the profession of
Faith; that every Member united to that visible Society of Believers, must hold
the profession of his Faith without wavering.

And there is the next particular; The injunction of what both Nature and the
Gospel directs us unto, is not unlawful but necessary, and both require that of
our Faith we should make Profession; and it is very good, that Rulers from
their Subjects require the same.

SECT. III. Every particular Believing Subject ought to be enjoined to this
open profession of Faith.
PRofession of Faith is an essential of the visible Church, and none can be
concluded in the Judgment of men, of the visible Church, that does not make
profession of Faith.

The visible Church is not a Company but a Society, and what makes the Society
a Church is profession of Faith. Every one is to evidence himself of this
Society; if he will claim right to the Privileges of a Society, he must
perform the offices and duties, and be diligent in the Ministration of the
Society.

A Minister may gather a Company, but he cannot gather a Church, nor make them
to be so by his own single confession. Every man that will approve himself of
the Church, must not only give a tacit, but an express consent by an open
Profession. This is necessary for constituting every man in Church Membership,
and this is rationally required and enjoined of Christian Governors, to their
Believing Subjects, for their own and Subjects satisfaction.

This concerns the whole Congregation, and is to be done not only by the Clergy
but Laity, not only Priest but People, not only Men but Women, nor only they
that are grown up, but Children. Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings, God
thus has his praise perfected; and in his Temple, when met for Gods worship,
every one must speak for his Honor, of such as have received the Faith of the
Gospel.

And this we are led unto by the eminent Examples of Angels and Saints, who
served and pleased God, that Church triumphant in Heaven. Thus when we knew not
where we were, before the foundations of the Earth were laid, every Angel
signified his consent and delight, he had in the enjoyment of God; Job 38.7.
All those Morning Stars sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted for joy.
No Dignity exempted any of those from Duty; They all sang together, they all
shouted together for joy.

And the multitude of that heavenly Host, that appeared to the Shepherds,
commended this practice to every particular Saint, it being observed and
recorded for an imitation, that every one was praising God, and saying, Glory
be to God on high, on earth peace, good will toward men, Luke 2.13, 14.

And the Vision that St. John recorded, that glorious Divine that now is equal
if not above Angels, is for direction and imitation of us, and others, to the
end of the World; and what he heard, Revel. 5.11, 12, 13. And I beheld and
heard the voice of many Angels round about the Throne, and the Beasts, and the
Elders, and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and
thousand of thousands, crying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was
slain, to receive power, etc. and every Creature which is in Heaven heard I
saying, Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power, etc. Certainly this was recorded to
instruct us, that this ought to be the duty of every particular Saint on Earth,
which does the work of every Saint and Angel in Heaven. That every man of
Christ's Temple below, as well as of that above, should speak to his Honor, set
forth his Praise.

And thus they thought it, and practiced the Apostles and Disciples of Christ
in their first meeting, who made confession of their Faith in that Article of
the Resurrection, Luke 24.33, 34. not only the Eleven, but they that were with
them were saying, The Lord is risen indeed, and has appeared to Simon. The
Disciples come from Emmaus, were they silent? They told what things were done
in the way, and how he was known by breaking of Bread. And thus they continued
speaking till Christ came among them.

Acts 13.2, 3. the Church met together at Antioch, and there we find them met
at their Liturgy; there was a public ministration they all agreed in: That
ministering was not touching the People, then it would have been (...), but it
was (...), something done for Gods honor and service, and it was Fasting and
Praying.

To instance in one more, 1 Cor. 14.24. they were all Prophesying. In their
holy Assemblies at Corinth the Apostle St. Paul supposes, that there was a
business they were all employed in; it is set forth in the word Prophesying,
what can we in reason understand by that word? Sure it was not Preaching, for
if all were preaching, who could be hearing. It was not foretelling things to
come; this was given about that time to some extraordinarily, upon the
plentiful effusion of the Spirit, but not commonly or generally to every
Believer. It was not extatical effusion from gifts of Tongue, given to all to
speak; that was not given to all, and the Unbeliever if he upon his coming in
had found them all thus busied would have accounted them mad; but Laity and
Clergy Women as well as men might be employed in this Prophesying.

But this work every Believer was busy about, it must be therefore some open
and plain declaration, either of some Article or Articles of Religion, or some
acknowledgment of the divine Perfections, or some speaking freely in praising
of God, or praying unto him; for they were publicly ministering to the Lord,
they were falling down and worshipping him, as the Apostle supposes, that
(being convinced by the joint actual concurrence of every Believer) the
Unbeliever coming in, would fall down and worship God with them, saying, of a
truth God was in the midst of them.

He supposes it done by the Believers and Saints at Corinth, what he desired
might be done by the Saints at Jerusalem; that they did not decline their
Assembling themselves together for Religious purposes, nor in their Assembling
did any one decline the profession of his Faith, which every one was to hold
fast without wavering.

In probability there was some Liturgy they agreed in at Corinth, as there was
among the Believers at Jerusalem, and at Antioch and Alexandria, and every
Believer accounted himself obliged to give his attendance on it, and joint
concurrence with it, to the honor and worship of God. Every one offered a
Sacrifice not private or mental, which was not discernable by man, but vocal,
the fruit of his lips, and Unbeliever might sensibly perceive it; and this
tended to the service of God though external, and well they were assured, that
with such Sacrifices (which was every Christians duty to offer) when they were
offered, God was well pleased.

Thus every Believer by the practice of the Church of Christ, in purest times,
is led to profession of Faith, and I appeal to any man's Reason or Experience to
determine, if he be a Christian, whether upon a wilful omission of this Duty
any true Believer can rest satisfied.

For if I be a sincere Believer, I can never satisfy my self, unless, as I
owe, so I give all unto Gods glory: The Hypocrite will to his power keep back
something, but the Christian which is sincerely holy will give all. He knows
and considers that his Body is created, redeemed, sanctified, and shall be
glorified, to present them a living sacrifice to God, is but reasonable
service. That it is not a gift but a debt, he owes and is bound to pay, that as
with his Soul he is to know God and love him, so he is to offer his Tongue to
praise God, and his Body to worship him.

But if I be diligent in the Profession of my Faith, I forthwith feel a content
and satisfaction attending and accompanying my holy employments, and a
delightful pleasantness spreads it self over my Soul, while my Body is busied
in religious exercises. Its the most relishing meat and drink for Gods Children
thus to do their Fathers will, and these Services are their greatest freedom.
Those that are beloved of God, and after his own heart, feel their Souls
satisfied as with marrow and fatness, while their Mouths freely praise him with
joyful lips. No such full content as in those exercises of Godliness, which
has the greatest profession of delight in this life, and the most certain
expectation of those full joys that are to come.

Thus we most please our selves, and we best satisfy our Neighbors, in
whatsoever Relation he respects us in the practice of Holiness, which directly
tends to true Happiness. Our Father, the Magistrate, the Minister, our Equals,
are all solicitous to know and be assured of our pious and holy inclinations;
and when they can perceive they have not watched over us nor labored in vain,
they are most delighted and best pleased.

Now our Relations are not to be satisfied in the state we are in, with
probable conjectures of our meanings and intentions, but they must have clear
and significant expression of our minds and intendments, either by words or
actions.

A sullen silence cannot content us in our Contracts, but we must have sensible
assurance of our mutual assent or refusal. In our Secular Trafficks and
Commerces, we cannot carry on our Bargains but by external signification: And
as in Temporal so in Spiritual Covenants, there is a necessity of these things
when no communion can be held without them. We cannot be mutually pleased with
mutual assurances of our purposes, to stand firm to the Faith of the Gospel,
without an open declaration; unless every one hold forth the profession of his
Faith without wavering.

There can be no contenting assurance of any persons continuing a Member of a
visible Church, without profession of Faith in Service or Sacrament; Hearing
the Word preached only is no sufficient evidence; I am in charity to believe
the Minister to be a good man, because he signifies his pious intentions by
Religious expressions: But I cannot in reason conclude the Hearer so long as he
says nothing. If People wanted nothing but Knowledge, Conversion, or Faith, if
ignorant or unconverted, I could excuse this boulimy among us, and it were far
more tolerable that people mind only Sermons: But when People are knowing and
converted, baptized and engaged in Profession, certainly it were more truly
Religious to spend some time in doing as well as hearing, to show they have not
heard in vain, but that they have got this Faith they so greedily heard for, by
holding forth the profession of it etc.

By Hearing constantly, I in charity conclude thou desire to be good, thou
would get Faith; but if Hearing is all, how can I without rashness judge that
thou art good, or have got Faith, which is not evident to me without thy
Profession.

It is a painted, no real Fire, that has neither light nor heat: It is a
Stock, a Log, not a living Tree, that has neither leaves nor fruit: It is a
Carcass, not a living Body, that has neither words nor motion: It is
Presumption, and no living Faith, that is not signified by Profession.

And now with all meekness, I beseech those that separate from us, seriously to
consider this undoubted Truth, That the visible certain sign of any Companies
or Persons, being indeed of the Catholic Church that is Militant, is the
Peoples Confession of Faith in Service and Sacraments.

Since therefore Profession of Faith is of such necessity, and has so great an
influence to please both our selves and others, and is a duty and service, by
Gospel Rules, incumbent to every Christian, we may truly conclude, That the
Christian Magistrate may and ought to enjoin an open Profession of Faith to
each believing Subject in his respective Congregation.

SECT. IV. Every one is to make profession of his Faith, and the best time and
place to do it in, are in respective Congregations, and the Magistrate is to
enjoin every one, etc.
4. THat there should be meeting and assembling of Congregations, must be
adjudged expedient and necessary for the imparting and promoting what is good
and comfortable, and the preventing or removing of what is hurtful or
inconvenient, which things cannot be hoped for, or compassed, by Singularity or
Separation. And, that this is confessed, is evident from the general practice
of all Cities and Nations that professed any Religion, were it true or false,
and by the practice of ordinary Men, without any respect to Religion, who agree
to meet in Markets, Fairs, Exchanges, Walks, for Temporal ends abovesaid. And
if general Meetings be rationally concluded, to be necessary for imparting
things Temporal, then they must be concluded also natural and necessary for
imparting things Spiritual.

And for any one wilfully and perversely to decline these Meetings, lawfully
appointed, must be a sin, being prohibited by the Gospel, when the Hebrews are
commanded not to forsake the Assembling of themselves together, as the manner
of some is, Heb. 10.25. because such Meetings are appointed and designed to
advance the exercise of Piety and Religion.

Such Congregations of Believers as respect the Worship and Service of God, are
the Congregations we mean, and the Believer is to discharge his duty of
Profession in the midst of them.

God, Nature and Grace, does not delight to do any thing in vain, and all
voluntary Agents freeliest exert their kindly operations upon such Objects, as
may be influenttal upon them for good, and are in capacity to receive the said
Operations.

Confession of Faith is not expected, when not called to it, to be made to
Persecutors, or Infidels, that are professed enemies of the Gospel: where there
is more probability of their Rage, than Conversion, and where there is no hope
of advancing Gods glory, or our Neighbors good; where there is less hope of
dying a Martyr, than danger of being a Manslayer, where he may seem to conspire
with the Persecutors to take away his own life.

Mat. 7.6. By Christ's own direction, we are not to cast holy things to dogs,
nor pearls to swine, least they trample them under foot, and turn again and
rent you. But holy things are properly tendered to holy Men. Our delight to
communicate these should be chiefly to the Saints of the Earth, and such as
pretend at least a desire to excel in virtue; yea, where we may act with safety
to our selves, and probably with benefit to others, there Confession of Faith
is best made, and that if among a Congregation of Believers.

And for any that stupidly or sottishly sit at home, soaking and smoking in
their Chimney Corners securely, indulging the sensual part, and never regard
but slight the opportunities of Meetings conveniently, and communicating of
holy apprehensions and affections, for their own and Neighbors comfort. We
must look upon them as an unnatural sort of Men, and the most lazy kind of the
beasts of the people, who industriously study to be useless, and to neglect
their own and the general good of the Neighborhood, which they are obliged to
further and maintain. And, if they have sharp goads and lashes, to prick them
or quicken them vigorously to move under that yoke to which they are naturally
bound, it is no more than what is just and reasonable, for the good and welfare
of the Community, which every particular Officer and Ruler are concerned to
promote and advance.

For Time and Place of Meeting, that these be determined by the wisdom of the
Governors, upon Convenience, as best conducing for the public good of the
Society, are things so unquestionable, as I think will meet with no opposition.

Now, that every Christian is bound to attend these Congregations, to advance
Religion, and propagate the general good; he has lost his Reason as well as
Religion that dares deny it.

For what things we find experimentally, either to be believed or done, to be
good and comfortable to ones self, we ought to impart and communicate to the
good of others; and what St. Paul desired to see his Brethren, Romans 11. so we
should put in practice, as near as we can, to impart some Spiritual gifts, that
we may be comforted together with them, by the mutual faith both of them and
our selves.

For Temporal things, such is our unhappy necessity and the baseness of the
things, as if we would have any good to our selves, we must have a particular
propriety in them and enjoyment of them. The more we give others, the less we
enjoy to our selves.

But for Spiritual things, the commoner the better; as there ought not, so
there needs not of them be desired an appropriation; our propriety is not lost
by Communication. These things like seeds, they multiply by scattering, as fire
kindles by blowing, so our Faith increases by Confession. Draw me and we will
run after thee. Holy Souls, when drawn to good things, would have others good
with them; not so selfish to run alone, but call others to bear them company.
Andrew calls Peter, Philip Nathaniel, to come to Christ. David would have the
Tribes go up to the House of the Lord, to bear testimony with him, and give
thanks with him, etc. And when with him, there he would have others sing with
him, rejoice with him, fall down with him, worship with him.

So the Author to the Hebrews; not forsake meeting, nor in their meeting mutual
Exhortation, offering Sacrifice, Thanksgiving, Profession of Faith, none
excepted or excluded. Every one, without injury to himself, may help on his
Neighbor, by exercise of Religion, and profession of Faith.

And certainly, the declaring and publishing of our firm assent, and soundness
of Faith and Devotion, must help on the resolution, and settle the constancy of
others in the same things. Thus are we props and stays to our staggering and
sinking Brethren; and others waxing strong in the Lord, and being strengthened
and confirmed in their Faith, grow confident in their Profession also. And when
thou art thyself converted, thou ought also to strengthen thy Brethren.

Thus we blow up the coals of Devotion, and kindle that Piety that breaks out
into an heavenly flame, to the inlightning and warming both our selves and our
Neighbors. Thus we shine as lights in the World.

While all agree, and every one is intent in the Congregation on this
Confession, we stand directly under the influx of Grace. It is the probable
way, when we are all thus employed, to have Christ come and make one of the
Company. While in Via, like the two Disciples going to Emmaus, while we are
thus communing, Jesus may draw near and go with us. While we are thus speaking,
no doubt but Christ is ready to stand in the midst of us, and say, peace be
unto us; for so he has promised, and he is faithful, That when two or three
are gathered together in his Name, he will be in the midst of them.

With this general Preaching and Ministering usually goes along the ministration
of the Spirit. And, whosoever would not quench or stint the Spirit in this
operation to Holiness, he ought not to neglect or despise this kind of
Prophesying.

It is a probable way, in the Apostles Judgment, to work upon those that are
without the Church, and unconverted, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. when every one, and all
in a believing Congregation are thus Prophesying, speaking freely, and
preaching and confessing Gods Excellencies and Perfections, and show our selves
reverencing him and believing in him; when an Heathen or Infidel come into such
a Congregation, He will fall down and worship God also, being convinced of the
reasonableness, necessity and benefit of the duty, by our respective Harmony
and Uniformity, he will say, of a truth, verily God is in the midst of us.

He is worse than Saul, that will not thus prophecy among the Prophets, and
seeing others unanimously and devoutly worshipping and confessing to God, who
will not fall down and worship God also.

And while thus like Elijah, we are riding up to Heaven in the Chariots of this
holy fire, it is not improbable that others like Elisha, standing by, may have
the same Spirit resting upon them.

Thus every one that aims at the general good of himself and others, be they
within the Church, or be they without the Church, is obliged to an open
profession of Faith, in that respective Congregation to which he is associated,
that he may be instrumental to draw others to the worship of our glorious God,
who before perhaps little regarded him.

And that Governors, that are to aim at the general good of the Society,
should enjoin every believing Subject to a duty so extensively beneficial, is
so clear that it needs no further demonstration.

In Fine, Our Governors, as Christ's Deputies, who are to Rule by Christ's new
Law, the Gospel, have done well to enjoin to their Believing Subjects an open
profession of Faith in their respective Congregations. And, that this
Profession ought to be signified by an open Uniformity, is our next undertaking.

CHAP. V. In such Congregations Unity of Faith ought to be signified by an open
Uniformity.
Section, I. In a Catholic Church there must be Unity. II. In particular
Congregations there ought to be Unity of Faith. III. That Unity of Faith ought
to be signified by an open Uniformity.


SECT. I. In a Catholic Church there must be Unity.
THE Nature of the Church of God is best represented and deciphered unto us
under the resemblance of a Body; As many Members make one Body, so many
Believers make one Church. By several Nerves and Sinews the several Members are
compacted into one Body. By several Laws of the Gospel, as so many Ligaments,
the several Believers are fitly joined together into one Church; and as many
Members compacted by the same Nerves are enlivened and guided by one Soul, so
many Believers joined together by the same Laws are quickened and governed by
one Spirit. For the Body is not one member but many: For by one Spirit, we are
all baptized (...) one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, bond or free, and
have been all made to drink into one Spirit. Thus we believe one Holy Ghost,
and one Catholic Church.

In Scripture and Fathers many other Figures and Representations we meet of the
Church of Christ, which all speak the necessity of Unity of several parts for
its Constitution. Sometimes we find it compared to Noah's Ark, as Extra Arcam so
Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus: In those great inundations of sin and misery,
wherewith the Earth is overspread, as once out of the Ark, so now out of the
Church there can ordinarily be expected no Salvation. The Ark was cemented
within and without with Pitch, and the Church with Charity. Sometimes they have
likened her to a Coat, to Joseph's Coat that was polymita, diverse colored; to
Christ's Coat, inconsutilis, without seam, rents or divisions.

In Holy Scripture, in several places, the Church of Christ is compared to an
House or Temple. Many distinct stones, and several pieces of wood, make up one
Building, for the protection, entertainment and comfort of the Owner; so many
Believers make up one living Temple, one spiritual House, for Christ and his
Spirit to dwell and delight in.

As no number of Planks can make up a Ship an Ark, without close joynting: No
multitude of Threads can make a warm Garment, without close weaving: No Stones
can make up an House, without close cementing: No Members or Parts can make up
a Body, without close compacting; so no number of Men can make up a Church
without Conjunction or Unity.

And this the Holy Spirit of Christ intimates unto us in that heavenly Song,
Cant. 6.9. My love, my undefiled is but one, the only one of her Mother, the
choice one of her that bare her; yea, so we believe and so we teach, there is
but one Catholic Church.

Let the Sectaries and Separatists, that think to drown the cry of their sin
with the noise of Conscience; Let them boast vainly of their Multitudes; that
every one of their Congregations, though of different Persuasions, is the pure
Church; while they study to be many, and make Divisions, they are not the true
Spouse and Church of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Devil may have many Synagagues, but Christ has but one Church, one Wife,
one Spouse, one Royal Priesthood, one holy People, one People of his purchase.
There is but one Catholic Church, One invariable from the beginning of the
World, as to Substantials, and so will continue to the end of the same; and
rather than there should be an appearance of two, Christ, our Peace, shed his
Blood to make those that seemed twain both one, and has broken down the middle
wall of partition between us, Ephesians. 2.14. One End, to be attained by the same
Means. One People, to be governed by the same Laws. One Body, to be actuated by
the same Spirit: Of that one Body, one Head, one Faith, one Baptism. One Eve,
the Mother of all living Men: One Church, the Mother of all Believers.

No wonder St. Paul should so pathetically beseech the Ephesians, that if they
would walk worthy of the Vocation whereunto they were called, that they should
hold the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace.

No wonder our Blessed Savior, in his last Agony in the Garden, should pray so
earnestly for those especially that had received the Laws which he had given
them from the Father, that they might be One as they were, John 17.23. That all
that believe on him through his word, might be made perfect in one.

If we see rightly, we may behold Christ's Heavenly Jerusalem, that is
encompassed with holy Angels as Walls, like a City that is compacted with the
same Rules, as so many ligaments, and actuated with the same Spirit; accounts
it not only good and joyful, but necessary for all the Members of the Society,
to be joined together in Unity.

It not only continues the welfare, but upholds the Constitution and being of
the Church of Christ, to banish Division, and hold fast this Unity.

SECT. II. There must be in the Catholic Church Unity of Faith.
THus the Church of Christ began in the last Dispensation, and so it is to be
continued in Unity: They were all, that were believers, with one accord in one
place: The multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and one soul.

As taught of God, so of Christ they were taught to love one another, and to do
unto others as they would be done by; like members of the same Body, mutually
sympathizing, weeping with those that wept, and rejoicing with those that did
rejoice; bearing one another burdens, and thus fulfilling the mind of Christ.

Neither had they of the Church of Christ a like respect to each others
persons, but the same respect to the Objects that were presented before them.
They did unanimously agree to choose and refuse, to love and hate the same
thing. They had a like hope, a like fear, the same joy, the same sorrow: Like
Travelers, tending to the same End, they agree to walk in the same way, and
had the same will, the same mind, the same affections.

As they of the Church of Christ are to agree in the desires and affections of
the appetitive part, so ought they to agree in the conclusions and persuasions
of the intellective part, that nobler part of the Rational Soul of man, if they
will be knit into that Society that will hold professed subjection to the Rules
of the Gospel. The Society of Believers are to agree in the same Faith, the
same Judgment, the same Conscience.

Thus St. Paul desires and expects of the believing Corinthians, that they
should be perfectly joined together, in the same mind, and in the same
judgment; and of the Ephesians, that they should endeavor to keep the Unity of
the spirit in the bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4.3. There being meant by Spirit as
elsewhere, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. the superior faculty of the Rational Soul, the
conclusions of which were to be kept one and the same: For but one Body and one
Spirit, even as ye are called into one hope of your calling. One Lord, One
Faith, One Baptism. For Christ being ascended, and set at the Right hand of God
in heavenly places, and having all things put under his feet, as Head of the
Church, in it appointed several Orders, and to them gave several Gifts, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying his
Body, till every part might come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, etc.

Upon this Rock Christ has promised to build his Church, meaning St. Peter's
Faith, not his Person or Office. As Christ has but one Church, so that one
Church is founded upon one Rock, and that unmovable, unchangable, always the
same. The Rain may descend, the floods may come down, and the winds may blow,
and waves of opposition may split themselves with their own violence; but the
Faith of Christ's Servants stand unmovable, rather confirmed than hurt: The
Church of Christ is but One, built upon one Rock.

But the Synagogues of Satan are built upon heaps of Sand: Such is their Faith
(if I may say they have any) as is like heaps of Sand, whose forms are changed
upon every pressure, tossed up and down with every wind, ready to receive
either augmentation or diminution upon external Contingencies. They are always
Changable.

But those that are truly Members of the Church of Christ, from an unalterable
Rule, are of an unchangeable Judgment: They are not like Children, tossed up
and down with every breath, nor carried about with diverse and strange
Doctrines; but the God of hope, as he has filled them with all joy, so with
all peace and unity in believing. That they continue steadfast in the same
Faith, are perfectly joined together in the same Judgment; and amidst Society
of Believers, there is but one Spirit, one Conscience.

The Head and perfection of a Rational Creatures Unity must be in Judgment.
Beasts may agree in Affection, only Men can agree in Judgment. And Judgment,
Faith and Conscience (of which there is a noise in the World) are but little
different; All the result of the Souls Reasoning, the deliberate conclusion and
agreement of her Counsel from a certain Rule and infallible. A respect of the
Rational Creature to the Rules of the Gospel, not only as true and warrantable,
but as good and acceptable; and a serious purpose and resolution to conform to
those Rules accordingly. Of which Rules some are supernatural and revealed,
others are natural; some positive, but being enjoined by Christ they are
eternal, universal, indispensable and binding to the Catholic Church of Christ.

But some Rules are particular, given by Christian Rulers to their particular
National Churches, to whose wisdom Christ has left the ordering and injoyning
of some Canons, not unlawful, for settling Peace. And be the Canons either
concerning Words or Actions, since they are accomodately fitted to the custom
and apprehensions of the People, and are significant expressions of the
Subjects unity of Judgment and Faith: They are binding to believing Subjects
for the Lords sake.

So that as in the Catholic Church, for the General Rules, so in particular
Churches for particular Commands, where lawfully fixed and unrepealed, the
Believing Subjects are to be of the same Faith, of the same Judgment.

And where difference of Faith or Judgments are in the same constituted Church,
impossible it is there should be Unity of Affection, impossible it is the
Soldiers and Servants should be in peace and Unity, where Captains and Leaders
are at variance and dissension.

Liberty, or pretense of Conscience, in a constituted Church, can never be plea
sufficient to justify two differing Believers in differing and contrary
undertakings. If one of those undertakings be warrantable, the others must be
unlawful and unwarrantable. There is but one Conscience, one Faith in this
case, can be justifiable, as certain as there is but one Rule, and but one
Truth. And when two differing Believers, in differing and contrary Actions, can
have but one true and justifiable Rule. There cannot be in contrary Actions any
more than one right Faith, or justifiable Conscience.

And Conscience is Concludens scientia, a deliberate Conclusion, and settled
Judgment, a fixed Determination of the Intellective part from a certain
infallible Rule, from which we infer, assume and apply to our selves the
morality of our Actions, and determine of the subsequent issue accordingly. So
that two things are required to make up a Conscience:

1. A deliberate Determination or Conclusion.

2. A certain Rule from whence we infer the morality of our Actions.

1. There must be a deliberate Determination in what may be called Conscience;
so no Example or practice of the most retired, mortified man, can be a Rule for
thy Conscience. The most devout of men are no Lords of our Faith, who at the
best are but Helpers of our joy. Infallibility is not to be granted to any
particular man, which is not granted to any particular Church of Christ.
Neither can Conscience be made up soundly, from the practice of a fallible man,
but from the law of Nature and Rules of an Infallible God. So that it is not to
be called Conscience that is grounded on the Examples of godly Religious men,
without thy own Deliberation.

Nor is that Conscience that has only former Resolutions for its Rule: for
wilful obstinacy, timaciousness of purpose, cannot be a part of Conscience,
which is not in the Appetitive part at all. Nor can Humor, Animosity, a sudden
precipitate engaging be justified by plea of Conscience, when there must be
(...). Conscience cannot be without Deliberation; neither can Deliberation,
without applying or determination, be called Conscience. For while the
Understanding is fluctuating, questioning, and inquiring, it may be in tendency
to it, it is not yet to be called Conscience.

And here again, they seem as far from Reason in their expressions, as from
Obedience in their actions, that call out for liberty of Conscience, May not my
Conscience be free? And they would make the doubting Reason against the
undoubtedly lawful Command of the Superior, in things indifferent, to be the
weak, tender Conscience: But where liberty or doubting is, there can be no
determination of the thing doubted, and where no determination there can be no
Conscience.

2. That cannot be called Conscience that grounds not its Determination upon a
certain Rule. When Conscience is but a Witness to a Rule, at the best a
subordinate Rule; neither can it be an absolute Law which must be determined by
a Law; without which it may be Humor, Animosity, Fancy or Opinion, whatever it
is, surely it cannot rightly be called Conscience.

And since Conscience cannot be without a Rule, and when the Rules of Nature
and the Gospel do not interfere, and are not contrary, there cannot be two
different or contrary Consciences that can be both good, of any professed
Believers in a constituted Church wheresoever.

Over the General Church of Christ there be Rules Natural and Necessary, whose
morality is determined, and some Rules Positive and Arbitrary, that are
eternally and universally binding to all Believers to the end of the World.

In all these Gospel Rules, there can be but one Conscience in all Believers
undoubtedly.

And in every particular Church, somethings are to be determined for Peace sake
by the wisdom of Governors, as time and place, words and gestures, etc. in the
service and worship of God.

Now in a Constituted Church where these things are determined, I deliberately
declare in this Subjects submission, and the others refusal, there can be but
one Conscience. For when indifferent things are determined by wise and good
Rulers, most conducing to convenience and peace, the Rule, upon such
determination, is for every Believing Subject, to submit to every Ordinance of
man for the Lords sake.

Now when no Conscience can be without a Rule, since I have a Rule for my
Submission, and thou can show no Rule thou have for thy Refusal, certainly it
must be concluded, I have a Conscience in my willing subjection, but thou can
have no Conscience in thy wilful omission and opposition. And being there is
but one Rule that is good and warrantable in all positive things, there can be,
to speak properly, in such things, but one Conscience.

For Resolutions, if without, yea much more if against a Rule* cannot be called
Conscience. And Conscience, which is (...), must have a double look, the first
look it must cast on the Rule, the second it must cast on the Actions, be they
either necessary or positive, or else it cannot be counted Conscience; and from
thy agreeing or disagreeing with the Rule, so thy Conscience accuses or
excuses accordingly.

And now I appeal to any sober man's Consideration, since there cannot be
contrary Rules justifiable, whether there can be contrary Consciences.
Certainly then, we may safely conclude in all Constituted Churches, since for
Belivers actions there is but one Truth, but one true Rule; there must be for
all such Believers but one right Faith, there can be but one sound Conscience.

SECT. III. In such Constituted Societies, Unity of Faith must be signified by
an open Uniformity.
GOD, who created man for his glory, designed him for Society, that what
comfort he could not get by separation, he might compass by Communion. And
Communion, in the state we are in, cannot be maintained but by Externals, by
Bodily offices. As the Communion of the Invisible Church must be maintained by
Unity of Faith, so the Communion of the Visible Church, or any part that is
associated or united in obedience to the Faith, must be maintained by agreement
in the exercise of Religion, and Unity of Profession.

And this Unity of Profession is properly called Uniformity, which is nothing
else but a sensible form of an united Society agreeing in one Profession, both
in words and actions.

So if any one should ask, What is the sign or mark by which we may know a
visible Church by, or any associated Company to be a part of it. I must
properly Answer, by Uniformity.

And Uniformity, as the word clearly speaks, is an Unity of the outward form of
things, or an agreement of visible practice, and joint concurrence in the
Exercise of Religion, both in wards and actions; which ought to be in every
Congregation of Believers. Preaching of the Gospel, and receiving the
Sacrament, of the People as well as of the Minister, being indispensable signs
of every one that would be accounted of the Church of Christ.

And first, we will undertake to prove, that Unity of Faith must be signified
by Uniformity of words; and this is not only lawful, but necessary and useful.

1. Lawful, as declared by the practice of all Nations that had a sense of
Religion. For if Heathen, yet reasonably they agreed in the same Festivals and
Solemnities, in the same Sacrifices and Gestures, in the same forms of
Thanksgivings and Devotion; which, because written of by many, and confessed by
all, it will be needless to cite Authors, or any further to insist upon the
proof of it; no question but they Universally agreed in constituting and
maintaining Uniformity amidst their Assemblies in all Religious observances.

If they were a People to whom God had more clearly manifested himself, and the
true Religion, wherewith he would be well pleased, these marks they gave of
their associating and uniting into a Church, by their Universal joint
concurrence in Religious Exercises, in all Ages, in their solemn Congregations.

And it is facile to prove, that among the Jews they judged the fittest Medium
to preserve Unity, was Ecclesiastical Uniformity from their coming out of
Egypt, till their dissolution in Canaan. And in some measure the Jews maintain
this to this day, in their several Congregations.

They had their set Forms for Aaronical Benediction, for hymns, and praises,
and prayers of the People, who agreed in one express assent to the Covenant and
the Law delivered by Moses; in the same Sabbaoths and Festivals, in the same
Sacraments and Ties of Obedience.

They agreed in the same Prayers composed by Jewish Teachers for their
Disciples. St. John the Baptist taught his Disciples to pray. And Christ's
Disciples in the last dispensation, would be taught of him to pray, as John
before had taught his Disciples. And our blessed Savior not only taught his
Disciples a Form but a Prayer, which they were to say. When you pray, say, Luke
11.2. Our Father, etc.

To follow him can be no mistake. Certainly, deliberate Composures of Set
Forms, from Christ's Example, receive not only Toleration, but sufficient
Approbation.

And that the Apostles and their Successors, in Primitive times, used this
Prayer in all their holy Administrations, especially at the Sacraments we have
more than probable Authority.

And that the Church had set Forms after the first Century, is beyond all
dispute. And that Reformed Churches have their set Forms now, generally, is
openly manifest, except some Phanatical Schismatics, that out of a Spirit of
Contradiction, and precise singularity, by the neglect of these things wilfully
Unchurch themselves, and would blot out all appearance of a Visible Church upon
the Earth.

Mr. Calvin, from the conviction of this Truth, Epist. 87. approves it, That
set Forms of Ecclesiastical Rights might be determined; that it might not be
lawful for Ministers in their Administrations, or the People in their
Attendances to vary from them. And this he was forced to acknowledge from
Example, Practice and Reason.

God, who cannot err, prescribes set Forms to the Jews, and Christ to his
Disciples. And it would be a misapprehension, yea a sin to think, that They
would enjoin or command what might be an hinderance to Godliness, or a
disadvantage to the Exercise thereof.

And the concurrent Judgment and practice of all Churches, must convince any
sober person of the lawfulness and expediency of set Forms, both in Prayers and
Worship, which will be furthered by his own Reason, if he please to consider
Scripture directions.

2. I shall prove set Forms lawful and expedient from Scripture.

St. Paul, 1 Cor. 1.11. pathetically beseeches the Church at Corinth, by the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that they would all speak the very same thing.
Verba sunt symbola mentis; e consensu verborum colligimus consensum animorum.
Words are but expressions of our Intentions, and from agreement in Words we
conclude of agreement of Mind. And sure enough it was not required there by the
Apostle, that the Speeches of the Corinthians in their Religious Assemblies,
should be of the same sense and meaning only, but of the same expression; not
only contradiction of words is prohibited, but diversity, if they would grant
his suit, whle he beseeches them to speak the same thing.

And well might this be enjoined in Religious Exercises; for, Vbi novae
phrases, ibi nova dogmata: A quibus Vna fides, ab iis requiritur Vna Confessio.
Where new phrases are used, there will be new opinions: And in whom there is
expected but One Faith, from them there is required but One Confession, says
Mr. Calvin.

And, when idolizing of the Gifts and Parts of the Ministers, caused
Contentions among the Corinthians, the Apostle might adjudge it necessary, that
ostentation of Eloquence and excellency of Speech should be forborne among them,
even in exercises of Devotion, and therefore earnestly beseeches them to speak
the same thing.

So, by St. Paul's direction, Timothy was to hold fast the form of sound words,
at his Church at Ephesus; that as there is but one Faith, so in Believing
Congregations there might be but one Confession.

And this not only evinced from Scripture and Reason as expedient, but from the
Apostles practice, who having received the promise of the Father, and power
from on high at Jerusalem, they agreed on one summary Rule for their own
Teaching, and the Peoples believing, a compendious sum of Evangelical
Doctrines, exquisitely composed, which is delivered to us by Tradition, from
Antiquity, and generally received under the Name of the Apostles Creed.

In which Confession, the intelligent Believer not only makes an acknowledgment
of his assent to Promises of Mercy to be relied upon, but to the reasonableness
of Duties of Obedience that are enjoined by the Gospel to be practiced, and
makes open profession of Communion of Saints, which must be maintained by the
practice of Holiness, and comprehend all the duties of Christianity that are
required.

And this compendious Confession of Faith by repeating this set Form,
prescribed by the Apostles, has been used by the People as well as the
Minister, by which they openly declared their unfeigned Assent to what they did
believe, and their steadfast Resolution of what they would do, in every
Congregation that would be reputed of the Church of Christ.

And if it be lawful and expedient to have set Forms for Confession of Faith,
it cannot be unlawful and unfitting to have set Forms for the exercise of
Devotion. It cannot be a reproach but a duty to have our Spirits thus stinted,
when the Spirit of Grace limits himself in the Rules of Holiness, and has the
denomination of Holy from this limitation.

And if new sorts of Words, and variety of Expressions must be used in praying,
as some wildly fancy, I wonder St. Paul in all his Epistles, in the beginning
should use the same Salutation, and in the end should use the same Valediction;
and that Christ in his Agony, who wanted neither expression or fervency, should
pray thrice together the same words.

At Antioch, that the Christians there in their Congregation, had their
Liturgy. At Corinth, that the People were all Prophesying. At Jerusalem, that
in their Religious Assemblies, they were to hold fast the profession of their
Faith without wavering; is so evident, as doubtless it can need no further
illustration.

And if set Form of Words were unlawful in Gods service, certainly the
multitude of Angels would never have been represented unto us as agreeing in
one Anthem on Earth, nor they above in the same doxology in Heaven.

And if the Examples of Saints and Angels may lead us rightly; if Nature, God
and Christ, and his Apostles may direct us safely, we must conclude, That
Uniformity of Words is not only lawful but expedient in the exercise of
Godliness.

3. I shall prove Uniformity of Words necessary and expedient by Reason.

1. And Reason it self will tell us (if we have not abjured it) that Uniformity
in Words is necessary, and conducing to the practice of Godliness; for take
this away, and see what giddiness and distractedness must necessarily ensue in
every Assembly.

Without agreement in these things, to terminate and bound both our Thoughts
and Words, how improbable is it, that most men should be secured from
inconsiderate wanderings, and unwarrantable expressions. But being confined to
words of Faith and Devotion, we call home our Thoughts to consider what these
import and signify, that are enjoined and prescribed us, and reverently we
worship God, and pray to him, and confess to his Name.

And our wilful Opposers give Testimony to this Truth by their practice, that
set Ferms must be prescribed to the People.

When the best gifted Brother is appointed and agreed on to put up Prayers,
which are set Forms to the whole Congregation; and it is not to be denied, but
every Member that is truly Religious, secretly does concur with such Prayers,
and limit their Thoughts to what is signified by such Expressions. Weak
Creatures! never considering that they split upon that Rock which they pretend
studiously to avoid, while they voluntarily enslave themselves, and stint their
spirits and thoughts to conform to the sudden wild effusions, and often
unwarrantable expressions of their idolized Teacher; and dare not spoil their
Liberty, to submit unto, and concur with the deliberate Forms and Prescriptions
of their sober Governors and Rulers, which will undoubtedly guide and lead
them to the right exercise of true Religion that tends to peace.

Poor inconsiderate People, they know not what to do; for it is not a set Form
they hate, which they may see they cannot avoid, but a spirit of Contradiction
they love, while they oppose the warrantable directions of their Religious
Leaders, and willingly suffer themselves to be captivated by wild ungoverned
Enthusiasts, and run headlong into an inexcusable sin of a wilful Disobedience.

But if any can think set Forms to be unlawful, and will be tied to none, but
avoid them, then must every pretended Saint bring a distinct Prayer and Psalm,
to be poured out by himself in their several Congregations. And it must
necessarily follow, when every one is singing a several Psalm in their
Congregation, it must happen what St. Paul says was at Corinth, when they all
spoke with several Tongues, a Stranger coming in must in reason conclude, that
there was madness in the midst of them.

Thus in Reason we must determine, to terminate and bound the Thoughts and
Considerations of them that would be truly Religious, there ought to be set
Forms of Words agreed upon and prescribed in Believing Congregations.

2. That is best to be used that will most heighten our Devotion and Intention
in our Religious addresses to God; for how shall I hope that God should intend
me, if I do not intend my own Petitions. And I am verily persuaded, Prayer
without Devotion, is like a Body without a Soul, it is dead and ineffectual.

Now this I do deliberately affirm and maintain, That premeditated and set
Forms of Prayer must heighten any man's Devotion and Intention.

I desire such as obstinately oppose premeditated and composed Forms, to
consider, that in this they contend only for freedom of Words.

And have Words any power or influence over God? Can we imagine, that God is
taken with variety or shift of Phrases? Words or loeutions are for man's
necessity, not Gods information. They are of no necessity to make our hearts
known to him, who understand what we need before we ask him, and our Thoughts
afar off. And it is the affections of our Hearts, not the expression of our
Mouths, that make us prevail with our God.

What therefore may best conduce to settle our Consideration, to fix our
Desires and Intentions on God, and good things, is most lawful and most
expedient to be used. And this, I dare say, upon Reason and from Experience, is
best done by well-weighed Forms of set Prayers, foreknown and assented unto
both by Priest and People.

For the operation of one Faculty hinders the operation of another; the
employment of the Understanding and Invention must hinder the intention of the
Will and Devotion. Sure we must acknowledge the busying of the Invention in him
that speaks, and his Consideration in him that hears, whether things be
warrantable or acceptable that is spoken, or not, must hinder the Intention of
either.

And since Intention is more prayer, and more likely to prevail with God than
Elocution, I may possibly busy my head and strain my Invention, when I go
about to please men, and if possible, quicken my Elocution in preaching. But I
will settle my heart, and fix my Intention, when I go about to entreat or speak
to my God.

In Reason therefore, I must conclude, and from Experience avouch it, That
Devotions united in same Expression, like Waters straightened in one Channel,
run the most irresistably; yea, undoubtedly, premeditated and fore-known
Expressions heighten Intention and Devotion, and make the Prayers of any
Congregation the more acceptable, and the more prevalent with God.

The Objection is frivolous and weak, which our dissenting Adversaries make
against those Repetitions used in our Common Prayer, as if they did remit and
bedead our Affections; when, if rightly considered and applied, they intend,
inliven and invigorate them.

Our Savior at the last Agony in the Garden, three times retired himself, and
prayed thrice the same words, Mat. 26.44. Sure none dare say he wanted ability
to alter his Expression, or that he wanted affection, though he did not. No
sure, we may safely conclude to this Point, That, as Christ, so the Christian
has his Devotion helped and not hindered, by a set and foreknown expression.

3. The weakness of the People is to be considered; and I appeal to any sober
man to judge, It being to be granted, that the generality of the People are
dull of Apprehension, of slow Judgment, prone to inconsiderateness, and
inadvertency; whether set Forms, seriously fore-weighed, and prudently digested
and prescribed, are not more probable Helps of Devotion, and better
preparations for the Peoples general Concurrence, who have neither quick
Apprehensions nor discerning Judgments, than extempore, indigested, and
voluntary effusions.

4. The manifold necessities we are involved in, and wants we are straightened
with, and the infinite number of Mercies wherewith we are blessed, and have
received, cannot in an instant be called to remembrance, and duly be considered.

So it is not to be supposed, that our Petitions or Thanksgivings can be fully
or comprehensively expressed upon extempore effusion, but only upon serious and
deliberate premeditation.

Lastly, It would be good to leave to future times and to other Churches, for
their Example, our settled Agreement and Consent, unanimously concurring in the
soundness and incorruptness of our Religion, which we cannot evidence, without
we agree in constant Uniformity, in Words and set Forms, fore-known and agreed
unto by Priest and People. But I forbear.

If we will follow the practices of all Nations that pretended to Religion,
true or false. If we will be guided by the Rules and Directions of the Gospel.
If we will follow the dictates of discursive Reason; we must conclude it
lawful, necessary, and expedient, and conducing to the practice of true Piety,
That Unity of Faith should be signified by Uniformity of Expression, in all
Believing Congregations.

And as Unity of Faith was to be signified by agreement in the same Words, so
by Uniformity in alike Gestures and Actions, in all the Congregations that were
parts of the Catholic Church of Christ. From those Prophecies that foretell
what there would be, we may conclude what there should and ought to be expected
in the Church of the living God.

Christ foretold his Spouse in her Militant state, Cant. 6.9, 10. should be an
Army under Banners, sub vexillo Crucis, whatever distraction of an Army, when
secure, yet when terrible under Banners, They all agree in the same posture,
offensive or defensive. In the same guard, the same march and motion.

And no less is intimated, Cant. 1.9. when the Church is compared to a company
of Horses in Pharaohs Chariots; for this resemblance was not only to intimate
of believing Parties, equally joined together in the same design, that like
Pharaohs Horses there was quickness in expedition, but also that there was
Uniformity in that motion. Not that one stood up, and another ly'd down; not
that one drew forward and another backward; that one pulled this way, another
that way. But when one stood they all stood, when one ran they all ran; all
went the same way, all the same pace, all used the same motion. And thus the
Saints of Believing Congregations might be said to be like a company of Horses
in Pharaohs Chariots.

And that enlightened Divine, that saw a door opened into Heaven, and a Throne
fixed, and one sitting upon the Throne, and Elders and Angels, ten thousand
times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands, worshipping him that sat upon
the Throne, represents them to us in their glorious state, as all unanimously
agreeing, to fall down, and cast their Crowns before him that lives for ever
and ever, and all saying, Blessing, honor, glory and power, etc. All recorded,
without question, to inform us what ought to be our behavior on Earth, if we
would be like them in Heaven, namely, always to be busied in a joint concurrence
of acknowledging and worshipping God, as with the same words, so with the same
actions,

And if any would yet further defire to see this Uniformity more expressly
urged, by the Apostle, upon particular Churches in the Primitive times, let
them observe St. Paul's direction to the Church at Corinth. To them he could not
write unto as spiritual, but as carnal, and the reason was, because there were
strifes and divisions, and that when they came together in the Church of God,
they eat, and acted distractedly, and showed they were bent more to gratify
the humor of a Party, rather than to preserve the Unity of a Society by a
well-ordered decency. Shall the Apostle praise them in this? No, such meetings
were for the worse, and not the better. They were to maintain no such custom
in the Church of Christ, in that there were to be no Divisions, but all things
were to be done decently and in order.

So to the Ephesians, If they would walk worthy of the Vocation whereunto they
were called, they were to hold the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace.
True indeed, Unity of spirit is internal, but Peace and its bond, their
endeavor and walking, were all external; and it is no more than this, That
they would endeavor to hold the Spirits Unity by their obliged Uniformity.

So Heb. 10. After the Divine Author had set out the glorious Privileges they
might expect from Christ, he proceeds to direct them a joint profession of
Faith, to a demonstration of love, to a provocation to good works, to mutual
exhortations to Public meeting.

And as he to them, so to all the rest of the Churches does St. Paul enjoin,
that they should adorn their Profession; that their Conversation should be
becoming the Gospel; that they should behave themselves orderly as in the House
of God.

And now certainly, it may be concluded both from Scripture and Reason, from
the practice of Saints in the Church Militant, or Triumphant; That as internal
Unity of spirit is to be endeavored after to present us blameless to God, so
should external Uniformity in words and actions, be endeavored to be preserved
in all believing Congregations.

And now I have plainly and perspicuously discoursed of every Section contained
in this Chapter, and I think convincingly to any sober Reason. I may justly
complain, that there be too few will believe our Report. Infaelix infirmitas,
ad se vocat medicus ut litibus occupatur aegrotus.

Peace and Unity is praised of many^, but very few endeavor to preserve it;
And, Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell in Mesech, and have my habitation
among the Tents of Kedar. My soul has long dwelt with them that are enemies to
Peace.

And now I speak for peace, I look that some are ready to prepare themselves
for battle. I look that that which is the lot of many good Physicians, should
be mine at this time, that although my design (God knows) is not to torture my
sick Countrymen, but to heal them; that some like frantic Patients should run
from me, and that others now but touched should cry out of me.

Many, either insensible of their sickness, or else in love with their
distemper, are not only careless but backward to be cured. I see and bewail it,
that many men are miserably wounded with, and yet I justly lament it, that I
find a great unwillingness in most of them to be Healed.

For Unity of Faith, How many men either out of weakness, or partiality, or
prejudice, or interest, or acquaintance, have espoused rashly a wilful Opinion,
and set it up and idolize it. And this fancy, Opinion, perhaps Persuasion, they
shall cry up and publish it abroad for Conscience, Judgment, Faith. For which,
God knows, if examined, they have not the least shadow of a Rule, or appearance
of Reason. So I may complain with St. Hilary, ad Constant. Aug. Facta est
fides, fides temporum potius quam Evangeliorum periculosum; and miserabile, tot
nunc fides existere, quot voluntates. Exciderunt ab ea fide quae sola est, and
dum multae fiunt, ad id coeperunt esse ne ulla sit.

I lament that, too apparently to be seen in our days, what the Holy Father
complains was to be found in his, viz. That the Faith among us is the Faith of
the Times rather than the Faith of the Gospel. It is very dangerous and
miserable, that there should be among us as many Faiths as Wills, and as many
Consciences as obstinate Resolutions.

They have departed from that Faith which is One, and while they pretend to
have many Faiths, they cease to keep any. And if it be rightly considered, what
Faith or Conscience is, there is scarce any true knowledge, or practice, of
either to be found in too great a part of our Generation.

I hear the words frequently among us, but I must publish it, that I do not
understand them; May I not have liberty of Conscience? May I not differ in
Judgment from other men, and yet agree in Affection? May we not go several
ways, and yet meet together at the end of our Journey?

Were ever any such things reasonably vented in a Constituted Church? Have not
the men lost both Reason and Religion that dare confidently publish these
things? Can there be such a thing as Liberty of Conscience? Are they not
absolutely inconsistent? Consider, and it must be acknowledged, If thou have
Conscience of any thing thou have no Liberty; if thou have Liberty there can be
no Conscience.

May not men differ in Judgment and yet agree in Affection? What, ad idem, in
respect to the same thing? certainly, No; it is impossible. If I judge a thing
lawful and thou judge the same thing unlawful, our Affections must differ as
much as love and hate, and certainly these are contrary Affections.

Can we not go several ways, and yet meet at the end of our Journey?
certainly, No. The end of our Journey we both tend to is agreed on to be
Heaven, Happiness. Now if Virtue be the right way to Happiness, and that lies
in a strait line, as Morality teaches us, sure there can be no declining this
Line but there must be obliquity. If the Way to Heaven be narrow and straight
on, as Divinity teaches us, thou can not go besides this Way but thou will at
last fall headlong into the Ditch. We must both of us keep the same way, or
else one of us must be in the broad way that leads to destruction.

And for Unity of Affection, where can we find that in a Family, much less in a
Parish or Congregation? If ever the Complaint was true it is now in our days,
that Fratrum concordia rara est. We are all pretending to travel with the same
design from Egypt to our Father in Canaan, and we are Brethren, but how few of
us look to the Charge given us? How few are they that take heed that they do
not fall out in the way.

There be two Graces that Christ commends to us as the way to the kingdom of
Heaven, Humility and Charity, but instead of these we see the contrary, Pride
and Contention. All pretended Members of Christ's body, yet no sympathy, no
bearing one another burden. We are ready to laugh at each others infirmity,
and to rejoice at each others misery. Our iniquity abounds, and love waxes
cold. Our distinguishing Garment is rent clean in pieces, which should be our
Charity, and that is the bond of perfectness. This man's hope is that man's fear.
One man's joy is another man's sorrow.

And as we can hardly find Unity in Judgment, or Affections, so rare it is to
see Uniformity in Words or Actions. For words instead of agreement, what
difference, what opposition? And for those that separate from the Communion of
the visible Church of England, where can we find that Congregation that agrees
to speak the same thing.

We dwell among People of a strange Language. The Trumpets have given, from
most Pulpits, an uncertain sound, and how can the Soldiers agree to prepare
themselves to the Battle.

We may observe, many of our Priests have been lingering to offer strange Fires,
such wild expressions and inconsiderate excursions, as instead of helping have
diverted our Devotions and distracted our Affections.

And for Actions instead of decency and order, what distraction, yea, what
confusion in all our separated Congregations. By appearance one would judge
them of Babel rather than of Jerusalem. Such distractions, as if every one had
a peculiar God by himself; or rather, such universal profaneness or
irreverence, as if no God were thought of as present throughout their whole
Congregations. Our Neighbors and Acquaintance stand aloof off from that
Uniform worship of God that is prescribed and enjoined, and no wonder if
Strangers think and report, that some dreadful Disease cleaves fast unto us.

I heartily lament many Crying sins that are generally spreading over the body
of this poor Nation, and yet, upon sober Consideration, I cannot judge any sin
so manifestly destructive to the health and beauty of the believing Society,
and Church of England, as is this of Schism and Separation.

There is no one sin that tyrannizeth more over us, but we may say to Schism,
as the Pirate did once say to Alexander, Thou blamest and condemnest me for
preying on single Persons, and accountest thy self without fault, while thou
destroyest a whole Nation.

These things have I written and spoken to my dissenting Countrymen, not in
wrath and bitterness to shame and torment them, but with grief and compassion
to warn and amend them, that we may all agree to banish those Schisms and
Divisions in the Service of God, which are this day our shame, and that we may
endeavor to bring back that Unity in Gods worship, which was once the glory
and joy of this poor Church and Nation.

My endeavor, as well as my Prayers, shall always be, that we agree to hold
the Unity of the spirit in the bond of Peace. For Zions sake I cannot hold my
peace, nor for Hierusalems sake be quiet, till I have manifested my study and
endeavor to bring all the baptized Subjects of this Church and Kingdom, to
signify the Unity of their Faith by an open Uniformity.

CHAP. VI. The Canons and Forms established and prescribed by our Governors,
to direct and promote the General Uniformity of English Professors, are most
agreeable to the Rules of the Gospel, and are the best and most convenient that
are visibly extant to us in the World.
Section, I. There must be Forms or Canons prescribed, by Rulers, to carry on
Uniformity. II. The Canons and Forms already established to this end, in
England, are agreeable to the Rules of the Gospel. Section, III. These Canons
and Forms are visibly the best, extant to us, upon sober Consideration.
SECT. I. There must be Forms or Canons prescribed by Rules, to carry on
Uniformity.
GOD, who by his wise Providence governs all the works of his hands, rules them
all by a Law. And Governors subordinate, as appointed and sent by him, are to
govern Rational men, joined in Society under them, by a Law also.

As God in the World, so Christ in his Church, complying with the Necessities
and Infirmities of his Subjects, has given Rules to direct them in Faith,
Devotion and Conversation, by that New Law, which is the Gospel, by which
superintendent Frame of Government, his subordinate Governors are to govern
his Church to the end of the World.

And so according to that New Law, Christ's Deputies are to establish Laws of
Piety and Laws of Honesty.

We are now in this part of our Treatise to speak of those Laws that respect
Piety; and according to the two parts whereof Man consists, some Injunctions of
Piety must concern our Souls, and some our Bodies.

The Injunctions of Governors that direct to purity of hearts and spirits, may
be called Counsels, Monitions. They cannot properly be called the Laws of
Governors, but Laws of Christ; for they cannot oblige the Souls of the
Subjects either by rewards or punishments, having no cognizance when they obey,
or when they rebel, when they heartily like or dislike such Injunctions. Christ
can only reward these according to their hidden works.

But Rules of sensible things, for ordering men's words or actions, those are
properly called the Laws of Governors; for of these they can make discovery.
The observance or omission of these things are discernable by Rulers, and
according to the Merits of their Subjects so they can recompense them.

And let no sober Person think, that Laws about external demeanor, or decent
behavior of our Bodies in our Religious attendances, are such trifles, toys,
needless Circumstances, childish, insignificant Ceremonies, as many
irrationally and inconsiderately defame them, when they are natural and
necessary for our Communion in our present condition; when true Grace operates,
the light within us directs, and the Holy Spirit delights in these things,
being willing to admit of our Bodies to be his Temple; when these Vessels are
to be possessed in sanctification and honor. And God has called us not to
uncleanness, but holiness of these things.

When Christ, by his Gospel, has ordered the hearing and preaching of his
Word, the administration and receiving the Sacraments, the regarding our
Conversations and Words, by which we are either justified or condemned. And
these things are sensible and external.

And certainly, an imputation of Rashness and Incharitableness cannot be
deserved by us, if from such open and wilful opposition and slighting of
Externals, as unnecessary and inexpedient, we should judge these men as
wilfully bent to overthrow Humane Government, when they would destroy that in a
moment, about which alone Government can be busied and employed.

It must then be granted, That the public exercise of Universal Piety, ought
to be the Governors first care, and that their first Laws ought to be about
injoyning Uniformity to their Subjects.

Now by Uniformity, as it has been set forth in the preceding Chapter, is
meant an Unity or joint assent and concurrence of Professors both in Words and
Actions, Confessions and Gestures, fitly expressing and signifying a Religious
respect and reverence to that Supreme Majesty we meet to adore. A service so
useful and necessary, that all Governors by their Laws have enjoined it; and
all Nations by their practice have attested it in all Religious Meetings
through all Generations.

1. Because GOD, who is not a God of Confusion but of Order, a God not of
Division but of Unity, is best pleased and most glorified when no man draws
back, but when without distraction there is an Universal discovery of every
man's evident respect to him. When the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord,
unto the Testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the Name of the Lord.

2. Thus Neighbors are most edified. Consent and agreement of others with us,
give a pleasure and content to us. It gives a confirmation to our Judgment and
practice when we receive approbation and allowance from the practice of others.

3. Thus Infidels are most likely to be wrought upon and converted. One man's
preaching may make a man consider, but certainly it cannot have so great an
influence as the Uniformity of a whole believing Congregation. We are ready to
think those things not hurtful but beneficial, which we see universally
practiced; and we are easily drawn to the practice of those things which we see
generally allowed and used by others.

So that, if a man be converted or unconverted, joint Concurrence in Common
Service, and the Uniform Worship of God, is more to be valued than any one man's
Preaching, being of a greater influence and of a stronger operation.

Since therefore we speak of a visible Church, be it Catholic, National, or
Parochial, it is Coetus evocatorum, a Company of Men called, not invisibly,
internally, but externally, sensibly, and such as have manifested their
compliance with that Call. Not a Company but a Society of Believers joined
together by a mutual profession of Faith.

For as Unity of a sincere Faith is necessary for the Constitution of the
Church invisible, so is Unity of profession of Faith necessary for the
Constitution and being of a visible Church. And to avoid rash unanswerable
expressions, and unbecoming behavior, it is both reasonable and necessary that
words and actions should be reasonably agreed upon and determined.

The thoughts of our Souls, like the eyes of our Bodies, without an Object to
terminate them, will wander to the ends of the Earth; therefore the prime work
of Piety and Religion, in the Rational Soul, is to set God before the eyes of
its Understanding. That, upon serious consideration, seeing and concluding him
the Best and the Greatest, man may rationally both think and speak most
honorably of him, and behave himself most reverently toward him.

For Uniformity then in Religious exercises, of necessity there must be the
same Object; GOD, who is infinite, must be proposed. That our considerations
and respects may be terminated upon him. And of necessity there must be Rules
and Forms agreed upon and fixed, to direct and limit all associated Professors,
that their considerations and respects may be united either in knowing God or
worshipping him.

Circumstances cannot be left indefinite and undetermined; for man's Thoughts
are as diverse, naturally, as their Faces and Tempers. Their Words and Actions
usually wild and extravagant, and not only different but contrary also; unless
all these be bounded and terminated, what Unity can there be? An arbitrary
Will Worship will follow, according to every man's fancy; and in every meeting
instead of a well-ordered Unity, there must necessarily happen distraction and
confusion.

And these things are obvious to every man that rationally considers them; for
never any Nation that had Religion true or false, but always agreed on a
Common Ministration. And in all their Sacrifices, either propitiatory or
gratulatory, they have united together by certain Rules in a common Service,
and a joint concurrence in it, to that Deity which they adored.

And certainly, all those Reasons formerly alleged to urge an open profession
of Faith, return with new vigor, strictly to oblige every Visible Church, to
acknowledge the necessity of fixing and observing Rules of Uniformity in every
respective Congregation. That the infinite Majesty of GOD may be generally and
worthily glorified: That our Neighbors and our selves, may be most probably
edified and comforted: That those that are Unbelievers may have their
Conversion best furthered; there must be Canons and Forms prescribed by Rulers
to carry on a general Uniformity.

To conclude this Section then, Governors must Rule by a Law; their Laws can
reach only to Externals in the exercise of Godliness. In which Exercise of
Godliness, the first aim of Governors by their Laws, is to promote Uniformity
in Religious Assemblies. To settle and continue an Uniformity there must be
Rules to limit and direct.

SECT. II. That the Canons and Forms in our Liturgy, prescribed to the ends
abovementioned, are most agreeable to the Rules of the Gospel, is the next
considerable.
LITURGY in its etymology, if rightly understood, gives its full import and
signification. It is a Form or Rule of Administration in some public Office.

Sometimes it is put in Scripture for Ministration in offices of Humanity and
Liberality. But our discourse and common Acceptance leads us, to take it for
that kind of Ministration that relates to Holy things about the Service and
worship of God. So here we understand it to be, the Canons and Forms prescribed
in a Visible Church, of external profession of Faith, by an evident
demonstration of Obedience. For, (...), quod fit per populum, and sit publicum,
a public, Religious Ministration in a Congregation of Believers. So the People
must be understood concerned in the Ministration as well as the Priest. And
those of the People that would be accounted of the Visible Church, are to
submit and conform to such Canons and Forms as are prescribed in the
Ministration.

And when a Church is not an Assembly only, but a Society of the Faithful; not
internally Faithful only (for that is not discernible by us) but externally by
public Profession, either by words or actions.

What our Judgments must be of them, that in Assemblies neglect and despise
Profession, according to Rules prescribed, is easily to be concluded: For
whatever good opinion others blindly may have of such, or they may have of
themselves, yet, not giving in their Assemblies any evident signs of external
Profession, they are in reason not to be judged of the Visible Church of Christ.

And this shows, how unjustifiable the Meetings of our Separatists are, when
there is no public exercise of Religion, no vocal confession of Faith, no
express desires of Obedience, in any of their Congregations.

To give evidence of any Assembly, that it is a part of the Visible Church,
there must be a sensible Profession, an apparent submission to the Canons and
Forms of a Liturgy. And conformity of the People to those Rules, gives
satisfaction who are to be reputed; but wilful omission and neglect declares
who are not to be reputed of the Church of Christ. And blessed be God, we have,
as it is necessary and expedient, from our wise Governors, considering our
infirmities and extravagancies, Canons and Forms prescribed in our Liturgy for
Religious Ministration, which are most agreeable to the Rules of the Gospel.

The Rules of the Gosple, given by Christ and his Apostles, are of so different
natures, such different sorts: The Canons and Forms ordering our
Common-Service, in the public exercise of Religion, are so numerous and
various, as it were the work of an Age to discourse distinctly and pertinently
of every particular, that may be comprehended in this Section. But first let us
consider what we understand by the Rules of the Gospel, to which our Canons and
Prayers are to conform.

Now our Blessed Savior, at the first planting of the Gospel (upon the
Apostles and Seventy, before his Passion, and upon some Chosen Vessels for his
Honor, after his Ascension having all power given him) did in those days
plentifully pour out his Spirit upon them, and gifts, graces and ability he
gave to them in an extraordinary manner and measure, for the work of the
Ministry and edifying his Body, by the prevalence of his Word and Gospel,
which he sent them abroad to preach, confirming the Word by signs following.

That the whole power of the World was not able to resist the wisdom and Spirit
by which they spoke, diverse Gifts he distributed of miraculous operation. For
different Administrations; as Gifts of Healing, working of Miracles,
Prophesying, discerning of Spirits, diverse kinds of Tongues, Interpretation of
Tongues. All these in an instant wrought that one and self same Spirit,
dividing to every man severally as he pleased.

And several Rules he gave them, that trusting to the supply of the Almighty in
all their exigence, upon this Heavenly design, they should provide neither Gold
nor Silver, nor Scrip, nor Coat, nor Shoes, nor Staves. No care what to speak,
dabitur in illa bora; whatever they needed, the Heavenly Father that called
them to the work, would supply them in all those things.

But these Rules were extraordinary, and so were the Assistances needful only
for those Persons, in those days of Persecution when they were hated of all
men for his Names sake, and were to trust only to a support and a supply from
the All Sufficiency of the Almighty.

But, blessed be God, we are not now encompassed with these streights, God has
provided better things for us. That although the malice of some men would bring
us to walk according to these Rules, and support our selves with the
expectation of such Assistances, and those mistakes have caused no little
disturbance in the Church of Christ; yet, now the Gospel has found a free
passage and reception, we have an happier juncture of Affairs.

We need not expect Miracles for our support, when we have Means in peace
afforded us to carry on the design of God. God is, and we may well be contented
with more reasonable Services. And it is unreasonable to think, having none of
the same necessity upon us, and to conclude, that in these days the same Gifts
and Assistances should be continued among us, is a dangerous and an
unsufferable presumption.

These extraordinary Rules and Assistances were given to those particular
Persons, during those particular Times; but they are now unpracticable, and not
according to the mind of Christ. And there were some Rules given to certain
Churches, and some particular places, but these are not our Canons or Forms to
be modelled by. The Rules then of the Gospel we are to look after, are not
particular but universal, not temporary but eternal, binding for ever to the
whole Church of Christ.

Now, the Laws of the Gospel given by Christ, or his Apostles, are of two
sorts; some respect internally, the regulating Intentions, Thoughts and
Desires, for private Persons, singular peace: And some respect externally,
ordering the Conversation of the Visible Church of Christ. To the Rules of this
latter sort we must have regard unto, in this present discourse.

And these Rules are of two sorts; either natural, necessary, eternal and
indispensable, and would have been binding if Christ had not revived them; As,
that we praise God, fall down and worship him; that we keep our Tongues from
evil, and our Lips that they speak no guile; that we keep our Bodies from all
filthiness; that whatever we would that others should do to us, the same, etc.

But some Laws are positive and voluntary, receiving their being and
constitution from Christ, whose goodness, wisdom and Authority, we are not to
suspect, but that he will direct those things to his Church that are best and
most convenient, and such Directions, by his Subjects, are carefully to be
observed; As, that they should pray in these words; receive the Sacraments with
those signs and manner of Communication required.

All these positive Laws of Christ are universal, indispensable, and though the
positive Laws of Men are particular and mutable upon inconvenience, yet these
positive Laws of Christ are constituted, and come from such unquestionable
Wisdom, as they must be accounted universally and eternally binding to his
Church, to all Generations.

The Laws then of Christ, be they either those natural Laws that he revived, or
the positive Laws that he constituted, that he has ordinarily, universally,
eternally, left his Church to be ruled by to the end of the World, are the Laws
we would have our Canons, for Uniformity, to be tried by.

And because our Blessed Savior knew very well, that an Anarchy was unnatural,
and not to be endured, he wisely directs these Laws to two sorts of People that
will be in his Church to the end of the World.

First, To Rulers, Leaders and Superiors.

Secondly, To Inferiors, Subjects and the Generality of the People under
Authority.

1. For Rulers, They be of two sorts; some Civil, which we call Magistrates:
Others Ecclesiastical, which we call Ministers.

What concerns Magistrates we treated of formerly.

For Ministers we have several Orders, and distinctions, allowed by the Gospel.
The Laws for them are obvious, in the discharge of their several Offices.

Inferior Ministers most concern us in the Exercise of Religion. These, if
any, we should in this discourse respect. And certainly, that Obedience which
these Ministers show in their usages, as directed in their Rites, Ceremonies,
Habits, Gestures, observing days, etc. are lawful and easily justifiable.

And these things are made so clear by the pens of sober, Learned and Judicious
men, to any that will not be wilfully blind, all the Objections so fully
answered, as it would be tedious and impertinent for me to insist in a further
Vindication.

It were more reasonable and Christianlike if men would look more diligently to
the discharge of their own duties, and be less ready to censure and condemn
other men's Just observances. If any thing were questionable in them, viderint
ipsi, they must answer it to their proper Judge, who made thee one?

Be not curiously inquisitive what others do, or should do, Toll quod tuum
est, do thy own business, and seriously consider what thou art bound to do thy
self, that thou may inherit eternal life. And this I am sure thou art obliged
to do; to give thy Decent attendance, and jointly to concur in the Public
exercise of Holiness, and the worship of God, as it is ordered in the Book of
Common Prayer.

And now our discourse begins to be brought into a narrow compass. This is all
that remains for us to prove in this Section, That the Canons and Forms
prescribed to the Common sort of our Believers, in our Book of Common Prayer,
are agreeable to the universal, eternal, and indispensable Rules of the Gospel,

Canons for Uniformity, in our Religious meetings and Assemblies which we are
not to forsake, respect either Words or Actions, let us take a quick survey of
either, and see if both be not allowed and prescribed by the Gospel.

After a Company is Religiously met and assembled together, all admit and
approve of a Pastor or Teacher, an Exhorter, a Leader to holy Services, unless
they have lost their Reason and Religion also.

After their Assembling, the Minister, by Scripture Exhortations, prepares the
People for their joint concurrence in the solemn Worship of God.

After Preparation, the whole Congregation is ordered and directed to join in
an open Confession, of Gods Excellency and All Sufficiency, of their own Sins,
of Christ's Merits, in whose Name they ask forgiveness, and of their desire of a
full Obedience, that they may live a godly, righteous and sober life.

After this, upon good grounds, is denounced Absolution of sins, upon the
intimation of their unanimous desires to leave and forsake them.

Then all the People join in the Lords Prayer, Confession of Praise and Thanks
to the glory of the Trinity, into whose Name they were all Baptized.

Then they proceed to Hymns and Psalms, to mutual Exhortations, and stirring up
each in other holy Affections.

Then follows vocal Confession of Faith; a Litany they all join in, deprecating
all evil, praying for all good, for themselves and all men.

Then they proceed to give intimation of their mutual desires and resolutions,
of a full obedience and respect to all Gods Commandments.

And as in Service so in Sacraments, the People give a clear acknowledgment of
their adhering to the true and undefiled Religion, to which they have engaged
themselves. Of their consideration and estimation of God; of their meet and
suitable Affections.

And if the People be silent for a while, while the Priest is offering up a
sacrifice of Prayer and Praise in Christ's Name, on the behalf of the
Congregation; yet, that every man may testify his intention, and
consideration, and particular assent, when universally, as directed and
ordered, they speak Amen, which is then best done when most heartily expressed,
that our Amen in our meetings might be like thunder, and our Hallelujahs like
the noise of many waters.

For Actions, they are not many enjoined to the People; As, their meeting at
convenient time and place. Their kneeling and prostration upon acknowledgment
of Gods Excellencies, and begging Mercy. Their standing at any Exultation or
rejoicing at a sense of Mercy promised or exhibited. Receiving the Sacrament
with significant intimations of becoming Considerations and Affections.

These Canons and Forms prescribed for the Peoples Uniformity, which are in our
Liturgies, are allowed and justified by the practice of the Primitive times, by
dictates of Human Reason, or else by express Rules of the Gospel.

SECT. III. These Canons and Forms, in our Liturgies, are the best that are
visibly now extant to us, upon sober Consideration.
AND, how shall we be able to maintain these the Best, which some will not
grant to be good at all?

The Herd of Seciaries are all of them nibbling at our Liturgy. Their work is
to defame, and if they can, to destroy; yet of all things, they most virulently
aim at the Public Service of the Church.

We remember with grief enough what late storm brought these Locusts; but yet
we may complain, no contrary wind has driven them quite away, there are yet
too many in our Coasts.

We hear them still maliciously and unreasonably Object:

1. That our Liturgy is taken out of the Romisn Missal; the greater part of it
is Popish Trumpery; the Papists use it, etc.

Malice, whose end is always to wound and do mischief, never boggles to
compass it by the most unlawful means. What she can never hope to bring about
by publishing truths, she is ready to attempt by raising slanders and false
suggestions. For certainly none that are not wilfully ignorant, but must
acknowledge, that most of our Prayers, Confessions, and Responses, used in our
Divine Service, are taken either out of the Holy Scriptures, or out of the
Liturgies of the Primitive and purest Ages, before ever the Court of Rome had
exalted it self, or proudly had usurped the Supremacy and Headship above the
Church of Christ.

But suppose it be granted, what we cannot deny, That many things are used in
our Liturgy by us, which are to be found in the Romish Missal or Breviary, the
question is, whether the things be good and lawful of themselves or not?
Doubtless, we are not to forbear things that are good and lawful, because bad
men make use of them; then we must not use either meat, or drink, or cloth, or
Sun; we must necessarily go quite out of the World.

I shall thankfully partake of the meat that is wholesome, although wicked and
unclean men sometimes eat of it. I shall willingly embrace any holy Truth,
though confessed by the Father of Lies.

I see light and darkness may be in the same Subject, health and sickness in
the same Body, good and evil are in the same Persons.

I shall pluck a wholesome Herb, and make use of it, though I find it in a dirty
Ditch: I Will throw away a poisonous Weed, though in a Garden.

And, if I can discern, I shall decline what is bad, though I see it in the
most Virtuous; and follow what is good, though in the most Licentious.

If Evil men give good gifts to their Children; If Jews or Papists offer to God
a sacrifice of Praise, and use such words or actions as may best promote tke
right exercise of true Religion; I shall think it my duty, in all things that
are good and lawful, to follow them.

Object. 2. In our Liturgy are (they say) vain Repetitions, dead Sacrifices,
empty Forms; void of that life and affection which is necessary for Gods
service.

And now, who does not see the weakness and malice of our Opposers in this
Accusation, charging the fault upon the Forms, which is properly laid upon them
that inconsiderately make use of them. For the vanity is in the Persons that
are careless, not in the Repetitions, if rightly attended. For, if thou be
well disposed, Repetitions will awaken thy Consideration, and not becalm or
bedead, but quicken and heighten Devotion.

Deadness of Affection is a fault, but certainly the Forms or Repetitions are
not guilty of it; the fault is in thy heedlesness.

It Is not just to impute that fault to the Offering, that is in thy self that
art to tender it.

Thou who wilfully opposest thy self, restrain thy wild, wandering Thoughts,
summon thy Intention, banish thy Dullness, quicken thy Devotion, never doubt it,
all will succeed well in using these Forms; I dare engage, both thou and thy
sacrifice will be accepted.

Object. 3. They are offended at the length of the Prayers. For using all the
Forms as they are prescribed in our Liturgy, takes up (say they) too much Time,
that the Gifted man has not his full liberty of exercising himself in
preaching, with which the godly People are most delighted. Common Prayer would
be omitted, or shortened, that Sermon may not be hindered. This they take for
granted, that Preaching is to be preferred before Praying.

Answ. The Allegation is false and ridiculous in every particular. For, the
Forms prescribed are not too long, nor so long as they necessarily hinder
Preaching; both may very conveniently be done.

But, what if the Gifted man were hindered from offering his strange Fire, his
wild effusion in Praying or Preaching; Certainly if this were in the compass of
the length of our Common Prayers to be prevented, it would prove not their
fault but their commendation.

What unhappy Consequences have happened from Ministers oftentation of
Eloquence, Parts and Gifts, its notoriously evident among us. While the People
having their idolized Teachers Persons in Admiration, they have divided into
Factions and Parties, and have disturbed the peace and Unity of the most
flourishing Church of the World.

And if it be seriously considered, what unsound Doctrines, what distracting
Notions, what pernicious Opinions, what erroneous and Dividing Principles, have
been published and entertained of late years in the midst of us?

It cannot be unreasonably concluded, That there should be limits and
boundaries set, in this present juncture of Affairs, to restrain the wildness
of some men's Preaching as well as Praying, certainly would much conduce to the
settling of Order and Peace both in Church and Nation.

But, if as Common Prayer is wisely enjoined, so Preaching must be freely
tolerated, let it be soberly considered, which of the two, if we cannot do
both, is most conveniently omitted, either Prayers or Sermon.

Our Prayers are deliberately composed, in Preaching there is too often sudden
and unjustifiable effusions.

Prayers directly and immediately tend to Gods Honor; Preaching often does not,
but to the diftracting of the People.

In Prayers God is served and worshipped; by Preaching men's humors are
gratified and fancies pleased.

In Sermons at best, we do but hear what we should do; in Prayers, we do what
we hear is fit to be done. Sermons edify our knowledge, Prayers our practice.

In short, As much as doing is to be preferred before hearing, Practice before
Notion, the certain knowledge of God before the uncertain knowledge and the
humouring our selves; so much without doubt ought our attendance upon Praying
to be preferred, before running after Preaching.

But since it would be little conducing to my own content, or the Christian
Readers delight, or the wilful Opposers credit, to rake into that puddle of
Reproach, that from unreasonable prejudice they have, falsely and maliciously,
vomited up against our best composed Liturgy; I forbear advisedly, and declare
my Judgment freely under my hand, in the Reverend Dr. Hammonds words, Ever
since the Reproaches of men have taken considence to vent themselves against
our Liturgy, there has been nothing but air and vapor vomited out against it.
Objections, of little force to conclude any thing, but resolute, contumacious
ignorance or malice of the Objectors.

For when we consider, how full our Liturgy is of Canons and Forms directing
every Believer, in true Religion, to the acknowledging and worshipping of God:
That all the Promises are confessed to be relied upon, as the ground of our
Confidence. That all the Rules are repeated that are directive to a Gospel
Obedience, and that we signify our Desires and Resolutions to observe and
conform to them. When all the Evils we fear are deprecated, and all the
necessary Blessings we can desire are petitioned for.

And when I consider that comely Order, and decent Uniformity, of the whole
Society that submit to our Churches pure Directions, that upon diligent search,
I cannot perceive any of the Popish paint of superstitious, needless
Ceremonies, that may cause a suspicion of dishonest Intentions. Nor
contrariwise, the least careless, forlorn Irreverence, that may bring a
disesteem and contempt upon our Exercises, as is seen in the Meetings of our
Schismatics, whose open Profaneness extract not only a suspicion, but a just
censure of the Meeters Atheism and Infidelity.

I must conclude with that Blessed Martyr, Father to our Gracious Sovereign
upon the Throne, upon search and dispute, That our Liturgy of England is
absolutely the Best, that is visibly extant to us in the World.

If it were possible, it can be neither pleasure to my self, nor profit to
others, to take a survey of all the Liturgies that have been and are in the
World; to understand, compare, weigh, and judge distinctly of every of them; to
set out the redundancies of some, and the defect of others; to pass sentence,
and give preference to what is most absolute. This is more than ever any man
did fully, or can do, in that short time of his Pilgrimage that is measured out
unto him.

This cannot be expected, nor is it necessary; for when our discourse is
directed to our Fellow Subjects of England, who are generally Christians of an
ordinary Capacity; to cast an eye upon those Liturgies that may fall under
their general Cognizance, may in this case suffice us.

A man's Choice cannot extend beyond the dimensions of his knowledge. We neither
choose nor refuse any one thing before another, but we understand and discern
either a surpassing goodness or inconvenience in it. And it is as natural for
discursive Creatures to choose what is best, as to desire what is good.

And for Believing Societies to have Canons and Forms, for the People to abide
by, is not only expedient but necessary; and this, I dare say, has been proved
sufficiently.

Since then, we of this Church of England, as is pretended, have a Liturgy
prescribed, in which Dissenters themselves can allege nothing absolutely
unlawful; frowardly to lay this quite aside, or to change it for another, which
is less useful and unwarrantable, is unreasonable and unnatural.

For the generality of my Fellow Subjects to linger after the Romish Mass is
not to be defended, nor excused: For in Prayers, or Praises, or Confessions,
how shall be that is unlearned concur, seeing he does not clearly understand
what is said.

And the same may be said in this case in regard of all other Liturgies used
among us; There can be no desire of them, of which most of the Commonalty have
little (if any) understanding.

Besides, in the Romish Missal or Breviary, how many things of Faith and
Manners are prescribed; how many Confessions and Prayers enjoined, which
neither by Scripture or Reason can be defended or justified, and this by our
Learned Pens have been cleared to the World sufficiently.

But for our Liturgies, I dare challenge the most professed Enemy, the most
wilful Recusant, to instance, if he can, in any immodest or light action that
is enjoined in any unmeet Expression that is prescribed.

Let them say what is superfluous or redundant, that can be rescinded. What is
defective and imperfect, and what ought to be supplied and completed.

So that upon exact scrutiny, I must moderately and truly give in this Return,
That the Canons and Forms in our Liturgy are so ordered, that they plainly
direct the whole Congregations to most clear significations of their Religious
Intentions.

Our Preparations at our first Assembling, are such, as must beget in us a holy
Reverence and godly fear.

Our Confession of sins, such as are declarative of our unfeigned sorrow and
humility.

Our asking Pardon, so ordered as we express our Confidence.

Our Suffrages short, but indicative of true Piety and Devotion.

Our Articles of Faith to be confessed, are compendiously composed, but fully
and comprehensively.

Our Hymns used, and Doxologies, so Heavenly, as may well become a quire of
Angels.

All our Common Service, so reasonably, so piously ordered and disposed, as our
dissenting Enemies dare not be so impudently malicious, as openly to condemn it
of sinfulness or unlawfulness. Neither can I ever expect (as wise as they are
in their own eyes) that they will be so presumptuous, as to attempt the
presenting us with a Form of Public Worship, with all the precise method of
that Order and Decency, that ought to be used in it, in which they will pretend
to better and transcend the excellency of our Liturgy, which is prescribed and
used among us. -- Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti, si non, his utere mecum.
And until they can do this, their wisdom is to study to be quiet, and conform
to this, till they can find out and propose a better Method of our public
Worshipping of God beyond all exceptions, that they will abide by.

And now, I say, what Subject of the Church of England can reasonably desert or
reject our Liturgy, which is visibly the best that is extant to us upon sober
Consideration?

And how can I but stand amazed, that the Common Service, as prescribed, should
by so many of our Neighbors not only be neglected but contemned, when it can
neither be justly blamed nor amended.

Certainly, I am not uncharitable (but should be too conniving if I did
forbear) to declare a want of Religion and Reason in those men, that run away
to the flocks of our pretended Companions, that hold no Uniform Communion that
is Visible; When, no worship of God is evident; no practice of the Peoples
Devotion; no vocal Confession of the Believers Faith; no offering any sacrifice
of Praise: and yet, every Christian is bound to Conform in all those things, as
well as the Minister, in every Believing Congregation.

Why will ye go away from us, O ye of little faith, we hold fast the words and
practice of eternal life.

Friendly Perswasives to my Countrymen.
COme then, my beloved Countrymen, since these things are so, that an Uniform
profession of Faith must be maintained in Believing Societies, and fifth by our
Liturgy, according to Gospel Rules, we are ordered and directed to this
reasonable Service. Let us lay aside all prejudice and partiality, all
contentious humors. Let there be no longer a Spirit of Opposition, or wilful
Contradiction, be found among us. Let us follow after the exercise of those
things that make for Peace, and wherewithal we may best edify one another.
Whatever things are honest, whatever things are just, whatever things are pure,
let us think and conclude of the practice of such things. Let us endeavor to
bend our selves to the quiet of the Church of God, and to hold the Unity of the
Spirit in the bond of Peace. Let Us evidence, the God of hope has filled us, as
with all joy, so with all peace in Believing. There is but One Truth, but One
Faith among us; let there be but One Spirit, but One Conscience. Let us show,
the God of Patience and Consolation has granted us to be like-minded. Let Us
not forsake the Assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is,
but let us hold fast the form of sound words, and the profession of our Faith
without wavering. Let there be no divisions, but let us speak the same thing,
to declare we are perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same
Judgment.

Let there be no divisions among us about Ministers, account of them as
Stewards of the Mysteries of God; and yet your Faith stands not in the wisdom
of Men, but in the power of God. Have their Persons not so much in admiration,
as if lords of your Faith by Preaching, only esteem them highly for their works
sake, whereby they lead you to the holding fast the Profession of your Faith,
and the true exercise of right Godliness, which has the promise, etc.

And, as in your speeches you declare your Unanimity in your holy Assemblies,
so in your Behavior let there be Uniformity. Let your Conversation be such as
becomes the Gospel of Christ, and let all things be done decently and in
order, and reverently as in the House and presence of the living God. Worship
God in the beauty of Holiness, so as if an Unbeliever come among you, he may be
convinced, and fall down and worship God also, because he sees, verily, of a
truth God is in the midst of you. It is the fit time for Christ to be born in
us, when Unity is among us. In a calm night the Dew descends to the Earths
refreshment; and Grace is like to come down to us when we are in the way of
Peace. Finally, Brethren, farewell; be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one
mind, live in peace, as directed, and the God of love and peace shall be with
you.

AMEN.
Proposition II. The wilful Omission or Recusancy of any Believing Subjects
Conformity to those Rules, is an heinous Sin, and a dangerous Disobedience.
I Heartily beg of the Candid Reader so much charity to believe it as true,
what I publicly declare and avow, That I am a Reformed Christian of the Church
of England, and, that I shall never attempt to persuade my fellow Subjects to
any practice that is ungodly, or contrary to the Rules of the Gospel. And be
assured (whoever thou art) that I sincerely desire every man may come to the
knowledge and practice of Truth and be saved; and therefore I dare not by a
flattering compliance, or connivance, sooth any man in the error of his way,
which will lead him securely to his destruction. And I dare not daub over
Recusancy, as some desire, with a paint and varnish of a trifling weakness or
infirmity, or palliate it over with a false pretense of tender Conscience, when
it will prove, if considered, an heinous sin, and a dangerous Disobedience.

Give me leave therefore without offense, if thou be willing to be Informed,
to bring to thy Remembrance what I have formerly delivered, and am ready to
defend concerning our Canons and Rules of Uniformity, prescribed about the
Public exercise of Religion.

1. Our Governors, as subordinate under Christ, do not Rule their Believing
Subjects, arbitrarily; but by Laws subordinate to the Rules of the Gospel.

2. All that the power of Governors can reach unto, in a Visible Church, is to
order and direct Externals in the public exercise of Religion.

3. That the right exercise of true Religion, is the open profession of Faith.

4. Of that open Profession, there must be Uniformity.

5. Every Baptized Subject of England is obliged to conform to such Laws
prescribed. For to command or prohibit, as the Gospel directs, is warrantable.

And all our Laws, to the Common sort of Believing Subjects, are according to
those Rules.

If Natural, or expressly Evangelical, there can be no dispute, if a Christian,
thou art bound to obey.

And if the Laws be Positive or Humane, and not against Nature, or Injust; thy
Obligation is divine, and thy Submission is natural, being thou art to submit
to every Ordinance of man for the Lorods sake.

SECT. I. Let us determine and agree, what we are to understand by those Laws,
and the Conformity to them, that the Believing Subject of England is bound to
observe.
THE Governors aim and care is not only at the keeping and diverting from the
People what is grievous and inconvenient, which will render their lives
wretched and miserable; but also at the compassing and injoyning the things
that are good and pleasant, which make their lives happy and comfortable.

For these two distinct ends, there must be two distinct sort of Laws. Some
Prohibitive, forbidding and restraining Transgression, which is the way to
divert Evils feared; some Preceptive, by conforming to which Laws, the People
might attain the Good designed and propounded.

And because Man is not to be satisfied, barely with escapes of Evil and
Misery, but with obtaining a confluence of Blessings, which may minister some
competency of Content to him in this his present condition; therefore he is to
make it his business, not only to respect the Laws Prohibitive, but those that
are Preceptive are to be regarded especially.

And when we observe, the Happiness of Man does not only depend upon the love
and comforts communicated from his Neighbor, but upon the favor and blessings
of God; hence it must evidently appear, that as man, in a Society, ought to
have respect to the Laws of Honesty, that he live quietly and comfortably with
his Neighbor; so is he to regard the Rules that direct him to the practice of
true Piety, which will make him to walk acceptably before his God. And the
Preceptive Laws that concern Piety ought primarily to be regarded, because the
Conforming to them, will bring upon him the Blessings of God.

Now we are to agree to understand, that our present Discourse relates to Laws
of this sort, viz. Preceptive Laws of Piety that are wisely and piously ordered
by our Governors, according to Gospel Rules, that command the decent and
reverent attendance, and joint Concurrence of every Believing Subject of
England, in the Uniform exercise of Religion, as in the Book of Common Prayer
is ordered and prescribed.

These Preceptive Rules of Uniform worship, as in our Liturgy the People are
directed, are the Laws by us intended, and ought by Believing Subjects of
England, principally to be regarded, and conformity to such Laws ought to be
observed accordingly.

For as a Negative Happiness will not content us, no more ought a Negative
Holiness: so a Believers care must be, to be truly virtuous and religious. The
holy Soul, that intends a thorough sanctification, rests not satisfied that he
is not vicious, when he knows his being virtuous and truly religious is that
which will please his God.

For to cease from evil of sin only, will keep us from evil of punishment and
judgment which is threatened; but to do well, is that which will bring us to
good, and to the mercies and blessings promised.

Conformity then to Preceptive Rules of Piety is necessary for our comfort and
well-being, and one of the principal Duties of an English Christian. And the
fashioning and framing of his Words and Actions, according to the Canons and
Lines in our Liturgy prescribed and directed, is that Conformity we now
understand. That our Converses and demeanor in the Worship of God, be
accommodately ordered and commensurate to the Rules of the Liturgy. That none
of the lines or lineaments be carelessly pretermitted. That upon our private
fancy, no tumor or exuberancy be added superstitiously, that we admit of
neither excess or defect that may spoil that beauty of Holiness, whereby we may
represent an exact symmetry of parts, according to that exquisite Original and
Copy which is set before us.

This I mean by that Conformity we are to attend and heed. Happy should we be
if a People once in such a case; yea, blessed should we be, if we could thus
decently Worship our God.

SECT. II. Wilful Omission or Recusancy of this Conformity, is a Sin or
Disobedience.
THere be two great mistakes that our Pharisaical Fiduciaries are eminently
guilty of about Omission. One is, that omission of Carnal sins probibited,
Presents them Saints, and is all the virtue by them desired; the other is, that
the omission of external duties of Piety that are commanded, is no sin, and is
not at all feared. But as pure as this Generation may seem in their own eyes,
yet in neither cases can they make it appear, that they are cleansed from their
wickedness, when from the first mistake they swell with Pride, and from the
second mistake they must disdain Humility.

They say, They are not open Blasphemers, nor Riotous, nor Thieves, nor
Adulterers, nor Murderers, and we may believe them; yet while this negative
Holiness content them, they are ready to account themselves Righteous, and
despise others. Thus they choose easiest Duties, and neglect the greater,
advance one to the suppressing of another, and, without regret, securely pass
by obedience to Preceptive Rules, and with a partial and piecemeal Conformity
they deceive themselves. But we have otherwise learned the mind of Christ.

For in reason, when Virtue lies in medio, and is only a straight line and
tendency to Happiness, as Morality teach us; the defect as well as the excess,
will keep us from ever coming at this end. And when every Believer is bound to
obey the Gospel, that expects to enter into the kingdom of Heaven, as Divinity
teaches us.

Certainly, bare unholiness, uncharitableness, infidelity, unpeacableness, that
are but cessations and suspensions of those due Acts that be commanded, and
ought not to be left undone, cannot content any true Believer. For no person,
be he either Child, Servant, or Subject, if he neglects to do what he is
enjoined, but is justly looked upon as disobedient. To him that knows to do
good, and does it not, to him it is sin, Jam. 4.17.

But when Omission arrives at that height, to be wilful, it become that sin we
would have notified and avoided. When men declare their love and choice, by an
open and continued separation from Holy exercises as commanded, such wilful
Omission is rightly called Recusancy; being an open and declared refusal of
doing that service and holy Duties they are commanded.

And, if seriously considered, I know not how our Officers, in our several
Parishes, can be excused or acquitted of the guilt of Perjury, when of forty
Persons, that wilfully omit and despise the Divine Service and Sacrament, they
cannot in their Returns at Assizes, or Sessions, find one open Recusant; when
certainly, a wilful Omission or Recusancy of due Obedience, deserves both
sentence and punishment, when it is an heinous sin, and Disobedience.

SECT. III. Wilful Omission or Recusancy of Conformity to these Laws, is an
Heinous sin and Disobedience.
SO much the Nobler the Law fixed and established is, so much the greater the
sin, and the more grievous the transgression of that Law.

Now Conformity to the first and greatest Law of Piety, is a nobler Virtue than
Conformity to the Rules of Charity; and aversion from that Conformity must be a
greater sin, because then we turn away from GOD, who is infinitely better than
Men, or any Creature whatsoever.

The first and greatest Commandment is, To love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul: these must respect God indeed; but, with all thy
strength, this must relate to Man. For the strength of a visible Christian is
demonstrable to Man by outward actions, when strength exerts it self by doing
what is Commanded.

Omission therefore, of a visible exercise of Piety, must be concluded, in
reason, a sin of the greatest size, since it is a transgression of the greatest
Commandment.

Again, Transgressions of a general, comprehensive Law of Piety, are greater
than the transgression of a single, particular Law, that command a single Duty.
But omission of Uniformity prescribed, is a transgression of a general
comprehensive Law of Piety.

Faith comprehends all the duties of Christian Obedience, and what does it
profit a man, in a Visible Church, to say, he has Faith, if he has no Works,
and do not make his faith appear by Confession. If we know we must acknowledge;
if we believe we must speak. He that offends in this one point is guilty of
all, Jam. 2.14.

And, if offending against a particular prohibitive Law of Charity, renders a
man guilty of transgressing every part of that Law, how much more if a man
offends a comprehensive Law of Piety? In the Judgment of Man, such a Person
must be looked upon to have denied the Faith, etc. So, if any man would ask,
what is the Name of this sin? it must be answered Legion, for they are many.
When most of the Commandments of the first Table are openly transgrest by this
wilful Omission.

And, if deliberately considered, it must be acknowledged, That these sins of
wilful Omission or Recusancy of Obedience, to preceptive Laws of Piety, are
greater sins than sins of Commission against the prohibitive Laws of the second
Table, that concern Charity, in respect of several Circumstances that such
Transgressors are involved in, which must needs aggravate these sins
exceedingly.

For these sins of Omission are open and manifest, but those sins of Commission
are many times secret and hid. Therefore, many times, sins of Commission fall
under the Judgment of God only; but sins of wilful Omission fall certainly
under the judgment and condemnation of Men: and therefore it is undeniably just
and reasonable, that Religious Magistrates make severe animadversions upon
those sins especially.

And, he that judges and condemns his Neighbor for Hypocrisy, though he
judges truly, yet he judges rashly and uncharitably, because such sins are
indiscernible to man; but when Profaness and Impiety are manifest by a wilful
Recusancy, such sins go before men to Judgment, and Officers may accuse and
condemn such notorious Crimes, justly and warrantably.

And sins that are done impudently and shamelesly, are worse sins than those
that are done modestly and closely.

Now beastly sins of Commission are committed secretly, 1 Thessalonians. 5.7. they seek
the night to conceal them, and darkness to cover them. But if men will be
openly guilty of their Abominations, and not be at all ashamed; if they will
declare and publish their sins like Sodom, and make their Faces harder than a
Rock, and refuse to return, a Visitation is lawful and justifiable upon such
open sin; and the Magistrate is not just that will not take vengeance upon such
wilful Transgressors.

A second aggravation of sin may be, when a sin is Electively and voluntarily
committed. For this must be confessed, that Virtue or Vice are more or less
Meritorious, as they are more or less Voluntary. A sin must be greater that is
upon deliberate Choice committed, than that which is done upon surprizal,
through the prevalence of a Temptation, suddenly and inconsiderately.

Now, sins of Commission have many of these Excuses; Either men are basely or
degenerously indulging the Bestial part, and so are transported with the
present impression of some sweet delight that pleases the sense, which admits
of no deliberation. Or else through Pride, Envy, Malice, or Revenge, which
would be satisfied, men have hurried headlong into irregular Attempts. Or else
through a fawning, flattering Compliance with the prevalent Humors of the
Times, men have been misled with the Customary practice of a multitude, and
have pressed, like Beasts, Non quo eundum, sed quaitur; Following bad Example to
do evil, and without natural affection, not guided by Reason, have fallen into
the worst of sins of the worst of Times.

But now, what Temptation or excuse can any man allege or pretend for wilful
Omission, or Recusancy? Other sinners have had either pleasure or profit to
quicken the Temptation, and make it more active, and more prevalent; but what
fruit, what benefit can the Recusant allege for not doing what is enjoined?
He absolutely chooses the evil, and refuses the good voluntarily, without
Temptation; sure this sin is to be accounted without excuse.

Another aggravation of a Sin is, when it is done resolutely and obstinately.
Now, what is done resolutely and constantly, if bad, is worse than what is done
uncertainly, and contingently.

Now, sins of Commission, many of them have their abatement and weakening by Age
and Time; but sins of Omission gather strength by continuance, and make man
more indisposed to forsake them.

For sins of Commission, men are ashamed, weary of them, and forsake them in
time; but for sins of Omission, we rest securely, and delight in them. In this
case, there is no probability men should take care to be well, who never are
sensible they are sick.

They make choice of their Delusion, and willingly would be given up to the
Continuance of their Abominations. We see their obstinacy, and resolved
impenitency. And this must be accounted another aggravation.

Another aggravation of a Sin may be, if it be against a Promise and Covenant
solemnly made to the contrary.

Every man is bound stare pactis and promissis, so it cannot reasonably be
denied, but a wilful Omission of duties of Piety in a Baptized Subject, who
has declared and signified firmly his profession of holy Obedience to the
Faith, is far worse than a wilful Omission of a Jew or Infidel, that never
promised observance to Gospel Rules, and never made Profession.

Heb. 10. The wilful sin was not an invisible, but a visible Recidivation; For
this must in reason be accounted a visible and interpretative Apostasy, drawing
back, and falling off from his Profession, declared by his wilful omission,
which by Promise and Vow he had engaged himself to perform. And what sense the
Divine Author, in his Epistle to the Hebrews, had of this sin, is easy to be
gathered from this tenth Chapter.

The Holy Author directs his Epistle to a Society of Believers by Baptism,
externally united and sanctified to be visible Members of a Christian Society,
that had not power to discern spirits or intention, but judge they might of
Externals, words or actions. He wrote therefore to them, v. 23, 24, 25. to take
care of their Carriage and Conversation that was sensibly to be discerned in
their Religious Assemblies. That they did not decline or forsake Assembling;
nor in those Assemblies, profession of Faith, nor mutual Exhortation, nor
provocation to good Works: For the Blood of the Covenant by these wilful
Omissions, would be accounted an unholy thing, and so was doing despite to the
Spirit of Grace; and so throw away the probable means to get the helpful
assistance of the Spirit of Grace, which was ready to attend upon them that
were frequently busied in those holy Ministrations. For the Blood of the
Covenant did sanctify them, as a visible Society of the Faithful, to Religious
exercises, which if they fell away from, they sinned wilfully, and must look
for a subsequent punishment.

And now, I humbly beg of my well-meaning Countrymen, that separate and
withdraw themselves from us, that they would considerately receive these things
with the same spirit that I have written them, without gall of bitterness, or
desire of Revenge, and with meekness and holy fear. Be not wise in your own
eyes; think soberly of your selves, and your ways: Be not high-minded but
fear. Be not without fear, to add sin unto sin; weigh not things with a false
Balance; put not light for darkness, nor darkness for light, good for evil,
etc. This will bring woe and abomination, This the way, while you clamor
against others Superstition, to be guilty of the same you condemn, while
wilfully you stand upon your mistaken Persuasion.

I know not how far you may flatter your selves with the Opinion you have
assumed to your selves, and gained from others of your Sanctity; yet upon right
deliberation, you must conclude with me, While you wilfully omit, or refuse, to
conform to the Preceptive Rules of Piety prescribed, you are guilty of
transgressing the greatest and most comprehensive Commandment.

And, if thou be involved in those Circumstances that usually attend and
aggravate these sins; if thou sinnest yet openly, voluntarily, perfidiously,
and impenitently, thou will render thy self guilty of a most notorious Crime;
and, without repentance and amendment, thou will hasten thy own misery, and
contributest, to thy power, to bring speedy and inevitable ruin, upon the most
flourishing Church and Kingdom in the World. And this puts me upon the fourth
Section.

SECT. IV. Recusancy is a dangerous sin, and hurtful Disobedience.
IT is a great part of wisdom, to ponder the way of our feet: And now, because
considering the issue and end of our Actions will keep us from doing amiss,
give me leave mildly to represent, upon an impartial survey, the dreadful
consequences of this sin, those cursed effects it certainly brings upon all
Orders of men throughout the whole Nation.

The injury it offers to King and Parliament, and all thy Governors both Civil
and Ecclesiastical; while thou declarest manifestly, thou suspectest their
goodness, doubtest of their wisdom, despisest their Authority, and to thy
utmost (by thy wilful Recusancy) intimatest to others, That they have rashly,
and inconsiderately, imposed Commands that are unlawful and unwarrantable; and
by this evil Example, misguidest thy Neighbor into a dangerous Disobedience.
For when other sins of Commission reach to the injury of a person, or Family or
two, this sin of wilful Omission is extensively hurtful to all sorts of Men in
the Society, and disturbs the public peace of all that are among us.

These (...) are dreadful and detestable, not only because, making Divisions,
they certainly turn themselves out of Church Membership, that are guilty of
them; but when these men run into (...), and separate into Sects and Factions,
and in their Meetings, make it their business to deprave or defame the Divine
Service, and Uniformity, prescribed by Religious Governors; These things must
highly aggravate their Crime, and sadly increase our misery, and this we
sensibly perceive by too woeful experience.

It is no pleasure to me to see, what I heartily bewail, the deplorable estate
we are in at this time, in this poor distracted Nation, by that wilful
Recusancy and sinful Separation, that by our tameness and connivance, we have
suffered unhappily to thrive and spread among us. When every person and party
that has deserted the Communion of our Church, covers the deformity of this
Error with a Cloak of pretended Conscience, and proudly and unyieldingly
idolizeth his mistaken Judgment, and limits his affection to his own Party of
the same Persuasion, and betrays his disaffections to those of sound Judgments,
by venting his opposition wrathfully, with bitter Invectives against them.

And those Parts and Endowments men should use in closing and healing our
Breaches, they misemploy in widening them. Every one is wiser in his own eyes
than his Ruler or Teacher, and pertinaciously defends his own Fancy, and
justifies unyeildingly his own Persuasion.

Diversity of misled Judgments, and pretended Consciences, have caused an
alienation of Affections, and hence wrath and bitterness has broke out into
contemptuous Carriages, Sections, and provoking Expressions. That in Church
matters our several Factions show nothing but Ataxy and distraction. And in
matters of State, from men's wilful disobedience to lawful Commands, an
inclination is discovered to tend to Sedition and Rebellion.

The religious Ruler, and faithful Minister, must needs be grieved and
disquieted to see our Reformed Profession so much blasphemed, the Gospel and
its Faith, so much disgraced and despised, and the Name of Christ and his Cause
so much dishonored.

And what honest heart, that loves the King and Church of England, but must be
sad and bemoan it; That Peace and Love (which are the cement and glory of any
Church and Nation) should, by these our Divisions, be seen to wax faint and
languish, and be even expiring in the midst of us.

And let any now (that thinks most lightly of the Divisions, and stands most
for Liberty) tell me, if he can, and instance in any one Order of men that is
not injured by them. For the King and the Parliament are rendered Vile, and
their Authority contemptible, while their greatest and best Laws, about the
Public exercise of Religion, are neglected and despised. The Protestant of
England, that is truly Religious, must be offended and grieved, to see his
Neighbor, by his wilful Separation, continue in an open and heinous sin.

By this thy Relations, Equals, and Inferiors must be injured in all
probability, while thou seducest the poor and weak by thy evil Example, and
make them to think meanly and dishonourably of our established Liturgy, the
most necessary and the most Religious Constitution that is visibly extant in
the World.

By this especially has come the Universal decay of true Christian Piety, and
epidemical disesteem and aversness from the public Worship of God.

From this, as from a Fountain, has that deluge of Sins flowed forth, that
has overspread, and overwhelmed this unhappy Nation.

We cannot deny but that almost every where we discover sinful prejudices,
superstition, blindness of heart, Rash judging and censuring both of holy
Persons and sound Doctrines; Pride, vainglory and hypocrisy; Envy, hatred,
malice and uncharitableness.

We cannot deny, but Seditions and privy Conspiracies, false Doctrine and
Heresy, hardness of Heart and contempt of Gods Word and Commandments, are too
manifestly to be seen in the midst of us.

Wrath, emulations, bitterness, clamor, evil speaking, whispering, backbiting
and detraction, lying and slandering, etc. all these sins and miscarriages, are
but the numerous and unlucky Offspring of Recusancy and wilful Separation,
that I cannot but in anguish of Spirit cry out, Cursed be the womb of SCHISM
that bare these things, and the Paps that has given them suck.

For these things sake, if not repented of, the wrath of God must hasten upon
us as wilful Children of Disobedience.

Neither has this detestable sin made us thus miserable among our selves, but
has rendered us unhappy among other Nations; when it has brought a dis-repute
of us, and a dis-esteem of our Religion, almost in all parts of the World.

Turks, Heathens, Pagans, Jews, not only contemn, but blaspheme our Church and
Faith, because of the divisions and dissensions of our Professors.

And when the concord of Professors Uniformity preserve the beauty and
loveliness of a Church, which attracts all men's admiration and affection,
undoubtedly Divisions and Factions must bring that deformity upon any Nation,
which must make it loathed and abhorred.

And how can we in reason expect, that others should desire to be United to us,
who are not United among our selves. We can never hope, but they that are
without will shun us as infectious, as long as this deadly disease cleaves
close unto us.

I hear the sad Complaints of my Countrymens fears, That Popery is like to be
brought in among us. And this I confess is my fear also; for while we wilfully
maintain Divisions and Separations among us, unquestionably we contribute to
the utmost to that which we fear to fall upon us: And the way has not been
made more plain this hundred years for the return of Popery than we have lately
made it by our Divisions.

The Papists and Jesuits very well know, they can never set up their own
Church, till they have pulled down ours, which alone stand in competition for
precedence, and outvies them. And to destroy this our Church of England, which
is the best ordered in the World, by our Schisms and Sects we lend our helping
hand most effectually. Who does not see that we are running into that Bondage
we pretend to abominate, while we endeavor to destroy Uniformity as it is
prescribed.

For out of the Visible Church there is no ordinary way of Salvation; And there
is no keeping up the face of a Visible Church without Uniformity.

If therefore we wilfully persist by our Schism to destroy Uniformity in the
Church of England, when there is none to be found in our separated
Congregations, what remains, but we must willingly run to the Church of Rome if
we will be saved.

All these things perpended, it must be concluded, That wilful Recusancy of
Conformity or Schism, is not only an heinous but an hurtful sin in respect of
those within us? It renders us disesteemed and contemned by those without us.
It contributes to the introduction and prevalency of Popery into the Nation.
And, It is a dangerous sin to Men themselves that are guilty of it, when it
renders them liable to the just condemnation both of Man and God.

We are most affected with those Evils that most nearly touch our selves.
Consider then thy own dangerous condition, who ever thou art that separatest
from the Church of England, if thou persistest in thy wilful Disobedience, and
what must follow by the just Judgment both of Man and God.

Thou art guilty, at the fairest, of the dreadful sin of Schism, by thy
voluntary departure and wilful separation from the Communion of that Visible
Church, whereof once a Member. A sin, by St. Paul, branded with the odious name
of Carnality, 1 Cor. 3.3. Are ye not carnal? walk ye not as men? And, Romans
16.17, 18. the same Apostle directs the Believing Brethren, to set this note
and remark upon such as caused and maintained Divisions; they were such as did
not serve the Lord Jesus Christ, and were to be avoided. Their fair speeches
and smooth actions in this case could not acquit but condemn them, whilst both
of them were used with this end by them, to deceive the hearts of the simple,
and pervert their practice from the Uniform Communion of a Believing Society.

It is sad, but true, that such from Believers Censure and Judgment (if they
will be directed by the Apostle, and persuaded) must lose the reputation of
being Christians, and be marked and noted for such as are not servants of Jesus
Christ.

And further, if it be questioned, Whether continuing wilfully in a manifest
sin be inconsistent with the state of Grace, or not? certainly, upon serious
Inquiry, it must be determined Affirmatively. And it must be granted, upon the
Reasons forementioned, That wilful Omission of the necessary Duties of Piety is
an open sin, and such a sin as withdraw men from the kindly operations of
Grace, and makes God withhold and turn away his Spirit from a People, who waits
to be gracious to his Servants, usually, while in the exercise of Holiness.

This despising of Holy Duties, puts a contempt, and offers despite to the
Spirit of Grace: And certainly, the consequence of that sin is sad enough, that
makes God withhold his Spirit from men, such draw back to perdition by their
visible Recidivation.

The effects and consequences of this sin, in probability, will be dreadful (as
you have heard) among Men; and there will be a sad issue of this sin from the
Just GOD, who not only will withdraw his Grace, but will manifest his
displeasure by his wrath which will come upon the wilful Children of
Disobedience. And good it will be for this sinner in time to consider, That
although he may possibly escape the condemning Judgment of fallible Man, yet he
cannot warrantably promise himself to escape in another day the condemnation of
Christ. Sins of Omission, that are obstinately for the most part persisted in,
will fare worse than sins of Commission that oftimes are repented of, and will
meet with a more severe Sentence from the mouth of Christ.

And the mind of Christ is clearly discovered unto us in this particular, Matt.
25.41. when as accursed, they shall hear that fearful Discedite, Depart ye into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And the sin he charge
them with, and sentenceth them for, was a wilful omission of Acts of Charity.
For I was an hungry, and ye gave me no meat; Thirsty, and ye gave me no drink;
Naked, and ye clothed me not, etc.

Now, if for wilful Omission of such Acts of Charity, sinners shall hear that
fearful Ite maledicti, how justly may they hear the like dreadful Sentence for
omission of Acts of Piety: You have not worshipped mein the beauty of Holiness;
You have not spoken to my Praise, to make my Name glorious; You have not held
fast the open profession of your Faith, etc. For greater sins, there cannot
reasonably be expected a lesser Sentence, or easier punishment, from the most
just Judge.

For sinning thus wilfully, what can be looked for but Judgment and fiery
Indignation. If he that despised the public Law and polity of Moses was judged
worthy of Death, of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, that
wilfully despises those Rules that are commanded by the Gospel of Christ. If
any man draw back [wilfully] from his Profession, when the soul of the Apostle
took none, what pleasure can the soul of Christ take in him?

And now my dear Countrymen, that have been too long Dissenters, who have
stood at distance, and separated from us, I humbly beseech you in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, that you would consider, That by your Baptism you have been
dedicated to the Obedience of the Faith of which you have made profession. And,
by the Laws of the Gospel you are bound to submit to the Laws of the Land,
prescribed for the exercise of Piety. And that wilful Omission, or Recusancy,
of Conformity to these Laws, is an heinous Sin, and a dangerous Disobedience. A
Transgression against the first and greatest Commandment; against a
comprehensive Law of Piety. It is a sin not far off from a dangerous Apostasy.

We are sure it is an accursed Schism. It Is a sin of direful fruits to them
within us; of dreadful consequences to them without us. It Is probably an
introduction and advance to Popery, in the midst of us. It Is a sin displeasing
to the Spirit of Grace and Christ. I would have so much charity to persuade my
self, that many of you have been drawn into this sin ignorantly, through
Unbelief.

It is not my intent to write these things to shame you, but, as beloved, in
meekness to warn you. Knowing all these Terrors, I would persuade you as men,
soberly to consider the fearful dangers of this Sin, and to return to a right
mind, and practice that which is warrantable, and to bend your selves to the
peace of the Church, and Unity in the Worship of God. Mark them that have
caused Divisions, and hereafter avoid them. Let us follow Peace with all
Believers, and the practice of Holiness, that we may come at last together to
the sight of God.

And for you that have not separated from us, but have associated with us in
the Faith of the Gospel, go on, as Just Ones should, to live the life of Faith,
of which you have made profession. Be not of those that draw back to perdition,
but of those that believe to the saving of your souls. Be not led away with the
Error of the wicked, to fall from your stedfastness. Have no fellowship with
the unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove them. Come not into their
secrets, nor nigh their Habitations. Do not fawningly flatter, or countenance
them; for thy connivance and lenity will strengthen them. Blow not the coals of
these Sinners, least thou be consumed with the flames of their wild fire.

Let this be our main design, to banish all Factions and Schisms, which this
day are the shame, and to bring back that Uniformity in the Worship of God,
which was once this Nations glory. Let Us mind those things which tend to peace
and unity in Divine Service, whereby we may best edify one another. Let us, as
Brethren, be steadfast and unmovable, abounding in this work of our God,
forasmuch as we know our labor is not in vain in the Lord.

But if any wilfully fall back, and obstinately continue in this sin, let such
take notice, That Judgments are justly prepared for Scorners, and stripes for
the backs of Fools.

Proposition III. The threatening and determining of Punishments against such
wilful Transgressors, is according to the dictates of Human Reason, and the
constant practice of the Church of God.
THE Transgressor we mean, is the Recusant who wilfully omits to conform to
those Canons and Forms prescribed and ordered in our Liturgy, which are
agreeable to the Rules of the Gospel. And this wilful Omission in every
Baptized Subject, how slight of trivial soever it may seem to be, I soberly and
deliberately affirm and maintain to be a worse sin than Murder, Theft,
Adultery, or any other single sin of Commission; whereby the prohibitive Rule
of Charity is transgressed, which is to be detested and avoided by every
Believing person, who would live comfortably in any Believing Society.

For it being a Transgression of the first and greatest, and most comprehensive
Law of Piety, it must be a greater sin than that which transgresses a
particular prohibitive Law that concerns Charity; that sin being a wilful
aversion from that way that directly leads to that full content and happiness,
which ought to be intended. And this we cannot but advisedly conclude, when
this sin, for the most part, as we may sensibly perceive, is attended with
those circumstances, which must aggravate the Crime exceedingly.

For when we observe such Transgressors run into this sin, not inconsiderately
through surprizal, but deliberately and electively; not modestly, but
impudently; not uncertainly or contingently, but constantly and obstinately;
when they strive to be guilty of these Abominations, contrary to Vows and
Resolutions; and when we confider the dreadful consequences, what can we do
less than without rashness conclude, That such are heinous Transgressors, and
dangerously Disobedient.

And when such Transgressors are very rarely converted or amended by monitions
or persuasions, it is but reasonable and necessary that Religious Governors
(if it can be) should restrain them by the threatening and predetermination of
Punishments.

For when Governors are to be set over Societies, to promote their public
good and happiness, it is just and reasonable, not only by proposing Rewards
they should encourage their People to Religious and Virtuous Duties, which will
render them happy and comfortable, but also by threatening and predetermining of
Punishments, to restrain and deter them from evil and enormous Actions, which
will render their lives wretched and miserable.

They mistake dangerously, and wander no little out of the way, who make it
their work to defame the threatening and determining of Punishments with the
odious slander of Malice and Bitterness, when these things are evidences of the
Rulers Love and Care, who are set over a People by God to be a Terror, and
affright the People from doing Evil by such manifest Determinations.

If Persons were so well disposed, that they would be persuaded to be good by
Counsels or Monitions, or would be so ingenious as to be drawn to Religious
and Virtuous Actions by proposal of Rewards, then my mercy is such, as I would
have threatening and determination of Punishments forborne.

But, when we see Men are led by Sense and Custom more than Reason, and are
generally vain in their Imaginations, disorderly in their Affections, wild and
precipitantly irregular in their Actions, it is needful to limit and
circumscribe this their beastly Exorbitancy with an Hedge of Thorns, and to
bound them with a Fence of Punishments. When foolishness is bound up in most
men's childish hearts, that incline them to extravagancy, it is but the fatherly
love and care of good Rulers, by the Rod of Correction, to drive it away. Thus
are they truly represented to be Patres patriae, and Rulers cannot be blamed
for harshness, if they carry themselves toward their Subjects, with the same
tenderness that the best Fathers carry themselves toward their Children.

It cannot reasonably be accounted a sign of an unnatural Cruelty, but an
indication of a discreet Mercy, for a Father to threaten and shake the Rod over
his Child; when he does not this with a design to vex and torture him, but with
an intent to restrain him from inconsiderateness and vanity that will distract
him, and to move him to be circumspect, to receive that instruction which he
desires should be instilled into him.

And thus it is with the good Rulers in their threatening of Bonds, Stripes or
Death, upon such or such Transgressions. It cannot be thought, their design in
this is to torment and ruin their Subjects, but only by setting the
inconveniences and grievances that attend exorbitancies before their eyes,
they would stop them, and divert them from irregular courses, and move and
quicken them to the care of conformity to their Rules and Directions, which
will certainly felicitate them.

And in all this, They are but Gods Deputies, and show themselves like him whom
they ought to represent, who used this method to his own People when he gave
the Law at Sinah, when there was thundrings and lightnings, noise of the
Trumpet, and the Mountain smoking; these all to work in the People an holy
fear, which is the beginning of wisdom, to depart from evil that they sin not,
and to quicken them to observe his holy Commandments.

And sure we cannot in reason think, that either God, or the Ruler, designs
vexation or destruction when they threaten them. It is natural to them to show
Mercy and Compassion. They are not inclined to afflict willingly, nor to greive
the Sons of men. They are loath to torment or destroy, who would have all men
come to the practice of Truth and be saved.

He never can be imagined in reason, to intend wounding or destruction, who
gives warning before hand of the blow; by that the Creature prepares it self
(if it has either sense or reason) to guard it, or escape it. The threatening
of Misery, Death, or Hell, is a Mercy, without which we were like securely to
run upon them.

If Miseries were absolutely decreed or determined, that were Cruelty indeed;
but when threatened conditionally, that is a Mercy.

Thus it is evident, Destruction is of thy self. Charge not unjustly and
injuriously that as a fault, upon God or thy Rulers, which by thy own guilt
thou pullest upon thy own head.

They threatened it upon condition of thy Transgression and Disobedience, so
it is thy wilful Disobeying that gives thee up voluntary to the punishment. Thou
art contented to torment thy self. Thou saw the danger, and would run into
it. Thou knew the punishment, and would pull it upon thy own head. Thou
conspiredst against thy own peace and safety. That thou perishest, it is thy
own choice; for choosing the Sin, thou did choose the Punishment. Thy Blood
lies upon thy self. Thou perishest without others fault, and leavest thy self
without excuse.

Thus it is evident, Unnatural Cruelty is falsely and injuriously charged upon
God or the Rulers, for threatening or determining Punishments; when the Offender
only is Cruel to himself, who voluntarily (though he has warning) runs upon
them.

Again, Rulers, which are Gods on Earth, show themselves most Rational, when
they show themselves most to resemble God, by manifesting those Divine
excellencies to be conspicuously in them, which render God glorious in his
Providence throughout the World. And this manifestation they most clearly give,
when they deliberately determine Punishments beforehand, to be inflicted upon
open Transgressions.

First, Thus they manifest Wisdom: For if determinations of Punishments were
sudden upon a provocation of a sensible Injury, they might be suspected and
deemed the irruptions of a disorderly Passion; but when fixed before hand, they
cannot but be judged the result and product of sober Reason. And that is wisdom
or prudence, which orders and disposes fit and suitable means to a right end.

Now the right end and mark that Governors are to intend, is to promote the
good and prevent all evil from the Society. Now the means to prevent evil, is
to divert People from Actions that are irregular and vicious, which are the
cause of all Miseries that happen on a Nation.

Now no such hindrance or restraint can be put upon People from evil actions,
as to put them upon the thoughts and considerations of those miseries and
inconveniences that will succeed. And this is most probably done by the
publication of those determined Judgments and Inconveniences that must
inevitably follow upon Irregularities. These are most likely to prove the most
effectual means, to keep rational Creatures from running into them.

For, Malum qua malum, non est eligendum; No man chooses what is absolutely
Evil, either sin or greivance. No man will persist obstinately in that way,
that in the end, if he turns not from it, he sees will ruin him undoubtedly.

Evil of Misery before a man's face (unless he be mad) will make a man turn from
evil of Iniquity; so the publication of the Magistrates certain determination
of Judgment and Miseries, unavoidably to happen upon wilful Transgressors, is
the manifestation of the Rulers Prudence, being the most probable means to keep
their Subjects from sin and destruction.

2. The second thing wherein the good Rulers are to manifest their likeness to
God, would be Purity, and abhorrence of Sin.

Now, how can this Purity be manifest in God or his Rulers more clearly, than
by executing Judgments upon Transgressors; by ordaining Arrows against such
Persecutors, and preparing for them, according to their Merits, the instruments
of death How can this be made known better, than by causing the dreadful
effects of their wrath to come upon the wilful children of Disobedience.

Should they be silent, and not manifest their displeasure thus against
wickedness, the secure Sinners would be ready to think that they were
altogether such as themselves; but determining to take vengeance upon the
Ungodly, they discover themselves of purer eyes than, with approbation, to
behold Iniquity.

3. The third thing that in reason Rulers are to discover their resemblance to
God in, is, loving Righteousness, and this is best done by being resolved to do
the thing which is right, to give a meet Recompense, rendering what is due, and
rewarding every man according to his works.

For Justice is not an idle, lazy, unactive Virtue, as if Rulers might satisfy
themselves with barren notions, and curious, but unfruitful speculations. But
she is operative and practical, and where seated, is busy not only in passing
a right Sentence, but due execution of Recompense; and that not according to
the quality of the Person, but the merit of the Work. Not only acquitting the
Innocent, but condemning the Guilty; not only defending and rewarding the
Righteous, but also punishing the wilful Sinner, and pouring out wrath and
tribulation upon the Unrighteous, giving them that Recompense which is meet.

And therefore we see not only Scepters, and Purses, and Crowns, as Emblems of
the Judges Honor, but also Rods, and Swords, and Axes, to signify the design
of their Office to be as well a terror and avenger of them that do Ill, as a
Countenancer and rewarder of them that do Well.

The Sword is not to be born in vain, but to manifest the Rulers intention to
Righteousness. He ought to discover it by his threatening and the determination
of Punishments against wilful Offenders.

Fourthly, The religious Ruler is to show himself like God in exactiness of
Justice, and to evidence himself no respecter of Persons, and to do all things
without partiality.

Righteousness is best, when in a Land, like the Sun in the Firmament, it
shines with equal influence upon the thatched Cottage, as on the Ivory Palace.

Justice shows all the same, countenance, weighs all things with an equal
balance. Gold and Dirt, Pibbles and Diamonds, according to their weight turn
her Beam. Diverse weights and measures the accounts an abomination.

Gods Deputies are to incline to exact Judgment, and to show themselves ready
to punish the rich and mighty, as soon as the poor and contemptible. And this
is best done by Governors fixing and predetermining of Punishments upon the
Offense, without respect to the quality or relation of the Offender.

Thus Impartiality and Justice, Wisdom and Purity, these Divine graces, are
best discovered in Gods Deputies, which, unquestionably, is the most reasonable
thing in the World.

One thing remains yet to be proved, which is asserted in this Proposition,
That threatening and determining of Punishments, by Rulers, upon such wilful
Transgress;orts, is according to the constant practice of the Church of God.

And, if we consult the profane Histories of all Ages and Nations, we shall
find, never any People joined in Society of any Religion, true or false, but
had their determinations of Punishments upon those that were openly
disobedient, upon those who wilfully neglected and contemned such Services and
Duties enjoined, that they judged expedient and necessary to procure the favor
and blessing of that Deity which they agreed to adore. And this is so evident,
as is confessed of all, and needs no further proof or illustration.

But if we will consult Sacred Writ, which may content us, we cannot but
observe, that GOD himself can rarely be found to have taken care of the Conduct
of any persons, or People, to direct them in the exercise of an acceptable
Religion, but he fenced up their way with Thorns, to limit their aberration,
and restrain them from sin, with a Commination of Penalties.

Thus, that our First Parents might fear to eat of the forbidden Fruit, he
threatens them with Death, as a certain effect and consequence of their
Disobedience.

Thus to Cain, If thou do not well, Sin lies at the door.

Thus, to move Abraham and his Seed to keep his Covenant of Circumcision, God
threatens, Genesis 17.14. That the uncircumcised Man-child, whose flesh of his
Foreskin was uncircumcised, that Soul should be cut off from his People; for
he has broken my Covenant.

Thus in that Theocracy over Israel, every where we read Curses denounced upon
Disobedience; And by Moses, and all the Prophets, he threatens to visit their
sins with Rods, and their offenses with Scourges. So Levit. 26.14, etc. If you
will not hearken to me, and will not do all these Commandments. If you shall
despise my Statutes, I will set my face against you for evil, etc. says the
LORD; And, if you will walk contrary unto me, and not hearken, I will bring
seven times more Plagues upon you, according to your sins.

And certainly, it cannot be bad or unreasonable for Rulers to use the same
method in governing their Subjects, that GOD used in ruling his own People,
Israel.

If we consult the method Christ used to govern his Church in this last
Dispensation, it is impossible but we must acknowledge, That a coercive Power,
by Commination of Judgments, to restrain from evil, and quicken to good, cannot
be unlawful for the Christian Magistrate, when it was practiced by Christ
himself.

John the Baptist, that Messenger sent by Christ, before his face to prepare
his ways, presses upon his Auditors the Gospel duty of Repentance, and this
he inforceth from this reason, because the kingdom of Heaven was at hand. Which
is not to be understood of Mercies and Privileges only, that were promised,
that might attract and encourage them to Gospel Duties; but of Judgments and
Punishments threatened to be executed, which might enforce them to receive and
obey the Gospel. And there, Matt. 3. this Holy Preacher tells them, The Axe was
laid to the Roots of the Tree. Fire and Wrath was coming upon the unbelieving
World, which could not be escaped but by Repentance, and bringing forth fruits
worthy of Amendment of life.

And Christ himself preaches the same Doctrine, and urges the necessity of it
from the same Motive; For, except they Repented, they should all likewise
perish.

And when Christ had cured the Impotent man, to make him every whit whole, and
to restrain him from sin, he affrights him with a Commination of a worse thing
coming unto him. And to quicken his Disciples, to work the works they were sent
about while it was day, he minds them of a night coming when no man should work.

Thus, to awaken his Countrymen at Jerusalem, to know and consider the time of
their Visitation, and to mind the things that concern their Peace, he tells
them of a time when Peace should be hid from their eyes, and their Houses
should be left to them desolate.

And thus did the Apostles, in the Primitive times, who knew the mind, and had
the Spirit of Christ; they threatened the Impenitent with a day of wrath, a day
of vengeance, a day of punishing those with everlasting destruction that knew
not God, and obeyed not the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

So the Author to the Hebrews, to deter and terrify those Baptized persons
from Separation, and forsaking holy Assembling, not to decline mutual
exhortation and profession of Faith, he tells them of a day of Judgment, a day
of Vengeanee was suddenly approaching.

And this course was used by Christ and his Apostles, in the Primitive times,
at the planting of the Gospel, by threatening of Judgments and Vengeance to
drive their Followers to Repentance. Certainly, upon sober consideration, it
cannot be looked upon as unwarrantable, if pious Governors affright from evil
those Subjects that else would be disobedient, with menacing and determining
Punishments to be inflicted upon them.

Those frivolous Objections we meet with against this Truth are not worth the
mentioning, and, if thoroughly perpended, we may conclude them the issue of heat
and passion of men bent to Opposition, and not the words of sober Reason.

And what Spirit they are led with, let any sober man judge, who reproach and
defame the just determination of emendatory Punishments upon Recusancy, and
wilful omission of necessary Duties (which is an open sin) with the odious name
of PERSECUTION; and are ready to blaspheme the Rulers and Officers if they
threaten these Penalties (much more if they execute them) as Cruel, Tyrannous
and Antichristian.

I confess willingly, men that have not quite obliterated the Divine Image,
have bowels of Mercy, are full of Pity and Compassion, and Pugnat cum Natura
hominis, Dolor qua Dolor satiari; for any man to be full of Malice, and to
contrive with malicious intention to torment and endeavor to destroy his
Neighbor, is unnatural and unchristian, it is a sin.

But thus, unreasonably and falsely, have they done what they can to blast the
Repute of an harmless and necessary Duty with a bad Name, when Punishments are
threatened by the pious Rulers, with the design of Peoples amendment and safety,
not their torment or destruction.

No man intends his Beasts should run into the Ditch, or hedge of Thorns,
wherewith he encompasseth his Grounds; but designs only they may feed safely
within due Bounds. It is peevish and ill-natured for them to clamor of
Persecution, when their Extravagances are limited, and safety endeavored. But
so it is, some froward Tempers, when any ways constrained to be virtuous, and
restrained from being vicious, will cry out they are persecuted and afflicted.

And, if any Affliction or Punishment does follow the wilful Transgression of
these men, it is not the Magistrates designing or causing; but their own
choosing is justly blamed, who pull Tribulation upon themselves by the errors
of their own ways.

Again, when Rulers and Officers, by agreeing and fixing of Punishments,
constrain men, through objected Inconveniences, to reflect upon the evil of
their ways and return from them, and to come into the way of Truth, who
otherwise would still err and be deceived; it is Mercy of the Ruler to the
Transgressour, who designs his salvation. The Cruelty (if any) is to the Sin,
and its no fault to design its destruction.

Lastly, Persecution then is faulty and blame worthy when it is for well-doing
only, when men are hated for Righteousness sake, without any cause when men are
industriously pursued, to be vexed and tormented for walking in ways of
holiness and righteousness. This is Persecution indeed to be complained of and
lamented.

But when Punishments are deliberately threatened, and inflicted upon open
Disobedience and wilful Recusancy, these are Acts of remunerative Justice, a
Nations prop and and glory, and deserve justly to be commended. It is injurious
to account this a Persecution that deserves to be condemned.

They are therefore deservedly accounted malicious and injurious, who clamor
against the just determination of Punishments by pious Rulers against open
Transgressions, with censures of a culpable Persecution, which is, doing
Justice and no Injury; is Mercy and no Cruelty; an evidence of the Rulers
design of his Subjects Conversion and Salvation, not of Vexation and
Destruction. Which if it does happen upon the obstinate Offender, he pulls it
upon himself by his own choice; it comes not from the Rulers intention or
resolution.

Another Objection we hear frequently against the threatening and determination
of Punishments by Christian Magistrates, it is openly complained, That they
force the Conscience of the Righteous, which ought to have its Liberty. Their
Conscience, they cry it abroad, ought to be left Free.

But I appeal to any sober person to judge, whether these Complaints of
Greivances be not rather fancied and feigned, than possible to be feared or
imposed: But some there are that fear where no fear was.

To discourse this Point, in reference to our present State, Punishments,
threatened by our Governors Laws, for wilful Recusancy, is, twelve pence for
one Sunday, twenty pound for one Month, to be levied by Distress, a Force is
threatened upon their Purse, and they cry out a Force is offered to their
Conscience, which is impossible.

For when the Magistrates Sword and Power can reach only to Goods, or Body, or
what is external (than this they can do no more) they can have no power of the
conclusions of the Understanding, or resolutions of the Will, or any thing
internal, which we must understand by Conscience.

And, suppose the Magistrate can have any power upon Conscience, the operation
he can have will prove but Moral, not Physical; to incline it, not to force it.
Neither is this to be conceived feasible by Man, which is hardly to be
conceived to be done by God himself: For Force implies a thing to be done of
thee, thou art merely passive when Forced, and is scarcely to be imagined of
voluntary Agents, who are active, and are said to do what they do themselves.
Quicquid fit de te, tu non facis; Thy Conclusion or Resolution, is thy own
voluntary Act.

And as I said before of the Liberty, so I say now of Force, It is inconsistent
with, and cannot be offered to Conscience. Thy Conscience is freely thine own,
and cannot be forced, and if Force be upon any thing it is upon externals only,
it cannot be upon thy Conscience.

Thou fear, and criest out of that which cannot be offered thee, namely,
Force of Conscience; and thou dotest on and idolizest a Chimaera, NOTHING, what
thou can never find, namely, Liberty of Conscience.

Liberty of Conscience thou coutendest for, as thou say. Consider, thou have
not fully expressed thy mind and intendment; thou can not desire or contend for
what thou can not possibly have. There is something else thou meanest and
contendest for; and really, that thing is liberty of Action, licentiousness of
Recusancy, that thou may freely transgress the Preceptive Laws of Piety
without penalty. And this thou paintest and gildest over with a varnish and
pretense of Conscience.

Now, what Rule have thou that directs thee wilfully to omit and refuse the
Public Exercises of Piety? And if no certain Rule, thou can have no sound
Conscience. Thou have a Rule that forbids Recusancy, and it is a sin; Will thou
pretend a Conscience, to continue in sin? If thou have any Conscience in what
thou contendest for, it must be an accusing or condemning one: And well it were
if the Sword of the Magistrate could Force this Conscience from thee.

I am sure thou desire amiss to have Liberty and Freedom to enjoy a
condemning Conscience. I have no patience to persist any further Arguing; but I
have so much charity, not to desist from praying for you, that our Father would
forgive you, for you know not what you say.

At last then, study to be quiet, you that dissent and separate from us, and
seriously consider how your heat of Opposition and Contention has transported
you to the venting of such ridiculous Fancies, as certainly, if we do not
abjure Reason, we must expect to see them suddenly hissed out of the Nation.

From the Premises then, we must conclude, That the threatening and determining
of Punishments against Recusancy, is Mercy and Compassion, and ought not to be
called Cruelty or Persecution. That they tend to the informing and not
enforcing of Right Consciences. And that it is clearly evident, from Reason, and
her Dictates; from the Custom of all Nations; from the practice of GOD, both
before, and in the time of the Law; from the preaching of Christ, and his
Ministers, in the time of the Gospel; they are not only justifiable, but
expedient and necessary in the Church of GOD.

Proposition IV. The inflicting of Punishments, as determined, is just and
necessary for the safety and welfare of our Nation.
MAGISTRATES care and endeavor ought to be, to promote the welfare of the
People to whom they are related; and, without question, this is most likely to
be compassed, by an Impartial execution of an exact Righteousness.
RIGHTEOUSNESS is not only the Girdle, Robe and Diadem of the Ruler; but the
Stay, Crown and Glory of the whole Society.

Now Commutative Justice in Contracts and Bargains (if men would not be partial
to their own Interest, but dispatch them with equity, without fraud to each
others convenience) conduces highly to the content, comfort, and prosperity of
a People. Yet because frequent Contracts are often agreed of by Private persons,
for the most part secretly, and rarerly fall under the Magistrates cognizance;
At this time Commutative Justice will come little under our present
Consideration. Our great respect in this Treatise must be to distributive
Justice, which is of universal influence, and tends to Public peace and
prosperity of a Society. And it is the principal office and work of the just
Magistrate, undoubtedly, to see this executed impartially.

Now, refined Notions, and empty Speculations, are not sufficient for the
discharge of the Rulers duty in distributive Righteousness: But his business is
done in his office by practice and action, and his care must be not only of
passing a right Sentence, but of impartial execution of a meet Recompense,
proportioned to the Merit of every man's work.

Not only, that they who obey honest Laws, and continue in well-doing, may have
Commands, Riches, Glory, and Honor and Rewards, as encouragements to Virtuous
actions; but also, that they who are wilfully disobedient, may have
Indignation, Wrath, Tribulation, Anguish and Penalties inflicted, as restraints
and deterrments from sinful and Irregular attempts.

And to see this latter done, is the Magistrates Province as much as the
former, being sent by God as much for the punishment of evil doers, as for the
praise of them that do well.

REWARDS and PVNISHMENTS are like two Pillars or Walls, that support and uphold
the stately structure of Righteousness, under whose shadow and defense a People
may abide and rest comfortably, in peaceful Habitations. Take away one Pillar
or Wall, and all is shuffled together, the whole building becomes useless, and
is ruined immediately.

Let there be no fear of an ensuing Punishment to follow upon acts of
Wickedness in our Nation, and there will be little love or care of
Righteousness in the midst of us.

That Punishment should be inflicted upon the Offender is natural and divine.
God in the beginning did determine it, and surely what he determines is Just,
in whom is no unrighteousness.

And if the threatening and determining of Punishments be Just, then it must
follow, the inflicting of them must be Just also, and will follow certainly,
For he that is righteous hates lying, and he that loves Truth, will
faithfully perform what he has deliberately promised; and what he has spoken
for his Honors sake, will certainly bring it to pass.

To act like God cannot be injust; therefore Gods Deputies in judging any part
of the World, as to determine punishments upon Offenders, so to inflict them
when determined, must be just and reasonable also.

Again, Rulers are to be like God, and their chief Duty, by his appointment
that sent them to the Office, both by the Gospel as well as the Law, is to
execute vengeance upon wilful Transgressors. The Sword was given them, not as
an empty badge of Honor, for a show, for fashion, for ornament only, but for
use, for employment, for terror; For he is the Minister of God, a Revenger, to
execute wrath upon him that does evil, Romans 13.4.

The Private man that takes the Sword rashly, shall perish by the Sword of the
Magistrate justly; and who sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed.
And it is a great part of wisdom for an holy King, to scatter the wicked, and
to bring the Wheel over them, Prove. 20.26.

And without any great pains, it may be proved to have been the will of God in
all times, declared both before the Law of Moses, under the Law, and under the
Gospel, that Capital Punishments (if the heynonsness of the Crime deserved it)
might be justly inflicted.

And if Capital and Sanguinary punishments can be proved lawful, because in all
Ages appointed and allowed by God; sure Emendatory punishments cannot be denied
but they may be inflicted, and their inflicting may easily be justified.

True indeed, we ought not to mock at Calamity, or rejoice when an Enemy
falls. Vengeance ought not to be the Godly man's choice, which is not the
delight of God himself; and it is not agreeable with the nature of Man, to
delight himself with the grief, and to make himself pleasure with the torment
of his Neighbor.

Yet it is reasonable and just the Malefactor should be punished, and that
tribulation and wrath should come upon him that works unrighteousness. And
certainly they have as little Charity as Reason, who blaspheme him as malicious
or mischievous that accuses or punishes the Rebellious or Injurious.

1. Punishments, as to the Malefactors, prove but like bitter, unpleasing
potions, that work strongly for succeeding health. And if Capital, their Bodies
are destroyed that their Souls may be saved.

2. To put a period to the Malefactors wickedness; Vt quo uno modo
Possunt definant esse mali.
Sen. That they who would not learn to be good, may at last be restrained and
cease to do evil.

3. That others may be affrighted. For, Poena ad unum, metus ad omnes. That the
whole Congregation may hear and fear, and that they may not dare to sin so
presumptuously, or to commit any such evil among them; For when a Scorner is
smitten, the simple will beware, Prove. 19.25.

4. That the Righteous may be preserved, which cannot be but by Coertions and
Restraints upon the Wicked; keeping them in fear of Punishment. When, Inter tot
supplicia sontium satis tuta Innocentia, Innocence it self is scarcely safe,
and is never secure amidst all the Punishments. And to suspend Penalties is the
ready way to make the Rulers undervalued and contemned; their Laws slighted and
reproached; to cause the Offender to grow secure, impudent and not ashamed; to
make the heart of the Righteous faint, and the hands of the Wicked strengthened.

Upon these and some other Reasons, some dare not deny all Penalties, but would
have them inflicted only for the breach of Natural and Moral Laws, but not at
all for breach of Positive or Humane.

But I would have all Dissenters in this point consider that they may be
informed, How that cannot be unlawful, in probability, if done in the
Government of Men, which was so often done and practiced by God himself, in his
dealings and actings, amidst the Government of his Chosen people.

And it may very easily be made appear, upon a little observation, That where
God has most clearly manifested his Care to persons or people, that there he
required Obedience (not only to commands of things or actions intrinsecally in
their own nature good, but also to commands of things or actions that in
themselves were indifferent) when once enjoined and published; in that he did
not only take Vengeance on them that despised his Moral Precepts, but executed
it most severely on them that transgressed his Positive Commands.

Thus he most severely punished our First Parents for eating the Forbidden
fruit; Achan, for touching the unclean thing; Saul, for sparing Agag, and
saving the best of the Prey; the Prophet for eating Bread in the other Prophets
house; Lots Wife, for looking back.

Certainly, upon good reason this was done; for when God will maintain his
Prerogative, and be tender of his Honor, How could he hold him guiltless that
would despise his Authority Commanding? suspect his Goodness or Wisdom, or both
Directing? and, who frowardly as discontented with his wise disposal, would
betray his distrust of the sufficiency of the Almighty, and call in question
his direction; and wilfully shall gratify their own Humor and Fancy, rather
than dutifully submit to the express designation and appointment of the most
wise God. For, Obedientia in iis, quae parva sunt, exploratius probatur;
Disobedience to those least Commands is the greatest Disobedience, when we dare
rebel for a trifle.

And certainly, in submitting to Commands that seem least necessary, we give
testimony of our greatest observance, when we bring under our Reason to our
Faith, in his wise Directions, and silence our disputing with ready Obeying.

But when persons shall obey God only in those things they conceive Reasonable,
or think them profitable, only when the nature of the thing requires it, or
their own Interest or Advantage is concerned; Certainly, in such Obedience it
may safely be concluded, That such Persons offend rather than do what is
acceptable, when things are done with greater respect to please themselves,
rather than out of Reverence to please their God. And these Transgressions
which have been so great Offenses against God, must needs be also when against
his Deputies, even the neglect and breach of Positive Laws; and Punishments
proportionably determined, are justly inflicted upon those that are thus
unreasonably disobedient.

By this means persons discover their distrust of the Providence of God; who,
if any where, is to be found standing in the Congregations of Princes, and sits
and judges amongst the Gods: And, by whom Kings reign, by him Princes decree
Justice.

By this means the Authority of the Ruler is made vile and despicable, and his
Wisdom undervalued, and Directions as contemptible.

By this means others are prompted by thy Disobedience, to harbor low conceits
of their Governors, and to run with thee into the like disorder and
miscarriage; and the issue must be, unyieldingness, opposition, confusion, and
every evil work.

And, by this means the Morality of the fifth Commandment is quite destroyed,
when men can satisfy themselves with a formal (which is often feigned) respect
to the Persons, and have no regard to the Commands of their Governors.

When in truth, Submission to Humane Ordinances, as much as they are slighted,
is the clearest evidence of thy subjection to Higher Powers; and thy
Disobedience is no slight trifling disobedience. That Punishment should be
inflicted, as determined, upon such wilful Offenders, is just and reasonable,
and undoubtedly according to the will of Christ.

And now well I wot for these Positions, especially for this last (which I will
hereafter in spite of opposition, more fully and more clearly maintain, if
either desired, commanded, or provoked to it) I must undoubtedly expect and
prepare for it, That Troops of Antinomians, Anabaptists, Presbyterians,
Independants, Quakers, all the Libertines and Separatists, will with open mouth
come roaring upon me, and charge me as a person of a fiery, cruel, persecuting
disposition, that has nothing of the Gospel Temper, nor of the Spirit of
Christ.

But if they would thus go on to reproach and rail on me, and lay things to my
charge of which I am not guilty of, God he knows, by those Courses they will
never be able to acquit or purge themselves.

For who does not see, how Ambition, Opposition, or Interest has biased and
perverted their Judgments (if they can be said to have any in these things they
pretend) when having stolen into a Name and Party (as they falsely think)
considerable; and willing to set up both, out of ambition in themselves, and
opposition to Governors; they never boggle, without check or fear, at the
transgressing the wise and honest Laws established, and Rules prescribed unto
us, suggesting falsely, by their words and practices, that they are unlawful;
and when by their obstinacy they have incurred the danger of the Censure of the
Laws, and the Penalties affixed to them, then it must be their main concern
under a color of Meekness and false-term'd Moderation, to strive for a lawless
Toleration, that they may sin (when they cannot without Guilt) yet without
Punishment.

And now, It is their great business openly to preach and declare, That the
execution of Penalties determined, ought to be suspended, if not rescinded, and
so endeavor to involve the whole Nation confusedly to run into an Universal
Licentiousness, upon hope of Impunity. Things they can never believe fit to be
granted, whatever they say.

For if the Power and the Sword were put into their hands, when no Nation can
be preserved, nor Justice executed, without inflicting Punishments upon wilful
Transgressors; it is not to be imagined but they would quickly give a divorce
to these wild Principles they seem to espouse and maintain; Punishments would
quickly be determined, and readily executed by them on Dissenters and
Disobedient; and no doubt of it, we should feel by too sensible experience,
what we have formerly known, That they would be more cruel and bloody, than any
that can be justly charged upon our Governors to be so.

And say what they can, it is evident it is not a Toleration but Mastery that
these men aim at; for had they power, I dare say, their fiery zeal would again
be discovered to advance the Interest of their Sect and Opinion, and so severe
would their Determinations be, and execution of Penalties upon Dissenters, as
no man dissenting should find Impunity: Which, God forbid.

But now let us examine their Objections against our last mentioned Positions,
and seriously observe their strength and reasonableness, if any to be found in
them.

And they object thus unanimously, That Bodily, or External Punishments, cannot
be shown to have been ordered, to be determined and inflicted by any Rules of
the Gospel, nor proved that ever they were determined or executed by Christ or
his Apostles, especially not upon Omission, or difference of any in the open
profession of Faith, or public exercise of Religion.

And without haesitancy, with as much earnestness, but with more truth and
reason, we utterly deny all these things, and doubt not but to any sober
Reason, we shall assert and prove the direct contrary.

It is confessed by all, and not denied by any that I have met with, That,
before the last dispensation, Bodily and External Punishments might lawfully be
agreed upon and inflicted, and so they were in every Polity and Government:
that Sin might be restrained, and Righteousness executed, to preserve Peace,
and promote the welfare of the Society.

Before Christ's Incarnation, this is owned to have been natural and universal,
and according to the different heinousness of Offenders Crimes, and their
noxious influence; so by wise Governors there has been ordered variety and
difference of Punishments. The highest whereof have been Capital, mortal,
destructory of the Body and Life, which is all the Ruler can reach unto. And
that those have been lawfully inflicted before the Law, and in the Law, is
acknowledged by our Adversaries themselves.

Now, if our Opposers cannot show where this was repealed in the Gospel, I am
sure I can show where it was established; For Christ came not to dissolve, or
destroy the Law of Nature, but confirm and fulfill it, and it must continue in
Polities, as lawful in the times of the Gospel, as it was before, and in the
time of the Law. And this Inference must follow, If Capital, and destructory
Punishments may, certainly, those that are Emendatory may be determined and
inflicted by Governors, from the Rules of the Gospel.

Now, that the open and obstinate may perish by the Sword of the Higher Powers,
who bears it not in vain, is so plain from Christ's own words and the Apostles
Letters, as it were mispending of time to insist in a further proof or
demonstration.

Therefore, some of our Adversaries are so modest, as to confess the Gospel
does permit Capital Punishments to be inflicted by Magistrates, upon
contumacious persons, disturbing public Charity and Peace; but for things or
actions that concern Piety or Religion, either for Omission or Transgression,
the Gospel gives the Offender an Impunity and Indemnity, say our Opposers in
this particular; but with what truth or reason let any man judge.

But yet it is confidently asserted, That Heresy, or any erroneous Opinion
(which man can give a Reputation unto with a specious name of CONSCIENCE, when
it can be nothing less) ought not to be punished.

If by Heresy they mean, a secret though resolute electing or adhering to some
Opinion or Persuasion, contrary to some fundamental Article of Faith, or some
duty of Religion, if they keep it secret, that no man has cognizance of it,
the Magistrate can neither judge it, nor punish it, for his Power reaches only
to external and manifest things.

But open publication of this, defaming the Gospel, or any one Article of
Faith, accompanied with an endeavor to gain Proselytes to his Erroneous
Persuasion, this may be justly censured or punished.

Declared Heresy, and open Schisms, are of dreadful consequence to disturb the
Peace of the whole Society.

St. Paul wished, and not unlawful, if the Magistrate endeavor, they may be
cut off that trouble it. For such not only disturb the Society in point of
Piety, but in point of Charity and Peace, while they cause difference of
pretended Judgment, Faith, Consciences; upon which there must follow alienation
of Affections, and Contentions, as has been declared before sufficiently.

Now, if those sins that abuse our Piety to God have as bad or worse
influences, for unhappy consequences, as the sins that abuse Charity to our
Neighbors; why they should have lesser, or no punishment, it is beyond my
narrow Reason to discover.

This then I positively affirm, and will not doubt to maintain, That Heresy or
Schism, when open and declared, and disturbs the Peace of the Society, or any
other manifest sin, ought to have Punishments determined and inflicted by
Magistrates, by the Rules of the Gospel. And I hope it will be granted, what
was ordered by those Rules, may lawfully be ordered by the Laws of Rulers to
the end of the World.

It is yet insisted on, These things were not done by Christ or his Apostles.
That Christ threatened woes and destruction to the unbelieving Jews is
unquestionably evident; and that as he threatened them, so upon their
impenitence he inflicted them.

True indeed, all the time of Christ's Ministry and Humiliation, he did not
manifest his Regal power, by inflicting Punishments, but only by threatening
them upon supposed Disobedience. But when Ascended, taking upon him to be Judge
and King, he punished the Rebellious; and the Judgments and ruin of the Jews
must be acknowledged to have come by the avenging Power of Christ.

As he threatened, so he caused the root of the Tree to wither for its
unfruitfulness. For not returning Fruit when demanded of his Vineyard, he
pulled down the Wall thereof, and it was trodden down. For killing the Heir, he
miserably destroyed the Husbandmen. Because Jerusalem would not be gathered
together under the Obedience of the Gospel, he caused their House to be left
unto them desolate.

And sure it cannot be supposed unlawful, if it be lone by Christian Rulers
upon open and obstinate Transgressors, which was evidently done by Christ
himself.

And for the Apostles, Though they were not Kings, yet they had Authority to
censure and punish those that were obstinately disobedient, and they did
exercise their Power wherewith they were entrusted to this end, when their
Excommunication was often attended with Temporal Penalties, to the destruction of
the flesh sometimes, that the Soul might be saved.

And who dare say, It is unjust for Rulers, appointed by God, to do the like
things, for the same Reasons and End, which the extraordinary Spirit of Christ,
given to the Apostles, effected.

One thing yet remains to prove, viz. That this was done upon Omission or
Recusancy of Obedience to the Gospel. And questionless so it was; for Christ
(because the Jews would not know the time of his Visitation in mercy) visits
them with Judgments. They rejected him and his Counsel, would not receive the
Gospel, and therefore he ordered and brought destruction upon them.

And thus was it done by the Apostles also, who for open sins and disobedience
to Gospel Rules, came not always with spirits of Meekness, but sometimes with a
Rod. The obstinate Offender was ordered to be Corrected that he might be
ashamed; sometimes he was taken away from the Society of the Faithful, and
delivered to Satan for the destruction of the Flesh.

And, why should it seem unjust for our Magistrates to order the like things,
when by the Rules of the Gospel, by the practice of Christ and his Apostles,
Punishments may be determined and inflicted for wilful Omission of Gospel
Duties, and manifest Disobedience.

And if any may, sure I am Ours be, that are ordered and determined with so
much tenderness and moderation, as all the World must acknowledge our Rulers
designs are to amend their Subjects and not destroy them. They show themselves
good Physicians, they love not many Funerals. They had rather heal the
distempered Member, than cut it off. They proceed slowly and rarely to mortal
Punishments, only when the heinousness of the Crimes exact them, and, if
tolerated, would endanger the Peace of a great part of the Society. So that
undoubtedly, the Clamours of Oppression and Persecution, when penal Statutes
against Recusants are executed, as determined, can never be defended or excused.

When that peaceable and quiet state of the Church in the last Times, so often
commended, and promised, and desired by us, was promised upon a condition of a
Gospel Obedience, and cannot in reason be expected upon Professors wilful
Recusancy, and open Disobedience. Upon which, if any thing happens that is
over-grievous and vexatious to the Transgressor, let him blame himself, and not
his Rulers; When, sua voluntate obligat se ad poenam.

For when Laws are agreed upon soberly and deliberately; when published openly
as most convenient; when consented unto by declared Vows and Subscriptions, and
when Punishments are fixed upon supposed Transgression; the punishment happens
by the Recusants own election, for no man chooses such a Transgression, but
chooses such a Punishment. He had warning, knew the danger, and would run into
it; His blood be upon his own head.

Thus far we have reason, I hope, to conclude, That Punishments are justly
inflicted as determined; It follows now we proceed to prove, That it is
necessary to inflict Punishments, for the safety and welfare of our Nation.

MAGISTRATES, whose Offices are to their utmost, to advance the Public good of
the Community in which they are interessed, can no way more effectually
discharge their Duties, than by taking care of an impartial execution of
distributive Righteousness, rendering to every man the Recompense that is meet,
according to the Merit of his work. And one essential part of this distributive
Righteousness, is, the just inflicting of Punishments upon those obstinate
Offenders, who openly continue in evil doing. In our present State this is
necessary for the welfare of this Society in which we live.

That which evidently conduces to the order and peace of our whole Nation, and
without which all Orders of men are disturbed and injured, must be granted to
be necessary.

But without the just inflicting of Punishment as determined, all Orders of Men
are disturbed and injured. Ergo.

And, That the omission or neglect of a just inflicting of Penalties, as
determined, has an hurtful influence upon all Orders of Men (if we do not
unreasonably deny our senses and experience) we shall prove immediately.

1. With all submission we shall presume to consider, That an execution of
Vindicative Righteousness makes the Rulers honorable, and without this, their
Persons become despicable, and their Authority contemptible.

Vindicative Righteousness is the glory of a Ruler, it begets an awful
reverence and fear toward him from all his Subjects. The conspicuity of this
makes a man more excellent than his Neighbor. This made every ear that heard
Job to bless him, and every eye to bear witness unto him, and every knee to bow
to him, because he broke the Jaws of the wicked, and plucked the Prey out of
his Teeth.

Without this Executing Vengeance, when Rulers are cool and indifferent, and
connive at open sins, it must create a suspicion in others, that they are ready
to countenance them; Men can hardly forbear to entertain low and dishonorable
thoughts of that Governor, when they see he takes no Vengeance upon the open
Transgressor. They are ready to think, He is unworthily accounted above his
Fellows, who shows not his love to Righteousness by his open hatred to
Wickedness.

Without this activity of the Ruler, he has, for the most part among his
People, the same fate the great Logg had that fell into the Lake among the
Frogs; at its first fall they trembled and hid themselves, but at length
observing it stupid and inanimate, they crept up upon the top of it, and
insultingly croaked over it. Like a Scarr-Crow, at whose first sight hurtful
Fowls flock about and wonder at it, but perceiving it dead and unaciive, then
Terror vanishes, and they impudently sit upon the top of it, and defile it.

Thus punitive Righteousness exalts and renders Honorable, but Indulgence and
Impunity of sins are Reproaches to the Rulers of any People.

Again, I humbly propound it to Honorable Rulers consideration, That their
Indulgence to any open sin entitles them to the guilt of the same sin; They
have fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, that do not reprove them.

Poor Old Ely (good enough in other things for ought we read) by his Indulgence
to his Sons sins, contracts that guilt that he dreadfully suffered, for GOD, by
his Prophet told him, That he had despised him, and set his Sons above him, 1 Samuel 2.29, 30. and by Samuel he is expressly told his Iniquity which he must
know, viz. His Sons had made themselves vile, and he restrained them not.

And, let this be seriously thought of, That he who acts a sin may be catched
suddenly in a surprizal, through the prevalence of a Temptation; but, he that
deliberately consents to another acting, can hardly find a tolerable Excuse.
He is inexcusable, who knowing the judgment of God (that they who commit such
things as are worthy of death) not only do the same, but take pleasure in them
that do them. Faciens and Consentiens eadem lege tenentur: Qui tolerat aliena
peccata cum tollere potest facit sua. Religious Magistrates ought to take heed,
that they do not make Rebellious men's sins theirs, by Connivance or Indulgence,
who have too many to answer for of their own.

Again, as Indulgence in Rulers makes them guilty of sin, so it makes them
liable to the Judgment of GOD.

This is plain in good Old Ely's case, his gentheness and lenity to his Sons
proved cruelty to himself, and made him the sad object of the Anger of God; For
God is known and honored when Judgment is executed. And, they that honor him
in this, shall be honored; and whosoever despise this shall be lightly esteemed.

And, what Ruler that is guilty of this sin, in sparing whom God would have
punished, but must tremble when he reads the Sentence of the Lord by his
Prophet to Ahab, when he spared Benhadad? 1 Kings 20.42. Because thou have let
go a man out of thy hand, whom I appointed to utter destruction; therefore thy
life shall go for his life, and thy People for his People.

I truly honor, but dare not flatter those Rulers God has set over us; and
therefore I presume to put this into their remembrance, that toleration and
suspension of Penalties may be feared, and hereafter avoided by them; because
it is a dishonorable sin, and dangerous for them not to inflict Punishments,
as determined upon Recusancy and wilful Disobedience. He must remove the wicked
from him, and scatter all evil with his Eye, that would have his Throne
established by Righteousness.

2. As inflicting Punishments is necessary for the Governors, so for all their
Subjects, for the Transgressors sake, how grievous soever it may seem to him,
yet it works for good. For if the Punishment be destructory it can but be of
the Body only, and before that comes, time and helps are afforded, for working
that Repentance which may be accepted, so as the Soul we hope, by this means,
may be saved.

But most of our Punishments are castigatory, for amendment; and when (do we
think) will the sinner be amended, if never corrected. He will hardly be drawn
off from his accustomed Iniquity, that sees he can act it with Impunity.
Because Judgment is not executed, his heart is freely set upon his wickedness.
But, Malo suo dedoceatur malus delinquere. Sen. He is mad if he dotes and runs
to that wickedness which he sees hated and abominated, and will certainly be
punished. When he is sharply reproved, he will be ashamed.

There is a Cruel mercy sometimes in God and his Deputies which is to be
feared, when they are resolved not to discover their Anger against Offenders;
when they seem to be contented with their Delusions, and suffer them to sleep
on, vainly and securely, to their final destruction.

And there is a discovery of Anger from both, which ought to be loved; when
they hedge up the Transgressors way with Thorns; when by pains they awaken them
out of their Lethargy, and will not suffer them to sleep the sleep of death.

Thus, when Indulgence and Impunity contribute to the sinners destruction;
executing of Judgments must be judged necessary, when they must conduce to the
Transgressors amendment and salvation.

3. Executing of Judgments is necessary for the Righteous man's sake, without
which he must be discouraged, he must be offended and troubled. When Wickedness
triumphs and bears sway, the righteous are sad; but when Righteousness rules,
the godly rejoice. Impunity to the Sinner, is, a scandal, a stumbling block to
the Righteous. When it goes well with the Wicked, and they come in no
misfortune like other men, the Holy man is prompted to think it is in vain he
has served God, or made choice of any of his Ways. If there be any love in
Rulers to the flourishing of Righteousness, they cannot give way to the
indempnifying of Wickedness.

4. Inflicting of Punishments on the Transgressors, helps on the Amendment of
the whole Society. They will hear and fear, and will not dare to commit such
evil as will torment them. When Judgments are executed, the Inhabitants of the
earth will learn Righteousness. But, because sentence against an evil work is
not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the Sons of men is fully set in
them to do evil. Care therefore is necessary in Rulers to punish open
wickedness, if they desire about them an Holy people, and a Nation of
Righteousness.

5. This is necessary to give a Reputation to our Laws, that they are justly
and deliberately established, and have Penalties so affixed upon supposed
Disobedience. Our lives would be confused and uncomfortable without Laws, and
Laws are vain and unprofitable without Execution. By this suspension we give
ground to others to suspect, that we our selves doubt and fear that our Laws
determined are needless if not unlawful. But if they be unjust and needless, in
Gods Name let them be repealed and abrogated; but if they be just and
necessary, let us give them their deserved honor by a due Execution.

6. This is necessary for the safety and welfare of the whole Nation. For if
the Wicked be acquitted and goes unpunished, it is an abomination unto the
Lord: And, in any Nation, the not inflicting Judgments on sinners, hastens the
coming of the Judgments of God. There was not a man that executed Judgment in
Jerusalem, etc. Jer. 5. and God justifies the equity of his proceeding to
Judgment against that City, by that expostulation, Shall I not visit for these
things says the Lord, and shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as
this? If the faithful City becomes an Harlot; if she that was full of Judgment,
and had once Righteousness lodged in her, shall pervert or neglect Judgment,
Vengeance will come upon her from God, though with a sigh; Ah, I will ease me
of mine Enemies, and avenge my self upon such Adversaries, says the Lord of
Hosts, the holy and mighty One of Israel, Isai. 1.24.

But the Magistrates anger for Sins, turns away Gods Anger from a Nation; and
the executing of Judgment by Man, diverts the Judgment of God. Phineas stood up
and executed Judgment, and the Plague was stayed. Executing of Righteousness
not only appeaseth God, but procures his favor and blessings upon a People. It
makes God delight to dwell amongst them; for JUSTICE and JVDGMENT are the
habitation of his Throne. It not only speaks the Beauty but the sound
Constitution of that Government. Where Mercy and Truth meet together,
Righteousness and Peace kiss each other. Happy are the People that are in such
a case; for the Lord will show them what is good, and their Land shall yield
her increase.

If then the honor and preservation of our Rulers be precious unto us; If we
be desirous of the Transgressors Conversion and Salvation; If we would not
discourage and offend the Righteous; If we would not put a disreputation upon
our Laws, to render them contemptible, Then our care must be, that Punishments
be inflicted upon open and wilful Transgressors, as determined; for this (as
you have heard it proved) is not only just but necessary, for the safety and
welfare of our whole Nation.

Thus far, my Dear Countrymen, I have communicated openly, and presented to
your entertainment my serious Thoughts and Reasons upon four Propositions, so
easily justifiable, as although I cannot hope but I shall have many Opposers
and Gainsayers, yet I confess, I do not fear any Confuters.

What I have published did not proceed out of Opposition, from the heat of an
enraged Passion to carry me to any sharp reflections on particular Persons; but
are considerately come abroad in the simplicity of my spirit, out of an
unfeigned desire of Truth and Peace, which I heartily desire may at last
prevail and triumph in the midst of us. The direct way to this end, is, to
receive these things with the same spirit that they are written.

I verily believe, Prejudice will keep off many from reading or considering
these Truths, asserted and proved in this Treatise, because they utterly
destroy that wild Liberty and Indulgence which this Licentious Age so much
affects.

Some few of that Temper will read them, but disrelish them, and I think (what
many do) very few will be reclaimed by them. But yet I comfort my self, that my
labor will not be in vain, if some of our wel-wishing Friends, of more
moderate Tempers, will deign the favor of a look upon these weak Endeavors.
If they be not informed, yet they will be more fully confirmed, in the practice
of those Duties that are required at all our hands, when most agreeable to the
Law of Nature, and the Rules of the Gospel.

But to our Reasoning and Arguing, we must call in the Magistrates Sword to
assist; all without this will be little effectual, to reduce that general
Uniformity desired, which will prove the beauty and glory both of this Church
and Nation.

To you therefore I am constrained in this necessity, for our full Releif, to
make my humble Address, that are our RVLERS, and in Authority, appointed by God
for our good. It is evident your Concern by your Offices, is, to carry on this
great design, and are not barely to have respect to the Notion, but to the
Execution of Righteousness; and so you are not only to animadvert severely upon
Transgressors, of moral, natural, necessary and divine Laws; but upon those
that break the positive, particular, human Ordinances, that you have in Your
Wisdom deliberately and justly established among us.

If persons were so well disposed, as Counsels or Monitions might persuade all
to be good, from the Pulpit or in the Closet, then no need to urge any Rigor
from either Bench or Bar; but our unhappy Necessities require this at Your
hands, who are Ministers of Remunerative Justice, to show your selves as well a
Terror to them that do evil, as a Countenance to them that do well.

You see what a lamentable success your Lenity has had hitherto, it must be
Severity must do your business. Your method of leading this People, must be now
like God leading his Israel from Egypt to Canaan: the Conduct must not be only
as in the day, to lead them by a Cloud; but in this night it must be, by a
Pillar of Fire. The eyes of these People have too long been daubed up with
Honey, they must at last be opened with Gall: better to suffer some smart and
Cure them, than suffer them, through blindness, to run headlong into the pit.

Breath then at last, fresh life into the languishing Laws of a fainting
Kingdom, by an impartial Execution. Offer unto God the sacrifice of
Righteousness, and take all care that Justice and Judgment may be executed in
the midst of us. Remember, Lenity and Indulgence are Encouragements to the
Transgressour; and Cruelty and Grievances to the Innocent.

If you conceal and smother Disorder; if you wink at Wickedness, and
countenance Disobedience; Oh, sad Consequences! both your selves and your
wholesome Laws are dishonored and slighted. You are injurious to the Offender,
while his heart is hardened, because for his sin he is not corrected: You offend
the Righteous, when he is scandalized: You hurt your weak Neighbor, for he is
staggered if not perverted: You hurt your own Souls, for you are perjured; yea,
You are injurious to GOD, by Indulgence to Recusancy; for his Worship is
undervalued and contemned. For your own, for the Laws, for the Offenders, for
the Righteous, for your weak Neighbor, for Religion, for Gods sake, let there
be no more halting, no longer connivance be found in the midst of us. Execute
true Judgment without partiality, and if we cannot have that Obedience to the
Laws, which is justly required, let the Offender feel that just Vengeance which
is threatened.

Then, and not till then, we may hope to see the two standing Ordinances,
MAGISTRACY and MINISTRY, will be reverenced and respected, which as yet are
but mocked at and despised. Then we may hope, the Laws about the public
Exercise of Religion will find obligation and observance, which as yet are let
loose and weakened, and from too many meet with scorn and contempt. Then we
shall once again see the Faith of the Gospel openly professed by every
Believer, which now is concealed in most Congregations, as if men had cause
thereof to be ashamed. Then, and not till then, will the Church of England
recover her attractive comeliness and beauty, which is now much defaced and
loathed. Then Uniformity, the Glory of a Believing Nation, which has been too
long banished, will be brought back with joy into every Congregation. Then there
will be no more running into Corners, but the Tribes of our Israel will
unanimously go up to the House of their God, unto their Testimony, to give
thanks unto the Name of the LORD. Then shall God be glorified in all the
Assemblies of his Saints, by open Confession, which he knows is my earnest
endeavor and design, in my constant prayer in the Name of the Lord JESUS. To
whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory and honor, now and for
ever, Amen.

A Catalogue of some Books, Printed for, and Sold by H. Brom, since the
dreadful Fire of London, to 1675.
Divinity.
MR. Farindon 's 130 excellent Sermons, in 3 Vol. in fol. Price 2 l. 5 s. A
large Concordance, by S.N. to the Bible, fol. 16 s. 51 Sermons in fol. by Dr.
Franck, 15 s. Dr. Heylin on the Creed, fol. 15 s. A Guide to the Humble, by
Tho. Elborow, B.D. in octavo. 2 s. A Guide to Eternity, by John Bona, octavo, 2
s. A Guide to Heaven, with, A Rule of Life, 10 d. A Companion to the Temple,
or, A help to public Devotion, by Tho. Cumber, in octavo. 4 s. Holy Anthems of
the Church, 2 s. 6 d. A Looking-glass for Loyalty, 2 s. Bishop Wilkins
Principles and Duties of Natural Religion, in octavo, 5 s. Bishop Lanyes Sermon
at Court against Comprehension. 6 d.
Sermons.
Dean W. Lloyd 's Sermon before the King about Miracles. 6 d. -- his Sermon at
the Funeral of John L. Bishop of Chester, 6 d. -- his Sermon before the King,
in Lent 1673, 6 d. M. Naylor 's Commemoration Sermon for Col. Cavendish, 6 d.
Mr. Sayers Sermon at the Assizes at Reading, 6 d. Mr. Tho. Tanner 's Sermon to
the scattered Members of the Church, 6 d. Mr. Stanhopp 's four Sermons on
several Occasions, octavo bound, 1 s. 6 d. Dr. Du Moulin 's Papal Tyranny, as
it was exercised over England for some Ages, with two Sermons on the fifth of
November. in quarto, 1 s. 6 d. -- his Sermon at the Funeral of Dr. Turner, Dean
of Cant. 6 d.
Histories.
The Life of the Duke Espernon, the great Favorite of France, from 1598. where
D' Avila leaves off, to our Times, by Charles Cotton, Esquire in fol. price 18 s.
The History of the Ottoman Empire, with Cuts, by P. Ricaut, Esquire in octavo, 6 s.
Bishop Wilkins Real Character, in fol. Bishop Cousin, De Transubstantiatione,
octavo. 2 s. The same in English. 2 s. 6 d. The Commentaries of M. Blaiz de
Montluck, the great Favorite of France, in which are contained all the Sieges,
Battles, Skirmishes, for three Kings Reigns, by Charles Cotton Esquire in fol. 14
s. The Fair one of Tunis, a new piece of Gallantry, by C. Cotton Esquire in octavo,
2 s. 6 d. The History of the Savarites, a Nation inhabiting part of the third
Continent, called Terrae Australes incognitae, 1 s. Erasmus Coll. in English,
octavo, 5 s.
Poems.
Elvira, a Comedy by the Earl of Bristol, 1 s. M. A. Bromes S. and Poems,
octavo, 3 s. 6 d. -- his, with other Gentlemen's Translation of Horace, in
octavo, 4 s. Virgil 's Travesty, by Chapter Cotton Esquire 1 s. 6 d. Lucian 's
Dialogues, Burlesque, 2 s. 6 d. Horace, with a Song at every Act, by C.C. Esquire 1
s. Mr. Cowly 's Satyr against Separatists.
Physic.
Dr. Barbettes and Dr. Deckers excellent Practice of Physic, and Observation.
2 s. 6 d. Sir K. Digby, his excellent Receipts in Physic and Chyrurgery, and
of Drinks and Cookery. 3 s. 6 d. The Anatomy of the Elder Tree. 1 s. 6 d.
Miscellanies.
Dr. Glisson, De vita Naturae, quarto 8 s. Lord Bacons Advancement of Learning.
The Planters Manual, very useful for such as are curious in Planting and
Grafting, by C. Cotton Esquire The Complete Gamester, 2 s. Dr. Skinner 's Lexicon,
in fol. 1 l. 5 s. 14 Controversial Letters, in quarto 4 s. 6 d. The Vindication
of the Clergy, 1 s. 6 d. Toleration discussed, by R.L 'Estrange Esquire 2 s. 6 d. A
Treatise of Human Reason, in twelves, 8 d. Essays of Love and Marriage, being
Letters dissuading from Love, and answered; with some Characters and other
Passages of Wit, in twelves, 1 s. 6 d.
School-Books.
Nolens Volens, or you shall make Latin 2 s. 6 d. Centum Fabulae, in octavo 1
s. Artis Oratoriae, in duodec. 2 s.
Law.
The L. Cook 's Institutes, in 4 Vol. fol. 2 l. 5 s. Sir James Dyer 's Reports,
fol. 18 s. The Clerks Guide, in 4 parts, and the first part alone. The exact
Constable.
Controversies.
The seasonable discourse against Popery, in 4o. 6 d. -- the Defense of it,
quarto 6 d. -- the Difference betwixt the Church and Court of Rome, in quarto 6
d. The Papists Apology to the Parliament answered, 6 d. The Papists Bait, or,
The way to get Proselytes, by Chapter Gataker, B.D. 1 s. Dr. Du Moulin against the
Lord Castlemain 6 d. A Journey into the Country, being a Dialogue between an
English Protestant Physician, and an English Papist. Friendly and seasonable
Advice to the Roman Catholics of England, in twelves 6 d.
FINIS.

