THE Mystical Union OF Believers with CHRIST. OR, A TREATISE WHEREIN, That
great Mystery and Privilege, of The Saints Union with the Son of God, is
opened; In the Nature, Properties, and Necessity of it. The way how it is
wrought: And the principal Scripture-Similitudes whereby it is illustrated.
Together, with a Practical Application of the whole

By Rowland Stedman, M. A. and Minister of the Gospel (lately) of Ockingham in
Berkshire.

John 14.6. Jesus says unto him, I am the Way, and the Truth, and the Life. No
man comes unto the Father, but by me.

Si vis vir virtutis appellari, indue te Christum Dominum qui est Dei virtus,
and Dei sapientia: Et in omnibus adjunge te Domino, ita ut unus cum eo spiritus
fias: Et tunc vir virtutis efficieris. Orig. hom. in cap. 31. Number.

London, Printed by W. R. for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Golden-Bible on
London Bridge, under the Gate, 1668.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY. TO The truly Noble, and worthily Honored Lady, Dame
Eleanor Roberts of Neesdon in the County of Middlesex.
MADAM,
THE whole design of this Treatise, and the Authors ambition is, that it may
become subservient to the good of souls. And in testimony of that Honor and
Observance, which is deservedly due to your Ladyship from me, I have taken the
liberty to prefix your name unto it. Nor indeed do I know how to make a better
return to all your love and respects, than by presenting and commending these
Evangelical Truths to your most serious perusal. Truths they are, of the
highest importance; upon the right improvement whereof, lies the whole stress
of a Believers comfort and salvation. If an error be admitted in these things,
it may end ( unless timely rectified in utter and remediless ruin. Let them
not be therefore despised, because they tender themselves, clad in an homely
dress. I am conscious of mine own weaknesses and imperfections: But our God is
pleased to convey the richest of his Treasures, in earthen vessels; and to make
use of the meanest Instruments, that the excellency of the power may appear to
be of God, and not of man. The closer view you take of, and the greater
intimacy of acquaintance you get with these, and such like Divine Lessons; the
more sweet refreshings, and soul-satisfaction will they minister. It is the
nature of all Terrestrials, to be fairer in appearance, than reality: and to
promise more at a distance, than ever is to be found in them. Like the Apples
of Sodom, they seem glorious and beautiful, when beheld afar off; but upon a
nearer approach, and handling, they crumble into dust and rottenness.
Gospel-doctrines and excellencies have a contrary property; like some wholesome
herbs, which the more they are pressed, yield the sweeter juice, and are of
greater fragrancy. The deeper you draw out of these Wells of salvation, the
more Chrystalline, and cordial, will the waters be, and contribute more
sanative efficacy, to exhilarate and strengthen the vital parts. Only be sure
to keep the passage open, and free from obstructions, that goes from the head
to the heart and conscience; that the influence of every divine instruction may
reach to the quick.

The main objects of a Christians care and study, do for the most part,
concenter in three things. 1. To make a right choice of the chiefest good, and
pitch upon the true principal end of man: which is nothing else, but the
glorifying of God in the enjoyment of him. This only can allay the hunger and
thirst, and satisfy the perplexities of the soul. For, alas, what are all
created beings, and sublunary vanities, to content the infinite desires, of an
immortal spirit? These terrene possessions are only proportionate to the body;
and can the soul feed upon the bodies portion? It Is poor support can be drawn
from the abundance of this world, when the spirit is departing, to enter into
an endless eternity. 2. To select and determine upon the sure means, in order
to the compassing of that end. And this is only the righteousness of Jesus
Christ; applied and made over to us, by virtue of our union with him; to be
sought after in the ways of Gods institution; and evidenced by the holiness of
our conversations. 3. The sincere, spiritual, and vigorous pursuance of such
means. And, I hope, your Ladyship will find, in the reading of this Book, what
may be of special use, to direct and quicken, in each of these: But more
directly, in relation to the two latter. It is matter of sad lamentation and
sorrow, to behold how many, that go under the name of Christians, do miserably
faulter in these so weighty affairs. The multitude do little else, but labor
in the fire, for very vanity: And such as are, some times at leisure, to think
of their souls, do for the most part but study to find out the easiest and
cheapest course, a little to palliate and skin over those wounds and
grievances, which the Apostasy of man has brought upon them: without
endeavoring after a perfect cure. Your Ladyship has learnt better: Not only
to give soul-affairs the pre-eminence; but likewise to know, how needful it is,
to be intent, and industrious, in the business of salvation; and of what
dangerous consequence, to do that work by halfs. It is not my meaning to
trouble you with a large preambulatory discourse. Neither is it my way, nor
does your Ladyship expect it, that I should stuff up this Address with your
commendations. They who most deserve, least desire to hear their own praises.
You know to whose judgment, you stand or fall. My design is, only to encourage
your Ladyship to hold on, and to be faithful, in the good ways of the Lord,
wherein you are engaged. That our gracious God may preserve you, to be a
continued comfort to your Relations, and to be further useful in your Place and
Station: That he may mercifully please to grant you divine assistance and
counsel upon all occasions, for the right ordering your affairs, with Christian
sincerity and prudence: That his blessing may be upon you, during your abode on
the earth, in your Person, Family, and every concernment: And that you may have
real comfort, in the day of the resignation of your spirit into the hands of
God that gave it, is the unfeigned prayer of

23. July, 1668. Your Ladyships much obliged Servant ROWLAND STEDMAN.

To my dearly beloved Friends, The Inhabitants of the Town and Parish of
Wockingham, in the Counties of Berks and Wilts.
WITH a special respect to the furtherance of your eternal welfare, I have
suffered these ensuing Meditations, to see the light. For since it pleased the
Lord (at whose disposal are our persons, liberties, and every concernment) by
his righteous providence, to cause me to be separated from you: I have often
consulted within my self, how I might be most instrumental to do you service,
as to your soul-affairs. Which, at this local distance, I knew not how better
to accomplish, than by commending to you such spiritual Lessons, as may be
ready at hand, upon all occasions, for your guidance, and direction, in the way
to heaven. If Truth (as (...). Plut.
one says) is of the number of the greatest gifts, which the God of heaven
could confer on the children of men, or they are capable of receiving from the
Lord of glory: And if those Truths are most worthy of all acceptance, which
are, in their own nature and tendency, of the greatest weight and importance:
Then, I hope, I may justly expect your loving Reception, and diligent Perusal
of these Divine Instructions. Especially, when I call to remembrance your
fervent mind, and more than usual respect, which many of you have formerly
expressed toward me. If I detain you longer than is customable, by way of
Preface; impute it wholly to the earnestness of my desires, of being useful to
the promoting your everlasting salvation. For I can truly say, that since my
removal from amongst you, I have had you frequently in my thoughts, much in my
affections, and fervently in my Prayers.

Give me leave to be your Remembrancer, That you are a people under manifold
Obligations and Engagements, to serve the Lord, and to stick fast unto his
testimonies.

1. You have, some of you, for a long time, made a Profession of Godliness; and
openly avowed your selves to be the servants of the most High. And will you not
labor, to walk answerably to that Vocation wherewith ye are called? If the
Principles you own be good, they ought to be practiced: And if they be evil,
why are they professed? When King Alexander had a cowardly Soldier, of his own
name, he is reported to have called him aside, and thus to have spoken to him;
Friend, either change thy name, or leave thy cowardice. The like may be fitly
said to Professors of Religion; Either sh w forth the power of godliness in
your lives, or do not take upon you the profession of Godliness. Why call ye
me, Lord, Lord, if ye do not the things which I say? Luke 6.46.

2. You are, many of you, (I am apt to think) a people under convictions. The
clear light of the Gospel which has shined amongst you, has left, at least,
such impressions on your spirits, That you cannot but approve the things that
are excellent. You cannot but acknowledge the ways of God to be right, and the
service of sin to be abominable. Ask your consciences (to whom I appeal in this
case) if it be not thus. So that I may speak to you, as the Apostle Paul to the
King, Act. 26.27. King Agrippa, Believe thou the Prophets? I know that thou
believe. My brethren, Do you believe the absolute necessity, and incomparable
worth of Holiness? Do you believe, That the fear of the Lord is the best
wisdom, and the favor of God the chiefest portion? That Godliness is great
gain, and ought to have the supremacy and pre-eminence above all worldly
enjoyments? Do you believe, that the pleasures of sin are folly and madness;
and will end at length in everlasting destruction? I am persuaded, many of you
believe it. Now, Sirs, it is a dreadful thing to sin against convictions; to
disown that in your conversations, which you subscribe to in your consciences.
Happy is he that condemns not himself in that thing which he allows, Romans
14.22. To him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin, Jam.
4.17.

3. You are, most of you, a people of low estate, and poor in the world. And
will you not secure an interest in the true riches? If you have little, or no,
treasures upon earth; should it not quicken you to be the more industrious to
lay up treasures in heaven; that you may not be poor in every respect? When
Bishop Hooper (as I remember) was led to his Martyrdom, there came to meet him
a poor boy, that was blind, but had received the knowledge of the truth: To
whom the Martyr spoke to this effect; See to it that you continue to serve the
Lord, and that you lose not the knowledge of God; for then thou would be
blind both in soul and body. So let me say to those of this rank amongst you;
Well is it, if you have chosen the good part, which cannot be taken away; if
you have in heaven, an enduring substance: else you are poor, both in this
world, and in relation to that which is to come. Study to show your selves, men
and women approved of God, that it may appear, you are of the number of those
whom the Apostle James makes mention of, Chap. 2.5. Whom God has chosen, the
poor of this world, but rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which he has
promised to them that love him.

4. You are, all of you, a people of signal and eminent mercies. And if the
mercy of God rise up in judgment against you, what will be able to plead for
you? If mercy condemn you, how sore will be your condemnation? Will ye trample
upon the bowels of the compassion of God? And tread under foot his loving
kindness? Deuteronomy. 32.6, Do you thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and
unwise? Is he not thy father that has bought thee? Has he not made thee, and
established thee? I will not multiply the mention of Particulars: only there
are two mercies principally, come at present into my thoughts; which I would
have you never to forget.

1. Remember the days of old, consider the years of some generations at the
least: Ask your Fathers, and they will tell it; your Elders, and they will show
it, That you have been remarkably blessed with Gospel-priviledges, and
advantages for attendance upon God, and communion with him. You have had, for
some good while together, a succession of faithful and painful Ministers, who
rightly divided the word of Truth. When some other places were, comparatively,
in darkness; you dwelt in Goshen, a place of light. Keep therefore an holy
suspicion and jealousy over your hearts and lives, lest you be found guilty of
receiving the grace of God in vain, 2 Cor. 6.1. And to that end, let me beseech
you often to read, and meditate with seriousness, and self-application upon,
these awakening Texts, Mat. 11.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4, 5, 6.

2. Consult your late experiences of the goodness of God. That was a special
preservation, which I would have you to keep fresh in your Memories, and
constantly to retain the sense of it, upon your hearts: When it pleased the
Lord, in the late dreadful year, to contend with the Nation, by the destroying
Pestilence, you were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning. You were
exposed to the contagion, as well as other places where it violently raged.
Nay, more, upon several accounts, than some other Towns, which it laid almost
desolate. And the Lord was pleased only to give you thereby, an awakening call
to Repentance; and to suffer the destroying Angel to proceed no further. One
house amongst you was infected, and it swept away all that dwelt therein: And a
stop was immediately put to the further progress of it. Correcting providence,
and gracious deliverances, have both of them a Teaching virtue. They are the
voice of the Lord, whereby he cries aloud, unto the children of men, Mic. 6.9.
Amos 4.10, 11. And this dispensation which I am calling back to your
remembrance, being a Judgment allayed with the mixture of abundant mercy,
seemed in my apprehension, to speak thus much unto you: As if the Lord had
said, This people are in the way of declining apace from me, and begin to lose
the sense of the Gospel doctrines, wherein they have been taught: And therefore
I might justly break in upon them in wrath, and consume them with a sore
destruction. But how shall I give them up to utter ruin and desolation? How
shall I lay them waste, and make them as Admah and Zeboim? My bowels are turned
within me, my repentings are kindled together. I will not execute the
fierceness of mine anger: I will yet grant them some deliverance: I will wait
upon them a while further, that I may be gracious unto them. I will see what
their end will be, what use they will make of this eminent deliverance. My
Brethren, I question not, but there are many amongst you, that truly fear the
name of the Lord: And of the rest I speak, not to shame or accuse; But as my
dearly beloved friends, I warn and admonish. And I expect your pardon, for
dealing thus plainly; for if you would have me for your Friend, you cannot
rationally expect, that I should be Idem non potest esse amicus and adulator.
your Flatterer. Take heed therefore, lest that come upon you which is spoken
of by the Prophet Esaias, Chap. 5.4, 5, 6. What could have been done more to my
vineyard; that I have not done in it? Wherefore when I looked that it should
bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? And now, Go to, I will tell
you what I will do to my vineyard: I will take away the hedge thereof, and it
shall be eaten up; and break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden
down. And I will lay it waste, it shall not be pruned nor dug: but there
shall come up briars and thorns. I will also command the clouds, that they rain
no rain upon it. You may now expect to be dismissed. But before I conclude this
Epistle, give me leave to press upon you a few general Scripture rules. The
Lord cause them to work efficaciously upon your spirits.

1. Take heed of resting in a formal course of Religion, and of fancying to
your selves an easy way to salvation. But get through convictions upon your
hearts, of the necessity of making it your very business to walk with God, and
of acting with vigor and industry, in laying hold on eternal life. Lazy
wishes, and faint desires, an empty name and profession, and a bare keeping the
round of some outward duties, will never bring you into the glorious presence
of God. Formality and lukewarmness will no sooner get to heaven, than downright
Atheism and profaness. If you will be saved, you must not only seek, but strive
( you must put your selves, as it were, into an Agony with striving (...).
) to enter in at the strait gate, Luke 13.24. You may be brought into those
streights, that if you will keep a good conscience, you shall keep nothing but
a good conscience: And if ye will save your souls, you shall save nothing but
your souls, Mark 8.34, 35. And can this be done with a wet finger? Is it an
easy thing to bring your hearts into a willingness to forsake all that you
have for Christ? If you will enter into life, you must walk in a contradiction
to the generality of the world, 1 John 5.19. Romans 12.2. You must watch, and
stand fast against all sorts of solicitations unto sin, 1 Cor. 16.13. You must
not content your selves with the external performance of duties, but be
spiritual and servent in the performance of them, Isa. 64.7. Jude 3. The
kingdom of heaven suffers violence, Mat. 11.12. And every man presses into
it; i.e. Every one that does savingly close with it, every one that gets a real
interest therein, every one that will not fall short of the grace offered
thereby, Luke 16.16. So that, if you will work out your salvation successfully,
you must act forcibly. The height of security and wickedness in the heart of a
sinner, usually enters in at this door, of slightness and formality in the
service Nemo repent fit turpissimns.
of God. When persons are negligent and superficial in duty, they will quickly
make no conscience of duty; and at length forget that there is a God to be
served, or immortal souls to be regarded, Prove. 19.15. 2 Timothy 3.13.

2. If you will act to purpose, in working out your salvation, you must set
upon the prosecution of that design, with the full purpose of your hearts. If
you will follow the Lord fully, you must walk resolvedly. That Is the way, to
resist the devil, that he may flee from you: and to break through all
impediments, and aversions, that they may not turn you aside. A double-minded
man is both unstable and slothful in all his ways. It Is a settled resolution,
that strengthens the spirit under pressures, fortifieth the soul against
difficulties, and makes it unmovable as a Rock, that nothing shall prevail to
the alteration of his course. Let me give you the exhortation of Barnabas, Act.
23. That with purpose of heart, you cleave unto the Lord. Say, every one of
you, as Joshua, Chap. 24.15. As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.
The God of heaven we will adore, and his Statutes we will keep: His Ordinances
we will observe, and the ways of holiness we will own, whatever comes of it.
To this end, consider often the absolute necessity of making your peace with
God, and walking before him in the integrity of your hearts. If you trifle in
this business, you are undone for ever. And bethink your selves, how
obstinately the wicked are bent, upon the satisfaction of their lusts; and will
not you be as peremptorily fixed, upon the saving of your souls? That Is an
excellent Copy, to transcribe in your practice, Mic. 4.5. For all people will
walk, every one in the name of his God: and we will walk in the name of Jehovah
our God, for ever and ever.

3. Be sure to get your understandings and judgments rightly principled, with
distinct knowledge of the mysteries of the Gospel. As there can be no saving
grace in the heart, without a competent knowledge of the principles of
Religion: So it is hardly to be imagined what abundant mischiefs do arise (as
to errors in the mind, disorders in the conversation, and deprivement of
comfort in the soul) for want of a distinct knowledge of those principles.
Ignorance is vertually any evil whatsoever. The understanding is the gate of
entrance into the soul; and the other faculties depend, in all their regular
operations, upon the guidance of the understanding. So that, if the light that
is within you be darkness, how great is that darkness? If it be dim and cloudy,
how easily will you be carried into innumerable mistakes? Let the word of
Christ therefore dwell in you richly, in all wisdom, Col. 3.16. And whatever
truths you learn, let it ever be with a personal appropriation unto your own
hearts and consciences. One plain truth closely In absoluto, and facili stat
aeternitas.
applied to the heart, will be of more advantage, to help you forward in your
journey toward Canaan, than multitudes of notions, that lie only floating in
the head, and do not descend with energy, upon the conscience. Job 5.27. Lo
this, We have searched it, so it is: hear it, and know thou it for thy self.

4. Labor, what in you lies, to edulce and sweeten the way of God to your
selves. Be not always poring upon the black and dark side of Religion; but
take a frequent view of it, in its beauty and pleasantness. When people fancy
Religion to be a sad and melancholy way; and think of nothing but the sorrows
and severities of it; their spirits are apt to hang off, and are hardly wrought
to any cordial compliance. So that, study much the loveliness and amiableness^
of it, and take a daily prospect of the bright side of godliness, Prove. 3.13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Happy is the man that finds wisdom, and the man that
gets understanding. For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise
of silver, and the gain thereof, than fine gold. She is more precious than
rubies, and all the things thou can desire, are not to be compared unto her.
Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand, riches and honor.
Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. She is a tree
of life, to them that lay hold upon her; and happy is every one that retains
her. This was the very course that David took, which made his soul to follow
hard after God, and even to break with longings for the enjoyment of him, Psalm.
63.1, 3, 5, 8. And to this purpose, observe these ensuing Directions. (1.) Look
upon the word of precept in a continual conjunction with the word of promise.
If sinners did not separate between the Prohibition, and the Commination: If
they did join the sin forbidden, with the judgment threatened, it would help to
imbitter the ways of sin. And if the people of God did contemplate the
command, as it is linkt with the Promise, it would notably sweeten the course
of obedience, Heb. 10.23. 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. 2 Cor. 7.1. (2.) Be much looking
within the vail. Live in a constant meditation upon the crown of Righteousness:
And have a due respect to the recompense of reward. Are there difficulties in
the way? The kingdom of heaven Optanda est jactura, quae lucro majore
compensatur.
will make amends for all. If the wicked did live in the apprehensions of Hell,
it would make the path of ungodliness as bitter as gall and wormwood. And
therefore, that they may take their swinge, they cast off these thoughts, Prove.
9.17, 18. Psalm. 10.4, 5. So, if the righteous did live in the meditation of
Heaven, it would put sweetness into the way of righteousness, Heb. 10.34, 35.
Heb. 11.26. 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18. (3.) Often bethink your selves, what
comfortable lives you might lead, during your pilgrimage upon earth; if you had
good assurance of the love of God toward you, and did study to Hilaritatis
nostrae omnis rivulus, de font ducendus pietatis.
approve your selves in sincerity unto him. With what sweet serenity and peace
of spirit, might you enjoy your comforts, and perform all your undertakings, as
knowing your selves to be under the blessing and protection of the Lord of
hosts, who dwells between the Cherubims. i.e, of that infinite Being, whose
power and mercy are united 2 Samuel 6.2. The mercy-seat was placed between the
Cherubims.
for the defense of his children? How cheerful might you be in times of
affliction and trouble, as knowing that all things should conspire to the
advancement of your welfare? You need not then be afraid of any terror or
amazement, Prove. 3.21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. My Son, let them not depart from
thine eyes; keep sound wisdom and discretion. So shall they be life to thy
soul, and grace to thy neck. Then shall thou walk in thy way safely, and thy
foot shall not stumble. When thou lie down, thou shall not be afraid: yea,
thou shall lie down, and thy steep shall be sweet. Be not afraid [ i. e. Thou
need not be afraid Vtuntur Hebraei imperativo in promissionibus ut (...)
custodi praecepta mea and vive. i. e. vives. Sic, Ne timeto. i.e non timebis.
, there is no cause to be afraid] of sudden fear, neither of the desolation of
the wicked, when it comes. For the Lord shall be thy confidence, and shall
keep thy foot from being taken. Read Job 11. from v. 13. to v. 19. And Psalm.
34.12, 15. But I must contract my thoughts, lest I should far exceed the
intended bounds.

5. Endeavor to be best, in the worst times. And think not the worse of
Religion, because it is despised and set against. It is condemned indeed of
pride and humor; of faction, sedition, and turbulency. But who are the persons
by whom it is evil spoken of, but men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the
truth? who have deeply wounded their consciences, by sins against light and
knowledge, and given the victory to their fleshly lusts? Therefore they condemn
the fear of the Lord, and the strict ways of holiness; lest otherwise they
should accuse and condemn themselves. And will a Traveller be turned out of his
road, because of some Dogs and Curs, that bark at him? If you believe the
Scriptures, it is an excellent branch of humility, to be subject unto the Lord;
and the greatest pride imaginable, for poor Earthworms to rise up against the
most High, Jer. 43.2. Neh. 9.16. 1 Timothy 6.3. The Saints of God are the best
subjects in a state, who yield obedience in things agreeable to the will of
God, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake: And pray for Kings, and
for all that are in authority, that they may lead a quiet and peaceable life,
in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2. Religion otherwhile is condemned of
folly; But it will shortly be found to be a point of the highest wisdom, Ephesians.
5.15, 16. Job 28.28. Psalm. 111.10. That is a considerable passage in the
Apocryphal writings, Wisd. 5.4. Then shall the righteous man stand with great
boldness, before the face of such as have afflicted him, and made no account of
his labors. When they see it, they shall be troubled with terrible fear, and
shall be amazed at the strangeness of his salvation, so far beyond all they
looked for. And they, repenting and groaning for anguish of spirit, shall say
within themselves: This is he whom we had sometimes in derision, and a proverb
of reproach. We fools accounted his life madness, and his end to be without
honor. How is he numbered amongst the children of God? and his lot is amongst
the Saints. As for the oppositions you meet with, the word of God is evidently
fulfilled in them, before your faces: And they are none other, than you were
warned to expect, Act. 14.22. 2 Timothy 3.12. Besides, It is but yet a little
while, Nubecula est, cito pertransibit.
and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10.37.

6. According to your several abilities, set up the worship of God in your
families. And be conscientious and strict in sanctification of the Sabbath, the
Lords day. It is a matter of easy observation, That where these two are
neglected, or slightly managed, the fairest profession of godliness is quickly
shriveled, and withers away. Never plead, that you have no parts, or ability,
for these things. If you will set upon the discharge of your duty, in the
integrity of your hearts, God will meet you therein, and graciously assist you
unto the performance, Psalm. 27.14. And if there be [indeed] first a willing
mind [which willingness is manifested by vigorous and earnest indeavours] it is
accepted, according to what a man has, and not according to what he has not,
2 Cor. 8.12. See Genesis 35.2, 3. Josh. 24.15. Psalm. 101. Jer. 10.25. Isa. 56.2,
4, 5. Isa. 58.13, 14.

7. Be constant and diligent in the duty of prayer. That is one of the special
ways, whereby a fellowship and correspondency is maintained, between God and
his people. In taking counsel of the word, we hear what the Lord is pleased to
speak unto us: And by the exercise of the grace of supplications, we have the
liberty given us to speak unto the Lord. And remember what has often been
inculcated upon you, That as all sorts of blessings are stored up in the
promises, so Faith and Prayer are the special means, which God has appointed
for the fulfilling and accomplishment of all his promises, Jer. 29.11, 12, 13.
Psalm. 10.14. As you cannot comfortably expect, that God should preserve and
keep you from the pollution of sin, unless you be careful to avoid the
occasions of sin: So on the other hand, You cannot rationally expect to receive
mercies from the Lord, unless you seek unto him by prayer, for the obtaining of
mercy. Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it
shall be opened unto you, Mat. 7.7. Philip. 4.6, 7. Ephesians. 6.18, 19.

8. Live in the daily contemplations of eternity, and of the uncertainty of the
time of your continuance here. Study how you may subordinate all your affairs
and concernments in this world, unto the matters of another world. Put an
estimate upon all things, as they have reference thereunto. Often say within
your selves, What evidence have I, to prove my interest in God? What are the
grounds, whereupon I look for eternal life? What thoughts am I likely to
entertain of sin, and the world, on the one hand; and of conformity to Christ
on the other hand, when I am to depart hence, and shall be seen no more? How
precious will that time and space of repentance then be, which now I am ready
to squander away upon trifles? What answer shall I be able to make, when God
visits; for the filling up of my Relations; for the management of the
Talents, wherewith I have been entrusted; for the right improvement of the
means of grace, which I have enjoyed; for all the particulars of my
conversation in the world? Did you frequently press these, and such like
considerations home upon your spirits, and keep them closs, and warm, by
meditation, upon your hearts, what manner of persons would you be in all
sobriety, holiness, and righteousness? My brethren, You know not how soon, how
unexpectedly, you may be summoned to the giving up your accounts: And it
infinitely concerns you to be in a readiness, That you may be found of God in
peace. Boast not thy self of To morrow: for thou know not what a day may
bring forth, Prove. 27.1.

9. Beware therefore of procrastinating in the business of providing for your
immortal souls. It is one of the principal snares of the devil, whereby he
holds sinners fast, in their spiritual bondage, and captivity, unto their final
destruction. If therefore you would set effectually upon working out your
salvation, engage speedily, presently, in the work; without further delay. Give
not place to the devil. Deliver thy self, as a Roe from the hand of the hunter:
and as a bird from the snare of the fowler. Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor
slumber to thine eye lids, Psalm. 119.6. Heb. 3.7. 2 Cor. 6.1, 2.

And now I shall trouble you no further with this preliminary discourse: But
conclude with my unfeigned Prayers, for you all. That the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the Infinite,
Eternal, and Almighty God; and the only Redeemer of lost sinners: The love of
God, our Father in him, who spared not his own Son, but delivered him up unto
death: And the sweet and comfortable Presence, Guidance, and Communion of the
holy Ghost, the same Infinite, Incomprehensible, and Immortal God, the Spirit
of Grace and Truth: The Sanctifying, Assisting, Quickening, Comforting, and
preserving presence of that Spirit, may be with you, and amongst you: To enable
you unto your duties, To keep you against Temptations, To support you under
Burdens, To carry you through difficulties, To strengthen your weaknesses, and
plentifully to supply all your wants: That you may walk wisely in your
Families, spiritually in your Closets, soberly in your companies, and
Christianly in all your conversations: So as to write Holiness to the Lord,
upon every of your undertakings: That upon all occasions you may be effectually
instructed in the will of the Lord, and bring forth his word into practice:
That you may thereby witness your Union with Christ, and be rooted and built up
in him, and stablished in the faith: And so the Blessing of God may be your
constant portion here, and you may be everlastingly blessed, in the glorious
presence of God, hereafter. Amen.

23. July. 1668. Written by one, who truly and affectionately desires your
Edification and Salvation. ROWLAND STEDMAN.

To the READER.
IT may be interpreted by some (to whom I am best known) not only as a defect
in prudence, but a doing violence, and treading counter to my personal
inclination ( who have always affected the privacy of Retirement) thus to
appear in public; and consequently to expose my Sentiments in the matters of
Religion, to the censure of all sorts of persons, who may light upon this Book.
To whom therefore I owe this account of my Studies, and the publication
thereof. Having often, in the course of my Ministry, pressed the necessity of
Union with Christ, in order to the partaking of the benefits of Redemption: I
was, a while since, entreated by letter from some, that I would further
instruct them, in the nature of that Mystery, of Union with the Son of God.
With the proposal of this spiritual and useful enquiry, and the sundry
particulars relating thereunto, wherein they desired information, I was, not a
little, well pleased: knowing how usual it is, with many Professors of
Godliness, to leave the kernel and marrow of Christianity, wherein the life and
sweetness of it lies; and to exercise themselves about the shell, and bones
only of contention: As if they had been brought up at the feet of those
Schoolmen, who turn Religion into Quodlibets, and make it little else, but a
well-digested heap of intricate Statum lacessunt omnipotentis Dei,
Calumniosis litibus.
Fidem minutis dissecant ambagibus
Vt quisque est lingua nequior.
Solvunt ligantque quaestionem vincula
Per syllogismos plectiles.

and doubtful disputations. To those savoury questions, I returned answer, as
he that ministers seed to the sower, was pleased to give ability: and as might
be contained within the compass of one sheet at the most. Which answer I
intended but as a compounding for forbearance, till I should be ready to give
fuller satisfaction. For I found within my self a strong propension of spirit,
upon the first motion of it to me, to wait upon God, in the deligent search of
the Scriptures, for a more through insight into that great Gospel-doctrine. When
my Meditations were digested into this method and frame, according to the
following Treatise; I was persuaded to believe, That I could not be better
serviceable, to the souls of many of my dear friends, from whom the Lord has
suffered me to be rent, then by commending these plain Truths to their most
serious study. And I think, I may be assured, That many amongst them, who have
loved the Author for the Truths sake, will be no whit the more averse, from a
sedulous enquiry into these Truths, for the Authors sake.

For the Subject matter, it needs no Apology (being one of the highest, and yet
most necessary, Points of Christian instruction) unless it be for this, That so
mean a person, as my self, has attempted the handling of it. To which I shall
say with Minutius Felix. Nihil indignandum vel dolendum, si quicunque de
divinis quaerat, sentiat, proferat? Cum non disputantis Authoritas, sed
disputationis ipsius veritas requiratur. Atque etiam quo imperitior sermo, hoc
illustrior ratio est: Quoniam non fucatur pompa facundiae, and gratiae; sed ut
est recti regula sustinetur.

All the perversion in humane affairs, and disorders in the spirits of the
children of men, do arise (according to the observation of Augustine) from a
twofold Original. Cum fruimur utendis, and utimur fruendis.
1. The enjoying of what should only be used. And 2. The using of that, which
ought to be enjoyed. By giving that place to the creatures, which is only due
to the God of heaven; and making use of the Lord, and his service, in a
subordination and subserviency to other ends. Our great work therefore
consists, in referring all things to their proper places, and restoring them to
their appointed stations, according to the eternal Law. To use the things of
this world, as not abusing them; and to make God alone the object of our
enjoyment. This enjoyment of God, since the fall of man, is only attainable
through Jesus Christ, the Mediator: And there is no fellowship to be maintained
with God through Christ, but only by such as are in Christ. And this is the
scope and drift of the Tract ensuing, so to manuduct and lead sinners unto the
Son, That, being knit unto him, they may thence be conducted into the bosom of
the Father. And I suppose, If a just reckoning be made, of such as have
designedly dealt upon this Subject, of a Believers Union with Christ,
considering how many have wrote upon some others, this Book need not be
accounted as supernumerary.

If any be offended with the meaness of the style, and for want of such
embellishments of Rhetoric and History, wherewith it might have been adorned;
or that I have sometimes descended too low, in the explication and proof of
such matters, as seem not to require it: Let such please to take notice, That
my intent was (if possible) to speak to the capacity of the meanest. I have
often thought of Mr. Dod 's observation, That most Ministers in England are
wont to shoot over the peoples heads. Rather would I utter the plainest Truths,
to the understanding and edification of the weakest Christians; than study to
feed more curious fancies, with sublimer notions and niceties Dissoluti est
pectoris sonos auribus infundere dulciores, non medicinam vulneribus adhibere.
Arnob.
. And as for ringing changes upon words, and the counter-marching of sentences
(as one speaks) they may pass for wit and elegancy with some; but contribute
nothing to the nourishment of the vitals of Christianity. I have purposely
declined all controversal points, for that I would not scratch the Disputandi
pruritus est Ecclesiarum scabies. Wotton. Plaus. and Vot.
Itch of any, in this litigious generation. Let us follow after the things
which make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify another. What is
found to be agreeable to the mind of God, and the tenor of the everlasting
Gospel, let it be received and embraced in the love of it: And pardon the
defectiveness of the Author, in the management of the whole. I dare not say as
Cicero, who was confident, Se nu^lum verbum, quod revocare vellet, emisisse.
Yet I may truly speak, as another: Ego omnia quae dixi, bona fide, sine ullo
studio contentionis, sine aliqua dubitatione veritatis, sine aliquo praejudicio
diligentioris Tractatus, exposui.

R. S.

A Table of the Contents of the Book.
CHAP. I.
The Context opened. Believing 1. That Jesus is the Christ page 3 2. Jesus
Christ p. 4 3. On the Lord Jesus Christ p. 5
What it is, for a Believer to have the witness within himself. In three things
p. 6 How unbelief makes God a liar. 1. Negatively. 2. Positively p. 8 The Text
explained. What is meant by eternal life p. 10 Eternal life the gift of God, in
a fourfold respect p. 12 Eternal life is in the Son, on a threefold account p.
14 The manner of the conveyance of Eternal life p. 15 Qu. What is meant by
having the Son? Answ. In three things p. 16 Doct. In order to an interest in
Eternal life, and participation of the blessings, which are given forth by the
Son, in a tendency thereunto, it is of indispensable necessity, That we be
united to Christ p. 18
CHAP. II.
Conclusions introductory, to the handling this Mystery of Union. Concl. 1. The
grace of a Christians Oneness with the Lord Jesus, is for the intimacy and
closeness of it, one of the deep things of God. p. 20 This needful to be
premised, on a fourfold account p. 21 Concl. 2. Although the Union of a
Believer with the Lord Jesus, is in it self a Mystery, not easy to be
attained, as to right apprehensions of it, yet it is a point of great
concernment to be studied. p. 24 And that for three Reasons p. 25 Concl. 3.
Instead of curiously prying into this Mystery, and the manner of this Union,
further than is revealed in the Scriptures, our principal design should be, to
secure it to our selves, that we are sharers therein p. 28 This Conclusion
backed with three Arguments p. 29
CHAP. III.
Union with Christ distinguished into that which is, By way of 1. External
Adherence only. 2. Spiritual Implantation p. 31
The first member of this Distinction opened, in four Positions p. 32 Pos. 1.
The principal Bonds or Ligaments whereby this Union with Christ, by way of
outward Adhaesion, is wrought, are four. 1. An approbation and acknowledgment,
of the doctrines of Christianity p. 34 2. A professed subjection to the
Ordinances of Christ p. 35 3. Some common workings on the heart p. 36 4. A
measure of reformation in the Life p. 37
Pos. 2. It is a great privilege and mercy, considered in it self, for a man
or woman to be taken thus near unto Christ, and in this sense to be in him, by
way of external adhaerence p. 38 The advantage of it discovered in four things
p. 39 Pos. 3. When persons are thus only in Christ, by external adhaerence,
though they may abide with him for a time; yet at last there will be made a
separation betwixt them, and this Union will be dissolved p. 42 Three special
ways, how this sort of Union is dissolved p. 43 Pos. 4. The state and
condition of such as are thus only in Christ, by outward adhaesion, and do not
improve this privilege, that they may be indeed, what they profess to be, is a
wretched and miserable estate p. 46 The misery of their estate set forth, in
four things p. 47
CHAP. IV.
Union with Christ, by way of spiritual ingrafture described, and the branches
of the description explained p. 55 1. Branch. The general nature of the grace
of Union; it is a persons relation to Jesus Christ p. 56 Under this head three
things to be observed p. 57 2. Br. A note of difference whereby it is
distinguished from other relations. It is the special relation which Christians
have to the Son, as Mediator of the Covenant of Reconciliation p. 61 A
threefold Relation betwixt Christ and the children of men p. 62 3. Br. The
Sub^ects of this Union, to whom it does appertain, viz. Believers. And that on
a fourfold account p. 66 4. Br. The foundation of this Union, on which it is
bottomed. On a Believers intimate conjunction with Christ p. 69 5. B^. The
blessed effects or consequents that flow from this Union. 1. Hereupon they are
accounted as one with Christ. p. 70 This appears in four respects p. 71 2.
Hereby their spiritual estate is fundamentally changed p. 73 This doctrine of
the change of a man's spiritual state, of great concernment to be studied. For
three Reasons p. 74 This point opened under six Heads p. 78 3. The third
consequent of Union, is, An effectual application of all the Benefits of
Redemption p. 87 A threefold Application of those benefits 1. External p. 89 2.
Internal, but conditional p. 90 3. Effectual, and saving p. 92

CHAP. V.
The manner how Christ and a Believer are united in eight gradual Propositions
Prop. 1. The children of men by nature are separated from Christ, and strangers
unto him p. 94 Prop. 2. Over and above their separation from Christ, they are
actually joined to such objects, as are utterly inconsistent with their Union
with the Son of God p. 95 They are 1. In convenant with sin p. 96 2. Contracted
to the Law as a covenant of life p. 98
Prop. 3. The first work that is wrought upon the soul of a man, in order to
his conjunction and oneness with Jesus Christ, is the withdrawment of the soul
from those objects, to which it has been joined in opposition to Christ. p. 99
Prop. 4. The divorce and separation of a person from sin, that he may be united
to Christ, is principally accomplished by a fourfold work p. 101 1. Conviction
p. 102 2. Consideration p. 105 3. Compunction p. 106 4. The grace of Repentance
p. 108
Prop. 5. To deaden a sinner to the Law, and to take him off from seeking
justification thereby, that he may be united to Christ, God is pleased to make
use of a twofold special means. 1. The Law it self. 2. The body of Christ. p.
109 1. The Law it self does deaden a sinner to the Law, by ministering knowledge
p. 110 Of 1. The terms of justification by the Law p. 111 2. The spiritualness
of the Law p. 112 3. The rigor and severity of the Law p. 114
2. The sufferings of Christ in his body, deaden a sinner to the Law, by making
a threefold discovery p. 117 1. Of the sinfulness and damnableness of sin. p.
118 2. Of the inexorableness of Gods justice p. 119 3. That there is no other
way, to make reconciliation p. 120
Prop. 6. The way of actual conjunction betwixt Christ and his people, when
they are thus divorced from sin, and deadned to the Law, is to be conceived
thus. 1. The Lord Christ by his Spirit, takes possession of them, and dwells
in them. 2. Believers through faith take hold of Christ, and get into him: And
so they are knit together, and become one p. 121 From hence arises a twofold
union 1. Natural. 2. Legal.

CHAP. VI.
1. The Natural Union betwixt Christ and Believers. The bond whereof is the
Spirit of Christ, dwelling in them p. 123 This Natural Union opened, in five
particulars p. 124 Four Reasons, why the Spirit of Regeneration is called
Christ in us p. 132 2. A legal conjunction, and oneness thereupon: whereof
justifying faith is the bond. Opened in four particulars p. 134 1. The
Scripture mentions a fourfold faith 1. Historical p. 136 2. Temporary p. 138 3.
Of miracles p. 140 4. Just^fying p. 141
2. Justifying faith has Christ himself, for the special Object, upon which it
is exercised p. 142 3. The ultimate, completing act of justifying faith, is a
fiducial reliance upon Christ p. 143 4. Wheresoever there is this fiducial
reliance upon Christ, in a saving way, there is also as a necessary concomitant
thereof, an universal subjection to the will of Christ p. 146 P^op. 7. From the
Mystical Union of a Believer with Christ, does flow another sert of Union
betwixt them, whereof love is the Bond, and is commonly called, A Moral Union.
p. 148. That this Moral Union may be improved as an evidence of the former, our
love to Christ must have four properties. It must be 1. Sincere p. 153 2.
Serviceable p. 154 3. Superlative p. 156 4. A love of complacency p. 157
Prop. 8. The Mystical Union of Believers with Christ, and all the blessings
which are the consequents thereof, do originally flow from the merit of the
death of Christ; which in pursuance of the eternal covenant with the Father, he
suffered in their stead, and whereby he gave satisfaction to divine Justice p.
159 This last proposition explicated under five heads p. 161
CHAP. VII.
The properties of a Believers Union with Christ. 1. It is an immediate Union
p. 168 2. It is a spiritual Union p. 169 3. It is an inseparable Union p. 170
The inseparableness of this Union, built on six foundations. 1. The
Enchangeableness of the purpose of God p. 172 2. The nature of the covenant of
Grace p. 173 3. The charge given to the Lord Jesus Christ, and his faithfulness
p. 175 4. The Advocateship, and intercession of Christ p. 177 5. The mighty
power, by which Believers are preserved p. 178 6. The durable nature of the new
creature p. 179 Those things which are most likely to make a separation betwixt
Christ and a Believer, shall not be able to effect it. Not 1. The remainders of
sin p. 181 2. The violent assaults of the devil p. 183 3. The allurements of
the world p. 185 4. False Teachers, the devils instruments p. 187 5. Troubles
and persecutions for the sake of Christ p. 188 6. Death, which is the great
separating providence p. 190
The doctrine of the inseparableness of the Saints Union with Christ,
vindicated, in two Rules. Rule 1. This doctrine is so far from being an enemy
to holiness, that if rightly improved, it will be a notable incentive, and
provocative thereto p. 192. This evidenced, by four considerations p. 194 Rule
2. The many counsels and warnings, which Christ has given to his people, to
take heed that they lose not their hold of him, are no proof at all, that this
Union may be dissolved p. 198
CHAP. VIII.
The spiritual blessings enumerated, which flow from the grace of Union with
Christ, and have dependence thereon. p. 200 1. The grace of justification in
the sight of God p. 202 This particular opened, under six Heads p. 203 2.
Adoption, or inrollment amongst the children of God 214 3. Participation of
actual grace, or the supplies of the Spirit p. 215 This, a point well to be
considered, for three Reasons p. 218 This doctrine explained, in three things
p. 220 Seven sorts of actual grace instanced in p. 222 4. The fourth blessing
arising from union with Christ, is, the gracious acceptance of all our duties
p. 226 5. A title to the promises of the Gospel p. 228 6. Union with the
Father, and intimate acquaintance with him p. 229 7. Peace and joy in the holy
Ghost p. 230 8. Deliverance from the sting, and consequently the fear of death
p. 232 9. A glorious Resurrection of the body p. 235 10. Boldness at the bar of
Judgment p. 236 11. Actual admission, into the kingdom of Heaven p. 237
CHAP. IX.
The special Scripture similitudes, whereby the mystery of union with Christ is
illustrated p. 238 1. The first similitude taken from the natural union,
betwixt the head and members of the body p. 239 1. Christ the head of
Believers, in a fivefold respect p. 240 2. The way of union with Christ, is, by
being quickened through his Spirit p. 243 3. Believers must be in subjection to
Christ, and follow his conduct p. 244 4. This similitude holds forth also, that
unity, love, and concord, which Christians should maintain amongst themselves
p. id. 5. As Christ is the head of the Church, so he is constituted head of all
things, for the good of his Church p. 245
2. The second similitude drawn from the corporal union, betwixt the Vine, and
the branches graffed into the Vine p. 246 This similitude holds forth four
things 1. A Christians whole dependence is upon the Lord Jesus p. 247 2. The
union of Believers with Christ, is a closely compacted union p. 248 3. In order
to union with Christ, we must be taken off, from all other dependances id. 4. A
Christians glory lies in practical holiness, or being fruitful p. 249
3. The third similitude, taken from the nuptial union, betwixt the Husband and
Wife p. 250 1. This union is with the consent; and according to the pleasure of
the Father p. 251 2. Christ does woo and entreat sinners to come unto him p.
252 3. Our faith in Christ is the consent of our hearts to take him p. 253 4.
This consent must be a Marriage-consent. In three respects p. 254 5. A
Christians obedience must be service mingled with love p. 258 6. There is a
mutual complacency and satisfaction between Christ and his people p. 259
4. The last similitude taken from the artificial union, betwixt the
Foundation, and Building, erected thereon 1. A twofold Foundation 1. Doctrinal.
260 2. Personal. 261
2. Believers must be conformable to Christ. On a fivefold account p. 262 3.
Our faith in Christ, is a resting on him p. 265

CHAP. X.
Inferences collected, from the doctrine of Union 1. Inf. True believers are
the most excellent persons p. 268 This Inference amplified, in five respects p.
270 2. Inf. God has a special regard to Believers, and their concernments p.
276 The peculiarity of the providence of God toward them, in four things p.
278 3. Inf. Christless sinners are in a state of death p. 281 In respect of 1.
Abomination, in the sight of God p. 283 2. Putrefaction, and rottenness p. 284
3. Impotency, and inability, to what is spiritually good p. 286 4. Damnation,
and liableness to eternal death p. 288 This point pressed, by two
considerations p. 290 5. The abundant evils, incident to that estate p. 294
Exemplified in five things. p. 295
Obj. To what purpose are the unregenerate commanded to turn themselves, and to
walk in ways of holiness, if spiritually dead? p. 299 Sol. In five things p.
300
CHAP. XI.
Use of Trial, whether we are united to Christ p. 306 Self-examination
necessary to attain the knowledge of our Union p. 307 1. Else we cannot
pertinently apply the word of God to our selves p. 308 2. It Is the means which
God has appointed to that end p. 310 3. Hereby we may find out the deceits and
falsehoods under which our spirits are apt to hide themselves p. 311
Wherein the work of self-examination consists. In six Conclusions Concl. 1.
Self-examination is a compounded duty, made up of a threefold spiritual, and
reflexive action p. 314 1. Inspection, or Retrospection, into our selves p. 315
2. Probation, or Trial, of our selves p. 316 3. Conclusive determination, or
passing sentence upon our selves p. 318
Concl. 2. The special faculty, by which the work of of self examination is
performed, is the practical judgment or conscience p. 319 Concl. 3. This work
cannot be done effectually and successfully, without the concurrent influence
and witness of the spirit p. 321 Concl. 4. The way of procedure in the business
of self-examination, is by consulting those marks and signs, which are the
evidencing properties of union with Christ p. 323 Concl. 5. The marks and signs
to be consulted are of three sorts p. 326 1. Exclusive, or Negative p. 327 2.
Inclusive, or Accumulative p. 329 3. Adaequate, and proportionate. These
principally to be minded p. 330
Concl. 6. Such marks and signs, of whatever sort, whereupon a person may
confidently rest, in passing judgment upon himself, must be clearly deduced
from Scripture, and bottomed thereon p. 332 Motives to quicken to
self-examination, as to our union with Christ p. 335 Eight Rules of direction,
by way of gradation, for guidance in this work of self-examination p. 340 Dir.
1. The first and fundamental evidence of union with Christ, to be enquired
after, is whether a sound conversion have been wrought upon us, or the grace of
regeneration poured forth into our hearts p. 341 Dir. 2. In order hereunto, we
must be sure to be rightly instructed in the nature of conversion, and what a
change it makes upon the soul p. 343 Several sorts of counterfeit and feigned
conversions p. 344 Dir. 3. The grace of conversion, is not ever discerned, in
the first planting of it in the soul; and when it is discerned at first, it may
afterward be questioned, as to the soundness and sincerity of it. And
therefore enquiry ought to be made, into the fruits and effects produced
thereby p. 348 Dir. 4. The fruits that will evidence a sound conversion, are
not some particular duties of Christianity discharged: But the main bent of the
spirit, as to the things of God, and the whole tenor of the conversation, must
be considered on that account p. 351 Dir. 5. That obedience, which will prove a
sincere conversion, must not only be right for the matter, what is done: But
rightly qualified also, in respect of the manner, how it is done p. 353 Dir. 6.
For the right qualifying our obedience, that it may be evidential of
conversion, and union with Christ, it must be 1. Spiritual. And that in a three
fold respect p. 355 2. Universal. A threefold universality of obedience p. 358
3. Evangelical. Which consists in 4 things p. 363 4. Sincere. Wherein sincerity
lies p. 367 5. Of an increasing nature p. 369 6. Steadfast p. 371
Dir. 7. Self-examination, if performed successfully, must be solemnly
undertook, with the best intention of the mind and spirit p. 373 Dir. 8. If a
person, upon most the serious and deliberate examination of himself, be still
in the dark, as to his union with Christ: four things to be done in that case
p. 374
CHAP. XII.
Exhortations grounded upon the doctrine of union with Christ 1. To the
unregenerate. 1. Dare not, in any sort, to oppose the Saints p. 381 This
Exhortation branched into 4 particulars p. 382 Motives to press on this
Exhortation p. 388 2. Do not build your hopes of eternal life, upon any
privilege or attainment, which falls short of union with the Son p. 393
Exemplified in nine sandy foundations, whereupon sinners are apt to build their
hopes p. 395 3. With unwearied endeavors, labor after this grace of union p.
403 Directions. 1. Despair of being saved upon lower terms p. 404 Three cases,
wherein we must not despair p. 406 Four cases, wherein despair is the way to
salvation p. 410 Dir. 2. Get the Spirit of Christ. What must be done in order
to it p. 413 Dir. 3. Endeavor after the uniting grace of faith p. 414 Five
encouragements to believing, or coming to Christ p. 415 Dir. 4. Lay it
seriously to heart, That if you perish in a state of separation from Christ,
you are in the fault, and guilty of your own destruction p. 424 2. Exhortations
to believers 1. Bless God for this signal grace of your union with Christ p.
425 2. Improve it. Six cases, wherein it should be improved p. 426
Exhortations to all 1. Learn the Lessons, which are from this point to be
learnt p. 430 Two spiritual Lessons, of a momentous nature, instanced in p. 431
2. Discharge the duties, that are on this account to be discharged p. 434 1.
Bless God for the manifestation of this mystery id. 2. Adore the condescension,
and grace of our Lord Josus Christ p. 435 3. Labor every day, more and more,
to clear it up to your selves, that you have the Son, by being united to him
id. Three further evidential properties of this union p. 435 436, 437
1 John 5. ver. 11, 12. And this is the Record, that God has given us eternal
Life, and this Life is in his Son: He that has the Son has Life, and he that
has not the Son, has not Life.
CHAP. 1. The Context opened, the Text explained, and the Point of Doctrine
deduced.
IT has been well observed in the case of Moral Prudence, that many never
attained to be wise indeed, because hindered in the pursuit by an over-weaning
conceit of their own Wisdom. Multi ad sapientiam pervenissent, nisi putassent
se pirvenisse. Sen.
The like may be truly said of the favor of God, and the Kingdom of Heaven;
Multitudes have fallen short of eternal Life, by an over-confident opinion of
their interest in it. Presumption of finding Mercy with the Lord, is one of the
principal snares of the. Devil, Qui jugum suscipiunt Diaboli, Diabolus eos
delectat and d^ipit, ne discedant a malo impii usque ad mortem suam.
whereby sinners are held fast in their impenitence. This presumption for the
most part, is wont to spring from a twofold Fountain.

1. Ignorance and misapprehension of the mercy of God. 2. Misapplication of the
death and righteousness of Christ.
I shall endeavor, through Divine assistance, to contribute a little help
against the spreading of this evil, and toward the drying up of these
poisonous Fountains, which have caused the death and ruin of many thousand
Souls. This I shall do, 1. By Showing the necessity of the Mediation and
Righteousness of Christ, Satan is not willing to deal roughly with the
unregenerate, if he could choose, for he stands ever in most danger of losing
them, when he carries himself toward them in so hard a fashion: Wherefore he
rather flatters and fawns; endeavoring to rock them asleep still, if he can, in
the Cradle of security and presumption. Whately's New Birth.
to procure saving Grace for lost sinners. 2. By discovering the like absolute
necessity of our Union with Christ, in order to partaking of that
righteousness, and receiving the grace which he has purchased thereby. Both
these are fully comprised in the Text. I shall only touch occasionally upon the
first, as it will fall in the way of my insisting designedly upon the latter.

This portion of Scripture (which I have chosen as the basis or subject of the
following Meditations) may not unfitly be styled An Abstractor Epitome of the
Gospel of Christ, whereby life and immortality is brought to light; wherein the
way is revealed for restoring fallen sinners to their primitive happiness, or
conducting souls to everlasting bliss. God has graciously pleased to declare
this way by the Scriptures, and to leave it upon record in the Word of the
Gospel; and here we have the substance or summary of that Record, viz. That God
is the giver of eternal Life, and that this life is in his Son, etc.

If you examine the connection or dependence, which the words of the Text have
with and upon the foregoing passages of the Chapter; You will evidently find,
our Apostle is herein giving a succinct account of the great foundation-truths,
which are proposed to be the object of a Christians Faith, by closing with
which we do eminently and signaly advance the glory of God, and by disbelieving
whereof, we are said to make him a liar. Our faith is to be built upon the word
of the Lord, to be bottomed upon the Record which God has given concerning his
Son: And this (says the Apostle) is the Record, That God has given us eternal
Life, etc.

The better to clear this coherence, and so the genuine import and scope of
these words; let us a little cast our eyes back upon the context, or the verse
immediately preceding the Text: wherein we may note two things.

1. The nature and excellency of the grace of faith, or believing on Christ,
ver. 10. former part, He that believes on the Son, has the witness in himself.

1. For the nature of Faith, it is a believing on the Son; so it is usually set
forth in the dialect of the Holy Ghost, Act. 16.31. Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved and thine house. Joh. 3.36. He that believes
on the Son, has everlasting life. This is the saving act of Faith which will
bring a soul to Heaven, a believing on the Son. And therefore I might touch by
the way, on that common distinction as useful to be considered; that there is a
threefold act of Faith, or three ways of Believing in reference unto Christ.

There is a believing, 1. That Jesus is the Christ. Credere Christum. Christo.
In Christum

2. Jesus Christ. 3. On the Lord Jesus Christ.


1. There is a believing that Jesus is the Christ; an assent unto the truth of
this principle, that he who was born of the Virgin Mary, is the true Messiah
and Mediator, sent of God to be the Savior of Mankind: So the very Devils
believe. As they know there is one God, so they acknowledge this principle, that
Jesus is the Son of God, and the only Redeemer of lost sinners. Hence it is
that they are so unwearied in their endeavors, to hinder poor souls in closing
with Christ; and that they labor by all manner of false suggestions to draw
their affections from the Lord Jesus, Mark 1.24. The unclean spirit cried out,
Let us alone thou Jesus of Nazareth, I know thee who thou art, the Holy one of
God. And that herein the Father of lies spoke the very truth, you will find by
the testimony of the Spirit of God himself, v. 34. He cast out many Devils, and
suffered not the Devils to speak, because they knew him.

2. There is a Believing Jesus Christ, i.e. a subscribing to the truth of the
Doctrines that he delivered, which are contained in the Scriptures, the Word of
Christ, and Preached by Ministers of the Gospel in his name. Thus a Simon Magus
may believe, he may own the verity of Christ's Word, though in the gall of
bitterness and in the bond of iniquity, Acts 8.12, 13. When they believed
Philip Preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and the Name of
Jesus Christ, then Simon himself believed also. Thus Nicodemus believed, before
he was instructed in the necessity, or acquainted with the grace of
regeneration: he was convinced by the Miracles wrought by Christ, that he was a
teacher sent of God; and consequently, that the Doctrines which he taught, were
the truths of God, Joh. 3.2. As a carnal person who never tasted of saving
grace, may have much knowledge in his understanding of the will of Christ; so he
may be under such convictions upon his judgment, as in a sort to approve the
Word of Christ, Rom 2.17.18.

3. But lastly, there is a believing on the Lord Jesus. When a man is so
powerfully convinced of the evil of sin, and his own obnoxiousness to the wrath
of God; and the heart so fully persuaded of the excellency of Christ, and the
sufficiency of his Righteousness; together with the utter insufficiency of all
other ways of deliverance; that thereupon he does actually close with Christ
upon Gospel terms, and make application to him, casting himself upon the Son of
God for Salvation, and renouncing all things for the enjoyment of him. Although
believing on Christ does not always signify a saving faith (as, see Joh. 2.23)
yet for the most part it does; and so may fitly be made use of, by way of
distinction. It being observed by some, that (...) is a phrase peculiar to the
Holy Ghost, and not used by profane Authors.
This is the saving act of Faith, A believing on, or in the Son. Joh. 11.25,
26. He that believes in me, though he were dead, yet he shall live; and
whosoever lives and believes in me, shall never dye. For mark it Sirs, that
assent of the Judgment unto the great truths of the Gospel, which is required
of the Lord, and is well pleasing in his sight, is not a bare naked, lifeless
assent; but a compounded and operative assent; such as does engage the heart to
comply with those truths, and brings the whole Soul in subjection unto them,
Romans 10.10. With the heart man believes unto righteousness.

That's for the nature of Faith, It is a believing on the Son.

2. For the excellency and preciousness of thus believing; He that does so,
has the witness in himself] i.e. in his own Soul and Spirit and Conscience. He
has it graven upon the very tables of his heart. But what is this witness
which a Believer has in himself? Answ. You may understand it either of these
three ways.

1. In relation to his spiritual state. He has a fundamental evidence that he
is a child of God, and in covenant with him; here is sufficient matter, if
rightly improved, whereupon to raise a testimony of this thing. It is faith
which brings a man under the favor of God, and the act of believing is a sure
token that the person is endowed with the grace or habit of Faith. Spiritual
actions, as they must proceed from a Divine principle, so they are evidences of
that principle from whence they do proceed. 1 John 5.1. Whosoever believes
that Jesus is the Christ (not with a bare assent of the Judgment, but he that
believes it with the heart, as before When a particular duty is produced as an
evidence of a state of Salvation, or has a promise of grace and mercy annexed
to it; it ought always to be understood of a sincere spiritual and Evangelical
discharge of that duty. Compare Matt 7.7. Hos 5.6. with Jer. 29.12, 13. So Joel
2.32. Prove. 1.28 with Psalm. 145.18.
) is born of God. That is an undoubted evidence of his regeneration; for how
could the heart of a sin r bring forth such fruit, unless there were the ^oot
of grace planted in the heart?

2. It may be meant in reference to the Doctrines of the Gospel, He has the
Witness himself,] that is, he is able to seal to those t uths experimentally,
from the work they have had upon his own Conscience, and the effects wrought by
them in his own soul. He has not only heard by report of the awakening,
convincing, and converting power of the Gospel (which are a strong witness of
its divine original and authority) but this witness he has within himself, as
having felt that efficacy. So that he can say to the Ministers, as the men of
Sychar to the woman, Joh. 4.42. Now we believe, not because of your reports,
for we have found it our selves to be a divine doctrine, because it has
subdued our hearts, and wrought mightily upon our spirits. Or as the stranger
that comes into the Church Assembly, upon whom the Word is quick and
powerful, and sharp as a two edged sword, piercing into his bosom and
discovering the secrets of his heart; O says he, God is in you of a truth;
surely this is none other than the Word of the Lord of Hosts, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25.
The Arguments produced by the Minister are a witness without him, and the
energy of the Word upon his heart is a witness within him.

3. Or thirdly, You may understand it metonymically; the witness for the person
witnessing, q.d. He that believes, has the Spirit of grace and holiness
conferred upon him; He is made partaker of the Holy Ghost, whose work it is to
bear witness unto Jesus, No man out of sincere aff ction and true faith, can
profess that Christ is the Lord, but by the instinct of the Holy Ghost. Engl.
Annot. in loc.
and without whom they could never believe in Jesus, 1 Cor. 12, 3. No man can
say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost; that is, no man can speak it
spiritually from the heart as he ought to speak it, so as to subscribe to this
principle, that Jesus is the Lord, and to submit to his Lordship and
Government, but by the Holy Ghost.

That's the first thing I would note in the context, The nature and excellency
of believing.

2. We have the sinfulness of the sin of unbelief, the horrid and heinous
nature thereof. It does implicitly charge the God of truth with falsehood, and
virtually impeach him as a liar, v. 10. latter part, He that believes not God,
has made him a liar, because he believes not the Record that God has given
of his Son.

How does unbelief make God a liar?

Answ. 1. Not by the contamination or pollution of the divine nature; as if the
Lord contracted any defilement thereby. He cannot be tempted to sin, nor
tainted with sin, Jam. 1.13. The blessed Angels are not tainted with pollution,
but the nature of God cannot be tainted, he is infinitely out of the reach of
it. Unbelief does not take from the truth of Gods promise, but puts a bar in
the Way of our receiving the mercy promised, 2 Timothy 2.13. If we believe not,
yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself. And mark what the same Apostle
says, Romans 3.3, 4. What if some do not believe, shall their unbelief make the
faith of God of none effect? God forbid, q. d. Let not such a cursed thought
enter into your hearts; it cannot be, but the faith of God [that is, the
faithfulness of God] as to his word and promise, must abide firm and immutable
to such as have an interest therein. We make our fellow servants oftentimes
sinners by real infection, when the guilt is spread into their souls, being
seduced by us, and made partakers with us; but God is holy, holy, holy, Isa.
6.3. infinitely holy, unchangeably holy, capable of nothing but holiness. Our
unbelief does not hurt him but our selves, Job 35.6.

2. But it makes God a liar in a way of calumniation or detraction. Unbelievers
do really and consequentially (though unjustly) charge God with this
imperfection. They say in their hearts, the Lord is not a God of truth: For did
they own the truth of God, they would undoubtedly subscribe to his word. By
questioning the matter witnessed, we impute falsehood to the person witnessing;
Tantum valet testimonium, quantum auctoritas testantis.
and this is the very nature of unbelief. As it is the damning sin that locketh
up a man under the guilt of all his transgressions, so it is an exceeding
heinous and sinful sin, it carries a kind of blasphemy in the bowels of it; it
makes as if God were a liar. As by believing we seal to the truth of God, Joh.
3.33. Non quod dei fidem labefactet little impietas: sed quod* per eos non stat,
quin issum arguant vanitatis. Calv.
So by unbelief we do in effect lay falsehood to his charge. O the desperate
wickedness of man's heart! O the horrid abomination of this great ungodliness!
and the wonderful patience of God toward unbelieving sinners!

That's the second thing to be noted, The sinfulness of the sin of unbelief.

3. Now the Text is brought in as a Specification of that Record, which is
propounded as the object matter of our faith, and in reference to which,
unbelievers do asperse and calumniate the God of Heaven as a liar. They will
not acquiess in the dictates of the Scripture, they call in question the record
that God has left concerning his Son. And if it be demanded what this record
is, or what special matter it does contain? The Apostle informs you in the
subsequent verses; This is the record, that God has given us eternal Life, and
this life is in his Son: He that has the Son has life, and he that has not
the Son has not life.

Which words are a Compendium of the Christians Charter: An abbreviature of the
great deed of gift, or conveyance, which God has made of eternal glory and
blessedness unto the children of men: the record which he has left touching
the way of salvation. Wherein you have observable, for the distribution of the
words, these four parts.

1. The mercy provided, or the blessing conveyed, that is, eternal life.] What
are we to understand by eternal Life in this place? Vita aeterna sumitur. 1.
Proprie pro beato electorum statu post hanc vitam. 2. Improprie seu Metonymice
pro via seu medio perveniendi ad vitam aeternam. Ravan.
I answer, 1. Expressly, and primarily, the enjoyment of God in heaven; the
blessed Vision and fruition of the Lord in glory: the Rivers of pleasures that
are at his right hand for ever: the reward of the Inheritance, commonly set
forth by this expression, eternal Life, Romans 6.22. Galat. 6.8. 2. Virtually,
and secondarily, all sorts of spiritual blessings, that have a tendency to
glory, and are required to fit us for the possession thereof: that is to say,
grace and holiness, pardon of sin and reconciliation with the Almighty; the
supplies of the Spirit for doing the will of God, and ability to persevere in
that way unto the end. These are all included in this expression of eternal
Life: for they are the first fruits and beginnings of it. As glory is but grace
in its ripeness and perfection, so grace is glory in the bud and blossom: And
therefore our Savior calls the knowledge of God, eternal Life, Joh. 17.2, 3.
This is life eternal, to know thee the only trus God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent: that is, This is the foretast of eternal Life, the way to it,
an earnest penny in order to the full possession; it is none other than the gate
of heaven.

Thus you are to understand it here, in the full extent and latitude of the
expression: as it comprehends the saving mercies conferred upon the Saints on
the earth, as well as the crown of Righteousness to be enjoyed in heaven: For
in the covenant of Peace (whereof the Text is an abbreviation) God has made
provision for the one, as well as the other. He has not only given Salvation,
if men are sanctified and repent: but has provided for the sanctification and
repentance of his Elect, that they may be saved, Psalm. 73.24. Thou shall guide
me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory. And accordingly Christ
the Mediator has made his purchase; he has not only bought an inheritance to
be given to the Saints: but for the Elect of God he has procured Saintship,
and all the appendices thereof, that they may be partakers of that inheritance,
Tit. 3.5, 6, 7.

That Is the first thing in the Text, The mercy provided, or the blessing
conveyed.

2. You have the Original or Wellspring of this mercy; the fountain of this
Blessing, whence it is derived: why, from the free grace and pleasure of the
Lord; it is his gift. It is not merited and deserved by us, but freely and
graciously bestowed upon us: This is the record, that God has given us eternal
Life.]

Herein it differs from the reward of ungodliness; that is the natural product
of our sins, but this is not the purchase of our boliness; that is justly
merited, but this mercifully given: as the Apostle observes, Romans 6.23. The
wages of sin is death: but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Wherein the holy Ghost speaks, as if he did plainly intend
to obviate and prevent the corrupt reasonings of men. Will some be apt to
argue, If the wicked by their transgressions deserve eternal destruction, then
a Believer by his holiness does merit eternal Salvation: Nay, says S. Paul,
here I must have leave to deny the consequence; the one indeed is a wages, but
the other is a gift.

We may take a view of the blessedness, or salvation of the Saints, in a
fourfold period: and in each of them (in respect to us) it is of grace. God
has given us eternal Life.

In the 1. Purpose of the Father. 2. Promise of the Gospel. 3. Purchase of the
death of Christ. 4. Respect of our interest therein.


1. In the eternal counsel and purpose of the Father: As he determined and
foreordained to bring sons to glory, so it must of necessity be of grace and
love. Who has first given to him, and it shall be recompensed? What could move
the Lord to design compassion for some, and to pass by others of the same
nature with them, of greater parts and dignity, and in higher place, as to
worldly honors and accomplishments? To appoint an handful in comparison unto
bliss and glory, to set them apart for himself; and to leave the rest of
mankind in their undone condition? Surely it was only because it seemed good in
his sight: and therefore it is called election of grace, Romans 11.5, 6. There is
a remnant, according to the election of grace: and if by grace, then it is no
more of works. It is ascribed to pure mercy, nothing but mercy, Romans 9.15, 16.
For he says to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will
have compassion on whom I will have compassion. So then, it is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy.

2. In the Covenant and Promise, which God has made of eternal Life, and
whereby it is made over to Believers. Pray, whence was the Lord induced to make
such a gracious Covenant, but from his own good pleasure? It is given to us. 2
Pet. 1.4. It is true, the faithfulness, and, in some sense, the righteousness
and justice of God, oblige him to fulfill the Covenant, when it is made [ Nehem.
9.8.] but it was only free love that could incline him to make it, or to enter
into this Covenant; and to make publication thereof, to some and not to others,
Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8. Psalm. 147.19, 20.

3. In the purchase of it, by the blood of Christ. God sent his Son into the
world upon that errand, by his obedience and sufferings to become the Author of
Salvation. And what was the motive that prevailed with the Lord to send him?
what provocative stirred him up to make this Mission? Why, God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life, Joh. 3.16. He shut up the fallen
Angels irrecoverably in the chains of darkness, he gave not Christ to take
their nature upon him: but for us men, and for our Salvation, he came down from
heaven: and herein God commends his love to us, Romans 5.8.

4. Lastly, eternal Life may be considered in respect of our Title to it, and
interest therein; together with the possession thereof: which is accomplished
in the work of Regeneration. And whence does this proceed? Why, it is a gift, 2
Cor. 5.5. He that has wrought us for the self same thing is God, who has also
given unto us the earnest of his Spirit. 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us, and
called us with an holy calling: not according to our works, but according to
his own purpose and grace. It is God that works in us both to will and to do
of his own good pleasure.

That Is the second branch of the Text. The original of this mercy, whence it
does proceed.

3. We have the great dispenser of this mercy or blessing: into whose hands it
is put to be dealt forth unto Believers. This is Jesus Christ the Son of God;
And this life is in his Son.] It is put into the hands of a Mediator, and that
Mediator is none else but the eternally and only begotten Son of God. It is in
him upon a threefold account.

1. As in the meritorious Cause, by whom it is procured: by whose death it was
purchased. As Christ bought the Elect of God to be his people and servants; so
he bought eternal Life to be their inheritance: Hence the Kingdom of Heaven is
called the purchased Possession, Ephesians. 1.14.

2. It is in Christ as in the Representative, by whom possession is taken in
the name of Believers, and to their use. For when our Savior entered into
heaven, he was not only admitted thither upon his own account: but he took
livery and seizin thereof, in the behalf of his people. He entered as the
forerunner: and not for himself only, but for us, Heb. 6.20.

3. It is in Christ as in the hands of a public Officer, or Trustee, whom God
the Father has appointed to this very purpose; to dispense forth eternal Life,
unto those for whom it is prepared. For as the souls of men and women are
blessed upon the account of Christ's righteousness, so that blessing is
communicated through the hands of the Lord Jesus. He is God the Fathers high
Steward, whom he imployeth in the distribution of his grace. He sends him to
bless his children, Act. 3.26. And what the Spirit does it is in Christ's name,
Joh. 14.26.

There Is the third particular to be observed: The great dispenser of this
mercy. God has given us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.

4. Here is the manner of the conveyance of this mercy; how it is made over to
us, and becomes ours: Why, by virtue of our union with Christ. It is given
forth by the Son, to them that have the Son, and to none besides. He that has
the Son has life, and he that has not the Son has not life.

So that it is laid down or expressed 1. Positively. 2. Exclusively.


1. Positively, He that has the Son has life.] He has it, 1. in respect of
right and title thereto: he has a good interest therein, Praesentia gratiae
atlestatur faelicitatem futurae gloriae sine dubio sequuturam.
it is his portion and his inheritance, to which he may warrantably lay claim;
and for which he may plead as his own. 2. He has life in the beginning and
entrance thereof: he has those mercies which are certain harbingers of glory,
and will end in glory. Or, 3. He has eternal life; that is, he shall as
undoubtedly enjoy it, as if he were already in possession: it being an usual
form of speaking, in the writings of the holy Ghost, to mention things future
in the present tense, to note the certainty and undoubtedness of their futurity.

2. It is delivered Exclusively, He that has not the Son has not life.] that
is, 1. He has not life in reality, whatever he may have in his own conceit and
apprehension: he may think himself to be something, when indeed and in truth he
is nothing. 2. He has not life; that is, he is stark dead in sins and
trespasses, he is under the wrath of God, he is still an accursed wretch. So it
may be meant, by an usual Meiwsis, whereby less is mentioned than is intended.
3. He has not life, i. e. if he die in that estate, it will be evident that he
has it not: he will perish surely, eternally, and unavoidably.

I mainly intend to handle this last branch of the Text. For the further
clearing of which, there is one previous enquiry to be made.

Q. The Question is this. What is meant by a persons having the Son? Or, How
may a man or woman be said to have the Son, that he may have life?

A. For answ. you must note these three things.

1. The way, whereby the holy Ghost in the Scripture does most commonly set
forth our having the Son, it is by our union with the Son, or being in him. We
are said to have him, by being made one with him. This is evident at the first
to any one that is verst in the books of the Old and New Testament: that having
the Son is the same thing, for substance, with that which is frequently called
our union with Christ, or being in Christ, Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no
condemnation, to them that are in Christ Jesus.] i. e. to them that have him,
by virtue of their union with him, Joh. 6.54. Whosoever eats my flesh and
drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.
And if you would see how this feeding on Christ does contribute to a sinners
having eternal Life; you will find it to be, because thereby he has the Son;
which is expressed by union with the Son, v. 56. He that eats my flesh and
drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. And thus having the Son
seems to be explained in the following part of this Chap. 1 John 5.20. And we
are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God,
and eternal life. q. d. this is the way to eternal life, hereby alone you will
come to the enjoyment of it: you must have the Son, that is, you must be in
him, or united to him.

2. By our union with Christ (which is the way whereby we are said to have the
Son) I understand all along (to speak distinctly) the Oneness of a Believer
with the Lord Jesus.

You may observe a difference between these two things, viz. 1. The making of
Christ and a Believer one. And, 2. Their being one, when they are so knit
together. 1. (...) Unitio. (...) Unitas.

There is the bringing of a soul unto Christ, and ingraffing into Christ. And,
2. There is the being or standing of that soul in Christ, when it is so brought
and ingraffed, 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ. Now it is this latter I
mean all along, by union. The term is indeed of a latitude that may comprize
both of them, but I shall use it principally to denote the latter.

3. Although in the writings of the Scripture you do not meet with this
numerical word of Union with Christ, in the very letters and syllables of it;
yet you have plentiful mention made of the thing signified thereby. How often
do you read of the Saints being in Christ? and being put into Christ? and
expressly in one place, you have mention of their Oneness with him, and with the
Father, Joh. 17.21. That they may be one in us.

The words of the Text, being thus unfolded and opened, will afford us this
doctrinal Point.

That in order to an interest in eternal life, and partaking of those blessings
which are given forth by Christ, in a tendency thereunto, it is of absolute
necessity, that we be united unto Christ.

If we will have life from the Son, we must have the Son: that is, we must be
made one with him. No union with Jesus, and no communication of life and
salvation from Jesus. For, he that has the Son has life, and he that has not
the Son has not life. And therefore you shall find, that this is the method
and order, wherein the Lord is pleased to conduct sinners to happiness: First,
he does plant them into Christ, and then does bless them in him, and through
him, Christus habet quod omnibus prosit; sed si non bibitur, non medetur.
Ephesians. 1.3. So that this is a point of a very momentous nature, which I would
press on my own heart and yours: that we may perish everlastingly
notwithstanding what christ has done and suffered, except we be ingraffed into
Christ. As life is in him, so our selves must be in him, that we may partake of
that life. This is the privilege which Paul did thirst after, and for which he
willingly suffered the loss of all things, accounting them but dung; that he
might win Christ, and be united unto him, or found in him: as it is, Phil. 3.8,
9.

In the prosecution and management of this practical note, and for the opening
of this Mystery and privilege of union with the Lord Jesus: I will cast the
matter I have to speak, under seven general heads.

1. By way of Introduction: premising some things, that may be of use to lead
us into the study of this Mystery. 2. For Explication of the nature of this
Union, wherein it does consist. 3. For unfolding of the way and manner, how how
it is wrought and accomplished. 4. By way of Enquiry, into the signal and most
remarkable properties of this union. 5. For Demonstration of the indispensable
necessity of it, in order to the attainment of eternal Life. 6. I shall briefly
touch upon the special similitudes, or resemblances which the holy Ghost makes
use of, for illustration of this Union. 7. Lastly, we will close up all in a
particular Application; for the practical improvement of this Doctrine.
CHAP. II. Introductory Conclusions premised, to direct us in the studying of
this Doctrine.
1. TO premise a little by way of Introduction. There are three preliminary
conclusions, useful to be pondered and settled in our thoughts, by way of
entrance to the study of this great truth: and getting an insight into this
subject, of a believers Union, or Oneness with the Lord Jesus.

Concl. 1. That this grace of a Christians union with the Son is, for the
intimacy and closness of it, one of the deep things of God: one of the great
mysteries held forth in the Gospel.

The Doctrines of the Bible are well compared by one to the holy waters in
Ezekiel. cap. 47, 3, 4, 5. In some places they were no higher than the ankles of a
man; but in other places up to the loins, nay, a great River that could not be
passed over. In some places so shallow, that a Lamb might wade; but in others
deep, that an Elephant might swim. So in the truths of God, you have many
things easy and obvious, that he that runs may read them; the meanest
Christian may apprehend them: But then other passages are so deep, that they
may exercise the strongest capacities. You meet with this distinction of divine
truths, Heb. 5.12. There is milk for Babes, and strong meat for such as are
more experienced, and have made some considerable progress in the School of
Christ. There are plain truths to feed the weakest constitution, and higher
mysteries to exercise the greatest parts and indowments. And this point of
Union with Christ is one of those mysteries.

Mark, I say for the intimacy of it, and a through insight thereinto. As to the
matter [or quod sit] it is one of the first principles: but in respect of a
full comprehension thereof, it is an unsearchable depth. It is called a
mystery, a great mystery, Ephesians. 5.32. It is one of the things which God has
prepared for them that love him: such as never entered into the heart of man to
conceive, 1 Cor. 2.9. where the Apostle primarily speaks of these spiritual
blessings, though that passage is usually applied to the kingdom of glory. This
Union is set forth, for mysteriousness of it, by that Oneness which is between
the Father and the Son, Joh. 17.21. sufficiently importing, that it is an
unfathomable depth.

This is needful to be premised, on a fourfold account.

1. That we may begin the study of this point, and you may be careful to manage
your attendance upon this doctrine, with an holy and humble adoration and
admiration of the wisdom of God, in this glorious contrivance: That God should
not only redeem lost sinners by the death of his Son: but make them one with
his Son. How should it fill us with astonishment, in the contemplation hereof?
That is a posture of spirit, very suitable to an enquiry into the nature of
this transcendent privilege. Well may a person cry out as S. Paul on a like
occasion, O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God,
Romans 11.33.

2. That we may the rather be induced, in our meditations on this Doctrine, as
to search diligently into the Scriptures, so to confine our thoughts and
speculations thereupon to the plain revelations and discoveries made in the
Scriptures. Not to launch forth by our inquisitiveness beyond what is contained
therein, and made known to us thereby. For, Fides in regula posita est. Cedat
curiositas fidei, cedat gloria saluti. Nihil ultra regulam scire, omnia scire
est. Tert.
should we set reason on work, and give up our selves to the guidance thereof,
and labor to make this Doctrine compare with Philosophical notions, or the
like; we should soon be lost, or be wildred in the contemplation of this thing.
Or perhaps (which is worse) split our selves on the rock of some uncouth
opinion, bordering upon blasphemy; instead of embracing the truth: as some
persons have done, when they sought to be wise herein above what is written. As
far as we have the light of the Word to go before us, we may proceed with
safety, in our enquities of this nature: Quae abstrusiora sunt, and in arcanis
divinorum judiciorum perrecondita, illa neque investigare tutum est, neque
reperire (...). These. Sam. de Langle de ^aedobapt.
and we should be very careful to venture no further. For it is a great
mystery, a matter of pure revelation: the full manifestation whereof is
reserved for heaven: and it requires a special illumination of the Spirit to
give us any competent insight into it. So much is evident from the words of our
Savior to his Disciples, Joh. 14.20. At that day, ye shall know that I am in
my Father, and you in me, and I in you. At that day, that is, when the Spirit
is poured out from on high, Qui enim ausu temerario mortalitatis parum memores,
per excelsae naturae and Philosophiae fastigia (tanquam arbore conscensa) ad
mysteria divina aspirant; his poena proposita est perpetuae inconstantiae, and
judicii vacillan^is and perplexi. Cum enim aliud sit lumen naturae, aliud
Divinum, ita cum illis fit ac si duos soles viderent. Bacon. de sap. veter.
when the Comforter is come to guide you into all truth, then you shall know
this mystery; q. d. Now it is as the lines of a book that is sealed up, a
matter beyond your reach, but then you shall read and understand.

3. That hereupon you may be quickened, to set upon this study with prayer: with
the earnest and fervent lifting up your hearts to heaven, that God would anoint
your eyes with ey-salve, for the perception of this truth. That he would open
your minds and judgments to understand the Scripture in this particular: and
lead you into the knowledge and acknowledgment of this mystery. For it is an
Unction from the holy One must teach us these lessons, 1 John 2.20, 27. And
therefore that prayer of the Psalmist is an excellent pattern, (...). Plato.
for the outgoings of our hearts, at such a season, Psalm. 119.18. Open thou
mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy Law.

4. That in order to the getting acquaintance with this Doctrine, you may be
convinced of the necessity of putting your selves under the promise which God
has made, to reveal the secrets of his Covenant to his servants. For this is
one of those secrets, a great mystery: and upon that account mostly styled a
mystical Union. And you know, the way to get under the verge of that promise,
Nulla in discendo mora est, ubi spiritus sanctus Doctor adest. Beda.
is by endeavoring to maintain an holy dread and fear of the Majesty of heaven
upon your hearts: and not daring knowingly, to sin against him, Psalm. 25.14.
The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them his
Covenant. This is the very reason, why many poor Christians, of low parts in
comparison with others, can speak more clearly and savourily of these things,
than some profound Doctors, who are strangers to the power of godliness:
because the promise is not made to great parts and learning, Ille qui cum
puritate animae legit Scripturas, plus proficiet quam si enodare tentaret
mysteria multis commentariis. Acost. Jes.
but to such as have a reverential awe and regard of the Majesty of God upon
their spirits. The Lord does often hide these things from the wise and prudent,
and reveal them unto babes. Why? because it so pleased him; and because he has
promised to instruct them in these lessons, Psalm. 25.9. The meek he will guide
in judgment, and the meek he will teach his way. Again, v. 12. What man is he
that fears the Lord? him he shall teach in the way that he shall choose. And
therefore mark what I say: Humility, self-emptiness, and poverty of spirit,
together with a due dependence on the teachings of God, will strike a greater
stroke in acquiring the knowledge of these Lessons, than the choicest
accomplishments of parts and learning without them. A conscientious respect to
plain truths and precepts, is the way to learn hidden mysteries, John 7.17. If
any man will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine.

That Is the first Conclusion to be premised.

2. Concl. 2. Although the Union of a Christian with the Lord Jesus, is in it
self a mystery, not easy to be attained as to right apprehensions thereof: yet
it is a point of very great concernment to be studied; and a clear insight
thereinto will abundantly recompense all the pains you can take in the search
of it. So that the difficulty of attainment, should not deter us from a diligent
enquiry into it: but rather stir us up to pursue it, with all our might and
industry. It is a point wherein a man cannot with safety be ignorant. It is
incumbent upon us, as we tender our everlasting welfare, to get right
apprehensions of the substance of this thing. A mistake herein may occasion our
eternal undoing. And therefore when Christ had treated, Mat. 13. of the mixture
there is in the visible Church, in many parables together: How that some are in
the Church who are not of the Church; that there are many seem to be members of
the body, who are not spiritually united to Christ the head of the body (for
that is the drift of the parables, though delivered in other words) how does he
close his Sermon upon that subject? See v. 51. Jesus says unto them, have ye
understood all these things? As if he had said, It does infinitely concern you
to get a good understanding in this matter: you cannot safely be in the dark,
as to this Doctrine: Let these things sink deep into your hearts, and be much
pondered in your thoughts. Hence the holy Ghost is so much upon it, and does
frequently mention, not only the excellency and need of Jesus Christ, but
likewise the necessity of our Oneness with Christ, or being in him.

It is a dangerous thing to have false conceptions in our minds concerning this
union, or to be ignorant of it, for three Reasons especially.

1. Because it is the want of a right knowledge, and due consideration of this
very thing which is the cause of the ruin of many thousand souls. Amongst
those that live within the pale of the Church, and have heard the joyful sound
of the Gospel, a great number perish by splitting upon this rock. They apply
the virtue of the death of Christ to themselves, without ever minding whether
they are in Christ. They hope to be saved upon his account, and so go on
securely to hell, under the shelter of those hopes; because they never
considered the nature and necessity of being united to his person. See the very
rise of their destruction, how they plead themselves into a fools paradise, in
expectation of being pardoned and saved through Christ's blood; because they
never minded if they had the Son or not; if they were in Christ or no, Luke
13.26, 27. Then shall ye begin to say, We have eatten and drunk in thy
presence, and thou hust taught in our streets: But he shall say, I tell you, I
know you not whence you are: depart from me all ye workers of iniquity. Observe
their mistake from the answer that is returned them; I know you not whence you
are] as if he had said, You are utter aliens and strangers unto me, persons
with whom I never was acquainted: Though you heard my Word, yet you were never
ingraffed into my body, though you were never ingraffed into my body: though
you have eaten and drunk in my presence, yet you were not implanted into me;
nor ever had any fellowship with me. And who are those which thus deceive
themselves? why, many, very many, as in that parallel Text, Mat. 7.22, 23. I
think, experience may give us cause to suspect, they are the most.

2. It is a dangerous thing to have false apprehensions of Union with Christ;
because this is the great fundamental blessing upon which all our comfort is
built: and other spiritual blessings have a dependence hereupon. So that see to
it, that you study this Doctrine, and judge aright concerning it: for if the
foundation fail upon which our comfort is bottomed, all the superstructure must
of necessity vanish that is erected upon that foundation. All other seize
are as nothing without this. If the leading mercy fail upon which others
depend, we must undoubtedly fall short of those other mercies, which have their
dependence hereon. Why sirs, Union with Christ is the very Basis of
consolation, and the leading mercy, Joh. 15.6. If a man abide not in me, he is
cast forth as a branch, and is withered; and men gather them, and cast them
into the fire, and they are burned. The meaning is this, A man's profession is
nothing, and all his common indowments and privileges are nothing: they will
not signify a jot, as to save him from destruction: he cannot escape the
damnation of hell, except he get into Christ, and abide in him.

3. It is dangerous to be ignorant of this mystery, and it much concerns us
to get a sound knowledge hereof: because this Doctrine, of late, has been
notably corrupted, and perverted. It has been abused to the countenancing of
some men's (even) blasphemous assertions, which they have vented, under the
notion of high seize. They have endeavored to break down that
distinction which is between Christ and his people, and to turn the whole
substance of the Gospel into Allegories, upon pretense of opening this Union.
And it concerns us to be well instructed and established in present truths;
as the Apostle Peter phraseth it, in 2 Pet. 1.12. truths which are mostly
perverted in the present time, or that need special vindication in the present
age, wherein we live: in the defense whereof God calls us to stand up against
the adversaries. If we would not be led aside by the error of the wicked, and
fall from our own stedfastness, as we must labor to grow in grace, so to
increase in the knowledge of Christ, 2 Pet. 3.17, 18.

So much for the second Conclusion to be premised.

3. Concl. 3. Instead of curiously prying into, and overmuch inquisitiveness
after this Mystery, and the manner of this Union, further than is revealed in
the Scriptures of truth; it should be the great design of men's souls to secure
it unto themselves; and to make it evident that they are sharers therein.
Herein lies the marrow and fatness of this glorious privilege, when we can
personally appropriate it to our own souls, and say: This is a mercy, whereof
we are partakers. Else, what sweetness can we taste in the contemplation
thereof, whilst our selves are strangers thereunto? This is the very counsel of
the Apostle, in another case, to his Corinthians, 2 Cor. 13.3, 4, 5. They were
enquiring after a proof of Christ speaking in him: Why, says he, your business
lies in reflection upon your selves, to prove that Christ is formed in you.
The like advice I would give in this present affair. And we should the rather
give diligence herein, upon a threefold account.

1. Because hereby we shall be the better enabled, to perceive the real meaning
of what is delivered in the unfolding of this Mystery: We shall easier discern
the import of all the particulars mentioned in the opening of it: when we have
found it made good upon our own souls, and feel somewhat wrought within us
answerable to the doctrines which are taught concerning it. For Sirs, Postquam
coelitus spiritu houste, in novum me hominem nativitas secunda reparavit, mirum
in modum protinus confirmare se dubia, patere clausa, lucere tenebrosa, etc.
Cyp. Ep. 2. ad Donat.
a little experience of the power of godliness will notably help a man to
discern clearly into the mysteries of godliness: it will serve instead of many
Commentators for the unfolding of divine truths. If a Scholar should make a
large and eloquent Oration, to set forth the sweetness of honey; a little taste
of it would contribute more to a right understanding thereof, than many learned
Lectures without it. So when persons have tasted the grace of God in this
Union, matters will be plain and easy unto them, that seem dark and intricate
and full of obscurity unto others. In what a puzzle was Nicodemus as to the
Doctrine of Regeneration, in his understanding, for want of feeling the work of
Regeneration upon his heart? So that he cried out, How can these things be?
Joh. 3.4, 9. And therefore David exhorts us to taste and see, Psalm. 34.8. that
is, endeavor to taste, that you may the better know, and understand the
goodness of the Lord.

2. This is to employ these excellent truths, which God has graciously
revealed, to the end for which they are revealed to us. The Lord has not
opened the treasures of his Wisdom, in declaring these mysteries, only to feed
men's fancies, and to fill their heads with speculations: but to excite and
extimulate us to get an interest in these mercies: that we should personally
apply them to our selves, and make sure our claim and title thereto. You will
find this apparently to be the end of the promulgation of this very Doctrine, 1 John 5.13. These things have I written, to you that believe on the name of the
Son of God, that you may know that you have eternal life. These things] that
is, these high mysteries of salvation aforementioned; that it is in the Son,
and to be enjoyed by virtue of our union with the Son. I have written them,
that you may take them home to your own consciences, and pass judgment upon
your selves, according to the tenor of these words.

3. If we learn the nature of this privilege, and do not secure it to our
selves, it will but tend to the heightning of our condemnation. So that better
for us we had never known it, or heard a word concerning it: for this very
thing will aggravate our contempt of the grace of God; and the reflection upon
it will be a continual torment upon our spirits. What a cut will this be to a
man's conscience, when he comes to die, to bethink himself, I knew that there
was such a glorious privilege prepared for the children of men, and yet would
never press after the enjoyment of it: I preferred the pleasures of sin, and
satisfaction of some base lusts before it: I was offered the Son, and life and
redemption through his blood, and would not labor to secure it unto my self,
so that now I am undone eternally and irrecoverably? See how Christ sets forth
men's wickedness on this account, Prove. 1.24, 25, 26. And it is evident,
conscience will take advantage from hence, to be a tormentor, to be a worm
gnawing upon the very entrals of a man's spirit. How have I hated instruction,
and my heart despised reproof? O what madness have I been guilty of, to know
these things, and not to make them sure unto my self? Prove. 5.11, 12, 13.

CHAP. III. Union with Christ distinguished, and the branches of the
distinction explicated.
HAving laid down these things by way of Introduction, let us now proceed to
the Explication of the matter it self. The question is this.

Qu. What are we to understand by a persons Union with the Lord Jesus? Or, How
may a man be said to be united unto the Son, and so to have the Son?

Ans. To this Question I shall answer two ways, by 1. Distinction. 2.
Description.


1. By way of Distinction. Our Lord Jesus himfelf, in the Sermons which he
preached, has made mention of a twofold union with him: or of two ways how men
and women may be in him. 1. By way of visible Profession, or external adbaesion
only; as a dead branch or sprig is in the Tree, though it nothing partake of
the sap derived from the root: as a glass eye or wooden leg is in the body,
though they do not partake of life with the body, in any degree whatsoever. 2.
By way of spiritual ingrafture, and implantation; when they are in Christ so as
to be quickened by Christ, and receive nourishment from him: as a living
fruit-bearing slip or sience is ingraffed into the stock. This distinction you
have, John 15.1, 2. I am the true vine, and my father is the husbandman: Every
branch in me that bears not fruit he takes away; and every branch that
bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth. more fruit. Which words
are a parable, wherein, 1. Christ compares himself to a Vine; and it is a very
pat comparison, both in regard of the mear ^^ness and lowness of his outward
appearance, having no form and comeliness that he should be desired in that
respect: as the vine is the most desplicable, in outward view, among st the
Trees of the garden. And in regard of his real worth and excellency; although
the vine has no beautiful shape, yet it is a very useful and excellent plant:
so the Lord Jesus is the chiefest of ten thousands, he is indeed a plant of
renown. But principally Christ is here resembled to a vine, in regard of the
sustentation of the branches, and the juicy influence that from him is imparted
unto the branches: it is by Christ they are upheld, and by communications from
him they are maintained. 2. God the father is likened to the Husbandman; by
whom the vine is planted and dressed; by commission from whom Christ was sent
upon his work, and furnished with all things requisite thereunto, and by whom
persons are graffed into him. 3. And persons in the visible Churches are
signified by the branches in the Vine: Of which, says our Savior, there are
two sorts; some that are dead and withered, and others which are living and
bring forth fruit. And both of them may be said to be in him; the one sort by
way of profession, the other by way of spiritual implantation. Every branch in
me that bears not fruit, etc. I will open this distinction, in each of the
members of it.

1. There is Union with Christ, or a being in Christ by way of common
Profession, or outward adhaerence only: when yet they have no saving interest
in him, or benefit by him. Thus all that own the Christian Religion, and have a
show of godliness are in him; though perhaps they have nothing of the life and
substance of godliness. They are said to be in his Kingdom, in the Church which
is his Body; and out of that Kingdom they shall be gathered and cast into Hell,
Mat. 13.41. The Son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather
out of his Kingdom all things that offend, Regnum Christi 1. Oecumenieum.
Oeconomicuin.
and them which do iniquity; (not only out of the world in general, but out of
the visible Church, the Mediators Kingdom) and shall cast them into a furnace
of fire, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Statim parebunt Christo
summo Judici messores, and Ecclesiae purgatores; tollent enim e regno Christi
omnia offendicula. Marl. in loc.
As carnal Professors are said to be sanctified through Christ, so in a like
sense it may be said they are in Christ. You read expressly of their being
sanctified by the blood of the Covenant, who yet drew back unto perdition, and
trampled that blood under their feet, Heb. 10.29. Of how much sorer punishment,
suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy of, who has trodden under foot the Son
of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was
sanctified, an unholy thing? i.e. There is a sanctification to the purifying of
the flesh, and a sanctification to the purifying of the conscience from dead
works, to serve the living God, Heb. 9.13, 14. The sanctification external to
the purifying of the flesh consists in the man's separation from the world,
and dedication unto God's service by calling and Covenant, common to all the
members of the visible Church, etc. Dicks.
whereby he was separated and set apart from the Heathen, and worshippers of
false gods; and taken amongst the professed people and servants of Christ: this
I take to be the genuine import of the place; for it is an evident allusion to
the blood of the Sacrifice, sprinkled on the whole body of the Israelites,
whereby they were sanctified and set apart unto the Lord; or as a token of
their covenanting with the Lord: although with many of them God was not
well-pleased, they continued weltring in their sins, under the power of their
unbelief and other wickednesses, notwithstanding. Now as they are sanctified by
Christ, so in a like sense it may be said they are in him: they belong to him,
as his disciples and followers by way of profession. See Joh. 6.66.

Concerning which Union with Christ, by way of common profession, or external
adhaesion only, I will entreat you to mind these four Positions.

1. Position. 1. The principal bonds or ligaments whereby this union is made
up, by which persons are thus knit unto Christ, do mainly consist of four
things.

1. An approbation or acknowledgment of the doctrines of Christianity. 2. An
external subjection to the Ordinances of Christ. 3. Some common workings upon
their hearts and spirits. 4. A measure of reformation in their lives and
conversations.
Let us a little touch upon them severally.

1. The first bond of this Union, by way of external adhaesion, is an
approbation and acknowledgment of the doctrines of Christianity; so as to
assent unto the truth, and confess (at least) the goodness and excellency of
them: so as to close with them, in opposition to all contrary ways of Religion.
It is not enough to the establishment of this Union, that a man does hear the
word of Christ; so may a Heathen do, out of curiosity; so may a Jew or
Mohammedan, to blaspheme and cavil: but at least there must be some kind of
reception and approbation of the word. Thus the carnal Professors of whom the
Apostle makes mention (for of such he speaks under the name of Jew's) Romans
2.17, 18, 21. It was this which made them Jews outwardly; See Rev. 2. ^. The
Christians were at first reckoned by the Heathen as Jews. vid. Suet. in vita
Claud. Judaeos imgulsore Christo assidue tumultuantes Roma expulic. So that the
Christians seem to have go^e under that name, and to ha^^ been banished with
them by the decree mentioned, Act. 18.2.
though they were no savingly instructed, nor taught the truth as it is in
Jesus; yet they had some knowledge of the mind of God, and were convinced of
the truth and excellency of the Law of the Lord; so as to subscribe to it, and
to own and approve it as such. This made them Christ's people at large, by way
of profession. And this must needs be one of the ligatures of that Union; for
such as avowedly reject the fundamental doctrines of Christianity, are not so
much as Christ's seeming friends; but open enemies to his crown and dignity.

2. There must be an external subjection to the Ordinances of Christ: so as to
afford their presence at them, and outward compliance with them, and attendance
upon them. For Sirs, Gospel Ordinances are the badges of Christ's followers,
Sacramenta, ut and alia insti uta divina, sunt figna piotestativa fidei.
as well as means to convey his grace into their souls. And if a people belong
to him at all, they must at least wear his livery. So that when persons live in
the open neglect, or contempt of the Ordinances and Institutions of the Lord
Jesus, or think they are arrived at so high a pitch as to be above Ordinances;
they do thereby declare themselves, to be so far from the truth of grace, that
they are not arrived to a serious prosession. Above Ordinances, and below
Christianity. Such have not so much as Christ's livery upon them; for this is
one of the bonds of a common union. Thus Simon Magus was baptized into Christ,
and for a while held fellowship with the Disciples, and so in a sort did belong
to Christ; till afterward he apostatized and discovered his rottenness, Act.
8.13. So far the lowest rank of hypocrites ordinarily go. It is true, they have
no spiritual communion or fellowship with Christ in his Ordinances: but they
are many times pretty-constant in attendance upon Ordinances. So those carnal
Israelites, whom God owneth in this respect to be his people, Isa. 58, 1.2. And
therefore the Apostle calls men off, from trusting in this, to mind the grace
of Regeneration, and Conversion upon their hearts: for these privileges avail
not to a saving union with Christ, but a new creature, Gal. 6.15.

3. There is usually some common workings upon their hearts and spirits: as
now, convictions in the conscience of the evil of sin, sometimes an inclination
upon their souls to give up themselves to be the Lords: only a beloved lust
hinders the performance of it. Possibly many common graces of the Spirit are
conferred upon them, in which respect they are said to be made partakers of the
holy Ghost: for so far a carnal Professor may arrive, Heb. 6.4, 5. The holy
Ghost may strive with a professed enemy to the Kingdom of Christ; There are
some Converts external from the world to the Church, who yet stick in their
naturals; and are not in the sense of sin fled unto Christ for refuge, nor
converted from nature to saving grace. Dic^^s.
but when he shall moreover work some remarkable effects upon a sinner; as
terrors in apprehension of the wrath of God, desires to be sheltered under the
wings of Christ, that he may escape that wrath; so that he joyneth himself
outwardly to his people, then he becomes a seeming friend, though he proceed
no further.

4. The last bond which I shall mention, of this common union with Christ, is
some degrees of reformation in the life and practice. When persons live and lie
weltering in gross pollutions of the world, they do apparently belong unto the
world: they do openly proclaim themselves to be the very children of the devil.
If a man belong to Christ but by profession, there must be some measure of
reformation wrought: there must be an actual abstaining from those wickednesses
whereby the name of Christian is openly contradicted. As real holiness and
closs walking with God is essential to the being of a Disciple indeed: so a
cleansing of the outside of the cup and platter (as our Savior calls it) is
required to make a man a Disciple but in appearance. And thus far they commonly
go, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. They retained their doggish and swinish nature still,
as is evident from their Apostasy, v. 12. The dog is turned to his vomit again,
and the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire: and yet they escaped
the pollutions of the world, and that through the knowledge of the Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, v. 20. Although the doctrines of the Gospel had not a
saving effect upon their souls, yet they had a real effect: though their
natures were not transformed, yet their lives in some particulars were
reformed: their conversations were cleansed from gross and scandalous
abominations. That Is the first Position touching this matter.

2. Pos. 2. It is a very great privilege and mercy, considered in it self, for
a man or woman to be taken thus near unto Jesus Christ, and in this sense to be
united to him; namely, by way of external adhaesion. To be separated from the
Heathen to be his people, and to be made to differ from the profane world and
the notoriously wicked; who do avow their sins openly in the face of men, and
declare themselves subjects unto the prince of darkness. Though it be not the
best of privileges, yet it is a great privilege; though it be not a mercy to
be rested in, yet it is a mercy thankfully to be acknowledged: it is no way to
be slighted and undervalued. The Apostle speaks of it as such, Romans 3.1, 2.
What advantage has the Jew? or what profit is there of circumcision? that is,
what benefit does arise by being a member of the Church of Christ? what profit
is it to be a Jew outwardly, a Disciple by profession? into which relation
circumcision did give them solemn entrance, it was the Ordinance for
initiation. Is this nothing? or is it a privilege of a low nature? No, in no
wise, says the Apostle, do not thus esteem it. It is an eminent mercy, there
is much advantage by it every way.

You will say, wherein lies the advantage of being thus in Christ? Answ. In
four things especially.

1. Chiefly and primarily, because hereupon they are set under the means of
grace, and tenders of salvation. They have eternal life set before their souls,
and upon the terms of the Gospel offered unto them. Hereby they do enjoy the
word of Christ, the Oracles of God; and the Ordinances, which are the places
wherein the Lord Jesus himself is to be found of them that seek him: and which
are the conduit-pipes through which he does use to convey spiritual grace and
blessings, to such as thirst after them. The remainders of the light of nature
are enough to leave a sinner inexcusable in his condemnation, when he does not
live up to that light; but they can proceed no further, they can make no
discoveries of the path of salvation: But now persons in the visible Church
have these things revealed before their eyes: they have Christ set forth that
they may know him: and his excellencies displayed that they may love him. So
that it is a merciful privilege in this respect; Nay, if the fault be not in
themselves, it may bring them to Christ in a saving way, Psalm. 147.19, 20. He
shows his word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel. He
has not dealt so with any Nation, and as for his Judgments they have not known
them. Praise ye the Lord. q. d. Here is matter of praise and abundant
thanksgiving. See also Romans 9.4. and Ezekiel. 20.11, 12.

2. Hereby persons do enjoy communion with such as are real Saints, and
servants of Christ in sincerity: which may be of excellent use to provoke them
to emulation, and so to save their souls. They have the benefit of the society
of the godly, to be an encouragement unto them to serve the Lord indeed: and
the advantage of their example, as a copy for imitation. Multum resert
quibuscum vixeris.
They are under their counsel for admonition; and many times partakers of their
provoking conferences, to incite and stir them up to become such as they are.
They have a share in their inspection and watchfulness over them, whereby
oftentimes they are restrained and kept in due bounds. And so it is a signal
mercy in this respect. As by fellowship with the wicked, and contracting
friendship with them, men learn their ways, and get a snare unto their souls:
so by communion with the Saints, persons are in a capacity of learning their
ways, and saving their souls, Psalm. 141.4, 5. Let the righteous smite me, it
shall be a kindness, and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil,
which shall not break my head: Nihil tutius amico monitore.
that is, (by an usual Mei^sis) it will abundantly tend to my spiritual good,
and to the promoting and carrying on my eternal welfare. As coals are kindled
by other burning coals: so are the ungodly many times by hearty counsel, and
holy walking, and the like, made instrumental to quicken and inflame such as
have fellowship with them, Jam. 5.19.

3. From hence it is that they do in a sort partake of that special care which
God takes of his Church: and receive some drops of those blessings which
Christ does shower down upon his Church. You know, that although God by a
general providence does mind and govern the whole creation [he feeds the ravens
when they cry, and gives meat to the beasts of the field] yet he has a special
inspection into the affairs of his Church: he makes peculiar provision for
them, reserving his dainties in store for them. Now by this external adhaesion
unto Christ, and being in the visible Church, a person may have a share in
those mercies; and the out-skirts of those blessings may fall down upon their
heads. As one that is but a sojourner in a family, and no stated fixed member
of it, may taste of many good things, which the good man of the house prepared
for his own children. And therefore a people are said upon this kind of
neerness, to have God himself nigh unto them: that is, to be under his special
care, even the body of the people, though multitudes of them went no further
than profession, Psalm. 148.14. The children of Israel a people near unto him.
Deuteronomy. 4.7. For what Nation is there so great, that has God so nigh unto them,
as the Lord our God is, in all that we call upon him for? And it seems to be
mentioned as a privilege of the whole visible Church. Isa. 4.5. That the Lord
will create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies
[upon the Church of Christ, whereof Zion was a type, and upon all the
particular Congregations thereof] a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of
a flaming fire by night. The meaning is this, God will in a special manner be a
guide unto them, and undertake for their safeguard and protection: He will lead
them and preserve them, as he did the children of Israel in their travels out
of Egypt, when he went before them in a cloud by day, and in a pillar of fire
by night. So, Isa. 31.5. As birds flying, so will the Lord of hosts defend
Jerusalem, defending also he will deliver it, and passing over he will preserve
it. As birds flying] that is, swiftly and speedily, at the cry of his people he
will come as in an instant, before the adversaries are aware. Or as a bird does
hover over the nest to preserve her young ones, so will the Lord watch over his
people to secure and deliver them. These and such promises are made to the
Church in general, and even carnal Professors, by virtue of their station in
the Church, may have a share in this security and these deliverances. As when
the godly join in confederacy with the wicked, they may be made to smart under
the judgments that are sent upon the wicked: so Professors by their fellowship
with the godly, may taste of the blessings imparted unto them.

4. It is a great privilege, because hereby men are often restrained from
venting many corruptions that otherwise would have prevailed: and from turning
aside into such sins and abominations wherein others wallow. And so they are
prevented and kept from contracting much guilt which otherwise would be
contracted by them. And this is no small advantage. Restraining grace is a
mercy, though sanctifying grace is an higher. And God does make use of this
neerness to Christ, as a restraint or bridle to stop sinners in their carier:
hereby they are purged from their old sins. 2 Pet. 1.9. That Is the second
Position.

3. Position. 3. When men and women are only thus united unto Christ, by way of
visible profession or external adhaesion, though they may abide with him for a
time, and seemingly cleave unto him; yet at last there will be made a
separation betwixt them; and this union will be dissolved and broken asunder.
As it is a dissoluble Union for the nature of it, Quomodo ergo Zizania sunt in
regno Dei, and Putres pisces in reti Evangelico, carena vest nuptiali in
nuptiis Christi: ita in Chricto est qui non sert fructum, nomine tenus
stilicer, and secundam externam (...) tantum, non antem ver^ fi^e. Quare
telluntur isti tandem, and velut resecti arefactique pelunites gebennae
addiciottur. Bucer.
so in the event it will actually be dissolved, sooner or later, by one means
or another. When a soul is in Christ by a spiritual implantation, he shall
never be parted from Christ; but this common union will be broken, and the
cords of it snapt asunder. If a dead branch stick to the Vine for a season, yet
at length the Gardener comes with his pruning-knife and catteth it away. This
is the very Metaphor whereby the dissolving of this Union is set forth, John
15.2. Every branch in me, that bears not fruit, he takes away. i.e. he cuts
off with his pruning-hook, and casts them into the fire. If they do not live
through the vine, they shall have no further being in the vine.

And there are three principal ways, how this separation is made, or this sort
of union is dissolved.

1. By their Apostasy and drawing back from the profession of the Faith, in
days of tribulation and trial: for they are the usual seasons wherein carnal
Professors discover themselves. When God does exercise his Church under
discriminating providence, as sore afflictions and persecutions for the truths
sake, then it appears who are his indeed, and friends unfeigned to the truth.
Cum exurimur persecuti^^ ^ardare, tunc probamur de fidei tonore. Tertul.
Then the living branches stick fast, and such as are dead fall off and perish.
For this Sirs, is one end which God aims at, by bringing his Church into
distress; not as if he took pleasure in their smart and grief, but to pare off
their exuberancies, and that such as are approved may be made manifest. Then
hypocrites mostly unstrip themselves of their covering, and are discovered to
be what they are, Mat. 13.21. When tribulation or persecution arises because
of the word, by and by they are offended. Mark it, They were only united to
Christ by external adhaesion: and when the winter comes, and the frost nippeth
them, they wither and fall away. In this sense we hold falling away from grace,
and apostarizing from the faith, Amici ob utilitatem una cum utilitate
dissolvuntur; namnon sui mutuo erant, amici, sed utilitatis.
that is, from common grace, and the profession o^ of the Faith. This may serve
to direct you how to judge of Apostates, and backsliders: either they fall but
partially, and God in due time will restore, and bring them back by weeping
cross: or if they depart totally and finally from Christ. The reason is,
because they were but dead branches in Christ, and so they drop off.

2. This common union is dissolved, by the execution of the spiritual judgments
of God upon their souls: by giving them up to themselves, and delivering them
over to the will of Satan. When persons continue long unprofitable in the
Church; under the Ordinances, and are not spiritualized nor bettered by them;
God is provoked thereby to withdraw the very strivings of his Spirit from such;
and to let loose the reins of their corruptions, which formerly were kept
under; to give them up to vile affections, and a reprobate mind, that they may
make it appear to whom they really belong: even to the God of this world, the
spirit that rules in the children of disobedience. You read that thus he dealt
with the Heathen, for not living up to the dictates of the light of nature,
Romans 1.24, 26, 28, 29. Much more may it be feared, when persons abuse the light
of the Gospel, and receive the grace of God therein manifested in vain, or turn
it into wantonness. For as it is, Heb. 6.7, 8. The earth which drinks in the
rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it
is dressed, receives blessing from God. But that which bears thorns and
briars, is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. By
the earth understand the souls of men and women, likened to the earth, for
their natural stupidity. O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord: 2.
Because of their tendency downwards unto earthly things: But in this place
especially, because of the souls activity and fructifying virtue, it will bring
forth something either good or evil. By the rain that comes often upon this
earth, is meant, the doctrines of the word, which fall as the rain, and distill
as the dew upon the face of the ground, for the watering thereof. Now, that
earth which drinks in this rain, and bears thorns and briars [ i. e. if they
live still in their sins, defiled with their abominations, and are not such as
walk answerably in some measure to the means they are under] is nigh unto
cursing [unto this spiritual curse of being given up to themselves, to commit
iniquity with greediness, whereby they are sealed up to destruction: to the
curse of barrenness, Never fruit grow upon these souls any more. See also, Hos.
4.17. and Psalm. 81.8, 11, 12. This should have a mighty influence upon us, to
make us watchful over our hearts, that we be not barren or unfruitful in the
vineyard of Christ.

3. This Union will be certainly and solemnly dissolved, by pronouncing the
sentence of eternal judgment. If the hypocrisy of such be not discovered until
the last, then it will be made known in the face of all the world. Christ will
then rend them from him, however they may hope to shelter themselves under his
wings. Then the Lord will judge between cattle and cattle, between one branch
and another, Mat. 13.49, 50. At the end of the world, the Angels shall come,
and sever the wicked from among the just, and shall cast them into the furnace
of fire. Mark it, They shall be then severed from amongst the just; intimating
that now they are together as tares and wheat in the same field, as good fish
and bad in the same net, as living branches and dead in the same vine: but then
the wicked shall be removed from their station, and cast into hell. That Is the
third Position. That this Union with Christ will sooner or later be dissolved.

4. Pos. 4. The state and condition of such persons as are thus united to
Christ, by way of external adhaerence only, and do not aspire nor press after a
further intimacy with him, and a nearer conjunction; that do not improve this
privilege that they may be indeed, what they profess to be, is a very wretched
estate, and a miserable condition. It is worse than the condition of open
enemies to Christ; such as are grossly ignorant of the truths of the Gospel, and
that never professed to be his servants. The Scripture calls it a wretched
and miserable condition: that is, very wretched, exceeding, miserable. God does
hate them with a perfect hatred, and loath them with a full abhorrence and
detestation, Rev. 3.16.17. So then, because thou art lukewarm, and neither hot
no cold [neither a sincere Professor of Religion, nor a professed enemy to
Religion; neither faithful to Christ, nor an open adversary against Christ] I
will spue thee out of my mouth. Because thou say, I am rich and increased in
goods, and have need of nothing, and know not that thou art wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Better for such carnal Professors,
that continue in that estate, and rest contented therewith, without getting
higher; I say, better for them they had never known the way of righteousness,
then to take up their rest in this common union; and not to improve it to a
pursuance after a more inward conjunction with Christ, 2 Pet. 2.21. The sadness
and deplorableness of their condition will appear in these four particulars.

1. Because they do thereby put themselves into the greatest unlikelihood, and
incapacity of being ever savingly wrought upon, of any that live where the word
of Christ is published: and the glad tidings of Salvation are made known to the
children of men. There is more hopes of the conversion of the most debauched
wretches, that live in a professed subjection to the devil, than of those who
have long continued only carnal Professors. As when they apostatize they do
usually become the most bitter enemies of Christ; so it is the hardest thing to
draw them effectually unto Christ. This is none other doctrine than our Savior
has taught, Mat. 21.31. Verily I say unto you, that the publicans and barlots
go into the kingdom of God, before you. They go into the Kingdom of God] that
is, they are easier prevailed upon, to subject themselves to Christ's
government: it is a harder thing to work upon your souls, than upon theirs:
there is more probability of their being converted, than of yours. Who were
these to whom Christ speaks? Why, they were the chief Priests and Scribes and
Elders, men that were thought to be some bodies in the Church, that were had in
great estimation of the Church, that seemed to be pillars in comparison; that
made a fair show; but rested therein, as being strangers to the life and power
of godliness. Mind it, says Christ, I say unto you; verily I say unto you; q.
d. It is an undoubted truth, let it sink deep into your hearts, that publicans
and the harlots [the vilest of people] go into the Kingdom of God before you.
It will seem no wonder, that such are in the greatest unlikelihood of being
savingly wrought upon, if you mind these three Considerations.

1. Consider, That these dead branches in Christ, or carnal Professors, do
commonly thereupon maintain a good opinion of themselves; and get a strong
confidence thereby, that their estate is good. They think themselves well
enough already, and therefore will not easily be persuaded to look after a
saving interest in the Redeemer: because they suppose their interest is already
secured. Initium est salutis notitia peccati. Egregie hoc mihi videtur dixisse
Epicurus. Nam qui peccare se nescit, corrigi non vult. Deprehendas te oportet,
antequam emendes. Sen. Epist. 28.
And be sure of this, that nothing is a greater hindrance of a sinners
deliverance out of an estate of wrath, than a strong confidence that he is in a
good estate, Prove. 26.12. See thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is
more hope of a fool than of him. It may well bear this interpretation. See
thou an unregenerate person that is righteous in his own eyes? [for by wisdom
all along is meant righteousness and holiness, that is true wisdom; the fear of
the Lord is the beginning of wisdom] There is more hope of a fool; that is, of
one that is plainly and openly a wicked person: for he is the fool in Solomon's
account. Kings are wont to have their fools, and Solomon was a great King, and
his fool is the ungodly, that provokes the Lord to wrath, and neglects to
provide for eternity, and sells his soul for a trifle. So Mat. 9.12. They
that be whole need not the Physician; that is, Such as have a good opinion of
themselves, do not see their need of Christ's righteousness; they will not
hunger and thirst after it, as being full already. Quid nos decipimus? Non est
extainsecus malum nostrum: intra nos est, in visceribus ipsis sedet. Et ideo
difficulter ad sanitatem pervenimus, quia nos agrotare nescimus. Son. Epist. 50.
There is a double work required to the conversion of such, first to empty them
of self, and then to drive them unto the Savior: first to make them sensible
of their sickness, and then to quicken them to seek a remedy: first to convince
them of their damnable estate, and then to cause them to flee from the wrath to
come. And the first is a matter of very great difficulty.

2. Consider, That such as are in Christ by visible profession only, are most
likely to have their consciences seared as with an hot iron: so that those
awakening truths which serve to rouse up other sinners, produce little or no
effect upon their souls. By continuance in sin under the preaching of the
World, and constant attendance upon Ordinances, men become Sermon-proof, and
Prayer-proof, Sacrament-proof, and Affliction-proof. Scarcely the hottest fire
will melt such obdurate spirits. As it is reported of them that live near the
Cataracts of Nilus, by continual hearing those dreadful sounds, they become
deaf and stupid: Primo importabile, processu temporis grave, paulo post leve,
postea placet and suave est: ad extremum quod erat importabile ad faciendum est
impossible ad continendum. Bern.
so it befalls these hypocrites; by constant hearing of Gospel Truths, and
not regarding them, their spirits at length become dead, stark dead, twice
dead, as it is expressed, Jude 12. Before they were dead in sin, and now they
are dead in security likewise: To their natural hardness is added a contracted
hardness. And who are they of whom the Apostle speaks? why, such as are
clouds without water: that is, who make a show of Godliness, but have nothing
of the substance: who have the form, without the power of it. To them the word
of the Lord proves an obdurating word: that makes their hearts fat, and their
ears heavy, and shuts their eyes, lest they should see with their eyes and
hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert and be
healed, Isa. 6.9, 10.

3. Consider withal, That God is usually provoked by such men's barrenness and
unproficiency, utterly to depart away from them, and so to bind them over
unavoidably to condemnation: to swear in his wrath, that they shall never enter
into rest, Heb. 3.10, 11. So that he will deal with them no further, in order
to their repentance and salvation. For this is the very method of Gods
dispensations of this nature, first men resist the Spirit, which he sent to
knock at the door of their hearts, and then he calls away his Spirit from
them, Genesis 6.3. First, they neglect to hearken to the grace of God, that should
lead them to repentance, and so he will wait to be gracious no further: but
seals them up in a state of impenitence. First, they will not believe, and
God swears they shall never believe, Joh. 12.39, 40.

2. The condition of these unfruitful branches in Christ, is miserable above
that of others, in respect of the intolerableness of the damnation that will
befall, and the sore torments that will be inflicted upon such. All ungodly
sinners will be punished everlastingly, but such as seemed to cleave unto
Christ, but yet served the devil, will be punished most severely, and made to
drink of the dregs of the cup of God's indignation: as sinning against most
light, Gospel Light, and under means of grace denied to others: which are the
main aggravations of sin. To them is reserved the mist of darkness for ever;
Genitivus reflexus super nominativum singularem importat eminentiam. Ut coeli
coelorum. i.e. Altissimi. Et sic in Synenimis ut iniquitas peccati; i. e.
maxim peccaminosa. Sic caligo tenebrarum; i. e. densissima.
that is, the grossest darkness and sorest destruction, 2 Pet. 2.17. You know,
our Lord Christ pronounces the most terrible woes on this account, Mat. 11.21,
22, 23. Woe to thee Chorazin, woe to thee Bethsaida, for if the mighty works
which were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have
repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. But I say unto you, it shall be more
tolerable for Tire and Sidon, at the day of judgment, than for you. And thou
Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven; shall be brought down to hell, etc.
that is, because thou art highly advanced in spiritual privileges, and have
not improved them, thou shall be destroyed with double destruction, and made
utterly desolate. For as our Lord Jesus elsewhere concludes, This is the
condemnation, that men live in sin under Gospel Light; light is come into the
world, and men love darkness rather than light, Joh. 3.19.

And besides, I might have added, that the torments of such will be the
greater, because of the reproach and scandal which they bring upon Christ, and
his ways. As they dishonor him actively by their own transgressions, so they
give occasion to others to speak evil of him, and his service. For will wicked
profane wretches be ready to say, when they see the haltings and hypocrisy of
these carnal Professors: Lo, these are your Saints, that would be accounted
more precise than others: Here is their Religion, and such they are all of
them, and the like. It is because of the blots and blemishes of these
counterfeit Christians that the name of Christ is blasphemed, Romans 2.24.
compared with Ezekiel. 36.20, 23.

3. Their condition is sad, because of their more than ordinary inexcusableness
in their eternal damnation. They will have no manner of Apology, or defense, to
make for themselves; their mouths will be stopped to purpose: for indeed they
are condemned of themselves. May Christ say unto them, if my service were evil,
why did you call your selves may servants, and go under my name, and list your
selves into my family? and if it be excellent indeed, why did not you serve me
in truth and in sincerity? Mat. 22.12. When the King came in to see the guests,
he saw there a man which had not on a wedding garment: And he says unto him,
Friend, how came thou in hither, not having a wedding garment? and he was
speechless; q. d. Why did thou associate thy self with such company, if thou
were resolved to continue in thy filthiness? what an impudent wretch art thou,
to enter thy self into my household, and family, unless thou were purposed to
subject to the Laws and Discipline thereof? How could thou for shame rank
thy self amongst believers, whilst thou lie polluted in thine impurity?
(...) quasi capistro injecto obmutuit.
And he was speechless; he was muzzled, as the word signifies: he had not a
word to say in his own defense: his own conscience silenced him. For as the
Apostle argues, If the light of nature will render the Heathen inexcusable,
and leave them without apology in the day of judgment, how much more
inexcusable are those, who are brought within the pale of the visible Church of
Christ, and yet will not have that man to reign over them? that call themselves
Christians, and partake of the privileges of Christianity, and yet serve the
devil, and are of his Synagogue? Romans 1.20. compared with Chap. 2.1.

4. Their estate is sad, bedanse of that vexation and horror, which the very
reflection up on this thing will bring to their spirits everlastingly. How will
the worm of conscience gnaw upon their hearts, from this very consideration?
and the hypocritical wretches be ready to fear out their own bowels? When, they
shall bethink themselves, they were so near to Christ, and yet fell short of
salvation by him: that then took possibly a great deal of pains in the outward
part of Religion, to go on in a round of duties, and yet for want of truth and
integrity in the inward parts, must lose the benefit of all that ever they did:
that they were not far off from the kingdom of God, and for want of going
further, must perish amongst the devils and damned for ever; and make their bed
in hell According to that in Luke 13.28. There shall be weaping and gnashing of
teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in
the Kingdom of God, and you your selves thrust out. So much more will it bring
vexation and anguish upon a man's spirit, when he shall see such an acquaintance
of his got to heaven, that perhaps fate in the same seat with him, who was wont
to meet at the same religious exercises with him, and himself excluded. When he
shall find such an one received into Abraham's bosom that possibly she fat
outstript in commons gifts and qualifications; a poor brokenhearted sinner whom
he was a^^ to despise, and himself t^rust into the chains of ^arkness amongst
dogs, and forcer^rs, and whoremongers, amongst professed Atheists, and the
profanest of men. What bitterness will this bring to a man's thoughts* O my
friends, think of this betimes, ere it be too late: and the Lord a waken your
hearts, that you may not rest on this side of a saving Union with the Lord
Jesus.

So much for the first branch of the distinction, viz. An Union with Christ by
way of common profession, or exce^nal adh^sion only.

2. There is an Union, or Onchess with Jesus Christ, my spiritual implantation,
and ingrature. When a person is in him, so as to receive life and nourishment
from him; as a quick fruit-bearing graff is in the stock: as a living member is
in the body, and united unto the head. When a soul is not only set upon the
foundation, but is also cemented to it, by the cement of special grace: the
peculiar work of the spirit of holiness. When he is a lively stone built upon
the living foundation, as the holy Ghost expresses it, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5. To whom
coming as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God and
precious; ye also as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house. It is this
sort of union which the Scripture mentions, as so great a mystery; and to
which eternal life and salvation is annexed. He that [thus] has the Son has
life. And peace be to all them that are [thus] in Christ Jesus, 1 Pet. 5.14.
This is it which we are enquiring into, wherein the nature of it consists,
which I shall now enter upon the unfolding of, in the second answer to the
question propounded, By way of description.

CHAP. IV. Union with Christ described, and the parts of the Description opened.
2. HAving thus cleared our passage by the aforementioned distinction; come we
now to lay down a brief description of this great privilege, or grace of Union
with the Son, or having the Son: which I shall endeavor to explicate, in the
several branches of it. Take the description thus.

Union with Christ is that special relation, which believers have to the Lord
Jesus, as Mediator of the Covenant of Grace; arising from their closs and
intimate conjunction with him: whereupon they are accounted as one with Christ,
their spiritual state is fundamentally changed, and the benefits of redemption
are effectually applied unto their souls.

In which Description, that we may handle it methodically, and so the more
understandingly, you have these five branches into which it may be divided:
that need each of them a little explanation.

1. The general nature of this grace, or privilege; It is a persons relation
to the Lord Jesus. 2. A note of difference, whereby it is distinguished from
other relations. It is that special relation, which they have to Christ as
Mediator. 3. The subjects of this Union, unto whom it does appertain: and they
are believers. It is the special relation of Believers to the Lord Jesus. 4.
The foundation of this Union whereupon it is bottomed, and whence it does
arise. Why, it arises from their intimate conjunction with Christ. 5. The
blessed consequents that flow from it, or the great effects which are produced
by it. And they are three. 1. Hereupon they are reckoned as one with Christ. 2.
Their spiritual state is fundamentally changed. 3. The benefits of redemption
are effectually applied.

1. The general nature of this grace or privilege of Union with Christ. It is
a persons relation to the Lord Jesus.] So (as I conceive) it may be most
properly styled: that mutual habitude or reference which is between them, or
which Christ and his people have one to the other. Vnio hat est spiritualis
illa relatio hominum ad Christum, qua jus acquirunt ad omn^s illas
benedictiones qua in ipso praparantur. Ames. med.
It is called in the Text, an having the Son; and it is frequently set forth by
a being espoused or married to the Son, 2 Cor. 11.2. For I have espoused you to
one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ. Romans 7.4. That
ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead.
Elsewhere it is called, A belonging to Christ, Mar. 9.41. And a being his, Gal.
5.24. You know, though there is a very near conjunction, and oneness thereupon,
between the Husband and Wife that are married together; yet it is but a
relative oneness: their individual properties remain distinct, notwithstanding.
Such is this Union of a sincere Christian with the Lord Jesus; they are
contracted and married together, and so become united. For by such umbrages
taken from external things, God is pleased to set forth this high mystery; that
it may be better apprehended by us; that it may be easier let into our
understandings.

Under this Head, I shall entreat you heedfully to mind and observe three
things.

1. That this Union of the Saints with Christ, is not a transformation of
either into the essence or substance of the other: Nostra and ipsius [Christi]
conjunctio nec miscet personas, nee confundit substantias: Sed affectus
consociat, and confoederat voluntates.
either of Christ into theirs, or of Believers into his essence. They are not
so made one as as if there were a substantial alteration, or commixtion
therein: as if their persons or natures were so contempered together, as to be
made up into one. A sincere convert is one with the person of the Mediator, but
they are not thereby made one person: as some have vented their blasphemies,
that they are Christed with Christ, and Godded with God, and such like
expressions, that would make the heart of a sober Christian to tremble, and his
ears to tingle at the mention of them. This oneness is not to be understood
grossly and carnally, as the Capernaites mistook it, but in a spiritual sense,
as Christ himself does interpret it, Joh. 6.56, 63. He that eats my flesh,
and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. How is this to be
understood? Mark v. 63. Loquitu^, non de externo ac ^ranseunte verborum istorum
sonitu, sed de sensu illorum: Ac significat se non carnaliter de carnal carnis
suae esu, in quo vita non est, sed spiritualiter de spiritus vivificatoris
virtute, in qua vita est, loquutum esse. Muscul. in loc.
It is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing; the words that I
speak, they are spirit and life. As if he had said, these things are to be
taken in a spiritual sense, and not after a carnal manner. Indeed it is so
undeniably evident, that it is not to be meant of a corporal union, that I
shall not need to insist upon arguments for the confutation of such uncouth
notions. Christ and a believer are not so made one, but that they retain their
natures distinct, and their personal properties distinct, notwithstanding that
union: they have different places, properties, and employments. Christ is
corporally in heaven, the heavens must contain him, till the time of the
restitutions of all things, and many of the members of his mystical body are
still militant upon the face of the earth. He is the Redeemer, and they are the
redeemed, Act. 3.21. To the Lord Christ does justly and deservedly appertain
all worship and homage, All ye Angels of God worship him, Heb. 1.6. But it were
monstrous and hateful idolatry, to give it unto the Saints, who are our
fellow creatures, Rev. 22.9. Acts 14, 13, 14, 15. The Lord Jesus is ordained
and constituted to be the Judge; and Believers are a part of the persons to be
judged. It is true, they shall fit as Assessors with Christ, in passing
sentence upon the wicked; but first they must stand themselves before the
Judgment Seat, and receive their acquittal, Act. 17.31. Romans 14.10. I might
multiply passages of this sort, if it were needful. So that this Union is not a
perfonal, or corporal oneness with Christ, but it consists in the near
relation which they have unto him.

2. Hence it follows plainly by way of consectary; that it is a gross mistake
of such persons who would gather from a Believers oneness with Christ, that
they are perfectly freed from all remainders of sin. Sirs, Christ is holy and
pure, a Lamb without spot, and blemish, he never kn^w the least iniquity, so as
to be tainted therewith in the smallest degree: but his Disciples and
followers, whilst they are in their pilgrimage here, even the best of them,
have much corruption Habitat peccatum in regeniti^, sed non regnat, manet sed
non dominatur: Evulsum quoda^modo, nec tamen exp^lsum: dejectum sed not pro^si^
ej^^^um. Bern.
still abiding in their natures, and are under manifold imperfections. For
their union with him is not a confornding of their beings, as if they were made
one physical person with Christ; but it lies in their near relation unto
Christ. There has been much poison of late years vomited, by wretches of
profligate principles, who turn the grace of God into wantonness. Let them
commit never so many cursed abominations, yet they will plead that they sin
not, because Christ is in them. But though Christ be in the godly (not in such
whose heart walks after their detestable things) and the godly are united to
him in a spiritual way, yet they do not lose thereby their personal beings and
operations. This oneness with the Son of God does necessarily suppose a man's
freedom from the reign of sin, and the allowed practice of it; but it may stand
together with the remainders of corruption; it is not altogether inconsistent
with many failings and infirmities in the conversation, 1 John 1.6, 8. If we
say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness [if any sin be our
way, and course, wherein we travel, and allow our selves] we lie, and do not
the truth: And on the other hand, If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us.

3. Remember this in the third place, that although we call this oneness of the
godly with Christ, their near relation unto him; yet there is a great deal of
reality in it: Christ and his people are united truly, and verily, though not
corporally. You must not look upon this grace of Union, as if it were a bare
notion and imagination that has its existence and being only in the fancies of
men; but there is an oneness indeed, between the Lord Christ and his servants,
Joh. 15.1. I am the true vine: q. d. As truly as there is a natural union bed
tween the vine and the branches, so there is an Union spiritual betwixt me and
my Disciples. And again, Joh. 6.55. My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is
drink indeed. This is not a mere speculation, or the product of men's brains; it
is not an Ens r^tionis, only fabricated and invented by the wit of man: but
there is much truth and reality in the thing. Nay it is a very closs and
intimate Union. What expressions could be used of a fuller significancy than
those, Ephesians. 5.30? For we are member^ of his body, and of his flesh, and of his
bones. But still understand it not grossly and carnally, but in a spiritual way
and manner. Relationes sunt minimae, entitatis, maximae vero efficaciae.
So there is a real ground on which it is bottomed, and many glorious effects
produced by it: it is the inlet into all other Covenant-blessings, and has
much reality in it self.

That Is the first branch of the description; As to the general nature of this
grace, It is a persons relation to the Lord Jesus.

2. Here is a note of difference, whereby it is distingued from other relations
unto Christ: therefore I call it, That special relation which Christians have
to him, as Mediator of the Covenant of grace; as he is the Redeemer of Gods
elect, and as they are persons knit unto him, that they may partake of the
redemption which he has purchased. Such a relation as is appropriated unto
them that are sanctified, and whereunto the rest of the world are utterly
strangers. As there are special qualifications put into the godly, and special
work and service performed by the godly, so there are special privileges
conferred upon them: and this Union is one of those distinguishing privileges;
whereby they have relation to Christ, as he is the Redeemer that comes to
Zion, Isa. 54.5. Fear not, for thy Maker is thine Husband, and thy Redeemer,
the holy one of Israel, the God of the whole earth he shall be called. For the
right apprehending of my meaning herein, you must observe, that there is a
threefold relation which the children of men may be said to have to the Lord
Christ: and upon each of them (in a sense) to be in him.

There is the relation of 1. Creatures. to Christ as The eternal God. 2. Men.
to Christ as The Son of man. 3. Saints or Christians. to Christ as The Mediator
of the Covenant of grace.


1. There is the relation of creatures to Christ, as the eternal God; of the
same essence and substance with the Father, and equal unto the Father: by whom
they were made and preserved, from whom they received their being and
continuation in their being. For Sirs, as Christ was appointed to transact
matters with the Father, so he is coessential and coequal with him; God blessed
for ever, Rom 9.5. As in respect to his incarnation, he was born in the fullness
of time; so upon the account of his divine nature, he is the Father of
eternity, Isa. 9.6. The man that is Gods fellow, Zech. 13.7. As he came to be
the Savior of the world, so by him the world was made, and all things therein,
and by him they are upheld, Joh. 1.1, 3. In the beginning was the word, and the
word was with God, and the word was God. All things were made by him, and
without him was nothing made that was made, Heb. 1.3. He upholdeth all things
by the word of his power. Now from hence does arise a relation unto Christ, as
creatures are related unto the Creator; as dependent beings unto that infinite
Majesty upon whom they have dependence. Caus^ Procreans Esse Caus^ quae dat
Porro Caus^ Conservans Esse.

And, the holy Ghost styles it a being in him, as the effect is in the cause,
both of creation and conservation, Act. 17.28. For in him Or by him, as it may
be re^dred. For I understand nothing further by this in-existence, than,
Dependentiae ereatura a creatore, tam in esse quam in operari.
we live, and move, and have our being -- For we are all his offspring. This
relation is common to the vilest of people, nay to the very devils. There are
some poor ignorant souls delude themselves from hence; they hope God will save
them, because he made them: Will Christ damn his creatures, the workmanship of
his hands? it can never enter into their hearts to believe it. But O vain man,
if thou continuest ignorant or unregenerate, and walk in a course of
ungodliness, God that made thee will show no mercy toward thee, Christ that
formed thee will send thee to hell, Isa. 27.11. God may refuse to own thee for
the creature that he made; he made thee holy, and thou have corrupted thy self:
He made man upright, but he has sought out many cursed inventions, and made
himself achild of the devil. Besides, this is none other ground than the devils
may have to expect salvation: Thus they are related to Christ; For by him were
all things created, that are in heaven and in earth, visible and invisible,
whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principal^ties, (...)
or powers, all things were created by him and for him: and he is before all
things, and in him all things consist, Col. 1.16, 17.

2. There is the relation of men to Christ as the Son of man: As he humbled
himself to take the form of a servant, and to assume our nature, and not the
nature of Angels. And indeed such a one it was necessary our Med ator should
be: As it was requisite he should be God, that his obedience and sufferings
might be of value sufficient to content and satisfy the demands of the justice
of God: so likewise that he should be man, that he might be capable of
subjection unto the Law, and undergoing the penalty of the Law, Gal. 4.4. Heb.
10.5. As it was necessary he should be God, that he might be able to vanquish
and subdue our spiritual adversaries; so also that he should be man, that he
might taste death for the children of men, which was the way appointed for that
conquest to be made, Heb. 2.14. As it was needful he should be God that he
might be a prevalent high Priest: so likewise that he should be man, that he
might be a merciful high Priest, Si enim homo non vicisset inimicum hominis,
non just victus esset inimicus. Rursus autem nisi Deus donasset salutem, non
firmiter haberemus eam. Et nisi homo con^unctus fuisset Deo nostro, non
potuisset particeps fleri incorruptibilitatis. Opertuer at enim Mediatorem Dei
and hominum, per suam ad utrosque domesticitatem, and ad amicitiam and
concordiam utrosque reducer^; and facere ut Deus assumeret hominem, and homo se
dederet Deo. Iraen. adv. haeres.
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, Heb. 2.17. And from hence does
arise a relation to him, a kind of identity or oneness with him, as between
beings of the same nature. Thus the Apostle says they are one, specifically
one, in respect of his humane nature, Heb. 2.11, 16. For he that sanctifies,
and they that are sanctified are all of one. That is, of the same stock, and
lineage; the children are partakers of flesh and blood, and he took part of the
same. For v. 16. Verily he took not upon him the nature of Angels, but he took
upon him the seed of Abrahaem. But still this is a relation which is common to
the just and the unjust, to them that fear the Lord, and to them that despise
him. Indeed the benefit of it redoundeth only to such as are sanctified; For
what advantage is it to thee, that Christ was the Son of man, if thou lie
still in the gall of bitterness, and art a slave to the devil? But the relation
it self extends to all the generations of mankind. They are the children of
men, and Christ was found in fashion as a man, Phil. 2.7, 8. they are of the
humane nature, and so was Christ; being the seed of the woman according to the
flesh, Genesis 3.15, 16.

3. There is a peculiar relation of Saints and sincere Christians to Christ, as
the Mediator and Redeemer; God and man in one person: as members are related to
the Head, or the Spouse to the Husband. A saving relation to him; whereby they
have a right and title to what Christ has done and suffered, and an interest
in the mercies procured thereby: such a relation is this Union we are speaking
of. The Apostle does evidently pu^ a difference betwixt this and the former.
Col. 1.16, 17.18. By him were all things created, etc. and in him all things
consist. And he is the head of the body, the Church; q. d. It is true, Christ
is the Lord and Sovereign of the whole Creation, men and Angels and devils: but
his own people have a peculiar neerness unto him, he is the head of the body,
the Church. And the beloved Disciple mentions it as a differencing privilege,
1 John 5.19.20. We know that we are of God dear children, and the whole world
lies in wickedness: And we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us
an underst^nding, that we may know him that is true; and we are in him that is
true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. Mark it, we are in him, others are not; we
who are born of God have a share in this signal mercy, whereof the rest of the
world are not sharers. This leads us to the third branch of the description,
which is,

3. The subjects of this Union, to whom it does appertain; why to believers. It
is the special relation which believers have to the Lord Jesus] that is, sound
believers, which are made partakers of the faith of God's elect: such as are
Israelites indeed, and Christ's Disciples and followers in good earnest, Col.
1.2. To the Saints and faithful brethren in Christ. You know, there are
Disciples of Christ in appearance, and others who are such in truth; who have
not only the show, but the substance of Religion: that do not only call
themselves servants of Christ, but are steadfast and faithful with him, Rev.
17.14. And these are the persons who are in him. It is for them only he
prays, that they might be one with him; and therefore unto them peculiarly
does this privilege belong, Joh. 17.20, 21. Neither pray I for these alone,
but for them also which shall believe in me through their word. That they all
may be one, as thou father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one
in us. Mark it, it is affixed to Believers, that they may be one in us.

How are Believers the subjects of this union? I answer, on a fourfold account.

1. Solely, and exclusively. 2. Universally, and comprehensively. 3. Entirely,
and undividedly. 4. Formally, under that respect, as Believers.
1. Believers are the subjects of this Union, solely and exclusively: It is a
part of the hidden Manna, which none taste of but Gods hidden ones, as
believers are called, Psalm. 83.3. Carnal Professors have no lot nor portion in
this matter; they may enjoy great advantages by having their station in the
Church, but only real Saints, and luch as are regenerate, are ingraffed into
Christ, the head of the Church. God does give forth some spiritual mercies
promiscuously and indifferently, to the good and bad, to the righteous and
wicked: but there are other privileges peculiar unto the righteous; and this
of implantation into Christ is one of them, whereby he does manifest himself
unto his own, and not unto the world. How can this be, says Judas (not
Iscariot) How is it that thou will manifest thy self to us, and not unto the
world; Joh. 14.22. and mark our Saviors answer, v. 23. Jesus answered and said
unto him, if a man love me he will keep my words: and my Father will love him,
and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him; q.d. We will be united
and knit to such a one, and thereupon maintain a constant communion and
intercourse with him: which is a way of the manifestation of our selves, which
the world knows not of. The world is shut out of Christ's prayer for this
mercy, and it is confined to believers, Joh. 17. v. 9. compared with v. 21.

2. It belongs to believers, Universally and comprehensively; that is, to all
of that sort and number, whether they are weak Christians or strong: whether
they are more eminent in the Church, or of a lower esteem. My brethren, this
grace of Oneness with Christ, is not a dignity conferred upon some eminent
Saints, whereby they are advanced above their fellows; but this honor have all
the Saints. If there be true justifying faith, but as a grain of mustard seed
(as our Savior speaks in another case) it puts a man into the possession
of this privilege. It may be the comfort of the meanest and poorest of the
people of God upon earth, that however men despise them, yet they are married
to the King of Kings, to the only begotten Son of God. You read of babes in
Christ, who are the lowest rank of Believers, 1 Cor. 3.1. It may be improved as
a point of wonderful consolation, by poor drooping souls that love the Lord
Jesus in sincerity: When your corruptions struggle within you, and you are
violently assaulted by temptations from without, and thereupon are afraid how
you shall be able to hold out, and to keep on in the way of godliness: when
your spirits are ready to sink under your burdens; endeavor to raise them up
again with this meditation: The Lord Christ is my Husband, why should I fear?
He is engaged to preserve me, for I belong to him, nay I am in him. See and
study, Isa. 40.27, 28, 29, 30.

3. This Union appertains to Believers entirely and undividedly. My meaning
is this, the whole persons are the subjects of this Union, and every part of
them: not only their souls, the spiritual and immortal part, but their very
bodies which are made of the dust of the earth. For, as the grace of Unction or
sanctification where it is poured out upon a person, it makes an entire change
both in body and soul: so does the grace of Union reach to the whole man, to
the body as well as to the soul, 1 Cor. 6.15. What, know ye not that your
bodies are the members of Christ? q. d. This is a known truth, a foundation
principle, you must not be ignorant of it: you should be well instructed in
this Point, that you may be careful not to defile your bodies; that it may
quicken you to glorify Christ with your bodies, as well as with your spirits,
1 Cor. 6.20. At the resurrection the bodies of the Saints shall be fashioned
and made like to Christ's glorious body; and here upon earth they are knit to
his person.

4. Believers are the subjects of this Union formally, that is, under that very
consideration, as such: quatenus Believers. For the grace of says is the
principle which God does peculiarly honor in this very business; to make up
our union with Christ; or to knit a person and the Lord Jesus together. Whom he
has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood, Romans 3.25. And
therefore our Apostle applies the doctrine of my Text, unto them that believe,
in the words immediately following, v. 12. He that has the Son has life, etc.
And v. 13. These things have I written to you that believe on the name of the
Son of God, that you may know that ye have eternal life. How should Believers
know it hereby? Why, because Believers have the Son; by believing they are in
the Son; eo nomine, because they believe.

That Is the third Branch of the description, the proper subjects of this Union,
viz. Believers.

4. Here is the foundation of this Union, on which it is bottomed: and from
whence it does arise; namely from their intimate conjunction with Christ. It is
that special relation which Believers have to the Lord Jesus, arising from
their intimate conjunction with him.] Or, from the closness of their being
joined together. This is well to be observed, as a material point; for first
there must be unition (as one notes) before there can be Union. First, they
must be brought together, and must be linked and fastened one to the other,
before they can become one together. At least in order of nature, conjunction
must precede: for Union does result or flow from it, and has a necessary
dependence thereupon. As it is in marriage, the great resemblance for
illustration of this mystery, First, the man and woman are brought together,
and married one to the other, and thence their union does arise; they become
one flesh. So it is in this spiritual grace, first Christ and a Believer are
joined together, and then they become one. This conjunction is so closs and in
imate, that it is called a being glewed unto Christ, so the word signifies 1
Cor. 6.17. He that is joined [ (...). Qui (Domino) ag^utinatur. (...) gluten.
or glewed] to the Lord, is one spirit. First they are joined, and so become
one spiritually. How this conjunction is wrought, I shall open at large, in
answer to the next question. This is the fourth branch of the Description.

5. Lastly, You have the blessed consequents which flow from hence, or the
glorious effects produced hereby, and they are especially three. 1. Hereupon
they are accounted as one with Christ. 2. Their spiritual state is
fundamentally changed. 3. The benefits of redemption are effectually applied.

1. Hereupon they are accounted as one with Christ. Being made so, they are
reckoned and esteemed as such; and accordingly made partakers of whatsoever
advantage does accrue thereby, and does grow upon this root of Oneness with the
Mediator. It is not an empty name, and an airy appellation, which is hereby
attained: but believers are answerably esteemed and dealt with, in all sorts of
dispensations. Therefore they are said to be found in him, Philip. 3.9. That I
may win Christ, and be found in him; that is, in all the dealings of God
toward them, they are looked upon as one with his Son: so their concernments
are regarded, and blessings are dispensed unto them: evils are averted, and
kept from falling upon them, and spiritual good things are given forth. When
God does go forth in his providence twoards the children of men, he finds the
wicked in their sins; polluted in their blood, under the curse of the Law, and
so there is a curse interwoven with his proceedings with them: but when he
looks down upon Believers, they are found in Christ: They are reckoned as one
with the Redeemer; and that in a fourfold respect.

1. God the father does so account of them, in his estimation. He puts an
high price and value upon their souls: he loves them with a superlative love,
as being one with his Son: they are sharers in the same love wherewith Jesus
Christ is beloved. It is true, in themselves they are despicable creatures, of
a mean extraction and original, and God might refuse to have any regard to
them: in respect of their Apostasy, they are polluted creatures; and so the
Lord might abhor them: but he takes a view of them in his Son, and so his
affections run out toward them, Joh. 17.23. I in them, and thou in me, that
they may be made perfect in one: and that the world may know, Dein^e coelestis
Pater eodem quo Ecclesiae caput amore complex^s est, membra quoque omnia
prosequitur, ut neminem diligat nisi in Christo. Marl.
that thou have sent me, and have loved them as thou have loved me. Not in
point of equality, but similitude: with the same love, with a real love, pure
love, eternal love, unchangeable love. And he will glorify them with the same
glory, where with Christ is glorified.

2. The Lord Jesus himself does so account of them, in the care which he takes
of their persons, and affairs. He has a tenderness for them, and a watchful
regard unto them, as parts and portions of himself. Whosoever roucheth them,
touches the apple of his eye, Zech. 2.8. In all their afflictions he is
afflicted, Isa. 63.8, 9. And whatever kindness is showed unto them, is a
refreshment to his spirit, Mind how he speaks to Peter, Joh. 21.15, 16. Simon
son of Jonas, love thou me more than these? He says unto him, yea Lord, thou
know that I love she. He says unto him, feed my lambs. And v. 16. Feed my
sheep: And again v. 17. Feed my sheep: as if he had said, Thou can no way
better express thy love toward me, than by being tender of those that are my
servants. Whatever thou do for them, for the least of them, I will put it
upon mine account: I reckon it as done unto my self.

3. The holy Ghost, the spirit of grace and consolation, does so demean himself
toward. Believers, in his operations, and workings upon their hearts. As he
comes to them in Christ's name, so he deals with them as Christ's members.
He takes of his, and does show it (or communicate it) unto them: because they
are parts of him, Joh. 16.14, 15.

4. Their fellow servants, all the sons and daughters of Adam, are warned of
God, thus to judge concerning them; and accordingly to suit their carriage and
actions toward Believers. They are apt to reckon them as the dung of the
earth, as the off scouring of all things, as the most contemptible persons
under the Sun: but God will have them to know, that they are one with Jesus,
Joh. 17.23. That the world may know, that thou have sent me, and have loved
them as thou have loved me. The world] that is the inhabitants of the world: or
principally in this place, the wicked of the earth: it is a lesson wherein it
concerns them to be instructed. That Is the first general consequent of this
Union. Being one with the Son of God, they are to all intents and purposes so
accounted of.

2. The second general effect of this Union with Christ, is the change of a
man's state and condition. Hereby their spiritual state is fundamentally
changed] so that of children of the wrath of God, they are made objects of his
favor, and delight, and complacency: in whom he takes pleasures. Instead of
the curse of the Law under which they lay, they are put within the verge of the
Covenant of peace and reconciliation: instead of firebrarnds of hell, they are
made heirs of a crown of righteousness. You know there is a threefold change
wrought upon a person, in order to conduct him to everlasting bliss. 1. There
is a change of the nature, and qualifications of the person: the frame and
temper of the heart must be altered, and turned from sin to holiness; from the
power of Satan to the living God. 2. There is a practical change in the
conversation, from living after the flesh to a walking in the Spirit, and
minding the things of the Spirit. 3. A change of the state and condition, which
we are now treating of; and this is fundamentally wrought by a man's union with
Christ. This change of the state is stilled in the Scriptures, A translation of
a sinner out of the kingdom of Satan, into the kingdom of Christ, Col. 1.13.
And by the grace of union this translation is originally made and brought
about. Mark, I say, originally and fundamentally; for although justification
and adoption are a change likewise in the state of a sinner, yet I ascribe it
originally to union with Christ; because those mercies are rivolets which flow
from this fountain. And you will find the holy Ghost attributing it hereunto,
Ephesians. 2.13. But now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were afar off, are made
nigh by the blood of Christ. The state of nature is a state of alienation and
estrangedness from God; then sinners are afar off from his favor and the light
of his countenance: but when they are implanted into Christ, this alienation is
removed, and they are brought nigh unto God. This is a point of very great
weight and moment, and therefore diligently to be heeded and studied. So that I
will open it somewhat largely for these three reasons.

1. Because upon the change of the spiritual state of our persons, does depend
the gracious acceptance of all our duties and performances. This being the
constant method of God's acceptance of them, first he has respect unto the
person, and then to the spiritual work and obedience which is tendered by that
person Deus non habet gratum offereutem propter munera, sed munera propter
offerentem. Gregor. (...).
Genesis 4.4. The Lord had respect to Abel, and to his offering. First to himself,
and then to his sacrifice, Ezekiel. 20.40, 41. I will accept you, with your sweet
savor. First you, and then your sweet savor thereupon. It is not all the care
and pains a natural man can take in some of the duties of the worship and
service of God, though he mean never so well (as some persons will boast, they
mean well and have good intentions, and therefore hope the Lord will not reject
them) that will render his duties pleasing unto God, except he first give up
himself to be the Lords, and be in covenant with him, and his spiritual state
be changed, Romans 8.8. They that are in the flesh, cannot please God. Qui in
carne sunt, i. e. per spiritum renati non sunt. Buling.
Not only they will not, but cannot: it is a thing utterly impossible, that God
should take delight in the works of the wicked, who are his enemies: let them
be never so zealous and forward in his worship. Such actions may less displease
the Lord than some others, but at the best he cannot take pleasure in them. And
therefore the whole stress of the matter is laid upon the state of a man, Prove.
21.27. The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination; how much more when he brings
it with a wicked mind? Mark it, though he come with a good intent and mean well
(as there is a kind of natural integrity) yet it is an abomination. This is
plainly intimated; if he come with a wicked mind, making the duties of religion
a cloak to cover his other horrid impieties, then his sacrifice is most odious
and abominable; but however he comes, it is an abomination. Why? because the
person sacrificing is a wicked, ungodly sinner; and the Lord judges men's
actions by their state.

2. This is a matter seriously to be weigh^d, because the greatest number of
persons, who call themselves Christians, do seldom or never think of it. They
go on in sin and perish eternally, for want of laying to heart this very thing.
And therefore we should give diligence the rather to study it; because it is
neglected by the most. You may observe it as an ordinary thing with carnal
people, when conscience is a little awakened, when they are brought into
distress by sickness, or some other sore affliction; they will cry out with a
kind of bitterness for their evil ways, and seemingly melt with sorrow for
some actual miscarriages: but not one of many will mind his spiritual state.
Thus it was with Micah the Idolater, when he heard his mother curse and ban for
the money that was stolen from her: these curses startled his conscience, and
made him to vomit up the sweet morsel which he had swallowed down: he minds that
wicked action, but never once considers his spiritual condition; and so goes
on in other sins notwithstanding, Judge. 17.2, 3, 5. Thus Saul was troubled, in
a reflection upon some of his evil ways: and profane Esau grieved because he
had displeased his Father by his sinful actions: but scarce one of an hundred
cries out of his sad condition. Nay commonly they are so far from it, that
they will be ready to fly in a man's face, that does but make mention thereof.
When you have convinced a wicked man of his evil life, and brought him to an
acknowledgment of a course of sin, wherein he walks: if thence you begin to
speak of his estate in sin, of his being an enemy to God, a child of his wrath,
and a wicked person, he will defy the words. No, will he say, I love the Lord,
and God knows my heart is good, and the like. See how fowl they fell upon
Christ, for touching upon this string; When he told them of their wretched
condition that they were not of God, but of their father the devil^ Thou art a
Samaritan, say they, and have a devil, Joh. 8.44, 47, 48. They could not endure
he should meddle with that matter.

3. It concerns you to be well instructed and settled in this particular of
your spiritual state Godward; because when the spirit of conviction does
powerfully prevail upon a man's heart, so as to turn him effectually from sin,
and to bring him to a sound and sincere conversion, it does ever end in
conviction of the state of sin. As conviction usually begins in some
particular actual wickedness, so it always ends in a discovery of that
wicked and damnable condition, into which the sinner is brought. Thus it was
with Paul, Romans 7.9. For I was alive without the Law once, but when the
commandment came, sin revived and I died; that is, Absentia, legis faciebat ut
viveyet: hoc est inflatus justitiae suae fiducida vitam sibi arrogabat, quum
tamen esset mortuus; etc. Calv.
I saw my self dead, and undone: I found that I was in a perishing condition
that unless the wonderful grace of God stepped in for my deliverance, I must
perish and be lost irrecoverably. Before I had a good conceit of my self, as to
my state and condition, however conscience might now and then check me for some
failings and actual miscarriages, yet I was alive, without the Law, i.e. before
I had a clear understanding of the Law, in my own apprehension I was a child of
life, I thought my self sure of salvation: but when the commandment came in the
life, and power, and vigorous workings of it. I found I was stark dead. So in
the return of the Prodigal, mark how far the conviction proceeds, Luke 15.17.
I perish. Not only I am a disobedient Son, that have ran away from my father,
and wasted my Patrimony; But if I continue in this condition I am undone for
ever. This is the spirit of bondage, which the Apostle mentione^^ as the fore
runner of the spirit of adoption, Romans 8.15. You have not received the spirit
of bondage again to fear. Mark it, not again intimating that once they had
received it, that all who are savingly converted must first be under it. When
is the holy Ghost a spirit of bondage? Why, when he does discover to a man's
soul his wretched and miserable condition: when he does not only show him his
work wherein he has exceeded, but does also make him sensible of the lost
estate wherein he is involved: when he causes a sinner to see that he is a
child of the wrath of God, bound over to answer to the demands of the justice
of God, obnoxious to the everlasting and insupportable vengeance of the most
high; and raises fears and terrors in the soul in apprehension thereof; so
that he sees it necessary that his state be altered. The holy Ghost Sirs may be
a spirit of conviction, as to sundry acts of sin, when he is not a spirit of
bondage: for this relates to the state of sin: which is always an antecedent
to sound a conversion. And therefore, as I said, I will open this point of the
change of a man's spiritual state in six particulars.

1. There is a twofold state or condition of men's souls, in reference to
spiritual and eternal concernments. The state of nature, and the state of
grace, as they are usually called. The state of condemnation, and exposedness
to the wrath of God: and the state of favor and reconciliation with the Lord.
That of alienation from God, and that of friendship and fellowship with him. A
state of service to the Lord, and of slavery to the devil: Of liableness and
obnoxiousness to everlasting death, and the state of heirship, and title to the
kingdom of heaven. You read often of them in the Scripture, Joh. 3.18. He that
believes on him is not condemned; but he that believes not is condemned
already. So Romans 6.17, 18. But God be thanked, that ye were the servants of
sin. There Is the state of nature. And v. 18. Being then made free from sin, ye
became servants of righteousness. There Is the state of grace, Ephesians. 2.19. Now
therefore, ye are no more forreiners and strangers [that's the state of
alienation from the Lord] but fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the
household of faith [this is that of friendship and communion with God.] That is
the first thing to be noted, as to this matter.

2. These two estates as to matters of salvation and condemnation, are
comprehensive of all the posterity of mankind; without exception of any. They
do take in the whole compass of the children of men. My meaning is this, that
there is no middle condition: there is not a man or woman upon the face of the
earth, but must of necessity fall under one of these two ranks. Either he is a
Saint and servant of God, or a vassal and slave to the devil: either he is an
heir of heaven, or a firebrand of hell. And, pray Sirs, let us apply it
diligently unto our selves, and often say in our hearts; One of these two is
the condition of my soul: if I am not a child of God, and in covenant with him,
it will necessarily follow that I am a child of the devil; for there is no
third estate. If I be not sanctified and called to be a Saint, it cannot
otherwise be, but that I am in the gall of bitterness; and if I die in this
condition, I drop immediately into hell. As there are but two places into which
all nations shall be sent at the end of the world, that is, heaven and hell;
the place of eternal life, and that of everlasting punishment: so there are but
two states in which all are comprised during their abode in the world; either
they are Gods friends, or his adversaries: still in their sins, or delivered
from their sins, 1 John 5.19. And we know that we are of God, and the whole
world lies in wickedness. The whole world] that is all other persons besides
us, of what rank and quality soever. And that is a pregnant Text, Eccl. 9.2.
All things come alike unto all, there is one event to the righteous and to the
wicked; to the good and to the clean and to the unclean: to him that
sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not: as is the good, so is the sinner:
and he that swears, as he that fears an oath. Mark it, all people in the
world are cast by the holy Ghost into two ranks, or companies: either they are
righteous, or wicked: clean, or unclean; good, or sinners. There is no middle
condition, or state of neutrality, upon a spiritual account. And indeed there
is strong evidence of it, from the reason and nature of the thing: because the
distinction which is between these two estates, is such as we call a difference
of contradiction in some respect, such as is between the negation and
affirmation of the same thing; which cannot possibly admit of any third or
middle estate whatsoever, If you will rather say, they are privative opposita,
yet the argument holds good: for such admit not a middle in subjecto capaci.

Oppositorum duorum privative cum unum non inest, necesse est alterum inesse
susceptibili. Aquin.

Privatio euim est circa certum genus contradictionis. Alex. de Ales.


Joh. 3.36. He that believes on the Son has everlasting life; and he that
believes not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.
Mark it, here is a difference of contradiction, betwixt believing and not
believing. You cannot possibly pitch upon a man, but either he believes on the
Son and so is in the state of grace; or he believes not on the Son, and
remains in the state of wrath. They who are regenerate and converted, have the
promise of salvation, and such as are unregenerate and not converted, shall in
no case enter into the kingdom of heaven. Here is a kind of difference of
contradiction, between converted and not converted. And so I might instance in
other qualifications. That is the second thing to be noted as to the change of
a man's spiritual state.

3. Observe in the third place, That these two estates upon a spiritual
account, are utterly incompatible, and inconsistent one with the other: and
cannot upon any hand stand together. Plainly thus, they cannot both appertain
to the same person, at the same time. It is altogether impossible that a man
should be in the favor of God, whilst he is in league of amity with his
corruptions: that he should be in the kingdom of Christ, and under the prince
of darkness together. This is a truth so plain and obvious, at the first view,
that one would think it should be needless to press it: But I insist upon it
the rather, because there are secret workings in the hearts of the children of
men, to the contrary. Their inward thoughts are that they may serve the Lord,
and be subjects of the devil together: that they may be vain, and earthly, and
sensual, and follow the course of the world; and yet be the people of God
notwithstanding: That they may drink, and revel, and be wanton, and the like;
and be in the state of salvation too. You shall find these are the secret
thoughts and imaginations of men's spirits, Mic. 3.10, 11. They abhor judgment,
and pervert equity; they build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity:
The heads thereof judge for reward, and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and
the Prophets thereof divine for money: Yet they will lean upon the Lord, and
say, is not the Lord amongst us? They flatter and sooth up themselves, that
they were servants of Jehovah the God of heaven, although they served diverse
lusts and pleasures; and turned aside into crying wickednesses: that the Lord
was on their side, and they belonged to him, though they openly espouse the
interest of sin. But alas Sirs, it can never be; these imaginations are vain
and sottish. Mark how peremptorily our Savior asserteth the contrary, backing
that assertion with forcible argument, Mat. 6.24. No man can serve two masters,
for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to
the one, and despise the other: ye cannot serve God and Mammon; q.d. It is a
sottish thing to entertain such a fond conceit, as if you could join both
interests together: The Laws of Christ and the commands of sin, are diametrally
opposite one to the other: if the affections run toward the one, they must of
necessity be withdrawn from the other; nay set against the other; for they are
directly contrary. And besides, where God accepts of the heart, he will have
the whole heart: where he is served truly, he must be obeyed entirely and
universally, with the whole soul. So that never dream of such a thing, as
making a commixtion of these two; It is as easy to join together light and
darkness, heaven and hell; as to make a conjunction between righteousness and
unrighteousness, between Christ and Belial. The words of Joshua are very
pertinent to this purpose, when the people seemed to promise so affectionately
and resolvedly, that they would serve the Lord, Jos. 24.19. And Joshua said
unto the people, ye cannot serve the Lord; for he is an holy God, he is a
jealous God, he will not forgive your transgressions nor your sins; that is,
unless you forsake your corruptions, you cannot; except you detest and cast off
your idols you cannot; whilst you are in confederacy with sin, and before you
have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, you cannot be the Lord's
servants. He is an holy being who will have no communion with the workers of
iniquity. Perhaps you will walk in sin, and hope to make amends for all by
crying to God for forgiveness; you will swear, and curse, and ly, and defraud,
and commit adultery, and profane the Sabbath, and cry God forgive me: But Sirs
be is a jealous God, and will not forgive you; as long as you go on in a course
of impenitence, he will never pardon your transgressions. Possibly you will
walk, as the generality do, in the vanity of your minds, and wallow in all
sorts of uncleanness and filthiness, and then call upon God to have mercy on
you: Alas poor souls be not deceived, He will not be merciful to any wicked
transgressor, Psalm. 59.5. So that whilst you serve sin, you cannot serve the
Lord. That Is the third thing to be noted.

4. Remember this withal, That the state of all persons by nature, as they are
in themselves, and as they came into the world, is an accursed estate: a state
of utter estrangedness from God, and of liableness to the indignation of the
Almighty. Mark, I say, this is the condition of all persons, whether Jews or
Gentiles, bond or free, learned or unlearned, whatever privileges they enjoy,
and wheresoever their lot is cast; this is their state by nature, to be under
sin, Romans 3.9. What then? are we better then they? No in no wise, for we have
before proved, both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin; q.d. Is
this the sad condition of the heathen, and of the infidel world only, to be
under the guilt of sin and the curse of the Law? No, it is the condition of
every Son and daughter of Adam. Are the Jews, we that are visible members of
the Church, in a better state than others in this respect? No, we are all
involved in the same wretched condition. There is not a person amongst us, but
may lay his hand upon his heart, and appropriate it to himself, and say, this
was my condition: and if I have nothing to plead for my exemption, besides my
birth privilege, the name of Jew or Christian, and the like; this is my
condition, to be under sin. Not only to betainted with sin, but under sin, i.
e. under the guilt of it, and under the condemnation due to it. All the
posterity of mankind are by nature condemned persons, in a damnable estate: and
if God should take them away in that condition, they would be actually damned
and perish for ever. Sin would lie upon them, and they would fall under it, and
so it would sink them irremediably into destruction. O my brethren, how
infinitely does it concern us to prove that we are renewed and born again! for
as we came into the world, this is the estate of all of us, to be under the
curse. both of my soul who speak, and of thy soul that hear or read these
things. Certainly, if any man upon earth could have freed himself from being
involved herein, it might have been Paul; who had as much to plead as any,
Phil. 3.5, 6. He was circumcised the eighth day, that is, according to the
ordinance of God, he was solemnly admitted into the visible Church: Of the
stock of Israel, to whom pertained the adoption, and the Covenant, and the
giving of the Law, and the promises: He was of the tribe of Benjamin, not of
one of the ten tribes who fell away so grossly to idolatry, but of them who
retained the true worship of God, when the others apostatized: An Hebrew of the
Hebrews, that is, both his parents were Israelites, he was not descended of
Proselytes on either side, but of native Jews, without any mixture of Gentiles
in his lineage. He that was born of a Proselyte either by Father or Mothers side
was termed Ben-ger the Son of an He-proselyte, or Ben-gera the Son of a
Sh^proselyte. But he who had both parents Israelites was an Hebrew of the
Hebrews. Godwin. Moses and Aaron.
Touching his profession, He was a Pharisee, he was of the strictest Sect
amongst the people, of those who held fast many of the great truth; of
Religion, which the Sadduces and other Sects rejected: he was more Orthodox
than some others. Lastly, for his practice, he was blameless touching the
righteousness of the Law, that is, in the sight of men; they could lay nothing
to his charge, they could not say black was his eye. And yet he includes
himself as wrapped up amongst others, in this cursed estate: he acknowledges
himself to be a child of the devil, and led captive by him, till he got into
Christ, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. Amongst whom also we all had our conversation in times
past, in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the
mind, and were by nature children of wrath even as others.

This is the fourth thing to be noted, That the state of all men by nature is a
state of wrath.

5. For the conducting of a sinner to everlasting life, and glory, in the
prefence of God, and to make him for ever blessed in the enjoyment of God, this
state must be changed. They must be taken out of this condition, and put into
another; namely into the state of grace. As there must be a physical change
wrought upon the heart, so there must be a relative change in the state. For
indeed Sirs, it will be the principal matter of Christ's enquiry at the day of
accounts, in what state men are. He will divide the persons that come before
him into companies, according to the state they are in ^ and pass sentence upon
them answerably thereto, Mat. 25.31, 32, 33. When the Son of man shall come in
his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne
of his glory: And before him shall be gathered all nations, and he shall
separate them one from another, as a shepherd divides his sheep from the
goats. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.
Mark it, here is the great matter of enquiry, whether they are sheep, or goats;
righteous, or wicked; in the state of grace, or still abiding in the state of
nature. It is true, the Lord Christ will make an exact scrutiny into men's ways
and carriage, he will bring every work in to judgment, and render to every one
according to his deeds: But those works will be looked into, as an evidence of
their state; and the nature and quality of the actions do much depend upon the
state of the person acting. Itaque non quid fiat aut quid detur, refert, sed
qua mente. Quia beneficium non in eo quod fit dut datur consistit, sed in ipso
dantis aut benefacientis animo. Sen. de Benefic.
So that if we would assure our hearts before Christ at his appearance, and
comfortably expect to receive the reward of the inheritance, we must not think
it sufficient to make a little reformation in our lives; but our spiritual
state must be changed. Instead of strangers and enemies, we must be made the
friends of the Lord; we must be taken out of Satan's family, and put into the
household of faith.

6. In the sixth and last place, to bring it home to our purpose, observe, that
this change in a man's spiritual state is fundamentally brought to pass by his
union with Christ: it is wrought by virtue of being ingraffed into Christ. Then
is a sinner put into another state and condition, when he is broken off from
the old stock, and put into the true vine: when he is taken out of the wild
Olive, and inserted into the good Olive Tree. For Sirs, Christ is the head and
master of the whole party of God's peculiar people; as Satan is the prince of
the children of disobedience, so the Lord Jesus is the king of Saints, the
Prince and Captain of their salvation to whom they belong; and when they are in
him, then they belong to him, Gal. 3.28, 29. There is neither Jew nor Greek,
there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female [that is, such
things as these, Country, Sex, and Nation, or outward condition of life, make
no difference on a spiritual account; but union with Christ, as it followeth]
but you are all one in Christ Jesus. [one mystical body by virtue of
conjunction with him] And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and
heirs according to the promise; then is your state changed, from children of
wrath to be inheritors of a kingdom.

That Is the second general product or consequent of union with Christ. Thereby
a man's spiritual state is fundamentally changed.

3. From hence does redound a right to all the blessings of the Covenant.
Hereby the benefits of redemption are effectually applied to their souls.] So
applied, that believers have a title thereto, and may plead their interest
therein: they may come unto the Lord with an holy boldness, and challenge those
blessings as their own. They have not only liberty to pray for them as mercies
which they want, but with an holy reverence and humility, they may put in their
claim to them; when they are united unto Christ the Son of God. The very
justice of God is engaged to answer their suit, as well as his compassion. For
Sirs, when a man is knit unto Christ, all things that are Christ's do of right
belong unto that man, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. All things are yours, whether Paul,
or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or
things to come: All are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's. Mark
it, all things are yours; that is, in respect of title to them, and the benefit
of them. Upon what ground is that title bottomed? why upon your oneness with
Christ: therefore all are yours, because ye are Christ's. As the interest which
a woman has in the goods and possessions of her husband, does arise from her
being united to the person of her husband: so the right which any have to the
possessions of Christ, and the mercies which he has purchased, does flow from
their oneness with the person of Christ. First, we must be his, before we have
a right to any thing that is his. This is a known principle, That if we would
receive any benefit by the redemption which Christ has purchased, it must be
applied unto us: Now this application is made effectually by our oneness with
Christ. It is the Spirit by whom the application is made, and union with Christ
is the way wherein or whereby that application is made effectually.

And therefore you must observe, there are three ways how the benefits of
redemption are applied to the souls of men and women.

There is an 1. External and doctrinal application. 2. Internal but conditional
application. 3. Effectual and saving. application.


1. There is an external or doctrinal application, by the Ministers of the
Gospel. When the general promise of salvation is particularly manifested unto
us, and the tenders of life and happiness are made to our souls, by the
Ambassadors whom Christ employeth to that end. This is the great privilege of
such as have their standing in the visible Church. As there is eternal life
procured through the blood of the Lord Jesus, so it is offered unto them.
Christ does beseech them by his Ministers to accept of it. The general promise
of blessedness to all that believe, is brought home to them, and personally
applied unto them. This I call a doctrinal Application. Thus Peter applied the
grace of God unto the people, Act. 2.38. Then Peter said unto them, Repent and
be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of
sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost. Again, Acts 3. v. 19.
Repent ye therefore and be conv^rted, that your sins may be blotted out, when
the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. Mark it,
There is a general promise of pardon, to such as repent of sin and turn from it
unto God, that iniquity shall never prove their ruin: Now this very thing the
Apostle applies unto them, Repent ye, and you shall be pardoned; your sins
shall be forgiven you; and when Christ shall come at the day of judgment, which
will be a day of gladness and refreshment to believers, then you shall be
openly acquitted from your guilt; it shall be proclaimed in the face of all the
world that you are pardoned and accepted. Thus Paul and Silas apply salvation
to the Jailer, Act. 16.31. Believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved,
and thine house. There is an universal promise, that whosoever believes shall
be saved: Now say Paul and Silas to the keeper of the prison, Thou art not
excluded out of this promise: by virtue of our commission from Christ, and in
his name, we tender salvation to thee, and to thine house. This application
does oftentimes leave men as it found them; life and happiness is tendered, and
they put it far from them, Act. 13.46. Mat. 22.2, 3.

2. There is an internal, but conditional application, of the benefits of
redemption: and this is wrought by the Spirit of God dealing with a man's
spirit. When the holy Ghost does present unto the soul, what in the Ministry
of the Word was sounded in the ear. Interna oblatio est spiritualis quadam
illuminatio qua cordibus hominum proponuntur illae promissiones quasi per
verbum internum. Haec etiam aliquando and quodam modo conceditur non electis.
Ames.
When he does take salvation in the offers of it, and lay it before the
conscience; and does press an acceptance of it upon the heart; and does strive
with men and women in order to a closure with it, upon Gospel-terms. This is
sometimes called a knocking at the door of the soul, Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand
at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come
in to him, and sup with him and he with me. By the door understand the heart of
a sinner, whereby entrance is made into the whole person, and possession took;
as a man enters into an house by the door: the heart, which is naturally shut
against Christ, nay barred and bolted against him, by vain thoughts, and vile
affections, and carnal reasonings; by pride and prejudice, and love of sin and
the world: Now to this door Christ comes by the Spirit, who acts in his
name, and knocks at the door, that is, he does argue and reason the case with
men's souls, by his internal motions; that they would accept of salvation as it
is offered. He does expostulate with them, why they will be so foolish as to
spend their time and strength in seeking after that which is not bread, and
cannot satisfy? And in order to move them to turn to God, he does set
salvation before them, and assures them of the enjoyment of it, if they will
submit to the government of Jesus Christ. If any man open the door I will come
in unto him, etc. This I call an internal-conditional application, because it
is an inward work of the Spirit, treating with the heart of a sinner. And pray
mind it Sirs, as it is a common thing, so it is a very dangerous thing to stand
out against this application of eternal life. When the holy Ghost has been
dealing with a man's heart, convincing him of the necessity of closing with
Christ, and he does break through such convictions, God does many times
withdraw the very strivings of his spirit from such a sinner, and never deals
with him further in order to his conversion, Prove. 1.23. Turn you at my
reproof, behold I will pour out my spirit unto you, I will make known my words
unto you. It is the speech of Christ the eternal Wisdom of God inviting sinners
to repentance; q.d. I do not only call upon you by my Word, but I will send the
holy Ghost to treat with you: He shall speak over to your consciences what the
Minister preaches in your ears. And what is the issue of rejecting this work
of the holy Ghost? See v. 24. and onward. Because I have called and ye refused:
I have stretched out my hand and no man regarded: But ye have set at naught all
my counsels, and would none of my reproof: I also well laugh at your calamity,
and mock when your fear comes. When your fear comes as desolation, and your
destruction comes as a whirlwind. [That is, when judgments which you were
afraid of shall actually seize upon you, and make you desolate: when the wrath
of God shall fall down upon you suddenly, in a dreadful and terrible manner.]
When distress and anguish comes upon you: Then shall they call upon me but I
will not answer, they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me. How is
this to be understood, seeing God is always found of such as seek him in
sincerity? Why the meaning seems to be this, God will withdraw his spirit,
and deal with their hearts no further, and then they will grow hard and
impenitent: and though they cry in their afflictions, yet it will only be the
cry of hypocrities; such as the Lord will have no manner of regard unto. O my
brethren, let this dreadful Scripture, and these awakening expressions, sink
deep into your ears; that you may not dare to resist the holy Ghost, or to send
him grieved away from you.

3. There is an effectual saving application of the benefits of redemption,
when they are so applied to us as to be made ours: so that we may say, this
promise is a part of my heritage, and the other mercy is that which I have an
interest in: And this is effected upon our union with Christ. When the holy
Ghost does not only show us his excellency, and propound unto us salvation
through his righteousness; but does also mightily prevail upon us to come unto
Christ, and we get into him; then we have a right to all that he has to bestow
upon the sons and daughters of men. First we must have the Son, and so a right
to the inheritance by the Son, 1 Cor. 1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus,
who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption. Mark it, Then he is made so to us, when we are in him. It is one
thing for Christ to be made wisdom, and righteousness, etc. i.e. to be set
apart as the storehouse of all these spiritual good things: and it is another
thing for him to be made so to us. By virtue of God's commission, and the
qualifications poured out upon the Lord Jesus, and that active and passive
obedience undertaken and performed by him, he is made wisdom, and
righteousness, and fanctification, and redemption: he is delegated to be God's
high-steward or Treasurer for the giving out of these mercies: he is become the
source and fountain of all saving grace. But when we are in him, he is made
wisdom to us, and righteousness to us, and sanctification to us, and redemption
to us: so that we are actually made partakers of them. These four things seem
to comprehend the whole of the provisions made to conduct a sinner to glory. 1.
Wisdom, for the revelation of the mind of God to us. 2. Righteousness, for our
acceptance with the Lord. 3. Sanctification, for inabling us to walk as a
peculiar people, and for carrying on the work of holiness to perfection. 4.
Redemption, for our full deliverance from misery, and completing our
happiness. And all these are made over to us, by virtue of our union with him,
our mystical oneness with Christ.

So much for opening the several branches of the Description; and for the
second general Head, concerning the nature of this Union wherein it does
consist.

CHAP. V. The manner how Christ and a Believer are united, cleared up in eight
gradual Propositions. Six of them insisted on.
3. COme we now to the third principal Head, propounded to be handled: touching
the manner of this Union, how it is brought about. The question is,

Qu. How is this Union wrought, and accomplished? After what manner is this
conjunction made up, whereby Christ and his people become one?

Ans, I shall return answer to this question, by laying down and enlarging upon
eight distinct and gradual Propositions. To which I must entreat your heedful
and diligent attendance.

1. Propos. 1. The first Proposition is this, That all the children of men in
their unregeneracy, before they are partakers of the differencing or special
grace of God, are wholly separated from Christ, and mere strangers unto him. As
they are afar off from God, by reason of their apostasy and declension from: so
they are without Christ, by whom alone they can be brought back again unto the
Lord. They can plead no share in his death and sufferings, or if they do plead
it, they will be found guilty of usurpation: for they are without him in the
world. This is clearly the doctrine of the Scripture, Ephesians. 2.12. At that time
ye were without Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and
strangers from the Covenants of promise. At that time] that is, whilst you were
dead in sins and trespasses, before you were quickened by grace according to the
riches of the mercy and love of God, v. 4,5. then ye were without Christ, not
only destitute of the knowledge of Christ as Gentiles (though that seems to be
the primary intent of the words) but without an interest in him because
unconverted sinners. For what the Apostle speaks of the Gentiles is true, in
that sense, of all wicked ungodly persons whomsoever. There is no difference in
that respect between. Jews and Heathens; carnal Professors, and open Infidels.
S. Paul plainly does include himself, and such as he was before his conversion.
And therefore in the day of grace, when the eternal love of God does break
forth toward his chosen people, they are said to be brought to Christ, and
espoused unto him, 2 Cor. 11.2. When they are taught of God, they are drawn to
the Son of God: when they have heard and learnt of the Father, then they come
unto Jesus, Joh. 6.44, 45. evidently implying, that before they had so learned,
they were without Christ; and at a distance from him. That is the first
Proposition.

2. Propos. 2. The sons and daughters of men in their carnal unconverted
estate, over and above their distance and separation from Christ, are actually
knit and joined unto such objects, as are wholly inconsistent with their Union
with Christ.

I will instance especially in two things. They are 1. In Covenant with sin. 2.
Contracted to the Law.


1. They are in covenant with sin, and at league of peace with their
corruptions: their spirits are glewed and fastened unto base lusts and
pollutions. Though some remainders of sin abide in the hearts of the godly,
whilst on this side of heaven, yet they are hated and abhorred, they are ever
pursuing them unto death, and executing a kind of holy revenge upon them, and
never satisfied till they are utterly vanquished and rooted up: But now an
unregenerate person is under the dominion of sin, as an hired servant is under
the command of his master; Pride bids him go, and he goes; flattery bids
him run, and he runs; covetousness injoyneth him to do this, and he does it:
carnal fear requires him to wound his conscience in this particular, and he
wounds it; uncleanness commands him to venture upon that provocation of the
wrath of God, and he ventureth: as having given up himself to the obedience of
sin. As the Lord says of the Israelites of old, it is true, in its kind and
measure, of all impenitent sinners; They are joined to their idols, Hos. 4.17.
Sin has a being and residence in the hearts of the dearest of God's servants,
but the spirits of the wicked are fast linked together with it. Such a one as
Paul may be sold under sin, but Ahab sells himself to work wickedness in the
sight of the Lord, Romans 7.14. 1 King. 21.20. Unconverted sinners yield up
themselves to be the servants of unrighteousness. You shall find that sin is as
dear to a natural man, as the most useful members of the body: Hence it is that
Christ compares a man's beloved lusts to the right hand, and the right eye,
Mat. 5.29, 30. And hereupon it is that their hearts are so ready to rise up
with indignation, and hatred against the means, which are made use of to rid
them of their sins: and that sometimes they will not stick to be at a great
deal of cost, and pains to retain their abomiminations. See what an offer they
make, Mic. 6.7. Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten
thousands of rivers of oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression,
the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? q.d. Let us keep our lusts, and we
will stick at nothing, we will part with our Estates, and sacrifice our
children, rather than abandon our bosom corruptions. Nay, how do many venture
their lives (not to speak of their souls, which all of them willingly run the
hazard of losing) for satisfaction of their lusts?

Now Sirs, this can never consist with our being joined to Christ. In omnibus
nobis regnavit peccatum -- Unusquisque tamen habuit in se aliquem specialem
regem, qui in eo regnabat and dominabatur ei. Verbi causa, in alio regnum
tenebat avaritia, in alio superbia, in alio mendacium regnabat; in alio libido
d^minabatur, and alius regem patiebatur furorem -- Postea vere quam venit Jesus
and occidit omnes reges qui in nobis tenebant regna peccati: praecepit nobis
interficere omnes istos reges and nullum ex iis relinquere. Si quis enim
aliquem horum in semet-ipso servaverit vivum, in exercitu Jesu esse non
poterit. Si ergo regnat in te avaritia, si jactantia, si superbia, si libido,
non eris Israeliticus miles, etc. Orig. hom. 15. in Jos.
He will have no manner of fellowship with the workers of iniquity. The design
of his coming was to destroy the works of the devil, and therefore he will not
dwell with such as give up themselves to serve the devil, that make it their
trade to promote his interest: these are the persons whom his soul abhors.
What communion has Christ with Belial? 2 Cor. 6.14. Thou love righteousness,
and hate iniquity, Psalm. 45.7. Into a polluted soul Christ the wisdom of God
will not enter, nor will he take up his habitation with those that are in
confederacy with sin. That Is the first object to which sinners are joined in
opposition unto Christ.

2. They are contracted unto the Law, as it is a covenant of life; and are
ready to seek for justification and acceptance upon legal terms; which is a
strong bar in the way of union with Christ. For where the Lord Jesus is a
Savior indeed, he will be acknowledged as a perfect Savior, he will have the
whole glory of our redemption redound unto himself. See what the Apostle
speaks to this purpose, Gal. 5.4. Christ is become of none effect unto you,
whosoever of you are justified by the Law; that is, if you seek to be justified
by it; none are or can be justified by it in reality, but if you rely
thereupon, and expect and look for acceptance with God upon those terms, you
will undoubtedly fall short of the righteousness of Jesus Christ: you do quite
put your selves from under his shadow. If you rest upon the works of the Law,
never think to receive benefit by the death of the Mediator of the covenant of
peace and reconciliation: Christ is become of none effect unto you. Now Sirs,
justification by works is man's natural element, upon which his soul is fixed,
and where he delights to dwell. Although the Law is disabled to minister relief
unto fallen sinners, yet there is a proness in them to follow after it still,
and to rest their souls upon that foundation. This is plain from the pains the
Apostle Paul takes in his Epistles to unsettle men from this bottom, to take
them off from leaning upon this broken reed: especially in his Epistles to Romans
and Gal. Besides, you read expressly of men's desires to be under the Law, Gal.
4.21. Tell me, ye that desire to be under the Law, q. d. I perceive that
hitherward your spirits have a tendency, there is a natural inclination in you
to split your selves upon this rock; as there is in a stone to deseend
downwards, toward its center. As the Law is a rule of life, so it is written
upon the heart of a Believer: but unregenerate persons cleave to it as it is a
covenant of works: they make use of it so, as to seek justification from
thence. And this mostly arises from that monstrous pride, which is fast rooted
and rivered in men's hearts: they would fain advance something of themselves,
and are loath to give the glory of their salvation to another. It is an harder
thing to close with the grace of God, and to glorify free grace in salvation,
than most persons imagine. This is the second Proposition. That unconverted
sinners are not only separated from Christ, but actually joined unto such
objects as are utterly incompatible with their being in Christ.

3. Propos. 3. Hence it clearly follows as a third Proposition, That the
first work which is wrought upon the spirit of a man, in order to his
conjunction and oneness with the Lord Jesus, it is the separation or
withdrawment of his soul from these objects, unto which he is joined in
opposition unto Christ. Till this work be done, the finner is not in a near
capacity of having the Son of God, of being joined to the Redeemer. First, a
bill of divorcement must be written, and the former husbands put away, before
the soul can be married to another husband; to him that is raised from the
dead. For Sirs, Christ will not be a sharer with another: if he have the soul
at all, he will have it altogether: if persons have the Son really, they must
have him only. So that first the soul must be wrought upon to renounce those
things which stand in competition with the Lord Jesus, that they may be in a
preparedness to be knit unto him, Psalm. 45.10, 11. Hearken O daughter, and
consider, and incline thine car: forget also thine own people, and thy fathers
house: so shall the King greatly desire thy beauty. They are words spoken of
the mystical marriage betwixt Christ and his Church Hoc de Ecclesia, quam ut
Christi regis uxorem depingit -- Vides de Christo esse sermonem qui enim de
Solomone diceret: Quoniam ipse est Dominus Deus cuus? Marian. in loc.
: and they amount to thus much; q. d. If you will have Christ, you must forsake
all things for Christ: if you will be joined unto him, you must be parted from
all besides him: as a virgin that will be espoused to an husband must forsake
father and mother, and cleave to her husband. First you must be broken off from
the old stock, if you will be ingraffed in the true vine. This is a special
part of that self denial which is required in the followers of Jesus, Mar.
8.34. Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself. He must den^ his
carnal self, and say to his corruptions get ye hence: he must deny his legal
self, by renouncing all confidence in the flesh, in his own righteousness, as
to justification in the sight of God: he must be dead to sin, and the Law, if
he will be married to the Son of God. See the proof of each. 1. He must be dead
to sin, Gal. 5.24. They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and lusts. Carnens pro radice posuit, and concupiscentias pro
fructibus. Caro enim est ipsa naturae corruptae vitiositas, unde mala omnia
prodeunt. Calv. in loc.
Such as are united to his person, must be planted together into the likeness
of his death: as he died for sin, so must they be dead unto sin: as Christ was
crucified in the flesh, so must their corruptions be crucified in them. The
principle or body of sin must be subdued, and the lustings and workings of it
must be set against, else it will be in vain to pretend that they are knit unto
Christ. 2. He must be dead to the Law: because it is impossible for a man to be
coupled to both together. It was a defectiveness herein which was the cause of
the utter undoing of the carnal Israelites: they were fast joined unto the Law,
and they could not be taken off from seeking life upon those terms; and
therefore, though they followed after righteousness, yet they did not attain
it, they fell short of righteousness. How came it to pass, that they fell short
of what they sought after? Why, Because they sought it not by faith, but as it
were by the works of the Law, Romans 9.31, 32. That Is the third Proposition. The
first work that is wrought upon the spirit of a man, in a tendency to his
conjunction and oneness with Christ, is the separation of his soul from sin,
and the Law; to which he is naturally joined in opposition to Christ.

4. Propos. 4. The divorce and separation of a sinner from his iniquity, which
is of indispensable necessity to the reception of Christ, and union with him,
is principally accomplished by a fourfold act. 1. The eyes of the understanding
are opened, to see the evil of sin. 2. The heart is awakened, to consider the
consequents of that evil. 3. The spirit is made to tremble, in apprehension of
the danger of continuing in sin. 4. The grace of mortification is poured out,
for the subduing of corruption, and a secret antipathy put into the soul
against it. When this work is wrought, then the sinner is set free from bondage
unto his lusts, and is at liberty to be married to another. I will briefly
touch upon these four steps, or acts of the holy Ghost, whereby tho divorce is
made.

1. There is an act of Conviction, whereby the eyes of the understanding are
enlightened, to see the evil of sin: and that with application to a man's self,
and his own transgressions and iniquities. For indeed general notions of the
evil of sin, will never have a due operation upon the heart and conscience
Generalia non pungunt.
, unless it be brought home, by a personal and particular appropriation to a
man's self. When a sinner is wrought upon so as to turn savingly from his
iniquities, he is made to do it understandingly: God working upon a man's heart,
answerably to man's nature. He does not force him to cast off his sins against
his will, but makes him ready and willing to abandon them: and to that
purpose, he gives the sinner a sight of the guilt he is under. He makes him
to know what a contempt sin is of the Majesty of heaven, what a slighting of an
holy, and just, and righteous Law; what a despising of the goodness and
compassion of the Lord, and consequently a provocation of his wrath: that so
there may be raised in the soul a regular abhorrence of it, and detestation
against it: and the sinner may be willing to sue out a divorce. Will the person
think, when he is thoroughly convinced of sin, What a fool was I thus to serve
these base lusts and pleasures? What madness possessed me, that I should depart
from the Lord and follow after lying vanities? For mark it Sirs, When the
affections act regularly, in closing with, or rejecting and refusing any
spiritual object, there must always precede a competent knowledge of the good
or evil of that object. And the reason is plain, because the will and
affections are blind and dependent faculties, they depend in their operations,
upon the information of the understanding. So that the heart cannot hate the
evil of sin, nor will the person loath himself upon the account of it, till the
judgment be convinced of the nature and greatness of that evil. You read of
this as one of the first works of the Spirit, Joh. 16.8. When the comforter is
come, he will convince the world of sin. He will make them to see clearly what
an ugly deformed nature it is of, what a bitter thing it is to rebel against
the most high. He will discover unto them the guilt which lies upon their
souls; and that by such evident concluding arguments, as will take away from
them all excuses whatsoever, whereby they were apt to cover their
transgressions: (...); i.e. (...).
and therefore it follows, that he will convince them of their unbelief,
which is the great damning sin, and that whereby other transgressions are fast
bound upon the soul. To this end God does sometimes bring the sinner into sore
afflictions and tribulations; that he may thereby taste the bitterness and
malignity of departing from him: which before was accounted but a trivial
matter, little to be regarded, Job 36.8, 9, 10. When they be bound in fetters,
and holden in the cords of affliction, then he shows them their work, and
their transgressions that they have exceeded. He opens their ear also to
discipline, and commands that they return from iniquity. Jer. 2.19.
To this purpose, the holy Ghost does set the Law before a man's face, in the
spiritualness, equity, and excellency of it; that the sinner may behold himself
in that glass, and pass judgment upon the evils of his heart and ways,
according to that rule. For when the commandment comes, then sin will revive
indeed, and be seen in its proper colors, Romans 7.9. Before, the person is
mistaken concerning the evil of it, he reckons it a small matter, and
wondereth that Ministers and Precisians should make such an ado against sin;
because he judges of it by false rules: by the opinion which the generality of
the world have concerning it; by the pleasure and worldly advantage that are
attendant upon it, and the like: But when the Law comes his mistakes are
rectified, and he sees sin as it is. And to this end the Spirit of God does
make discoveries unto the soul of the holiness, and purity, and infinite and
spotless perfections of the nature of God himself, against whom sin is
committed. When Job saw the Lord, then he did abhor himself, as in dust and
ashes, Job 42.4, 5. When Isaiah had a full sight of the infinite power, and
holiness, and glorious perfections of God, then he cried out, Woe is me, for I
am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, and dwell in the midst of a
people of unclean lips, Isa. 6.3, 4, 5. This is a certain rule, and if you will
observe your hearts anddemeanour, the truth of it will every day further appear
to you by experience That as your apprehensions of God are, so the manner of
your applications unto God will be, and so your apprehensions of the evil of
sin against God will be likewise. This is the first act in order unto a divorce
from sin, An act of Conviction.

2. There is an act of Consideration, wherein the heart is awakened to weigh
the sad consequents of the evil of sin: What will be the issue of these things?
What will become of my precious and immortal soul, if I go on in this course?
There is no way (thinks the sinner) to escape the damnation of hell, without
conversion: and the torments thereof will be endless and everlasting torments.
If I am once cast into that lake, there is no deliverance out of it. Therefore
you read of confidering and turning from sin, Ezekiel. 18.27, 28. When the wicked
turns from his wickedness that he has committed, and does that which is
lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive: Because he considers, and
turns away from all his transgressions that he has committed, he shall
surely live, he shall not die. And the truth is, the reason why men and women
do still hug their sins in their bosoms, and roll them as a sweet morsel under
their tongues, is for want of consideration. If they did sit down and consult
what would become of them: did they lay it seriously to heart, and revolve it
in their thoughts, what precious souls their lusts are destroying, what
insupportable wrath they are pulling down upon their heads, what rich grace
they are abusing, what an incomprehensible Majesty they are setting against,
and what a dismal condition it will, without a speedy repentance, reduce them
unto; would they harbor sin any longer in their hearts? would they not fly
from it as from a Serpent? certainly they would cast it away with indignation,
and say, Get ye hence ye filthy accursed lusts, you have brought me into a
wretched estate, and should I follow you still, I must be undone forever, Isa.
47.7. Thou did not lay these things to thine heart, neither did thou
remember the latter end of it. As if the holy Ghost had said, the cause of your
continuance in sin is want of consideration: if you had laid the end of it to
heart, it would have put a stop to your carier in a course of impiety. This
will appear in the return of the prodigal, Luke 15.17, 18. When he came to
himself, he said, How many hired servants of my fathers have bread enough, and
to spare, and I perish with hunger? I will arise and go to my father. When he
came to himself] that is, when he entered into debate with his own spirit, Ut
nemo tenat in se descendere -- Per. sat.
when he communed with his own heart, touching his deplorable condition: then
he quickly resolves to abide amongst the swine no longer, he will feed no more
upon husks, he will rather be as the meanest servant in his fathers house, a
doorkeeper in the house of God, than dwell in the tents of wickedness. Before
that time he gave up himself in subjection to his lusts, and did not consider
what he was doing: he did not bethink himself, as the expression is 1 Kings
8.47. If they shall bethink themselves, and repent This is the second act in
order to a divorce from sin. An act of Consideration.

3. There is a work of Humiliation and Compunction; whereby the spirit is made
to mourn and ^ament in the sense of sin, and withal to tremble in apprehension
of the danger of it. This is that pricking to the heart which is the usual
forerunner of conversion, Acts 2.37. Now when they heard this, they were
pricked to the heart, and they said unto Peter and the rest of the Apostles,
men and brethren, what shall we do? Now their consciences are wounded, and they
mourn in reflection upon their evil ways: They are as an heavy load and burden
uptheir spirits. What shall we do? q.d. We are utterly ruined and undone,
except the grace of God step in for our recovery. Can you show us any way to
escape? we are ready to close with any directions prescribed. When God does
bless men's souls in turning them from their iniquities, he does first cause
them to grieve, and be in bitterness for those iniquities, and stirs up in
them a dread and fear of his judgments. Quos non expugnat ratio, eos
mansuefacit motui.
For mark it Sirs, although it be love unto God, and sense of the love of God,
which have a mighty influence to cause a converted person to cleave unto the
Lord: yet it is a dread and fear of wrath, and judgment, which brings a
sinner, in the first conversion, unto God. Thus you know the Jailer came in
trembing, Acts 16.29, 30. And when Christ does shoot out his sharp arrows into
men's hearts, then the people fall down under him, Psalm. 45.5. It may well be
understood of these arrows of compunction and terror, Haec dicuntur typice de
evangelica administratione Christi. Malv. in Psalm. 45.

Cordaque vul^ificis figens inimica sagittis.

Sponte sibi cogis valides precumbere gentes. Buchan.

The Hebrew (...) rendered shall fall down, may well be be meant of an act of
adoration. So it is used in Deuteronomy. 9.25. and in Chald. Dan. 2.46. Dan. 3.7.


whereby the perverseness of men's hearts is overcome and subdued: of enemies
they are made friends, and brought into to a ready subjection unto his
government, That Is the third work.

4. The grace of Repentance is poured out upon the soul; whereby the heart is
crucified unto sin, and the reigning power of sin is removed; and a standing
aversness, and antipathy put into the spirit against it. When this is done,
then the divorce is completed: and the sinner is set at liberty from his
corruptions, that he may be joined unto Christ. For it is not all the arguments
and persuasions in the world that can effectually prevail upon a man to cast
off his iniquities, and bring him from under the power of sin, until the Spirit
of God does set home those arguments, and does deaden sin in the heart Alii
parts formales regenerationis duas constituunt, mortificationem veteris and
vivificationem novi hominis -- Et haec illam necessario praesupponit; a qua non
re sed ratione tantum distincta est. Wend. Syst. majus.
Restraints of providence may keep a man from the outward acts of sin, but
still the heart is glewed to it. As Balaam durst not comply with Balaack
actually to curse the Israelites, but fain he would have done it; his heart
followed the wages of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2.15. But now the spirit of
Repentance takes down the dominion of sin, and breaks I distinguish between
the grace of Repentance in the first workings of it upon the heart, and the
exercise of Repentance in the further mortifying and subduing of sin.
the bonds of the Covenant, whereby the sinner was held fast in subjection to
it: and then he does say, What have I to do any more with my idols? Therefore
believers are said to be dead to sin, Romans 6.1, 2. and, to have their old man
crucified with Christ, that they may no longer serve sin, Romans 6.6. Thus they
are set free from sin, that they may be united to Christ, and become the
servants of God through Christ, Romans 6.22. This may serve, for opening the
fourth Proposition.

5. Propos. 5. To deaden a person unto the Law, and to take him off from
seeking justification by the Law, that he may be united or married to the Lord
Jesus. God does especially make use of two means. 1. The Law it self. 2. The
body of Christ; that is, the sufferings which he underwent in his body. For
this you have the Scripture express, Gal. 2.19. For I through the Law, am dead
to the Law; q. d. by studying the Law it self, I see it can never avail to give
me acceptance with the most high. Whatever expectations I have formerly had
that way, I now utterly renounce them; and the Law it self has sufficiently
instructed me in this Lesson. 2. For the sufferings of Christ, that place is
obvious, Romans 7.4. Wherefore my brethren, ye are also become dead to the Law,
Mori legi est illi renuntiare, and ab ejus imperio manumitti; ita ut nihil
habeamus in ea fiduciae -- Ne offenderet Judaeos verbi asperitate, si dixisset
legem esse mortuam, deflexione usus est dicens nos legi esse mortuos. Non ergo
been vivendi regula quam lex praescribit abrogata est, sed qualitas illa quae
libertati per Christum parta opponitur. Nempe dum summam perfectionem requirit,
and quia non praestamus constringit nos sub aternae mortis reatu. Calv.
by the body of Christ, that ye should be married to anther, even to him that
is raised from the dead; q.d. This instruction God has given us from Golgotha,
that by the works of the Law no flesh can be justified: indeed our hearts have
been hankering after that way of life, and acceptance; nay we have been closely
linked thereunto, but the body of Christ has made a separation between them.
The body of Christ, i. e. the passion of Christ in his body. The doctrine of
Christ's death and crucifixion, if rightly improved, will show a man the Law's
utter insufficiency to give a righteousness, wherein we may appear before the
God of heaven. I know many understand it of the Law of sin, to which the death
of Christ does deaden us: but the Apostle speaks evidently in the former
verses of the cap. of the Law of God. See v. 1. I speak to them that know the
Law, that the Law has dominion over a man as long as he lives. And so in the
subsequent verses, v. 5. The motions of sin that were by the Law; that
corruption which took occasion from the commandment to carry us into sin with
the greater violence. Parallel to v. 8. And v. 6. Is the Law sin? God forbid;
that is, Can we justly charge the Law of God, with our transgressions? far be
it from you to imagine such a thing: only our hearts pervert it, and suck poison
from that which in it self is excellent. And why may we not understand it in
the same acception, in v. 4? I will open this Proposition, by showing you the
influence of each of these means or instruments apart, to take off a man's heart
from seeking justification by the Law.

1. The first special means is the Law it self. That, if we hearken diligently
to the voice of it, will loudly proclaim its own insufficiency to save us. If
the question be put, where is righteousness to be had? As the light of nature
will say, it is not in me; so the Law will answer, it is not in me. And
therefore says the Apostle, Gal. 4.21. Tell me ye that desire to be under the
Law, do not you hear the Law? If you did but hearken to it, it would speak
enough in this case, of it self; there would need no further testimony to be
produced. Lex vere percepta nos sibi mori cogit. Id.
Do but carefully and strictly examine it, and you will quickly find even from
it self, that there is no standing before the Lord in the righteousness which
is of the Law. For mark it Sirs, the reason why sinners seek justification by
the Law, is their ignorance of, and unversedness in the Law. A little serious
study of it would soon dispel those mists of ignorance. There is a threefold
ignorance of the Law, which is the occasion of men's resting upon it for
acceptance, and seeking justification thereby.

1. Ignorance of the terms of the Law, upon which life is promised therein, and
eternal happiness made over thereby: unacquaintedness with the conditions that
are required, to put us under the verge and compass of justification by it. Men
think to come up to the terms of the Law, because they do not mind and consider
wherein those terms do consist, upon which it promises justification: nor of
what extent and latitude they are. A little search into the Law would rectify
this error. If a man will answer the demands of the Law he must be able to
produce a personal, perfect, and everlasting obedience. Mark it, I say. 1. It
must be personal obedience that is produced: the Law does not admit of a
surety, to supply our defects, and to do that for us which we cannot do of our
selves. 2. There must be perfect, exact, and spotless obedience; not only
sincere and upright, but in every particular the command must be filled up. If
there be a failure in the least action, or in the minutest circumstance of an
action, the Law still not acquit us. 3. It must be perpetual and everlasting
obedience; to the very end and period of our course. This is an argument of its
inability to justify, drawn from the Law it self, Gal. 3.10. As many as are of
the works of the Law are under the curse. How prove you that? why it will
undeniably appear, if you mark the terms of the Law. For it is written: Cursed
is every is every one that continues not in all things, which are written in
the book of Law, to do them. Vis argumenti. Maledictus est qui non servat totam
legem: at nemo id facit, nec potest. Ergo -- Marian, in loc.


2. The hankering of a man's heart after justification by the Law, does proceed
from ignorance of the spiritualness of it. If it were studied in this property,
it would sufficiently manifest its own inability to save us: for the Law
requires holiness in our persons, as well as rectitude in our lives; it is the
rule of man's nature, what he should be, as well as the rule of his practice,
what he should do. The Law condemns us for the native pravity and pollution
of our hearts and spirits within us, and not only for the actual miscarriages
in our demeanor: so that, which of the posterity of fallen man can stand
before it? The Law injoyneth an absolute rectitude and purity in the thoughts,
and affections, and first motions of the soul; as well as integrity in the
outward carriage: so that, it is not a civil conversation which will bring you
off from the curse denounced by it. If you could suppose a man that had walked
all his lifetime blameless, that no man could charge him with guilt upon any
account: that no one could say black was his eye (as the self-justiciaries
boast is) yet the Law will pronounce him accursed, and send him to hell, for
the least vain imagination: for the least rising of a proud thought, or an
envious thought, or an unbelieving thought, or the like: for the smallest
inordanateness in the affections: nay, for the corruption brought with us into
the world, as well as for the grosser pollutions perpetrated and committed in
the world. And the reason is because the Law is spiritual: it is exceeding
broad, as the Psalmist expresses it, Psalm. 119.96. I have seen an end of all
perfections, but thy commandment is exceeding broad. It is as extensive as the
workings of the whole soul of a man, in any part or faculty of the same: it is
as broad as the person; it reaches to the nature, it is a discerner of, and
gives prescriptions unto the very thoughts and intents of the heart. Thus our
Savior does vindicate it from the false glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees,
whereby they did narrow the commandment, and enervate the force of it. Mat.
5.21, 22. Ye have heard it was said by them of old time, thou shall not kill,
and whosoever shall kill shall be endanger of the judgment. But I say unto you,
that whosoever is engry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of
the judgment: and whosoever shall say unto his brother, Racha, shall be in
danger of the council: but whosoever shall say, thou fool, shall be in danger
of hell fire. It is as much as if our Savior had said, Your teachers of old in
their interpretations of the Law confined the prohibition to the external act:
but I tell you, the Law is spiritual, the least groundless anger is murder in
Gods account, and deserves the wrath of God, as well as actual killing; if
there be hatred of his brother in a man's heart, he is a murderer; much more if
he express that anger or hatred in any contemptuous and provokin, words. The
like you have in the case of adultery, Mat. 5.27, 28. Now if this spiritualness
of the Law were but thoroughly studied, it would take off men's hearts from
resting thereupon. For it condemns us for the first rising, or ebullition of
sin within us, as well as for the gross outward acts of impiety. It speaks a
man accursed for the defects and imperfections in his obedience, as well as for
the neglect and omission of his obedience. It leaves him under the wrath of
God, for the original corruption of his heart. For as the Apostle speaks,
Romans 7.7. I had not known sin, but by the Law: for I had not known lust [or
concupiscence] except the Law had said, thou shall not covet. And therefore by
the deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be justified in his [Gods] sight, for
by the Law is the knowledge of sin: as the argument is pressed, Romans 3.20.

3. A third ground of a man's trusting in his legal righteousness, is ignorance
of the rigor and severity of the Law. It requires exact conformity the
precepts thereof, but administers no strength or assistance to help us in the
observation of those precepts: Lex jubet, gratia juvat.
It calls for exact performance of what is required, and leaves no room for
repentance and pardon upon any failings whatsoever; nor does it promise
acceptance upon our repentance. The Law Sirs, or Covenant of works does not
know what a pardon means. Inceed upon supposal of sin it injoyneth
repentance, but does not accept repentance in any case. The Law is such a
severe task-master, that when it has appointed our work there is no relaxation
to be expected: it will not make any abatement in the least, Romans 10.5. For
Moses describes the righteousness which is of the Law, that the man which does
those things shall live by them. Mark it, not he that repents for his neglect
of what is not done, but he that does them: not he that is humbled for his
imperfections and failings, but who so never fails in the least particular.
And if this were well considered, the Law it self would knock us off from
dependence on the Law; and would thereby prove as a Schoolmaster to drive us
unto Christ. You have many carnal people, when conscience galleth them for sin,
and their hearts smite them for their abominations, they will mourn and lament
a little under the sense of it; they are filled with trouble, and perplexity,
and a great deal of legal sorrow upon that account, and here they take up their
rest. Surely, think they, God will pardon and accept of us, for we have grieved
and repent of what we have done. Why mind it Sirs, As this does proceed from
ignorance of the nature of repentance [the repentance of Judas carried him thus
far: True Evangelical repentance does does not only humble a man for sin, but
turns him from it even unto God, and is mingled with faith in the blood of
Christ] so it proceeds from ignorance of the law. If thou art not in Christ,
but stand on the old bottom of legal righteousness, there is not one word in
that Covenant for admission of repentance: that is a privilege brought to
light by the Gospel, a part of the purchase of the death of the Mediator of the
Covenant of grace; who can have compassion on the ignorant, and such as are
turned out of the way. The Covenant of works knows nothing of forgiveness of
sin upon our repentance: it speaks not a syllable of comfort, unless we had
kept undefiled in the way without the least aberration, or wandering out of it
Christ Jesus is the Author of repentance, and of acceptance therein, Acts 5.30,
31. The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew, and hanged on a tree.
Him has God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, to give
repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins.

This is the first instrument that God makes use of, to take off men's hearts
from seeking justification by the law, that they may be united unto Christ;
viz. the Law it self. And indeed it is delivered to that end, not that persons
might rest upon it, but might see the utter impossibility of being saved by it;
that it may show us the necessity of Christ's righteousness, and lead us unto
him. It was published as a Covenant of works upon this very design, that it
might lock men up under guilt, and bind them over to the wrath of God, and make
them to see their miserable and remediless condition in themselves, that so
they might be necessitated to run for refuge unto Christ, Romans 3.19. What
things soever the Law says, it says to them that are under the Law. To what
end? Why, that every month may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty
before God, Romans 10.4. Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every
one that believes. The end of the law] that is, say some, of all the shadows
and ceremonies of the law, they had a reference to Christ, and did typifie and
prefigure the Lord Jesus. I would not exclude this sense, but I think it may be
meant of the publication of the law as a Covenant; it was to this end, that
sinners might see more clearly into the weakness of the law to justify them,
and so might have recourse unto Christ, and be justified by faith. The law it
self does bear testimony of itself, how unable it is, being become weak through
the flesh: and therefore Christ is the end of it, to bring in everlasting
righteousness, such a glorious righteousness as abides for ever.

2. The second special means to divorce men from the law, or to deaden them
unto the law, that they may be married or united to the Son of God, is the body
of Christ; the sufferings of Christ in his body, the cursed death which he
underwent for the sake of sinners. The death of Christ does not enervate or
exauctorate the law of God, as it is a commandment for guidance of our ways,
or as it is a rule of life: Christus est legis finis perficiens, non
interficiens. Aug.
so the sufferings of Christ are the great Evangelical argument to quicken us
unto the conscientious observance of it; shall we not obey his voice, that died
for us? shall we sin against him, who shed his precious blood for our sakes?
shall we think any thing too hard to be done at his injunction, who thought it
not much to humble himself unto the death, even the cursed death of the Cross,
that our souls might live? Romans 6.10, 11. In that he died, he died unto sin
once, etc. Likewise reckon [(...) reason or argue] your selves to be dead
indeed unto sin, but alive unto God.
Why the love of Christ does constrain us not to live unto our selves, but to
serve him to the uttermost, 2 Cor. 5.14. Do we make void the law through faith?
God forbid: yea we establish the law, Romans 3.31. But now, as it is a Covenant
of life, and does promise justification unto the observers of it, so the death
of Christ does deaden us unto the law: it is of notable force and efficacy to
take off a man from building and bottoming upon his own legal performances. For
this very topic the Apostle argues with the Galatians, cap. 3.1. O foolish
Galatians, who has bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth, before
whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth crucified among you? Mark
it, the great matter wherein the Galatians fell from the truth of the Gospel,
was by adhaering to the law, and seeking righteousness therein: Now says the
Apostle, a man would have thought, the doctrine of Christ's death and
crucifixion might have been a strong fence against that error, unless you had
been under a kind of fascination and witchcraft upon your spirits. Has the
great fundamental principle of the death of Christ, been so plainly and
faithfully preached unto you, and set forth amongst you in such lively colors,
as if he had been crucified before your eyes, and are you still so foolish as
to rest upon the law? Certainly this is an argument of abundant sottishness and
madness, or else you have quite forgotten the doctrine of Christ's death, and
neglect to make a due improvement thereof. The death of Christ will be of
notable use to deaden a man to the law, by making a threefold discovery.

1. By discovering the sinfulness and damnableness of the evil of sin, or
transgressionof the law of God: in that it could be expiated at no lesser rate,
than by the crucifying of the Son of God. It is not any corruptible thing, as
silver and gold, could make satisfaction for sin, but the precious blood of the
Son of God; and therefore certainly it is an evil of a very heinous nature.
Thus, my brethren, a real sight of the greatness of the evil of sin, would
sooner convince a man of the insufficiency of all his legal righteousness, to
satisfy for the wrong that is done unto God by it. If men think to recompense
the Lord, by any obedience of their own, for the sins whereof they are guilty,
it is because they have low and slight thoughts of the evil of their sins. Now
the death of Christ may serve to rectify such thoughts, and to set forth the
damnableness of the nature of sin. And indeed it was one of the ends which God
aimed at in the death of Christ; as to save the sinners, so to damn the sin,
Romans 8.3. For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh;
God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned
sin in the flesh. He condemned it] that is, he made it thereby to appear what a
deadly, destructive, and damnable nature it is of; how odious, and abominable a
thing it is in his sight. He condemned it of that capital crime, that it was
the meritorious cause of the death of Christ, who was most innocent. Engl.
Annot.
By what way was this made to appear? Why, because nothing could appease his
wrath, but the crucifying of the Lord Jesus. Undoubtedly it must needs be a
very accursed thing, for which Christ himself was made a curse.

2. The death of Christ is of use to deaden a sinner to the law, by making
discovery of the inexorableness of the justice of God: of his severity and
strictness in requiring the utmost farthing, that is due for satisfaction. He
did not spare his own Son, when he had iniquity laid upon him, but he was put
to a painful, cursed, ignominious, and reproachful death; so that let not the
children of men ever expect to be spared, if they lie under the guilt of the
least ungodliness. God the Father did not abate his own beloved Son any part of
the punishment; surely he will never make abatement unto his adversaries. And
this was another end of Christ's death, to set forth the exactness and
inexorableness of the justice of God; that he will by no means clear the
guilty, Romans 3.25, 26. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through
faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that
are past, through the forbearance of God. To declare I say at this time his
righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier of him that believes
in Jesus. Deus justitiam suam dicitur oftendisse, quia non aliter remisit
peccata hominum, quam pretio iusto redemptionis accepto; non ab ipsis
hominibus, sed a Christo pro nobis satisfaciente. Justum ergo se Deus exhibuit
in nostro justificatione, and liberalem seu gratiosum. Justitia fuit relatione
ad Christum, gratia vero relatione ad nos. Tolet in Romans


3. Lastly, the death of Christ will serve to take off a man from seeking
justification by the law, by making a full discovery, that there is no other
way imaginable to make reconciliation for sin, and to deliver sinners from the
wrath to come; but the death of Christ only.

For Sirs, if there had been any other way could have been found out,
undoubtedly God would have spared the dearly beloved of his soul: he would
never have stricken and bruised his only begotten Son. For as the Apostle
argues, If there had been a law given which could have given life, verily
righteousness should have been by the law, Gal. 3.21. q. d. Had that way been
sufficient, to save men and women from everlasting destruction; God would have
taken that way, and prevented the sorrows and sufferings of his Son. He would
never have sent him into the world, in such a low and despicable condition: nor
have brought him into such strairs and agonies, as made him sweat drops of
blood: not would he have poured out upon him the vials of his wrath, for the
accomplishment of that which might have been otherwise accomplished. So that to
test for justification upon the law is, in effect, to frustrate and make void
the grace of God, in the death of the Mediator: For if righteousness come by
the law, then Christ is dead in vain, Gal. 2.21. Thus much for the fifth
Proposition touching the way of a sinners union or conjunction with the Lord
Jesus.

6. Propos. 6. The way of the actual conjunction between Christ and his people
(when they are thus divorced from sin, and deadned to the Law) may be conceived
thus. The Lord Christ, by his Spirit, takes possession of them, and dwells
in them; and Believers through faith of the operation of the Spirit, take hold
of Christ, and get into him; and so they are knit together and become one. For
this conjunction, you must understand, is a mutual conjunction; Abide in me,
and I in you. And again. He that abides in me, and I in him. By which
expressions it appears, that these are two (...) things, Our being in Christ,
and Christ's being in us Burgess on Job. 17. Sermon. 126.
the Lord Jesus comes and takes up his residence in them; and they are
enabled to go forth unto Christ, and receive him as he is offered in the
Gospel; whereby they are in him: and thus this Union is established. These are
matters distinct, and accordingly the holy Ghost speaks distinctly of them,
Joh. 14.20. At that day, ye shall know, that I am in my father, and you in me,
and I in you. See also Joh. 6.56. He that eateh my flesh, and drinks my
blood, dwells in me, and I in him. So that there are two great bonds or
ligaments of this conjunction, and of the union which follows thereupon. 1.
The bond, on Christ's part, is the Spirit, whereby the people of God are
apprehended of him, and he takes up his abode in them. For he dwells in them
by his Spirit, Romans 8.9, 10. But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if
so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit
of Christ, he is none of his. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because
of sin, etc. Observe, that what is called the Spirit dwelling in us in one
verse, is styled Christ in us in the other: because Christ seizes on us by his
Spirit, and abides in us through the Spirit. 2. The bond of this Union, on the
Believers part, is Faith, whereby they do apprehend the Lord Jesus Christ, and
take him home, as it were, unto themselves. Being apprehended by him, they take
hold of him; and so they are knit together, Ephesians. 3.16, 17. That he would grant
you, according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his
Spirit in the inner man; that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. First
Christ comes by the holy Ghost and enters into them, and then they are
enabled by faith to receive him unto themselves, and to apply themselves unto
him: and so they are conjoined, and made one together.

From this mutual conjunction, does arise or spring a twofold Union, or
Oneness, between Christ and Believers.

There is a 1. Natural. 2. Legal.


Union, the bond whereof is The Spirit, dwelling in them. Faith of the
operation of the Spirit.


I will treat of each of them severally, with as much clearness and
succinctness as I can.

CHAP. VI. A natural, and a legal Union with Christ. Wherein they severally
consist. A moral Union proceeding from the former. The last Proposition
explained.
1. THere is a natural Union, or Oneness betwixt Believers and the Lord Jesus;
arising from the possession which he takes of them, and his residence in them:
whereupon they are partakers of the same heavenly and spiritual nature with
him; having Christ formed in them, and dwelling with them. Therefore I call it,
for distinctions sake, a natural Union, because herein they agree in the same
divine, and spiritual nature: else for the manner of its effecting, it is
supernatural. This you have mentioned abundantly in the Scriptures, 2 Cor.
13.5. Christ is in you, except ye be r^^probates; that is, If you are
Christians in good earnest, such as are sound in the faith: unless you are
persons unapproved Si quid habent Christi, and sincerae pietatis. Calv. Nisi
forte reprobi estis, i. e. improbi. Marian.
, such as upon trial are found to deal falsely, and unfaithfully in the
Covenant of God: except you are rotten at the heart, gilded metal, that will
not abide the test and touchstone, you must have Christ within you. It is not
enough that Christ be preached unto you, but he must be revealed in you. As the
Apostle speaks of his conversion and mission to preach the Gospel, Gal. 1.16.
When it pleased God who spearated me from my mothers womb, and called me by his
grace, to reveal his Son in me. Not only called me to be an Apostle, and made
known Christ unto me; but also called me to the fellowship of his Son Jesus
Christ, revealing him in me. The bond of this Union is the Spirit of Christ,
which is shed abroad in to the hearts of God's peculiar people; and whereby the
Lord Jesus takes up his habitation in them. For it is the Spirit that treats
with them in Christ's name, and takes possession of them to his use and
service. For hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which be has
given us, 1 John 3.24. This is the first sort of Union betwixt Christ and
Believers, which we call a natural union: and it is wrought by the Spirit of
Christ that dwells in them. Concerning which, I will enlarge a little, for
the better clearing it to your understandings, under five Heads.

1. This dwelling of Christ in the souls of his people by his Spirit, whereupon
does arise a natural union with him, is the same thing, for substance with the
positive part of the grace of regeneration: whereby the principles of holiness
and new obedience are introduced into them; and the image of God is restored
upon their natures. For it is hereby that the holy Ghost makes his entrance
into them, and fixes his settlement with him. You know that regeneration or
sanctification (take it for the first saving change, or distinguishing work,
upon the soul) consists of two parts. 1. There is a privative part, or the
mortification and subduing the principles and habits of sin. 2. There is a
positive part, or the introduction of new principles of grace, and holiness.
There is, 1. A blotting out the image of the devil. 2. Stamping upon a man's
heart the divine nature again. You read of them distinctly, A taking away the
heart of a stone, and giving an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 11.19. There is a
removing of the old man, and a bringing in of the new man, which is created
after God. Now Christ's being in his people by his Spirit, is the same thing,
for substance, with this positive part of regeneration. By the mortification of
sin, Satan is outed of his possession of the soul: and by the implantation of
spiritual grace Christ enters, and takes possession of the soul; by the
renewing of the holy Ghost. Thus you have it explained (for one expression
there seems to be exegetical of the other) Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. A new heart will
I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you. And I will take away the
stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh: and I
will put my Spirit within you. Mark it, by the renovation of the heart God's
Spirit is said to be within us. And by the washing of regeneration the holy
Ghost is said to be shed upon us abundantly, Tit. 3.5, 6. In the new birth
Christ is formed in the soul, by the working of the Spirit.

2. Where Christ does come, by the operations of his Spirit, to dwell in the
hearts of his people, he does at the same time make his entrance in their whole
persons; and take seizin and possession of all their powers and faculties unto
his use and service. The plian meaning is this; that the work of sanctification
is a through-work, wrought upon the whole man: there is grace infused into
every part and faculty. As in the work of mortification, all the habits of
corruption are subdued; so in the work of renovation or vivification, all the
seeds of holiness are introduced: the whole man is purified as Christ is pure.
The common gifts of the Spirit are bestowed many times singly, and apart one
from the other: but special sanctifying graces are planted together. This I lay
down, that you may not deceive yourselves in this matter, by thinking Christ is
in you, when you are strangers unto him. There is great proness in us to
mistake upon this account; and to flatter our selves in this case: for some
common workings upon the heart, to conclude that saving grace is planted in the
heart. And therefore mind what I say, to prevent this self-cozenage; that where
a person is cleansed savingly, and effectually, there is an universal
purification of the whole man; and all the graces, in the seed of them, are
infused together. As all old things pass away, so every thing is made new, 2
Cor. 5.17. The understanding is renewed with saving knowledge of the mind of
God; and the will is brought into a blessed subjection to the will of God; the
conscience is furnished anew with tenderness and faithfulness: the affections
are renewed by being turned into their right channel, and pointed upon their
right objects: love and delight upon God, and hatred and sorrow toward sin;
and what is displeasing unto the Lord: the heart is principled anew, with
sincerity and singleness; and truth put into the inward parts: the memory is
made a treasury and storehouse of good things; and the body is fitted to be
subservient unto the soul, in ways of holiness. Thus I might run over the
several branches of this work. There is vigor and activity put into the soul,
to do the will of God commanding; and patience to suffer, and be contented
under the will of God disposing: there is the grace of moderation, to guide in
prosperity; and the grace of faith, to support under affliction and trouble:
and the man is prepared and fitted unto every good word and work, 1 These. 5.23.
And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God, your whole
soul, and spirit, and body be preserved blameless, unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Mark it Sirs, the work of sanctification is a very extensive and
diffusive work; it leaveneth the whole man, both the inserior and superior
faculties of the soul; the animal and the rational powers; and the body
likewise. So that it is not some slight trouble upon the conscience for sin, or
a little touch upon the affections, or inclinations toward the Kingdom of God,
that will evidence you to be sanctified; for sanctification ingageth the whole
man in an holy compliance with the ways of holiness, and the interest of
Jesus. As a partial repentance, in the exercise of it, which strikes at some
sins only, and leaves a man in the allowance of others, is but a feigned
repentance: so partial workings upon the heart, are but common workings; they
will not amount to saving grace, Jer. 3.10. When Christ enters by his Spirit
into any of the children of men, he does take possession of them wholly, and
set up his residence in every part and faculty.

3. In this work of the entrance of the Spirit into to a man's soul, whereupon
Christ is said to be in him, and to dwell with him, and possession is taken for
his use and service; the soul of that man is altogether passive. My meaning is
this, It is not in the power of any person upon the earth to plant grace in his
own soul, or to confer the habits of holiness upon himself: nor does he
contribute any active assistance in the performance of it; but is wholly
wrought upon by the mighty power of God, and the effectual operation of the
holy Ghost. We are apt to imagine, that it is in our own power to make a saving
change within our selves: that we can convert and turn to God at any time, and
repent when we please. As Luther said (in point of merit) there is a Pope in
every man's belly: so may I say in this case, there is a tang of Pelagianism in
every man's heart: and hence it is they take encouragement to procrastinate, and
delay, in the matters of salvation, they think they can repent when they will;
if it be but upon their deathbed. But Sirs, it must be a day of power that
makes you willing: A as, if God should give you up unto your selves, you would
perish for ever in your unregeneracy. The planting grace in the heart is a
turning the course of corrupted nature; it is as a quickening the dead: it is a
creating and infusing of how principles into a man; Opus hoc conversionis sive
duobus effici non potest: Uno a quo fit, altero in quo fit. Deus est ^^tor
sal^^is, liberum arbitrium tantum capax. Bern.

Observetur, in primo actu veluntatis, qui procedit a gratia praeveniente,
voluntatem esse motam, non moventem. Aquin. prima secundae q. 111.


of which there is nothing in us by nature, but a contrariety and repugnancy
thereunto. Ephesians. 2.5. Even when we were dead in sins, he has quickened us
together with Christ. And v. 10. For we are his workmanship created in Christ
Jesus unto good works. So that it is not man's free will, but God's free grace
and his infinite power, by which it is wholly wrought: and to him alone does
belong the glory of it.

4. Although we are wholly passive in this work of regeneration, or planting
grace into our hearts, (whereby Christ enters into, and takes possession of
us) and we contribute no manner of active affistance therein: yet there is
something required at our hands, in order to the attainment of this grace; and
that we may be made partakers thereof. This is well to be noted, that it may
prevent our abuse of this doctrine, and that we may not turn the grace of God
into negligence, and slothfulness. For will sinners be apt to argue thus: if it
be God alone by his infinite power who can imprint grace upon our hearts, and
this he does without our concurrent ass^stance; then we may fit still, and let
the Lord perform his own work; if he please to convert and sanctify us, we
shall be converted; and if not, all our endeavors are to no purpose. But Sirs,
this is to pervert the grace of the covenant; God forbid, there should be such
cursed inferences drawn from this excellent doctrine: although it tends to
advance and magnify the free grace and power of God, yet it gives no manner of
encouragement to the sloth and carelessne's of men. For though we are not
active in the planting grace into our souls, yet there is something expected at
our hands, in order to the a tainment thereof. Although we cannot convert our
selves, yet we are to wait upon God, that we may be converted by him: and are
to attend upon the means which he has appointed; and wherein he is wont, to
meet the souls that seek him. Although we cannot cleanse and sanctify our own
spirits, yet we are diligently to search the Scriptures, and to press arguments
upon our selves from the Scriptures, and to give constant attendance upon God
in his Ordinances, which are the special instruments he is wont to make use of,
whereby to convey the spirit of sanctification. S^bordinata non sunt opponenda,
sed componenda. Auditio hominis irregeniti etsi conversionem non inchoat; Est
camen ordmarium requisitum quod conversionem ordinariam a^tecedit; tanquam
quaedam ad eam nondum existentem praeparatio. Wendel. Syst. majus.
And this is none other, then what God looks for at our hands, Ezekiel. 36. v.
26. compared with v. 37. A new heart also I will give you, and a new spirit I
will put within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh,
and I will give you an heart of flesh. But then v. 37. Thus says the Lord God,
I will yet for this be enquired of, by the house of Israel, that I may do it
for them. Though we cannot mortify and subdue our own corruptions; yet we
should reason the case with our selves, and be much in expostulation with our
own hearts; why we should be so vile and foolish, as to serve base lusts and
corruptions, and to turn our backs upon the Lord? and though we cannot put the
principles of holiness into our own souls; yet we must follow after God by
prayer and supplication, that he may graciously send forth the holy Ghost to
plant them in us. And this seems to be one of the great ends of God, in
laying his commandments upon us, though we have no strength or ability to the
performance of them; that we might turn the commandment into prayer, and be
earnest with him to work in us, what he requires to be within us, Jer. 31.18.
Turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou art the Lord my God, Psalm. 51.6,
7, 10. Behold thou defirest truth in the inward parts, and in the hidden parts
thou shall make me to know wisdom. Create in me a clean heart O God, and renew
a right spirit within me. It is just for all the world in the case of a private
man or woman, as it is in the work of a Minister: It is not within the power of
the most excellent Preacher in the earth to convert one soul; but it should be
his care to preach such heart-searching truths, and to press upon sinners such
awakening considerations, in season, and out of season, as may have a tendency
toward conversion: to instruct in meekness them that oppose themselves, not as
it he could give them repentance, but if peradventure in the use of the means
God may give them repentance, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. So it is with sinners
themselves; they cannot bring spiritual life into their own souls; yet they may
wait upon God in the duties which he has required, and be earnest with the
Lord to speak the word that their souls may live in his sight. As we are to
serve God with grace, or in the exercise of grace, when it is bestowed; so we
are to seek unto him for grace, that it may be conferred. And pray mind it
Christians, this will be enough to stop the mouths of impenitent sinners, and
render their plea, of inability to convert themselves, invalid. Why thou sinful
wretch, who thus cavillest against the Lord, have thou duly and diligently set
upon the discharge of that work, which God calls for in order to conversion?
That is a notable acknowledgment, Dan. 9.13. We made not our prayer before the
Lord our God, that we might turn from our iniquity, and understand thy truth.
If Daniel had only confessed that they had not turned from iniquity, might
some captious sinner have been apt to say, alas we had no power, we were not
able to turn of our selves; yea, but says that holy man, we have neglected the
means which God has appointed to turn us; so put it home to thy conscience,
have thou not resisted the Spirit whereby God has many times striven with
thee? Have thou not neglected to study the word, or restrained prayer before
the Lord, wherein peradventure he might have been found by thee? Thus I might
instance in other particulars, but I proceed?

5. These principles of grace infused into the soul, in the work of
Regeneration; or this image of God restored upon the soul by the Spirit, in the
day of conversion, may be called Christ in us; and the Lord Jesus may be said
thereby to dwell with us; and that upon a fourfold account especially. Because
1. This grace is derived upon the soul, out of the fullness of Christ. 2. Hereby
we are made conformable unto Christ. 3. The Holy Ghost implanting it, does act
in Christ's name. 4. Hereby we become his servants, and possession is taken of
us to his use.


1. It may be called Christ in us, because the habits of grace infused into the
soul are derived upon us out of Christ's fullness. The whole stock of grace was
put into the hands of the Mediator, and from thence it is communicated unto
Gods chosen people. When the Lord Jesus was anointed with the Spirit without
measure, it was put into his hands as into a common Storehouse, or Magazine,
that from thence the Elect of God might be furnished. It was put into him as
into a fountain, that out of that fountain our vessels might be filled. It
pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell, Col. ^.19. And out of
his fullness we all receive, and that grace for grace, John 1.16. And therefore
it is called, The Law of the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.2.
It is in him originally, in us derivatively, being imparted to us from him.

2. Hereby Christ may be said to dwell in us, because grace does render a man
conformable to Christ. In the work of Regeneration our natures are fashioned
according to his nature. As there is an answerableness between a Copy and the
Orignal from whence it is transcribed; there is line for line, and sentence for
sentence, word for word, and letter for letter: so take the humane nature of
Jesus Christ, as he was anointed by the Holy Ghost, and the nature of a Person
sanctified; and there is a suitableness between them: there is love for love,
and joy for joy, and hatred for hatred; they have the mind of Christ, and the
meekness of Christ, and the long-suffering, and compassion, and gentleness of
Christ, and the like. Therefore they are said to purify themselves as he is
pure, 1 John 3.3.

3. By the grace of Regeneration, the Lord Christ is said to take up his abode
in us, because the Holy Ghost in that work does act in his name: as purchased
by Christ, and receiving commission from him, and being sent by virtue of his
Prayer and Intercession, John 16.16. I will pray the Father, and he shall give
you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever; even the Spirit of
truth, whom the world cannot receive. In the transactions of the everlasting
Covenant, our Lord Jesus undertook to sanctify, and comfort, and to quicken
and stablish his people; and by the Spirit of truth he does accomplish that
undertaking. By his death the Spirit was purchased, and in his name he is sent.

4. The grace of Regeneration may be styled Christ dwelling in us, from the
tendency of it; which is to bring sinners in subjection to the Government of
Christ, and to make them ready to obey the Laws of Christ. Hereby we become his
Servants, and possession is taken of us to his use and behoof: that we may
cleave unto him, and be followers of him, Col. 3.24. For ye serve the Lord
Christ, Mat. 19.28. Ye that have followed me in the Regeneration, etc. that is,
in your regenerate condition, in the exercise of that grace, which was bestowed
upon you in your New Birth; for so it may be well understood. The grace of
Regeneration plucketh sinners out of the Kingdom of Satan, and seizes on them
for the service of Christ, carries us out to him, and makes us obedient to
his Laws and Dominion. This may suffice to be spoken to the first branch of
that Union, which is between Christ and Believers; or the first sort of
Conjunction betwixt them.

2. There is a legal Conjunction and oneness thereupon arising from a Believers
reception of Christ, closing with him, and getting into him. Such an Union as
there is between the principal Debtor and the Surety, who has paid the debt
for him, and made over that payment unto him. The Law reckons them as one:
what payment the Surety has made for the Debtor in his name, and firmly made
over unto him, the Law accounts it as if the Debtor himself had paid it; and
discharges him thereupon, as if it had been his own personal Act and Deed:
because of that intimate relation, or oneness, that is betwixt them in the
estimation of the Law. Such an union there is between Christ and his people;
and therefore we call it a legal union, because it has a special reference
unto the Law of God, which acquitteth the person thus united to Christ, by
virtue of the sufferings and satisfaction of Jesus Christ; as fully and firmly,
as if the party himself had suffered and satisfied. And likewise we call it a
legal union, because of the analogy it bears unto the proceedings of Law in
Courts of Judicature amongst men. The bond of this union is a saving faith,
whereby Believers receive Christ, and take hold on him. As by the Spirit of
Regeneration Christ does take hold of their souls; so by a living faith of the
operation of the Spirit, they are enabled to take hold of the Lord Jesus: and
so they are compacted and knit together. You know faith is set forth by such
expressions, a receiving of Christ, and taking hold of him, John 1.12. But to
as many as received him, to them he gave power to be the sons of God; even to
them that believe on his name. Mark it, we receive Jesus Christ, and take him
home to our selves, by believing on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. As under
the Law, when a man q. d. ran for refuge and protection to the Altar, he was
wont to lay hold upon the horns of the Altar: so by faith a sinner betaketh
himself for shelter and security unto Christ, and lays hold upon Christ, Heb.
6.18. That we might have strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay
hold on the hope set before us, We who to flee from deserved wrath, have taken
our course toward Jesus; in hope to get the Salvation offered to us in him.
Dicks. in loc.
that is, upon Jesus Christ the object of our hope, and confidence; who is set
before us in the Gospel, as the person in whom we are to trust; and upon whom
to rely and place our hope. By faith we lay hold upon him: and by this laying
hold on Christ a Believer is joined unto Christ, and made one with him. By
faith we are in him, and put on his righteousness, Phil. 3.9. That I may be
found in him, not having mine own righteousness which is of the Law, but that
which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by
faith. It is of God] he provided it for us: and it is made over to us, and
becomes ours by faith in the Mediator. This is the Second Branch of the mutual
conjunction between Christ and a Believer, and the union thereupon: the bond
whereof is faith in Christ. Concerning which I will propose only these four
things to your serious perusal, and meditations.

1. That the Holy Ghost in the writings of the Scriptures, does distinctly
speak of a fourfold faith.

There is 1. An Historical Faith. 2. A Temporal Faith. 3. A Faith of Miracles.
4. A saving and justifying faith in Christ, which is the bond of our union with
the Lord Jesus.
As this is an ordinary School-distinction, so it is a Scripture-distinction
which has its warrant from the word, and its foundation in the word of God.

1. There is an Historical Faith, whereby we believe the Scriptures, and the
matters therein contained to be Divine Truths, and to have proceeded from God,
This is by some called a dogmatical faith.
such a faith the Apostle supposed to have been in Agrippa, in respect to the
writings of the Old Testament, Acts 26.27. King Agrippa, believe thou the
Prophets? I know that thou believe, q.d. I am confident thou art persuaded of
the truth of those things. Agrippa being a Jew, and always conversant in Judea,
could not be ignorant of the Scriptures; and Paul takes it for granted, that he
who owned their Original to be of God, and that in them was discovered nothing
but the truths of God. I know that thou believe, I am well assured thou
dare not deny their Divine Authority. This we call an Historical Faith,
because it assenteth to the truth of the History of the Bible, as it is a
Narrative of things done, and contains Predictions of things to be done: as
it comprehends matters of fact mentioned to be performed, Doctrines asserted,
Prophesies and Promises to be fulfilled, and the like. And pray mark it Sirs,
this faith is diversifyed according to the different testimony on which it is
bottomed. Quia testes, quibus fidem adhibemus, ex lege and ordine communi, sunt
homines vel Deus: idcirco sicut testimonium sic etiam fides distinguitur in
humanam and divinam, prout nititur testimonio vel humano vel divino. Ames. de
fid. divin. verit.
If it be built upon Education, or Custom, the Opinions of Learned men, or the
Traditions of our Fathers, and of the Church, and the like humane evidence;
then it cannot amount no higher than to an humane faith. And it is to befeared,
that the faith of the generality of people called Christians, is of this sort
only. They believe the Christian Religion to be the true Religion, and the
Bible to contain the word of God. Why? Because all their forefathers were of
that Religion, and they were bred and brought up in that way; such Ministers
have told them so, and they see many wise men are of that mind. They have the
same grounds for their belief, as Mahometans and other Idolaters have for
theirs. And, as one well observes, these are Christians rather by chance than
by choice. If their lot had fallen amongst Heathens, and worshippers of stocks
and stones, for the same reasons they would have been of their Religion; they
would have opposed the Gospel upon the very same grounds, that now they embrace
it. Divine truths may be believed by a mere humane faith, if the testimony be
humane, upon which they are believed. It being an impossibility that the assent
to the matters of faith should rise higher, or stand firmer, than the assent to
the testimony, upon which those things are believed.

My assent to the object believed, is according to my assent to the medium on
which I believe it. Stillingf. Rational account. p. 112.


A divine faith must be built upon a divinetestimony: when a man does believe
the word of God, from those divine Marks and Characters which are stamped upon
it; from that mighty and supernatural efficacy which it has, whereby God does
bear witness unto his word. Thus the Apostle observes touching the
Thessalonians, that they received divine truths upon divine testimony; they
received it as the lord of God, for it came to them not in word only, but in
power, and in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance, 1 These. 1.5. i. e. It had
such a powerful influence upon their hearts and consciences, that thereby they
were assured it was of God.

2. There is a Temporary faith, which goes a step further than the former.
When the judgment is not only convinced of the divine original and authority
of the Scriptures: but those convictions work in some measure upon the
affections, that they are taken with the goodness and excellency of them. When
the heart is carried out in a kind of love and liking to the Person revealing,
and the Doctrines revealed; and there are some degrees of inclination toward a
closure with those Doctrines: only they are raised in them but for a fit,
whist they are in a good mood (as we say) and it endures but for a time, it
cannot abide the trial; when any great difficulties attend their obedience unto
the word, then they cast it off: And for this reason it is called a temporary
faith. Such a faith you meet with in some of the followers of Christ, whom yet
he durst not trust; for he knew they were but hypocrites, though now they
followed him, yet shortly they would set against him: when the Scene was
altered, they would betray him, and of false friends become his professed
enemies, John 2.23, 24. Many believed in his name, when they saw the Miracles
which he did: Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he knew all men.
Such was the faith of those others mentioned as his Disciples, John 6.66. From
that time many of his Disciples went back, and walked no more with him. And
therefore it is observable what our Savior spoke to the Jews that believed on
him, John 8.31. If ye continue in my word, then are ye ^^y Disciples indeed.
Then are ye my Disciples] that is, then it will be evident that you are; then
you will give undeniable proof ^es tum demum dicunt^^ fieri, cum inci piunt
patefieri.
that your faith is of the right kind, else you may (...) gracious habits, the
Lord Jesus takes hold on their souls: and by putting forth this habit into act
and exercise, they receive and take hold of the Lord Jesus, Col. 2.6. As ye
have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him, i. e. as you
have believed on him, and embraced or received him by believing. That is the
first thing I would commend unto you, viz. this Scripture distinction of the
sorts of faith.

2. This justifying faith has the Lord Jesut Christ himself, for the special
immediate object, with whom it closes; and upon whom it is exercised. It is
Christ himself who is primarily tendered in the offers of the Gospel, and
therefore true faith, of this fort, goes forth unto him. The special
consideration under which a Believer goes forth to Christ, in the actings of
faith for justification, it is as dying and satisfying the justice of God: (and
therefore usually called faith in his blood) and the great encouragement
whereupon a Believer is emboldened to act his faith, is the tender of the
Gospel, and the promises thereof: but it is Christ himself which is the
special, immediate object, upon which faith as justifying is acted, and with
whom it closes. The sinner being encouraged by the promise, does embrace
Christ in the promise. Hence it is commonly styled faith in Christ, and a
believing on the Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 20.21. I have kept back nothing that
was profitable unto you, etc. testifying both to the Jews and also the Greeks,
repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Mark it, as
repentance has God for its ultimate object, it is a turning from sin, and
returning unto God; even unto him: so faith has Christ for its special object.
The great fundamental act of faith, whereupon finners are justified, is
conversant about Christ, Act. 26.18. That they may receive forgiveness of sins,
and an inheritance amongst them that are sanctified, by faith that is in me;
(...): by faith that is acted upon me, [ upon Jesus, for they are his words] It
is by faith exerted and acted upon him, that forgiveness of sins is conveyed:
Unto that it seems to relate, and the other words to come in as a
parenthesis; as if it had been, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, by
faith that is in me; and (also) an inheritance amongst them that are
sanctified. It has sometimes appeared as strange to me, to meet with
descriptions of the nature of justifying faith, without so much as the mention
of Jesus Christ, the object upon whom it is acted. See the process of the
workings of the heart of S. Paul in believing; and how he taught in the
Churches of Christ. First he was deadned as to expectation of life from the
Law, the first Covenant: and then he addresseth himself for justification unto
Christ, by believing on him, who is the only Mediator of the second Covenant.
That Text is very full, and worthy to be wrote on our hearts in letters of gold,
and as with the pen of a diamond, Gal. 2.16. Knowing that a man is not
justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ; even we
have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of
Christ, and not by the works of the Law: for by the works of the law shall no
flesh be justified.

3. The ultimate or completing act of this justifying faith, whereby it
becomes such, is a fiducial resting or relying upon Christ, for righteousness
and acceptance with the Lord: and for all the spiritual benefits that follow
thereupon. That which I aim at is this; That justifying faith is not absolved
and completed, by a bare assent of the understanding; but it does evidently
include an act of the heart. With the heart man believes unto righteousness,
Romans 10.10. If thou believe with all thine heart, Acts 8.37. And the special
act of the heart is a reliance upon Christ: leaving a man's soul in his hands,
upon the articles of the Covenant of grace: leaning upon his merits for
acceptance with God: receiving him as he is offered to sinners in the Gospel;
and trusting in him, for acceptance and salvation. Thus we have it explained,
Ephesians. 1.12, 13. That we should be to the praise of his glory, who first trusted
in Christ. In whom also ye trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the
Gospel of your salvation: in whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed
with that holy spirit of promise This is the faith both of Jew and Gentiles: We
first believed, unto whom the word of salvation was first spoken; and
afterward ye also believed in Christ. What is this believing? Why, it is a
trusting in Christ. First the soul hears the word of salvation promised in
Christ, and assenteth to the truth of that word, and thereupon is persuaded to
make his actual application unto Christ, and trusts in him for salvation,
Psalm. 2.12. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way: when
his wrath is kindled but a little; blessed are all they that put their trust in
him: q. d. There is no way of avoiding destruction from Christ, but by
believing in him, resting upon him* they are the blessed of the Lord that put
their trust in him. Sed multum inter est, utruns ^^isque credat ipsum esse
Christum, and utrum credat in Christum. Nam ipsum esse Christum and daemones
crediderunt: Ille enim credit in Christum qui and sperat in Christum and
diligit Christum. Aug.
Indeed there are many acts of the soul required unto this faith, and comprised
therein. If a man believe in Christ he must have some competent knowledge of
the nature of Christ, and his mediatory office, and satisfaction: there must be
a firm and lively assent to the truth of the Gospel; a sense of the evil of
sin; and the inability of all other means besides the righteousness of Christ,
to recover the sinner out of his lost condition: But now a fiducial reliance
upon Christ for salvation, is the last completing act. For when the sinner
being driven from all other refuges whatsoever, does not only hunger and thirst
after the righteousness of Christ, but actually renounceth every thing for him,
and embraces him as his Savior; casting his soul, and all his spiritual
concernments into Christ's hands; and resting upon him alone for salvation as
he is offered in the Gospel, this is a justifying and saving faith. As a
self-justiciary relieth upon his own righteousness; so a true believer r^steth
upon Christ's righteousness. This is set forth by coming unto Christ, Mat.
11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest. Come unto me, that is, believe in me, place your hope and confidence
in my righteousness. The Lord Jesus in the Gospel is set forth as a
propitiation; he was sent to be the Redeemer of lost sinners: Now when a person
being affected with his lost estate, sensible of the wrath of God, and the
insupportableness of it, and laboring under the burden of sin, does come unto
Christ as such, and make use of him to that end: namely to be his Redeemer, and
does rest upon him to make atonement for his soul; this is to believe with a
justifying faith, Joh. 6.35. He that comes unto me shall never hunger, and he
that believes in me shall never thirst. It is a looking unto Christ alone, for
redemption and deliverance upon his account. As the brazen Serpent was an
eminent type of the Lord Jesus, Number. 21.8, 9. so the Israelites looking up
thereunto, did signify our faith in Jesus, by whom our diseases are healed.
When a poor sinner is stung in his conscience with the fiery Serpent of the
guilt of sin, and being filled with dread in apprehension of the sad
consequents of it, does look up unto Christ, as held forth upon the pole of the
Gospel to be a Savior, and does rest upon him; expecting redemption only
through his blood; here are the workings of a justifying faith, Joh. 3.14, 15.
As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man
be lifted up: [by dying on the Cross; or by the publication and tender of his
death and righteousness in the Gospel] That whosoever believes in him should
not perish, but have eternal life. This is the third particular which I
intended to commend to you, for opening the nature of faith, which is the bond
of our union with Jesus Christ.

4. Wherever, and in what soul soever, there is this fiducial reliance upon
Christ, and his righteousness, in a saving way; there is also, as a necessary
companion thereof, an universal subjection to the will of Christ, and a ready
submission to his government. This I add, in the last place, to prevent (if it
be possible) the abuse of this doctrine by carnal hearts; and to stop the mouth
of those clamours, which are raised by some against it, and the aspersions
which they cast upon this evangelical truth; as if it were not a doctrine
according to godliness. Will such be ready to say, This doctrine will imbolden
sinners in their presumption, and vain confidence. If to believe savingly on
Christ, be to rest on him for salvation, who will not think that be does
believe? What carnal wretch will not say, that he does rely upon Christ? But
mind it Sirs, it is not a thinking or saying he does rely upon Christ, will
give a man an interest in him; but when he does rest upon him indeed, as he is
propounded for a Savior in the Gospel. And such a faith will purify the
heart, and cause the person believing to bring forth fruits of holiness, in the
conversation. Else it will be an evidence that he does but pretend thereunto,
and does not rest upon Christ in truth. For although it be not the work faith
[or faith as it is a spiritual act and work] not the works of faith, that
justify a sinner in the sight of God: yet that faith which gives him a title
to the righteousness of the Mediator; by whom alone he can be justified, must
be an operative and working faith; such as purges the conscience from dead
works, and brings the soul into subjection unto Christ's Laws, and
Government. To this purpose the words of the Apostle James are observable, Cap.
2.14. What does it profit my brethren, if a man say he has faith, and have not
works? can faith save him? It is not said, though he have faith and have not
works; for where there is faith in the heart, there will be new obedience in
the life: but if he say that he has it, if he be a pretender to it; can such a
dead, lifeless, pretended faith save him? Christ is held forth in the Gospel,
not only as a Redeemer, but as a Lord and a Lawgiver: and these are inseparably
connected and knit together. He that presumes to divide between what God has
joined together; that will accept of Jesus as a Savior, but not as a
Sovereign, does not indeed receive the Christ of God, but an idol stamed by his
own heart. Whom he does save, he will rule and govern, Heb. 5.9. He became the
Anthor of eternal salvation, unto all them that obeyed him. I shall not need to
trouble you with controversal points, as whether faith, qua justifying [under
that very notion or consideration] does receive Christ as a Lord? This is
acknowledged on both hands, that the faith which justifies does receive Christ
in all his offices, as a Prophet to instruct and guide us in the ways of God; as
a King, to exercise, rule, and dominion over us; and as a Priest, to reconci^e
and make intercession for us. If we come to Christ for salvation, we must take
his yoke upon us, Mat. 11.28, 29. For a dividing faith is a false hypocritical
faith, to whom Christ gives remission of sins, he gives repentance also. He
saves us by the washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost:
So that if we receive him as a Savior, we must have him as a Sanctifier; for
he saves by sanctifying, and conducteth sinners to eternal peace, by guiding
their feet in the ways of peace.

Thus I have ended together, the mystical union betwixt believers and the Lord
Jesus (which I mainly drove at, and intend, when I shall speak of it afterward
as the foundation of our communion with Christ, and receivings from him:) as
also the sixth Proposition laid down to open the manner of the Conjunction
between Christ and his people, and their oneness thereupon. There are two
Propositions more yet behind, which I come now to insist upon, that I may
finish my answer to the third General Head.

7. Propos. 7. From this mystical union of a Believer with Christ, or being
ingraffed into Christ, there does flow another sort of union between them,
whereof love is the bond: which may be well improved as an evidence of the
former, and it is usually called a moral union. Such an oneness as there is
between the dearest friends, whose hearts are linked together in the bond of
amity, and mutual affection. We say sometimes of intimate friends, they are so
nearly conjoined as if they were but one; as if the same soul did animate both
in their bodies. Amor non est desiderium aut appetitus, ut ab omnibus bactenus
traditum: Nam cum potimur amata re, non manet appetitus. Est igitur affectus,
quo cum re amata aut animur, aut unionem perpetuamus. Scalig. Exerc. 301.

Anima est ubi amat, potius quam ubi animat.


Deuteronomy. 13.6. Thy friend, which is as thine own soul. So are the Lord Jesus and
his peculiar people knit together. He has a very dear and inflamed affection
to them. He loves them that love him, Prove. 8.17. His delights are with the
sons of men, Prove. 8.31. And on the other hand, he is in their hearts, so as to
live and die together. It is the greatest pleasure believers have in the world,
to be contemplating the excellencies of Christ, and conversing with him: it is
that which does yield them the most solid content and satisfaction; and they
are still hungry and thirsting after the further enjoyment of him: as if they
could never have enough of fellowship and society with him, John 21.17. Peter
was grieved, because he said to him the third time, love thou me? And he said
unto him, Lord thou know all things, thou know that I love thee. He could
hardly bear it, to have his love to Christ called in question. This union is
notably set forth in the Song of Solomon: You have many passages for it, I will
transcribe a few of them. See the workings of their hearts toward Christ, Cap.
2.3, 4, 5.6, 7. As the apple tree amongst the trees of the Wood, so is my
bel^ved amongst the sons: I sat under his shadow with great delight, and his
fruit was sweet to my taste. He brought me to the banqueting house, and his
banner over me was love. Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples, for I am
sick of love. His left hand is under my head, and his right hand does embrace
me. I charge you O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the Hinds of
the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love till he please: as if the
Church had said, O take heed of displeasing the Lord Jesus; there is nothing
will cut me so deeply to the heart, as if you despise him, and sin against him.
He is the life of my life, and the strength of my soul; it is acquaintance with
him that puts sweetness into all my accommodations, they would be
comfortless comforts, were it not for Christ. I am never better then when I am
in communion with him. Again, cap. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. By night on my bed I sought
him when my soul loves, I sought him, but I found him not. I will rise now and
go about the City, in the streets, and in the broad ways, I will seek him whom
my soul loves; I sought him but I found him not. The watchmen that go about
the City found me, to whom I said, saw ye him whom my soul loves? It was but a
little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my soul loves, I held him
and would not let him go, till I had brought him into my Mothers house, and
into the Chamber of her that conceived me: as if the soul of a believer should
say, how much does my Spirit long after Christ? My thoughts are not only upon
him by day, but my meditation is concerning him in the night season. And if he
does hide his face, I have no rest in my Spirit: I make use of all means to
recover the light of his countenance; I pray, and seek, and cry, and watch. I
converse with this Christian touching the way to Christ, and I go to that
Minister, to direct me in following after him. I leave no stone unturned, no
means unassayed: And if I get but a glimpse of his favor, I think all my
endeavors well bestowed. O how welcome is he to my soul? With what unspeakable
rejoicing does it fill me? So that I can boast of Christ all the day long. How
careful am I to preserve my fellowship with him, that no clouds for the future
may interpose betwixt me and the beams of that Sun of righteousness? I might
dwell upon the passages of this nature in that book: I will but point you to
them. See the Churches as earnest pantings after Christ, as the Heart pants
after the waterbrooks, cap. 8.1, 2, 3, 4. And her description of him, and holy
exultation, upon the account of her interest in such a Lord and Husband, cap.
5.9, 10, 11, 15, Wherein the close of all is observable, v. 16. His mouth is
most sweet, yea, he is altogether lovely. This is my beloved, and this is my
friend, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, q. d. He is the object matter of my whole
affections; there is none in heaven but Christ, nor any thing upon the earth to
be loved and desired in comparison with him. He is most worthy to be beloved:
who cannot but admire such a gracious Redeemer? Do not wonder that my heart is
so set upon him, for he is altogether lovely. If you knew but Christ as well as
I, it would inflame your hearts in desires after him; it would even ravish your
Spirits in the contemplation of his beauty. Never is it possible for any to be
so blessed, as those who have him for their friend.

So upon the other hand, for the affection of Christ to believers; he has them
graven upon the palms of his hands, upon the very Tables of his heart, Cant.
2.14. O my dove, that art in the clefts of the rocks, in the secret places of
the stairs, let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy
voice, and thy countenance is comely, q. d. Thou that art despised amongst men,
but highly regarded in my sight preserved by my power and righteousness, which
is stable as the rock, that can never be removed: I have provided secure
fortifications to preserve thee, when thou art hunted and persecuted on every
hand: Come now, and let us converse together, for therein I take pleasure. Mark
it, nothing is so welcome to Jesus Christ, as the voice and countenance of his
Saints: If they do but chatter as a Crane or Swallow, Isa. 38.14.
it is as lovely Songs unto him: If they send but a sigh or a groan up to
heaven, it is a refreshment to his Spirit: Jer. 31.18, 20.
If they offer but a mite, it is a sweet oblation before him, because of the
love which he bears unto them. Whereas the incense of the wicked is but as
dung in his sight, and the best of their sacrifices, but as the cutting off a
dogs neck, or the offering of swines blood; that is, odious and abominable,
such as his soul hates. See another place to this purpose, Cap. 4.9. and so
forward. Thou have ravished my heart, my Sister, my Spouse: Thou have ravished
my heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck. How fair is thy
love, my Sister, my Spouse! How much better is thy love than wine, and the
smell of thine ointments than all spices! Thy lips O my Spouse, drop as the
honeycomb; honey and milk are under thy tongue, and the smell of thy garments
is like the smell of Lebanon. But I must forbear, only remember what was hinted
in the proposition, that this intimate love between believers and Christ, may
be well improved as an evidence of their ingrafture into Christ. This moral
union may be produced as a proof of the mystical union. For he that dwells in
love, dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John 4.16. And that it may be of use
to this end, our love to Christ, whereby we are knit to him morally, must have
these four properties.

It must be 1. A sincere love. 2. A serviceable active love. 3. A superlative
love. 4. A love of complacency and satisfaction.


1. It must be a sincere and single hearted affection, without dissimulation
and hypocrisy, when the heart of a Christian goes out after Christ himself,
and for himself; when our love to him is kindled by the contemplation of his
own innate worth and excellencies, and the spiritual blessings which he has
purchased. There may be a kind of love to Christ for the leaves sake, a
following after him for some outward advantage. When Religion is countenanced
to be amongst the servants of Christ, is a matter of honor and repute in the
eyes of men, it may help to advance a man's secular interest; and many come
after him moved by such considerations. But now the heart of a believer is
fixed upon Christ for himself, though nothing but frowns from men should follow
their cleaving unto him, although it were likely to bring disgrace and reproach
along with it, and to expose them to sorrows and sufferings upon every side;
yet their souls are resolved to have Christ, Id propter se expeti dicitur,
quod, quamvis habeat extra se commoda, sepositie quoque ill is ac remot is
placet. Sen de Benefic.
with all the encumbrances that attend the possession of him. Hereunto the
promise is made, Ephesians. 6.24. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus
Christ in sincerity, i.e. in simplicity and incorruptness, having a single aim
at the enjoyment of himself.

2. It must be a serviceable and active love, such as sets a man a doing to
advance the glory of Christ, by a cheerful obedience to his Commandments: that
makes him study, and contrive how to please the Lord Jesus: Such a love as
restrains from the evil of sin, whereby Christ is grieved and dishonored;
Such as constrains unto holiness, and causes a man to take delight and
pleasure in doing the will of Christ from the heart. The passion of love Sirs,
is an active passion, that will set the whole man a work to please the party
beloved: it will make him indefinite to all intents and purposes, to all sorts
of services, and nothing will seem burdensome upon that account, John 14.21. He
that has my Commandments, and keeps them (says our Savior) he it is that
loves me, 1 John 5.3. For this is the love of God that we keep his
Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous. The grace of love has a
facilitating virtue, it makes difficult things easy; and sweetens the whole
course of obedience. When a man has a dear affection for Christ, he will do
any thing, and suffer any thing for his sake: he will not be afraid to own him
in the face of the world, though it may cost him all that is dear to him
besides, 1 John 4.17, 18. Herein is love made perfect, that we may have
boldness in the day of judgment, that is, (as I take the meaning of the Apostle
to be) in the day of man's judgment; when we are called before men's tribunal
seats, for the profession of Christ; and required to give an account of our
faith in Christ: then we that are true believers will do it boldly, we are not
ashamed to own him for our Lord and Master. Why? Because we love him; and this
is the top of our love, to make us stick fast unto him in times of trial. Or
this is the perfection of our love, the putting it to its proper use; it was
one of the ends for which this grace was planted within us, that it might cause
us to abide with Christ, and not to shrink away from him when we are brought
before men's judgment seats. The latter clause of the 17. v. Because as he is,
so are we in this world, is rendered in the Syriack in the time past. Because as
he was, so are we in this world. As if the meaning were this. Why should not we
be bold to stand to the cause of Christ? If we suffer for him, it is but what
he did for our sakes: We are thereby rendered conformable unto him. He was a man
of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and shall we not willingly partake of
his sufferings? Vide Marian. in loc.
I am the rather confirmed in this interpretation, from the following words, v.
18. There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear, as if he had
said, if persons love Christ sincerely, (which is Evangelical perfection) if
they love him really, and in good earnest, they will not be terrified with the
threatenings of men: but they will acknowledge him for their Master, in the
midst of an adulterous and sinful generation; and though they should be dealt
with for it even as they dealt with Christ. Why? Because they dearly love him,
and that love keeps under their carnal fear, and causes them to go on with
courage amidst all oppositions. The Gnostics (whom as some think, the Apostle
here confutes) held, that Christians in danger might to save their lives deny
Christ outwardly: Provided that they owned him in their-hearts. To confute
which devilish opinion St. John asserts the necessity of confessing Jesus, v.
15. answerable to Matthew. 10.32, 33. And here he shows that denying Christ for
fear of death was utterly inconsistent with love to him.
For many waters cannot quench love, neither can the flonds drown it, Cant.
8.7. And therefore when Peter had denied his Master, once and again, for fear
of danger, what is the question that our Savior puts to him, after his
Resurrection? See Joh. 21.15, 16, 17. Simon Son of Jonas, love thou me more
than these? Simon Son of Jonas, love thou me? He said to him the third time,
Simon Son of Jonas, love thou me? as if Christ had said, haste thou not cause
to question the integrity of thy love toward me? Should not thy love have kept
thee from disowning thy Lord, even in the High-Priests-Hall, though in times of
danger? Is there not reason for thee to search into the reality of thy love?
where was it at that time, when thy carnal fear did so prevail?

3. That love of Christ, which will be evidential of our ingrafture into him,
must be a superlative love. When we give the Lord Jesus the top of our
affections, and the uppermost seat in our hearts: and place nothing above him,
or in competition with him. When persons plead that they love Christ (and it is
pity he should live, will some carnal people say, that does not love the Lord
Jesus) but they love the world better: they love the Son of God, but they have
more love for their lusts, and the pleasures of sin; this is indeed to reject
and despise him. For, Mat. 10.37. He that loves father or mother more than me,
is not worthy of me; and he that loves son or danghter more than me, is not
worthy of me. Luke 14.26. If any man come to me, and have not his father, and
mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea and his own life
also, he cannot be my disciple. If he does not hate them] that is, if he have
not a lesser affection for them, than for me; which in comparison with a
greater love is a kind of hatted: if he be not ready to cast them away, even
with detestation; and to trample them under his feet, when they come in
competition with Christ; as we are wont to do that which we hate, and abhor; he
cannot be my disciple, says our Savior. For a Believers love to Christ must
be a superlative love: so as to account all things but loss and dung for
Christ's sake, and to part with all things to win Christ. And to this purpose,
you must be much in studying the worth of Christ, and be careful to get an
insight into his excellency. For as in secular negotiations, men will never
part with a great price for a commodity, except they know the worth of that
commodity: so in spiritual affairs, you will never be willing to sustain any
great loss for Christ, unless you know the excellency of him. As your
apprehensions of Christ's worth are, such will be your readiness to venture and
lose for Christ's sake. Unless the Merchant had been acquainted with the
preciousness of the pearl, he would never have sold all that he had to buy it,
Mat. 13.45, 46.

4. It must be a love of complacency and satisfaction: when there is an holy
acquiescence of the soul in Christ, and a sweet contentment that arises from
the enjoyment of Christ: When it is the joy and rejoicing of a man's heart, to
be conversing with him. Amor est delectatio cordis alicujus ad aliquid, propter
desiderium in appetendo, and gaudium perfruendo: Per desiderium currens,
requiescens per gaudium.
Else when persons say they love Christ, but perhaps think not a serious
thought of him, from one end of the day to the other; seldom or never have him
in their meditations; care little for any spiritual intercourse with him, that
is but a pretended love. If a man love the Lord Jesus indeed, he will long
after converse with him; it will be as marrow and fatness to his soul to be in
his society, Psalm. 63.1, 2, 3, 8. O God thou art my God, early will I seek thee:
my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty
Land, where no water is, etc. And v. 8. My soul follows hard after thee. It
is love to Christ which makes Believers so prize the Ordinances, wherein they
are wont to meet with him: that is the reason, why they take it so heavily, to
be deprived of those privileges: and that they can hardly bear the
withdrawment of his presence, but their spirits are ready to sink within them.
See what effect it had upon the Spouse, Cant. 5.6. I opened to my beloved, but
he had withdrawn himself, and was gone: my soul failed when he spoke; that is,
when he gave forth his parting words: The Spouse, at first, was not ready to
open to Christ, and to give him entertainment, v. 3. Why then farewell, says
Jesus, I will wait no longer; seeing you so little regard me, I will be gone
immediately. O, then the soul raileth, this strikes the spirit dead, and there
is no quietness to be had, till Christ be found again, and entreated to return.
It is love to Christ, that makes it so pleasant a thing to a Believer, to
recount his perfections, and to reckon up the glorious things that he has
done. See what delight the Spouse takes in the enumeration of them, Cant.
5.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. So much for the seventh Proposition.

8. Propos. 8. The eighth and last Proposition is this. The mystical union of
Believers with Christ, and all the privileges and blessings which are the
consequents thereof, do originally flow from the merit of the death of the Lord
Jesus: which, in pursuance of the eternal Covenant between the Father and
himself, he suffered in their stead; and whereby he gave satisfaction to the
justice of God, in their behalf. To this end he undertook to be a Mediator, and
to die an accursed death in their room; and in the fullness of time he actually
performed it, that they in whose stead he stood might be gathered unto him, and
by the Spirit and faith might be made one with him. Upon the account of this
his standing in their stead, and transacting matters with the Father, for their
good and benefit, some speak of an eternal Union betwixt them. Say they, In the
eternal counsel of God for reconciling sinners unto himself, Christ engaged to
suffer as representing their persons, and so they are considered as one. This
we may call a judicial Union (as some) or a transcendental Union. But I will
not stand upon an enquiry into the fitness of these expressions. This I take to
be clear, from the Scriptures of truth; That the mystical Union of Believers
with Christ, wrought by the Spirit and faith (which is the matter we are
treating of) and until which they are dead in sins and trespasses, and under
the wrath of God as well as others; is a fruit of Christ's undertaking to die
for them, and actual performance of that undertaking. Haec transactio inter
Deum and Christum fuit praevia quaedam applicatio redemptionis and liberationis
nostrae ad sponsorem nostrum, and ad nos in ipso: Quae ad secundariam istam in
nobis peragendam, rationem habet cfficacis cajusdam exemplaris, ita ut illa fit
hujus repraesentatio, and haec illius virtute producatur. Ames. med.
That which I drive at is this. That the Lord Jesus did not enter himself into
an obligation to undergo the cursed death of the Cross, and in due time
actually undergo it, only that the elect of God might be saved if they should
get into him: but that they might be brought unto Christ, and ingraffed into
him, and so made partakers of salvation. You shall find that their gathering
unto Christ, and being implanted into him is mentioned as an effect of his
undertaking and suffering for them. This is notably set forth in that
Anti-Socinian Chapter (as I may call it) which has broken the teeth of such as
have been nibling at it, and out of which it is impossible for them, with all
their subtle devices, to extricate themselves. I mean, Isa. 53. v. 10, 11, 12.
Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief; when thou
shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed; he shall
prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. He
shall see of the travel of his soul, and be satisfied: by his knowledge shall
my righteous servant justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities.
Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the
spoil with the strong: because he has poured out his soul unto death; and he
was numbered with the transgressors: and he bare the sins of many, and made
intercession for transgressors. Mark, but how abundantly this point is
confirmed. Therefore shall Christ have a people gathered unto him, and a seed
to serve him: because he made his soul an offering for their sins. Upon that
very account, many shall be united to him, so as to be justified by him;
because he bare their iniquities. Therefore he shall divide the spoil with the
strong; because he poured out his soul unto death. How does Christ divide the
spoil with the strong? Why, when in the day of conversion he knittetn sinners
unto himself. As Satan the strong man armed has his company, that continue
finally impenitent in their wickedness: So Christ by his Spirit does gather a
company unto himself. And whence does this proceed? Why, it is the product of
the satisfaction which he made for them. Thus it shall be, because he bare the
sins of many. These are the trophies of the victory, that Christ got, by dying
the death of the cross. They are ingraffed into him, because he suffered for
them. Hence the grace of faith, which is the uniting grace, is said to be
attained through the righteousness of Christ. As it is acted upon Christ's
righteousness, so it was purchased thereby, and is given forth upon the account
thereof, 2 Pet. 1.1. To them that have obtained like precious faith with us,
through the righteousness of God and our Savior Jesus Christ.

This is the last Proposition. For the clearing whereof, and the point
asserted, I will take it asunder into five heads of observation.

1. Observe. That the eternal transactions of matters between God the Father
and our Lord Jesus Christ, in order to the redemption and deliverance of the
elect, are set forth in the Scriptures, under the notion of a Covenant, that
passed betwixt them, for the accomplishment of that redemption. As there is a
Covenant made with the souls of Believers in Christ; so there was a Covenant
from everlasting made with Christ: a kind of compact and agreement between the
Father and the Son; for the restoration of fallen sinners. This is
acknowledged by most, as to the matter and substance of the thing: and I think
we have it plainly eno^gh under that notion, and expression of a Covenaut,
Zech. 6.12, 13. Thus speaks the Lord of hosts, saying, Behold the man whose
name is the Branch, and he shall grow up out of his place: and he shall build
the temple of the Lord. Even he shall build the temple of the Lord, and he
shall bear the glory: and shall sit and rule upon his throne, and he shall be a
Priest upon his throne; and the counsel of peace shall be between them both.
The counsel of peace] that is, the transactions in order to making peace
betwixt an incensed God, and sinful men and women. Between whom shall this
counsel be? why, between them both, Jehovah the Lord of Hosts, and the man
whose name is the Branch; Jesus Christ who is to build the Church, and who is
appointed to be the Ruler and Governor of it. So I conceive it may be
understood. Or if you will have it rather to relate to the Kingly and Priestly
Offices of Christ, yet it will hold nevertheless, that there was a consultation
in heaven, for reconciling of the world: which Christ as King and Priest was to
b^ing into execution. As there was a counsel taken touching the creation of
man, between the persons in the blessed Trinity; Let us make man after our
image: so there was a consultation held concerning the restoration of mankind
out of their lapsed condition. Upon this account (as some observe) Christ is
called The Covenant, Isa. 49.8, 9. I will give thee for a Covenant of the
people, to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages.
That thou may say to the prisoners, Go forth; to them that are in darkness,
show your selves. Why for a Covenant? Because God's Covenant with Believers is
established in Christ; and there was a Covenant of Redemption made with Christ;
upon the terms whereof he is constituted to be a Redeemer: To say to the
prisoners, Go forth; to bring deliverance to the captives, and to proclaim the
year of release, or Jubilee, the acceptable year of the Lord, as it is, Isa.
61.1, 2.

See another Text to this purpose, Psalm. 89.28. My mercy will I keep for him
for evermore, and my Covenant shall stand fast with him. With whom? Why, with
the Lord Jesus Christ, of whom David was an eminent type: for so I apprehend it
must be interpreted, as of whom many passages in the Psalm are most clearly
verified; and to whom they may very pertinently, and appositely be referred;
And some passages there are, which caunot well be referred to any other. See v.
19. I have laid help upon one that is mighty. Agreeable to that of the Apostle,
He is able to save unto the uttermost, Heb. 7.25. I have exalted one chosen out
of the people. Which is the very title that is given to the Son of God. Behold
my servant whom I uphold, mine elect [or chosen one] in whom my soul
delights, Isa. 42.1. Again v. 20. I have found David my servant. Christ is
o^en called by that name, as being the most dearly beloved of God; A (...)
Dilectus, fit (...) qu. Amabilis.
proceeding from the loins of David, according to the flesh; and in a special
manner typified by David, both as King and Prophet of his Church, Jer. 30.9.
Hos. 3.5. Ezekiel. 34.23. It follows there, With my holy oil have I anointed
him. Answerable to that of Christ, Luke 4 18. The spirit of the Lord is upon
me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor. Again v. 27.
I will make him my first born, higher than the Kings of the earth. Compare it
with Heb. 1.6. Col. 1.15. And that I may not make too long a stay upon this
matter, see v. 29. His seed will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as
the days of heaven. Quis non videt porro illud quod dicitur in hoc versu [viz.
v. 29.] non posse esse verum, nisi ad spirituale Christi regnum referatur?
Corporalis enim successio in stirpe Davidis, jamdudum cum regno desecit.
Simeon, de Muis. in loc.
Compared with Dan. 7.13, 14. Now says God, I have made a Covenant with him:
not only a Covenant of grace with the Saints in him, but a Covenant of
redemption (as we call it for distinctions sake) with him: and it shall be an
everlasting Covenant, which shall not be cancelled or disanulled, it shall stand
fast with him. That Is the first thing to be observed.

2. In this Covenant and compact between the Father and Christ, for the
redemption of sinners; the Lord Jesus undertook to put himself under the Law,
and to bear the curse of the Law: to give up himself unto death, and so to
carry on their salvation. In the consultation between them, it was found, that
nothing else could satisfy for the wrong done by sin; and therefore there was
no other way to deliver the sinners, but by the death of Christ. God the Father
promised unto the Son, That if by his death satisfaction were made, then the
sinners should be delivered, they should be put into Christ's hands to be saved
upon those terms: And our Lord Jesus closed with this proposal, he accepted the
offer, and undertook to make satisfaction, by dying and suffering. We have both
the branches of that everlasting Covenant in the Scriptures. 1. God's promise
of salvation, made to Christ, in the behalf of his children, Tit. 1.2. In hope
of eternal life, which God, that cannot lie, promised before the world began.
Mark it, All the promises made to Believers, are made in time; but here is a
promise of salvation from eternity: And unto whom could that be made, but unto
Christ, for such as should believe in him? 2. Christ's undertaking to satisfy
divine justice, by humbling himself unto the death: in that famous place, Heb.
10.5, 6, 7. quoted out of Psalm. 40. Wherefore when he comes into the world, he
says, sacrifice and offering thou would not, but a body thou have prepared
me: In burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin, thou had no pleasure: Then I
said, Lo I come (in the volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy will,
O God. This was the way, wherein the Father would have salvation wrought out,
for lost sinners: and Christ takes it upon himself to accomplish the will of
God in that behalf. This is the second Observation.

3. Observe in the next place, That our Lord Jesus, in dying and satisfying the
justice of God, for the sins of Believers according to what he had undertaken,
did not only die and suffer for their good and benefit; but he died in their
stead, and suffered in their room; that is; he underwent that punishment, which
by the rigor of the Law they should have undergone; and took upon himself that
curse, which in the strictness of justice would have fallen down upon their
heads. Therefore it is said, The Lord laid their iniquities upon him, Isa.
53.6. All the sins of God's elect were made to meet together, and laid upon his
shoulders to bear, Romans 5.6, 8. In due time Christ died for the ungodly. And,
whilst we were sinners Christ died for us; that is, in our stead and room. We
deserved to die, and God graciously spared us, and put his own Son to death in
our stead, Gal. 2.20. He loved me, and gave himself for me.

4. To bring this home to our purpose, observe, That the end of Christ's
undertaking thus to die, and of his actual dying in the stead and behalf of
lost sinners, was that in due time they might be knit and united unto him; and
so partake of the salvation which he purchased for them. So that the mystical
Union of Believers with Christ, is a fruit of the fatisfaction and merit of his
death for them, 2 Cor. 5.21. He was made to be sin for us; who knew no sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Therefore he died for
us, that we might be implanted into him; and so made righteous on his account.
And therefore mark it Sirs, Though the elect of God have no right or title to
any laving mercy, till they are one with Christ: yet he has a right to this
Union for them; and to all other blessings, which are the concomitants or
consequents thereof. He prays for it on their behalf, and upon his account it
is given forth unto them, Joh. 17.20, 21. This is the fourth particular to ^^e
observed, and it leads me to the last.

5. This satisfaction and merit of the death of Christ, although it was laid
down for the benefit of such as the Father had given him, and he suffered in
their stead; yet does make no change upon them, till they are drawn unto
Christ, and by the Spirit and faith made one with him. Until this grace be
wrought in them, or conferred upon them, they are still children of the wrath
of God as well as others, Ephesians. 2.3. The wrath of God abides on them, Joh.
3.36. They are amongst the unrighteous, which, remaining in that condition,
shall not inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. And if we could
suppose them to die before conversion, (although indeed it is not to be
supposed) they would perish unavoidably, even as others. And the reason is
this; Although Christ died in their stead, and laid down a price for purchase
of their pardon, and salvation; and God the Father accepted thereof: yet it was
agreed between them, in that everlasting Covenant, that an order should be
observed in conveying those mercies, and making them actually partakers of the
benefit thereof. Which order is this, First they must be sanctified by the
Spirit of Christ, and brought by faith unto him, and made one with him, and so
receive salvation through his blood. For till they have the Son, they can have
no life by the Son.

Thus I close my answer to the third general question propounded, concerning
the manner, how this conjunction is made up; or the way wherein this Union is
wrought.

tual, and their hearts are carnal. Ad claram rei intellectionem requiritur
proportio inter potentiam apprehendentem and rem apprehensam.

Intellectus assequitur scientiam secundum modum sui, non secundum modum
objecti: Quia receptum est in recipiente per modum recipientis.


And as the Apostle says, 1 Cor.2.14. The natural maureceiveth not the things
of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know
them, because they are spiritually discerned.And of this sort is the grace of
Union with Christ; and all the transactions hereabouts are spiritual
transactions. And therefore when Christ preached this doctrine unto the people,
that if they would be blessed by him, they must feed upon him, and become one
with him, Qualis est fames qua cibum appetimus, qualis cibus quem appetimus,
qualis vita ad quam pascimur, talis quoque est manducatio, and cibi in nobis
mansie. Atqui fames ista est spiritualis, etc.
his carnal Disciples knew not what to make of it. This is an hard saying, who
can hear it? and from that time many of his Disciples went away back, and
walked no more with him, Joh.6.60, 66. That Is the second property, It is a
spiritual Union.

3. And principally, It is an inseparable, and indissoluble Union; such as
shall never be broken asunder. When Christ and a Believer are once knit
together, they shall never be parted any more. When the Lord Jesus comes by
his Spirit, and takes up his abode in a man's soul, he makes that soul his
eternal mansion; and does not at any time withdraw himself from it: And when
the sinner is by a living faith gotten into Christ, he shall in no case be
broken off from him. A dead branch may fall off from the tree, but the living
branches will abide there for ever, 1 John 2.27, 28. But the anointing which ye
have received of him, abides in you, and ye need not that any man teach you:
but as the same anointing teaches you of all things, and is truth, and is no
lie: and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him. And now little
children abide in him, etc. As here is an exhortation pressing Believers to
abide in Christ; so here is a word of promise, that they shall abide in him:
and that as to both the branches of this conjunction. 1. The anointing which ye
have received, abides in you; that is, The principle of grace infused into
you, which was typified by the unctions or anointings in the ceremonial Law,
which was signified by the precious ointment poured upon the head of Aaron,
that ran down to the skirts of his garments; this principle will prove
indefectible. 2. On the other hand, ye shall abide in him, Your faith is a
grace that shall not fail, nor decay. This is clear from the reason that is
given of the apostasy of some, That therefore they are separated from Christ,
because they were never spiritually ingraffed into Christ, Triticum non vapit
vontus, nec arborem solida radice fundatam procella subvertit. Inant's paleae
tempestate jactantur, invalide arbores turbinis inoursione evertuntur. Cypr.
1 John 2.19. They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had
been of us, they would, no doubt, have continued with us. Had they been
quickened by Christ's Spirit, they would never have departed from him. It is a
matter (q. d.) without controversy, no doubt of it.

This is usually called, The Saints perseverance. All natural unions must be
dissolved; the husband must be separated from the wife, and children from the
patents, and one dear friend from another; but here is a relation that will be
everlasting. This is a point of great concernment to the comfort of a child of
God; without which he could in no wise be assured of his safe arrival at the
kingdom of heaven. And therefore I will a little longer dwell upon this
doctrine.

1. By showing you the principal fou^dations, on which this inseparableness of
union with Christ is bottomed. 2. By propounding a consideration, further to
strengthen and confirm the truth of this point. 3. By vindication of this
doctrine of perseverance, from the two grand exceptions, that are made against
it.
1. For the foundations upon which this perseverance is built. Whence does it
come to pass, that a Believers union with Christ, is of such duration, and
continuance; that when a man is gotten into Christ he shall abide in him, and
persevere in that state unto the end? I answer, It is built especially on a
sixfold foundation.

1. Upon the unchangeableness of the purpose of God concerning believers, and
the never failingness of his love toward them: whereby he did elect and
fore-ordain them to everlasting life, and set them apart for the eternal
enjoyment of himself. This purpose of God cannot be frustrated or disappointed.
His counsel shall stand, and he will perform all his pleasure: and the love of
God toward his chosen is not a transient fleeting; but an everlasting love.
And therefore when he has gathered a people unto Christ, he will never suffer
them to be divided from him again: For that love which moved him to show
compassion upon them, and to draw them unto his Son, is unalterable as his own
nature and essence; Dona dei sunt (...), Romans 11.29. i. e. Dona illa quae
proficiscuntur ex electione: ut indicant verba proxime praecedentia, Secundum
electionem Charissimi. Suar. de Praedest.
without any variableness or shadow of turning, Jer. 31.3. I have loved thee
with an everlasting love. As for its original, it is from everlasting; so it
reaches unto everlasting: whom he loves indeed, he loves unto the end. This
is noted as the very ground of their perseverance, 2 Timothy 2.18, 19. Who
concerning the truth have erred saying, The resurrection is already past, and
overthrow the faith of some. Nevertheless the foundation of God stands sure,
having this seal, The Lord knows who are his. The foundation of God] that is,
the eternal purpose, and electing love of God, upon which the salvation of the
faithful is built, as upon a sure groundwork: This cannot be shaken; that any
of them should fall away to perdition, whom God has chosen to eternal life.
And the Lord knows who are his; q. d. It is true, the faith of some may be
overthrown, who were never sound in the faith; but not a person who is the
Lord's indeed, shall ever miscarry: for their perseverance is built upon a sure
foundation, namely, upon the electing love of God that will never fail.

2. The indissolubleness of this union is built, Upon the nature of the
Covenant made with believers; and the truth and faithfulness of God in keeping
Covenant with them. It is such a lasting Covenant as is confirmed with an oath,
whereby the Lord has manifested the unchangeableness of his counsel: And
wherein he has made provision for the discharge and performance of the
articles which are on their part to be discharged; as well as for conveyance of
the mercies, which he is engaged to convey thereupon. This you have often
spoken of as the ground of their establishment, Isa. 54.8, 9, 10. In a little
wrath I hid my face from thee, for a moment, but with ever lasting kindness I
will have mercy upon thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer. For this is as the
waters of Noah unto me: for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no
more go over the earth; so have I sworn that I would not be wrath with thee,
nor rebuke thee. For the mountains shall depart, and the hills shall be
removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant
of my peace be removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee. As if he had
said, As sure as the day and night shall not fail, according as I swear unto
Noah after the flood; so sure my mercy shall not fail toward you, not shall ye
at any hand fall short of it; for I have made it over unto you by a covenant,
confirmed with an oath.

It is one remarkable difference between the word of God, and his oath; That
sometimes a word of promise is made under certain exceptions and conditions
employed: upon the failure whereof, God may repent of the good which he promised
to do, Jer. 18.7, 9, 10. But when the Lord swears, he will not repent; That
is a certain token of the immutability of his counsel, Psalm. 110.4. Heb. 6.17.
Now, the perseverance of the Saints is a mercy which God has sworn to give
unto them, Luke 1.73, 74, 75. The oath which he swear to our father Abraham,
that he would grant us, That we being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies, might serve him without fear: in holiness and righteousness before
him, all the days of our lives. Not only that we should be admitted into his
service, but likewise abide therein unto the death. And for the freeness of the
Covenant, wherein God has graciously obliged himself, not only to perform the
mercy promised; but also to assist believers with his Spirit for performance of
the duty required at their hands, so as not to fall short of that mercy: Take
that noted place, Jer. 32.39, 40. And I will give them one heart, and one way,
that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them and of their children
after them. And I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not
turn away from them to do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts,
that they shall not depart from me.

3. The indissolveableness of the union between Believers and the Lord Jesus,
is built upon the charge that is given unto Christ concerning them, and his
faithfulness in accomplishing what he has undertaken for them. Thus Sirs, when
God the Father did put all his elect into Christ's hands, and constituted and
ordained him to be a Mediator for them, it was with this express charge; That
he should conduct them to glory. Not only that he should gather them unto
himself, and give them spiritual life; but that he should guide them with
safety to the kingdom of heaven. And this charge he undertook, John 17.2. As
thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life, to
as many as thou have given him, Heb. 2.10. In bringing many sons to glory. Now
in pursuance of this undertaking Christ does kni^ them to himself inseparably;
that he may be a faithful steward of the grace of God. It is the very reason
which our Savior gives, why no man shall pluck Believers out of his hands;
because he is to give them eternal life, John 10.28. And the Apostle Peter put
much stress upon it, when he prays for the settlement of Believers in the
faith, 1 Pet. 5.10. But the God of all grace, who has called us into his
eternal glory, by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you
perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. Here is a bundle of arguments to
encourage our dependence upon God, for our abiding in Christ. There is scarcely
a word but has an emphasis upon it, to that purpose. 1. It is God that
strengthens you; he that is able to do it, and is on your side: so that greater
is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. All your adversaries are
but creatures, who labor to draw you away, but he that establishes you is the
Creator; God blessed for ever. It is God, whose ways are perfect, that is not
wont to carry on his designs by halfs, and to leave them in the midway,
unfinished: and that cannot be disappointed in the fulfilling his counsels. 2.
It is the God of grace, the Author and giver of grace, and who aims at the
magnifying of the riches of his grace in the salvation of his people; and
therefore will certainly accomplish it, and not suffer them to fall back, and
perish from the right way. 3. He is the God of all grace, of strengthening, and
persevering, as well as of the first converting, and sanctifying grace. 4. It
is that God who has called us, and therefore will not forsake us utterly, now
we are called. To what end do you think did he bring you into fellowship with
himself, if he purposed afterward to reject you, and let you perish for ever?
certainly he that has begun a good work in you, will perform it until the day
of Christ. If whilst you were enemies he reconciled you unto himself, and took
you into the bond of the Covenant with himself: it cannot be imagined, that he
will now cast you out of his favor. If when ye were dead in sins and
trespasses, he quickened you; much more being quickened, ye shall be saved
through his grace. 5. It is he that called you by Christ Jesus; who will
undoubtedly carry on the work which he has undertaken. Indeed if God had put
your happiness into your own keeping again, you might have lost it, as Adam did
at the first: But he has put it into the hands of his own Son, who is a
faithful Trustee. And he has done it to this end, that the promise might be
sure to all the seed. Wherefore do ye think did God lay such a sure foundation,
and build his people upon the rock, but that the wind and storms might not
overturn the building? 6. It is that God who has called us unto glory, unto
eternal glory by Christ Jesus: not only to have fellowship with him for a time
here, but to sit down with him in his kingdom for ever. And how should that be
attained, if he should suffer you to be separated from his Son, and to draw
back unto perdition? Undoubtedly you may go to this God, with a full assurance
of faith, to make you perfect, to stablish, strengthen, and settle you. That is
the third foundation on which the inseparableness of this Union is built.

4. It is built upon the Advocateship and intercession of our Lord Jesus, which
he is making for believers at the right hand of the Father. For as he came into
the world to give satisfaction for them, unto the justice of God; so he entered
into heaven, by virtue of that satisfaction, to plead for mercy in their
behalf: And this is one of the mercies which he pleads for; That they may
abide in him for ever, and may not at any time be parted from him. God the
Father hears his Son always, and grants him whatever petition he makes
for his people. And this is one of the great petitions which he presents;
that whilst his servants are in the world, they may be kept from the evil of
the world: that as they are knit to him, so they may never be divided from him,
till they arrive with safety where he is, Joh. 17.15, 24. And it is noted as
one of the foundations, whereupon the indefectibility of a Christians faith is
bottomed; and consequently of their Union with Christ, which is made up
thereby, Luke 22.31, 32. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold Satan has
desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat: But I have prayed for thee,
that thy faith fail not; q. d. The great design of the devil is to root out
your faith. He knows if that grace fail, other graces will fail with it: if
your faith be gone, your union with me is dissolved and broken asunder: But for
thy comfort, I assure thee of the contrary, Thought it be strongly assaulted,
yet it shall never be utterly vanquished; though it may be battered, yet it
shall not be wholly overcome; though it may be kept under a little, yet it
shall in no wise be rooted up. Whence does this proceed? Why, from Christ's
intercession, it shall not fail, for I have prayed for thee, that thy faith
fail not.

5. The inseparableness of a believers union with Christ, is built upon the
mighty power by which they are upheld; and whereby they are preserved in
Christ: and that is the infinite, unlimited, and almighty power of God. All the
power in heaven is engaged in their defense. This the Apostle Peter urges for
our encouragement, 1 Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the power of God, through faith
unto salvation. As the inheritance is reserved in heaven for you, so ye are
kept and preserved for it. Yea, but Satan our adversary is a roaring Lion, that
seeks to devour us; and what if he should pluck us out of the hands of our
keeper? Why, says the Apostle, Your keeper is God, the Lord of Hosts, who has
engaged his strength for your preservation: He is able to bruise Satan under
your feet. Is not he that delivered you at first out of the paw of that Lion,
of strength sufficient to keep you? The work is easier in it self to keep Satan
out, when he is dispossessed; than at first to cast him out of his possession;
to keep sin under, when it is subdued; than at first to subdue it. Besides, God
is omnipotent, there is nothing too hard for him; you have his power for your
defense, who is greater than all; and none can pluck you out of his hands, Joh.
10.29.

6. Lastly, it is built upon the durable nature of the new creature; or the
graces of the Spirit, whereby Christ is formed in the souls of believers; and
they are fashioned after his likeness. It is a seed which is of a permanent
nature, 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, for his seed
remains in him: neither can he sin, because he is born of God, i. e. He does
not sin allowedly, and customarily, as the wicked do; he does not give up
himself to serve his lusts; for he has a seed within him; another principle,
which is contrary to sin, and warreth against it, and has the supremacy in the
Spirit. But what if that seed should be lost? would he not then return with the
dog to his vomit? yea, but says the holy Ghost, It shall not be lost; for the
principle of grace is a divine principle; not only infused and put into the
soul, but fast riveted into the soul. Herein it differs from the habits put
into the nature of man at first: They were of divine original, but they were
loseable; but when grace is restored under the second Covenant, it shall never
be lost. It is an indefectible principle, an everlasting seed; If not in it
self, yet in respect of the fountain whence it is derived, namely, from the
Lord Jesus Christ, who has the fullness of the Spirit, and is still following
his people with fresh influences thereof. Grace was poured forth into Adam, as
water into a cistern or vessel; which being not carefully looked to, was by the
heat of temptation dried away: but it is issued forth into the hearts of
Believers, as a stream that comes from a living fountain, and is fed
continually thereby: as a spring from the Ocean, whose current is never
stopped, and therefore cannot be drawn dry, Joh. 7.38. He that believes on me,
as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water.
But this he spoke of the spirit, which they that believe on him should receive,
Joh. 4.14. Whosoever shall drink of the water that I shall give him, shall
never thirst: that is, Not with a thirst of emptiness and indigence; He shall
thirst the more with a thirst of desire, Satietas ista non desiderio, sed
tant^m siccitati opponitur.
and earnest breathings after further communications thereof: but he shall
never thirst as a person deprived of it; he shall have constant, daily, and
continued supplies, until his desires be swallowed up in full fruition and
satisfaction: For, as it follows, The water that I shall give him shall be in
him a well of water springing up into ever lasting life. This is the first
thing for the clearing of this property of our union with Christ, to wit, the
inseparableness of it, By showing you the firm foundations whereupon it is
built.

2. For the further confirmation and strengthening of this point, consider, That
as for those things which are most likely, in the apprehensions of man, to make
a separation and disjunction between Christ and a Believer; the holy Ghost has
expressly intimated concerning them, that they shall in no case be able to do
it. And therefore certainly it is an indissoluble union. Si quod magis videtur
posse nou potest, tum quod minus videtur posse non poterit.
For if any thing could disunite them, a man would think it should be one of
these six things.

Either 1. The remainders of sin. 2. The violent assaults of the devil. 3. The
allurements of the world. 4. False teachers, the devils instruments. 5.
Troubles and persecutions, for the sake of Christ. 6. Death, which is the great
separating providence.


1. The first thing that is most likely to disunite a Believer from the Lord
Jesus, is the remainders of sin, and that by way of provocation. There are many
corruptions left in the hearts of the children of God; and thereupon frequent
infirmities and failings in the course of their obedience: sometimes foul
miscarriages committed in their lives. For although grace does ever act like it
self, (sin cannot grow upon that root) yet a gracious man does not always act
like himself. Now the question may be, Will not these pollutions provoke the
Lord Christ to abandon their society? Will he hold any intercourse and
fellowship with them, that are thus defiled? May not they justly expect, that
this should separate between them? Why mark it Sirs, sin in the godly shall
never come so high, as to make a separation between them and their Redeemer. It
may somewhat interrupt their communion, and hinder them from tasting that usual
sweetness, that is to be tasted, in fellowship with Christ: but it shall never
break asunder their union with him. For the power and dominion of sin over them
when they lay we tring in their blood, would rather have hindered the making
them one at first; than the presence of sin shall dissolve that union, when it
is made. If Christ sent forth his Spirit to sanctify them, when they were
slaves of the devil, that he might dwell in them; certainly he will not utterly
reject them, because of their infirmities, when they are sanctified; and become
the children of God. If he had mercy upon them, when they were in the gall of
bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, and knit them unto himself; surely he
will not cast them off, now they are members of his body. The Apostle presses
it as a forcible argument, Romans 5.8, 9, 10. God commends his love to us, in
that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us: Much more then being now
justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. For if when
we were enemies we were reconciled to God, by the death of his Son; much more
being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. As if he had said, Undoubtedly
our state of enmity against God, would rather have prevented our
reconciliation; than the remainders of sin can now prevent our salvation. There
is nothing can be imagined to come in now as an obstacle in the way of our
salvation; but would have much more proved an obstacle to impede our
conversion. If we were ingraffed into Christ, through the superabundant love of
God, notwithstanding our former walking in a course of sin: without
controversy we shall abide in Christ, he will never withdraw from us, because
of some unallowed failings. And besides, remember, that when Christ married
believers unto himself, and gave up himself unto them, he did it in judgment.
He did not act rashly, and in considerately; but he knew well enough their
frame, what creatures they were, to what failings they were subject, and what
remainders of corruption would still abide in them, Hos. 2.19. I will betroth
thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in
mercies. And that promise is observable, Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32. If his children
forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments: if they break my statutes, and
keep not my commandments; then will I visit their transgressions with the rod,
and their iniquity with stripes: nevertheless my loving kindness will I not
utterly take away from them, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. Mark it, God
does own them as the children of Christ notwithstanding their manifold
infirmities. Though he may correct them, in his fatherly displeasure, for their
sins; yet he will never wholly forsake them: The continuance of his love being
not bottomed on their absolute perfection in the faith; but upon his own
faithfulness.

2. A second thing which is most likely, but shall not be able to prevail to
dissolve this union, is, The violent assaults of the devil, by way of
temptation. He is a potent and cunning adversary, and will be ready to put
forth all his strength and subtlety against the children of God; to make them
lose their hold of Christ, and if it were possible to separate betwixt them and
the Lord Jesus. And this is the very ground of the despondency of poor
afflicted spirits. When they are strongly buffetted by Satan from without, and
find their lusts stirring within, they are apt to yield up the cause, and to
say in their hearts, We shall one day perish by the hands of Saul: we shall
never be able to hold out against this powerful assailant. But mind it
Christians, Although this should much excite you to watchfulfulness, yet here
is no cause of discouragement. Is Satan a potent enemy? yet he is a conquered
enemy. That Christ who dwells in you, has broken the power of hell, and
brought under the prince of darkness. His temptations should quicken you to run
to Christ for succor, and to clasp the faster about him, and in no wise to
cast off your confidence. A sincere believer in this case, should recollect
himself with David, Why art thou cast down O my soul? and why art thou
disquieted within me? Is not my Savior stronger than the strong man armed? Can
it be imagined that he delivered me out of the snare of the devil, that he
might give me up again unto his will? Did he break in with a mighty force upon
my soul, and eject the devil out of his habitation, and come and dwell in me;
that afterward he might surrender up his dwelling place to his greatest
adversary? Why, Satan by being mine enemy, is Christ's enemy thereby; in whom I
am, and unto whom I am closely united; and he will never suffer him to get the
victory. Although he may permit him to vex and disquiet me for a time, that my
faith may be exercised, Deus bonos non negligit cum negligit: nec obliviscitur,
sed quasi obliviscitur. Ideo videtur deferere, quia non vult deseri.
yet he will bruise him under my feet shortly, Romans 16.20. Mark, how he
rebukes the devil in the case of Joshua, Zech. 3.2. And the Lord said unto
Satan, The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord who has chosen Jerusalem
rebuke thee: is not this a brand plucked out of the fire? q.d. Have I preserved
him to this time by a special preservation, that now I might deliver him into
thy merciless hands? So, does Christ pluck poor souls as firebrands out of the
fire of the wrath of God, and gather them into his own kingdom; that afterward
he may give them up to the prince of darkness? Mat 16.18. Upon this rock will I
build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. The gates
of bell] that is, all the power and policy, all the might and craft of the
devil and his adhaerents. The gates of Cities were the places where their arms
and ammunition were laid up; and there their Judges and Counselors were wont
to meet, and advise for the good of the place. So that by the gates of hell is
meant, the strength and crafty machinations and devices of Satan and his
instruments: they may trouble and vex the Saints of the most High, but they
shall not prevail against them: not against the meanest faithful member of the
Church; because they are built upon the rock. For it is not only the Church in
general that is built upon that rock, but every particular Saint. Behold I lay
in Sion a chief corner stone, elect, precious: and he that believes on him
shall not be confounded, 1 Pet. 2.6.

3. A third particular that is most likely to disunite a Believer and the Lord
Jesus, is, The allurements of the world. Temptations objected, Temptations are,
1. Injected, such as the tempter darts immediately into the soul. 2. Ascendent,
which arise from some stirred humor or inferior faculty. 3. Objected, which
proceed from external objects, baited and suited to the inclination of the
Spirit.
(as the Schools distinguish) the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes,
and the pride of life; as the Apostle gives us an inventory of all the worlds
goods, and accommodations, 1 John 2.16. These were the very engines whereby our
first parents were seduced: and commonly they have a great influence on the
souls of their posterity. To follow after which some have made shipwreck of
faith, and put a good conscience far away from them. For the pleasures of sin,
they have forsaken Christ: and for earthly profit and advantage have let go the
pursuit of heavenly blessings: and to get honor of men, have neglected that
honor that comes of God only. See Luke 8.14. 2 Timothy 4.10. John 12.42, 43. But
these are outside Christians, who thus forsake their station, and run away from
their Master: Charitas quae descri potest, nunquam vera fuit. Aug.
Such as are indeed ingraffed into Christ, will never let him go: For they have
renounced these things already for his sake; when they first gave themselves
unto the Lord, it was upon these terms, That they should be ready to suffer the
loss of all things at his command. They find in the enjoyment of Christ more
solid and substantial pleasure, than sin can minister unto its followers; and
greater riches than the whole earth can afford: They account it their highest
dignity and preferment to be in him, and of the number of his attendants: They
see that in the Covenant, which does infinitely out-bid the world, in all that
it can promise unto them that serve it. Besides, Through the Cross of Christ
the world is crucified unto Believers, and they are crucified unto it, and
redeemed from it: So that it cannot have that power and prevalency over them,
as upon others, Gal. 1.4. Gal. 6.14.

4. False teachers and seducers may be thought likely to dissolve this union.
They have oftentimes cunning artifices to deceive, and are of unwearied
diligence to gain Proselytes, and to make them the children of hell. They are
wont to come as messengers of righteousness, and transform themselves into the
Apostles of Christ. They pretend to high seize, and plead the Spirit, and
new light, for introducing their abominations. And may not these subtle
emissaries of the devil overturn the faith of God's people? May not they so
prevail, as to make a separation between Believers and Christ? Why Sirs, the
holy Ghost has given sufficient warrant to assure us it shall not be. They may
lead captive silly, unsettled persons, who are laden with sins, and led away
with diverse lusts: They may beguil unstable souls, who though they have been in
the School of Christ, were never taught the truth as it is in Jesus: Nay, they
may possibly fly blow the souls of Christ's peculiar servants with wretched
errors, and taint their faith; but they shall not be able to overturn their
faith: For the foundation of God stands sure, as the Apostle asserteth
expressly in this respect, 2 Timothy 2.18, 19. And therefore their seductions are
mentioned, as to deceiving the elect, with an [if it were possible] Mat. 24.24.
For there shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets, and shall show great
signs and wonders: insomuch that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the
very elect. Intimating that eventually it is impossible: they are placed out of
harms way, they are put through grace without the reach of their gunshot, as to
a total seduction from the faith: as having an unction from the holy One,
whereby they know all things, 1 John 2.20. Not that this should imbolden the
godly to be tampering with errors: If a man will tread upon hot coals, his feet
may be burnt and scorched, though withal his life may be preserved. But this
should make you the rather heedful, to stick fast unto the truth; that it may
be evident you are such as they have no power over to lead aside into the error
of the wicked. It is the very particular consideration which the Apostle John
presses upon Believers, why they should not hearken unto seducers, when they
teach for doctrines men's inventions, and uncouth notions of their own: Because
they were sufficiently taught of Christ, and his word was a plentiful directory
unto them, without the help of other additions: and because they should abide
in Christ; therefore they were not to be followers of false teachers, 1 John
2.26, 27.

5. Troubles and persecutions for the sake of Christ shall not be able to
dissolve this union. They may seem to be providence very likely to do it: When
Christians shall be dragged into prisons, and abridged of their comforts, and
reduced into hardships and extremities; when they shall have trial of cruel
mockings and reproaches, yea moreover of scourgings, and torturings in the
severest manner that the wicked heart of man can invent: and when all these
things might be avoided, if they would but part with Christ. Will not such sore
persecutions from the world, drive them back again for deliverance into the
world, out of which they were called? Do but mark, how confident the Apostle is
of the contrary, Romans 8.35, 36, 37. Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? (As it is written, for thy sake we are killed
all the day long, we are acounted as sheep for the slaughter.) Nay in all these
things we are more than conquerours, through him that loved us. How more than
conquerours? Why, q. d. We are so far from being foiled, that we are brought
off with advantage: our faith is thereby fourbished, and our patience
strengthened, our other graces are quickened, and our experiences increased.
When conquerours get a victory over their enemies, it is seldom or never but
with some loss to themselves; but we are gainers by our troubles. Our spiritual
strength is augmented, and our vigor heightened to a more intense degree, and
we come purified as gold out of the fire of tribulation. So that we can glory
in it; For tribulation works patience, and patience brings experience, and
experience begets hope, and hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God
is shed abroad in our hearts. As you have it in that climax or gradation, Romans
5.3, 4, 5.

In the winter of adversity the leaves drop off, and the withered boughs are
pared away; but the living branches abide. And the reason of it is this,
Because when Christ brings his people into distress and trouble for his Name,
he has promised to stand by them, and to afford them strength sufficient for
their support, under those distresse^, Isa. 42.2. When thou passest through the
waters, I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow
thee: when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt; neither
shall the flame kindle upon thee. When Christ reduces them into such straits,
as they never had experience of; he will then minister to them such strength
and assistance, as they never had before experience of. As sure as he is a God
of faithfulness he will do it; according to that precious word, 1 Cor. 10.13.
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able:
but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to
bear it. But may some poor disconsolate soul say, I may quickly be called into
temptations and troubles, and I find no strength nor ability, O what is like to
become of me at such a season? I am afraid I shall sink under the burden. Why,
mind the promise, he will do it with the temptation: It is not said he will
give ability before the trial; but when you are called to use it, you shall not
fail of it: You shall have it time enough against you have occasion to exercise
it. My brethren, it is an excellent word of promise, an establishing word, if
we had hearts to believe. And indeed it is according to what the Saints of God
have experimentally found. How faint-hearted was Mr. Sanders in the days of
Qu. Mary, and very doubtful of himself, till he was actually brought into
sufferings? How dead-spirited was Mr. Glover, till he was reduced to the pinch?
and then he could cry out, He is come, He is come. Nay how cowardly and full of
fear was Moses himself, till he was engaged in his work? as appears from the
excuses he made to evade the employment, Exodus 4.1, 10, 13.

6. Death it self, which is the great separating providence, that parts between
a man and all his worldly accommodations, that parts between friends and
kinsfolks, between brethren and sisters, and the nearest and dearest relations,
shall not separate believers from Jesus Christ: But still they are entirely in
him, even when they are dead. As it was in the death of Christ himself, though
it made a separation between his body and soul, yet it did not separate the
humane nature from the divine: So it is in the death of the Saints, Though it
rend the spirit from the flesh, yet it can part neither from the Son of God.
The very bodies of Believers are still united unto Jesus, even when they are
dead; and shall be raised up again (as I will show you afterward) by virtue of
that conjunction. Therefore they are said to sleep in Jesus, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14.
and, Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, Rev. 14.13. It is not said
only, They that die for the Lord, but in the Lord. A man may suffer death, in
some cases, for the true Religion, that never was sincere therein: But if a
person die in Jesus, then he is blessed indeed. Upon the upshot of all, I may
well conclude this point with that of the Apostle Paul, in answer as it were,
to this question we are upon, Romans 8.35. Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? q. d. Is a Believers union with Christ a dissolveable union, or not?
Can it be broken asunder? Or, if you will, rather understand it by way of
assertion, though delivered interrogatively: For nothing is more ordinary than
for affirmative interrogations to denote a vehement denial of the matter
questioned. As if he had said, This union is altogether inseparable; nothing
can part betwixt a Believer and Christ. So fast are they glewed and linked
together, that they shall never be divided, or broken asunder again. For says
he, v. 38, 39. I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. That Is the second thing I intended,
for the confirmation of this property of a Believers union with Christ, viz.
the inseparableness of it.

3. A little to vindicate this point from the grand exceptions thas are made
against it, I will lay down only two rules.

Rule. 1. This doctrine of the perseverance of a sincere Believer in the faith,
or the inseparableness of his union with Christ, is so far in it self, from
being as enemy to practical holiness and new obedience, that if rightly
improved it will be a mighty incentive and provocative thereunto. It will have
a powerful influence to enlarge a man's heart, to run the steps of God's
commandments; and to cause him to take heed unto himself, to continue upright
and undefiled in the way of the Lord. This assertion I maintain, to obviate the
main cavil and objection that is made against this comfortable truth. For there
is an aspersion cast upon it, as if it were not a doctrine according to
godliness: as if it did minister occasion to slothfulness, and carelessness,
and carnal security. They will be ready to say, who are the opposers of this
truth, if a person be in Christ, so as to be sure he shall in no case be
separated from him; then they will be apt to think they may live as they list:
that they may take what liberty they please, to indulge the flesh, and satisfy
their lusts, and walk in a way of licentiousness; seeing whatever they do, they
shall abide in a state of grace, and come safe to heaven at the last, Thus a
door, say they, would be opened to all manner of wickedness. But mind it Sirs,
It is a calumny falsely laid to the charge of this doctrine: For in it self, it
is a strong argument and motive unto holiness: It is a consideration that may
have a tendency to the mortifying sin, and awakening the Spirit, if rightly
pressed on the soul: and thus it will be improved by a gracious heart. Hac
igitur certitudo [perseverantiae] non potest consistere cum deliberate
proposito peccandi, nedum tale quid causari. Piis exercitiis procreatur and
conservatur; eadem etiam invicem procreat, conservat, and auget. Ames. Coron.
It Is true, there is not the most wholesome herb, but a toad or spider may suck
poison from it: there is not the most heavenly doctrine, but a carnal heart
will pervert it unto evil; especially such truths as are purely evangelical,
that hold forth the free grace of God, Jude 4. They turn the grace of God into
lasciviousness; that is, not only the experience which they have of the grace
of God, in the exercise of it, in their preservation, and affording to them
means and seasons for working out their salvation: but it seems principally
to be meant of the doctrine of the grace of God. There is no doctrine more
influential in its native tendency, to the subduing of sin, and crucifying the
flesh, and quickening to a closs walking with God: But ungodly men wrest it, and
writhe it, to countenance their filthiness. So has it befallen this particular
point of the Saints perseverance; though in its proper causality, it will help
to cleanse a man from all the filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and make him
vigorously to pursue the designs of holiness. See what use the Apostle Peter
makes of it, 1 Pet. 1.5, 13. He had before told them, that they were elect
according to the foreknowledge of God, v. 2. and that this grace of election
had broken forth in their regeneration from whence they had a lively hope of
enjoying the inheritance prepared for the Saints, v. 3, 4. And then he does
assure them that they were kept by the power of God, is the state of grace,
that they might not fall short of actually possessing what they hoped for, v.
y. etc. And in the close of all, he subjoyneth this exhortation, v. 13.
Wherefore gird up the loins of your minds, be sober, and hope to the end, for
the grace that is to be brought unto you, at the revelation of Jesus Christ. As
obedient children, not fashioning your selves according to the former lusts, in
your ignorance: but as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all
manner of conversation; q. d. If God has graciously taken care of the
concernment of your souls, will not you be diligent to advance the glory of his
grace? Will not you be ashamed to sin against him, who has in every respect
dealt so bountifully with you? If the Lord has not been unmindful of securing
your salvation, will not you mind his honor, and follow his conduct? Should
not this mightily prevail upon you, never to cast off this God, but to cleave
unto him unto the end? O set diligently, and industriously, about your work; be
ready and prepared for all the ways of holiness, and to continue steadfast, and
unmovable therein. Do not walk as the generality of people walk, nor as your
selves have formerly walked: for God has called you out of the world, and
prepared for you a kingdom; and takes care of your preservation, that you may
come to the enjoyment of it. This is the proper use of this doctrine; which
will plainly appear, if you seriously weigh these four things.

1. That God has not promised to preserve his people in the state of grace,
and union with Jesus Christ, whether they be holy or no, or however they walk:
But the promise is to keep them in the exercise of grace and in the ways of
holiness that so they may not be separated from him. If any represent it in
another dress, it is not the Scripture doctrine of perseverance; but they
endeavor to cast a slurre upon it. We do not teach, that God has engaged to
bring his people safely to heaven, let them live as they list: or, that he will
keep them from falling away from Christ, though they cast off the fear of the
Lord, and run to all excess of riot: But God has engaged to enable them to
live the life of the just, and to cause them to fear his Name, and through the
Spirit to mortify the deeds of the body, that so they may never draw back to
perdition, 1 Pet. 1.5. Ye are kept by the power of God, through faith, unto
salvation. It is not said, God will keep them by his almighty power, whether
they believe or no: but he will suodue their unbelief, and set their faith on
work, in order to their being secured, Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear into
their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Mark, it is not said, They
shall never depart from G^d, though they slight his word, and despise his
Majesty, and reject the fear of his Name: But he will maintain in their hearts
an holy aw, and dread of him, that so they may never be cast out of his favor.

2. Consider, That the contemplati^n of this mercy, and seriously pondering it
in the heart, by Believers, that God has so knit them unto his Son, that they
shall be still growing up into him, and never be separated from him, will be of
notable efficacy to draw forth their love back again to the Lord and to kindle
is their breasts a fervent affection toward him. Which love so kindled, is a
mighty quickner to obedience. Love is a commanding passion, that will set all
the powers of a man's soul on work, to please the party that is beloved. It will
level mountains, and make rough ways smooth, and no difficulties will deter
it. What will not a man do for one whom he dearly loves? You know what is said
of Jacob, Genesis 29, 20. Although he served seven years hard service for Rachel,
the drought consumed him by day, and the frost by night, and his sleep departed
from his eyes; yet it was as nothing to him, because he loved her. Why Sirs, a
pure, entire, and affectionate love to God, would cause men willingly to spend
themselves in his service: it would make them very cautious and fearful lest
they should dishonor him, or sin against him. Now this great privilege of an
indissoluble union with Christ, will mightily inflame the heart with affection,
and stir up a person to thankfulness. Will the soul of a Believer be thus
arguing with himself, has the Lord Christ been pleased not only to give me a
transitory glimps of his favor, (which yet was more than ever I deserved) but
taken me into everlasting fellowship with him? O what shall I render to the
Lord? How shall I sufficiently express my readiness to serve him? Wherein may I
be instrumental to show forth his praise? Surely I will cleave to this God as
long as I live, and call upon him whilst I have a being: I will never more
rebel against him, Psalm. 31.23. O love the Lord all ye his Saints, for the Lord
preserves the faithful. If it be meant of temporal preservation; of how much
greater force will the argument be upon the account of spiritual grace and
establishment? How should a Believer say with David? Psalm. 116.1, 2. I love the
Lord, because he has heard the voice of my supplications: Because he has
inclined his ear to me, I will call upon him as long as I live. Surely, it is
ignorance, and unacquaintedness with the workings of the Spirit in a sanctified
heart, that makes men think doctrines of free grace are encouragements to sin.

3. The consideration of the inseparableness of a Believers union with Christ,
should cause a Christian to entertain a holy jealousy, and suspicion over his
own soul; lest at any time he should draw back from the faith: That by his
fixedness in the ways of God, it may more abundantly appear, that his
profession of godliness was a sincere profession. For if persons are unstedfast
in the Covenant of God, it will be a shrewd evidence that their hearts were not
right with him. If they do not hold on their way in the practice of godliness,
it will be manifest that they went no further, than the form of godliness
carried them. So that the doctrine of perseverance is an awakening doctrine: It
should awaken us to be watchful over our selves, and to work out our salvation
with fear and trembling. For then we are made partakers of Christ, if we hold
fast the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the end, Heb. 3.14. That is,
then it will evidently appear, that we are partakers of him, and have a share
in his death. If we sall away from Christ, it will be an undeniable token, that
we were never spiritually ingraffed into him.

4. A due meditating upon the inseparableness of a Believers union with the
Lord Jesus, will encourage the soul of that believer in resisting, and
repelling the instigations of the devil; and standing fast against all
solicitations to sin. Through grace ( thinks a godly man) I shall get the
victory, and therefore I will stir up my strength to the fight. I see it is not
in vain to strive against the wicked one. If God should leave his children in
their own hands, to stand or fall according to the exercise of their own power;
then indeed their hearts might sink, and their courage might flag: But seeing
God has engaged for my perseverance in the faith, I will wrestle with all my
might, and use the utmost diligence; for it will not be in vain so to do, Psalm.
27.14. Wait on the Lord, and be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine
heart: wait I say on the Lord. Has God promised to preserve you, then be
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might; follow hard after him, and
urge him with his promise; and in his way you may expect the accomplishment of
it.

This is the first rule for vindication of that property.

Rule 2. The many counsels and warnings which Christ has given to his people,
to look well to themselves, lest they should lose their hold of him, and be
separated from him; are no proof at all that they may be separated; or that
their union with him may be dissolved. God's injunctions upon them to keep
themselves, and his engagement to be their keeper; do not interfere one with
the other; but may well consist and stand together. And the reason is evident,
Because these cautions an^ commandments, are the very means which God is
pleased to make use of, for their establishment in the faith: whereby he does
fulfill his promise for their safeguard, and together with which he does convey
his Spirit into their hearts, for prevention of their apostasy. This is
according to that Statute Law of the Lord of hosts, That his Spirit shall go
forth in his word, and with his word, Isa. 59.21. Will some say? To what end
does God so often warn Believers that they draw not back to destruction, if
they are not liable thereunto? True, it does suppose that they are liable to
apostasy in themselves, Vere dicitur fidelem posse a fide sua deficere, quum
scilicet in se and principiis suis intrinsecis consideratur solis: sic enim
defectui subjicitur and mutabilis existit. Deas tamen immutabili faedere
spospondit se conservaturum in sais faederatis principium illud vitale. Hanc
autem promissionem non solet exequi, nisi verbi ministerio, and similibus
auxilils adhibitis. Ames. Coron.
and without divine assistance would totally backslide and perish from the
right way: But God has graciously, undertaken for their preservation and
abidance in Christ; and these cautions are the means for the acomplishment of
that undertaking; and wherewith he sends forth the holy Ghost to strengthen
them, that they may abide in his Son, Joh. 17.17.

Thus I have finished my answer to the fourth head of enquiry, touching the
most signal properties of a Believers union with Jesus Christ.

CHAP. VIII. The indispensable necessity of Union with Christ: Proved by
enumeration of the fundamental blessings, that have dependence thereon.
5. THe next question to be handled, is concerning the necessity of this Union.

Qu. How does it appear, that it is a matter of such absolute and indispensable
necessity; that if we will have life from the Son, we must have the Son? or
must be thus made one with our Lord Jesus? For he that has the Son has life,
and he that has not the Son has not life.

Answ. For answer hereunto, I will show you the necessity of this Union, by
recounting the blessings which are conveyed hereby, and that have a necessary
dependence hereupon: which cannot be received by us, except we are in Christ.

1. First then in the general, A Believers union with Christ, or being in him,
is the foundation of all his communion with him, or communications of grace out
of his fullness: in whatsoever does appertain either to the quickening, and
comfort of our hearts here, or making us meet to partake of the inheritance of
the Saints hereafter. In our Lord Jesus is stored up plentiful provision of all
things, needful to conduct a sinner to glory; but it is dealt forth to them
alone who are knit unto Jesus. It is imparted unto them, by virtue of their
being in him. Except the branch be, and abide in the vine, it cannot partake of
the s^p and fatness of the vine: so except you be implanted into Christ, you
cannot be made partakers of his grace, or of the treasures of mercy and
blessings that are hid in him. It is in Christ we are complete, Col. 2.10. that
is, we have all things derived upon us to make us completely happy, from the
fullness that is in Christ; and by virtue of our oneness with Christ. The
Apostle had laid down this assertion, v. 9. That in him dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily; i.e. essentially and substantially: Yea, but
might believers say, what is that unto us? Yes, says he, it is all for your
comfort and benefit: If you are in him, you shall thereby attain from him
whatsoever is requisite to make you perfectly blessed: So that you need nothing
else, to each up any defect therein: Thus only in the general.

2. To descend unto particulars, I shall enter upon the enumeration of the
several covenant-blessings, which flow from our union with the Lord Jesus. And
I find there are especially 11. fundamental mercies, or blessings which are
communicated unto the Saints, by virtue of their being in Christ; and which
have a necessary dependence thereupon.

1. The grace of justification in the sight of God, through the righteousness
of Christ imputed to us. 2. The grace of adoption: or our inrollment amongst
the number of the children of God. 3. The participation of the supplies of the
Spirit, to guide us in our journey to the kingdom of heaven. 4. The gracious
acceptance of our duties and performances. 5. A title to the promises of the
Gospel, which concern this life, or that which is to come. 6. Union with the
Father, and an intimate acquaintance with him. 7. That peace and joy in the
holy Ghost, which puts life and sweetness into every condition. 8. Deliverance
from the sting of death, and consequently from the fear of that king of
terrors. 9. A glorious resurrection out of the dust of the earth. 10. Boldness
and comfort in our appearance at the bar of judgment. 11. The actual
possession, and enjoyment of a crown of glory.
So that, whatsoever grace or mercy is prepared for the Saints, it is dealt out
unto them in this way; from their first entrance into the state of grace, to
their sitting down upon the throne of glory. I will mainly enlarge upon the
first and third of these, glancing only upon the rest.

1. The first blessing that I shall mention as depending upon Union with Jesus
Christ, is the justification of a sinner in the sight of God, upon the account
of Christ's righteousness imputed to him: whereby the guilt of sin is removed,
and the person of the sinner is accepted as righteous with the God of heaven.
Here lies one argument of the necessity of being thus ingraffed into Christ:
Because without union with him, there can be no justification through his
blood, nor clothing with his righteousness for acceptance with the Lord. Our
righteousness for pardon and justification, is in the Lord; and we our selves
must be in him, that we may partake of his righteousness: For it will signify
nothing to us, except we are in him, Ephesians. 1.6. He has made us accepted in the
beloved. And v. 7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace. This is a
fundamental, leading mercy, which makes way for the conferring of other
mercies. Doctrina justificationis est articulus stantis aut cadentis Heclesiae.
Luth.
For till sin be pardoned, the curse of the Law cannot be removed from the
sinner: and this pardon is given forth upon the account of Christ's
righteousness imputed to us; in order whereunto we must of necessity be in him.
For in him we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins.

I will open to you the force of this argument, by taking it asunder into six
branches, and speaking distinctly to each of them.

1. Observe, That the grace of justification in the sight of God, is made up of
two parts. 1. There is forgiveness of the offenses committed against the Lord.
2. Acceptance of the person offending, pronouncing him a righteous person, and
receiving him into favor again as if he had never offended. This is clear from
the Scriptures of truth. 1. There is an act of absolution and acquital from the
guilt of sin; and freedom from the condemnation dedeserved by sin: The desert
of sin is an inseparable accident or concomitant of it, Reatus vel 1. Simplex
2. Redundans (...) personam.

that can never be removed. It may be said of the sins of a justified person
that they deserve everlasting destruction: But justification is the freeing a
sinner from the guilt of his iniquity, whereby he was actually bound over to
condemnation; so that the person justified may say, Who is he that condemns?
He may read over the most dreadful passages of the Law, without being
terrified; as knowing the curse is removed from over his head: his fins that
brought him under the curse are forgiven; and are in point of condemnation as
if they had never been. This is to be justified; to have sin thus forgiven, and
the penalty remitted, Romans 4.5, 6, 7, 8. But to him that works not, but
believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness. Even as David also describes the blessedness of the man to whom
God imputes righteousness without works, saying, Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to whom
the Lord will not impute sin. Mark it, what David calls forgiveness of sin
and not imputing of iniquity, S. Paul styles a being justified. This is
expressed elsewhere by not remembering transgressions any more, Heb. 8.12. And
there are three ways how they shall not be remembered any more. (1.) God will
not remember them, so as to upbraid his people with their miscarriages: He will
never hit them in the teeth with their sins. When the wicked seek unto him in
affliction, and howl for deliverance, God does upbraid them with their
wickedness, Jer. 2.27, 28. Where are thy Gods which thou have made thee? Let
them arise, if they can save thee in the time of trouble; q. d. Why do ye come
to me, seeing you hate me, and cast me off, and set up idols in your hearts?
Get you to them for deliverance, for you are none of my servants. But when
persons are justified, their sins shall be as if they had not been: God will
welcome them into his house, and embrace them in his arms, and never throw it in
their dish, how unkind, or unthankful, or stubborn they have been formerly. See
it in the return of the Prodigal, Luke 15.20, 21, 22. When he was a great way
off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell upon his neck
and kissed him. And the son said unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven
and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son. But the father
said unto his servants, bring forth the best robe and put it on him, and put a
ring upon his hand, and shoes upon his feet. One would have thought, he would
have fallen foul upon him, and said, You are well enough served to depart out
of my family: you see what it is to think your self wiser than your father:
What account can you give me of the patrimony you received? Do you think I will
give you entertainment, now you have spent your substance with riotous living,
and amongst harlots? Go to your sinful companions that have made a prey of you,
and see what relief they will afford now in the day of your distress. But here
is not a word of such language; But, welcome my dear son, he is a pleasant
child, my bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him, Jer.
31.20. (2.) Their sins shall not be remembered so as to stop the current of
God's bounty, or to withold good things from them. When God would have healed
Israel, their sins came to remembrance, and put a stop to the progress of his
mercy, Hos. 7.1, 2. But now by the grace of pardon, this obstacle is removed
out of the way, that his compassions may flow down freely upon them, ^et in
peccati reatu est luerum cessans, and damnum emergens: Ita condonatio peccati
non est tantum ablativa mali, sed and collativa^oni.
Mic. 7.19, 20. (3.) He will not remember them so as to condemn them for sin,
iniquity shall not prove their ruin, Peccata sis velantur, ut in judicio non
revelentur.
Joh. 5.24. That is the first part of justification, namely, the pardon of sin.
2. There is the acceptance of the person as righteous in God's sight:
pronouncing him such and dealing with him accordingly, restoring him into that
favor again which he had lost by his transgressions, Romans 5. v. 16. compared
with v. 19. This is the first thing I would note to show you the force of this
argument, That justification, for the nature of it, is the gracious pardon of
the sinners transgressions, and acceptance of his person as righteous in God's
sight.

2. In order to our partaking of this grace, of the forgiveness of sin and
accep ation of our persons, we must be able to produce a perfect righteousness
before the Lord, and to present and tender it unto God. And the reason is
evident, from the very nature of God himself: He is infinitely, immutably, and
inexorably just, as well as incomprehensibly gracious; And in the justification
of a sinner, he does act as a God of justice, as well as of compassion. He does
forgive iniquity in a way of righteousness, 1 John 1.9. He is faithful and just
to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. God does
not pronounce men righteous when they are not; but first he makes them
righteous, and then receives them as such, and pronounces them to be such.
Non igitur docemus credentes sine justitia justificari: qualem justificationem
impii, Deus pronunciat esse abominationem, Prove. 17. Isa 5. Sed dicimus necesse
esse ut in justificatione intercedat and interveniat justitia: Et quidem non
qualiscanque-justitia, sed talis quae in judicio Dei sufficiens and digna sit,
ut justa pronuncietur ad vitam aeternam Chemn. exam. Con^. Trid.
So that if a man will be justified, he must be able to produce such a complete
righteousness, as wherewith he may stand before the justice of God. This is a
matter very seriously to be weighed, because multitudes deceive themselves
herein: They hope God will forgive them, because he is a God of mercy, and of
unspeakable compassions: but they never consider what entertainment the justice
of God will give them; nor how they shall stand before his righteousness. Why,
man remember: The Lord is infinitely just, as well as merciful; and if ever thy
sins be pardoned, it must be by an admirable contemperament or mixture of mercy
and justice together. I will not enter upon the debate of that question, which
some have ventilated, whether God in his absolute sovereignty could not have
forgiven sin, merely as an act of grace, without the sinners producing any
satisfaction to justice? Suffice it us to be assured, That God will not; and
supposing his word and purpose, he cannot: for he is a God that cannot lie,
that cannot change, or vary in his determinations. It was one of the great ends
of the Gospel dispensation, that God might exalt his justice in the
justification of a sinner, Romans 3.26.

3. The only matter of man's righteousness since the fall of Adam, wherein he
can appear with comfort before the justice of God, and consequently whereby
alone he can be justified in his sight; is the obedience and sufferings of
Jesus Christ, the righteousness of the Mediator: There is not any other way
imaginable, how the justice of God may be satisfied, and we may have our sins
pardoned in a way of justice; but by the righteousness of the Son of God. And
therefore this is his name, Jehovah Tzidkennu. The Lord our righteousness, Jer.
23.6. This is his name] that is, this is the prerogative of the Lord Jesus, a
matter that appertains to him alone, to be able to bring in everlasting
righteousness, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, Dan. 9.24. All our
obedience to the Law, and the good works we can perform, throughout the whole
course of our lives, can never be a sufficient righteousness for us. Alas, what
are they, even all out righteousnesses put together, but as a filthy rag, and
as a menstrous cloth? The very imperfections and sinful mixtures of our most
spiritual duties, were enough to condemn us. It is by Christ alone, that they
who believe are justified from all things, from which they cannot be justified
by the Law of Moses, Act. 13.39. I will add two considerations further to
strengthen this particular, besides what has been delivered, when we were
speaking of the divorce of a sinner from the Law, and to take us off from
resting upon a legal righteousness.

1. The most eminent and choicest servants of God, that ever lived upon earth,
have utterly disclaimed and disowned their own personal obedience, in the point
of justification. They durst not, at any hand, put their trust in it; but knew
it would be too short, and that they should miscarry for ever, if they relied
thereupon. Thus my brethren; If any persons under heaven could be justified by
the Law, and pronounced righteous upon legal terms, that is, upon the account
of their own holiness and good works; it would be such as have been most active
for God, and most useful and upright in their generations, and that lived in
the nearest conformity unto the Law: But even they durst not place their
confidence therein, but have utterly renounced it. Take the instance of Job, a
man who had not his fellow upon earth, as we have assurance of it by the
letters testimonial of the God of the spirits of all flesh, Job 1.8. Durst he
depend on his own righteousness? See how he disclaimeth it, Job 9.20. If I
justify my self, my own mouth shall condemn me if. I say I am perfect, it
shall also prove me perverse. And cap. 42.6. I abhor my self, and repent in
dust and ashes. Take the example of David, a man after God's own heart, who
fulfilled all his wills, Act. 13.22. What says he in this case? See Psalm.
130.3, 4. If thou Lord should mark iniquities, who, O Lord could stand? But
there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared. Meum meritum est
miseratio Domini. Bern.

Justitia nostra est indulgentia tua, Domine.


Let us descend to Daniel, a man greatly beloved, and of singular integrity;
insomuch that when the Lord does reckon up the most noted examples of piety he
is singled out as one, Ezekiel. 14.14. And mark how he renounceth all confidence
in the flesh, and rests only upon Christ, Dan. 9.17, 18. Cause thy face to
shine upon thy sanctuary which is desolate, for the Lords sake. And v. 18. We
do not present our supplications before thee, for our righteousnesses, but for
thy great mercies: For he had before acknowledged, that unto them belonged
confusion of face. It is true, that believers have sometimes pleaded their
holiness, as an evidence of the sincerity and uprightness of their hearts with
God, and of their interest in the promises of mercy: But they durst not appear
in it before the justice of God. That is a notable passage of Nehemiah, Cap.
13.22. Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and spare me according to the
greatness of thy mercy; q.d. Through grace I have been serviceable to the Lord,
and expect a blessing thereupon: but withal I stand in need of great mercies to
cover the defects of those services.

2. Such persons as have gone about to establish their own righteousness, and
attempted to be justified thereby, have everlastingly miscarried in that
attempt and fell short of heaven, and found it to be but a broken reed, that
could never bear them up before the justice of God. You read of some persons
that seek to come to heaven, and are not able, Luke 13.24. And these are one
sort of those persons. As such who seek it slothfully, and negligently, without
striving to enter in at the strait gate; so they that seek it by their own
personal righteousness, and expect to be justified thereupon. And therefore
observe what the Apostle says to the Galatians, whose hearts bankered after
that way of justification, Gal. 3.4. Have ye suffered so many things in vain?
if yet it be in vain; q. d. If you go on to lean upon your own righteousness,
and rely not upon Christ, all your Religion is in vain. Whatever you have done
or suffered will never save you from the wrath to come. This is the third thing
to be observed, That it is only the righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by
which a sinner can be justified in the sight of God.

4. We can receive no benefit by the righteousness of Christ, for justification
in the sight of God; nor can we be pardoned and accepted thereupon, until that
righteousness become ours, and be made over unto us. This is evident at the
first view; How can we plead it with God, except we have an interest therein?
What advantage can it be to us, unless it be ours? Here is the mistake of many
carnal people, they hope to have their sins forgiven upon the account of
Christ's righteousness, and never enquire if that righteousness be theirs. Mark
it Sirs, It must be yours, and made over to you, or else it will never stand
you in stead. They shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ, who receive the
gift of righteousness by him, Romans 5.17. Except they receive it, it is nothing
unto them. It is in it self white raiment, and beautiful and glorious apparel;
but it will never cover our nakedness, except it be put on, and we are clothed
there with, Rev. 3. v. 18. It must be made over to us, that we may be justified
thereby.

5. Observe in the next place, That the way wherein, or whereby, this
righteousness of Gods providing is conveyed and made over to us, that we may
receive the benefit thereof, and be justified thereby; it is by way of
imputation. That is the usual expression made use of in this business; and the
meaning is this, God does reckon the righteousness of Christ unto his people,
as if it were their own. He does count unto them Christ's sufferings and
satisfaction, and make them partakers of the virtue thereof, as if themselves
had suffered and satisfied. This is the genuine and proper import of the word
imputation: when that which is personally done by one, is accounted and
reckoned unto another, and laid upon his score as if he had done it. Imputari
dicitur. illud alicui, quod in aliquo non inhaeret seu existit realiter, sed
tamen ei adscribitur, ac si in ipso realiter inhaereret and existeret: atque
adeo quod in ipsum transfertur. Pet. Ravan.
Thus it is in this very case: We sinned and fell short of the glory of God,
and became obnoxious to the vindictive justice of God: and the Lord Jesus
Christ by his obedience and death, has given content and satisfaction unto
divine justice in our behalf: Now when God does pardon and accept us hereupon,
he does put it upon our account; he does reckon it or impute it unto us, as
fully in respect of the benefit thereof, as if we our selves had performed it,
in our own persons. This is not a notion only invented by men, but it is the
way wherein the holy Ghost expresses it, Romans 4.6. Even as David also
describes the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes righteousness,
without works. And v. 11. That righteousness might be imputed unto them also.
And therefore let me entreat you to mind this Scripture rule: That in order to
the satisfaction of the justice of God, the sins of God's people were imputed
and reckoned unto Christ; and in order to our partaking of the benefit of that
satisfaction, or deliverance thereby, Christ's righteousness must be imputed
and reckoned unto us. The first branch of this rule you have, Isa. 53.5, 6. He
was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, etc. and
the Lord laid upon him the iniquity of us all. And for the other branch of the
rule, see Romans 5.19. As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners; so by
the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. How did Adam's sin become
ours? Why, by way of imputation. He transgressed the Covenant, and did eat the
forbidden fruit, and it was justly reckoned unto us. It was personally the
sinful act of our first parents; but it is imputed to many, even to all of us
who proceeded out of his loins: For we were in him, not only natural, as he was
the root of mankind, but also legally as he was the great Representative of
mankind. In the covenant of works and the transactions thereof, Adam stood in
the stead, and acted in the behalf, not only of himself, but of all his
posterity; and therefore his sin is reckoned unto them. Even so, says the
Apostle, After the same manner, the obedience and righteousness of Christ is
made over to many for justification.

6. Observe further, to complete this argument, in the last place, That no
persons whatsoever of the children of men can have the righteousness of Christ
imputed to them, but only such as are in Christ: Such as are united to him, and
made one with him; For Sirs, Union is the very ground of imputation. The sin of
Adam had not been reckoned to us, nor laid to our charge, unless we had been
legally and by way of representation in Adam (which is the reason, that the
sins of our more immediate parents and ancestors are not reckoned to us,
further than we personally comply with them, and follow their example, Ezekiel.
18.14, 15, 16, 17.) so we cannot have the obedience of Christ made over to us
and reputed as ours; but first in order of nature we must be in him. Est autem
Christus justitia nostra. Sed quomodo per illam, ut alienam, possumus
justificari ad vitam aeternam? Respondeo, sicut Paulus inquit, Gal. 3.
Quicunque in Christum baptizati estis, Christum induistis. Simul ergo ejus
etiam justitia induti sumus. Chemn. exam. Conc. Trid.
2 Cor. 5.21. That we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Phil. 3.9.
That I may be found in him, not having my own righteousness which is of the
law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness
which is of God by faith. Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus. Unless they be in him, they are condemned: For,
no union with the Son, and no justification in the sight of God, through his
righteousness.

This is the first fundamental blessing which has dependence upon union with
Christ, viz. The grace of justification.

2. There is the grace of adoption, or inrollment amongst the number of the
children of God: whereby we are enabled to look up unto him as a Father, and
have a right to all the privileges belonging to the sons and daughters of the
most High. As by the grace of conversion we are returned back again to the
service of the Lord; so by adoption we are readmitted into the number of the
children of God. You know, the Church of Christ is called God's household or
family: Now, the work of conviction, and humiliation, and legal terrors bring a
sinner to the door of the house: Effectual calling and sanctification open the
door for entrance into the house, and fit the sinner to live according to the
laws of the family: Justification clothes him as a member of the household; and
Adoption puts him amongst the children, Gal. 4.5. That we might receive the
adoption of sons; that is, that we might be taken out of Satan's family (for by
nature we are of our father the devil, Joh. 8.44.) and instated into the number
of God's children: This is a very precious mercy. What can a person want who
has such a father to provide for him? If earthly parents take care for their
children, will not the God of heaven supply the necessities of his little ones?
Shall they be in distress and will not he succor them? Mat. 6.32. With what
boldness may they come to the throne of grace, and beg whatever they need, and
be assured not to be sent away empty? Now this blessed privilege depends upon
our union with Jesus Christ: As it was a mercy purchased by his blood, so it is
actually conferred upon those that are in him. The Lord Jesus is the natural,
eternal, only begotten Son of God, who lies in the bosom of the Father; and
when we are married unto Christ, we become the children of God also; by virtue
of our conjunction with his Son, and neerness of relation unto his Son, Ephesians.
1.5. Having predestined us to the adoption of children, by Jesus Christ unto
himself. And if you enquire when this purpose is executed, and we actually
become his children? The same Apostle will resolve it, when we are in Christ.
Predestination has designed us unto this privilege, and union with Christ
does instate us in it, Gal. 3.26. For ye are the children of God by faith in
Christ Jesus; by that grace which knitteth you unto Jesus. This is a second
Argument of the necessity of having the Son: For no union with Christ, no
adoption of children by him. Therefore the Lord is our Father because Christ's
Father, and our God because his God, we being one with him.

3. The third fundamental blessing, which I shall mention as flowing from
oneness with Christ, and having a necessary dependence thereupon, is, The
participation of the supplies of the Spirit of Jesus, to guide us in our
journey to the kingdom of heaven. As a sinner must partake of regenerating
grace from the Spirit, to put him in the way of everlasting life; so he stands
in need of the continued supplies of that good Spirit, to conduct and keep him
in that way. Besides the first grace which brings us unto Christ, there must
be fresh influence, or actual strength derived from Christ, for the assistance,
succor, and support of a Believer on all occasions: And this influence is
imparted to us from Christ, by virtue of our being knit to him. No union with
the Son, no communication of spiritual strength and influence from the Son,
Isa. 45.24. Surely shall one say, In the Lord have I righteousness and
strength. In the Lord] that is, in Jesus, the Mediator, who is Jehovah God
blessed for ever. In him] or through him, by virtue of my being in him; I have
not only righteousness, but strength also; that is, actual grace to help in the
times of need. It plainly relates unto Christ, unto whom every knee shall bow,
and every tongue shall swear, v. 23. Upon which Text the Apostle himself is a
Commentat^r, Romans 14.10, 11. I will endeavor to make this very plain to your
understandings (being a matter of much weight and moment as to the life of
Religion) by handling it in a way of gradation, in three steps.

1. In the first place you must remember, That a Christian is not able to keep
on in his journey toward heaven, so as to arrive with safety at that
everlasting Kingdom, only by the strength of habitual grace bestowed upon him
in his first conversion; but there must be a daily communication of further
grace unto the soul, or of fresh actual strength conveyed into the soul. It is
not enough that the principles of holiness be at first formed in the heart, but
there must be a constant supply of fresh influence imparted to us, or else we
should quickly fall short in our travel toward Canaan. As the air is not
maintained in light, barely by the first rising of the Sun upon it, expelling
darkness out of the air, and spreading abroad his beams into it: but there must
be a constant issuing forth of fresh beams from the Sun, and streamings forth
of new influence into the air: else it would quickly return to its former
darkness. Let but the Sun go down, or some opacous body interpose to hinder the
fresh beamings of it forth, and the air would presently become black again;
notwithstanding the first light that was put into it. Thus it is in our
spiritual concernments, We cannot be maintained in a state of favor with God,
and carried on to glory, merely by the strength of habitual grace, p^anted at
first within us, in our regeneration: but there must be further grace imparted
to us. The beams of the Sun of righteousness must be still issuing forth upon
us fresh and fresh; or else we should quickly faulter in the working out our
salvation. This fresh influence of the Holy Ghost is usually called in the
Schools Actual grace: And in the Scripture you have it under the name of The
supplies of the spirit, Spiritus subministratio est praesidium, and consolatio,
and omne spiritus sancti bonum quo servamur contra omnia scandala. Eras. Sacr.
ex Marl.
Phil. 1.19. For I know that this shall turn to my salvation, through your
prayer, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. Mark it Sirs, As there is
a standing stock of habitual holiness put into the soul in the day of
conversion; so there is a constant supply given forth upon all occasions for
maintaining and promoting of that stock. As there is the regenerating work of
the Spirit, so there are additional incomes or supplies of the same Spirit:
Which are elsewhere called The strengthenings of the Spirit, Ephesians. 3.16. That he
would grant you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with
might by his Spirit in the inner man. There is the inner man, the new creature,
principally seated within, the hidden man of the heart; and there is auxiliary
strength shed abroad every day afresh into the inner man. This is a matter
heedfully to be regarded, and that calls for our most serious thoughts, in
the study of it; and that for three reasons.

1. Because, herein does lie a special difference between the state of man in
his primitive perfection, under the Covenant of works, and the state of
believers under the Covenant of peace and reconciliation: and indeed the
excellency and stedfastness of the latter, above the former. In the state of
innocence man had a sufficient stock of holiness, and spiritual power to
manage: but now in Christ there is provision made for constant supplies, to
carry us on in the management thereof. Under the Covenant of works man had
power to stand, if he would: but in the Covenant of grace there is fresh
strength also provided, to work in us both to will and to do, Phil. 2.12, 13.
There is not only a new heart, and a new spirit given to the servants of
Christ, whereby they are qualified and disposed to the keeping of God's
statutes: But a further actual ability is imparted unto them, whereby they are
caused to walk in the way of those Statutes, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.

2. From hence it many times comes to pass, that weak Christians stand fast in
those trials, wherein the stronger fall; and overcome the temptation, whereby
they are foiled. Here you have a great reason of the difference, that is
between one Believer and another in the same case, and under the like trial. A
Peter may fall foully, who is a pillar in the Church, a cedar in the Forest:
and another ^^ay stand fast, in the same hour of temptation, who is in
comparison but a shrub, and of low statute in the faith. How can this be?
whence does it proceed? Why, though the strong Christian has arrived at an
higher pitch and degree, in respect of habitual grace; yet resting upon himself
for strength, God might justly be provoked to leave him unto himself: And he
who is weaker in the faith, as to the habits of grace, yet keeping his spirit
in a constant dependence upon the Lord, Sanctum opus semper inspirae in me, ut
cogitem: compelle, ut faciam; suade, ut diligam: confirma me, ut te teneam:
custodione, nete perdam, Aug.
might have more actual assistance imparted to him, so as to be enabled to hold
on his way, when the other shrinks back. This is palpably apparent in the
example of Peter, who was a man of great forwardness and courage in the cause
of Christ: yet how shamefully did he deny his Master? Because trusting in his
own strength, the Lord was pleased to withdraw his actual assistance, that he
might learn thereafter to live in the sense of his own weakness. Thus Hezekiah
fell in the business of the Ambassadors of the King of Babylon, although he was
a man of eminent piety: yet the Lord left him, and then corruption discovered
it self, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. How did God leave him? Not as to the principle of
habitual grace; for that is an abiding principle, never taken from a person on
whom it is once conferred: But God left him, as to these fresh supplies of the
spirit; he withheld from him, for that time, such efficacious assistance, as
whereby he might have vanquished the temptation: and then his deceitful heart
prevailed and carried him aside.

3. This is a point which deserves well to be studied, not only that we may be
provoked thereby, to live in a constant dependence upon God for further grace,
to help in the time of need: but likewise, that we may be stirred up to give
all the glory of (...)

There is Actual 1. Exciting grace. 2. Cooperating grace. 3. Resisting grace.
4. Supporting grace. 5. Restoring. grace. 6. Increasing grace. 7. Stablishing
grace.


1. There is Exciting grace, whereby the principle of holiness is awakened, and
stirred up, and put into a readiness unto that which is good. For although
there are habits of grace always resident in the hearts of the godly, yet
those habits are not always in a present aptness and preparedness unto the
matters of godliness. What a listlessness and heaviness is oftentimes upon the
heart of a sincere Christian? So that he has grace to seek, when he is called
to the exercise of it: he is not in a readiness to bring it forth into act. And
therefore we have need frequently to quicken our hearts, and to awaken and stir
up the grace of God that is within us. It was the complaint of the Lord against
his people, that they did not stir up themselves to take hold of him, Isa.
64.7. There needs exciting grace and assistance, to stir us up unto practical
holiness; that our loins may be girt, and our lamps burning, and our selves [in
procinctu] in a readiness to every good work; as the exhortation is, Luke
12.35. Tit. 3.1. How much is David in prayer, that God would quicken him? Psalm.
119.37. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken thou me in thy
way, Psalm. 80.18. Quicken us, and we will call upon thy name, Psalm. 86.11.
Unite mine heart to fear thy name; q. d. Gather the forces of my soul together,
that they may conspire, as (...) be wandering and out of the way: when I have
use for them, then they are to seek: O Lord call them in, and put them into a
readiness. Now this exciting influence proceeds from Christ, and is given
forth unto them that are ingraffed into him. It is he that knocks at the door
of the heart, to awaken believers out of their security; and to put them into a
posture, that they may be ready to follow him whithersoever he shall lead them,
Cant. 5.2.

2. There is Cooperating grace, or assistance to do the will of God: whereby
the new creature is set on work, and enabled to walk in the way of Gods
commandments. For Sirs, herein lies a vast difference between the principles
of sin, which are naturally seated in the soul, and the habits of holiness
which in the new birth are introduced into the soul. The principles of sin can
work of themselves, without any foreign assistance to reduce them into act. If
there were no devil to tempt us unto ungodliness, the corrupt heart of man
would be a tempter to it self, Jam. 1.14. and would rush on into wickedness of
its own accord: But the habits of grace cannot act of themselves, there must be
renewed strength imparted to set them on work, which we may fitly call
cooperating grace, Psalm. 119.35. Make me to go in the path of thy
commandments, for therein do I delight. Though David had a spirit of new life
within him, yet he could not actually walk in the path of God's precepts, till
by an additional force he was set a going. Cant. 4.16. Awake, O North wind, and
come thou South Wind, blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow
out. By the garden, understand a sanctified soul; and by the spices in this
garden may be meant the (...) (...) sistance of the Spirit it is educed into
act. And this cooperating assistance is in Christ, and issued forth unto them
that are one with him, 2 Timothy 2.1. Thon therefore, my Son, be strong in the
grace that is in Christ Jesus. That is, Get assistance from him, out of his
fullness, to strengthen thee to the discharge of the work of the Lord.

3. There is resisting grace, to oppose temptations unto sin, and to vanquish
and overcome the assaults of the devil. Although in the first work of
conversion there is a secret antipathy set up in the spirit against sin; yet if
you would be actually free from the taint of it, there must be further strength
to help you, in grapling with temptations unto sin. And this also is in Christ,
to be communicated unto his members, Ephesians. 6.10. The Apostle does exhort us to
be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Not to enter the lists in
our own strength, but to put on the whole armor of God, that we may be able to
stand against the wiles of the devil. And the spiritual combat maintained by a
child of God is called The fight of faith: because sin is especially opposed by
the exercise of faith, and the victory obtained through faith in Jesus; by
which, fresh supplies of strength are fetched down from him, 1 Timothy 6.12.

4. The fourth sort of actual strength is supporting grace, for the bearing
such burdens as are laid upon us. Strength to enable us, with an holy
quietness, and submission, to endure afflictions and hardships, (...) thy to
suffer in his cause; and you have ability miniffred to carry you through
sufferings, to keep your hearts from sinking in the day of tribulation, and
adversity. As you are called to suffer, so through the supplies of Christ's
Spirit you are empowered and fortified thereunto.

5. Restoring grace, To recover us out of that deadness, into which we are apt
to fall; and to call us back from those decays unto which believers are
subject. For though habitual grace shall never be quite lost, yet the vigor of
it may be much abated: in which respect a Believer may be said to lose his
first love, Rev. 2.4. And though grace remain, yet in this sense it may be said
to be ready to die, Rev. 3, 2. Now for the restoring of a man's soul to its
former life and activity, and reviving upon the new man its ancient luster and
beauty, there must be fresh strength communicated. Which reviving strength is
stored up in the Son, and given forth to them that have the Son. It is by the
fresh beams of the Sun of righteousness, that the clouds are dispelled, and the
mists are driven away; and the soul of a Christian is made to look forth as the
morning: according as it is expressed, Cant. 6.10.

6. There is increasing grace for augmentation of the principle of holiness;
that the new man may artive at his full growth and stature unto which he is
appointed. And it is by grace which is in Jesus Christ the head, and by fresh
influence out of his fullness, that the body makes increase unto the edifying
of it self, Ephesians. 4.16.

7. Lastly, establishing and confirming grace, whereby Believers are fixed and
settled unto the end. And this likewise is from Christ, by virtue of union with
him. It is in Jesus Christ we are preserved, Jude 1. Being rooted in him, we
become established in the faith, Col. 2.7.

So much for the third signal mercy or blessing which flows from ingrafture
into Christ, and has dependence thereupon: namely, The communication of the
supplies of the Spirit.

4. A fourth mercy that depends upon having the Son, or union with the Son, is,
The gracious acceptance of all our service and duties. Take an unconverted
sinner, and he may do many things in Religion; he may suffer much upon a
religious account, and be at much cost and expense in his profession and
practice; And the God of heaven has no regard unto it. Herein lies the misery
of a man out of Christ, that whatsoever he does for God, is not accepted of the
Lord. He may make many prayers, and lose all his labor therein: For the cars
of the God of heaven are shut against them, Isa. 1.15. When you spread forth
your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: yea, when you make many prayers I
will not hear. When you spread forth your hands] that is, Although you call
upon me with never so much seeming earnestness; although you seek after me in a
solemn and seemingly affectionate manner, with your hands stretched out toward
heaven: I will hide mine eyes from you] i. e. I will (...) in a way cannot
endure the sight of them. And when you multiply to pray, I will be so far from
granting your requests, that I will turn away my self in disdain from you: I
will not so much as give you the hearing. O what a sad word is this to the
ungodly! They trust in their duties, when the Lord abhors them. See another
Text setting forth their deplorable condition in this respect, Jer. 7.21. Thus
says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, Put your burnt offerings unto your
sacrifices, and eat flesh. It is unto the wicked he is speaking, and it amounts
to this. As if he had said, Keep your duties to your selves, I will have
nothing to do with them: make your best of your offerings, and never bring them
unto me, as long as you live in your iniquities. Their burnt offerings, or
Holocausts, were wholly to be burnt; but as for their sacrifices, the offerers
themselves might eat some part of them. Now says God to those impenitent
sinners, Take them and and eat them both; put them together, and use them your
selves, make your best advantage of them, for I regard them not. Mark it, These
were costly duties, and in respect to their signification they were Evangelical
duties: but whilst they were still in their sins, God has no delight in them.
What course then shall a man take, that his sacrifices may be accepted? Why, he
must get into Christ, and be knit to him: for this is a mercy which flows
from union with him. Then, if he offer up his duties in the Name of Christ, the
work is owned, and the concomitant infirmities will be passed over.
Particularly, then his supplications and prayers shall be graciously answered:
which is (...) given. The Lord will withold no good thing from him, Joh.
15.7. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will,
and it shall be done unto you. O what a mercy is this, to have the King's eat?
the ear of the King of kings? Your heavenly Father will deny you nothing. And
for the general acceptance of all their duties of God's appointment, consult
the Text, 1 Pet. 2.5. Ye also as lively stones are built up a spiritual house,
an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ; q. d. Then your performances will be accepted through him, when ye your
selves are built upon him, and cemented unto him. Here is another proof of the
indispensable necessity of this Union, No having the Son, and no acceptance of
any duties whatsoever.

5. Another blessing which flows from union with Christ, and is attainable
only thereby, is, A title to the promises of the Gospel, which concern this
life, or that which is to come. And this is a matter of unspeakable
concernment: for if you would enjoy the mercies conveyed by the promises, you
must have an interest in the promises. You must secure a title to them, as your
heritage, and portion; and then they will prove a rich treasury, or magazine,
to furnish you with every thing needful for life, comfort, and happiness. There
can be nothing desired for the advancement of a man's welfare, which is not
contained therein. The promises are the foundation on which our hope is
bottomed; Indeed herein it differs from presumption, which expects mercy from
God, without a word of promise, to warrant the expectation thereof. But good
hope through grace is built upon the word, Psalm. 119.49. Remember the word unto
thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope. If a person entertain
strong hopes of mercy, and salvation, without a word for it, or against the
word; that is hope of the devils causing: or such as proceeds from the
delusion and cozenage of his own Spirit: it will prove such an hope as will
make him ashamed at length; and will be like the giving up the Ghost. When God
causes a man to hope, it is built upon the word; that is, the word of promise,
whereby mercy is entailed upon the servants of the Lord. And, pray mark it
Sirs, you can have no title to the promises, so as to rest upon them, and to be
able to plead them with God, and to lay hold upon them as your heritage, till
you have the Son, and are knit unto Jesus: For in him they are established.
They are part of the inheritance prepared for the Saints; and unless a person
be married to the heir, he can lay no just claim to the inheritance, 2 Cor.
1.20. For in him all the promises of God are yea, and in him Amen, unto the
glory of God by us. And therefore the promise is said to be given through faith
in Christ, Gal. 3.22. that is, A title to the promise, or the enjoyment of the
mercy promised, is made over to a sinner by faith in Christ: by that uniting
grace, which joyneth us unto Christ.

This is the fifth special mercy depending upon union with the Son. Except you
have the Son, the Mediator of the Covenant; you can have no right to the
promises contained in the Covenant. Your title to them, does result and flow
from your oneness with him.

6. There is Union with God the Father, and an intimate acquaintance with him.
Whilst out of Christ, we are at a distance from the Father: yea, at an enmity
with him. He is a consuming fire, and we are as so much briars and thorns: and
it were a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. But by having
the Son, that distance is removed, and the enmity taken away, and we are knit
unto God; so as to have fellowship and communion with him. As Christ is in the
Father, and the Father in him: so Believers by being in Christ, are in the
Father also, Joh. 17.21. That they also may be one in us. Not only in Jesus the
Mediator, but in the Father likewise, by means of their being in Jesus. So 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. Unto the Church of the Thessalonians, which is in God the Father,
and in the Lord Jesus Christ. It was the end of Christ's sufferings in the
flesh, that he might bring sinners unto God; and by virtue of their union with
the Son they are actually brought unto him, and knit unto the Father also. O
what a wonderful advancement is this, to sinful dust and ashes! To poor
despicable creatures, that dwell in houses of clay! With what astonishment
should it fill us? What a springhead of all manner of consolation is here? Who
would not be a Christian? not only almost, but altogether? Who would not have
fellowship, and hold a correspondency with the Saints? For truly their
fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ: as the Apostle
mentions it by way of gloriation and boasting, 1 John 1.3.

This is the sixth fundamental blessing. By having the Son, they have the
Father also.

7. A Believers union with Christ, is the ground of all that peace and joy in
the holy Ghost, which puts true gladness into the heart, and life and
sweetness into every condition, and providence. The joy of the hypocrite is but
for a moment, and the pleasures of sin are poor, empty, external pleasures: In
the midst of laughter, the heart is in bitterness: they have many a secret
griping of conscience, that spoileth their mirth; and many a fearful surprizal
upon their spirits, that marreth all their jollity. Let them be set in the
midst of their riotings and revellings, their banquettings and carowsings,
amidst all the content and pleasure that sin and the world can afford: and one
serious thought of judgment to come, will overturn it wholly: one flash of hell
in the conscience, will put an end to their rejoycings. It will quickly befall
them as it befell Belshazzar; The appearance but of the likeness of a man's
fingers upon the wall, made his countenance change, and his thoughts trouble
him, and the joints of his loins to be loosed, and his knees to smite one
against another: and that, when he was in the top of his gallantry, and in the
height of his merriment, Dan. 5.5, 6. O, thinks the poor carnal wretch, what
will become of my precious and immortal soul? Can all these enjoyments deliver
me from the pit of destruction? Who can dwell with everlasting burnings? Isa.
33.14. But the people of God have such peace as passes understanding: such a
sweet calm and tranquillity in their spirits, that they can rejoice with joy
unspeakable, even in the midst of afflictions. The joy of the ungodly is worse
than sorrow: It is but a fit of madness, proceeding from ignorance of the state
they are in. If they knew but their own condition, it would fill them with
vexation, and horror and anguish of heart: But great peace have they that fear
the Lord and are in Covenant with him, Meditationes rerum divinarum voluptates
sensus, non tantum potestate, sed etiam suavitate superant. Bacon. de sap.
Veter.
nothing shall offend them, Psalm. 119.165. Their portion is peace, peace; that
is, perfect peace, nothing but peace and serenity which will put gladness into
the heart, greater than the joy of harvest, Isa. 26.3. And, pray, whence does
this peace arise? Why, originally from their union with Christ: All peace out
of him will end in sadness: it is but as the crackling of thorns under a pot.
In him our consolation is stored up, and given forth by virtue of our
conjunction with him, Joh. 16.33. These things have I spoken to you, that in me
ye might have peace. If any of the children of God are under disquietness and
perplexities upon their spirits, it is for want of the evidences of their union
with Christ; or through their neglect of the right improvement thereof. For
here is a fountain to fill up a Believers joy, Joh. 15.11. These things have I
spoken to you, that my joy might remain with you, and that your joy might be
full. What were those things which Christ had spoken to them? It was the
doctrine of a Believers ingrafture into him, and abiding in him; and the
consequents and concomitants thereof: in the sormer part of that Chap. So that,
no union with Christ, no solid peace or satisfaction in the soul; no true joy
in the Spirit: For all manner of consolation and revivings from him, depend
upon our oneness with him.

8. It is a believers union with the Lord Jesus, which gives him deliverance
from the sting and curse of death: and consequentially, from the fear of that
king of terrors. It is this conjunction with the Son, which makes the last
change, to be a comfortable and happy exchange, that alters the nature of
death, from a curse into a blessing. So that a Christian is able to bid it
welcome, and to look it in the face with boldness: it being disarmed as far as
it is an enemy, and having the venom and malignity taken out of it. This is a
very precious and unvaluable mercy: For it is the fear of death which keeps
sinners all their life time, in bondage; and puts a kind of Coloquintida into
every enjoyment. O death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that
is at ease? to every impenitent sinner? There is a terribleness to the
unregenerate, in the apprehensions of death, upon every account: But as it is
the passage unto eternity, it is the greatest of terrors, Job 18.14. Mark it, I
say, there is a dread in the thoughts of it every way. Death may be considered
in a threefold respect. 1. As it is a dissolution, between the soul and the
body: as it parts and separates those ancient friends, which have long
conversed intimately together. And thus it startleth a sinner, to think of
leaving his old habitation, having no better provided in the stead of it: But a
Believer can triumph in this respect, and say with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.1. If
our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God,
an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. 2. If you consider it as
it is a period, and puts an end to all worldly accommodations; so it cannot but
perplex a sinner. The place of his habitation shall know him no more: he shall
be then stripped and divested of whatever earthly comforts have been dear unto
him: His heart is glewed unto the world, and what anguish and bitterness must
it needs create, to think of being taken from all? But now a child of God has
something to counterballance this loss, even a better, and far more enduring
substance, Heb. 10.34. 3. As death is a passage unto eternity, so it is
dreadful indeed. O thinks the sinner, what will become of my soul for ever?
When I go hence and be no more upon the Land of the living, into what chains of
darkness, what an eternal prison must I be sent, amongst devils and damned
spirits? But a sincere Christian can cheerfully welcome it, under this
consideration also. He knows it is but a messenger sent from his heavenly
Father, to conduct him home to his mansion place; and to bring him into nearer
fellowship with his Redeemer. It puts an end to all sin, and temptations, and
troubles of every sort; and opens a door of entrance into unspeakable joys
that shall never end. O Sirs, what a privilege is this to be able to triumph
over death? It is that unto which we are subject every moment: Quotidie
morimur, quotidie enim demitur aliqua pars vitae: Et tunc quoque cum crescimus,
vita decrescit -- hunc ipsum quem agimus diem, cum morte dividimus. Sen. Epist.
24.
and what is that which will sweeten the passage, and remove the fears which
are usually attendant upon the contemplation of it? Why, It is our interest in
Christ, and union with him. He drank that bitter cup, yea, the very dregs of
it, that he might sweeten it unto such as are in him, 1 Cor. 15.53, 54, 55. O
death, where i^ thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is
sin, and the strength ^f sin is the Law. But thanks be to God, who gives us
the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Christ tasted an accursed death,
that it might be made a blessing to his members, Rev. 14.13. And I heard a
vo^ce from heaven, saying unto me, write, Blessed are the dead which die in the
Lord. It is not a being called Christians which will render the day of death a
blessed day; nor an outward attendance upon Christ: but getting into him.
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord.

9. A believers union with Jesus Christ, is a sure inlet unto a glorious
resurrection out of the dust of the earth: when this corruptible shall put on
incorruption, and this mortal shall put on immortality. And therefore observe
it Sirs, Although the wicked shall be raised at the last day as well as the
godly, yet not by the same means through which the godly are raised. The wicked
shall be raised by the power of Christ as a Judge: but Believers shall rise
again by virtue of their oneness with Christ, and near relation unto him, 1
Cor. 15.22, 23. For as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive.
But every man in his own order: Christ the first fruits, afterward they that
are Christ's at his coming. Such as sleep in Jesus, shall awake by virtue of
their being in him: and thereupon their vile bodies shall be changed and
fashioned like to his glorious body. Romans 8.11. He that raised up Christ from
the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by [or because] his Spirit that
dwells in you.

Vivificari in hac sententia significat resurrectionem gloriosam, quae similis
est Christi resurrectioni, and propria bonis in quibus inhabitat spiritus.
Illud autem [Propter inhabitantem spiritum ejus] ad Christum refertur, non ad
Deum. Et in hoc est argumenti efficacia, quia enim spiritus hic Dei qui in
nobis habitat; etiam Christi est. Sicus Christum ut homo, a Patre suscitatus
est; ita and nos suscitabimur qui eundem cum Christo spiritum habemus. Tolet.
in loc.


To which that passage of the Prophet Isaiah may be fitly referred; which
though it primarily be intended of outward deliverance, and the wonderful
restoration of the Church, out of such a forlorn and desperate estate, as that
they were as dead: yet it may extend also to the last resurrection, of which
that eminent deliverance was but a shadow and resemblance, Isa. 26.19. Thy dead
men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise: awake and sing ye
that dwell in the dust, for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall
give up her dead. This is another blessing which flows from this fountain.

10. Our union with Christ Jesus will minis^er boldness at the bar of Judgment:
and cause us to lift up our faces without spot or confusion at that great and
notable day of the Lord. How will the wicked be ashamed to look Christ in the
face at that day, seeing that now they despise him, and trample his blood under
their feet? seeing that now they slight his word, and contemn his Ordinances,
and his people? Then the Kings, and the chief Captains, and the great men, and
the mighty men, and every bondsman and freeman; I mean, all impenitent sinners
of what rank or quality soever; Will be ready to call upon the rocks to fall
upon them, and the mountains to cover them from the presence of him that
sits upon the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. Then what would not a
man give to be able to assure his heart before Christ at his appearance? and to
be of the number of Christ's followers, that shall stand at his right hand,
when the ungodly are trembling at the left? Why, It is not all the substance of
a man's house can purch^se this privilege; It is not all your prayers and tears
at that day that can do it; (though you should cry out your heart blood) if you
are unconverted sinners. But it depends wholly upon your union with Christ, 1 John 2.28. And noor, little children, abide in him, that when he shall appear,
we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming, 1 Thessalonians.
4.14. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which
sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. Mark it, He will summon the wicked
before him; but such as are members of his body he will bring with him; i. e.
in his train and company, under his own shelter; and protection. Christ himself
will undertake the patronage of their cause, and to silence all the accusations
of Satan, which are brought in against them. Well may they exult, and be glad;
for it will be the day of the consummation of their marriage with their
Redeemer. If now they are espoused and contracted, then they shall be married
with the greatest solemnity, in the presence of God and of his holy Angels.
Then will that vision be most notably fulfilled, Rev. 21.2, 3, 4. I John saw
the holy City, new Jerusalem, coming downfrom God out of heaven, prepared as a
bride, adorned for her husband.

This is the tenth mercy which depends upon our union with Christ.

11. Lastly, It is our having the Son, or being united unto the Son which will
give us actual admission into the kingdom of glory: and possession of the
inheritance prepared for the Saints. When the wicked are sent into everlasting
punishment, then shall the righteous inherit eternal life. When the ungodly are
thrust together into hell, then shall believers dwell in the presence of God
for ever: and drink of the rivers of pleasures, which are at his right ^and:
and be made perfectly blessed in the fuil enjoyment of him, unto all eternity.
And this by virtue of their union with the Son of God; and because they are so
nearly related unto him, Joh. 17.22. The glory which thou gave me, I have
given them. Who are these of whom our Savior speaks? Why, such as are in
Christ, and in God the Father through Christ, v. 21. And again v. 24. Father I
will, that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they
may behold my glory, which thou have given me. So that all sorts of blessings
are conveyed in this way: from the leading mercy of forgiveness of sin, to the
very consummation of a believers happiness. First God does unite his people
unto Christ, and then he does bless them with all subsequent blessings in
Christ; from the acceptance of their persons, to the very crown of
righteousness. So much shall suffice to be spoken unto the fifth general head
of enquiry, touching the signal benefits that flow from our union with Christ;
and for evincing the necessity thereof.

CHAP. IX. The special similitudes, made use of in the Scriptures, for
illustration of this Mystery, of Union with Christ.
6. THere is yet one question more to be answered, before I come to the
Application and practical improvement of the Point. The question is this.

Qu. What are the special similitudes, or resemblances which the holy Ghost is
pleased to make use of, for illustration of this mystery, of a believers union
with the Lord Jesus Christ?

Answ. I answer, There are principally four. Which I shall not handle at large,
as if I designed to show you, in all particulars that might be reckoned up,
wherein the proportion holds: Only I will select a few things, under each of
those similitudes, which will be most obvious, and apposite to our purpose; and
of greatest use for giving us light into this mystery and privilege.

A Believers union with Christ is illustrated by comparisons taken from the 1.
Natural. 2. Corporal. 3. Conjugal. 4. Artificial.


Union, that there is between the 1. Head and members of the natural body. 2.
Vine and branches graffed into the vine. 3. Husband and Wife, married together.
4. Foundation and building, erected thereupon.


1. The first similitude which I shall open, for the further illustration of
the grace of union with Christ, is taken from the head and members of the
natural body. The Lord Jesus the Mediator is the head of the Church, and his
people are his body; and every individual Saint is a member of that body; so
they are compacted and knit together. Thus the holy Ghost does condescend, in
compliance with our weakness, to shadow forth heavenly things under the figure
of earthly, Col. 1.18. And he is the head of the body, the Church: who is the
beginning, the first born from the dead; that in all things he might have the
pre-eminence.

(...) The Church here is compared to a vineyard, that brings forth fruit
unto God: and the Lord himself has undertaken the charge and custody of it. So
that if you get into Christ, you need not be troubled at events, what may befall
you: you may cast your care upon him, who is the keeper of Israel, and will
take the care of you. He will destroy the little foxes that spoil the vines, as
his care is set forth, Cant. 2.15. He will root up the errors, that endanger
the faith of his people: and pluck up the Schisms, that tend to the destruction
of their peace; further than may be fit to exercise them for their good, and to
make manifest such as are approved. He will weed up the corruptions out of the
hearts of his people, and in due time put a stop to the rage of persecutors:
and whatever is noxious and prejudicial shall be averted, and taken out of the
way.

3. He is the head of the Church, In respect of influence, and virtue derived
from him, upon it. As from the head are derived the animal spirits, for motion
and sensation in the body, and by it vigor and activity is put into the body:
So Christ does minister unto the supply of his Church, and people, on all
occasions. By him the Spirit is sent down from above, and all their vacuities
are filled up, Phil. 4.19. My God shall supply all your need, according to his
riches in glory, by Christ Jesus. That Is the third respect of his headship.

4. In respect of his completion, and perfecting by the Church. The head is not
complete without the body: Every part and member thereof does help to the
perfection of the whole. Thus does the Lord (...) himself imperfect, till his
body be filled up. And therefore the Church which is his body, is called The
fullness of him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.23. In his person he is
complete, without the least taint of an imperfection: As to his Godhead he is
infinite, he fills all in all: But as he is the head of his Church he
accounts himself to be defective, till all his people are gathered unto him.

5. Christ is the Head of the Church, upon the account of their near relation
to him, and intimate union with him. They are as clesly knit together, as the
body is to the head. And this is true, not only of the Church in general; but
every particular Christian is united unto the head, and partaketh of the
influence of it, 1 Cor. 12.27. Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in
particular. That Is the first thing to be noted under this similitude.

2. In pursuance of this comparison, observe further, That the way wherein a
Believer is knit unto Christ, it is by being quickened through the Spirit of
Jesus Christ. For wherein lies the conjunction between the head and the body?
Why principally in this, that they are both animated with the same soul. There
is nothing properly and strictly, a part of the body, unless it partake of life
with it. So the Saints are quickened by the Spirit of the Son; thereby he
joyneth them to himself, and inableth them to take hold of him, and cleave unto
him, Ut Christus similitudinem capitis naturalis gerit, and Ecclesia coporis
naturalis, ita elect orum tantum Rex and caput Christus est: quia in ^os tantum
vi(...) electi seli sunt, quia soli Christo tanquam a capite naturali
spiritualiter vegetantur. Part. de Pol. Eccles.

Christus non aliter caput est, quam ut Ecclesiae vitam praebet. Whitak.


Ephesians. 2.5. Even when we were dead in sins and trespasses, he has quickened us
together with Christ: with the same Spirit wherewith (...) Ghost which is
poured forth upon him. And if we are alive unto God, it is through Jesus Christ
our Lord, Romans 6.11.

3. According to the tenor of this resemblance, If we are made one with our
Lord Jesus, we must of necessity give up our selves in subjection to him, and
be ready to follow his conduct. The members of the body are subject to the
head: As the head dictates and commands, so the hands work, and the feet walk,
and the rest of the body is ordered. Such an authority must Christ have over
us, and we must be in a readiness to close, and comply with his directions, and
counsels: Or else it will be evident that we stand not in the relation of
members to him as our Head, Rev. 14.4. These are they which follow the Lamb,
whithersoever he goes: these were redeemed from amongst men, being the first
fruits unto God, and to the Lamb; that is, These who are the redeemed of the
Lord, are a people wholly dedicated and consecrated unto the service of Christ;
and to the worship of God in Christ; as the first fruits were set apart unto
the Lord, and devoted unto him. As the first fruits were but an handful in
comparison of the whole crop, so they were consecrated unto the most high: and
thus are God's redeemed ones; They are ready pressed to be at Christ's beck, and
to follow his guidance. See Ephesians. 5.23, 24. Christ is the head of the Church,
and the Savior of the body: and therefore the Church is subject unto him.

4. This Metaphor taken from the head and (...) hold forth that unity and
concord which Christians should maintain amongst themselves: and that mutual
love and tenderness, which they ought to entertain one toward another. They are
members of one body, whereof Christ is the Head: and therefore it is unseemly,
nay it is unnatural, for divisions to be amongst them. If one member be weak,
will the other enter into contest with it, and be filled with indignation
against it? Does not the whole body suffer, with one member that suffers? And
do they not mutually rejoice, at each others welfire? So should sincere
Christians be kindly affectionated one toward another, with brotherly love:
the weak should rejoice with the strong; and the strong bearing with the
infirmities of the weak, should help them; and not be filled with wrath and
bitterness amongst themselves. It is an argument often pressed to this purpose,
Ephesians. 4.3, 4. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of reace.
There is one body, and one spirit; q. d. Is it not a shame for you to fall out
by the way? Why, you are brethren, nay members of the same mystical body;
animated by the same Spirit, made partakers of the same workings of the Holy
Ghost, and under the conduct of the same head: see to it, that there be no
contentions amongst you; that you live at peace and amity between your selves.
This consideration is largely insisted on to this purpose, 1 Cor. 12, 13. to
25. v.

5. As our Lord Jesus the Mediator of the Covenant of peace and reconciliation,
has a peculiar relation of Headship unto the Church; so he is made the head of
all things, for the good and benefit of the Church. He is the Head of his own
people, in (...) and providential disposal of affairs, he is the Head of all
things, for their good. This is a matter of wonderful comfort to Believers. Art
thou an Israelite indeed? a Disciple of Christ in reality? Be not afraid, there
is nothing in the world can hurt thee, or hinder thy salvation: For that Jesus,
unto whom thou art joined, is ordained of God to be the head of all things; and
that unto this very intent, that he might guide and govern them in a
subordination to the good of his servants. Quemadmodum Christus similitudinem
capitis Politici gerit, ita quoscunque in Ecclesia externe regit, and non
electos so^um. Quid minus? Cum and gentium caput etiam sensu isto a Patre
Christus constitutus sit, Psalm. 18.44. Et Angelorum, qui nedum de Ecclesia
redempta sint Col. 2.10. imo and singularum personarum, sive de Ecclesia sint
vel non sint, 1 Cor. 11.3. Parker. de Pol. Eccl.
So I understand that Text, Ephesians. 1.22. He has put all things under his feet,
and gave him to be head over all things, to the Church, which is his body. Mark
it, in a peculiar sense he is the head of the Church, which is his body: but in
point of rule and authority, he is exalted as head over all things, to the
Church; i.e. with respect to his peoples good, that he may dispose and manage
them for their best advantage, according to that, Joh. 3.35. The Father loves
the Son, and has given all things into his hands. And Col. 2.10. Ye are
complete in him, who is the head of all principality and power. This is the
first similitude for illustration of this mystery, taken from the head and
members of the natural body.

2. The second great similitude which the Spirit of God has made use of, for
the elucidation and setting forth of this Mystery of a Believers oneness with
Christ, is taken from that Union which is betwixt the vine, and the branches
graffed into the vine. Or betwixt the root or stock, and the sience inserted
into the stock. Believers are trees of righteousness in God's vineyard, but
they do not grow upon their own root: The Lord Jesus is the root, whence all
their sap is derived. An hypocrite brings forth fruit unto himself, and he
grows upon his own root; If he have any adhaerance to Christ, it is but
external: But now a Saint indeed is graffed into Christ, and there is a
coalescency betwixt them into one, Joh. 15.5. I am the vine, ye are the
branches. He that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much
fruit. As if Christ had said, This is the comparison wherewith I may fitly
compare my near relation to you my Disciples, and such as you are.

I have had occasion already to touch upon this similitude, and therefore at
present I will but lightly pass over these four things.

1. That the whole dependence of Christians, in every respect, as to the
matters appertaining to life and godliness, is upon the Lord Jesus: and they
cannot subsist one moment without him. If they have spiritual life and
Saintship, it is from Christ: if they are upheld and maintained in that estate,
it is by Christ: and if they have strength and ability to work the works of
God, it is imparted through him: For they are branches in him, and he is the
vine. So that we have no cause to boast of our selves, nor is there any ground
for self-confidence, or trusting in our selves: But the whole life that we
live, should be by faith on the Son of God. All our fresh springs are in him.
Separate the branches from the vine, and they quickly decay and perish, and are
fit for nothing but the fire: so does the soul of a man or woman, if separated
from Christ, Romans 11.18. If thou boastest: thou bear not the root, but the
root thee. Let this, says the Apostle, keep down the pride of your hearts, do
not glory in your selves; for you have nothing from thence. If a man glory, set
him glory in the Lord: for all the sap and juice comes from the root. The
branch has nothing of its own, but what is received from thence. All your
support is by virtue of the root; so that walk humbly with God, in the sense of
your own emptiness, and utter insufficiency. And if you would live the life of
God indeed, have your constant recourse unto the Lord Jesus, and be drawing
nourishment from him: for thou stand by faith, Romans 11.20.

2. The similitude imports, That the union of a Believer with the Lord Jesus,
is a very closly compacted and intimate union: that they are very firmly, and
entirely, knit together. The branch, when it is graffed, becomes thereby
incorporated into the vine: so in a spiritual sense, there is a kind of
concorporation of Christ and his people together; and therefore it is
represented under the notion of being graffed into him. There is a deep and
inward connection between them: so deep and intimate, that they are called by
his Name, 1 Cor. 12.12. As the body is one, and has many members, and all the
members of that one body, being many, are one body: so also is Christ; i. e. so
is the company of Believers [Christ mystical] who are so knit closs unto
Christ, as if they were the same; as if they were consolidated into one.

3. From this resemblance we may observe, That a person cannot possibly be
united unto Jesus, till he be taken off from all other dependances whatsoever,
First there must be a cutting on the (...) stock in which it naturally grows,
before it can be graffed into another. First there must be an abscission,
before there can be an insition. A branch may grow near to the vine, without
being cut off from its old root: but it must be wholly cut off, ere it can be
graffed into the vine. Sirs, By nature we grow in the wild olive tree, we are
rooted in the old Adam, sin and self: for when men are convinced of sin,
presently they have recourse unto self, as a Savior to deliver them from their
sins. But if you would get into Christ, you must be taken off from these: As
you have it in the continued metaphor, or allegory, Romans 11.25. For if thou
were cut off out of the olive tree which is wild by nature, and were graffed
contrary to nature into a good olive tree. Mark it, first cut off from the one,
before capable of being graffed into the other.

4. Learn in the last place from this similitude, That the glory and excellency
of a Christian does lie in practical holiness, or in being fruitful and
abundant in the work of the Lord. You know, The worth and excellency of a
branch does not consist in its beautiful outside, or in the fair leaves and
blossoms which it may bear: but in bringing forth much fruit. When there are
fair clusters of grapes hanging upon it, this does content the Husbandman, and
prevents the pruning hooks cutting off such a branch for the fire. So herein is
the excellency of a Believer, when he is active for God in his place and
calling, and filled with the fruits of righteousness: This is acceptable unto
God, and well pleasing in his sight. This commends the root as a juicy, sappy
root, when the branches are fruitful, Joh. 15.8. Herein is my Fathor glorified,
that ye bear (...) fruitful, you will be taken away and burnt: the unprofitable
servant shall be cast into outer darkness: But then you will honor me indeed,
and be like to enjoy the comfort of your relation toward me, when you express
the power of godliness in your conversations. This is the second resemblance.

3. The third similitude setting forth the relation of a Believer to Christ, is
drawn from the ^uptial conjunction which is betwixt the husband and wife.
Christ and his people are joined together in a conjugal union: He is married
unto them, and they are his Spouse whom he has betrothed unto himself. When a
man and woman are joined in marriage, according to the Institution and
Ordinance of God, they become one flesh: so the Lord Christ and true Believers
are one spirit, Ephesians. 5.31, 32. For this cause shall a man leave his father and
mother, and shall be joined to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. This
is a great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the Church. It is as much
as if the Apostle had said, If the husband and wife are one, by virtue of their
marriage-covenant, or nuptial contract; much more intimately are Christ and his
people one, by their spiritual marriage: the other is but a shadow of this
Union. Here is a mystery indeed, for of this spiritual union you must
understand me: I speak concerning Christ and the Church, Cant. 5.1. I am come
into my garden, my sister, my spouse. And throughout that book of the (...)

1. When the (...) together into one, It is according to the will and pleasure
of the Father; and a matter very pleasing and acceptable in his sight. When
marriages are regularly made, it is with consent and approbation of parents, on
either side: Now God is the parent on both hands, in this spiritual
conjunction; and they have his consent to their espousals. 1. He gives his Son
to the Church to be an husband, Isa. 49.6. I will give thee to be a light unto
the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation to the end of the earth, Gal.
4.4. When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, etc. Joh. 3.16.
For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son. 2. Upon the
other hand, he takes the Church to be a Wife or Spouse unto his Son, and
gives Believers unto him, Joh. 17.6. I have manifested thy name, unto the men
which thou gave me out of the world: thine they were, and thou gave them
me, Heb. 2.13. Behold I, and the children whom thou have given me. So that this
is the Father's will, that sinners should come unto Christ, and be united unto
him. And pray observe it the rather, because there is a proneness in the heart
of man to question the Fathers good will. Sometimes sinners have good thoughts
of Jesus Christ, as one that minds their salvation, and came down from heaven
to accomplish it: but they are full of doubts and jealousies touching the
Father; they question whether he be willing to accept them. Why, mind it Sirs,
What the Lord Jesus (...) (...) does is by God the Fathers appointment, and
approbation. It was he that sent him about his work, and gives lost sinners
into his hands to be saved. This is mentioned as an encouragement to believe in
Jesus: for if you do so, the Father will receive you graciously, and you shall
in no wise be rejected. See the words of our Savior, Joh. 6.37, 38, 39. Him
that comes unto me I will in no wise east out: For I came down from heaven not
to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me: And this is the Fathers
will, which has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I should lose
nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day. This is the first thing
to be noted.

2. For the winning over a sinner to become the Lord Christ's, and to surrender
up himself into his hands, He does first treat with the sinner to that purpose,
and does entreat and persuade him to accept of the grace of the Gospel. Just,
for all the world, as it is in order to marriage; first the party is wooed,
before the contract is made: so Christ does woo the soul to become his Spouse,
and to accept him for an husband. To this end he imployeth his Ministers to
entreat sinners in his name, and sends his Spirit to deal with their hearts,
and to propound the match unto them. Such is his gracious condescension toward
fallen man, that although the whole benefit of this union redound unto us, yet
he is pleased to beseech us to close with him, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. Now then we are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us: we pray you, in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ is
not only free grace, and abundant grace, but (...) (...) with salvation, unto
the children of men; so he does seek unto them, and earnestly beseech and
entreat them to accept the offers of salvation, Genesis 9.27. God shall persuade
Japhet ( (...) Alliciet, scilicet, ut suo tompore ad cultum Dei and tentoria
Shem, i. e. Ecclesiam accedat. Fut. per Apoc. (...) Hiph. pellexit, allexit,
etc. Buxtorf.
so the word signifies) and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem. Mark it, The
Church of Christ for some ages was well near confined to the posterity of Shem:
Abraham and his seed came out of the loins of Shem. And by Japhet understand
the Gentiles who were his offspring: for by them were the Islands of the
Gentiles possessed. Now, says the Spirit of God, the time will come that the
Gentiles shall be gathered unto Christ, they shall be brought into the Church.
How, or by what means will this be so brought to pass? why Christ will woo
them, and treat with them: he will persuade them effectually, and prevail by
his persuasions.

3. In pursuance of this comparison note further, That our faith in Christ,
which is the uniting grace whereby we are joined to him, and made one with him,
is, The consenting of our hearts to take Christ for our Redeemer, as he does
tender himself to us: and the resignation or giving up our selves into his
hands. As in the business of marriage, it is the consent of parties that makes
it. The proposal being made, the woman accepts of such a man to be her
Husband, and accordingly gives up her self unto him (...) gether. Thus it is
in the transactions of matters between Christ and the Church; we are contracted
to him by our consent to be his, and taking him to be our Lord and husband,
Cant. 2.16. My beloved is mine, and I am his. Will thou have me for thy
Husband, and Savior, upon the terms of the Gospel, says Christ by his Spirit
unto the sinner? O Lord, answers the sinner, through grace I will, I give my
full consent, and surrender up my self unto thee, and thus they are united.
Therefore it is the great complaint of Christ, that he comes to sinners, and
they will not accept him, Joh. 1.11. He came unto his own, and his own received
him not, Joh. 5.40. And ye will not come unto me, that ye might have life. And
it is said of the Christians of Macedonia, when they believed in Jesus, they
gave themselves unto the Lord, 2 Cor. 8.5.

4. This consent of the heart to be the Lord Christ's, and acceptance of him
for our Redeemer; if it be such as uniteth us to him, and makes us one with
him; must be a marriage-consent and acceptance. My meaning is, It must be so
qualified and circumstantiated, as is required in the consent of persons when
they are married together. That is to say, It must have these three properties.

It must be 1. A present consent and acceprance. 2. A full, and hearty consent
and acceptance. 3. An entry, and indefinite. consent and acceptance.


1. It must be a present acceptance of Christ, and closure with him: and not
only a promise for the future, to take him hereafter, and to submit to him in
time to come. For (as Casuists and Civilians observe) though promises for the
future leave an obligation, upon the parties promising; yet they do not make up
a marriag-contract; that must be in words de praesenti. So when sinners engage,
hereafter to give up themselves to the Lord Jesus, although it will add to
their sin, and condemnation, to live in the neglect of performing such
engagements; yet they are not thereby united unto Christ; but still abide under
the wrath of God. If we would be made one with him, we must immediately give up
our selves unto him, and take him to be our Lord and Savior, Psalm. 16.1, 2.
Preserve me, O God, for in thee do I put my trust. O my soul, thou have said to
the Lord, thou art my Lord. Psalm. 116.16. O Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am
thy servant. It is not said, I will become thy servant hereafter, when I have a
convenient season, and then I will obey thee and put my trust in thee: but I
thy servant, I thy servant; q. d. Here am I ready to set upon any service, I
enter my self now into thy service, to abide with thee henceforward even for
ever, 1 Cor. 7.22. He that is called being free, is the servant of Christ. If
he be effectually called, if he answer the invitation of the Gospel, he must
engage without delay in Christ's work: For it is the present time which is the
time of acceptance; and the present day which is the day of salvation, 2 Cor.
6.2. And the truth is Sirs, that bare promises for the future, are so far from
uniting us to the Son, that they are nothing else but the sly endeavors of the
heart, to put a cheat upon Christ. It is by such hypocritical promises, that
when sinners are convinced of the necessity of closing with Christ, they do
break through such convictions; and get from under the power of them. When
conscience presses them hard, this is the answer whereby they stop the mouth
of conscience; hereafter they will become obedient to the Gospel. But be not
deceived, Christ will not be dallyed with, but all persons shall know that he
searches the hearts and the reins, and is able to see through their
dissimulation and hypocrisy, and he will give to every one according to their
works, Rev. 2.23.

2. It must be a full and hearty consent and acceptance, with the whole soul of
a man. It is not a faint wishing and woulding after Christ that will give us an
interest in him, but when the whole heart goes out unto him. Quod cor non
facit id non fit.
As it is in marriage, A woman may have a months mind (as we are wont to
express it) to have such a man for her Husband, and yet remain a stranger to
him: When they are married indeed, there must be a rejecting all other Suitors,
and a full consent to be his: So it is in these spiritual affairs; there may be
a slothful velleity and lukewarm inclinations in the spirit of a wicked man
toward Christ, he may have an heart for his lusts, and an heart for a Savior;
but this cold and sluggish desire will never make up the match betwixt them. If
a man will be knit unto Jesus, he must abandon all things for him, and give him
reception with the whole spirit, Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be willingnesses
in the day of thy power. (...) Populus tuus erit spoutaneitatum, i. e. sum
spontaneus.
So the word imports; that is, they shall so heartily consent to take Christ
for their Lord and Husband, as if all the faculties of the soul were turned
into will: they shall so fully embrace him, as if there were a concentring
together of many wills, to make one violent current to go forth unto him: as if
all the doors of the soul were set wide open for his entertainment. They shall
be willingnesses; abundantly willing, as if the whole man were nothing but
will. See it in the case of Zacheus, how heartily he consents to take Christ
upon his terms, and salvation by him, Luke 19.6. He made haste, and came down,
and received him joyfully.

3. It must be an unlimited and indefinite acceptance, without any secret
reservations or exceptions. Poor carnal people are apt to deceive themselves in
this respect: They will have Christ for their Savior and Master, but it is
always upon some proviso or other: that they may keep such a beloved lust,
that they may have liberty to fulfill this carnal pleasure, or to live in the
practice of the other profitable sin: they will give up themselves to the Lord
Jesus, provided always, they may comply with the times, and save their
estates, and humor such a great man on whom they depend: provided they be
required to serve him only in the Sunshine of the Gospel, and be not bound to
follow him through tribulations. Such caveats, and proviso's they enter into;
but this leaves them still in subjection to the devil. For that acceptance and
consent which uniteth a sinner unto Christ, must be a marriage-consent; when we
take him wholly and entirely without any acceptions, to submit to him in all
his institutions and commandments, and to cleave to him in all estates and
conditions. When we take Christ for our Lord and Husband, to have and to hold,
for better and for worse, for richer and for poorer, in sickness and in health,
to go with him through fire and water, resolving through grace, that nothing
shall divide betwixt us, and that we will never join with any other in
confederacy against him. We must come to him as Paul upon his conversion, Act.
9.6. Lord, what will thou have m^ to do? q. d. Here I am in a readiness and
resolvedness for any manner of service: Let me but know thy will, and through
divine assistance I will stick at nothing. He does not say; thus far I could be
contented to follow after thee, upon conci^ion I be not put upon difficult
service; and that I be not forced to forsake such a lust; or to break off my
intimacy, and familiarity, with this or the other sinful companion. No, but
here I bring my soul as a blank paper, write what terms and conditions thou
please, and I am ready to subscribe to them: Do but show me thy way, and cut
out the work which I am to do; and whatever it is, I am resolved to set upon
the performance. This is the fourth thing to be noted; our consent to take the
Lord Christ, must be a marriage-consent; and upon marriage terms, and articles.

5. Note from this comparison in the next place, That a believers obedience and
service, which he tenders unto Christ, throughout the whole course of his life,
must be an affectionate obedience; or a service mingled with love, and
proceeding from love. We must not serve him as slaves, merely out of fear, and
no further than we are forced by outward respects; or by the clamours of
conscience: but as a Spouse is obedient to her husband, and careful to please
him, because of her affection toward him. Matrimonial subjection is a loving
subjection, and such must ^e ours to the Lord our Savior. This is to to serve
him evangelically answerable to the dispensation of the Gospel, which
proclaims and promalgateth the love of Christ, unto sinners. When our
obedience does spring from a principle of love to Jesus, and is intermingled
therewith, and is promoted by the sense of his love to sinners; th^n it is
Gospel-obedience, and new Covenant-service. Not but that the fear of wrath and
he^l, may have its due place and efficacy, to quicken a Believer unto the works
of holiness; but love is the most evangelical motive, most proper and suitable
to the dispensation of the Gospel. And therefore the Apostle prays in behalf
of the Ephesians, in order to their more abundant fruitfulness in the ways of
God, and their being filled with all the fullness of God, that they might be
rooted and grounded in love [that is love toward Christ] and that they might
be able to know the love of Christ [his love toward them] which passes
knowledge; i. e. that they might have some clear and competent apprehensions of
it, though in its full extent and greatness it can never be comprehended, Ephesians.
3.17, 18, 19.

6. Lastly note, That this similitude taken from the relation betwixt the
husband and wife, besides its holding forth the union of a Believer with
Christ, does import also that mutual complacency and satisfaction which they
take in converse one with the other. How does Christ delight in maintaining
fellowship with the Saints? And how do their spirits exult in the enjoyment of
Christ? See the mutual dearness that is betwixt them, Cant. 7.10, 11, 12. I am
my beloveds, and his desire is toward me. Come my beloved, let us go forth
into the field, let us lodge in the villages, let us go early to the vineyards,
let us see whether the vine flourish, whether the tender grapes appear, and the
pomegranates bud forth: there will I give thee my loves. The meaning is this,
The heart of the Church was so set upon Chri^, that it was her chiefest delight
to be in communion with him; as the wise takes pleasure in the society of her
husband, and he in hers. So much for the third special resemblance for
illustration of this mystery, drawn from the conjunction which is betwixt the
husband and wife.

4. The fourth and last similitude, which I shall mention upon this account, is
taken from the union between the foundation, and the building erected
thereupon. They are coupled together, and knit into one, so as to make up one
house: So the servants of Christ are knit unto him, being built upon him, 1
Cor. 3.9, 11. Ye are God's building. Upon what foundation are they built? See
v. 11. Other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ. Believers then are as a fabrique erected upon Christ, and cemented unto
him.

A little to unfold this resemblance, I will only mind you of three things.

1. The holy Ghost does make mention, in the records of the Scripture, of a
twofold foundation, with reference to the Church.

1. A doctrinal foundation. 2. A personal foundation.


1. A doctrinal foundation, whereupon our faith is to be bottomed, as upon an
infallible and unmovable ground. This foundation is the Scriptures, the
doctrines contained in the Bible, the Word of God therein revealed; and in that
way made known unto the children of men, Ephesians. 2.20. Ye are built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets; that is, Upon the doctrines contained
in the Old and New Testament, whereof the Prophets and Apostles were the
publishers, and the penmen: by whom, as instruments, the mind of God was
transmitted to succeeding generations. Gubernabit te verbum Dei, and ad portum
coelorum te adducet spiritus sanctus.
Our faith Sirs is not to be bottomed on the dictates of men, or the traditions
of our fathers; for then it would be a fickle; unstable, uncertain faith: But
it is to be built on the sure word of Prophecy. The doctrines of the Bible are
to be the foundation of it. In this respect, our Lord Jesus Christ is compared
to the chief corner stone. He is the principal subject whereof the Scripture
treats, and whereunto the doctrines tend: they are appointed to discover Christ
unto us, and to bring us unto him, and to build us up in him. He is the person
in whom the strength of the building lies, and through whom the two walls of
the building are joined together, Jews and Gentiles are made up into one house,
and Church; as the sides of a building are coupled together by the corner stone.

2. There is a personal, or essential foundation, upon whom a Believer depends
for life and salvation: by whom the Church subsisteth, and through whom it is
constituted as a temple for God. Thus Christ is the foundation, and every Saint
is a stone in the building founded upon him, Isa. 28.16. Behold I lay in Sion
for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure
foundation. Which the holy Ghost expounds, once and again, as meant of Jesus
Christ. And it is an excellent passage containing abundant matter of
encouragement for humbled sinners, to come unto Christ, and to rest upon him.
1. He is a Savior of Gods appointment, sufficiently authorized to be the
Mediator; so that if you come to God by him, he will not reject you; for it is
the Lord's doing to constitute him to be our Redeemer; it is the way which God
himself has set open to bring sinners to salvation, He is the foundation which
the Lord has laid. I lay in Sion for a foundation. 2. For the qualification of
his person, he is mighty to save, able to deliver to the uttermost: He is not
as sand or gravel, by which the building cannot be supported; but a stone, or
rock, which notes the stability and strength of Jesus Christ; he is able to
bear whatever weight is laid upon him. No winds, or storms from earth, or hell,
can prevail to overturn what is built upon him. And this arises from the
constitution of his person; being very God, as well as man. 3. He is a tried
stone. Do you yet question his sufficiency to save you? Are you still in doubt
whether you may trust in him? Why, do but mind the experience which he has
given of his ability, he is a tried stone: Eve has tried him, and Enoch tried
him, and Noah, and Abraham, and David, and Solomon, and all the people of God
in former ages have made the experiment; and their expectations were not
frustrated: they found him such a one as he is discovered to be; He is a stone
of trial, a foundation of proof, a sure foundation. 4. This is that which God
would have sinners to take notice of, Behold I lay in Sion for a foundation a
stone, etc. q. d. Hear, O people, and give ear all ye inhabitants of the earth,
mind what I have done to carry on the salvation of sinners. And to what end is
this publication made, but that we might come unto Christ, and unto God by him
with full assurance of faith? This is the first particular I would observe
under this similitude.

2. This resemblance does import, That all such persons whatsoever, who are
knit unto Christ, and built up to salvation upon his righteousness, must of
necessity be made conformable unto him. There must be an answerableness betwixt
them. As the foundation is the supporter of the building, so it is a rule and
measure unto the building. The stones which are set upon it must be
proportioned thereunto: the superstructure must be of length, and breadth,
according to the foundation. So it is in the spiritual building. The souls of
Believers, who are joined to Christ, must bear a proportion to him with whom
they are joined. This is the Statute Law of the God of heaven, and it is more
unalterable, and irrevocable, than the Laws of the Medes and Persians, That
there is no saving interest in Christ without conformity to him, Romans 8.29.
Whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of
his Son. Mark, It is the unchangable decree of the Lord of Hosts; If you are
saved in any other way, or at a cheaper rate, it must be by the alteration of
God's decrees; which are unchangeable, as his nature and essence, without any
variableness or shadow of turning. As Christ could never have been our
Redeemer, but he must be made like unto us: so we shall never taste of the
Redemption purchased by him, unless ^e be made like unto him.

This conformity of a Believer to the Lord Jesus Christ, does mainly lie in
five things, viz. 1. The qualifications of his ^erson. 2. The sufferings of his
death. 3. His resurrection, and ascension into heaven. 4. The holiness of his
conversation. 5. The troubles and persecutions, which he underwent upon the
earth.


1. Believers must be made like unto Chist, in the qualifications of his
person. Their judgments must concenter with Christ's judgment, in the
approbation of such things as he approves, and disapproving those things which
he disliketh: Their affections must run in the same chanel wherein Christ's
affections run, loving what he loves, and hating what he hates, and
delighting in that wherein he takes delight: Their minds must be placed on the
same objects on which Christ's mind is placed, and act in the like manner as
his acts: Their hearts must be molded into the same frame with his heart:
and so I might instance throughout the whole man. Christ must be formed in
them, Gal. 4.19. And Phil. 2.5. Let this mind be in you, which was also in
Christ Jesus. They must be so clothed with his divine qualities, that it may be
said they have put on the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 13.14.

2. There must be conformity to the sufferings of his death, in a spiritual
sense. As Christ died for sin, so Believers must die unto sin. As our Lord
Jesus was put to a painful, lingering, and ignominious death; in like sort must
their corruptions be mortified, and killed. For Mark it Sirs, The death and
crucifixion of our Lord Jesus, is not only the meritorious cause, through which
sin is mortified; and a strong evangelical reason, why it should be mortified;
but it is also the pattern and exemplar according to which it is done. In the
very same way and manner, as Christ was put to death for us; so are our lusts
and corruptions to be crucified within us. Hereby we are rendered conformable
unto his death. Phil. 3.9. and planted together into the ^^keness of his death,
Romans 6.5.

3. There must be conform^y to the Lord Jesus, in his resurrection and
ascension into heaven. As he rose again from the dead, and went up into heaven,
never to return to corruption any more: so must the hearts of believers be
raised unto spiritual objects, and their affections set upon things that are
above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God, Col. 3.1. Their hearts
must be withdrawn from sin, and the world, never to be engaged upon them any
more: but they must live as persons that are revived, and made partakers of a
new life, Romans 6.4. As he was raised from the dead by the glory of the father,
even so must we also walk in newness of life.

4. Believers must be made conformable unto Christ, in the holiness of his
conversation. They must tread in his steps, doing the same work as he did; and
acting upon the same principles and motives, as he acted upon; and carrying on
the same designs as Christ carried on; and serving the Lord in the like manner,
with cheerfulness, delight and alacrity, as he served him, Ephesians. 5.2. Walk in
love, as Christ also loved us. And Romans 15.1, 2, 3. We ought not to please our
selves, but every one his neighbor, for his good to edification: for Christ
also pleased not himself, etc.

5. They must expect to be made conformable to Christ, in the troubles and
persecutions that befell him upon the earth. Therefore it is called, a suffering
with him; that is, the same things, and in like manner as he suffered, Romans
8.17. If we will be faithful unto Christ, we must look to meet with the like
usage as he met with; and to go through many tribulations, into the Kingdom of
God.

This is the second thing to be noted under this comparison.

3. According to the purport and tenor of this similitude, taken from the
foundation and the building; Our faith, which is the uniting grace, is a
resting upon Christ and his righteousness. The stones are joined to the
foundation by being laid upon it, and there resting: So when we lay the stress
of our salvation upon Christ, and cast our burden upon him, and there stay our
selves, as upon a rock; thereby we are united unto Jesus, and made one with
him. By nature we are as rough, unpolished stones in a quarry, without any
relation to Christ. Now the work of conviction, may be compared to the
unsettling of these stones; and humiliation and legal terrors upon the heart,
are the hewing of these stones; By the first they are removed out of the
Quarry, and by the other their ruggedness is pared away: The grace of
conversion is as the fitting, and polishing the stones for the building; and
faith is a putting them upon the foundation, and their resting upon it. As by
the cement of love, the stones are coupled one to another; so by faith they are
knit unto the foundation. By the Spirit they are brought unto Christ, and so
stay upon him, Isa. 50.10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, and obeys
the voice of his servant, and walks in darkness, and has no light? Let him
trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Romans 9.33. Behold I lay
in Sion. stumbling stone, and rock of offense, and whosoever believes on him,
shall not be confounded. Mark it, As Christ is a foundation to his people, so
he is a rock of offense to them that are disobedient; they split themselves
against this rock, they stumble and fall and are broken in pieces. If you would
be saved by him, you must by faith rest upon this foundation: For whosoever
believes in him shall not be confounded. 1 Pet. 2.4, 5. To whom coming as unto
a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious. Ye
also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, etc. See likewise, Ephesians.
2.21, 22.

This is all that I shall speak under the sixth general Head, for the
illustration of this Mystery of Union with Christ, by those similitudes which
the holy Ghost has made choice of to this purpose. That which remains further,
is the Application of the Point.

CHAP. X. Inferences drawn from the Doctrine of Union with Christ. The
excellency and dignity of Believers. The peculiarity of the providence of God
toward them. The miserable estate of Christless sinners.
FOr Application or practical improvement of this Doctrine, I will manage it
under these three Heads. By way of 1. Information. 2. Examination. 3.
Exhortation.


1. By way of Information. What are the practical Inferences which may be
deduced from this Point, of a Believers union with the Son of God, and the
necessity thereof? I will not aim at the engrossing of all, that might be taken
in upon this fruitful, and spiritual subject: Only I shall select these three
Inferences, which naturally arise from what has been delivered.

1. If believers are united unto Christ and made one with him in order to their
salvation, then hence I gather, That they are the most honorable, and most
excellent persons upon the face of the earth. Why? Because they are united unto
the Son of God: and accordingly they should have the greatest esteem of us, and
be most precious and lovely in our eyes. It is the character of a man that
shall see the Lord in Sion, that he contemns a vile person, but he honors
them that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15.1, 4. Now here is that which makes them
right honorable, above all their fellow creatures; they are intimately joined
unto Christ. So that the Saints which are in the earth, are the excellent of
the earht, Psalm. 16.3. more excellent than their neighbors, than all that
dwell round about them, Prove. 12.26. You know, the excellency or worthlessness
of any being, is to be measured and judged, by its neerness to, or remoteness
from, that which is most excellent. Perfectissim^m in unoquoque genere est
mensura perfectionis caeterotum.
Now the children of God are nearest the most excellent being; for they are
married unto Christ. And this is that which gives them advancement above the
highest Prince, or Monarch in the world; who is a stranger to the power of
godliness. Take the greatest Potentate, and he is but the son of a man, but
Believers are the children of the Lord of Hosts, the King of kings: Nay, They
are one with Jesus, Exulta Popule Dei audiens tuae nobilitatis insignia. Tibi
enim dictum est Genus regale and Sacerdo^ale, populus in acquisitionem. Iden
quia vos reges estis me^ito rex noster Christus Dominus Rex dicitur Regum, and
Dominus Dominantium. Orig. Hom. in Judic.
who is over all God blessed for ever. Mark how Solomon puts the comparison,
Eccl. 4.13. Better is a poor and a wise child, than an old and foolish King,
who will no more be admonished. Here are persons put in competition, that upon
an outward account, are at as great a distance as is lightly imaginable. What
is a poor man that gets his living from hand to mouth, in comparison with a
King, that rules over Cities and Countries, that has great attendants
following him, multitudes of subjects at his beck and command, and millions of
gold and silver heaped up in his treasury? If the poor man should come to his
gates, he would hardly find entrance: he might dance attendance for many days,
before he might be admitted to see the King: Possibly he might never get the
privilege, as long as he lived to kiss his hand, and fall down at his feet.
Yea, but if this poor person be in his childhood, which is an age contemptible
of it self, and having poverty added to it, is rendered more contemptible: and
the King be an old one, who has long sat at the stern, and enjoyed the
Sovereignty; and possibly is grown famous by glorious exploits; and has heaped
up treasures as the dust, and settled his throne upon the best security, which
the world can afford; that he thinks it can never be moved: you would think
such a poor child would not weigh a feather, if laid in the balance with this
mighty Prince, and Emperor. But I tell you says Solomon, if this poor child
have saving grace in his heart (for that is true wisdom:) and the King be
foolish, if he be a wicked man, an enemy to godliness, a stranger to the life
of Religion (for such an one is Solomon's fool:) the poor child is to be
preserred before him: He is a more noble person than the old and foolish King.
And here is the reason of it; The poor child is united to Christ, and a friend
of God through Christ; whilst that old King is a slave of the devil.

My Brethren, there is utterly a fault amongst the generality of Professors at
this day; that they put a value upon men, according to their worldly greatness
only; and the poor amongst the godly are despised. As all that are upright in
heart are commonly slighted, and trampled upon by the wicked; so the meaner
sort of them are not duly regarded, by the people of God themselves. Whereas
indeed they are of the number of the most honorable, being nearest to the
fountain of honor. So that we ought to have a special respect for the godly,
be they never so low in the world: Our delight should be in them, and our great
ambition to be amongst them. David was a companion of all them that feared the
Lord, Psalm. 119.63. and all his delight was in the Saints, Psalm. 16.3. They are
the most excellent persons, deserving our chiefest estimation.

There are five things, from whence for the most part men are highly esteemed;
and as to each of them the Saints have the pre-eminence.

1. The first and poorest ground of our high esteem of men, is by their
garments, wherewith they are clothed. S. James noted it as a corruption in his
time, Jam. 2.2, 3. If a man came with a gold ring, and in goodly apparel, and a
poor man in vile raiment; they were apt to have respect to him that was in gay
clothing, and to despise the other: And this corruption is hardly rooted out of
men's spirits. But in this respect the servants of God have the precedence: they
wear the best clothes, of any men in the places where they dwell. Is the rich
man clothed with purple and scarlet? Well, but Lazarus has on the
righteousness of Christ. A wicked man may be adorned with gold and silver, but
a Believer has the ornaments of faith, and patience, and meekness, and
temperance, and other excellent graces, which are in the sight of God of great
price. All that a wicked man has on, are but tokens of his shame, and mere
rags and patches, which will not cover his nakedness: Fulgent moailibus,
moribus sordent: purpurata vestis, conscientia pannosa. Bern.

Solicitiores de capitis sui decore, quam de salute: Inter pectinem and
speculum diem perdunt; Concinniores esse malunt quam honestiores, and Remp.
minus turbari curant quam comam. Sen.


God sees all the rottenness, and filthiness, and putrefaction that is under
his gorgeous apparel. But the godly have on the garments of salvation, and are
covered with the robes of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself with
ornaments, and as a Bride adorneth her self with her jewels, Isa. 61.10. Job
was a Prince, and a Magistrate, and it is likely he was arrayed answerably to
his place, and dignity: but what was the best suit of apparel in all his
Wardrobe, whereof he most glories? Mind what he says, Job 29.14. I put on
righteousness, and it clothed me: my judgment was a robe and a diadem. Vestite
vos Serico prebitatis, byssino sanctitatis, purpura pudicitiae: Taliter
pigmentatae Deum habebitis amatorem. Tert. de cult. mul.
Here is the daily apparel of the Saints, of more worth than cloth of gold,
Zech. 3.3, 4, 5. Luke 15.22. 1 Pet. 3.3, 4.

2. Men are commonly esteemed by their wealth and riches. He that has the
greatest income, shall have most respect, and honor. He shall have cap and
knee, as deserving estimation in our account. And if this be the rule. the
servants of Christ are the most honorable; for they are the wealthiest men in
the world. Has Esau much? yea, but Jacob has all, having an interest in God
the giver of all, whose is the earth and the fullness of it, (...) est mihi
multum, said Esau. But Jacob answered him (...) sunt mihi omnia. Arias Mont.
Genesis 33.9, 11. Psalm. 24.1. And in reversion believers have a kingdom for their
inheritance, Luke 12.32. A worldling may have bags full of thick clay (for gold
and silver are but the purest clay, and pearls and diamonds but the finest
colored earth) yet these bags have a bottom, and will be emptied: But a
Believer has a mine, a treasure without a bottom; like the widows vessel of
oil, that will not be emptied. The best state of a worldling is but in lease
for a term of years: Let men boast what they will of having such, or such an
inheritance for ever, the truth is, the best Freeholder in the Land is but
tenant for life: death will, as by a Lease of Ejectment, thrust him out of his
possessions, Psalm. 49.16, 17. But a Believers inheritance is for ever, and
ever, Prove. 8.18, 19. Riches and honor are with me (says Christ the eternal
wisdom of the Father) yea durable riches and righteousness. My fruit is better
than gold, yea than sine gold, and my revenue than choice silver. And v. 21.
That I may cause those that love me to inherit substance, and I will fill their
treasures. All the riches in the earth are but a shadow and fancy; like the
apples of Sodom, that crumble into ashes between the fingers. They can never
fill a man's heart: A person may be glutted, and surfeited with worldly profits,
and pleasures; but never satisfied. But spiritual blessings are substantial
riches, that give satisfaction to the soul, Rev. 3.18.

3. We put a value upon men according to their employments and callings: As a
Physician or Lawyer is esteemed above others that are in meaner places, and
employed about more servile work, and the like. Now the employment of a
Christian is of the highest rank: He is called to be an attendant of an
infinite Majesty. He spends his time in converse with the mighty God, and is
one of his intimate acquaintance. He drives a trade for heaven, and in pursuit
of a crown, an incorruptible crown: whereas others are bufied about the trash
and dung of the earth, Phil. 3.20. For our Citizenship (so the word imports
(...).
) is in heaven; i.e. We are members of that corporation, and trade in heavenly
merchandise; and drive on our designs for the enjoyment of that everlasting
Kingdom.

4. Men are usually prized according to their endowments, and inward
accomplishments of the mind. As now, If a man have a quick understanding and a
strong memory, and abundance of learning; if he be of great parts, and have a
deep reach into affairs; such a one is honored, and admired; and persons of a
mean capacity are little set by, in comparison. Why, mind it Sirs, A truly
godly man is the best learned man; He has the highest accomplishments, and the
greatest insight into matters: And no marvel, for he has been trained up in
the School of Christ, and none teaches like him: He has had his breeding in
the Court of the great King; he has knowledge of those mysteries that puzzle
the understandings of the greatest Doctors, and which the wisest Philosophers
could never attain unto. The greatest Statesman, and wisest Counseilor upon
earth is but a fool, a very dolt, in comparison with the meanest of those that
are upright in heart. Quanto magis for as es sapiens, tanto magis stulius
efficeris. Si in omnibus es prudens, circa te ipsum insipiens. Bern.
For if men reject the w^rd of the Lord, what wisdom is in them? as the
questi^n is put, Jer. 8.9. All their knowledge is but madness, and that which
they boast of as wisdom, is but the shadow of it. They are cunning to pursue a
feather, to hunt after a thing of naught, and neglect the substance: and is
this to be wise? It is the greatest wisdom in the world, to please the Lord;
and the highest point of knowledge, to see into matters that concern Vide miser
homo, quia totum est vanitas, totum stultiti^, totum dementia, quicquid facis
in hoc mundo; praeter hoc solum quod propter Deum facis. Bern.
our eternal peace, Prove. 1.7. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
knowledge. So that unregenerate persons are but Abecedarians, they have not
gotten the first elements of true knowledge, Psalm. 119.99, 100. I have more
understanding than all my teachers, for thy testimonies are my meditation. I
understand more than the ancients, because I keep thy precepts. Multitude of
days should teach wisdom, and such as instruct others should be well skilled:
Yea, but says David, I have outstript them all; for I am a servant of God, an^
have respect to his word.

5. The last ground of honor I shall mention, (...) men's high extraction and
Parentage: their great kindred and alliances. Such a person we highly account
of, He is Son to an Earl, or Marquess, or Duke; he is nearly allied to
personages of worth, or the like. But now a Believer is a child of the
Almighty, Eternal, and Incomprehensible God; he is of near alliance to the Lord
Jesus, the Mediator. He is closly knit to him, and made one with him: which is
the highest pitch of dignity, which a creature is capable of; to be united unto
the Creator, the Lord of glory. This is it which a godly man may glory of, and
be thereby able to out-boast all his fellow creatures, all other the children
of men whosoever, Psalm. 87.4, 5, 6. I will make mention of Rabab and Babylon,
to them that know me: Behold Philistia and Tire with Ethiopia; this man was
born there. And of Sion it shall be said, this or that man was born in her, and
the highest himself shall establish her. The Lord shall count, when he writes
up the people: that this man was born there. As if the Psalmist had said, Men
are apt to brag of their high birth, and parentage; they will boast of their
Country, and kindred. I am a Citizen of Babylon (will one say) a famous City:
I, says another, was born in Tire, a renowned place, and have such personages
of my kindred: I can reckon my descent from Rahab, says a third, a place of
eminent remark, and am allied to this, or the other Prince, and Potentate.
Well, but a Believer can out-boast them, he can go a step higher. May he say, I
have God for my Father: I was regenerate and born in Sion, where the great King
dwells: I am married to the Son of God, and so have a place in his family.
Discamus sanctam superbiam, and sciamus nos esse illis meliores. Hier.
These are the people which God makes the greatest reckoning of. When he
takes a view of the world, and the inhabitants thereof, he puts an asterisk at
the names of such. He writes them down with a note of remark: Here is a man of
royal descent indeed. Here is a person that is of near alliance to the King of
heaven: that is united to Jesus Christ, who is King of kings, and Lord of
lords. And mark how in the midst of the genealogy, the holy Ghost sets a
note upon Jabez, 1 Chronicles. 4.10. And Jabez was more honorable than his
brethren. And Jabez called upon the God of Israel, saying, O that thou would
bless me indeed, etc. q.d. Here is a man of renown, we must not pass him by
without a note of memorial stamped upon him. He has outstript all the rest of
his brethren, for he is acquainted with God, and in communion with him. This is
the first Inference.

2. If Believers are united to the Son of God, and made one with him, then
hence it will follow, That the people of God may comfortably expect, that God
will take a special care of them, and their concernments: and have a peculiar
regard unto them in the exercise of his providence. For they are one with
Christ, and God loves them with the same love (for kind and substance, though
not for measure and degree) wherewith he loves the Lord Jesus: and therefore
certainly he will take a special care of them.

When the Lord is pleased, at some times, to appear gloriously in the
preservation, or deliverance of his Church and people; it makes the
bystanders amazed, and often fills the wicked themselves with astonishment.
What are these people above others, that God should bear such a gracious
respect unto them? You read the very Heathen could not but take notice of Gods
handiwork in this particular, Psalm. 126.2. Then they said amongst the Heathen,
the Lord has done great things for them, And Psalm. 48.5. They saw it, and so
they marvelled. It was a matter of astonishment in their eyes, that the Lord
should be so mindful of them above others. Viderunt and senserunt occultam vim
numinis pro Israelitis propugnantem -- Et commoti sunt ipsare. Sim. de Muis. in
loc.
Why Sirs, Here is the reason of it; they are in Christ, and brought nigh unto
God through Christ, and no marvel that he has a principle regard unto such.

You know, That is a common distinction, and it is a very comfortable
distinction, whereby the providence of God is branched forth. 1. Into his
general providence over all creatures: So he feeds the young ravens when they
cry, and provideth meat for the beasts of the field: he disposes and orders
whatsoever does concern any of the work of his hands. 2. His special providence
toward his own people, he has a special eye upon them, and respect unto them.
As it is with a Magistrate of the City or Country, If he be faithful in his
place; he has a regard to the affairs and government of all that are under his
jurisdiction: but he has a more than ordinary regard unto his own family, and
household. So the Lord is especially mindful of the godly; and here is the
ground of it, They are his family, united to his Son, and so his children by
virtue of that union. We have this distinction, and the reason of it. Mat.
6.26, 30. Behold the fowls of the air; for they sow not, neither do they reap,
nor gather into barns; and yet your heavenly father feeds them: Are not ye
much better than they? Wherefore if God so clothe the grass of the field, which
to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven; shall he not much more clothe
you, O ye of little faith? Mark it, If he mind other creatures, he will much
more regard his people. How does that appear? Why, because they are his
children, married to his Son: He is a Creator unto others, but he is a Father
to them. He that feeds the fowls of the Air (says Christ) is your heavenly
father. And therefore doubt not but he will exercise a peculiar providence over
you.

Wherein does this peculiarity of the providence of God manifest it self
toward them? For answer, I will take notice of it in four things, besides what
has been spoken of the peculiar Covenant-blessings, which are conferred upon
such.

1. It does appear, in the special cognizance he takes of their condition, and
concernments. When the Lord looks down from heaven upon all the inhabitants
of the earth, and takes a view of the transactions in the world; he does it to
this purpose, that he may manage them in a compliance with the welfare of his
children, and make them subservient to their good. He makes an exact enquiry
into the state of his Saints, and observes other things to this very end, that
they may be disposed of to their advantage, and benefit. That is a precious
Text, 2 Chronicles. 16.9. For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro, throughout the
whole earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is
perfect toward him. He makes an inspection into all the world, that he may
not miss any occasion of doing good to his little flock: but may take all
manner of advantages, to show kindness to them.

2. This peculiarity of providence does appear, in the special support which he
ministers unto the spirits of his people, to bear up their hearts; under such
pressures, wherewith others are over whelmed. For although there is no visible
difference always made in the acts of providence toward the righteous, but it
happens unto them according to the works of the wicked: Yet there is a
remarkable difference to be observed, by a discerning spirit, in the support
which is ministered unto their hearts. When the wicked are at their wits end,
and filled with terror on every side; then Believers can lift up their heads
with confidence, and not be troubled at any amazement. God is graciously
pleased, to send them love tokens at every turn; to be a relief unto them,
which the world knows not of: So that they can sing with joy of heart, under
those very dispensations, when the wicked cry for forrow of heart, and howl for
vexation of spirit, Isa. 65.13, 14. Do but observe their confidence in the
midst of troubles, Psalm. 46.2. We will not fear, though the earth be removed,
and though the mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea; that is, though
all things be in commotion, and combustion on every side: Our hearts are
settled under the most shaking providence.

3. It does eminently appear, in Gods overthrowing all things, that stand in
the way of the welfare of his people, and prove hindrances to the advancement
thereof. Sirs, The Lord will have no regard to thousands of others, that stand
in the way of the good of one of his chosen. He will overturn the thrones of
the greatest Emperors, if they are impediments to the good of the meanest of
his Saints. So that it is a dangerous thing to resist the proceedings of the
most high, when he awaketh to the deliverance of them that are upright in
heart, Isa. 43.3, 4. I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee.
Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, and I have
loved thee: therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy life. Hinc
generalis doctrina colligenda est. Sic Domino curae esse pios omnes, ut pluris
ipsos quam universum orbem faciat. Et nullum fore hominem, quem non tellat
atque perimat Dominus, ut suos conservet. Calv. in loc.
Rather than lose but one of those who are in Christ, he will destroy, and
pluck up whole nations before him. He will strike through kings in the day of
his wrath, and wound the heads over many Countries, Psalm. 110.5, 6.

4. The peculiarity of providence does appear in this, That many outward
enjoyments are given to the ungodly, and they are set on high for Believers
sakes. Not that God has delight in the wicked, or is a countenancer of their
evil ways: but therefore he does prosper and advance them, because he intends
to use them for the good of his Servants. Either to exercise their faith and
patience, and to purge away their dross; or sometimes to shelter them from the
rage of others. It was for Jacob's sake that corn was laid up in Egypt, Genesis
45.7. It was for Israel's sake that Cyrus was advanced to the Empire, and the
treasures of darkness given to him, Isa. 45.3, 4. Your great Statesmen little
think of this: Their design is, by the advancement of persons, to make their
party strong, or to please a friend, or to carry on their secular interest, one
way or other: But God over-ruleth all for his peoples sake: Unto whom he has a
peculiar regard in all things, that are brought to pass under the Sun. And no
marvel, for they are in Christ, married unto him, and acaccordingly God has a
respect unto them. This is the second Inference.

3. The last Inference, which I mainly intended to enlarge upon, is this: If
there be an indispensable necessity of Union with the Son, in order to the
partaking of life through him, Then the state of all unconverted sinners
whatsoever, before they are knit unto Christ by the spirit of regeneration
taking hold on their persons, and working faith in them to take hold on the
Lord Jesus, is a dead estate. For till they are ingraffed into the Son, they
can have no life from him. He that has the Son has life, and he that has not
the Son has not life; i. e. he is stark dead, utterly dead.

This is one of the expressions, which the holy Ghost has singled out, to set
forth the wretchedness and misery of a person in the state of unregeneracy,
before he is brought unto Christ. He is not only defiled with sin, but dead in
sin. Not only in a condition like that of the man that fell amongst thieves, in
his journey from Jerusalem to Jericho, Luke 10.30. (as some would bear us in
hand) who wounded him and left him half dead: But he is quite dead, without any
spark of spiritual life remaining in him. By our Apostasy we brought our selves
into a dead condition; Propheta dicit, Anima quae peccat ipsa morietur. Quamvis
mortem ejus non ad interitum substantiae sentiamus: Sed hoc ipsum, quia aliena
and extorris sit a Deo qui vera vita est, mors ei esse credenda est. Orig.
and till we are united to Christ, we are unavoidably shut up in that
condition. The Son is the fountain of life unto lost sinners, and there is no
reception of life from the Son, without having the Son. And therefore the
conversion of a sinner is not as the recovery of a sick man out of his
distemper, but as the raising of a dead man out of the grave, Joh. 5.24, 25. It
is a passing from death to life. For as it is v. 25. The hour is coming and now
is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear
shall live. It is meant of a spiritual resurrection, of the first resurrection:
and the raising of the body is afterward produced as an evidence of the mighty
power of God, whereby he is able to work this wonderful change upon the soul,
v. 28, 29. My brethren, When a godly man dies, he shall live: that is, when
his body is dead, his soul shall live in the presence of Christ, and see the
face of God in glory; but an unregenerate person, whilst he lives, is dead:
that is, whilst he lives the life of nature, and the life of sense, and the
life of reason, he is dead spiritually. And it must needs be so, because he is
separated from Christ who is the fountain of life. What is said of the widow
that lives in pleasures, is true of every impenitent sinner, He is dead,
whilst he lives, 1 Timothy 5.6.

How, or in what respect (you will say) are unconverted sinners dead? I answer,
In a fivefold respect, viz.

In respect of 1. Abomination in the sight of God. 2. The putrefaction and
rottenness of that condition. 3. Utter impotency, and inability to what is
spiritually good. 4. Damnation, or liableness to eternal death. 5. The abundant
evils incident to, or the perfect wretchedness of, that condition.


1. The state of all Christless unconverted sinners is a state of death, in
point of loathsomness and abomination in the sight of God. You know that dead
carcasses are loathsome unto the living: though a person has been never so near
and dear to us, yet when they are dead we cannot endure their presence. Let me
bury my dead, says Abraham, out of my sight. Thus the unregenerate are dead:
God loathes and abhors them, and all that is done by them. They are as smoke
in his nostrils, as dead stinking carrion in his sight, Prove. 3.32. For the
froward is an abomination to the Lord: but his secret is with the righteous.

By the froward, understand the wicked of all sorts; for they are opposed to
the righteous: And indeed every ungodly man is perverse and froward in his
ways: He rises up against the light of his own conscience, and resists the
workings of the Spirit, and is ready to rebel against the plain counsels of the
word. He is a prating fool (as he is elsewhere called) his heart is finding
fault with this command, and cavilling at the other duty: in all things he
walks cross to God and holiness, and delights in crooked paths. Let the
Lord say what he will, he has some objections against it, and is resolved to
hold on his own course: and therefore is justly called froward. And what is the
condition of such? why, they are an abomination to the Lord. I pray think of
this, you that live in any way of sin; you that harbor any secret lust in your
bosoms, and hide it as a sweet morsel under your tongues, and thereby evidence
that you are not in Christ. Remember, I say, though you may be rich and great,
and men may flatter you: yet God abhors, and detesteth you. You may have
high conceits of your selves, but you are a burden to the Spirit of the living
God: and if you go on in those ways, he will quickly ease himself of you. For
he hates all the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 5.5. O Sirs, How should men hasten
their escape out of this sad estate? and adore the patience that has hitherto
spared them? and the infinite goodness of that God, who still waits that he
may show mercy unto them? Certainly it is wonderful long-suffering, and
powerful patience, whereby the wrath of God is restrained, from taking
vengeance upon such, Numb. 14. v. 17, 18.

2. Persons unregenerate and out of Christ are dead, in respect of the
putrefaction and rottenness of their condition. A dead carcass, the longer it
lies, the more it putrefies, and is corrupted: so it is with impenitent
sinners, The longer they lie in their unconverted estate, the worse they grow;
the more their spirits are settled in hatred against God, and the greater is
their forwardness and proneness to all sorts of abominations. And therefore
none are so hard to be wrought upon as old sinners; that have spent the most
part of their time in the service of the devil, 2 Timothy 3.13. Evil men and
seducers wax worse and worse. For custom in sin does naturally tend to
strengthen the habits of sin. Suffocat hominem, a veritate avertit, abducit a
vita, est laqueus, est barathrum, est malum ventilabrum mala consuetudo.
As it is in any secular trade or employment, the more time a man spends in
his Trade, the more skill he gets, and the more handy he is at his work,
till he come to perfection in such an Art or Mystery: So the more time a sinner
spends upon his lusts, the more cursed skill and wisdom he gets, to make
provision for the flesh, and to find out ways to satisfy his lusts, and
evasions to break through convictions upon his conscience: the more handy he
grows to commit any sort of wickedness; so that in process of time he will
turn a deaf ear unto counsel. Ex voluntate perversa facta est consuetudo, and
dum consuetudint non resistitur facta est necessitas. Aug. conf.
You read of sinners compared to wild asses used to the wilderness, And who can
turn them away? says the holy ghost, Jer. 2.24. q. d. They are grown obstinate
in their rebellions; formerly, perhaps, a reproof would have taken with them,
but now you had as good speak to a stock or a stone. Continuance in sin takes
away the conscience of sin. Formerly some workings of a natural conscience
might put a stop to men's running to all excess of riot: but when the bridle is
broken, whither will not a wicked man run? So that my brethren, it is a point
of wisdom to seek unto God betimes: and for persons that are in their youth, to
remember their Creator in the morning of their lives. We are apt to cozen our
selves by promises to repent hereafter; when I have a convenient season (says
the sinner) I will make my peace with God; and when I am in a better temper.
Nay, but, O vain man, Qui promittit poenitenti remissionem, non promittit
peccanti poenitentiam.
now is the most convenient season: For besides the slipperiness and
uncertainty of a man's days upon earth; the longer thou lie in a course of
sin, the harder thine heart will grow, and the faster hold will the devil get
of thy soul. So that deliver thy self as a roe from the hand of the hunter, and
as a bird from the snare of the fowler: Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor
stumber to thine eyelids, Prove. 6.4, 5.

3. Persons out of Christ are in a dead condition, in respect of their
impotency, and inability to that which is spiritually good. A dead person has
no power to perform the works of nature, as eating, and drinking, and walking,
and discoursing, and the like; because he is dead. Thus impenitent sinners are
without strength unto the things of God, Romans 5.6. A sincere Christian is dead
to sin: and the unconverted are dead in sin; they have no power of themselves
to the works of holiness and righteousness. In this sense I principally
understand that place, Ephesians. 2.5. Even when we were dead in sins and trespasses,
he has quickened us; that is, When all our spiritual abilities were gone; If we
had been left to our selves, we should never have recovered out of our bondage
and slavery, but must have lain in it eternally, without hopes of being
delivered; and then God came and breathed the Spirit of life into us. And Sirs,
this should awaken us to cry mightily unto the Lord, and never to give him rest
till he steppeth in for our recovery. This should cause us to take diligent
heed, that we quench not the motions of the Spirit, nor provoke him to withdraw
his workings from us: for if he wholly depart, we are undone irremediably. I
might under this head descend unto particulars, by showing you. 1. That
unconverted sinners have no power to turn their souls unto God, nor to make a
saving change upon their own spirits, but this I have touched upon before. 2.
That they are without power to walk in the ways of holiness, or to perform one
good action in an acceptable manner. When the Lord himself took a view of all
mankind in their apostatized condition, he found not one that did good, no not
one, Psalm. 14.2, 3. And 3. That they are without strength to resist the
temptations of the devil, further than they are kept in by the restraining
grace of God. Satan leads them captive as he will, 2 Timothy 2.26. As the heart
of man is tainted with the principles of the most horrid abominations, that
ever were forbidden in the Scriptures; so if God did not set bounds to the
lusts that are within us, we should quickly rush into the practice of them.
Sirs, were it not for the restraining grace of the Almighty, you would have
been murderers as Cain, and guilty of witchcraft as Manasses, and have been as
gross Idolaters as any of the Heathen. Nay, you would have sinned your selves
before this time into hell, or without the compass of the promise of mercy and
forgiveness. Surely this is not a condition, wherein a person should quietly
rest one moment: for if God should pluck up the floodgates, whither would not
the violent torrent of a man's corruptions carry him? Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11, 12, 13,
14. I might have showed you, 4. That the unregenerate are so far from having
any power by nature to turn themselves unto God, or to serve him in truth and
sincerity; that their hearts are filled with enmity and hatred against God, and
his ways; and ready to fight against the means appointed to draw them
heavenward. Nay, the carnal mind is enmity it self, so it is expressed in the
abstract, Romans 8.7. As if they were made up of nothing but venom, and poison,
and wrath, and bitterness against God. But I must not dwell upon these things.
The Lord press them upon your hearts, and awaken you to follow hard after him,
and to take fast hold of him, and never to let him go, till he has given you
clear evidence of your freedom from this sad condition. The Lord make you
restless in your spirits, till you have secured your deliverance.

4. An unregenerate sinner must needs be in a state of death (because out of
Christ, who is the fountain of life) and that in respect of condemnation, or
liableness to eternal death. As we say of a malefactor, when verdict is brought
in against him, and sentence is passed upon him to be executed, He is a dead
man, dead in law; and as soon as a writ for execution comes forth to the
Sheriff, he will be actually put to death. In this sense every unconverted
sinner is dead, legally dead, that is, He is condemned to be sent into
everlasting burnings. So that, as the Egyptians said of themselves when their
firstborn were slain, We be all dead men, Exodus 12.23. The like sad message
may I bring to every impenitent person amongst you, Thou art a dead man, or
woman. Verdict is past upon thee as guilty, and sentence is gone forth against
thee, to be sent into the chains of darkness: only thou art reprieved for a few
moments, and hitherto there has been a respite of execution. But let me tell
thee, if God should send a providence to take thee hence in this condition (as
for ought thou know, he may do this night) thou would as certainly drop
into hell, and there lie for ever, as now thou art upon the land of the living.
See a full proof of it. Joh. 3.18. He that believes not, is condemned already.
Mark it, although he be not actually damned, yet he is already condemned; and
if he go on in his way, it is impossible he should escape the damnation of
hell. How is he condemned already? Why, the Law of God has pronounced sentence
against him, to be cast into prison, till he have paid the uttermost farthing;
which will never be paid. The sinner has wronged, and rebelled against an
infinite Being, and the Law does sentence him to make a proportionable
satisfaction. Now seeing he cannot render a satisfaction infinite in worth and
valuation, he is condemned to torments infinite in duration. This is the
sentence passed upon the wicked, and by reason of their unbelief this sentence
stands unrepealed: It remains in its full force and vigor against them; they
cannot plead the Gospel pardon for their discharge: because that pardon is
procured through the blood of Christ, and given forth to none but such as are
united to him. If men were duly sensible hereof, how would it disturb their
carnal peace, and cause their hearts to tremble? They would not enjoy a quiet
hour, till they had made sure their acquital from this dreadful sentence: They
would not eat in quiet, lest the next bit of bread they swallow down, should
stop their breath, and prove as God's executioner to drag them into prison:
They could not sleep in quiet, lest before the light of the morning, their
souls should be required, and sent into the bottomless pit of destruction. If
this point were believed, and laid to heart, surely it would fill many closets
and families full of complaints and cryings out, more than if they were under
the sorest temporal scourge. How would men's retired chambers be filled with
prayer, and earnest desires after God, to pluck them as firebrarnds out of the
burning? What pains would they take, to sue out their pardon in the blood of
Christ? What welcome entertainment would they give unto the Son of God, when he
comes to offer life and salvation to them? Exodus 12.30. There was a great cry
in the land of Egypt, for there was not an house where there was not one dead.
O my brethren, If this doctrine were thoroughly weighed, what a great cry would
be heard in many places and Parishes; where perhaps there are few houses,
wherein there are not several persons dead; sentenced to be sent into the lake
which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death? How would
men's bowels earn with pity toward their carnal relations, who spend their
days in rejoycings, and are every moment in danger of dropping into hell? What
mad men should we reckon ungodly persons to be, that go on in mirth and
jollity, or spend their time in heaping up the dross and rubbish of the earth,
when in the mean time they are persons dead in Law, condemned to hell? How many
do hardly think a serious thought of eternity, from one end of the week to the
other, when yet there is but a step between them and everlasting burnings? But
if this were considered, how would they run from one Minister to another, and
from one Christian to another; with that question, What must I do to be saved?
I am a condemned person, can you give me directions how to get the sentence
repealed? The Lord cause these things to sink deep into your hearts.

And a little to drive home this nail of doctrine, I will mind you further of
these two things.

1. As Christless sinners are already condemned, so the very glory of God is
concerned in their damnation, or in the execution of the sentence past upon
them, if they abide in that condition. And that is a matter very dear unto him,
whereof he is exceeding tender, and wherewith he will never part, Isa. 42.8.
God made all creatures for his own glory, and he will have it from them, one
way, or other. If you do not glorify his free grace, by closing with Christ,
and submitting unto him; he will glorify his justice, and severity upon you,
in your everlasting banishment out of the presence of Christ. It is
observeable, what is said in the case of Nadab, and Abihu, when they offered up
strange fire which God commanded not, and they were consumed in a dreadful
manner with fire from heaven, Lev. 10.3. Then Moses said unto Aaron, this is
that the Lord said, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before
all the people I will be glorified. It is as much as if he had said, This I am
resolved upon, that I will have glory from you one way or other. If you do not
honor me by a due observance of my word, I will vindicate mine honor upon you
by pouring down the vials of mine indignation. So may I say in this case, If
you do not glorify God actively in your conversations, he will be glorified
upon you in your confusion: for this is that which he has determined to have,
one way or other. If you do not give glory to God, by submitting to the terms
on which salvation is offered; you must of necessity be cast into outer
darkness: and God will glorify his righteousness and truth, and power, and
holiness, in your utter destruction; for by one means or other he will be
glorified, Romans 9.22, 23.

2. As impenitent sinners are dead in Law, sentenced to hell, and eternal
death; so if they go on still in their sins, the infinite mercy of God will
never save them, from that sore ruin and desolation. This is the constant
refuge, unto which they have recourse: Be it, that the Law condemns them, yet
God is gracious, and merciful, and full of compassion, and therefore they hope
he will spare them notwithstanding. Nay, but O vain man! If thine heart still
goes after thy detestable things, the God of incomprehensible mercy will not
show thee one drop of mercy: He that is unspeakable in his compassions, will
not have one dram of pity, or compassion upon thy soul. It is true, He is
gracious and merciful, and will not turn away his face from you, if ye return
unto him. 2 Chronicles. 30.9. But God shall wound the head of his enemies, and the
hairy scalp of such a one as goes on still in his trespasses, Psalm. 68.21. The
mercy of the Lord is from everlasting unto everlasting upon them that fear him,
and unto such as keep his Covenant. Psalm. 103.17, 18. But he will not be
merciful to any wicked transgressor. Psalm. 59.5. Why Sirs, do not you know that
he is a God abundant in truth, as well as rich in mercy? And he will show no
mercy to sinners in a way derogating from his truth, Exodus 34.6. It is he that
has said, The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the Nations that
forget God, Psalm. 9.17. and the Word of the Lord will certainly have its
accomplishment. When thou presumest of mercy, Remember withal, that he is a God
of truth; and as sure as God is true, if thou go on in sin, and remainest
ununited unto Christ, thou will perish for ever, notwithstanding that God is
merciful: For all the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth, unto such as keep
his covenant and his testimonies, Psalm. 25.10. Alas poor deluded wretch, do
thou hope for mercy to keep thee from hell, whilst thou art in a course of
ungodliness? Why man, The mercy of God will come up in judgment against thee,
and sink thee deeper into hell: Quos diu ut convertantur tolerat, non conversos
durius damnat. Hier.

Tarditatem vindictae compensat gravitate supplicii.


for by despising the goodness of God, thou art treasuring up wrath against the
day of wrath, Rom 2.4, 5. Do thou presume of mercy in thy state of
impenitence? Why man, This very presumption will add load upon thy back, and
degrees unto thy torments. Read over that Text deliberately, and the Lord
awaken thy conscience in the perusal of it, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20, 21. And it come to
pass, that when he hears the words of this curse, he bless himself in his
heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine
heart, to add drunkenness to thirst.] It is to this effect, as if the carnal
wretch had said, God is gracious and merciful, and though I have no interest in
Christ, but take my pleasure in sin, and am not so forward in godliness as
these precise Ministers would persuade me; yet I trust in God that he will show
pity upon me, he will not be so severe as these hot-spirited men would bear us
in hand: God is a God of mercy, and delights in it, and I hope to taste of
his compassion, and that he will not send me to hell, whatever he has said.
Well, But will such a person find mercy, because he hops for it? Will he meet
with peace, because he says in his heart, He shall have peace? Nothing less;
This very presumption of mercy whilst in his sins, will be a means to bar and
bolt the door of mercy against him. Quo diutius expectat, eo districtius
judicabit.
For mark what follows, v. 20, 21. The Lord will not spare him, but then the
anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the
curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him: and the Lord shall
blot out his name from under heaven. And the Lord shall separate him unto evil
out of all the tribes of Israel, according to all the curses of the Covenant,
that are written in this book of the Law, etc.

This is the fourth respect, in which a Christless estate is a state of death,
viz. In point of condemnation, or obnoxiousness to eternal death.

5. Lastly, Unconverted sinners are in a state of death in respect of the
abundant evils incident to that condition. They are in a perfectly wretched and
miserable estate: For death comprizeth all sorts of evils. As when life is
promised to the godly, it is a comprehensive term, that contains all sorts of
blessings and mercies whatsoever, Psalm. 30.5. Prove. 3.18. So when the wicked,
on the other hand, are said to be dead, that is a big-bellyed word, that
carries all kinds of evils in the bowels of it: troubles, and vexations, and
perplexities here; and at last eternal ruin, and desolation, Deuteronomy. 30.15, 19.
Now in this sense, they are all dead who are not in Christ. Destruction and
misery is in their ways, and the way of peace they have not known, Romans 3.16,
17. To work this upon your hearts, study seriously these three Texts of
Scripture, Job 15. from v. 20. to the 30. Job 18. from v. 5. to the 21. Job 20.
from v. 5. to the end of the Chapter. And withal observe these four subsequent
notes. 1. Christless persons are under the guilt of all the sins and
transgressions, that ever were committed by them since they had a being: And
God will one day reckon them up in order, and lay them in full load upon their
shoulders. Possibly sinners themselves have forgotten multitudes of them; but
the God of infinite knowledge has written them down exactly in his book; and
at length he will bring them forth into judgment. And truly Sirs, One would
think there needed no more to make them miserable enough. One sin, if laid to
our charge, would sink us irrecoverably into perdition. Alas, How will the
sinner stand, when all his iniquities shall meet together, and be sealed up as
in a bag, and bound fast upon him? If a wicked man should sit down, and make a
catalogue of the sins of one month or week, what a vast heap would they amount
to? Vain thoughts, proud, and earthly, and unbelieving thoughts; inordinate
passions and affections; unsavory and rotten communication, evil actions done,
and duties left undone, and slightness and superficialness in the discharge of
duty, and the like. Yea, but when all the sins of his whole life, and the
native pravity and wickedness of his heart, shall be gathered together into one
bundle; what a numberless number would they amount to? What unconceivable
torments would be the wages of them, if considered as clothed with all the
aggravating circumstances thereof? Why Sirs, when God enters into judgment with
the unregenerate, he will not abate them one sin, Psalm. 10.15. Break thou the
arm of the wicked, and the evil man: Seek out his wickedness, till thou find
none. That is, set them down in order, till they are all set down: Let not one
of them remain untaken-notice of: Let them be searched out so exactly, till
there be no more to be found. We are apt to think, that God will not be so
strict, as some would press us to believe: But if you are wicked sinners, he
will not abate you one transgression. The very sins of thy youth, which are
slipped out of thy memory, God will fill thy bones with them, and make them lie
down with thee in the dust, Job 20.11. And as for thy secret sins, which the
world could not observe, he will bring them to light, and set them in order
before thine eyes, Eccl. 12.14. Psalm. 50.21.

2. Persons out of Christ are in a wretched condition, because they have God
for their adversary: who is the mighty possessor of heaven and earth; in whose
hands are all the corners of the world, and at whose command and beck is every
creature in being, to fulfill his pleasure; Against whom never did person rise
up and prosper; For he is wise in heart, and mighty in strength, Job. 9.4. This
all-powerful God is their enemy, that sets against them: the living and
eternal God, who is able to pursue them that oppose him, with fiery indignation
for ever: Into whose hands therefore it is a fearful thing to fall, Heb. 10 31.
Job 9.4. My brethren, a few right and serious apprehensions of the nature and
attributes of God, would make a man's heart shiver, and tremble, at the very
thoughts of having him for an adversary. For as Moses says, Who knows the
power of his anger? Psalm. 90.11. No secure sinner knows it: for if they did,
it would rouse them out of their security, and cause them to fly for refuge
unto the city of refuge, Omnis peccans est ignorans.
No unregenerate person knows it. Had they but a glimps of the discovery of
it, their ears would tingle at the mention of his being against them: It would
be a vexation by day and by night, only to understand the report of God's being
their enemy; who in a moment can break them in pieces like a potters vessel.
Who knows the power of his anger? The meaning is, It is unsearchably
dreadful, and past finding out. So that this alone were sufficient to bespeak
them thoroughly miserable. For may a man say to the unregenerate, as the King
did to the woman that cried unto him for help, 2 King. 6.27. If the Lord do not
help thee, whence shall I help thee? If God do not comfort thee, what
enjoyments can do it? for they are all at his disposal, and can minister no
further assistance than he is pleased to put into them. If the Lord of Hosts be
set against thee, who can deliver out of his hands?

3. Unconverted sinners are under a curse in all that does concern them. And
how can they expect to succeed in any of their affairs, when there is a curse
from heaven intermingled therewith? This is the condition of every person out
of Christ, to be an accursed person. And that curse is of an extensive nature:
It rides a large circuit; it spreads it self upon, and insinuates it self
into every mercy which they receive, and every work they perform, and every
place and relation they are in, and every providence they are under, Prove. 3.3.
The curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked. But what if he go out of
his house, may he not escape it? No, The curse will follow him whithersoever he
goes, and suck out the sweetness of whatsoever he does possess, Deuteronomy. 28.15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 20. It shall come to pass, if thou will not hearken to the
voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all his commandments and his
statutes which I command thee this day, that all these curses shall come upon
thee, and overtake thee. Cursed shall thou be in the City, and cursed shall
thou be in the field, cursed shall be thy basket and thy store; cursed shall be
the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy land, the increase of thy kine, and
the flocks of thy sheep. Cursed shall thou be when thou come in, and cursed
shall thou be when thou go out. The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, and
vexation, and rebuke in all that thou set thine hand unto, for to do; until
thou be destroyed, and until thou perish quickly: because of the wickedness of
thy doings, whereby thou have forsaken me. Mark how the curse pursues the
ungodly; and although he stave it off with all his strength and skill, yet it
will come upon him: And if he flee from it, it will follow after him: And if he
run never so fast it will overtake and seize upon him, and all that he has:
and will never be removed till he leave his sins, and get into Christ, or else
be made eternally accursed. This is the third particular to set forth the
misery of a Christless condition, It is an accursed condition. And it must
needs be so, for Christ alone can deliver us from the curse of the Law: and you
can have no redemption through Christ, except you are ingraffed into him.

4. Persons unconverted and ununited to Christ, must of necessity be in a
perfectly wretched condition, because all the comminations and threatenings in
God's word, belong unto them, and hang over their heads; and unless prevented,
by a speedy return unto God, will actually fall down upon them. As a Believer
cannot but be blessed, because he has a right to all the exceeding great and
precious promises of the Gospel: so an unregenerate person cannot but be
miserable, because all the dreadful and direful threatenings of the word are his
share and portion. And this in very deed is the reason, why sinners for the
most part cannot endure to be conversant in the word; and it is a trouble and
vexation unto them, when passages of the Scripture are darted into their
Spirits: Because (as Ahab said of Micaiah) it never prophecieth good concerning
them; it denounces nothing but wrath against them. All that is written in the
Law is set against them: and if there be not enough written, God will bring
upon them more evils than are expressly mentioned in the threatenings of the Law.
Their inward thought is, that God will not deal so severely with them, as is
contained in the word. But mind it Sirs, if you continue in sin, he will fulfill
his word with advantage: He will bring upon such, all the plagues that are
written; Also every sickness and every plague that is not written in the book
of the Law, them will the Lord bring upon such persons till they be destroyed,
Deuteronomy. 28.61.

So much for the third Inference, That persons out of Christ must of necessity
be dead: for he that has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son has
not life.

There is one main objection should have been answered under this head, which
relates especially to the third way of their being dead, viz. in respect of
impotency, and inability to that which is spiritually good. I will briefly
touch upon it in this place, though it comes in, a little out of order, and
should have been handled under that third particular.

Obj. The objection is this, If unregenerate persons are thus dead in sins, and
have no power to that which is spiritually good; either to turn themselves unto
the Lord, or to walk in ways of holiness before the Lord: To what purpose then
does he so frequently command them to turn unto him, and to make their ways
perfect before him, and to cleanse their hearts from wickedness; if they have
no power to do what is commanded* Such injunctions you have often upon record
in the Scriptures, Ezekiel. 33.11. Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why
will ye die, O house of Israel? Jer. 4.14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from
wickedness, that thou may be saved. And Isa. 1.16. Wash ye, make you clean,
put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes. To what end, now will
you say, are these injunctions laid upon the unconverted, if they are stark
dead in their sins, and have no strength to do what is enjoined?

Sol. I answer, These commandments do not import any spiritual strength in the
wicked, for they are dead: They have lost the image of God which was the life
of the soul. For as the soul is the life of the body, so the image of God was
the life of the soul: and this image they put away from them, by their
apostasy. But these commandments have their usefulness many ways: principally
upon a fivefold account.

1. God does command the unregenerate to walk in his ways, and that in truth
and with a perfect heart; not as importing their strength what they are able to
do; But to show them their duty what they ought to do. Non mensura nostrarum
virium sunt praecepta Dei, nec vires nostrae mensura praeceptorum divi^orum.
Nec attemperat Deus mandata sua ad vires hominis peccato corrupti, sed ad
debitum natural. Wendelin. system. majus.
And it is no such strange thing, as some persons would persuade us, that a man
should be in duty bound to the performance of more, than in his fallen estate
he is able to perform. A little to illustrate it by a familiar instanc^ or two.
Take a servant, that by his licentiousness has made himself drunken, and it is
still his duty to serve his Master; although he has put himself into a present
incapacity for the discharge of that duty: His sin and wickedness does not
disannul or cancel his masters right and authority. If I lend a sum of money to
another, and he through negligence and ill husbandry squandereth it away, and
is not able to pay me: yet I may justly and legally call upon him for payment,
to manifest unto him what he is bound to do. This is the very case; God gave us
power at first to obey his will, and to keep all his statutes, and to walk in
obedience before him, and we wilfully put it away from us, Eccles. 7.29. God
made man upright, but they have sought out many inventions. Now man's wickedness
and sinful declension from God, does not invalidate God's authority over us,
nor enervate the obligation of his Law upon us. He may justly come and require
the debt of obedience at our hands, though we have made our selves unable to
tender it. As it is in the parable, Mat. 25.27. Ought thou not to have put
my money to the exchangers. Industriam tuam servus debebas demino. Marl.
So this is the work which we ought to do, though by our apostasy we are
deprived of ability to do it.

2. God does lay these injunctions and precepts upon the unconverted, not as
implying any power in them; but to make them sensible of their own weakness. As
sometimes when children will boast of what is above their strength, we set them
upon the work, that they may see their folly, and how unable they are to do
what they boasted of. Why Sirs, the heart of man is very deceitful, and apt to
boast of great matters. Most men think it is an easy thing to repent and
believe; and that they can turn unto God at any time. Why, let me see you do
it, says the Lord. Ad hoc lex data est ut superbo suam infirmitatem notam
faceret. Aug.
He sets them upon the performance, that he may cause them to see and
acknowledge their own insufficiency. As Christ dealt with the young man that
was full of self, Mat. 19.20, 21. He thought he was able to keep all the
commandments of God, and to climb to heaven by that ladder. And what says our
Savior to him? Why, If thou will be perfect, go and sell all that thou have,
and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven. As if he had
said, Thou think thy self able to do whatsoever is commanded; I will try
thy strength, Here is a commandment I give, go and do it: and then it quickly
appears how impotent and unable he was. In this respect all the commandments
of the Law are to the unregenerate [praecepta probationis] precepts for trial.
As it was with the Israelites, they supposed they could have kept all that God
had spoken; and he gives them his precepts in their full extent and latitude,
and leads them through the wilderness, to humble them, and to prove them, and
to know what was in their hearts, Deuteronomy. 8.1, 2. That is, to make them to know
what was in their hearts: for he knew it well enough; all things are naked and
open before him; But they could not believe it, that they had such a proneness
to evil, and such an aversness and impotency to that which is good. But by
putting them to the trial, God makes them to know it.

3. God is pleased to lay his commands upon the unregenerate, to turn unto him,
and to believe in Christ, and the like; That they might be stirred up to
address themselves unto the Lord, to work in them what he requires to be
within them; and to enable them to do, what is commanded to be done. Praecepta
Dei sunt precationum nostrarum materia; quia jubet Deus facere quae non
p^ssumus, ut sciamus quid petere ab ipso debeamus. Wendel, syst. majus.
That out of every precept they might frame a petition for strength and
spiritual grace, and present it unto the Majesty of heaven, Psalm. 119.4, 5.
Thou have commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently. O that my ways were
directed to keep thy Statutes! So should a sinner say, Thou Lord command me
to convert and turn; O that my soul were converted, that I might turn unto the
most high! Thou command me to repent; O Lord give me repentance, not to be
repented of! Thou requirest me to be holy; O make me such a one as I am
required to be! Lex data est, ut gratia quareretur: gratia data ut lex
impleretur. Aug.
And therefore it is observable that what is commanded in one place, the Lord
himself in some other place has undertaken to perform; that we might be
quickened to seek unto him for it. In Jer. 4.4. you have it as a precept.
Circumcise your selves to the Lord, and take away the foreskins of your hearts.
But in Dent. 30.6. it is a word of promise: And the Lord thy God will
circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul. Ezekiel. 18.31. God has laid it as a
commandment upon us, Make you a new heart, and a new spirit. But Ezekiel. 36.26.
The Lord himself has undertaken it for us. A new heart also I will give you,
and a new spirit I will put within you.

4. God does command the unconverted to turn themselves, though they are dead
in sins and trespasses: because he does employ his word of precept as the
means, whereby effectually to turn them. Together with his commandment, To
cleanse themselves, he does send forth his Spirit to make them clean. Utitur
Deus praeceptis ut corda nostra ad obsequium trahat. Sic mortuos quoque non
frustra Deus alloquitur, quando per ipsum illud alloquium vitam mortuis
infundit; and quod efficere vult declarat. Wendel.
It is just for all the world, in this case, as in Christ's calling upon
Lazarus, Joh. 11.43. He cried with a loud voice, Lazarus come forth. This did
not import any power in Lazarus, to raise up himself; for he had been four
days dead: But together with the word of Christ, there went forth a secret
energy and virtue from him, whereby he was raised. So when Christ's call goes
forth unto the wicked, to turn and repent; it does not suppose any power in
them: but together with his word, he sends forth the efficacious operation of
his Spirit, whereby they are turned, and repentance is wrought within them. And
this is according to one of the Statute-Laws of the great God of heaven, that
his Word and Spirit shall go forth together. The holy Ghost works in the
word, and by the word. The commandment is the [ vehiculum or] conduit-pipe by
which the Spirit is conveyed, to plant grace in men's hearts, Isa. 59.21. Prove.
1.23. Jam. 1.18. And this should encourage the unconverted to be much inreading
the word, and in meditation upon the word, and to give their constant
attendance upon it when it is preached, and to be often pressing it upon their
hearts, and personally applying it to their own cases and consciences.

5. I might show you, That although it is God alone by his Almighty power, who
is able to convert a sinner unto himself; yet he is pleased to lay his commands
upon them, and to reason and expostulate the case with them; that so they may
be wrought upon in a rational way: For God does not work upon men, as upon
stocks and stones; but deals with them as creatures endued with reason, and
understanding. He draws them powerfully to Christ: yet he does it sweetly,
without offering violence to the will of man. And therefore he makes use of
commandments to press them thereunto, and of arguments and spiritual reasonings
to enforce those commandments; and so does overcome their stubbornness, by
making those means to prevail, Joh. 6.44, 45. No man can come unto me, except
the father which has sent me draw him: and I will raise him up at the last
day. It is written in the Prophets, And they shall be all taught of God. Mark
it, The Lord draws men by teaching them, and making those teachings
efficacious. He acts with a strong hand and an outstretched arm but that arm
conquereth them in a way of instruction.

And thus I have done with the first Use, viz. that of Information.

CHAP. XI. The Use of Trial. Self-examination the way to attain the knowledge
of our Union with Christ. Wherein the work of Self-examination consists.
Motives to quicken thereunto. Directions for the right managing of that work.
2. THe principal use I drive at for the improvement of this point, is by way
of examination and Trial. If union with Christ, or having the Son, be of such
absolute necessity in order to salvation by him; Then it concerns us to take
this doctrine home to our selves, and to enter upon a serious debate which, and
examination of our selves; whether we be in Christ: whether we have the Son, by
being united unto him. Else we have no right to eternal life, but are still in
our sins, and under the wrath of God. So that, as you tender your everlasting
well-being, and the welfare of your immortal souls; put this question closly to
your hearts, and follow it earnestly till you get a determinate answer
thereunto. Am I united unto the Son of God? Does Christ dwell in me, and am I
ingraffed into him? It is a matter of infinite weight and moment: for if you
fall short of this privilege, you are ruined everlastingly. A mistake herein
may undo you utterly, without recovery. This is the foundation of all true
peace and comfort; so that make a strict enquiry into it. It is a matter which
may be known, for the Apostle John tells us of Believers, that they knew they
were in Christ, 1 John 2.5. and Self-examination is the way to know it. And
therefore take my counsel in the words of S. Paul, 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your
selves, whether you be in the faith: prove your own selves: Know you not your
own selves, how that Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? Examine and
prove, that is, make a curious and narrow search into it: be very inquisitive
concerning it; ransack your whole souls, that ye may find it out? pierce your
selves through, leave no stone unturned, no corner of your hearts unript up.
What! know ye not your own selves? q. d. Is it not a shame to be ignorant of
your own spiritual estate, whether you be in Christ, and Christ be formed in
you? Can you rest contentedly without the knowledge of it? Why, if you do not
know it, the fault is probably in your selves, because you do not set upon the
work of Self-examination; or you are slight and superficial in that work: so
that enter upon it thoroughly and in good earnest.

My brethren, If you knew that you were united to the Son of God, your hearts
would be able to make their boast of God continually; you might rejoice in him
all the day long; you might be assured of access unto him, and a gracious
acceptance with him, upon all occasions: you needed not be afraid in times of
evil, though one evil rumor come upon the neck of another, and one sore
calamity usher in another. When others walk droopingly, and disconsolately, you
might serve the Lord with alacrity and gladness of heart; and this joy of the
Lord would be your strength. And if you continue out of Christ, better were it
for you that you had never been born. So that it much lies upon you, to get
the knowledge of it; and therefore call your selves to an account, how the case
stands with you. Say, Have I the son? Am I planted into Christ? If people are
unacquainted with this particular touching themselves, it is mostly through the
neglect, or persunctory discharge of the work of Self-examination: As will evid
intly appear by these three following considerations.

1. Without Self-examination, a man can never pertinently and appositely, apply
the Word of God unto himself: nor compare the frame and temper of his soul with
the Word of the Lord; so as to be able to pass a righteous judgment thereupon.
My brethren, it is the Word of God which is the rule for discovery, whether we
be in Christ or not; (as I shall show you more fully anon) but this discovery
cannot be made, by a bare naked speculation of the truths contained therein,
except we personally apply the truths unto our selves, and compare our selves
with them. Just as it is in secular matters: The Carpenters line and plummet
will discover the straightness, or crookedness, of a piece of timber; but this
it cannot do by taking a single view of the line, unless it be applied unto the
timber. The Standard is appointed to show the justness or falsehood of weights
and measures: but then you must bring them unto the standard, and compare them
with the standard. So the Scripture is the rule for trial of men's hearts,
whether they be straight or crooked: It is the standard to evidence a man's
spiritual estate, whether his person will hold weight in the balance of the
sanctuary, when he comes to be judged of the Lord: but then he must apply this
rule unto himself, and compare himself with this standard. Such persons as
would know that they are of God, must not only view the light; but must also
bring their persons and actions unto the light, Joh. 3.21. He that does good
comes unto the light, that his deeds may be manifest, that they are wrought in
God. He takes the light of God's word and his own soul, and purteth them both
together, that he may see what correspondency there is between the one and the
other. And it is said of the wicked, v. 20. of that Chapter, He hates the
light, and does not come unto it; that is, He cannot endure personally to apply
it unto himself. You have many carnal people could be content to know the truth
in the general notion, but they hate it in the particular application to their
case. But if you would know whether you are in Christ, you must apply and
appropriate the word of God unto your selves, and compare it with your
condition. Now, to bring this home to our purpose, This application of the
word, and comparing our selves with it, can never be done aright, without
selfexamination. Except the Physician know the constitution and temperament of
the patient, he can never apply suitable remedies unto him: so except we search
and enquire into the frame of our souls, we can never apply the Scripture,
properly, and suitably, unto our souls. Except a man search into his ways and
actions, as well as into the word, he cannot compare those actions with the
word: But he will be apt upon every turn, to run into mistakes, and practical
errors: He will take that word home to himself, which does not belong to him;
and pass such a sentence upon himself, as is not to be passed upon him. It is
hinted as the ground of men's deceit, and self-cozenage, because they do not
look into themselves, Prove. 21.2. Every way of a man is right in his own eyes,
but the Lord pondereth the hearts. As if the holy Ghost had said, If men did
but search their own hearts, they would not be so mistaken concerning their
ways; nor pass such a false judgment upon themselves. They presently conclude
that their ways are right, because they do not thoroughly look into them, nor
take a view of their spirits, which are the principle of action; but God ponder
eth their hearts.

2. If you would know, that you are, or whether you are, united to Christ, you
must be diligent in the examination of your selves; and the reason is, Because
that is the very means which God has especially designed to this end, and
appointed to be made use of to this purpose, to bring us unto the knowledge of
it. This is a Maxim in Religion as clear as the noonday, That if we would
comfortably expect any mercy from the Lord, or gracious assistance unto any
work or business, we must look for it in the use of such means as God has
appointed to that end, and wherein he is wont to convey such grace and
assistance. Now self-examination is the means which God has required to be
made use of, to bring us to the knowledge of our ingrafture into Christ. For
Sirs, although it is God alone who can powerfully and convincingly make it
known to us; yet we must not sit still and be idle, and say, if God will
discover it to me I shall know it: But we must wait upon him in the way wherein
he is wont to meet his people to this end; which is in the duty of
self-examination. If we would have our calling and election made sure, our
selves must give dilige^^e to make it sure, 2 Pet. 1.10.

3. Self-examination is the way to arrive at this knowledge, whether we are
spiritually ingraffed into the Son: Because hereby we shall find out those
falsehoods, under which our spirits are apt to lie hid; and those deceits
whereby our hearts are ready to cheat us, in passing a false judgment upon our
selves. Self-examination will show us where the cheat lies, and upon what
ground it is that we deal treacherously in this matter. You read of a people,
Isa. 28.15. who thought themselves to be free from the wrath of God, when
indeed they were the very generation of his wrath. And what was the reason of
it? whence did this deceit proceed? Why, they took sanctuary in lies, and
covered themselves over with falsehoods. When the overflowing scourge shall pass
through, it shall not come unto us: for we have made lies our refuge, and under
falsehood have we hid our selves. The meaning I take to be this; They built
their hopes of deliverance upon rotten pillars, and sandy foundations: They
apprehended themselves to be in a right way, when they were not: that their
hearts were for God, when indeed it was a lie; for they were set upon sin and
idolatry, and full of desperate wickedness: They thought they were in the
service of the Lord, and that therefore he would show them favor, when in
truth it was a falsehood; they were in the broad way that leads to
destruction. Now how should a man discover the falsehood of these pretenses, and
find out the fallacies whereby our hearts would impose upon us in this case?
Why, By being diligent in the examination of our selves. There is a full Text
to this purpose, Gal. 6.3, 4. For if a man think himself to be something, when
he is nothing, he deceives himself. But let every man prove his own work, and
then he shall have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another. As if he had
said, It is no marvel if your hearts beguile you, if you do not make a narrow
scrutiny into your selves. Your spirits are treacherous, apt to put light for
darkness, and darkness for light. You will be apt to entertain good thoughts
and opinions of your selves, when perhaps you have nothing of the life and
substance of godliness; and your deceitful hearts take hold of every advantage
to strengthen those opinions. But if you would avoid this cheat, you must
examine your selves. Let every man prove his own work] that is, every one that
would not be thus deceived; and in order to the prevention of this
self-flattery, and cozenage. If you were much in self-examination, you would
not rest in the good opinions of others; nor conclude you were holy, because
they thought well of you: or you would not determine of your spiritual estate,
from the lives of others; that therefore you are the children of God, because
you are not so bad as they; or that you were in Covenant with the Lord, because
others run faster than you in the devils service: But upon the through trial of
your selves it would be seen, whether you have any substantial ground of
rejoicing.

So that let me tell you again, If you love your souls, if you would be assured
to escape everlasting vengeance, that you are persons in favor with God, and
shall arrive with sasety at the kingdom of heaven, when all impenitent sinners
are bound up in bundles together, and cast into hell fire; make it appear that
you are united to Christ. Get knowledge and assurance that you have the Son;
and to that end be diligent in the search of your selves: for self-examination
is the way to know it.

You will say, What course shall we take in the search of this matter? or in
what method shall we proceed, in this examination of our selves, that thereupon
we may know whether we be ingraffed into Christ? This is a work and duty, in
the discharge whereof eternal life it self lies at the stake; if it be not
managed aright, it may prove the occasion of a man's utter ruin and
destruction. And therefore I will insist upon it somewhat largely, by passing
over these three heads of particulars.

By 1. By showing you the nature of this duty, That you may know wherein your
work lies in this business; or what this self-examination is, in order to
finding out whether you be knit to Christ. 2. Pressing upon your spirits, some
of the principle motives or provocatives, to quicken you to set speedily, and
vigorously, upon the discharge of this work. 3. Subjoyning, in the close, some
special directions to guide you in the discharge of this work: that you may
come to a right conclusion, whether you have the Son; and not be deceived
therein.


1. To begin with the first, of showing you wherein your work lies in this
business of examining whether you be one with Christ, and have the Son: or what
this duty of self-examination is. Which is a matter needful to be a little
explained: Because, it is to be feared, that multitudes, who are called
Christians, are much in the dark as to any distinct knowledge of the nature of
this work: that they are not only strangers to the practice of it, but in a
great measure as to any clear apprehensions concerning it. But I shall not
handle it by way of description, at large; only I will give you some hints of
the most material points, which have a reference to this work, and that will be
needful to open our way for the directions I would give you, for the right
management thereof. All that shall be delivered under this head, I have
gathered into six plain conclusions.

Concl. 1. The first conclusion is this, That self-examination, as to our union
with Christ, is for the matter of it, a compounded duty; made up of a threefold
spiritual and reflexive action, in relation to a man's self.

There is 1. A search, or enquiry made into a man's self. 2. The probation and
trial of a man's self. 3. The passing sentence, or judgment upon a man's self.
a man's self.

Mark it Sirs, It does not lie in one only single act of the spirit, but it
does consist of several acts. For as there are some complicated sins, which
carry many transgressions together in the bowels of them: So there are some
duties, which we may call complicated or compounded duties. And such is this of
self-examination; wherein there are many actions folded up together: For it
comprehends a threefold reflexive act.

1. There is an act of inspection, or retrospection into a man's self: A search
or enquiry made into our persons and ways; our inward qualifications, and all
our performances. He that examineth himself, must curiously pry, and look into
his own heart and practice; into his principles and conversation, and into all
the workings of those principles, and the manner of them. He must descend into,
and take a narrow view of every corner of his spirit, and the several parts of
his demeanor: As a man would look with a candle into every room, and cast his
eye into every hole and crany of an house, for the finding out any thing which
is lost. You have it under this very similitude, Prove. 20.27. The spirit of a
man is the candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the belly. It
is the candle of the Lord] that is, there is a special faculty put into a man's
soul by God himself, whereby he is enabled to make enquiry into his innermost
thoughts, and and the secret operations of his own heart: in the exercise
whereof he may make a narrow scrutiny into himself, and look wistly into what
is within him, or has been done by him: as a man does that takes a torch, or
candle, to see that which could not otherwise be perceived. In mente hominis,
quasi in tabulis obsignatis conscriptum relinquitur, quid fecit, and quo animo,
quod etiam tandem (...) conscientia legitur and pronunciatur. Ames. de consc.
It is sometimes styled in respect to a man's ways (which, as I shall show you
by and by, are a main evidence of our union with Christ, or estrangedness from
him) a thinking upon them, Psalm. 119.59. I thought upon my ways, and turned my
feet unto thy testimonies. So that then does a person examine himself, when he
sits down and looks into his own soul, what graces are there, and how they
are exercised; what corruptions abide within him, and how much force and power
they have had over him, and the like: When he does bethink himself as to his
ways, with what care and conscience he has sanctified the Sabbath; how
instant and fervent he is on the one hand, or cold and careless on the other
hand, in the duty of prayer; how often he does read the Word, and meditate
thereupon; with what spiritualness and faithfulness, he does fill up his
particular calling and relations. When he does take a review of all his affairs
on a spiritual account. As a man that has lost any thing in his travels, he
goes over them back again, in his thoughts: He considers where he was such a
day, and what place he lay in the other night, and who was in his company, and
where he was most likely to leave that which he misseth. So does a Christian,
who is serious inself-examination; he does traverse his ways back again, in
his retired contemplations. He bethinketh himself, what indowments he has,
with what circumspection he has walked, how he has improved this opportunity,
and redeemed the other part of his time, etc. This is the first reflexine act
whereof this work is compounded, viz. An act of inspection, or retrospection
into a man's self.

2. There is an act of probation and trial of amans self. When a person that
examines himself has found out the particulars to be observed, touching his
heart and ways, he does not rest there: but immediately brings all to the
test and touchstone, that he may see of what sort his qualifications are, and
of what kind his actions have been: whether they are of the right metal and
stamp, as they ought to be; and as he would have them to be: whether they be
such as will pass for current in the court of Heaven. As a careful Goldsmith,
when he receives a sum of money, does not only count the pieces; but if any of
them be suspected, or look but suspiciously, he tries them, whether they be
such as will pass in payment: So does a Christian in this spiritual work of the
examination of himself, touching his union with Christ; First he observes and
takes notice what is within him, and what has been done by him, and then he
tries what metal they are of: that is, whether the graces which appear to be
within him, are saving graces indeed, or only counterfeit coin: And whether his
obedience be evangelical and spiritual obedience, or not: And whether the sins
which he has committed be such as may be styled, The spots of God's children,
or no. And the reason of it lies in this, Because, in soul concernments,
especially, there is oftentimes a vast difference betwixt reality, and
appearance. Many things at the first view, seem to be right and good; When upon
a stricter enquiry they are found false and rotten. And therefore, if we would
not be deceived, all things must be proved and tried. This is mentioned as an
act distinct from the former, Lam. 3.40. Let us search, and try our ways.
First we must labor to find out our ways what they have been; and then try
them by the light of the Word, of what sort they have been: wherein they accord
with the rule, how we have deviated from it, or fallen short of living up
thereunto. This is elsewhere called, The weighing of a man's self: in allusion
to the practice of Tradesmen in their negotiation and traffic. They do not
only view the commodities which they buy, but then they put them into the
scales, to see if they will hold weight, for what they wefe bought. So does a
careful Christian as to his demeanor. First he observes his own qual
fications and performances; and then he he tries whether they will hold weight
in the balance. Job 31.5, 6. If I have walked with vanity, or if my foot has
hasted to deceit: Let me be weighed in an even balance, that God may know mine
integrity; q. d. Let my actions be thoroughly fifted, and exactly looked, and
they will be found such as are acceptable unto the Lord. This is the second
reflexive act, whereof self-examination is made up or compounded.

3. There is a conclusive determination, or the passing sentence and judgment
upon a man's self, according to that search and trial. As it is in Courts of
Judicature amongst men; when the cause is thoroughly opened, and witnesses
produced, and the Law consulted in the case; then according thereunto verdict
is brought in, and sentence pronounced. Why Sirs, self-examination is the
erecting of a Court of Judicature in a man's breast; where, upon trial of the
matter, judgment does pass for, or against the person. Conscientia respectu
propositionis est lex: respectu assumptionis, testis; and respectu conclusionis
maxim prop^ie Judex.
Therein a man does gather a conclusion, touching his own ways; that they are
just, or unjust; pleasing unto God, or provocations of the wrath of God. And so
concerning his person, He draws an inference, and passes sentence upon
himself; that he is righteous or wicked; a child of God, or one of his
adversaries; united unto Christ, or still estranged from him, 1 Cor. 11.31. If
we would judge our selves, we should not be judged. And you have mention of the
hearts passing sentence, in both respects. As, 1. of condemnation, upon
supposal of the persons being wicked. 2. Of approbation and absolution, if
righteous, 1 John 3.20. If our heart condemn us; that is, If upon a diligent
search it pronounce sentence against us, as unsound; and such who have dealt
falsely and unfaithfully in the Covenant of God. And v. 21. Beloved, if our
heart condemn us not [if it acquit and discharge us] then have we confidence
toward God. Job 27.5, 6. Till I die, I will not remove mine integrity from me.
My righteousness I will hold fast, and will not let it go: my heart shall not
reproach me, as long as I live; q. d. I will conclude that I am a person
accepted of God, and in Covenant with him, and that I have walked in
uprightness before him; whatever arguments you have urged to shake my
confidence. My righteousness I will hold fast; i. e. I have concluded through
grace, that I am righteous: and by this conclusion I will stick. I will not
pass sentence in mine own wrong. This is the first conclusion asserted, for
opening the nature of self examination.

Conclus. 2. The special faculty or power of the soul, by which this work of
self-examination is performed, is the practical judgment, or conscience of a
man. That is the reflexive eye of the soul, whereby a person is enabled to look
inward; and to take an account of his own heart and ways. There is a twofold
spiritual eye, whereby a man has pre-eminence above all the inferior
creatures. 1. There is the eye of the speculative understanding, in the
exercise whereof he takes a view of matters without himself, at the remotest
distance of place, or time. 2. The eye of the practical judgment or conscience,
whereby he does reflect upon himself, and animadvert upon his own spirit, and
ways. So that your work, in this respect, if you would rightly examine your
selves touching your union with Christ, is to labor to get an awakened
conscience, and a well informed conscience, and a faithful conscience, free
from guile and self-flattery. It concerns you to take heed of deadness, and
security, and treachery in the conscience: For as that is the faculty which
does eye and observe a man in his ways; so whereby he is empowered to take an
account of those ways, and to acquit or condemn himself, according to the
merits of the cause, and as the matter does require. You read of the Apostle
Paul, that he had a witness on his side, that he was a servant of God, and
walked in sincerity before the Lord; whereupon his heart was filled with joy
and gladness. And what was that witness? Why, his conscience had examined and
found it to be so, 2 Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom,
but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world. And both
the business of accusing, and absolving a sinner is attributed thereunto,
namely to the workings of conscience, Romans 2.15. Their conscience also bearing
witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one
another, Joh. 8.9. They went out one by one, being convicted by their own
consciences. This you are sometimes to understand by the heart and spirit of a
man, when it is said to take cognizance of the things which are within him. The
heart knows its own bitterness, Prove. 14.10. What man knows the things of a
man, save the spirit of man which is in him? 1 Cor. 2.11. Again Eccl. 7.21, 22.
Also take no heed to all words that are spoken, lest thou hear thy servant
curse thee. For oftentimes also thine own heart knows, that thou thy self
likewise have cursed others. That is, If you would set your consciences awork,
they would declare plainly what is the filthiness that cleaves to you, and the
abominations that have been committed by you. So that your care must be to keep
life, and vigor, and activity in your consciences: and you must take heed to
your selves, that no mistakes, or falsehoods, or practical errors settle within
your consciences.

Concl. 3. Although it be the conscience of a man, by which he does examine
himself touching his union with Christ, and passes judgment upon himself in
that case: yet this work can never be performed effectually and to purpose,
without the concurrent assistance of the Spirit of God, and the powerful
infl^ence of the holy Ghost. It is the Spirit of God, by whom the conscience of
a sinner is excited and stired up unto this work, and directed and guided
therein; that it may see clearly into matters, and may pass a right and
convincing sentence thereupon. It is the same Spirit alone which converteth a
sinner from his natural estate, that can convincingly show him his sad estate
in order to conversion. And the same Spirit alone which planteth grace into the
soul, can discover that grace where it is planted; that so a Believer may take
comfort therein, and conclude from thence that he is ingraffed into Christ. And
therefore when we attain any comfortable evidences of our estate Godward, we
are said, to be sealed by the Spirit: because it depends upon his assistance
and testimony, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. In whom also, after that ye believed, ye were
sealed with that holy Spirit of promise: which is the earnest of our
inheritance. It is a manner of speech taken from the practice of men; who for
confirmation and assurance of a deed or grant, give writings under seal: so
has the Lord been pleased, says the Apostle, to deal with you; you have not
only the promises of acceptance, and pardon, and eternal life made unto you;
but these promises are sealed. How? Why, by the testimony of the Spirit. Again,
in making of a bargain men are wont to give earnest to confirm it; which is not
only a part of payment, but for assurance of the whole: This earnest, says he,
you have received; which is the witness of the holy Ghost. It is not the
testimony of conscience alone, can make a man effectually to know his relation
to Christ, or separation from Christ, without the concurrent operation of the
Spirit. There is a famous Text in reference to both, Romans 8.15. For ye have not
received the spirit of bondage, again to fear: but ye have received the spirit
of adoption whereby we cry Abba father. Mark it, If a man be brought into
bondage by the knowledge of his undone condition, by seeing himself to lie
under the guilt of his sins, and obnoxious to the insupportable wrath of God,
it is through the operation of the Spirit: And if he be able to plead his
adoption, and to look up unto God as his Father in Christ; it is by the
efficacious workings of the same Spirit. So that for the examination of your
selves concerning your union with Christ, and finding out whether you are knit
unto him, your work in this respect lies in two things (1) In being earnest
petitioners and supplicants at the throne of grace, for the special assistance
of the holy Ghost, to make this discovery to you; to strike in with your
consciences in bearing witness unto your spiritual estate. That the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of glory, may give unto you the
spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him: that the eyes of your
understandings being enlightened, ye may know, what is the hope of his calling,
and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints, Ephesians. 1.17,
18. (2) Your business lies in a careful attendance upon the dictates of the
Spirit, and taking heed that you resist not the holy Ghost, in these actings.
For it is an ordinary thing in many of the people of God to be accessory to the
disconsolateness of their own souls, by opposing the spirit of consolation.
They go on without that comfort, which they might have, in the knowledge of
their union with Christ, because they refuse to be comforted: as the Psalmist
speaks of himself, Psalm. 77.2. This is a common distemper in times of strong
temptations. As the ungodly resist the spirit of conviction, and conversion: so
believers themselves are apt to withstand, and strive against, the spirit of
consolation. And therefore your work is to give diligent attendance upon the
Spirit, and to hear attentively what he shall speak unto you.

Concl. 4. The way of procedure in this business of self-examination, or the
means whereby it must be found out, whether we are united to Christ, is, By
consulting and enquiring into those marks and signs, which are the evidencing
characters, and properties of that union. For Sirs, the change wrought upon a
Believer, by his oneness with Christ, is a relative change; and cannot be seen
immediately in it self, and of it self: But it is discerned and discovered unto
the spirit of a man, by its properties and concomitants; which are as certain
characteristical marks, and tokens, whereby the state of union with Christ is
differenced, and distinguished, from that of being strangers unto him. As it is
in natural things, If I would know, whether this or the other stone be a true
diamond, or a counterfeit; whether this, or the other piece of money, be pure
gold, or adulterate metal; I must consider, whether it have the properties of
pure gold; and whether the stone have the properties of a right diamond, or
not: So upon a spiritual account, If I would know whether I am one with Christ,
and in the state of grace, I must enquire whether I be made partaker of such
things as are the properties and concomitants of that estate, and peculiar
thereunto. These we call marks, and signs; because they denote and signify,
what spiritual condition a person is in. Signum est quod seipsum, and aliquid
praeter se potentiae cognoscenti repraesentat.


I know there are some who have spoken very slightly and contemptibly of this
way of procedure: They would have us only depend upon the immediate witness of
the Spirit, without making use of these marks and signs. But my Brethren, this
is the way which the servants of God have taken, in passing a judgment upon
themselves; who are left upon record in the Scripture, as patterns for our
imitation. And if you would not be deluded, you must take this course likewise.
For else how shall we know, that such an immediate testimony, as they speak of,
is from the Spirit of God, and not a delusion of Satan, or a fond persuasion of
our own deceitful spirits, but by bringing it to the touchstone of these marks
and signs? See 1 John 2.3. And hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his
commandments. Mind it, says the Apostle, we are acquainted with Christ, and
interested in him; and through grace we may come to the knowledge of it. How,
or by what means? Why, by this mark or character, if we keep his commandments;
that will be a certain sign or evidence of it. 1 John 3.14. We know that we have
passed from death to life, because we love the brethren. As if he had said, By
this mark or character we discern our translation into the state of grace,
Psalm. 119.94. I am thine, save me, for I have sought thy precepts. Mark it,
David had not only a title to the favor of God, but he was able to plead that
title; I am thine. How do you prove it? Why, by this mark or evidence, Because
I have sought thy precepts. My brethren, the soul of a man is not acted in this
work, by way of Enthusiasme; nor are we to depend upon a special revelation:
but the work is to be carried on by way of spiritual reasoning or
argumentation. Thus, he who has respect to all the commandments of God, has
the Son, and is united unto the Son: Now, says the soul, through grace I find,
upon a diligent search of my self, that I bear a respect to all Gods
commmandments; and from thence I conclude, that I have the Son of God, and am
ingraffed into him. Again, He that loves the Brethren is in the state of
grace, translated from death to life. And through mercy, says the soul, I find
this property in my self: So that hence I gather, that I am in the state of
grace. Take an instance on the other hand.

Whosoever walks in darkness, has no fellowship with Christ. My conscience
tells me, says the sinner, that I walk in darkness. Hence it evidently
follows, that, whilst I remain in this condition, I have no fellowship with
Christ. So that the convictions of conscience, on the one hand, as to the sad
estate of a sinner; are rational convictions: and the witness of conscience on
the other hand, in behalf of the Saints, that they are in Christ, is a rational
witness; and the Spirit of God does join in a concurrent testimony therewith,
Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God. Mark it, not only to our spirits, but with our spirit. They
join together in giving evidence of a Believers union with Christ. This is the
fourth conclusion, That the way of procedure, in this business of
self-examination, is by marks and signs. For my part, I do not question, but
the holy Ghost may please, at some peculiar seasons, to dart comfort (as it
were) into the heart of a Believer; and in a kind of immediate way, to signify
to him, that he is in favor with God, and in a state of reconciliation;
without any express or sensible reflection, at that instant of time, upon the
gracious qualifications, which are the marks of that estate: But then remember,
that in the conclusion it must be reduced to marks and signs. For else, how
shall a Christian be satisfied, that it was indeed from the Spirit of God,
unless he prove it by such evidencing properties as are given to that end?

Concl. 5. The special marks and signs, or evidential properties and
characters, by which we should examine our selves, touching our union with
Christ, and from which we may be able to judge most clearly, whether we are in
him, are such as are adaequate and proportionate to that estate. Such marks of
union as are appropriate thereunto, and run exactly parallel therewith: that
are of the same ex^ent, and latitude, as union with Christ is; and in no wise
appertain or belong to any other whomsoever. Such marks as these, Logicians
call properties in the strictest acception; that belong only to such as are in
Christ, and are to be found in all that are in him, at all times and seasons.
Proprium quarto modo, quod omni, soli, and semper convenit speciei, and cum ea
reciprocatur.


This will be cleared up, to the apprehensions of the meanest capacity, by
giving you a distinction of three sorts of marks and signs, as to a man's
spiritual state, or relation to Christ: and by showing you the several use,
that is to be made of each of them, in the business of self-examination, or
trial of our union with Christ.

There are 1. Exclusive, or Negative. marks and properties. 2. Inclusive, or
Accumulative marks and properties. 3. Adaequate, and proportionate marks and
properties.


1. There are exclusive, or negative marks and signs, as to union with Christ.
Properties of the first rank as they are commonly styled: that is, such as
belong to all who are ingraffed into the Lord Jesus, but do not solely, or
peculiarly, appertain to them: They are of a greater extent and latitude than
union with Christ is. To make it plain by instances, These are properties of
the first rank, viz. To have an enlightened understanding, and competent
knowledge of the mysteries of godliness: To be convinced of the evil of sin,
and to have the conscience awakened in the sense of it: To believe the word of
God to be true: To perform external duties, and to carry on a reformation in
the life and practice, and the like. These are properties to be found in all,
who are knit unto Christ; but not in them only. An unregenerate person may
partake of them likewise. And what is the use of these in the work of
self-examination, as to our union with Christ? Why, By the want of these, a
person may conclude negatively, that he is not in Christ: but by the attainment
of these alone he cannot conclude affirmatively, that he is in him. Therefore I
call them negative marks, for distinction sake. The absence of any of these,
will be a sign that a person is excluded from this privilege of having the
Son; but the presence of them will not prove that he is partaker thereof. If a
sinner has no knowledge of divine truths, but is grossly ignorant of the
fundamentals of Religion, he may conclude negatively, that he is none of
Christ's, Prove. 19.2. 1 Timothy, 2.4. But although he has much knowledge of the
principles of Religion, he cannot from thence conclude affirmatively, that he
does belong to Christ, Romans 2.17, 18, 21. 1 Cor. 13.2. See it in the case of
legal humiliation. A man may conclude negatively, that he is not a child of
God, if he were never humbled for sins against the Lord, Jer. 44.9, 10. But he
cannot gather in the affirmative, that he is at peace with God, only because he
has felt some trouble upon his spirit for transgressing against him, 1 Kings
21. v. 27, 29. 1 Samuel 24.16, 17. In the case of outward reformation, a person
may determine negatively, that he is not in covenant with God, if he live in
the practice of open sins, and the common neglect of external duties, Psalm.
36.1, 2, 3. But he cannot infer affirmatively, that he is one of the peculiar
people of God, because he has broken off the practice of some grosser
wickednesses, and sets upon the discharge of some outward duties, Luke
18.11, 12. So I might go over the rest. Every true Believer is convinced of the
evil of sin; but all persons under convinction of sin cannot say, that
therefore they are true Believers. All sincere Christians have their
consciences awakened, and assent to the truth of Scripture-doctrines: But it
will not follow, that all whose consciences are awakened, and believe the
Scriptures by an historical faith, are to be reckoned amongst the number of
sincere Christians.

2. There are inclusive marks, or properties of the second rank: which belong
only to such as are united to Christ, but are not to be found in all of them.
As now for instance, To have such high degrees of this, or the other grace, as
some believers have attained: To have such a measure of power over their lusts
and corruptions, as some eminent Saints have had: To be versed in the higher
mysteries of godliness, as they who have their spiritual senses exercised to
discern betwixt good and evil. To be strong in the faith, as Abraham; and
renowned for meekness, as Moses; and eminent for patience, as Job; and to
labor more abundantly, as Paul, and the like. Now what is the use of this sort
of marks in the work of self-examination? Why, from the attainment of them, a
Christian may conclude affirmatively, with a great deal of clearness and
undoubtedness, that he is a member of Christ: But he cannot from the want of
them conclude negatively, that he is not interested in Christ. And this is the
reason, Because a man's spiritual estate Godward, and Christward, does not
depend upon the degrees of grace; but upon the truth of grace. A person may
have his heart sound in the statutes of God, who has not arrived at that
measure of acquaintance with God, as some others have done. There are several
forms of Scholars in the School of Christ, and yet all of them savingly taught
by him. There are diverse ranks of persons in the household of faith, of
different growth and stature; babes, and children; as well as men grown up to
their full strength, and old experienced disciples, Mat. 15.28. Mat. 8.26. 1 John 2.12, 13. Rev. 3.8.

This is well to be observed, because the neglect of the consideration of this
very thing, hathoccasioned the troubles and perplexities of many poor souls,
that walk in the anguish and bitterness of their spirits. They cannot find such
workings in their own hearts, as sometimes are mentioned to be in the hearts of
David and Samuel, and Isaiah and Paul, and other servants of God in Scripture;
and from thence they presently draw sad consequences touching themselves; that
surely their estate is naught, and their hearts are rotten: Whereas possibly
these are workings of spirit that are not ever to be found in all the people of
God; but only in some that are eminent above others, and have attained to an
higher pitch of godliness than others. Only let me add this as a memento by the
way, That the weakest believer, who has the least degrees of grace, is still
pressing after the highest. He does not sit down contented with any measures
attained; but is still thirsting after more. He would, if it were possible,
pluck up corruption by the very root, out of his soul; and be serviceable unto
the Lord at the highest rate, and in the most excellent manner, Phil. 3.13, 14,
15. 2 Cor. 7.1.

3. There are adaequate, and proportionate marks and signs of our union with
Christ. Such as are of an even size with the state of grace; that carry the
same breadth with them, as interest in Christ does; and run exactly and
precisely, parallel thereto. Properties in the strictest acception, that are to
be found only in the children of God, and are to be found in all of them
without exception, and at all times and seasons. As now for instance, To have
the Law of God wrote upon our hearts; to worship God in Spirit; to hate every
false way; to walk before the Lord, as in his sight and presence; to resign up
our selves unreservedly to Christ, and to God by him. And these are as
two-edged swords, that cut both ways. In the examination of your selves, and
passing judgment upon your selves, touching your union with Christ, you may
conclude from them both negatively and affirmatively. If you be without these
qualifications, you are strangers unto Christ: and such as are thus qualified,
are implanted into him. These marks you have plentifully scattered up and down
the Scriptures, Romans 8.6, To be carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually
minded is life and peace. Mat. 10.32.33. Whosoever shall confess me before men,
him will I also confess, before my Father which is in heaven. But whosoever
shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in
heaven. Ezekiel. 18.30. Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions:
so iniquity shall not be your ruin. But except you repent, you shall perish,
Luke 13.3. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, Mat. 5.8. And
without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. Blessed are the
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, Mat. 5.7. And he shall have judgment
without mercy, that has showed no mercy, Jam. 2.13. He that believes on him
[Christ] is not condemned: but he that believes not is condemned already, Joh.
3.18.

These adaequate properties are such as you should principally take notice of,
and select for your use in the trial of your union with Christ; and for the
clearing of it up to your selves, whether you are ingraffed into him. You will
know them by these three conditions. 1. There must be universality of the
subject, they must be found in all persons united to the Son. 2. Peculiarity,
they must be such as belong only unto them. 3. Indefiniteness of time, such as
appertain to the Saints at all seasons. This is the fifth Conclusion I
intended, to open the nature of self-examination.

Concl. 6. The last assertion is this. That such marks and signs, of whatever
sort they be, whereupon a Christian may confidently rest in the examination of
himself, and according to the tenor of which he may pass a righteous sentence
upon himself, whether he be united to Christ; must be clearly deduced from the
Scriptures, and plainly bottomed thereupon. Mark it, I say, if you would not be
deceived and proceed upon mistakes, you must fetch your evidences from thence;
and see that they be such characters of union as are warranted thereby. Else
you may possibly get some presumptuous hopes, but you can never attain unto a
well-grounded assurance: For the Word of God is the only sure foundation, which
you can build upon; in this case of enquiry. And the reason lies herein,
because our Lord Jesus in his proceedings, will judge us by the Scriptures, and
pass everlasting sentence upon us according to the tenor of the Scriptures:
And therefore by that rule we should judge our selves. If a man have a trial at
Law, touching his estate or life; and would know beforehand, whether his cause
be good; he does not depend upon what this neighbors thoughts are, or the
others opinion is: But he searches the Law, and addresseth himself to men
skilful in the Law; as knowing the judge will proceed according to that Rule.
Why Sirs, At the great and general Assizes, Christ will try all causes by the
Word of God, and pass judgment upon all sorts according to the Word: so that by
it we are to be guided in the trial of our selves, Joh. 12.48. He that
rejects me, and receives not my words, has one that judges him: the word
that I have spoken the same shall judge him in the last day. As Christ himself
is ordained to be the judge of the quick and dead: so the doctrines which he
has delivered, will be the rule of all his judicial proceedings; both in
acquitting the righteous, and condemning the wicked. You read, Dan. 7.10. that
when judgment is set, The books shall be opened: And this is one of those books
which shall be consulted with in the case, The book of the Statutes and
Ordinances of the King of heaven; the Law which he appointed for a testimony in
Jacob. As the book of every man's conscience shall be opened for their
conviction, wherein they shall read their guilt in legible characters: For that
is a book of record wherein men's actions are entered; and although now it be
shut, and sinners will not look into it; many of the lines and sentences are
almost obliterated, or blotted, that they cannot be read: Yet at the day of
accounts, God will refresh and recover the luster of those ancient writtings.
And as the book of life shall be opened, Rev. 20.12. that is to say, the
decrees of God will be then published and made known, which now are sealed up
in his breast, and locked up in his Archives. Then it will be seen who are
appointed to life, for the glorifying of the free grace of God; and whom he
purposed to leave in their sins and perish, for the exaltation of his justice.
I say, As these books shall be opened, so there is another book to be made use
of in that day, to wit, The great Statute-book of the Lord of Hosts, the
records of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Jam. 2.12. So speak ye, and so do, as
they that shall be judged by the Law of liberty; i. e. by the word of the truth
of the Gospel of Christ; the whole Word of God registered in the Scriptures,
Chap. 1.23, 25. which, if hearkened unto, is the means to set men at liberty
from their bondage to sin, and Satan: By the Gospel of Christ; which though it
give no manner of countenance unto licentiousness, but is a strong argument
against it; yet proclaims liberty to penitent sinners, and the opening of the
prison to them that are bound, upon a due submission to the government of
Christ. Besides it may be called a Law of liberty or freedom, because it does
not flatter any man as to his spiritual condition, but deals openly and
freely with him, and tells him his own, without tergiversation. And this
affords us another reason why we should fetch our marks of union from the
Scripture; because it will deal freely and plainty in the discovery of our
spiritual estate, without respect of persons. For Sirs, if you build your
confidence upon the opinions of men, or upon the bare dictates of your own
hearts; you may be deceived. Men may sooth you up in your sins; and your hearts
will flatter you; but the word of God will deal freely, and impartially with
you: It will represent matters as they are, in their own proper colors,
without favor, or affection.

So that this is an excellent means to overthrow presumptuous hopes, and to
build aright in our expectations of eternal life; when we fetch all our marks
and signs of being in Christ, from the Scriptures; and bring our evidences unto
the Scriptures. Thou hopest to be saved through Christ, because thou wast born
in the Church, and baptized, and performest some outward duties of Christ's
appointment. Nay, but, Ovain man, where does the Scripture say, these are
tokens and evidences of union with Christ, and salvation through him? Thou
hopest for admission into heaven, upon the account of Christ, because thou art
free from such scandalous sins, whereof others are guilty: thou know such
and such truths, whereof many are ignorant: or because such godly persons
converse with thee, and have a good opinion of thee. But, poor deluded wretch,
where does the Scripture say, that any, or all of these are marks of having the
Son, or of coming to the kingdom of heaven, by the mediation of the Son?
Remember, my bres thren, that the Word of God is appointed, not only for the
rule of faith, and guide of our conversations, but also for the trial of our
spiritual estate; whether we be interested in Christ, and united unto him: That
we may have hopes indeed, and not only a presumptuous confidence, which will
make us ashamed at the last, Romans 15.4. For whatso^^er things were written
aforetime, were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort
of the Scriptures might have hope, Psalm. 130.5. I wait for the Lord, my soul
does wait: and in his word do I hope.

So much for the first thing I intended under this use of Trial, viz. to show
you what this self-examination is, and wherein consists your work in the
performance of it.

2. By way of motive, and prove^ative; to quicken and stir you up, to the
discharge of it. It is a duty whereunto the heart of a man is hardly brought;
as indeed all spiritual work is untastful, and unpleasing to flesh and blood.
So that, as we need line upon line, and precept upon pracept, to dispel the
mists of ignorance whereby our minds are blinded, and to prevent the mistakes
whereupon we are apt to proceed in this work: so we need motive upon motive,
and one spiritual argument upon the neck of another, to cure the backwardness
of our hearts, whereby we are commonly averse to the performance of this work.
I will not be large under this head, but only press upon you these four moving
considerations, or incentives.

Mot. 1. If you be loath to enter thoroughly, into the disquisition of this
matter, and to debate the case with your selves, whether you are one with
Christ, or not; That very thing will be a shrewd argument against you, that you
are utter strangers unto Christ; and in no wise partakers of salvation through
him. It will be a sign that your profession is unsound, and your hearts rotten,
when you are unwilling to search into your spiritual condition. As when a
Tradesman will not suffer his wares to be thoroughly viewed, it ministers ground
of suspicion, that they are not right and good: So it is in these spiritual
affairs; If you are hardly brought to make enquiry into your selves, it will
yield matter of suspicion, that you are conscious of some wickedness allowed in
your selves; and that your hearts are not right in the sight of the Lord. For
my brethren, It is not truth, but falsehood, that hates the light, and will not
come to the light, lest it should be discovered. A person that is indeed in
Covenant with God, and deals faithfully with him, in living up to the terms
of that Covenant, is willing to be searched to the uttermost, Psalm. 26.2, 3.
Examine me, O Lord, and prove me, try me and know my heart. For thy loving
kindness is before mine eyes: and I have walked in thy truth. I have not sat
with vain persons, etc.

Mot. 2. It concerns you to examine diligently, whether you be united unto
Christ, Because it is an ordinary thing for men and women to be mistaken in
this respect: to think that they have the Son, and are in a state of salvation,
when as in truth they lie still in the gall of bitterness: And this mistake is
the cause of their eternal ruin. From hence it is that they neglect to seek
after a remedy, because in their own apprehensions they are safe already: For,
as our Savior says, They that be whole need not a Physician, but they that
are sick, Mat. 9.12. Whilst men have good conceits of their own condition, they
rest secure therein, and are not sensible of the need of having it changed.
Immittit Diabolus securitatem, ut inferat perditionem. Neque dinumerari
possunt, quantos hac inanis spei umbra deceperit. Aug.
And there are multitudes of this sort, who say they are Jews, when they are
the Synagogue of Satan, as it is expressed, Rev. 3.9. That is, they imagine
themselves to be, and would have others esteem them as living members of the
body of Christ; when as in reality they are nothing else, but the children of
the devil. You find it was the house of Jacob, that is, the generality of the
people, who were thus deceived, Isa. 48.1, 2, 3, 4. They were obstinate and
obdurate sinners, their neck was an iron sinew, and their brow as brass: and
yet they called themselves of the holy City, and stayed themselves upon the God
of Israel. And Rev. 3.1. it is mentioned of the Church of Sardis, that is, the
body of the people (for unto them Christ speaks by his Spirit: Although the
Epistle was directed to the Angel, yet it was to be communicated to the Church,
v. 6.) That they had a name to live, whereas indeed they were dead.

Mot. 3. If upon the examination of your selves, you shall find, that through
grace you are indeed united to Christ, and make it sure to your selves that you
have the Son; the sweetness of that knowledge, or assurance, will abundantly
recompense you, for all the pains you were at, in the search of it, and the
travel you took in pursuance after it. O what an excellent privilege will this
be, to be able to say, that Christ is yours; that his death is a satisfaction
for your sins, and the salvation he purchased is your inheritance, and that he
is now at the right hand of the Father interceding on your behalf? With what
inexpressible joy will this fill your spirits? How will it sweeten your
enjoyments, and ease your burdens, and bring a vein of consolation and gladness
into every condition that you are in, and under every providence that befalls
you! Yo^ will then be able to read the Scriptures with delight, when you can
say, This promise conveyeth mercy to my soul; and this is a blessing wherein I
am a sharter: And as for the threatenings of judgment, they speak not a word of
terror to my soul for I am not under the Law, but under grace, being united
unto Jesus the head of the Covenant o^ grace. This will enable you to walk
cheerfully throughout your pilgrimage; and to meditate up on the excellencies
of God, with an holy exultation; when you can say, This God is my God, upon the
account of Christ, unto whom I am knit in separably: This infinite power is
engaged for m^ protection, and safeguard; this incomprehensib^ wisdom is at
work for my direction, and guidanc^ this alsufficiency is for my satisfaction,
and blessedness; and the like. Then you may say with the Prophet, Hab. 3.19.
The Lord God is my streng^ and he will make my feet like Hinds feet: and he
will make me to walk upon my high places. Then you may appropriate the Lord and
his attributes unto your sel^es; and be assured he will make haste for your
preservation and deliverance, as speedily and swiftly, as the Hind runs into
her covert: and that he will set you on high in the munitions of rocks. I might
thus expatiate abundantly, in setting forth the sweetness of this knowledge of
your union with Christ. Then you would taste real comfort in the accomodations
of this life, and be no way terrified or dismayed at the apprehensions of
death: for it will but translate you hence into a paradise of bliss and glory.

Mot. 4. Consider seriously in the last place, That although upon the
examination of your selves, it should appear that you are still in the state of
wrath, and condemnation, without a saving interest in ^he Son of God; yet the
finding it to be so, would ^e one good step toward your restoration, and
re^overy out of that estate; and make way for your ^ture getting into Christ.
It is less dangerous, for a ^an to be a stranger unto Christ, and know that he
is so; ^an to be in that condition, and not to know it. This I ^dd to remove
the main impediment, that hinders ^ens setting about the work of
self-examination: ^or I am verily persuaded, herein l^eth a principal ^stacle.
They are loath to search themselves, lest ^ey should find the worst by
themselves. Just as some ^reless Shopkeepers, that are run much behind and,
they cannot endure to look into their books, (...) to cast up their accounts;
lest they should be ^quainted with their own poverty, and see in ^^at a low
condition they are. But mind it Sirs, it ^better to try and know that you are
under the guilt of your sins, and children of the wrath of God; then to
continue such, and not to know it. It is the knowledge of a sinners perishing
condition will cause him to hunger and thirst after the righteousness of
Christ; and make him restless in his spirit till he get into Christ. These are
the people to whom Christ is sent, to bring deliverance; such as find they are
sinners, and are heavy laden under the burden of sin, Isa. 61.1, 2, 3. They are
such lost sheep, which the great Shepherd of souls will seek after; that is,
such as are sensible of their lost condition, Ezekiel. 34.16. I will seek that
which is lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and will bind up
that which was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick: But I will
destroy the fat and the strong, and feed them with judgment. And it is
ignorance of men's misery and wretchedness, which is the devils great engine,
whereby he carries sinners blindfold, and headlong into the pit of
destruction. As the knowledge of the disease is the first part of the cure; so
it is the knowledge of a man's damnable condition, which is one of the first
steps unto his conversion and salvation.

This is all I shall speak to the second head under the Use of Trial: By way of
motive and provocative thereunto.

3. Let me close this Use with some special directions, to guide you in the
discharge of this work of self-examination: That you may come to a right
conclusion, and resolution of the case, Whether you are spiritually ingraffed
into Christ, and be such as have the Son, and life through him, or not. And
here I might give you a catalogue of Scripture-marks and evidences, for trial
upon this account: But I shall not multiply particulars; we will only insist
upon the principal matter to be enquired into, for proof of your union with the
Son of God. And a little to direct you in the method of your proceeding herein,
that it may be done effectually and successfully, you must diligently heed and
observe these following Rules of advice; wherein I will proceed by way of
gradation, the better to help both your understandings and memories.

Direct. 1. For the examination and trial of your selves, and in order to the
passing a righteous sentence upon your selves, whether you are united to
Christ, You must, firstly, and fundamentally enquire, if the grace of
regeneration has been poured out upon you, and a sound conversion wrought
within you. This is the foundation evidence of a man's having the Son; and other
marks are made use of for discovery of this, and in a subserviency to the
manifestation hereof. And the reason of it is obvious, Because in the day of
conversion this union is made up: By the spirit of regeneration, Christ does
take possession of sinners for himself; and by a living faith, which is one of
the graces then planted in their souls, they do receive Christ, and embrace him
as theirs: and so are knit unto him; as has been largely opened. By a through
conversion, the Lord Jesus does cull out a people from the world, and gather
them unto himself: So that this is primarily and chiefly to be sought into,
whether you are truly converted, and made partakers of the renewing grace of
the holy Ghost. For if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature, 2 Cor. 5.17.
Here is the grand question, Are we new creatures? Is there a through change
wrought upon our spirits? Is corruption mortified in us, and the power of it
subdued; and a new principle of holiness put into, and engraven upon our
hearts? Thus it will be if you are one with Christ. Except you are converted,
you are strangers to him, and have no saving interest in him, Romans 8.10. If
Christ be in you, the body is dead, because of sin: but the Spirit is life,
because of righteousness. The body is dead] that is, the body of corruption is
mortified, and the force of it is taken away, whereby it exercised dominion
over you: As before you were dead in sin, so now you are dead unto sin; and
quickened and made alive unto righteousness.

Here is the failure of many, and the occasion of their being deceived in this
point of their belonging to Christ: They sometimes look into the actions of
their lives, but never seriously consider, whether the grace of conversion be
shed abroad into their hearts. They rest in a civil, moral conversation; and do
not thoroughly weigh whether they are made partakers of the spirit of
regeneration. Whereas this is the fundamental evidence of our union with
Christ, 1 John 4.13. Hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because
he has given us of his Spirit. And Romans 8.9. If any man have not the Spirit of
Christ he is none of his. That is, If he have not those gracious qualifications
which are infused into the soul by the spirit, in the work of conversion: If he
have not his heart molded anew, and fashioned aright by the holy Ghost: If he
have not the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and
might, the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord; which was the
spirit that rested upon Christ, he is none of his. Isa. 11.2. This is firstly,
and fundamentally, to be enquired after, whether the work of conversion be
wrought upon us, and the grace of regeneration be formed in us.

Direct. 2. If a person would be enabled to take cognizance of himself, and to
pass a right judgment upon himself, whether he be converted, and so knit to
Jesus; He must of necessity, in order thereunto, be well instructed in the
nature, and quality of conversion. My meaning is this, He must rightly
understand wherein a sound and sincere conversion lies, and what a change it
makes upon the soul, and what effects it produces: that so he may not mistake
a feigned conversion, for a true; and a slight work upon the spirit, which is
common to the wicked, for the grace of regeneration which is peculiar to the
people of God.

For mark it, Sirs, There is a false conversion as well as a true: and
counterfeit grace, as well as that which is grace indeed, and in reality. As
there is a feigned faith, and formal worship, and hypocritical obedience, so
there is a counterfeit conversion, Jer. 3.10. Her treacherous sister Judah has
not turned unto me with her whole heart, but feignedly, says the Lord. There
is much deceit and treachery in this work; there may be a turning from sin,
when it is done in falsehood; there may be an inward work upon the heart, that
does not amount to a saving change, or sanctifying of the heart. As for
instance. (1.) There may be a kind of abhorrence and forsaking of some wicked
ways, to cleave the faster unto others. A sinner may shake off some kind of
pride, to feed his covetousness, and in compliance therewith: He may leave his
profaneness, and become an Idolater or superstitious. As it was in the case of
Micha, Judge. 17.2, 5. When his mother cursed and bann'd for her money that was
stolen, this startled his conscience, and made him vomit up the sweet morsel,
which he had swallowed down. But the man Micah had an house of Gods, an made an
Ephod, and a Teraphim. A sinner may leave his worldliness, and become loose and
wanton: He may cast off his open debauchery, and become a secret opposer of the
power of godliness. For as sin is contrary to grace, and striveth against it:
so there are corruptions which are contrary to one another, and fight one
against the other, Jam. 4.1. (2.) There is a kind of conversion from sin, to
civility: When a person leaves his swearing, and drunkenness, and revelling,
and the like; and becomes a civil man, and of an ordinary external demeanor,
but proceeds no further, Mat. 23.27, 28. (3) There may be an abandoning and
casting away many miscarriages in the practice, when yet the heart still
hankereth after them; and were it not for some restraints of providence, would
quickly rush into the actual commission of them. What could have been spoken
more like to a convert than that of Balaam? Numb. 24.13. If Balak would give me
his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the commandment of the
Lord, to do either good or bad of mine own mind: but what the Lord says that
will I speak. When yet, he loved the wages of unrighteousness, and fain would
have cursed Israel, 2 Pet. 2.15. (4.) There may be a kind of conversion from
sin for the present, with a secret purpose of the heart to return to it again,
in convenient season. A sinner may fall out with his lusts, and be filled with
dislike of them, for some present mischief they have done him; when he is
corrected for them, with an outward judgment; and yet the heart intend no total
divorce, or separation. Just as friends may fall out in a fit of passion; but
when they are come to themselves, they are easily reconciled again. As it was
in the case of the Jews, Jer. 34.9, 10, 11, 15, 16, 17. When the King of
Babylons army fought against Jerusalem, and the Princes and people were in
great distress, they turned and did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord: But when the distress was over, they returned back again to their sins as
fast as ever. So it is with many carnal people when they are on their sick
beds: O how hot are they then against their sins! and what a cry will they
make, as if none were more filled with hatred against sin! But when once the
sickness is over, they quickly repent of their repentance. See how far the
people went in time of a destroying plague, when they were every hour in
jeopardy of their lives, Psalm. 78.34, 35, 36. When he slew them, then they
sought him; that is, they prayed to him, and they lamented after the Lord; they
poured out their supplications in the time of chastisement. And they returned]
that is, they left their sins, and promised amendment, and possibly made solemn
vows and Covenants never to return to them again; if God would deliver them but
this once, they would serve him for ever. And they enquired early after God]
that is, earnestly and affectionately, as if they were eagerly set upon
regaining his favor, and nothing would satisfy them without it: They enquired
after him, as if they had been ready to do whatsoever he should command them.
And they remembered that God was their rock, and the high God their redeemer. So
that this was not only a sudden flash of their spirits, but a matter done upon
some kind of deliberation: they were convinced that it was best for them to
serve the Lord, and they cast off their sins upon that conviction. And yet all
was done but in hypocrisy, as it follows, v. 36. Nevertheless they did
flatter him with their lips, and they lied unto him with their tongues. For
their heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant.

Now if persons be not rightly instructed, in the nature of a true conversion,
and where the difference is betwixt it, and this counterfeit work; it is
impossible they should rightly judge, if themselves are truly converted. If
they be not rightly informed of the nature of saving grace, they cannot rightly
determine, whether they are partakers of it. I am persuaded that this is the
original of the presumption, and self-deceit of many. They presently conclude
themselves to be godly, because they are not well instructed in the nature of
godliness. They think that they have repented unto salvation, because they know
not wherein such repentance does consist: they take the form of godliness, for
the power of it; and a legal repentance, for evangelical. If they find some
convictions and trouble in their spirits for sin, they are presently willing to
believe it is a conversion from sin: If there be found in their hearts some
slight affections to the word, they apprehend themselves to be savingly wrought
upon by the word: If in their conversations they leave some old sins, and turn
over a new leaf, they imagine themselves to be new creatures. Whereas a saving
conversion is another kind of matter; it makes a change in the whole nature of
the sinner. It is not limited and confined to any particular faculties of the
soul, but extends it self to the renovation of the whole man, Jer. 24.7. It
does not only set a man free from some grosser acts of iniquity, which a
natural conscience will startle at; but sets up a standing enmity in the
soul against every false way, whether greater or lesser, whether they be sins
of the flesh or of the spirit, Psalm. 119.104. And this enmity is a lasting,
irreconcilable enmity, such as shall never be rooted out again. It is not as
the damming up of a stream with mounds and banks, which when they are broken,
it runs the same way with as great a violence as ever; but it is as the
cleansing of the fountain, and turning the water into another channel, Jer.
3.19. A sound conversion does not only turn the soul from sin, but causes him
to return unto the Lord, even unto the Lord; and actually ingageth him in all
the parts of his service, Joel 2.12. Jer. 4, 1, 2. There is a kind of
conversion from sin, which is not a returning to the most High: when persons
take up their rest in negative righteousness, and abstaining from some
pollutions; but cannot endure to be in subjection to the whole government of
Christ; they hate the positive part of Religion, which consists in a closs
walking with God, and studying in all things to approve themselves unto him. A
sound conversion brings a man unto the Lord, that he may become his servant,
and have his fruit unto holiness, Romans 6.22. It is not every strong conviction
of the excellency of Religion, accompanied with some faint inclinations and
resolutions to close with it, that will amount to a saving conversion: But in
every respect it must be an universal work. For it is a turning of the whole
man, from the whole service of sin, unto the whole obedience unto the will of
God, during the whole course of our lives. And this is a matter you must give
diligence to get right apprehensions of: For if you err in the premises, you
will mistake in the conclusion deduced from those premises: If you know not
wherein the nature of conversion and regeneration consists; you can never
rightly pass sentence upon your selves, whether you are converted and
regenerate.

Direct. 3. The third Rule of direction is this. That the grace of regeneration
and conversion, which is the fundamental evidence of union with Christ, is not
always discerned in the first plantation of it into the soul; or if it be
discerned, yet it may afterward be called into question, concerning its truth
and savingness; and therefore for the finding out whether you have that grace,
you must enquire into the fruits and effects which are produced thereby. You
must examine your works, to prove that you are made Gods workmanship; and
search into your conversations, that it may appear you are partakers of a sound
conversion. It Is the exercise of repentance in the life, that must manifest the
grace of repentance poured forth into the heart: and your walking in the ways
of new obedience, that must evidence your being made new creatures. And the
reason of it is, Because it is not always perceived in the first infusion of
grace into the soul: or at least the sinner may be in doubt, whether it be a
saving work which he finds wrought within him. Although he find and feel a
present change in his spirit; yet he may question whether it be such a change,
as will speak him a true Convert. So that the way to put it out of question,
is to examine our obedience, and practical holiness, which is the natural
product of the principle of regeneration. Hence it is that we are so often
pressed to try our works, and to observe what fruit we bring forth, in order to
the knowledge of our spiritual estate, 1 John 3.7. Little children, let no man
deceive you; he that does righteousness is righteous. And v. 8. He that
commits sin is of the devil. Again, v. 10. In this the children of God are
manifest, and the children of the devil: whosoever does not righteousness is
not of God, neither he that loves not his brother. You have many carnal
persons apt to boast of the integrity of their hearts. It is true, will they
acknowledge, they live in a course of sin, and neglect of duty, their lives are
pestered with diverse sorts of abominations: yea, but will they plead, our
hearts are good, and we mean well, and we hope we may have grace within, as
well as they who are more forward in Religion. Why mark it, says the Apostle,
this is a plain cheat you put upon your selves; If false teachers sooth you up
in this conceit, do not hearken to them; they will but delude you to your
destruction: For if your hearts be good, your lives will be answerable: If the
grace of God be within you, it will guide your feet in the ways of
righteousness: you must prove your conversion, by the holiness of your
conversation.

So that this Rule of advice will be useful on both hands. 1. To overturn the
presumption of the wicked, when they boast of the sincerity of their hearts. 2.
For relief to the godly, when they question the truth of their conversion. It
is many times the ground of the hard thoughts they entertain concerning their
spiritual estate, because they never felt those throws and pangs of the new
birth, which some have felt: nor can they tell the time, when they were
effectually called, and converted. Why remember Sirs, Although this change is
visible unto some in the first workings of it; yet grace is planted in others
imperceptibly. And therefore the proof of it depends upon the fruit you bring
forth, Mat. 3.8, 9. Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance; and think
not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our father; q.d. You must
prove the truth of your profession of being the children of God, by walking as
becomes his children. How will you make it appear, that you have the grace of
repentance; unless your conversations be answerable thereunto? As the root of a
tree is hid in the earth, and is not seen with the eye; but if you would know
what sort the tree is of, you must look upon the fruit: so it is in spiritual
things, The habits of grace themselves (the root of the matter) are the hidden
man of the heart; they lie deep within, and sometimes their entrance is not
discerned: and therefore you must examine by your works, Gal. 6.4. Let every
man prove his own work. And no wonder that we are required to judge ourselves
by this Rule; for according to our works Christ will judge us at the last day.
When he comes to gather all people before him, and to divide them into
companies, according to their spiritual condition; such as are members of his
body into one company, and such as are strangers to him into another; and to
pass an irrepealable sentence upon them, he will proceed upon evidence drawn
from their works, Romans 2.6, 7, 8, 9. Who will render to every man according to
his works. To them who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory,
and honor, and immortality, eternal life. But unto them that are contentious,
and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness; indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man that does evil: of the Jew
first, and also of the Gentile. Rev. 20.13. And they were judged every man
according to his works.

This is the third Rule of Direction, That to prove your union with Christ, by
your conversion; you must diligently observe and enquire into the holiness of
your conversation; what respect you have to the commandments of God. For 1 John
3.24. He that keeps his commandments dwells in him, and he in him. And 1 John 2.5. Whosoever keeps his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected:
hereby we know that we are in him.

Direct. 4. In the examination of your ways and works, as a proof of your
conversion, and union with Christ thereupon, this must be carefully minded;
That it is not the external discharge of some particular duties, will evidence
a sincere conversion unto God: but a diligent search must be made into the main
bent of your spirits, as to the ways of holiness; and the whole tenor of your
conversations must be considered upon that account.

It must be observed, whether you make religion your business; and if it be the
great design you drive on, to study to please the Lord, and to be accepted of
him. It is not the workings of your spirits in a fit of affection, when your
hearts are warmed by the word, or you are under the call of some awakening
providence, that will prove you to be converts indeed; but the general scope
and tendency of your lives: when godliness is the trade that you follow, and
holiness the high way wherein you travel. As the expression is, Isa. 35.8, 9.
And a high way shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called the way of
holiness: the unclean shall not pass over it, but it shall be for those: the
wayfaring men though fools shall not err therein. No Lion shall be there, nor
shall any ravenous beast go up thereupon, it shall not be found there: but the
redeemed shall walk there. Mark it Sirs, Holiness is the high way, where the
servants of Christ take their journey. They do not only, now and then, make an
excursion into some acts of piety and godliness, when they are under
convictions, and the like: But they spend their very life time in walking with
God. As holiness is a plain way, wherein the meanest Christian may go on
directly to heaven without danger of miscarrying: Though he be of never so low
parts and endowments; yet if his design be to fear the Lord, and to be blessed
in the enjoyment of him, God has chalked out the way so clearly, that he that
runs may observe it. And as it is a safe way, wherein the Lord has undertaken
for the protection of travelers, against all dangers, and evil occurrents: So
it is the great road wherein all the redeemed ones travel, from one end of the
week to the other.

My brethren, such as are Christians in good earnest do not take up a garb of
Religion for the Sabbath, and then lay it aside the six days following: as men
put on, and off, their best apparel: They do not put on a kind of seriousness,
in spiritual exercises; and live as Atheists and worldlings in their secular
negotiations and affairs: They do not enter upon the performance of some
particular duduties only, to stop the clamours of an awakened conscience; and
when that turn is served, return to their vanity and wickedness: But they make
the Lord their constant companion, and take holiness as a clew of thread, that
runs through all their undertakings and concernments, Zech. 14.20, 21. In that
day there shall be upon the bells of their horses, Holiness to the Lord: and
the pots in the Lords house shall be like the bowls before the Altar: yea every
pot in Jerusalem and Judah shall be holiness to the Lord of hosts. In that day]
that is, when God does pour out plentifully of the spirit of grace, and wash
sinners in the fountain set open for sin and uncleanness; then they shall
endeavor to be spiritual in the very common and ordinary actions of their
lives, and to be holy in all manner of conversation. As it is not some
particular acts of sin, into which a man falls, through weakness, and the
violence of temptations, that will prove the person offending to be wicked, and
unconverted; but when he lives in a course of sin, and any ungodliness is the
way wherein he goes: So it is not the performance of some particular duties of
Religion, unto which a man is carried by the force of a natural conscience,
will prove his conversion; but when holiness is the high way wherein he
travelleth, and the very business which he prosecuteth. This was Noah's
evidence, that he was righteous and perfect in his generation; He did not only
obey the voice of the Lord in some particulats, but he walked with God, Genesis
6.9. And Enoch had this testimony that he pleased God, for he walked with him
for hundreds of years together; from one end of the year to the other. Compare
Heb. 11.5. with Genesis 5.22.

Direct. 5. That obedience which will evidence that you are regenerated, and
converted by the Spirit of Christ, and so knit unto him; must not only be right
for the matter wherein it does consist, but rightly qualified also for the
manner, how it is discharged and tendered unto the Lord. It is not barely the
work done [opus operatum] but principally [modus operationis] Bonum oritur ex
causis integris: malum ex quolibet defectu.
the manner of the performance, that will prove a principle of grace, to reside
in the heart of that man or woman, by whom it is done. As the sinfulness of sin
does lie chiefly in the manner how it is committed; as when men sin wickedly
and presumptuously against light and knowledge, and break through convictions
to the perpetration of evil: So does the excellency and evidencing virtue of
the acts of obedience lie especially in the manner, how it is performed. An
hypocrite may do the same external work which a believer does, and which for
the matter of it is good. Therefore the Lord does expostulate with that sinful
people, who trusted in their outward duties; concerning their defectiveness in
the manner of the performance of them, Isa. 58.3, 5. They had fasted and sought
unto God; but, Is it such a fast as I have chosen? says the Lord, v. 5. Mark
it Sirs, In the trial of your obedience to prove that you are sanctified, you
must not only mind the substance of the work what is done, but likewise examine
the suchness of it, how it is done. Possibly thou prayest often, and read
the Scriptures frequently, and give alms to the poor, and the like; and from
thence art confident of thy being in the state of grace: But man, is it so
praying as God requires? And such a studying of the word, to which the
blessing is annexed? Is it such a giving of alms, as has the promise of
acceptance? It is a good thing to run in the way of God's precepts: But do you
so run that ye may obtain? 1 Cor. 9.24.

This is the fifth Rule of Direction: That in the examination of your
obedience, for the clearing up your conversion, and union with Christ; you must
not only look into the matter what is done, but strictly enquire into the
manner how it is done; and whether it be rightly qualified according to the
purport and tenor of the Covenant of grace.

Direct. 6. For the right qualifying and modification of our obedience to God,
that it may prove a certain evidence of conversion, and consequently of our
union with Christ Jesus; It must of necessity have these six properties; and
each of them must be enquired after, in the business of self-examination.

It must be 1. Spiritual 2. Universal 3. Evangelical 4. Sincere 5. Thriving 6.
Steadfast
obedience.

1. It must be spiritual obedience, answerable to the nature of that God whom
we wait upon, and whose servants we are. His essence is spiritual, and such
must our obedience to him be; if we will serve the Lord acceptably, and make it
appear, that we are of the number of his peculiar people. Bodily exercise, and
a mere external devotion, will strike a great stroke in making up the form of
godliness; but the power of it consists in that which is spiritual, Joh.
4.23. The true worshippers shall worship the Father, in spirit and in truth:
for the Father seeks such to worship him. These are the true worshippers,
that is, such as are so in Gods account, whom he will graciously receive, and
own in their performances. When people serve him in a bare external, bodily
manner, he reckons them as his greatest enemies: their service is but a piece
of dissimulation, which has only the shadow of worship: For the substance
lies in what is spiritual: And such the Father seeks to worship him; i.e.
such worship he commands, and his soul is well pleased with. Although it
seems to be spoken here with a peculiar reference to instituted worship: yet
it holds strongly as to natural worship also; even of all the parts and
particulars of his service: For the reason which is rendered, v. 24. is
comprehensive of all, Because God is a Spirit. So that our obedience, if it
prove us a chosen generation, whom God has set apart for himself, must be
spiritual: And that in a threefold respect.

In respect of the 1. Principle, from whence it flows. 2. Extent, how far it
reaches. 3. Subject, whereon it is terminated.


1. In respect of the principle, from whence it proceeds. It must be such
obedience as comes from the heart, and wherein the soul and spirit is engaged.
Not an honoring him with the lips, and drawing near to him with the mouth,
when the heart is removed far from him: Not a serving him only by a kind of
compulsion, under some terrible apprehensions of the judgments of God: not in a
slothful, careless, and lukewarm manner, as if Religion were a weariness to us,
and we had no mind to our work: But when we serve him aright, our hearts must
be engaged to approach unto him, Jer. 30.21, 22. we must be fervent in spirit
serving the Lord, Romans 12.11. And our inward parts must be employed in the
works of holiness. When a man's tongue does speak forth the praises of God, and
his heart joyneth with him in the business: when his hands do act in the works
of piety, and his spirit concurreth in the action, and carry him on thereunto;
this is to serve the Lord with the Spirit. Although he calls for the body
also to be employed in his service: (as indeed he deserves the whole man) yet
not as a picture, or image, without life and soul; but as animated by the
heart, Prove. 23.26. My son, give me thine heart; and let thine eyes observe my
ways; q.d. A slave will give me his hands, and feet, and the strength of his
body; an hypocrite will offer up the outward man; but if thou be a son, I must
have the heart and spirit.

2. It must be spiritual obedience, in respect of the extent of it, how far it
reaches. Such as sets us in opposition against spiritual sins, as well as
fleshly: such as causes us to fight against secret pride, and envy, and
earthliness, and unbelief, and malice, and double-mindedness, and the like; as
well as to obstain from rotten communication, and gross outward pollutions. It
must be such obedience as is exercised in spiritual duties; as meditation on
the word of the Lord, and frequent contemplation of the excellencies of God,
adoring his Majesty, and admiring his works, and setting the affections on
things above; as well as in pleading the cause of holiness, and openly walking
in the profession of it. It must carry us to such works, as are performed in
the secret recesses of the Spirit; and sets us a striving against such
corruptions, as are forged and fabricated in the spirit, which no eye can
observe, but God and our own consciences, 2 Cor. 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves
from all the filthiness, both of the flesh, and spirit. Romans 8.5. They that are
after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh: but they that are after the
spirit, the things of the spirit. Psalm. 73.1. Truly God is good to Israel, even
to such as are clean of heart. See further, Psalm. 24.3, 4. Mat. 6.21.

3. In respect of the subject, whereon it is terminated. It ends in the
further renewing and purifying the spirit, and getting more degrees of habitual
grace into the heart. When we are not only contented to be kept free from the
acts of sin, but do mourn and lament under the principle of sin, and labor to
deaden that principle. When we do not think it enough to do much for God, but
fain would have our spirits transformed, every day more and more, into the
image of God. Thus it will be, if you are converted. If a carnal person resist
the temptation, he thinks his work is done; and is apt to glory in himself, as
if the whole business were dispatched: But a convert lays the ax to the root
of the tree; he follows the corrupt stream to the poisonous fountain, whence
it is derived; and nothing will satisfy him, but cleansing the fountain, and
taking revenge upon his lusts, that lodge within him, Romans 7.23, 24. Paul's
actual sins cause him to have an eye upon his heart, by which he was turned
aside. I see, says he, another law in my members, warring against the law of
my mind, and bringing me into captivity unto the law of sin, which is in my
members. O wretched man that I am: who shall deliver me, from this body of
death? This is the first qualification: It must be spiritual obedience.

2. If you would prove your conversion, and consequentially your union with
Christ, by your obedience; It must be universal obedience. Not a partial, and
restrictive serving of God; but a following him fully, as far as the whole
circuit of holiness reaches. As it is said of Caleh, Number. 14.24. He followed
the Lord fully; and that proved him to be a man of another spirit, and of a
gracious temper indeed, sanctified by the holy Ghost; because his obedience was
universal. There is a threefold universality must go to the right qualifying
our obedience, that it may be evidential of a converted estate.

It must be universal in relation to the 1. Agent, or person obeying. 2. Rule
of obedience. 3. Times, and seasons of the performance.


1. In relation to the agent, or person obeying: that is, when a man does
consecrate and devote his whole self, both soul and body, to the keeping of
Gods commandments; and does his will, not only from the heart, but with the
whole heart and spirit. When there is a concentrication, and conjunction of all
the powers and faculties of the whole person, in the service of the Lord: the
understanding is apprehensive of the mind of God, and the judgment approves
the way of his precepts: the affections run out in earnest desires to do, and
delight in doing the will of God; the will is in a posture of ready compliance
therewith: the conscience stirs up unto obedience, and the members of the
body are instruments in the execution of what is enjoined. Contrary to that
dividing heart, which the Scripture condemns; when the several faculties of
the soul draw several ways: The understanding, and judgment, and conscience
are for God, and his ways; but the will and the affections for sin, and the
world, and such lying vanities: When persons have an heart, and an heart; an
heart for God; and an heart for Belial: they are not come to any settled
determination, but their spirits halt between two opinions. My brethren, If you
would prove that you are converted unto God, your hearts must be united to fear
his name: and all that is within you, must be gathered together, to the
observing of his Statutes, Jer. 29.13. Ye shall seek me and find me, when you
search for me, with all your hearts. And mark the words of Samuel to the men of
Israel, when they lamented after the Lord, 1 Samuel 7.2, 3. And Samuel spoke unto
all the house of Israel, saying, If ye do return to the Lord with all your
hearts, then put away the strange gods, and Ashtaroth, from among you, and
prepare your hearts unto the Lord, and serve him only, and he will deliver you
out of the hands of the Philistines. As if he had said, Be not deceived, it is
not some faint inclinations unto godliness, and a little lamentation after the
Lord, that will give you an interest in his mercy: But if you would be accepted
of him, you must espouse none other interest but his; you must carry on none
other design coordinate with that of pleasing the Lord, and walking with him;
if you are his servants at all, you must be his altogether; and give him your
whole heart, and mind, and soul, and strength. And the reason is apparent;
because, in sanctification, grace is pouted out into the whole man, and the
change wrought is an universal change: And it is not the actings of a part
which will evidence a change in the whole; But when the whole man is set upon
the ways of God. This is the perfect heart which was a comfort to Hezekiah;
when all the soul goes together in the way to heaven, and there is no part
lacking, Isa. 38.3. Remember, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before
thee in truth, and with a perfect heart.

2. It must be universal in relation to the rule, or the particulars of
obedience: When there is an equal and uniform respect unto all the commandments
of the Lord; and a readiness to be pressed upon any service, whether greater or
lesser, with whatsoever difficulty it is attended, and whatsoever selfdenial is
required in the discharge of it. When a man's soul is drawn out in a
detestation of every sin, and does not live in the allowed omission, or neglect
of any known duty; whether secret or public, whether generally practiced or
despised by the generality. You read of Herod, that he heard John Baptist, and
did many things; but this was no proof of a sound conversion; because in other
things he fell short. Qui facit solummodo ea quae vult facere, non Dominicam
voluntatem implet, sed suam. Salvian.
In some cases he did what was commanded, and in others he took liberty to
trample upon the commandment, Mark 6.20. And this is the furthest that carnal
Professors go, They are as Cakes not turned, half-bak'd Christians, as it is
said of Ephraim, Hos. 7.8. As to the abandoning of some sins, and discharge of
some duties, they bid fair for heaven: But as for other corruptions, by which
they think they have their livelihood, and that have a more than ordinary share
in their affections, they will hold them fast; and shake hands with Religion
when they come to difficult points of obedience; and so discover their
rottenness. Thus Jehu bade fair for salvation, and yet fell short, 2 King.
10.30, 31. He destroyed Baal out of Israel, and did to the house of Ahab
according to all that was in God's heart: Howbeit, from the sins of Jeroboam he
departed not: he thought those sins were so interwoven with his secular
interest, that he could not keep the Kingdom without them: That, no calves at
Dan and Bethel, and no king in Israel. But now, when a person can say in
uprightness, that his heart stands in awe of the whole Word of God; and
whatever he finds with the stamp of a divine precept upon it, he is willing
to submit to; and through the assistance of the Spirit will close with it, be
it never so contrary to flesh and blood, though it run directly cross to his
worldly interest, and cost him never so much ignominy, and reproach from the
wicked, though it expose him to never so many troubles and hardships; here is
that obedience in the life which will evidence grace in the heart, Psalm. 119.6.
Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy commandments. i. e.
Then it will appear that my profession is sound, and my hopes well bottomed,
and such as will not deceive me: then I shall not be put to confusion at the
day of accounts, nor be frustrated and disappointed in my expectations of
glory; when I have this testimony to produce that I am a servant of God,
because I esteem all his precepts, in every thing, to be right, and have a
conscientious regard unto them all.

3. It must be universal obedience, in relation to the times and seasons of the
performance of it. Psalm. 106.3. Blessed are they that keep judgment, and he
that does righteousness at all times. Not, as some Professors, whose Religion
is modelled, according to the providence they are under, and the company which
they meet and converse with. When godliness is in esteem and credit in the
world, they will be clothed in that dress, and none shall be more forward in
religious duties and exercises: But when it is discountenanced, and under a
cloud, then their course is changed. They row their boat as the tide runs,
backward or forward; and hoise up their sails according as the wind blows. If
they fall into a religious family, and amongst godly company, there they will
approve and commend the ways of God; and if their lot fall amongst vain and
profane persons, they will be wanton, and vain, and profane, and scurrilous as
the rest: They will do (like travelers) as the rest of the company does. But
Sirs, If a man be gracious indeed, it will settle his spirit upon godliness at
all seasons, and in whatsoever society. If he live in Sodom, he will be so far
from saying a confederacy with them in their wickedness, that in seeing and
hearing, he will vex his righteous soul, from day to day, with their unlawful
deeds, 2 Pet. 2.8. Though he dwell in Ahabs family, yet he will fear the Lord
greatly, 1 Kings 18.3. He will own the Lord Christ for his Master in the face
of all the world; and speak of his testimonies even before Kings, and not be
ashamed, Psalm. 119.46. This is the second qualification: It must be universal
obedience.

3. That obedience which will evidence your conversion, and consequently your
union with Christ, must be evangelical obedience. Such as is suitable to the
Covenant of grace, into which believers are entered; 2 conversation answerable
to the dispensation of the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. For, as there is a slavish fear
of God in the heart; so there is a legal serving of God in the practice; which
will no way contribute to the proof of your being ingraffed into Christ. That
which is evidential thereof, must be such obedience as becomes the Gospel of
Christ: when you serve the Lord evangelically, in the newness of the Spirit,
and not in the oldness of the letter: as the distinction is given us, Romans 7.6.

Qu. But when is our obedience evangelical? I answer, It mainly consists in
four things.

1. When we are active and vigorous, in doing all that we can for God, and then
account it as nothing, to gain us acceptance with the Lord. When we are
serviceable, in our places and duties, to advance the honor of Jesus Christ,
endeavoring to the uttermost the promotion of his interest; and then lay all
that we have done at his feet; expecting our acceptance, and reward, purely
upon the account of his blood. When we labor to be intent upon the works of
personal righteousness; and then underwrite with our hearts, That we are
unprofitable servants, and lay the whole stress of our salvation upon the
righteousness of the Lord Jesus. This is Gospel-service, when we lay all our
sacrifices upon the Gospel-altar, that they may be sanctified thereby: and
place no manner of confidence in what is done by us; but in the obedience and
sufferings of Christ for us, Phil. 3.3. For we are the circumcision, which
worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence
in the flesh. As if he had said, We labor to serve God in the purest manner,
and offer up unto him the best that we have; but then we dare not put the least
stress upon it, but all our confidence is in Christ; it is of him we boast, and
not of our holiness: We give all diligence in point of performance, but are
nothing in our selves in point of dependence: And we are the circumcision, we
are Israelites indeed, who have our hearts circumcised. A legal frame of spirit
goes to God in duty, and then expects a blessing for his duties sake: and thus
a sinner may toil all his life time in a round of duty, and be very far from
the kingdom of God. Then we obey evangelically, when we do all in the name of
the Lord Jesus, Col. 3.17.

2. Then is our obedience Gospel-service indeed, when it is performed in Gospel
strength; i. e. not by our own abilities, but by virtue derived from Christ,
and in an humble dependence upon the assistance of his Spirit. That is a legal
way of obedience, when a person brings forth fruit unto himself, and when he
acts therein from himself: When he goes in his own might, and power, to
grapple with sin, and strive against temptations, and to keep the Law of God.
But a Believer is strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might: and here
is the evidence of a sincere convert, Romans 8.13. If ye live after the flesh,
you shall die: but if ye, through the spirit, do mortify the deeds of the
body, ye shall live. Mark it, It is not said, if you make resolutions against
sin, and set against the workings of corruption: But if you mortify them
through the spirit; then it is a sign you are quickened and made alive by the
holy Ghost, and that you shall live for ever in the presence of God.

3. Evangelical obedience is that which is according to the evangelical
pattern, viz. the life of Christ. When a Christian does study to be a follower
of him, and to tread in his steps, and to imitate the Lord Jesus, by
endeavoring to write after the copy which he has set before us, in doing and
suffering the will of God. This is the obedience which will evidence our union
with him, and interest in him, 1 John 2.6. He that says he abides in him,
ought himself also so to walk even as he walked. He that says he is in him]
that is, He that says so truly, and as the matter is in reality: He that would
not appear, to be a liar in what he pretends to; and to boast of what he has
no saving interest in; must walk according to our Savior's example.

4. Evangelical obedience is that which is tendered upon evangelical motives,
and considerations. When we are diligent and industrious in the service of God,
because our hearts are drawn forth in love toward him; and we are sensible of
his goodness in sending his only begotten Son, to die in the behalf of lost
sinners; and in making known the mystery of Christ unto us, and giving us
promises of salvation through him. Amor meus est pondus meum. Eo^feror
quocunque feror. Aug.
For although it is not only permissively lawful for a believer, but also a
duty incumbent upon him, to make use of the consideration of the wrath of God,
to quicken him in the ways of holiness, Luke 12.5. Yet he does not serve the
Lord merely out of fear of his wrath: But the love of God does constrain him,
and his affections toward God are a forcible restraint to keep him from
displeasing the Lord, who has been so gracious unto him, Hos. 3.5. They shall
fear the Lord, and his goodness in the latter days. i.e. Upon this very
account they shall be cautious not to sin against him, because he has dealt so
bountifully with them. This is the third qualification, it must be evangelical
obedience.

4. If you would prove your conversion and union with Christ, by the holiness
of your conversation and new obedience; you must look to it that it be sincere
obedience; done in the singleness and godly simplicity of your hearts. You must
serve the Lord, as in the sight of the Lord; and with a pure eye of respect
unto the advancement of his glory; and in order to your blessedness in the
enjoyment of him, and communion with him. For in those two things does consist
much of the nature of sincerity. 1. In studying to approve our selves in the
sight of God. So the Apostle seems to explain it, 2 Cor. 2.17. As of
sincerity, as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ. 2. In serving the
Lord for himself. My meaning is this; Then is a Christian sincere in his
obedience, when he is not acted therein by fleshly wisdom, nor does make
Religion subservient to any carnal ends: But he has a single eye of regard to
the glory of God, the maintaining fellowship with him, and the secuting his own
interest in the Lord, as a portion for his soul. When he is carried on to the
works of holiness, by spiritual arguments: he does that which is commanded, out
of respect to the commandment; or [eo nomine] for that very reason, because it
is the commandment of the Lord, and his heart stands in awe of it. This alone
is to serve the Lord in obedience to his will. Else, if you set upon a course
of Religion for any secular advantage that comes by it, you do but serve your
selves by Religion. As it is said of the Schismatics, Romans 16.18. They that
are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly. They pretended
Christ, but designed themselves. And so do hypocrites of all sorts; they serve
not God by their works of piety, but their own profit and advancement in the
word; These are (...) and (...) Christ-merchants and Christ-hucksters, as one
calls them.
they serve their own credit and reputation, and the furtherance of some carnal
interest: or perhaps they may serve their very lusts, and make provision for
them, by the duties of Religion. So the whore in the Proverbs, Chap. 7.14, 15.
She paid her vows, and offered peace offerings, that she might purchase a
license to sin more freely. Thus multitudes of people debase Religion: They go
on in a constant road of outward performances, that at other times they may
take the greater liberty, and sin with lesser disturbance in their spirits. But
now a sincere Christian serves the Lord himself, in all the parts of his
obedience. As he is spiritual in the discharge of his work; so the reasons and
motives are spiritual, whereby he is stirred up unto the discharge of it.

And here is a main ground of the universality of a believers obedience;
because spiritual reasons are comprehensive of the whole will of God, whereas
carnal motives and arguments have but a partial influence. A little to clear it
by instances. If you avoid sin, because of the shame of the world; that will
only help to preserve you from open wickedness; but will have no influence
against secret pollutions, which the world cannot observe: If you perform duty
to please a party, or to get some temporal benefit; that will only engage you
in the practice of such duties as are countenanced by them, and are pleasing in
their eye; but will no way prevail as to the practice of such as are contemned
and despised. But now if you obey the will of God, because it is his will; That
will enforce an obedience to all A quatenus ad de omni valet consequentia.
that he has enjoined, Psalm. 119.101. If you abstain from sin, because God
observes it; this consideration will fence against all sin whatsoever, Job
31.1, 4. If you walk in ways of holiness, that you may have fellowship with
God, and glorify his name, and be enabled to give up a comfortable account
unto him; these inducements will have an influence into the right ordering of
all the particulars of your demeanor, Eccl. 12. v. 14. And here is the
conversation, that will prove the work of regeneration; and minister joy
thereupon; When in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but
by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world, 2 Cor. 1.12.
When we do not truck with Religion, nor make it a stalking-horse in
subordination to any base or corrupt ends: But what we do, is done in a
measure, in a singleness of spirit, and in the integrity of our hearts; as
mainly endeavoring therein to to be accepted of God.

This is the fourth property of evidential obedience, It must be sincere.

5. It must be thriving obedience, and of an increasing nature: for sanctifying
grace is of a thriving nature. So that such as are holy indeed, will be still
pressing after further degrees of holiness; and they that live through the
Spirit, will endeavor to have life more abundantly: they will be going
forwards unto perfection; at least in vehement desires, and sollicitous and
earnest endeavors after it. Besides, there is such sweetness and excellency in
communion with God, that whosoever tastes it, cannot but be longing and
reaching after more and more, till he come to full fruition and enjoyment, 1
Pet. 2.2, 3. As new born babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye
may grow thereby. As new born babes] q. d. This is the property of all that are
regenerate; the picture of an infant does not grow, but a living child does;
and there is as natural and direct a tendancy in a child of God toward
increase in holiness, as there is in a new born child to the breast, that he
may grow in strength and stature. And this you will labor after, if so be that
you have tasted that the Lord is gracious: That taste will set an edge upon
your desires, and cause you to hunger and thirst with greater eagerness after
more. Sitis duplex est. 1. Vna totalis indigentiae, Isa. 6.5, 13. 2. Altera
fruitionis and complacentiae partialis: Illa tollitur per gratiae
participationem; haec crescit indies dum sumus in via, per fidem ambulantes and
non per aspectum. Ames. Coron.
When persons can sit down contented with the least measures of holiness, and
think, If they have but grace in the smallest degree, so much as will give them
an interest in God, and bring them safely to heaven, they will not care for
more; but there they will take up their rest, and live at ease, without
troubling themselves to aspire after further degrees: It is a shrewd sign that
they are utterly strangers to the workings of grace in the heart. For did they
but once taste the spiritual deliciousness of fellowship with the most High, it
would fill them with an insatiable appetite after greater seize; they
would be ever pressing toward the mark, and laboring to proceed from strength
to strength, til they should appear in Sion before the Lord: They would study
to augment their faith till it came to sight; and to promote their hopes, till
they were turned into fruition; and to blow up the smoking flax of their love,
till it were kindled in a pure, spiritual, unmixed flame: They would think they
never had grace enough, till it were swallowed up in glory; nor that they were
sufficiently holy, till made perfect in holiness, Job 17.9. He that has clean
hands shall be stronger and stronger. Prove. 4.18. The path of the just is as
the shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day. Here is
that sort of obedience, which will evidence your ingrafture into Christ: When
you are freed from sin, so as to be daily striving after greater freedom, and
getting more ground upon your corruptions: When you are not only active for
God; but still aspiring after further activity, and delight in doing the will
of God, and the rendering your selves more serviceable unto him. For although a
true Believer does not always thrive sensibly, and perceptibly; but may rather
seem in his own apprehensions to decay and go backward; nor does he at all
times thrive really: yet it is the main bent of his spirit; and the earnest
breathings of his soul are, that he may make a continued progress in the course
of godliness: He never rests satisfied with any measures attained, but is
still endeavoring after more. As he blesses God for the least dram of grace
conferred upon him, so he is ambitious to get into the uppermost form of
Christ's Scholars. And here is the note of oneness with Christ. For, Joh 15.2.
Every branch that bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more
fruit.

6. It must be steadfast obedience, and continued unto the end: When a soul does
give up himself to the Lord, to be his servant perpetually and everlastingly,
without limitation of time: When he is fully determined through the assistance
of the Spirit, that whatever comes of it, this God he will serve, and the
advancement of his glory he will carry on, and the way of holiness he will
travel in, and through grace nothing shall divert him from his course. When a
man's ear is bored, so as to serve the Lord for ever: as the expression of
Christ is, Psalm. 40.6. Mine ear have thou opened, or mine ear have thou bored.
It is in allusion (as some think) to the ceremonial Law, in the case of
servants, Non alienum omnino quod quidam e nostris putant, videri respexesse
Davidem ad consuetudinem olim usitatam in populo Hebraeo, ut servo sponte
permanenti in servitute, nec admittere volenti libertatem, quae septimo quoque
anno servis offerebatur, auris subula perforaretur. Ac dicere voluisse, habebis
me perpetuum tibi addictum servum, etc. Sim. de Muis. in loc.

(...) Si dicendo dixerit.


Exodus 21.5, 6. If the servant shall say plainly, I love my Master, my wife and
my children, I will not go out free: Then his Master shall bring him unto the
Judges, he shall also bring him to the door, or to the door post; and his
Master shall bore his ear through with an awl, and he shall serve him for ever.
So Christ gave up himself to serve the Lord for ever; He was not rebellious,
neither did he turn back. And thus must a Believer do, if he will prove that he
is in Christ: He must have his ear bored to serve the Lord for ever. If saying
he shall say, (as the Hebrew phrase is Non alienum omnino quod quidam e nostris
putant, videri respexesse Davidem ad consuetudinem olim usitatam in populo
Hebraeo, ut servo sponte permanenti in servitute, nec admittere volenti
libertatem, quae septimo quoque anno servis offerebatur, auris subula
perforaretur. Ac dicere voluisse, habebis me perpetuum tibi addictum servum,
etc. Sim. de Muis. in loc.

(...) Si dicendo dixerit.


) If he shall speak it truly and unfeignedly, in the very inwards of his soul;
If his heart shall su^scribe unto it; I love my Master, I will not go free: I
love the Lord, and the desire of my soul is toward him, I will serve him
perpetually, and abide in his family for ever; and accordingly does perform it:
Here is such obedience and service as will evidence union with Jesus Christ,
Heb. 3.6. Whose house are we, [ i.e. then it is clear and evident, that we are
Christ's house and temple, that he dwells in us, and we have fellowship with
him] if we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto
the end.

So much for the sixth Rule of direction, To show you how your obedience must
be qualified, that it may be produced as a proof of your conversion, and
consequentially of your union with Jesus Christ.

Direct. 7. This examination of your selves, touching your holiness and new
obedience, as the evidence of your regeneration, and union with Christ
thereupon; if it be done successfully, and effectually, must be set upon
solemnly; with the best intention of spirit. It is not enough to take a
transient view of our selves, and to pass over cursorily, in an observation of
our own souls: But if we would perform this work to purpose, we must sit down,
and consider, how the case stands with us. We must set a covenient time apart,
particularly to this end of entering into a serious debate with our selves; and
making a narrow scrutinity into the frame of our hearts, and the tenor of our
conversations. As one that would buy an house, or a tenement, does not only
cast a glance upon it, as he rides by the way; that is not enough to give him
a full knowledge of it: But he will take a day on purpose to view it; and
opens the doors, and enters into the house, and passes from one room to
another, and from one corner to another: So, if we would get a clear knowledge
of our spiritual estate; we must not think it enough to take a general view of
our selves, ( obiter, and by the by) but we must set time apart, and gather our
spirits together, to look wistly into every corner; we must take particulars
asunder, and search heedfully and intentively into each of them. And the reason
of it is very apparent, Because the heart of man is deep; and except it be
searched thoroughly, we shall never dive into the bottom or entrals of it, Psalm.
64.6. The spirit of fallen man, is exceedingly treacherous, and deceitful, Jer.
17.9. So that unless we trace it narrowly in all its steps, and follow after it
in to all its subterfuges, and hiding places; it will escape our cognizance;
and be apt to impose upon us in the business of salvation. It is to be feared
that many enter slightly upon the work of self-examination, and quickly slubber
it over in a carless and superficial manner: and that is the very reason why
they never bring matters to an issue, or determinate conclusion in this case.
For it is a work to be performed with the greatest cautelousness, diligence,
and deliberation: and with earnest prayer to the Lord, that he may discover to
us those intricacies and labyrinths, wherein our guilful spirits are apt to
hide themselves. This is the seventh Rule of Advice.

Direct. 8. Mind this word of counsel in the last place; That if a person upon
the most serious and deliberate examination of himself be still left in the
dark, as to his union with Christ, for want of clear evidences of his
conversion; The way to make sure work in this behalf, and to put the matter out
of question, is to put forth immediately fresh acts of faith upon the
righteousness of Christ for salvation; to renew his repentance as to the evil
of sin; to make a fresh surrender of himself into the hands of God, upon the
terms of the Covenant of grace; and to enter presently upon the course of new
obedience. Conscientiae merito perturbatae, haec unica est ratio pacanda: Si,
qui sic afficicur adduci possit in illum statum per veram fidem and
resipiscentiam, ut assumptio syllogismi illius quo turbatus fait, merito
incipiat esse falsa and jure negetur. Ames. These. de consc.


These Sirs, are those acts, which the principle of regeneration does first
exert, and put forth, when it is planted into the soul: and these spiritual
acts are often reiterated and repeated, by the souls of such as are converted.
So that if you were before effectually called, these will be the renewings of
your conversion: and if you were formerly unconverted, yet hereby it will be
evident that you continue such no longer: But that, through grace, now the work
is wrought: These being the immediate products of the grace of conversion. I
will a little open this word of Advice, in relation to each of the particulars
asunder.

1. Act your faith [afresh] upon the Lord Christ, and his righteousness.
Endeavor in the sense of the greatness of the evil of your sins, and
apprehension of the insupportableness of the wrath of God, deserved by sin; in
the due acknowledgment of the justice of God that must be satisfied, and the
insufficiency of all your personal qualifications and obedience to give
satisfaction thereunto; to cast your selves upon Christ's righteousness, to put
your selves for redemption into his hands, and to accept him for your Savior,
upon the terms of the Gospel. This is to believe in Jesus; and if it be done
now in sincerity and truth, it will be a comfortable evidence, that either you
were formerly united unto Christ, or else that at the present the knot is tied
betwixt him, and your souls. See the words of our Savior, Joh. 12.46. I am
come as a light into the world, that whosoever believes on me, should not
abide in darkness. Only take the advice with this provise; See to it that you
do not mistake in the nature of faith: that you do not take a dead faith, for a
living: nor an hypocritical counterfeit faith, for the faith of God's elect.
And then if you believe indeed, the putting forth that principle into exercise,
will be as a present evidence that you are gotten into Christ, and have a right
to the favor of God through his blood.

2. To put the matter out of question, touching your conversion, and union with
Jesus Christ; Renew your repentance, as to the evil of sin. Labor to get such
a sight of your transgressions committed against the Lord, as may fill you with
godly sorrow for them: and to be so deeply affected with your own filthiness
and pollutions, that you may loath your selves, and lie down in your shame,
upon the account of that filthiness: Upon taste of the bitterness of your
departings from God, and the destructive nature of your iniquities, let your
hearts be set in hatred of them, and cast them away from you with utter
detestation, and abhorrence, never to come near you again, as to any
reconcilement with them: Especially abhor those iniquities which have mostly
prevailed over you, say unto your lusts, get ye hence, what have I to do any
more with you? You have ruined my soul, and I will never yield subjection to
you further. If I have served you hitherto, through Gods assistance I will do
it no longer. This, my brethren, is repentance according to the Scriptures. And
if your hearts speak these things in uprightness, it will help to demonstrate
that you have the grace of repentance, and so shall never come into
condemnation. Only take heed that your hearts do not dissemble and flatter in
this work, Jer. 31.19. After I was turned, I repented; and after I was
instructed, I smote upon my thigh. First Ephraim was made partaker of the grace
of conversion, and then he does exercise that grace in a sincere repentance.
Indeed a legal repentance may be without grace in the heart; but this
evangelical repentance is the product of grace and an evidence thereof. See 2
Pet. 3.9. Luke 15.7, 10.

3. To prove that you are converted, Make a fresh surrender of your selves into
the hands of God, upon the articles of the Covenant of grace. Resign up your
selves anew unto the most High; make choice of him for your only portion, set
your affections upon him as the chiefest good, and give up your selves
unreservedly to be his servants, and to be wholly at his disposal. That is
another spiritual act which the principle of regeneration does immediately put
forth, when it is infused into the soul; and if you perform it in the integrity
of your hearts, it will be an evidence that you are partakers of that
principle, Isa. 44.3, 5. I will pour out water upon him that is thirsty, and
floods upon the dry ground: I will pour out my spirit upon thy seed, and my
blessing upon thine offspring. And then it follows, v. 5. One shall say, I
am the Lords: and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob: and another
shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and firname himself by the name of
Israel. Mark it, As Soon as the Spirit of God is put into the soul, that soul
does give up himself unto God, and list himself amongst his followers. So that
as a present proof of your having the spirit of conversion, take your hearts
along with you, and go to the Lord, and make a full and fresh refignation of
them, and of your whole selves into his hands. Take with you words and go unto
the Lord, as it is elsewhere expressed. My meaning is this. (1.) Take with you
words of election and choice; say unto him, O Lord, I now take thee to be my
God and my Master, I will henceforward make thee my refuge and fortress, I will
set my heart upon thee as my only happiness, and exceeding great reward: If I
have stood it out formerly against the tenders of grace, I will stand out no
more: If I have followed after lying vanities, I will follow them no longer:
Now I make choice of the Lord, Behold I come unto thee, for thou art my God,
and I abandon all things that stand in competition with thee. This sort of
words you shall meet with, Jer. 3.22, 23. (2.) Take with you words of
surrender, and say unto God, O Lord, here I am to dedicate my self, and my
strength, and my time, and my talents, to the doing of thy will, and the
advancement of thy glory: If hitherto I have served diverse lusts and pleasures,
now I will serve my God, even him only: If I have for the former part of my
life trampled upon thy commandments; now I will devote my self wholly to thy
fear, and to the keeping thy statutes, Psalm. 119.38. Psalm. 116.16. And (3.)
Take with you words of prayer and supplication, and say unto him, Lord, Receive
me graciously, and love me freely, and admit me again into thy service: It is
true, that I am altogether unworthy to have the least regard from the God of
heaven; but I come unto thee through Christ, who is worthy. I beseech thee
mercifully to inrol me amongst the number of thy peculiar people, Hos 14.1, 2.
And my brethren, if you do thus unfeignedly give up your selves unto God, it
will be a present testimony that you are alive from the dead, that you are
quickened by the holy Ghost, Romans 6.13.

4. To put this matter of your conversion out of question, Make an immediate
entrance upon a course of new obedience. Set now upon cleansing your selves
further from all sorts of filthiness, and actually perform those duties, which
in your places and stations are to be performed; and therein study to approve
your selves unto God. If thine heart be privy to any corruption, that has been
countenanced; let it be wholly forsaken, and the occasions of sin avoided. If
any wicked companion has had too much of thy converse and intimacy, now break
off society with him. If any duty has been omitted, let it be henceforward
discharged; if slightly performed, let it be done in an humble, serious, and
spiritual manner. Hereby it will appear that you gave up your selves to be the
Lord's in sincerity: that you do not complement only with him, as many
Professors do, who are often professing and protesting to the Lord that they
are his servants, but still they follow the imaginations of their own hearts.
Then is the resignment of our selves unto the Almighty done in truth, when it
does engage us presently to walk in the truth. I have sworn (says David) and I
will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments, Psalm. 119.106. And
such is the language of a true Convert; I am the Lord's, and now I will demean
my self as being his: I have given my self to the most High, and now I will be
no more at my own disposal: I have subscribed unto the Lord, and accordingly I
am doing his work. So that here is the last word of advice, for the present
proof of your conversion, and union with Christ thereupon: Yield up your selves
unto the Lord; and serve the Lord your God, 2 Chronicles. 30.8. Make a present
entrance, in the strength of the Spirit, upon all the ways of holiness; and
let that be your constant exercise, from henceforth unto the end.

Thus I have finished the second use of the point, by way of examination and
trial.

CHAP. XII. Exhortations grounded upon the doctrine of Union with Christ. To
the unregenerate and Christless, To Believers. To all.
3. THe last Use of this doctrine is for Exhortation; wherein I will study to
be more succinct and concise: addressing my self, in what I have to deliver
under this head, unto you my brethren under a threefold consideration.

I shall speak unto 1. The unregenerate, who are strangers to Christ. 2.
Believers, who are through grace ingraffed into Christ. 3. All of you, both of
the one sort, and of the other.


1. To the wicked, and unregenerate; who are strangers unto Christ, and that in
a twofold respect.

In respect to 1. Believers. 2. The wicked themselves.


1. To the unregenerate and ungodly, in reference to Believers. Take heed that
you be not found opposers of them in any regard whatsoever. Remember, they are
knit to the Son of God, and what you do against them he takes it as done
against himself, whose members they are: And how will you stand before Christ,
at his tribunal, if now you despise and set against his servants; who are not
only dear to him, but are in him? As Abner said to Assahel, 2 Samuel 2.22. Turn
thee aside from following me, wherefore should I smite thee to the ground? How
then should I hold up my face to Joab thy brother? So should you bethink your
selves, How shall I lift up my face to Christ, if I wrong his followers? How
will the Lord Jesus take it at my hands? May not I certainly expect that he
will avenge their quarrel upon me, in my destruction? For they are one with
him; so that he that touches them, touches the apple of his eye, Zech. 2.8.
Christ has a tender regard unto them, and is sensible of the smallest injury
that is done unto them; as we are of the least blow or prick upon the apple of
the eye. Sirs, It is the sorriest office imaginable, to be a Persecutor of the
Saints: it is the worst employment upon earth, to set against believers: for
they are one with Christ, and so in effect it is to fight against him. Doleamus
necesse est quod nulla civitas impune latura sit sanguinis nostri effusionem
Possumus aeque and exitus quorundam praesidum tibi proponere, qui in fine vitae
suae recordati sunt deliquisse quod vexassent Christianos, Sed qui videntur
sibi impune intulisse, venient in diem divini judicii. Non te terremus qui nec
timemus, sed velim ut omnes salves facere possmus, monendo (...). Fert. ad scap.
And therefore let my counsel be acceptable, in the words of Gamaliel, Act.
5.38, 39. Refrain from these men, and let them alone; if you love your souls,
do not meddle with them to their hurt; do not harbor so much as an hard
thought against them; for therein you will be found fighters against God; you
will be found enemies to the Son of God, for they are one with him. And is it
not a dangerous thing to set against Christ? If he plead against you, who shall
maintain your cause before the Lord? If thou make him thine adversary, who
shall be thy friend? If Christ sentence thee to hell, for opposing his members;
who shall be able to save thee from thence? If you do but touch the Saints to
their hurt, you will burn your fingers by it; nay, you will ruin your souls
for ever, without a speedy repentance; for they are one with Jesus.

This Exhortation may fitly be branched forth, into four particulars.

1. Do not scandalize, or offend the servants of God. See to it, that you be
not guilty of laying stumbling blocks in their way. Be careful, what in you
lies, that you do not grieve their spirits, nor sadden their hearts, by your
disorderly walking. But especially take heed that you lay none occasions of
falling in their way, (which is the offense that the holy Ghost Illud scandalum
dicitur ubi recto itinere ambulanti deceptie aliqua instruitur ad peccandum,
Orig.
mostly warns against) for they are knit to Christ. It is the very argument
pressed for prevention of scandals, 1 Cor. 8. v. 9, 12. Take heed lest by any
means this liberty of yours become a stumbling block to them that are weak. For
as it follows, v. 12. When ye sin so against the brethren, and wound their
weak conscience, ye sin against Christ. How against him? Why, not only against
the word and commandment of Christ, which is hereby contemned; so all sins are
against him: not only against the work of Christ, which you hereby oppose;
(Christ's work is to save these weak Christians, and what in you lies, by your
scandals you put an obstacle in the way of their salvation:) But you sin
especially against Christ, because they are his members, knit unto him, and
made one with him. So that, my brethren, the matter of scandalizing and
offending the meanest of the Saints of the most High; is not of such trivial
concernment, as many persons would make it. When they are pressed with an
argument drawn from this Topic of offending the servants of God, they turn it
off with a wet finger, as if it were a matter hardly worth the mentioning. But
Sirs, is it nothing to sin against Christ, the Mediator? Is it nothing to
destroy those for whom he died, and who are in him? sure I am, that our Savior
himself puts much weight upon it, and reckons it amongst the sins that he
will severely punish, Mat. 18.6. Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones,
which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about
his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea.

2. Do not reproach or speak evil of the people of God. Dare not to vent a
contemptuous, or malicious word against them; for they are one with Christ; and
so whatsoever is spoken against them, does not only reflect upon him, but is
accounted as spoken against him, Jude 15. Behold the Lord comes, with ten
thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all; and to convince all that
are ungodly amongst them, of all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodlily
committed; and of all their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoken
against him. How do they speak against him? Not only when they openly blaspheme
the name of Christ, and utter despiteful words against the person of Christ:
But when they reproach his people, and vent their hatred in evil words against
his Saints. This is reckoned as done against Christ, because of their near
relation unto him, and union with him. Commonly their hard speeches are
immediately directed against Believers, Many that pretend a love to Christ, or
that will not be so profane as to speak reproachfully of him, will be often
lashing at his followers, and taking all advantages to smite them with the
tongue, and to cast dirt upon their profession. But mark it Sirs, how little
soever you think of it; this is to strike at Christ, and to wound him through
their loins: And in the day of accounts, he will convince you of these hard
speeches; he will make you to know, to your eternal sorrow, what an evil it was
thus to wrong his people. For it is for the Son of man's sake that the godly are
reproached, and their name is cast out as evil: And besides, he dwells in
them, and they are one with him, Luke 6.22. So that you should be afraid to
speak evil of them. As the Lord said to Aaron and Miriam, Number. 12.8. Wherefore
were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses? q. d. He is my servant,
one of my family, and what he does is in my name; I the Lord employ him in the
work that he has undertaken; and could you imagine that I would not take his
part? or that I would not stand up in his vindication and defense? So may the
Lord Jesus say to you in this respect: This people, whom you despise and
trample upon, are my people; you account them as the dung of the earth, and the
off scouring of all things, and at every turn are ready to cast dirt in their
faces; But they are of my retinue, they belong unto me, nay they are mystically
one with me: and could you think I would not rise up in their behalf? Wherefore
were you not afraid, to speak a word against them? you do thereby east
dishonor upon Christ, and load him with your reproaches, for they are his
members.

3. Have not the least hand in persecuting, or actually opposing the people of
God. Do not hinder their progress in the ways of holiness, nor be a means to
bring them into sufferings, upon that account. Remember, They are one with
Christ the Savior; and if he shut the door of heaven against you, who can open
it for your admittance? He has the key of David, that opens and no man
shuts, and shuts and no man opens. They are united to Christ, the
Judge; and what favor can you expect at his hands, if you set your selves in
defiance against him? But you will say, we do not meddle with Christ; far be it
from us to act in the least against him: We only punish, and set against, a
company of inconsiderable people, that walk in a way contiary to the rest of
the world; who have a path by themselves, and would be deemed more holy than
their neighbors: If Christ were upon earth, we would honor and serve him. But
Sirs, be not deceived, God is not mocked: If you hate believers for their
holiness, you would much more have hated Jesus Christ, whose holiness is
unspeakably more than theirs; and you would persecute him, if he were within
your reach: for he walked more precisely and strictly than any of the poor
Christians, whom you oppose; and in a far greater contradiction to the world.
Besides, what you do against them, is interpreted as done against Christ
himself; because they are one with him, Act. 9.4, 5. Saul, Saul, why
persecutost thou me? And he said who art thou Lord? And the Lord said, I am
Jesus whom thou persecutest. Saul thought he had only hunted the poor Saints at
Damascus, a company of humorous people, that would not conform to the customs
and traditions of the Elders; a few despicable persons, who were contemned on
every hand: But he is arraigned as an enemy to Christ, and found guilty of
persecuting the Lord Jesus. When he breathed out threatenings and slaughters
against the Disciples of the Lord, it is accounted as if he had sought the
destruction of Christ himself: as if his rage and madness had been directly
bent against the Son of God. Why persecutest thou me? q.d. I esteem their
affliction, as if I were afflicted; and their sufferings, as if my self
suffered: And what reason have thou to set thus furiously against me? Is this
my requital for coming down from heaven, to open a door of salvation for lost
sinners? Is it not the greatest folly in the world, to provoke me to wrath, who
am able to break thee in pieces like a potters vessel? Think of it Saul ( as if
Christ had said) it is a dangerous way which thou art in; it is a miserable
employment thou spendest thy pains about; thou art but kicking against the
pricks, contending with one Sententia est proverbialis a bobus out equis
sumpta: qui dum stimulis punguntur calcitrando nihil proficiunt, nisi quod
stimulis altius infixis malum duplicant.
that is too strong for thee; for it is Jesus whom thou persecutest.

4. Do not neglect to give believers what help and furtherance you can, in
their pilgrimage. Be ready to show them any kindness that lies in your way to
show them, and to contribute what relief and assistance soever you are able to
minister, upon any occasion; for they are united unto Christ, intimately
acquainted with him, and nearly related to him. So that the Lord Jesus will
take it kindly at your hands whatever friendship you show to his people. Art
thou a Lawyer? Plead their cause. Art thou a Magistrate? Protect their persons,
against the Sons of violence; Break the jaws of the wicked, and pluck the spoil
out of their teeth. Art thou a private person, and hear the godly traduced,
and their profession bespattered? Endeavor to vindicate them, and what in thee
lies, to clear up their innocence. Art thou a man whom God has entrusted with
wealth and riches? Why, then as thou have opportunity, do good to all, but
especially to the household of faith: For they are members of Christ, and thou
shall in no wise lose thy reward. Christ has all the blessings in the world
put into his hauds to distribute, and in the distribution of his doles of
bounty, be sure he will not forget such as have showed kindness to his
servants; he will recompense them to the full; the smallest courtesy done to
the Saints shall not be forgotten, Mark 9.41. Whosoever shall give you a cup of
cold water to drink in my name, because ye belong to Christ, verily I say unto
you, he shall not lose his reward. He has promised to reward those that feed
their enemies, when they are hungry, and give them water to drink, when they
are thirsty; and will he not much more reward such as relieve and shelter his
own Saints and people? Prove. 25.21, 22. They are united to him; what kindness
is showed un^o them, is reckoned as if it were showed to our Lord Jesus Christ.

A little to press home these Exhortations, let me entreat you to consider
these four moving considerations.

Cons. 1. Holy men and women who study to please the Lord, and to walk in
integrity before him, are the very pillars of a Nation, by which it is upheld.
They are the main props and supporters of the places where they live, and of
the families wherein they dwell. It is for their sakes, that mercies are
continued unto a people, or kingdom; and judgments are kept off from falling
down upon them, to their utter desolation and ruin. So that it concerns you to
seek their good, and to encourage them in their holiness, as you tender your
own welfare. Were it not for the servants of Christ, you would quickly be in a
miserable case. And therefore when God does gather his own people unto himself,
it is usually the forerunner of some sore calamity, Isa. 57.1. The righteous is
taken away from the evil to come. Plainly intimating, that it was their
presence which staved off vengeance for a time; and when they are called home,
then the floud-gates of wrath are set open. It is upon their account that God
does restrain the wickedness of men, that they are not as monsters, and devils
one to another; and that he does withold the pouring out his wrathful
indignation. You know, what he says in relation to Sodom, whose sin was
grievous, and the cry of it was great, and went up to heaven; yet, if there had
been ten righteous persons in it, the place had been spared for their sakes:
And however, nothing could be done against it, till righteous Lot was gone
forth, Genesis 18.32. Genesis 19.22, 23, 24.

Indeed sometimes the wickedness of a place is so excessively heinous, that it
is beyond the prayers of the godly. The most eminent persons in holiness shall
not prevail for the sparing it. Though Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, they
shall deliver but their own souls by their righteousness, Ezekiel. 14.13, 14. Yet,
in many cases, they are instrumental by their presence and prayers, not only to
deliver themselves, but to keep off vengeance from others. And will you root
them out, who are the means of your preservation? You think they are these
precise persons, who speak so much of Religion, and are more strict than
others, that hinder your mirth, and jollity. What brave times of pleasure
should you have, were it not for these Precisians, who are as thorns in your
sides, and rubs in the way of your rejoycings, and merriment? But Sirs, if you
believe the Scriptures, it is evident, that were it not for the godly amongst
you, you might soon expect to fall under the saddest dispensations, and to have
the sluices of the fury of the God of heaven set wide open upon you. As soon as
Noah was arkt, the flood swept away the world of the ungodly. As soon as Lot
was lodged in Zoar, it rained fire and brimstone ( as it were, hell from
heaven) upon Sodom and Gemorrah. And mark what our Savior speaks of
Gospel Times, Mat. 24.22. Except those days should be shortened, there should
no flesh be saved. But for the elects sake those days shall be shortened. Were
it not upon the account of the servants of God, who are converted, and such as
hereafter are to be converted; the tribulation would prove like a sweeping
rain, that leaves nothing behind it. So that it concerns you in point of
wisdom to love and cherish the Saints, and to take heed that they be not
wronged: For they are the best subjects in a Kingdom; the best neighbors in
the places where they abide; the best relations and servants, you can get into
your families; they bring the blessing of heaven along with them, Genesis 30.27.
Genesis 39.5. They are the best friends you can have, for they will be friends to
your souls. So that I may allude to that passage of the Lord to Abimelech, Genesis
20.7. Restore the man his wife, for he is a Prophet, and shall pray for thee
and thou shall live. Show kindness to the godly, for they are favorites in the
Court of heaven, intimately acquainted with God; yea, united to Christ the Son
of God; They will pray for thee, and be instrumental to avert and turn away
judgments from thee, and to bring down blessings upon thy head; if not to save
thy precious and immortal soul.

Cons. 2. It is a shrewd sign that you are persons intended for utt^r
extirpation and ruin, when God does make use of you, as scourges to afflict
his Saints, and to persecute his own peculiar people. There is hardly a more
sure token of the destination of men, or any party of men, to utter
destruction, than this, that they are Gods rod for the whipping of his chosen
servants. For this is the usual method of his proceedings in that case; First
he corrects his children, and then the rod is thrown into the fire, Isa.
10.5.12. Possibly, he may grant them a little outward prosperity for a while,
but at length he will break in upon them, as the breaking in of mighty waters;
and will take them away as a whirlwind, both living and in his wrath. It is a
shrewd sign that God has determined to destroy them, who devour his people,
and consult against his hidden ones. See what dreadful threatenings are
denounced against Edom upon this very score, Obad. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
Thou should not have looked on the day of thy brother, in the day that he
became a stranger; neither should thou have rejoiced over the children of
Judah in the day of their destruction; neither should thou have spoken
prondly in the day of their distress, etc. And then it follows, v. 15. As
thou have done, so shall it be done unto thee, thy reward shall return upon
thine own head. For as ye have drunk upon my holy mountain, so shall all the
Heathen drink continually, yea, they shall drink and swallow down, and they
shall be as though they had not been. But upon mount Zion there shall be
deliverance, and there shall be holiness, and the house of Jacob shall possess
their possessions. And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of
Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau for stubble; and they shall kindle in
them and devour them, and there shall not be any remaining of the house of
Esau: for the Lord has spoken it. Read also Zech. 12.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and Isa.
34. the whole Chapter. Paul indeed was plucked as a firebrand out of this
burning; he was converted unto the Lord in the very heat of his opposition; but
it is mentioned as a wonderful act of grace, as exceeding abundant mercy, 1 Timothy 1.13, 14, 16. Do you be encouraged by his example, to submit to the terms
of mercy, whilst it is offered; and not to go on to kick against the pricks.

Cons. 3. This is a special matter which Christ will enquire into, in the day
of accounts, how you have carried your selves toward his members: And if you
have set against them, or neglect to seek their good, he will avenge it upon
you, as if you had despised himself. See how he makes their case his own, Mat.
25.42, 43, 44, 45. I was an hungry, and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and
ye gave me no drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me not in; naked, and ye
clothed me not; sick and in prison, and ye visited me not. Pray mind it Sirs,
What answer could you make against such a charge, in the great and notable lay
of the Lord? What apology could you plead for your selves, that you opposed
Christ, and neglicted to give him relief? What reason could you produce, why
you should not be sentenced to hell for it? If Christ should say, I walked in
the way of holiness, and you hated me for it; I was much in prayer and converse
with the godly, and you turned it into my reproach? I durst not run as others
to excess of riot, and you were filled with rage and madness against me: What
defense could you make to acquit your selves from this charge? Perhaps you
would deny the charge, and say, we never set against Christ; far be it from us
to despise the Lord Jesus; we love him and honor him with all our hearts: only
we now and then trampled upon a few hot-spirited people, who were more nice
than wise, and more strict than they needed, and cried out against out sins,
and corruptions. But when did we spurn at Jesus Christ? When did we see the Son
of God, and did not minister unto him? Why Sirs, this is the very plea which
the reprobates will make, at that day; but see how our Savior will reject and
overruled their plea, upon this very ground; Because he and his Saints are
united, and what is done unto them, is as if it were done personally unto
Christ, v. 45. Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, in as
much as ye did it not unto one of the least of these, ye did it not unto me.
Your despising them is a despising Christ. So that consider what will be the
end of all your contempt and oppressions of the godly, but to perish for ever?
For mark the dreadful sentence, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels; q.d. Now you serve the devil
herein, and hereafter you shall have your portion with the devil, and his
angels.

This is for the first Exhortation to the wicked, in relation to the godly.

2. In reference unto the wicked themselves, let me direct unto such, a twofold
word of Exhortation.

1. Negatively. 2. Affirmatively.
1. Negatively. If Union with Christ be of such absolute necessity in order to
salvation through him; Be exhorted to take heed, that you do not build your
hopes of eternal life, upon any privilege or attainment, that falls short of
this grace of oneness with the Son; or that may belong to a person which has
not the Son. For except you have the Son, you cannot possibly have an interest
in the possession that he has purchased. He that has the Son has life; and
he that has not the Son has not life. So that if you bottom your hopes upon
that which may consist without union with Christ, and may be found in such as
are not ingraffed into him; it will certainly prove but a sandy foundation, and
not able to support the fabrique which you reject upon it.

My brethren, It is a matter which nearly concerns us, to make a diligent
enquiry into the reason of our hopes of eternal life; and to see what are the
foundations upon which they are bottomed; whether they are built upon the sand,
or upon a rock. Many poor souls are undone for ever, for want of making this
enquiry: they have strong hopes and expectations of being saved, but are able
to produce no reason of their hopes; or else they build their confidence upon
such rotten grounds, as will not minister a sufficient reason for cherishing
such hopes; and so they go on securely, till they drop into hell, ere they are
aware of it. Now therefore for the prevention of self deceit in the
entertainment of your hopes, see that you do not swerve from this general Rule;
That there is no privilege which may be separated from the grace of union with
Christ, or that is to be found in any persons, which have not the Son, that can
be a sufficient ground for hopes of eternal life. All such foundations are but
sandy foundations, and therefore do not rest upon them. It is Christ in you
which is the hope of glory. Col. 1.27. If the Lord Jesus have not taken up his
residence in you, by the workings of the holy Ghost, and if you are not
implanted into him; all your hopes of salvation will vanish, and come to
nothing, whatever other foundations you build upon.

I will instance in diverse things, which carnal persons are apt to rely upon.

1. Church Membership, and such spiritual advantages as have a dependence
thereupon, are but a sandy foundation; though many lay the stress of their
hopes upon this bottom. They expect to be saved, because they were born in the
Church, and are baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, they enjoy the presence
of Gospel Ordinances, and give their attendance upon them. Surely, think they,
it cannot go amiss with our souls, who hear Christ's word, and are present at
his institutions, and belong unto the Church; however it fares with Heathens
and infidels. But, mind it Sirs, these things may be without having the Son,
which is of indispensable necessity to eternal life. A man may be visibly a
member of the Church of Christ, and yet an utter stranger unto Christ himself,
the head of the Church: He may externally and in appearance belong to Christ
kingdom, and yet really be a subject of the devils kingdom: He may be present
at the Ordinances, and yet have no communion and fellowship with the Lord
Jesus, in his Ordinances: He may be baptized with water in Christ's name, and
yet never taste the baptism of the holy Ghost, whereby believers are
spiritually knit unto him. You read of the children of the Kingdom cast into
outer darkness, Mat. 8.12. And in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails
any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature, Gal. 6.15. Circumcision is
put, by a Synochdoche, for all outward privileges, into which that Ordinance
was an inlet: These will never save you from hell, unless you be sanctified by
the Spirit of Christ, and so implanted into him. When the Lord comes to
execute judgment upon the ungodly, he will bind the Heathen and unsanctified
Church Members in the same bundle together, and cast them into the lake of
fire. Jer. 9.25, 26. He will punish the circumcised with the uncircumcised;
Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, and the children of Ammon, and Moab, and all that
are in the utmost corners, that dwell in the wilderness: For all these nations
are uncircumcised, and all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in the heart.
Church Priviledges if not rightly improved, will be as oil to make the flames
of hell fire burn hotter upon thee; But they will avail nothing to save thee
from hell, except thou be married unto Christ, the head of the Church.

2. Great measures of the knowledge of the will of God, and an insight into the
doctrines revealed in the Scriptures, are a sandy foundation, whereupon to
build your hopes of eternal life. For they are to be found in persons, that
were never ingraffed into Christ. A man may know much of the doctrines of
Christianity, when yet he never was taught the truth, as it is in Jesus. There
may be a clear head to apprehend the principles of Religion, and yet an unclean
and unsanctified heart. He may discourse understandingly to the edification of
others, of such mysteries of godliness, as he never felt the power of in
himself. He may know many things touching the Son, that never learnt of the
Father, so as to be drawn unto the Son. And indeed all the knowledge of
hypocrites is no knowledge in Gods account, and will only serve to double the
stripes Melius est ergo and utilius idiotas, and parum scientes existere, and
per charitatem proximum fieri Deo, quam putare multum scire, and multa expertos
in suum Deum blasphemos inveniri. Iraen. adv. haer.
wherewith they shall be beaten, Luke 12.47. He that says, I know him, and
keeps not his commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in him, 1 John
2.4. If a sinner did truly know the excellency of Christ, he could not but love
him, and thirst after his righteousness; he would never be at rest in his
spirit, till he had secured his interest in him, and were able to call him, his
Lord and his Savior, Joh. 4.10.

3. Some inclination in the affections toward the things of God, is not a
sufficient ground whereupon to build our hopes of eternal life: For it may
consist with an estate of estrangedness and separation from the Lord Jesus
Christ; and there is no salvation by the Son, without having the Son. A man may
rejoice at Christ's word, that does not give up himself in sincerity to be his
servant: He may see a loveliness and excellency in the ways of holiness, that
was never wrought up to an actual walking in those ways. Wemeet with John
Baptist's hearers, that they were willing for a season to rejoice in his light,
Joh. 3.35. He was a powerful and affectionate Preacher, and his doctrines
raised up some flashy joy in their spirits that heard him; when yet the word
took not such root as to make them fruitful. So, many who attended upon the
Ministry of Christ wondered (as the Text says) at the gracious words that
proceeded out of his mouth; and yet never felt a gracious work upon their
hearts: as is evident from the sequel of their carriage toward him, Luke 4.22.
A sinner may be warmed at the fire of Gospel Truths, that has not his lusts
and corruptions consumed thereby.

4. Comparative righteousness, is a sandy foundation of hopes of eternal life.
Although many persons imbarque in this bottom. They are better than others, and
wallow not in that filthiness wherewith multitudes are defiled; and therefore
their inward thought is, that certainly their condition is good, however it
fare with such and such profane persons. But, mark it Sirs, this is no proof of
unior with Jesus Christ; you may be better than others ( comparatively, i. e.
not so bad as others) and yet enemies to the Son of God, and the power of
godliness: For there are different ranks and degrees of impenitent sinners, but
all of them in the same state of damnation. There was none of the Kings of
Israel like unto Ahab; and yet many of them were bad enough, being servants of
the devil; and such as promoted his interest, though not at that rate as Ahab
did, 1 King. 21.25. He may die of a Fever, that never had such violent
paroxysms, as others have felt: So a sinner may perish in his iniquity, who yet
is not so notorious for impiety as some others are. This the Pharisee could
have pleaded, nay it was the foundation which he bunt upon, Luke 18.11. God, I
thank thee that I am (...) as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers,
or even as this Publican. And yet he went down to his house a condemned person.
All that can be said for the comfort of such a one is this, That he will have a
cooler place in hell, than some others who have ran beyond him in the
perpetration of horrid abominations.

5. A mere civil conversation, and inoffensive c^^riage toward men, is a poor
foundation of a man's hope^. You have some will lean upon this prop, and be very
confident of their salvation upon this ground; because they pay all men their
due, and walk honestly toward their neighbors; and defy all the world to
bring in a bill of accusation against them. But this will prove as a rotten
pillar, that cannot support the Fabric: For observe what our Savior says to
the Pharisees, Luke 16.15. Ye are they which justify your selves before men,
but God knows your hearts: for that which is highly esteemed amongst men is
abomination to God. Mark it, here is the question, Is thy heart washed and
sanctified? Art thou regenerated by the Spirit of Christ, and so knit unto him?
The God before whom thou must appear, is the searcher of the hearts, and will
bring to light the hidden things Deest aliquid intus. Said one of a picture
when he tried to make it stand and walk of it self. There wants something
within. So it may be said of the unregenerate moralist. There wants a
Principle of spiritual life within.
of darkness. He sees those secret and spiritual wickednesses, that lodge
within thee, which the world cannot discern. He takes a view of those inward
pollutions, and filthinesses, which pass the eye of the most curious
inquisitor, amongst the children of men. Civility is a mercy for which thou art
bound to bless the name of God, but it will not entitle thee to the Kingdom of
God. Va etiam vitae laudabili. Aug.
For the obtaining of that, thou must be united to Christ. Unconverted Paul was
of a blameless conversation, and yet a child of the wrath of God: And therefore
when he had a right knowledge of matters, he did not rest herein, but earnestly
breathed after Christ, and rejected all things that he might be found in him,
Phil. 3.6, 8.

6. Legal sorrow for sin, and a kind of reformation thereupon, will not serve
to beget a well-grounded hope of eternal life. When sinners are under some
pangs of conviction, that damps their mirth for a while; and their consciences
are troubled for some ungodliness which they have committed, and this trouble
prevails so far as to make them leave the practice of that ungodliness for
the present: Hence they are apt to cherish strong confidence of their
salvation. Surely (think they) it cannot go amiss with us, who have felt such
disquietness in our spirits, and begin to lead a new life: What will bring a
man to heaven, if this will not? But man, one thing thou lackest yet, and that
is union with Christ the Son of God. Unless thy sorrow for sin prove
efficacious to drive thee quite out of thy self, and to cause thee to give up
thy soul into the hands of the Mediator, whom God has appointed, it will in no
wise conduct thee to everlasting glory. Juda^ was troubled for sin, and
restored the pieces of silver which he had gotten, as the wages of
unrighteousness, and yet he went unto his own place, Mat. 27.4, 5. Act. 1.25.
He had deep gashes of conviction cut in his conscience, whereby he was wounded
sorely; and yet perished for ever, for want of getting into Christ, and
application thereby of the healing balsom of his righteousness. There may be
much torture and vexation in the heart for sin, and such as may carry a man to
some amendment of life; and yet not a drop of that godly sorrow that works
repentance unto salvation; not the least degree of that evangelical brokenness,
and contrition of spirit, which drives the sinner unto Christ, that he may
find rest for his soul.

7. The mere external performance of spiritual daties, is no sufficient ground
whereupon to bottom our hopes of eternal life. Such as prayer, and reading the
Scriptures, and frequenting religious exercises, and the like. These are good
means, if rightly managed, to bring a sinner unto Christ; but in themselves
they are no evidence of a good estate. The Pharisee was much in outward duties,
and yet he was not justified, Luke 18.12. A person may make many prayers, and
play the counterfeit in all that he does: many confess sin, and plead against
it with their mouths; and in the mean while hug it in their bosoms; they
pretend to earnest desires of grace and holiness in their expressions, but hate
it in their affections, with a perfect hatted; they read the Scriptures to find
out the will of God, and yet retain a secret resolvedness of spirit to follow
the dictates of their own wills: they att^nd with their bodies on the
Ordinances of Christ, whilst their hearts go after covetousness, and other base
corruptions, Ezekiel. 33.31, 32. Many labor only to stop the mouth of conscience
with outward performances, who are utterly strangers to the workings of a
renewed principle. Besides, What are the Institutions and Ordinances of Christ,
except they lead the soul unto Christ? That is the very end of their
appointment, to bring us unto him, and to build us up in him: without an
interest in whom, by way of union with him, there is no right to the kingdom of
heaven attainable by any.

8. The good opinions of the godly, are but a sandy foundation of hope. It is a
great mercy to converse with such as are spiritually wise, and to have a place
and seat in their affections, who are favorites in the court of heaven: But it
is no sure evidence of our title to heaven. And the reason is this, Because
their estimation of others may arise from a mistake of their persons, judging
them only by what is visible and apparent in open view; but God is a discerner
of the secret recesses of the heart. The Lord sees not as man sees, 1 Samuel
16.7. How was David mistaken in Achitophel? They took sweet counsel together,
and walked unto the house of God in company, and yet he was an accursed person,
and wickedness was in his dwelling, Psalm. 55.14. They may be much in the
affections of the godly, who are an abomination unto the Lord. So that, trust
not in this as a sign of a good estate: Thon may be of great repute amongst
Christians, and yet alienated from Jesus Christ; whereas it is only union with
the Son, and ingrafture into him which will give thee a right to salvation.

9. Lastly, (that I may hasten to a conclusion) A being joined in fellowship
with this, or the other party, who make a stricter profession of godliness than
others, is an insufficient ground whereupon to build our hopes of eternal life.
This is all the proof that some can make of their fincerity, Because they are
of such a persuasion, and settled in a Church way, with such eminent
professors; they are of the same judgment, and hold the same opinions with
them: this is made the foundation of great measures of confidence. But, mark it
Sirs, It is not external communion and brotherhood with the highest rank of
Christians, that will conduct a sinner to the kingdom of heaven, without a
spiritual conjunction with Christ himself. Many unbelievers went with the
children of Israel out of the Land of Egypt, even a mixed multitude that imbarkt
in the same bottom with them, and yet never arrived at the Land of promise.
Judas was in external fellowship with the Apostles, and yet the son of
perdition. The five foolish virgins held society with the wise, and were
accounted as members of their association, and yet the door of heaven was shut
against them, Mat. 25.1, 2, 12. If you would have good hopes through grace of
your eternal salvation, you must be knit to the Captain of salvation: If you
would enjoy the inheritance, you must be espoused to Christ, the heir of all
things: for he that has the Son has life; and he that has not the Son has
not life.

2. Affirmatively. If union with Christ be of such absolute necessity, in order
to salvation by Christ: Then be exhorted, with unwearied endeavors, to labor
after this grace of union. Give all diligence to get into Christ. Do thou not
perceive there is no salvation without it? This is the standing Law of the God
of heaven, which cannot be reversed or altered, That such as will be made
partakers of eternal life, must be intimately joined unto the Son of God. So
that think seriously with thy self, what is like to be thy case, if thou
should depart hence without being ingraffed into Christ. Why man, It is not
all the world can preserve thee from eternal destruction. Be not deceived,
either thou must have the Son of God, or p^rish irrecoverably for ever under
the wrath of God. To what purpose is all your knowledge of Christ, and the way
of salvation through him, except you be in him? This is the end of the Ministry
of the Gospel, that you may have an interest in him, and grow up into him in
all things, which is the head, even Christ, Ephesians. 4.15.

In order to the attainment of this foundationmercy, let me beseech you to
observe, and follow these ensuing directions.

Direct. 1. If you would be knit to Christ, that you may be saved upon his
account, labor to work up your hearts, unto an utter despair of having
salvation upon any lower terms, or in any other way whatsoever. Press such
considerations powerfully upon your spirits, as may have a tendency to drive
you from taking sanctuary in any other refuge. Study to overturn your hopes of
getting deliverance by any other means: For my Brethren, one of the first steps
in our motion toward Christ, and getting into him, is the casting away all
hopes of being saved otherwise. The holy Ghost does observe it as the great
obstacle and impediment, in the way of salvation, that sinners do not cast off
their presumptuous hopes: they see their misery by sin, but have secret
thoughts in their hearts that they shall have peace notwithstanding, Isa.
57.10. Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way, yet thou said not there
is no hope: thou have found out the life of thine hand, therefore thou wast not
grieved. Mark it, here was the reason of their continuance in sin, because they
retained their presumptuous hopes: They did bolster up themselves in some
groundless confidence of escaping, notwithstanding their impenitence. They were
not humbled for their transgressions, because they found out the life of their
hand; i. e. they still imagined to find some comfort, and support, ready at
hand upon all occasions; or sufficient means to strengthen their hand, and to
yield them succor; or they relied upon their own righteousness, their legal
performances, the work of their hands: they expected life and salvation from
thence. But these are vain thoughts and expectations, such as must be rejected
in order to salvation, Jer. 4.14. O Jerusalem wash thine heart from wickedness,
that thou may be saved: how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee?
i. e. thy vain thoughts of being saved at a cheaper rate, without being washed
Ego igitur non dubito quin Propheta hic fallaces illas spes designet, quibus
Judaei obs^inatiores erant adversus Deum, ut sibi a nulla poena metuerent.
Calv. in loc.
and sanctified. Many carnal people are offended with us, when we preach
doctrines of terror, and set forth the severity of God toward Christless
sinners; because, as they object, this is the way to drive them to despair, and
to overthrow all their hopes. Why man, It is the design of our Ministry to
drive thee to utter despair of ever being saved, without the righteousness of
Jesus Christ; and of being saved by Christ, except you are united to him, and
made spiritually one with him. We would not have you despair of finding mercy
with the Lord, if you repent and be converted, and give up your selves to the
Son of God, upon the terms of the Gospel: But it is that which we drive at to
cause you wholly to despair, and to cast off all hopes of being saved by the
Son, except you have the Son. This despair will awaken you out of your
security, and make you restless in spirit till you have gotten into the City of
refuge: It will make you earnest in prayer unto God, and to follow hard after
him, with a vigorous and unwearied importunity, till he has brought you unto
Christ, and ingraffed you into him.

And because I am fallen upon this argument; wherein many poor souls are
deluded, who live in the common practice of sin, but will thank God they do not
despair; not considering that a despair of being saved in an unconverted
estate, is one of the first steps leading to conversion: I will therefore take
the liberty to enlarge a little upon this head, by showing you wherein the rock
of despair is indeed dangerous, and to be avoided; and wherein, on the other
hand, we are bound to despair, and to cast off all hope, that we may diligently
prosecute the things that concern our peace. And this I will do by giving you
five Scripture Theses, or Assertions touching this matter.

1. Observe, That the mercy of God, for the acceptance of humble penitent and
believing sinners, is infinitely great, even as his nature and essence, and it
is an attribute which he takes special delight in the exercise of. So that
there is no cause of despair, for the most heinous offenders, of finding grace
and compassion with the Lord, if they return unto him in sincerity. Though
their sins be as scarlet, they shall be made white as snow; and though they be
red like crimson [of the deepest color, and aggravated with the most greatning
circumstances] they shall be as wool, Isa. 1.18. Have thou played the harlot
with many lovers? yet return unto me, says the Lord, Jer. 3.1. Have thy sins
reached unto the Heavens? yea, but the mercy of God is above the heavens, being
unsearchable as himself; for his compassions are himself: He is a God of mercy,
his nature and essence is made up of it, Psalm. 62.12. Have thou multiplied
thine abominations, above what can be reckoned? Why, his compassions are more
than can be numbered. Let the wicked for sake his ways, and the man of iniquity
his thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon
him: and to our God, for he will multiply to pardon, Isa. 55.7. But can it ever
enter into the heart of a man to think, that God will ever pardon such a wretch
as I have been, may the sinner say? Mind what follows, v. 8. He is God and
not man, his mercies are not to be measured by our scantling. For my thoughts
are not your thoughts, nor your ways my ways, says the Lord: For as the
heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and
my thoughts than your thoughts.

2. The death and sufferings of Jesus Christ, which he underwent for
satisfaction of the justice of God, are of infinite value, and have given
plenary content and satisfaction: and he is at the right hand of the Father to
plead that satisfaction in the behalf of lost sinners. So that there is no
ground of despair in this respect; as if they might be greater offenders, than
the blood of Jesus could purchase acceptance for. He is able to save to the
uttermost, Heb. 7.25. and there is nothing beyond the uttermost. If you perish
for ever, it is not for want of merit in the death of Christ; for it was the
death of that person, who is the eternal God, Act. 20.28. It was the death of
the man, who was God's fellow, Zech. 13.7. The Father has accepted of the
price that he paid; In him he is well pleased, fully contented as to all the
demands of his justice, Mat. 3.17. Ephesians. 5.2. So that if you address your selves
unto Christ, and to God by him, you may come with a full assurance of faith;
without doubting of acceptance, though your sins have been never so great, and
your condition never so deplorable, Heb. 10.19, 22. That Is the second thing to
be observed.

3. As our Lord Jesus is able to save the most heinous sinners that come unto
him in sincerity; so he is as willing to receive them when they come, and he
will in no wise cast them out. As he is mighty in strength, so he is tender of
heart; his arms are open for the entertainment of such as come to him upon
Gospel terms, and will subject themselves unto his government. So that there is
no reason to despair of Christ's willingness to become thy Redeemer. Here is
that at which poor sinners are apt to stick. Alas, will they say, We question
not the sufficiency of his merit, but will he ever vouchsafe to undertake the
patronage and salvation of such a rebel as I have been? Nay, but O man, art
thou willing to accept him for thy Savior and Master, and to follow his
conduct, and to become his Disciple indeed? Why, he is abundantly more willing
to receive thee into his protection. He beseeches sinners to come unto him,
and therefore surely he will not reject them when they do come, 2 Co^. 5.20.
Yea, but I have been a very rebel against heaven, will the sinner say, for many
years together, will not this hinder my acceptance? Why, mark that precious
Text, Psalm. 68.18. He has received gifts for the rebellious also, that the
Lord God may dwell amongst them. Oh, but never was there a sinner in such a
case as I am, will the soul be apt to urge against himself. Yet if thou come
unto Christ, he will in no case cast thee ont. Put the case that thou have been
guilty of the most horrid transgressions; put the case, that thou have ran to
all excess of riot: yet mind that comprehensive word of promise which proceeded
out of Christ's own mouth, who is the Amen, the faithful and true witness, Joh.
6.37. All that the father gives me shall come unto me; and him that comes
unto me, I will in no wise cast out. It is an asseveration strengthened with a
double negative, in the original; (...).
As if our aviour had said, I will not cast him out, whosoever he be, that
comes unto me: Do you question it? I tell you, I will not: You may build upon
it with the greatest confidence. As he has elsewhere confirmed the promise of
not forsaking those that are in him, I will never, never, never, never leave
thee nor forsake thee, (...).
Heb. 13.5. So here he has strengthened the promise of not refusing such as
come unto him, I will not reject them, I assure you (says Christ) I will not.
So that nothing can stand in the way of man's salvation, to hinder the
accomplishment of it, but his own wilful impenitence and unbelief. These are
the cases, wherein there is not the least ground of desperation in any
brokenhearted sinner whomsoever; the Gospel has provided plentiful remedy
against it.

4. Note in the fourth place, That the highway which leads the children of
men to this damnable despair, and so to give up themselves to commit iniquity
with greediness, is not doctrines of terror to the impenitent; but
presumptuously sinning against the Lord. When persons will walk contrary to the
light of their own consciences, and the clear dictates of the word of God, and
suffer their vile affections to suppress, and stifle the convictions wrought
upon their hearts; this is the direct path that tends to desperation. I pray
mind it Sirs, Poor ignorant people are very much deluded in this particular:
When they hear doctrines of wrath and judgment to come, and everlasting
destruction prepared for the workers of iniquity, they presently cry out
against the Ministers; These are Preachers of damnation, they would drive us to
despair. Nay, but O vain man, those doctrines tend to show you the necessity of
Christ, and getting an interest in him, and to cause you to despair in your
selves, which is a good step to salvation: It is rebelling against the light,
and sinning against knowledge, which make way for damnable despair. What made
Cain despair, but because he had wickedly and wilfully departed from the Lord,
and trampled the commandment under his feet? What brought Judas to despair, but
forcing down the dictates of his own light and conscience? And you read of the
people in Isaiah, They roared like Bears in the agony of their Ipirits, because
they had gone on to sin against knowledge, Isa. 59.10, 11, 12.

5. But then, in the last place, There are four cases wherein I would quicken
you to despair, and to press such arguments upon your hearts, as may be
influential to incline you thereunto. And without such kind of despairing, you
will never effectually mind the working out your salvation.

1. You must despair of ever coming to the kingdom of heaven hereafter, unless
you bring forth the fruits of righteousness here; and endeavor to be holy in
all manner of conversation. If you live in any course of sin, or in the neglect
of observing any of God's commandments, it is not possible you should come to
the enjoyment of God; whilst you abide in that estate. Never dream of being
saved without holiness; for such imaginations are but dreams and fancies, Heb.
12.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see
the Lord. 1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, etc. q. d. It is a plain case that the
unrighteous will perish unavoidably; it is a token of gross ignorance to think
otherwise: Do not hope for, or expect salvation without righteousness; for by
such hopes and expectations, you will but cheat your own souls, Gal. 5.19, 20,
21. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
variance, emulation, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders,
drunkenness, revellings, and such like: Of the which I tell you before, as I
have told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God. Mark it, if a man live in any of these sins, or in any
other sin like unto these; whether it be filthiness of the flesh, or of the
spirit; open or secret; though not here particularly enumerated; he cannot
enter into eternal life. It is a matter (as if the Apostle had said) which I
have studied, and the more I think of it, the more I am confirmed in it: I have
preached this doctrine to you formerly, and I am still of the same mind; and
therefore warn you of it again, that if you be such persons you cannot be saved.

2. Although I counsel you to be much in the works of righteousness, yet you
must despair of ever being justified, or saved, upon the account of your
righteousness. For alas, what are the best of our righteousnesses to give
satisfaction to the justice of God, for the wrong that we have done him? If you
be pardoned and accepted of the Lord, it must be for the sake of the
righteousness of Jesus Christ; and not by virtue of any thing of your own. For
the Seripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus
Christ might be given to them that believe, Gal. 3.22.

3. Although you must be active and diligent in the service of God, and labor
to walk in uprightness before him; yet you are utterly to despair of doing this
in your own strength. It is only strength and aflistance from Jesus Christ,
that will enable you to be faithful unto Christ. If you trust in your own
hearts, they will deceive you, 2 Cor. 3.5. Psalm. 71.15, 16. Ad evulsionem
hominis a statu peccati, requiritur, 3. ut ex evictione conscientiae,
desperatiosalutis consequatur, and respectu nostrarum virium, and omnis etiam
auxilii quod a creaturis haberi potest. Ames. de cons.


4. I would counsel you to work up your hearts, to an utter despair of
receiving either righteousness or strength from Christ, except you get into
him. Sit down and rest in this conclusion, that unless you be united to the Son
of God, you cannot dwell in the presence of God. There is no salvation to be
had upon other terms. And thus to despair of deliverance, in a state of
separation from Christ, is an excellent means, or inducement to drive you unto
him. Thus the Law is our Schoolmaster to lead us unto Christ; i. e. by
convincing us of our undone condition without him. Lex in vero suo officio est
ad gratiam ministra and praeparatrix: prodest ad justificationem, non quod
justificat, sed quia urgeat ad promissionem gratiae, and came facit dulcem and
desiderabilem. Luth.
It pursues us with wrath, as the avenger of blood, that we may be forced to
hasten into the City of refuge, Gal. 3.24.

This is the first Direction I intended, in order to the attainment of this
grace of union.

Direct. 2. If you would be united unto the Son, Get the Spirit of the Lord
Jesus into your hearts. It is only the holy Ghost, who is sent in his name,
that can lead you unto him, and ingraff you in him, and form Christ within you.
And if you have not the Spirit of Christ you cannot be his, Romans 8.9. And
therefore to this end. 1. Be much in prayer to God for this very mercy, that he
would graciously send the Spirit of his Son into your souls. There is an
encouraging word to draw forth your fervent supplications in this behalf, Luke
11.13. If ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children: how
much more shall your heavenly father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him.
It is the mercy which he delights to be sought unto for, and to be dealing
forth, in return to the prayers of his Servants. 2. Be much conversant with the
word of Christ, and constant in your attendance upon the Ordinances of the
Gospel. Be frequent in reading and studying the Scriptures, make them the
matter of your daily meditations; lose no opportunity to acquaint your selves
therewith, or to wait upon Christ in the ways of his appointment. Let the word
of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, Col. 3.16. For it is the word and
institutions of Jesus Christ which are designed as conduit-pipes to convey the
spirit of sanctification into men's hearts. And therefore the word has the
promise of conversion annexed unto it, because the spirit of conversion works
in, and with, and by the word, Psalm. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is perfect,
converting the soul. Jam. 1.18. Of his own will he begat us with the word of
truth. As the word cannot work savingly without the concurrent operation of the
holy Ghost; So the holy Ghost does not ordinarily work without the word: For
the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that believes,
Romans 1.16. And when our Savior prays for them that should be gathered unto
him, it is under this expression, For them that shall believe on me, through
their word, Joh. 17.20.3. Take heed that you resist not the Spirit, by
quenching his motions, or rising up in contradiction against the convictions
that he is pleased to work upon your hearts. Readily hearken to his call, and
comply with him in the tenders of grace. If you repel him by the frowardness
and perverseness of your sp^rits, you know not when he will return, Joh. 3.8.
Take therefore the Apostles advice, Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the holy Spirit of
God, whereby you are sealed unto the day of redemption.

Direct. 3. If you would be knit unto Jesus, and so have an interest in him,
endeavor after the uniting grace of faith in his blood; cast your selves upon
his righteousness for salvation, according to the proposals of the Gospel:
Receive him for your Redeemer, as he is tendered therein: Believe in the name of
the Lord Jesus, Joh. 6.29. This is the work of God, that you should believe on
him whom he has sent; i. e. It is a work exceedingly acceptable unto God; it
is the great work that he requires, to bring you unto his Son; that you may
have life through his blood. It is that work, that makes up the conjunction
betwixt him and your souls. And therefore what is attributed in one place unto
union with Christ, is in another place ascribed unto faith, Romans 8.1. There is
no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Joh. 3.18. He that believes
on him is not condemned. Why? Because it is faith which makes up the union; by
believing on Christ we are implanted into him. And therefore take the word of
direction, Jo. 12.36. Believe in the light, that you may be the children of
light; betake your selves by faith unto Christ, that you may be found in him.
And to that purpose be frequent in meditation upon those encouragements, which
God has given unto sinners to quicken them to believe on the name of his Son,
and to help against the misgivings of their own hearts. I will instance only in
five.

1. It is the command of God, that which he has left in special charge upon
men's souls, to come unto Christ, that they may be saved. And therefore it
evidently follows that he is willing you should believe; for it is that which
he mainly desires, that his will be done, that his precepts be observed. Can
you imagine that God should give you a strict commandment, backed with many
arguments and motives, to the observance of it, and yet be loath you should
obey that commandment? This is his commandment, that we should believe on the
name of his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 3.23.

2. God sent his Son into the world upon this very errand and business, that he
might draw sinners unto him, in order to their salvation: And the Lord Jesus
took our nature upon him, and was obedient unto the death, the accursed death
of the cross, to this very end and purpose, that sinners might come unto him,
and obtain eternal redemption through his blood. And can it ever enter into
your hearts to think, that God is not willing to accomplish what he has
designed to bring about? or that Christ is not willing to attain the end of his
sufferings? What was the Fathers design in sending Christ into the world? Why,
that we might live through him, and that he might be a propitiation for our
sins? 1 John 4.9, 10. Wherefore has he published the Gospel of Christ, and
revealed the glad tidings of salvation through him? Why, These things are
written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and
that believing ye might have life through his name, Joh. 20.31. To what end did
our Savior leave the bosom of his Father, and sojourn amongst us, and bear the
weight of his fathers indignation? Mark what account himself gives of it, Jo.
12.46. I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believes in me should
not abide in darkness. And v 47. I came not to judge the world, but to save the
world. And speaking of his death under the fimilitude of lifting up the brazen
serpent in the wilderness, v. 32. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will
draw all men unto me.

3. God has left upon record many precious promises, on purpose to invite
sinners unto Christ^ from which none are excluded, but such as shut out
themselves, by refusal of the grace which is tendered in them. And they are
promises of such extent and comprehensiveness, as may be sufficient to answer
all the objections of a man's spirit against believing in Jesus, Joh. 3.15.
Whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life. Act.
13.39. By him all that believe are justified, from all things, from which ye
could not be justified by the Law of Moses. But will the sinner object, I am
altogether unworthy to come unto the Son of God. Why Sirs, It is the due sense
of our unworthiness that does fit us for the ready reception of him, and
addressing our selves unto him, that we may by his righteousness be made
worthy. Art thou apprehensive of the necessity of being partaker of his death,
and the merit thereof? Do thou hunger and thirst after the enjoyment of him?
See then the promise or invitation, Isa. 55.1, 2, 3. Ho every one that
thirsts come ye to the waters; and he that has no money [that has no
desert, or worthiness of his own, to commend him unto God, or whereby to
purchase the least dram of favour] come ye, buy and eat; yea come, and buy wine
and milk, without money, and without price, etc. O but, will the sinner reply,
I have long stood out against the calls of Christ, and will he now receive me
graciously if I come unto him? Why, Hear what he says, Isa. 57.17, 18, 19. For
the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him; I hid me, and was
wroth; and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart; i. e. He withstood
chastizement, which is one of the loudest, and most awakening calls; in the
time of his distress he sinned yet more against the Lord: Instead of returning,
he held fast deceit, and refused to return: He went on frowardly, that is,
perversely, and stubbornly against all the dealings of God. And yet what
follows, v. 18? I have seen his ways, and will heal him; I will lead him
also, and restore comfort to him, and to his mourners. One would have expected
it thus rather, I have seen his ways and I will confound him, I will never
more have any pity, or compassion upon him. Nay, but faith the gracious God, at
length he mourns for sin, and is humbled for his iniquity, and my bowels are
turned within me, my repentings are kindled together: He is coming toward me,
and I will go forth to meet him; I will surely have mercy upon him; I will
pardon him, and guide him in the way of consolation and salvation. But what
does this concern me, will the heart of a sinner be apt to suggest? Am I
comprised in this word of comfort? Yes, if thou mournest for sin, and desire
to give up thy self unto Christ, and to God by him: For it is a promise made
without limitation; these words are intended for the henefit both of Jews and
Gentiles, v. 19. I create the fruit of the lips, peace, peace, [ i. e. My word
shall be the means to convey great peace, spiritual peace, perfect peace,
lasting, yea everlasting peace] to him that is afar off, and to him that is
near; i. e. to the Jews, who were a people nigh unto God; and to the Gentiles
when they shall be gathered to the Church, though at that time they were afar
off; and I will heal him, says the Lord. But, will the sinner say, I have
backsliden from Christ, I have made many promises and faultered in the
performance of them; I have deeply revolted, after frequent vows and
protestations of obedience; and shall such a wretch, as I am, find favor?
Observe the words of invitation and promise, Jer. 3.12. Return thou backsliding
Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you: for I
am merciful, says the Lord, and will not keep anger for ever. Only acknowledge
thine iniquity, etc. Hos. 14.4. I will heal their backslidings, I will love
them freely. I might be very copious upon this particular, but must forbear.
Get a catalogue of these rich and gracious promises; often read them, and study
them; pray them over to God, and have them always in readiness, to produce in
answer to all the suggestions of Satan, and the fears and despondencies of your
own unbelieving hearts.

4. There are sundry examples in the Scripture, of the most heinous
transgressors, who upon their believing on the Son of God, and returning by
repentance unto the most high, have found grace in his sight: and they are
recorded unto this purpose, that they may be encouragements for us to be
believe also. Our first parents were the most wilful offenders; that sinned
against the greatest light, and the clearest manifestation of the will of God:
who by one sinful act were guilty of the murder of all the generations to come.
The sin of our first parents ( and our sin in them, Romans 5.12.) was not one
single act of disobedience; but a twisted, complicated, or compounded sin, that
carried many horrid offenses in the bowels of it: There was cursed blasphemy,
and unbelief, a giving God the lie, and not crediting his word; monstrous
idolatry, in believing the suggestions of the devil, and hearkening to the
instigations of the Prince of darkness; devilish pride, and discontent with
that blessed condition wherein the Lord had placed man upon the earth; and
affecting to be equal unto God himself; unparalled cruelty, (as before)
venturing upon the insupportable wrath of God, to the destruction of themselves
and all their offspring: It was a sin committed in a most presumptuous manner,
and had abundance of ingratitude, wrapped up in the nature of it: And yet the
Lord was pleased to preach the Gospel unto them; and it is charitably supposed,
that they found grace and forgiveness upon the terms of the Gospel: However, it
is plain in the case of the woman, who was first in the transgression; so much
may be collected, from the enmity put in her heart, against the devil, Genesis
3.15.

Take the example of Manasseth King of Israel, who was a gross Idolater, and a
witch, and a conjurer, and shed innocent blood without measure, till he had
filled Jerusalem from one end to the other; and his wickedness was not confined
to his own person, but he made Judah to sin, 2 King. 21.3, 6, 16. And yet when
he humbled himself, and sought the Lord, and prayed, he was entreated of him,
and heard his supplication. 2 Chronicles. 33.12, 13. The Apostle Peter directed the
offers of salvation upon repentance, unto the crucifiers of the Lord Christ;
who denied the holy one, and the just, and desired a murderer to be granted
unto them, and killed the Prince of life, Act. 3.14, 15, 16, 19, 26. Not to
multiply instances of this nature, Take only further that of Saul who was a
persecutor, and a blasphemer, and injurious; who compelled others to blaspheme,
and was exceedingly mad against the Church; and yet upon his application to
Christ he obtained mercy, 1 Timothy 1.13. But what are these things to me, will
the drooping soul say? How shall I be assured to find the like grace and
compassion? Why mind it, These examples are recorded for thy sake; and to this
very intent, that thou may take encouragement to cast thy burden upon the
Lord, and expect to find the same abundant grace, as others have found before
thee. See what the Apostle says of himself, 1 Timothy 1.16. For this cause, I
obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all
long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him to
life everlasting; q. d. It was the design of Christ in showing mercy upon me,
to make it appear that he is ready to save others also; even the greatest
sinners, if they will come unto him, that they may be saved. Significat statim
ab initio Deum proposuisse tale exemplar, quod tanquam ex illustri excelsoque
theatro conspici posset; ne quis diffideret paratam sibi fore ven^am modo fide
accederet ad Christum. Et certe praevenitur nostra omnium diffidentia, dum
ejus, quam qu^remus grattae typum in Paulo sic videmus expressum. Calv. in loc.
To prove that we are thus to make use of these examples of mercy, consult that
passage of David, Psalm. 32.5. Thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. And then
it follows; ver. 6. For this shall every one that is Godly, pray unto thee,
etc. See also Psalm 34.6, 8.

5. The last encouragement to faith, which I shall mention to be considered is
this, That God is more eminently, and more abundantly glorified in the
salvation of such as believe in the Lord Jesus, than in the condemnation of the
impenitent and unbelievers. And therefore, without dispute, he is willing that
sinners should come unto the Son, that they may have life through his blood:
for it tends to the eminent advancement of his glory, which is the principal
end which he aims at, in all his dispensations, and undertakings. Can you be
so sottish, as to entertain a thought in your hearts, that God is not willing
to have his name glorified? Why, this is specially brought to pass, by our
believing in Christ, and salvation upon his account; above what is wrought in
the destruction of the wicked. God is really glorified in the vessels of wrath,
fitted for destruction: but he does make known the riches of his glory in the
vessels of mercy which he before prepares unto glory, Romans 9, 22, 23. A little
to make it appear, that it is so in very deed; because it is a comfortable
point, and may be improved as a wonderful encouragement, to strengthen the
hands of faith, in taking hold of Christ; I will open it in three particulars.

God is glorified in the salvation of such as believe, above what he is in the
condemnation of unbelievers. 1. More ways. 2. In more of his attributes, and
excellencies. 3. In some of his attributes, more transcendently.


1. He is glorified more ways, that is, both actively and passively: passively
on Christ their surety, and actively in themselves and him. God is glorified
upon the ungodly in their eternal desolation and ruin, i. e. they are subjects
upon whom he does show forth his power, justice, and severity, and the like;
out of whom he does fetch glory to his name, Ezekiel. 28.22. But believers are
active instruments to render glory unto the God of heaven. Their tongues will
make mention of the praises of his name, and sing aloud of his righteousness,
Psalm. 149.6. Their hearts will be filled with an holy admiration of his
greatness, and majesty, and wonderful goodness in their redemption, 2 These.
1.10. He will be glorified in his Saints, and admired in them that do believe.
Their lives also will be filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by
Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God, Phil. 1.11.

2. God is glorified upon believers in more of his attributes, and
excellencies. Peculiarly, in his free grace, and tender mercy; which is the
attribute that he delights to magnify, and takes singular pleasure in the
exercise of, Mic. 7.18. God does show forth his truth, and justice, and declare
his power, and holiness, in the ruin of the ungodly; but there are no prints
or footsteps of his free grace, and compassion: Their portion is wrath without
mixture, Rev. 14.10. But what says the Prophet of them that are saved? Mark
that notable Text, Isa. 63.7, 8. I will mention the loving kindnesses of the
Lord, and the praises of the Lord, according to all that the Lord has bestowed
upon us: and the great goodness toward the house of Israel, which he has
bestowed on them, according to his mercies, and according to the multitude of
his loving kindnesses. For he said, surely they are my people, children that
will not lie: So he was their Savior. Here is a discovery of grace, rich
inexpressible grace; herein is manifest the goodness of God, nay, the great
goodnesses of the Lord; here is mercy, and loving kindness, yea, and a
multitude of mercies, and loving-kindnesses.

3. In some of his attributes, God is more transcendently glorified, viz. in
his wisdom, and power. It was a work of infinite skill and wisdom, to find out
a way to redeem lost sinners from the jaws of eternal death: to execute
vengeance upon the transgression, and yet to save the transgressors. O the
depth of the riches of the wisdom, and knowledge of God! Romans 11.33. It is a
work of greater power, to pull a soul out of the hands of the Devil, than to
give him over to the will of Satan, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. Nay, the very justice of God
is better satisfied by believers, through their surety, than in the damnation
of such as perish in their unbelief. Here the price paid is the death of a
creature, but there the precious blood of the Son of God, as of a Lamb without
blemish, and without spot, 1 Pet. 1.18. The wicked that perish are ever
satisfying, and have never given full satisfaction, for the wrong which they
have done; their debt is paying, as it were, by driblets: But in the behalf of
believers, the work is completed and finished; the utmost farthing was paid
together upon the nail; and there is nothing further to be demanded. For by one
offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. Now
if God be more glorified in the salvation of such as are in Christ; undoubtedly
he is willing that you should come unto Christ; and is ready to receive you
when ye come. So much for the third direction.

Direct. 4. To stir you up to a closure with this advice, and diligent
prosecution of this work of getting into Christ; Often revolve in your
thoughts, and lay seriously to heart this following consideration, viz. That if
you perish for ever in a separation from the Lord Jesus, and for want of being
in him, that you may partake of his righteousness, it will wholly proceed from
your own default, and your blood will be upon your own heads. And what anguish
and horror will this bring to thy conscience in the day of accounts, to bethink
thy self thus, I might have been saved by the blood of the covenant, but I
would not; and now I must lie bound for ever in the chains of darkness? For it
is a sinners willful rejecting of the tenders of mercy upon the terms of the
Gospel, which is the cause of his falling short of the mercy tendered. Although
it is Gods free grace, and not man's free will, that does conduct believers un o
the kingdom of heaven; yet it is the perverseness and obstinacy of the will of
unbelievers, which hinders their deliverance from the damnation of hell, Jo.
5.40. Ye will not come unto me, that ye might have life, Hos. 5.4. They will
not frame their doings, to turn unto the Lord, Ezekiel. 18.31. Why will ye die, O
house of Israel? q. d. If you are destroyed for ever, you may thank your
selves; you are the blameworthy cause of your own eternal ruin, by refusing
the terms on which salvation is offered. And I pray think of it often, what an
unspeakable torment it will be to thy spirit for ever, to reflect upon this
very thing; I have been wooed and entreated to lay down the arms of my
rebellion, and to submit to the government of Christ, that I might be saved,
and I would not? How often has the spirit of God strived with me, and I still
resisted the Holy Ghost? The word of God has called upon me, and I have broken
through the convictions of the word. With what confusion will thou be filled,
when the Lord Jesus shall say unto thee, how often would I have gathered thee
into the number of my servants, and thou would not be gathered! and now
depart from me thou accursed wretch into everlasting fire, Mat. 23 37.

Thus I have ended the first head of exhortations, directed unto the wicked,
who are yet strangers unto Christ.

2. Let me speak unto the godly, who are through rich mercy and grace ingraffed
into Christ, and made partakers of this privilege of union with the Son. Be
exhorted. 1. To be much in blessing the name of God, for his signal, saving,
and differencing mercy. Adore him for advancing you to this high dignity.
Behold what manner of love, the Father has bestowed upon you, that you should
be called the sons of God! Nay, that he should take you into fellowship with
his Son Jesus Christ, and intimately knit you unto him! 1 Jo. 3.1. Will you
bless God for temporal mercies, and not be ravished with the contemplation of
this super-eminent blessing? Certainly, my brethren, eternity itself will be
little enough to admire the wonderful and unsearchable grace of the Lord. 2. Be
exhorted, moreover, rightly to improve the consideration of this unspeakable
gift. And that especially in these six cases.

1. Improve it in case of transgressions, to humble you, and to fill you with
an holy shame and self-abhorrence in the sense of your miscarriages. Not only
to fill you with hatred against sin, but with a loathing and detestation of
your selves, because of sin. Let your thoughts be set on work in this
Evangelical manner; Has God advanced me to this high dignity, and shall I be
so unworthy as to rise up against him? Am I a person closely joined unto
Christ, and in covenant with God through Christ, and shall I walk contrary to
his commandments? O the vileness and baseness of this heart of mine, which has
thus drawn me to sin against such a gracious Lord and Redeemer! This is the
great aggravation of sin; and thus will the kindness of God work upon you, if
you have any principles of ingenuity. As Lemuel's Mother pleads with him, Prove.
31.2. What my Son! and what the son of my womb! and what the son of my vows!
Give not thy strength unto women, etc. So may the Lord plead with his own
people, when they turn aside unto folly. What you my children, whom I have
taken so near unto my self! You that I have called out of the world, and
married to my only begotten Son! What, you that are in Christ, the men of my
covenant, and my intimate acquaintance! will you thus rebel against me? Is this
a good requital of all the love that I have showed you, and the great things
which I have done for you? See how this consideration melts the hearts of
believers into Evangelical sorrow and causes them to lie down in their shame,
Ezekiel. 16.62, 63. And I will establish my covenant with thee, and thou shall
know that I am the Lord: That thou may remember, and be confounded, and
never open thy mouth more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward
thee for all that thou have done, says the Lord God.

2. In case of temptations, Improve it to strengthen you, and to make you
resolute in opposing all solicitations unto sin. Say within thy self, Am not I
knit unto Jesus Christ, and shall I follow the guidance of the prince of
darkness? Shall I defile my soul with the pollutions of sin, who am taken into
oneness, and fellowship with my Lord and Savior? Far be it from me to close
with this motion, to commit any of these abominations. Sicut exultatis de
nobilitatis vestrae titulo, ita discere debetis quid agendo unusquisque vestrum
fiat Rex. Quod vobis ita breviter definiam. Regem te omnium esse facit si
Christus regnet in te Rex namque regende dictus est. Si ergo and in te animus
regnat, and corpus obtemperat; Si concupiscentias carnis sub jugum imperii tui
mittas, si vitiorum gentes sobrietatis tuae fraenis arctioribus premas, merito
Rex diceris, qui te recte regere noveris. Orig. hom. 6. in cap. 5. Jedic.
Let the swine wallow in the mire, and the dogs return to their vomit; shall I
stain my garments, which have been washed in the blood of the Lamb? Should such
a man as I flee? said Nehemiah, cap. 6.11. So should thou argue the case
with thine own heart; Shall such a one as I turn aside unto sin, and follow
after lying vanities? I am dead to sin, and married to my Redeemer, and how
shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? Romans 6.2.

3. In case of wants and necessities, Improve this consideration to support
you. Surely you shall not fail of every thing that is for your good, if you are
knit to Christ: for thereby you have a right to all things; And will the just
God withold from you that which is your right? Take therefore no thought, and
be not of a doubtful mind. Is not the Lord Jesus a greater gift, than food, and
raiment, and other outward conveniences? Has God knit you to his Son, and
thereby secured your everlasting welfare? and will he deny you the necessaries
for your present subsistence? Has he united you to the Captain of your
salvation, to guide you to heaven? and will not he give you enough, to bear the
charges of your journey thither? Let no such distrustful thoughts enter into
your hearts; for if he has given Christ for you, and implanted you into him,
certainly he will withold no good thing from you. See but with what
confidence the Apostle teaches us to reason, Romans 8.32. He that spared not his
own son, but delivered him up for us all: How shall he not with him also freely
give us all things? q.d. It cannot be otherwise. If you have a right to Christ,
God will deny you nothing, that is beneficial for you. How can you imagine the
contrary? Do you think he will suffer them that are members of his dearly
beloved Son, to lack any thing, which he knows to be fit for them? Why, your
heavenly Father knows what you have need of. So that be careful for nothing
[with an anxious, heart-dividing, (...), a dividenda and distrahenda mente --
Animum nunc huc nunc dividit illuc, and rapit in parts varias. Virgil.
or distrustful care] but i^ every thing by prayer and supplication, with
thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God, Phil. 4.6. Trust in the
Lord, and do good: So shall thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shall be
fed, Psalm. 37.3.

4. In case of sore afflictions, Improve it to comfort you. Make use of it as a
cordial against fainting fits, in the day of tribulation and adversity. For if
you are knit to Christ, be sure that the Lord will lay upon you no more than
you shall be enabled to bear: Christ himself will see to it, that you be not
hurt by your distresses; for you are his members. And do you think he will
suffer any thing that is evil to befall the members of his own body, further
than he knows it will conduce to their greater advantage? Why, In all your
afflictions he himself is afflicted, and he tenders your concernments as his
own: for you are one with him, Isa. 63.8, 9.

5. In case of doubts of Christ's forsaking you, Improve it to keep under and
silence your unbelieving surmises. Did the Lord Jesus take you into such
nearness unto himself; and will he, now you are near unto him, leave you
destitute of his loving kindness? Will he suffer his members to be torn from
him? It is a matter cannot be supposed. So that see to it, that thou be indeed
in Christ; and then fear not, for thou shall not be ashamed: neither be thou
confounded, for thou shall not be put to shame, etc. For thy maker is thine
husband, (the Lord of hosts is his name) and thy redeemer; the holy one of
Israel, the God of the whole earth shall he be called. Isa. 54.4, 5.

6. Improve it to quicken you to holiness of conversation. Make use of it as an
argument to enlarge your hearts in running the steps of Gods commandments, and
to make you strict and diligent in your obedience unto him. Live above the
world: walk not as the generality of people walk: Put on the Lord Jesus: Labor
to be like unto him; for you are one with him. Let no difficulties move you
from your course of godliness. Say often within your selves, Has God
vouchsafed to give his Son to me, and shall I think any thing too dear to part
Qui gratus futurus est, statim dum recipit, de reddendo cogitat. Sen* de Benef.
with for his sake? Has the Lord Jesus taken me into such a near relation unto
himself, and shall not I love him, and serve him with all my strength? Surely
to this precious Savior I will cleave, and his pleasure, I will do, and
nothing shall separate betwixt my soul and him. Take the exhortation in the
words of S. Paul, Col. 2.6, 7. As ye have therefore received Jesus Christ the
Lord, so walk ye in him: rooted, and built up in him, and stablished in the
faith, as ye have been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving.

3. Let me add but a few particulars, by way of advice and exhortation to all,
and so we will conclude our discourse upon this subject. If in order to the
salvation of sinners by Christ, they must be united to him, and ingraffed in
Christ; Then be exhorted all of you.

1. To learn the spiritual lessons, which are from this point to be learned. 2.
To practice the duties, that are hereupon to be practiced.
1. Learn the lessons which are from this doctrine to be learned: And they are
principally two, which I shall commend unto you, besides what I gave you under
the use of information.

1. Learn from hence, The necessity of regeneration in order to eternal life.
Except you are persons born again of the Spirit, you cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. Except you be quickened by the holy Ghost, it is impossible you
should be blessed in the presence of the Lord. Why? Because you must have the
Son, you must be knit unto Christ; and it is in the day of regeneration that
the knot is tied, whereby the Lord Jesus and a Christian are joined together.
It is the grace of regeneration and conversion that removes a sinner from his
own bottom, and builds him upon the Mediator, as upon a sure foundation: as
has been largely opened. So that, believe this point, and work it powerfully,
by meditation, and prayer, upon your own hearts, That no regeneration, no
salvation. It was the doctrine wherewith our Savior began his Sermon to
Nicodemus, and he speaks of it as a matter of great concernment to be
studied, Joh. 3.3. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born again,
he cannot see the kingdom of God. Mark how the assertion is strengthened with a
double asseveration, to note how hard a thing it is to convince a sinner
effectually of this matter; and how nearly it does concern us to be thus
convinced. It is as if Christ had said, The children of men are apt to think
otherwise: they hope to get into heaven upon the account of their notional
knowledge, and common privileges, and moral righteousness, and the like: But
it cannot be, I tell thee it cannot be; take it upon my word. Do your hearts
question it? Verily it cannot be, verily it is impossible that any man should
be saved, except he be sanctified.

Whence, you will say, does arise this, absolute necessity of a man's being
born again? I answer: It does arise from these four things.

1. From the stedfastness and unalterableness of the purpose of God. Whom he
has predestined unto life, he has determined to lead thither, through the
gate of regeneration. So that if ever you get to heaven without partaking of
this grace, it must be by the change of the decree and purpose of God; which is
in its own nature unchangeable; for the counsel of the Lord stands fast for
ever. And observe the tenor of his purpose touching the way of life, 2 These.
2.13. God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation, through
sanctification of the Spirit. Although God does not elect or save any of the
children of men, for their holiness; yet he does elect them unto holiness, that
they may be saved.

2. The absolute necessity of regeneration does appear, from the infinite
holiness and purity of the God of heaven: who will never maintain any converse,
or fellowship with such as lie dead in their sins; nor indeed is it possible,
they should have communion with God, till they are washed and sanctified. An
unsanctified mind cannot behold him, an unholy will cannot enjoy him, and
unholy affections can take no delight or complacency in him. My brethren, when
persons are called into the state of the favor of God, they are called also
unto fellowship with him: Now, what communion has light with darkness? What
friendly intercourse can there be, betwixt a God of incomprehensible purity,
and such whose spirits are nothing but sinks of filthiness. First you must be
made again after the image of God, and so fitted for acquaintance with the most
high: for God is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, and he hates all the
workers of it, Hab. 1.13. Psalm. 5.4, 5.

3. Without a principle of grace planted in the heart, there can be no fruits
of new obedience brought forth in the life: which are of indispensable
necessity to our getting safe to heaven. Such as are saved by the Lord, must be
serviceable unto him; for Christ will judge us hereafter according to our
conversations here. As a man sows, that he shall also reap, Rev. 2.23. Gal.
6.7, 8. Now except you be regenerate, you cannot walk in a course of new
obedience. First there must be a good treasure in the heart, before it can be
productive of what is good in the life. As the principles are, so the practice
will be, Mat. 12.33, 34, 35. Besides, God doith judge of men's works and deeds,
by the frame of their hearts in the doing of them. He does search the heart,
and try the reins, that he may give to every man according to his ways, and
according to the fruit of his doings, Jer. 17.10.

4. The indispensable necessity of regeneration does arise, from the influence
it has to unite a sinner unto Christ: without having of whom, there is no
partaking of life through his blood. The day of regeneration is the day of
espousals, between the Lord Jesus and his people. It is that which helps to
make the marriage betwixt them: For if any man be in Christ, he is a new
creature, 2 Cor. 5.17.

This is the first Lesson, I would from hence commend to your study and
meditation.

2. Learn from this point of a Believers union with Christ, What is the
influence of faith in the justification of a sinner; or in what sense it is
said to justify us in the sight of God. Not by any inherent worth and virtue
in it self; but because it is the bond that knitteth a sinner to Christ, by the
imputation of whose righteousness we are made righteous. If we are justified,
it is freely by the grace of God, through the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus: Only the grace of faith is the instrument to bring us unto Christ, and
the bond of our union with him, that so we may partake of that redemption,
Sicut olim in deserto serpens aeneus in ligno, punctis a serpentibus medebatur,
non omnibus sed iis qui in illum aspiciebant: Non quod aspectus medicamentum
esset, sed quod virtus serpentis per aspectum in iis sanitatem operaretur; Ita
Christas in cruce exaltatus virtutem passionis suae in iis exercet qui credunt
in ipsum. Tolet. in Romans 3.
Romans 3.24, 25. Faith does not justify a sinner, as the hand of a labourer
does enrich him; but as the hand of a beggar, Non ut manus laborantis, sed ut
manus mendicantis. Fidem dicimus justificare correlative, hoc est, per modum
instrumenti quod justitiam evangelicam extra nos in Christo constitutam
apprehendit, and nobis applicat. Wendel. system. majus.
who is enriched by a free gift, which he receives with his hand. We are
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by virtue of the satisfaction
which he has made; faith only does knit us legally unto Christ, and implant us
into him; that we may receive the benefit of that satisfaction, 1 Cor. 6.11.
Act. 13.39. Romans 5.1, 9, 10.

2. Set upon the discharge of those duties, which are upon this account to be
discharged. That is to say,

1. Bless the Lord for the manifestation of this great mystery, and that your
lot is fallen in such times, and places, when and where it is discovered, and
set open before your eyes. For, as the Apostle speaks, It is a mystery which
has been kept hid from ages, and generations, but is now made manifest unto
his Saints: To whom God would make known, what is the riches of the glory of
this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you the hope of glory. Whom
we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may
present every man perfect in Christ Jesus, Col. 1.26, 27, 28.

2. Adore the condescension and grace of our Lord Jesus: who was pleased to
humble himself to come down to us, that we might be exalted unto a state of
oneness with him. Especially if thou art partaker of this grace, how should thy
heart be ravished in the contemplation of it? Thou should be ready to cry out
with an holy astonishment of Spirit, as David in another case, 2 Samuel 7.18. Who
am I, O Lord God, my Redeemer, and my Savior? Where is any loveliness in my
person? or what have I deserved at thy hands, that thou have brought me
hitherto?

3. Take heed to your selves, that you do not fall short of this grace and
privilege. Labor every day more and more to clear it up, to the consolation
of your hearts, that you have the Son, by being united unto the Son. And to
that purpose (besides what has been mentioned already) seriously weigh and
ponder these three further evidential properties of such as are in Jesus.

1. If you be knit unto Christ, you will be sharers with him in all his
concernments. You will be affected with his interest and affairs, as if it were
your own. If Christ be advanced, it will rejoice your hearts: and if his name
be dishonored, or his glory be ecclipsed, it will bring trouble and sadness
upon your spirits. If you are in Christ, you will join interests with him, and
you will have Amici sunt qui simul laetantur commodis and contristantur
adversis: quibus eadem bona and malae sunt; and qui sunt iisdem amici and
inimici.
common friends and enemies with the Lord Jesus. You will be able to say in a
measure with Paul, it matters not what becomes of my secular concernments, so
that Christ be magnified, Phil. 1.20. And with David, The reproaches of them
that reproached thee, fell upon me. And in another place, Do not I hate them
that hate thee, O Lord? Am not I grieved with them that rise up against thee? I
hate them with a perfect hatred, I count them mine enemies, Psalm. 139.21, 22.

2. If you are ingraffed into Christ, you will not walk in any way of
ungodliness whatsoever. For whosoever abides in him, sins not; i.e. he does
not sin allowedly and presumptuously, at the rate as wicked men sin. Compare 1 John 3.6. with 2 Samuel 22.22, 23.

3. Lastly, If you are united to the Son of God, you will not only readily
close with his word, but continue steadfast and unmovable therein unto the end,
Joh. 15.7. If you abide in me, and my words abide in you. 1 John 2.5. Whosoever
keeps his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected: Hereby we know
that we are in him. Whosoever keeps his word] that is, he that hides it as a
treasure in his heart; and walks by the guidance of it in his ways; and will
not part with the word, nor with the way of holiness therein prescribed,
notwithstanding all assaults and opp sitions of men and devils. In him verily
is the love of God perfected] i.e. then it does appear to be love of the right
kind; and then it has attained its end, which is the perfection of it: For to
this end is the grace of love planted in the hearts of Christ's seed, that they
may cheerfully obey his word and precepts, and stick close thereunto at all
times and seasons. Hereby we know that we are in him] that is, If we keep his
word, and steadfastly cleave unto Christ, and to the doctrines which he has
taught. For, as it is in the second Epistle of John, v. 9. Whosoever
transgresses and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God: He that
abides in the doctrine of Christ, he both has the Father and the Son.

Orig. hom. in Genesis cap. 19. Si vis amplecti, amplectere sapientiam, and dic
sapientiam sororem tuam esse; ut and sapientia dicat de te, Qui fecerit
voluntatem Patris mei qui est in coelis, hic meus and frater and soror and
matter est. Quae sapientia Jesus Christus Dominus noster est: cui est gloria and
imperium in secula seculorum. Amen.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader. By reason of the Authors absence from the Press, many
literal mistakes, and some errors in pointing have happened, for which a pardon
of course is expected. Such Errata as most disturb or alter the sense are here
noted.

Errata.
PAge 2. The quotation is by the Printer misplaced, p 6. l 6. for either r.
one, p. 22. l. 10 for compare r. comport, p. 36. l. 27. r. are, p. 37. l. 25.
and in some other places, for closs r. close, p. 40. l. 22. dele un- p. 61. l.
17. r. distinguished, p. 85. l. 26. r. into, p. 94. l. 29. r. him, p. 106. in
the quotation r. tentat, p. 118 l. 2. r. from, p. 135. l. 27. dele q.d. p. 136.
l. 23. r. Temporary, p. 137. l. 10. dele who: in the quotation r. testes, p.
149. l. 8. r. in both, l. 26. r. hungring: in the quotation r. unimur, p. 212.
l. 31. r. naturally, p. 219. l. 2. and l. 6 for might r. may, p. 239. l. 17. r.
the, p. 253. In the quotation r. tempore, p. 257. l. 28. r. exceptions, p. 263.
l. 26. r. we, l. 27. r. him. p. 277 l. 12. and p. 313. l. 16. r. principal, p.
344. l. 14. r. orderly, p. 394. l. 7. r. erect. p. 396. in the quotation r.
proximos.

Books to be sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Golden Bible on London Bridge.
MR. Sedgwick's Bowels of Mercy. fol. Tho. Taylor's Works, the first vol. fol.
2. An Exposition of Temptation, and Matthew. 4. verse 1. to the end of the
eleventh. 3. A Commentary on Titus. 4. David's Learning: A Comment upon Psalm.
32. 5. The Parable of the Sower, and of the Seed, upon Luke 8. and 4. Divine
Characters in two parts, distinguishing the Hypocrite in his best dress, by
Sam. Crook. B.D. A Learned Commentary or Exposition on the first Chapter of the
second Epistle to the Corinthians, by Richard Sibbs, D. D. fol. A Commentary on
the whole Epistle of St. Paul to the Ephesians, by Mr. Paul Bain, fol. A
practical Exposition on the third Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul to
the Corinthians, with the Godly Man's Choice; on Psalm. 4. ver. 6, 7, 8. By
Anthony Burgess, fol. The dead Saint, speaking to Saints and sinners living in
several Treatises. The first on 2 Samuel 24.10. The second on Cant. 4.9. The
third on John 1.50. The fourth on Isa. 58.2. The fifth on Exodus 15.11. By
Samuel Bolton, D.D. fol. Colloquia Mensalia, or Dr. Martin Luthers Divine
Discourses at his Table with Melancthon, and several others. Translated by
Henry Bell, fol. The view of the Holy Scriptures. By Hugh Broughton, fol.
Christianographia, or a Description of the multitude, and sundry sorts of
Christians in the world, not subject to the Pope. By Ephesians. Pagitt. fol. These
six Treatises following, are written by Mr. George Swinnock.
1. The Christian Man's Calling; or a Treatise of making Religion ones business,
in Religious Duties, Natural Actions, his Particular Vocation, his Family
Directions, and his own Recreation; to be read in Families for their
Instruction and Edification. The first Part. 2. Likewise a second Part; wherein
Christians are directed to perform their Duties, as Husbands and Wives, Parents
and Children, Masters and Servants, in the conditions of Prosperity and
Adversity. 3. The third and last part of the Christian Man's Calling. Wherein
the Christian is directed how to make Religion his business, in his dealings
with all Men, in the Choice of his Companions, in his carriage in good Company,
in bad Company, in solitariness, or when he is alone, on a Weekday from
morning to night, in visiting the sick on a Dying-bed; as also the means how a
Christian may do this, and some motives to it. 4. The Door of Salvation opened,
by the Key of Regeneration. 5. Heaven and Hell Epitomized: and the True
Christian Characterized. 6. The Fading of the Flesh, and the flourishing of
Frith: Or One cast for Eternity, with the only way to throw it well; all these
by George Swinnock M.A. Large Octavo's.
A learned Commentary on the fourth Chapter of the second Epistle of St. Paul
to the Corinthians, to which is added, First, A Conference between Christ and
Mary. Second. the Spiritual Man's Aim. Third: Emanuel, or Miracle of Miracles,
by Richard Sibbs, D. D. 4to. An Exposition of the five first Chapters of
Ezekiel, with useful observations thereupon, by Will. Greenhil, 4to. The
Gospel Covenant, or the Covenant of Grace opened: Preached in New- England, by
Pater Bulkeley, 4to. Gods Holy Mind touching Matters Moral; which himself
uttered in ten words, or ten Commandments; Also an Exposition on the Lords
Prayer, by Edward Elton, B. D. 4to. A plain and familiar Exposition of the ten
Commandments, by John Dod, 4to. Fiery Jesuit, or an Historical Collection of
the Rise, Increase, Doctrines, and Deeds of the Jesuits. Exposed to view for
the sake of London, 4to. Horologiographia Optica; Dialing Universal and
Particular, Speculative and Practical; together with the Description of the
Court of Arts, by a new Method, by Sylvanus Morgan, 4to. Praxis Medicinae, or
the Physicians Practice, wherein are contained all inward diseases from the
head to the foot, by Walter Bruel. Regimen Sanitatis Salerni, or the School of
Salerns Regiment of Health, containing Directions and Instructions for the
guide and government of Man's Life, 4to. Christ and the Covenant, the work and
way of Meditation; Delivered in ten Sermons, Large Octavo's. By William Bridge,
late of great Yarmouth. Heart-treasure: or a Treatise tending to fill and
furnish the head and heart of every Christian, with soul enriching treasure of
truths, graces, experiences and comforts, to help him in Meditation,
Conference, Religious Performances, Spiritual Actions, Enduring Afflictions,
and to fit him for all conditions, that he may live Holily, dye Happily, and go
to Heaven Triumphantly, by O. H. with an Epistle prefixed, by John Chester,
Large Octavo. A Glimpse of Eternity, by A. Caley. A Practical Discourse of
Prayer, wherein is handled the Nature and Duty of Prayer, by Tho. Cobbet. Of
Quenching the Spirit, the evil of it in respect both of its causes and effects,
discovered, by Theophilus Polwheile. Wells of Salvation opened, or Words
whereby we may be saved: with advice to Young Men: by Tho. Vincent. The
Re-building of London encouraged and improved in several Meditations: by Sam.
Rolls. The sure way to Salvations or a Treatise of the Saints Mystical Union
with Christ; wherein that great Mystery and Privilege is opened in the nature,
properties and the necessity of it by R. Stedman, M.A. The greatest loss, upon
Matthew. 16.26. By James Livesey, small Octavo's. Moses unvailed, by William
Guild. The Protestants Triumph, being an exact answer to all the sophistical
Arguments of Papists: By Chapter Drelincourt. A Defense against the fear of Death.
By Z. Crofton. Gods Sovereignty displayed. By William Geering. A sober
Discourse concerning the Interest of words in Prayer. The Godly Man's Ark or
City of refuge in the day of his distress, in five Sermons; with Mistress
Moors Evidences for Heaven By Ed. Calamy. The Almost Christian Discovered; or
the false Professor tried and cast. By Mr. Mead. Spiritual Wisdom improved
against temptation, by Mr. Mead. A Divine Cordial. A word of comfort for the
Church of God. A Plea for Alms, in a Sermon at the Spittle. The Godly Man's
Picture, drawn with a Scripturepensil. These four last were written by Tho.
Watson. The True bounds of Christian freedom; or a Discouse showing the extents
and restraints of Christian liberty, wherein the truth is settled, many errors
consuted; out of John 8. ver. 36. A Treatise of the Sacrament, showing a
Christians Privilege in approaching to God in Ordinances, duty in his
Sacramental approaches, danger if he do not sanctify God in them; both by Sam.
Bolton, D. D. The Lords Day enlivened, or a Treatise of the Sabbath, by Philip
Goodwin. The sinfulness of Sin, and the Fullness of Christ, two Sermons; by W.
Bridge. A serious Exhortation to a Holy Life, by Tho. Wadsworth. Ovid's
Metamorphosis Translated Grammatically, by J. Brinsley. Comfortable Crumbs of
refreshment, by Prayers, Meditations, Consolations and Ejaculations; with a
Confession of Faith, and sum of the Bible. Aurifodina Linguae Gallicae, or the
Golden Mine of the French Language opened, by Ed. Gostlin. Gent. The difference
between the spots of the Godly and Wicked, in four Sermons; by Jer. Buroughs.
Four Centuries of Select Hymns, collected out of Scripture, by Will. Barton.
The Doctrine of Repentance useful for these times, with two Sermons against
Popery, by Thomas Watson.
FINIS.

