STATE TRACTS: Being a Farther COLLECTION OF Several Choice Treatises Relating
to the GOVERNMENT. From the YEAR 1660. to 1689.

Now Published in a Body, to show the Necessity, and clear the Legality of the
Late REVOLUTION, and Our present Happy SETTLEMENT, under the Auspicious Reign
of Their MAJESTY'S, King William and Queen Mary.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by RICHARD BALDWIN near the Oxford-Arms in
Warwick Lane. MDCXCII.

PREFACE to the READER.
THE Main and Principal Design of making this following Collection, was to
preserve entire in this Second Volume some other Excellent Tracts, of equal
esteem and value with the former, (which made that Book so much obtain among
the Learned and Curious, as that the whole Impression of it is already near
sold;) And as it cannot but be very entertaining to Us in the reading of them,
who do yet so sensibly remember what we then felt, and looked for worse to fall
on us every day than other; so it will certainly be of great Benefit and
Advantage to our Posterities in future, who may considerably profit themselves
by our Misfortunes.

This is a Collection, that in the general will set forth the true and Legal
Constitution of our Ancient, Famous English Government, which, of all the
Countries in Europe, Memoirs of Philip de Comines, Knight. lib. 5. cap. 18. p. 334.
in Octavo. Printed 1674.
where I was ever acquainted, (says the Noble Lord of Argenton) is nowhere so
well managed, the People nowhere less obnoxious to Violence, nor their Houses
less liable to the Desolations of War, than in England, for there the
Calamities fall only upon the Authors.

'Twas a true Observation that this Great Man made of the Justice of our
Gallant Ancestors in his days; how miserable the Successive Generations have
deviated from the virtue of their steps, how much the strict Piety of their
Manners, and the noble Bravery of their Spirits, Tempers and Complexions, have
been enervated and dissolved by the later looseness, supine carelessness and
degeneracy, the present Age has great reason to bewail; and, it is hoped, that
those to come will be hereby cautioned to grow wiser and better by those past
Follies and Miscarriages.

In particular, Here will be seen the dangerous Consequences of keeping up a
standing Army within these Kingdoms in a time of Peace, without consent of
Parliament.

The Trust, Power and Duty of Grand Juries, and the great Security of
English-mens Lives, in their faithful discharge thereof.

The Right of the Subject to Petition their King for Redress of their Wrongs
and Oppressions, and that Access to the Sovereign ought not to be shut up in
case of any Distresses of his People.

The Spring of all our late private Mischievous Councils and Cabals, and the
Special Tools that were thought fittest for Preferment, to be employed (under a
color of Authority) to put all those concerted Designs in motion and execution.

The Parliament's Care in appointing a Committee to examine the Proceedings of
the Forward and Active Judges upon several Cases that were brought before them
of grand importance to the Commonweal, Peace and Safety of the Nation;
and the Resolution of the House of Commons (upon their Report) That the Judges
said Proceedings were Arbitrary and Illegal, destructive to Public Justice, a
high and manifest Violation of their Oaths, a Scandal to the Reformation, an
usurpation of the Legislative Power to themselves, and a means to subvert the
Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom.

And the several Grievances that this Nation has long been laboring under,
for the Advancement of Popery, Arbitrary Dominion, and the unmeasurable Growth
and Power of France.

There are likewise interspersed in this Volume several Matters of Fact
relating to the Male-Admininistration of Affairs in Scotland, under Duke
Lauderdale, and his Favorites; as also a Large and Faithful Account of the
late Earl of Argyle's Trial, Escape and Sentence, with diverse other things for
the better clearing of his Case.

In a word, This Collection will discover to us the Mysteries of the Monarchy
in the two Late Reigns, and the Abused Trust of Government in those Princes, by
a Dispencing Power both in Ecclesiastical and Civil Matters, to Tyrannize over
their Subjects; who in the mean while were taught, by some Passive-Obedience
and Non-Resistance Doctrine-holders, That all their Duty was tamely to submit
to, and patiently sigh under their daily Sufferings and Oppressions; and, I
think we bore them so long, till we were within one throw more of loosing all
our good old Laws and Constitutions, and even the Government it self.

Our Miseries were lately so great and many, (as you will find here) that it is
impossible for any one better and more fully to express them, than in the words
of a very Learned and Judicious Author, who has thus given us a just and
lively Representation of them.

Our Laws (says he) were trampled under foot, and upon the matter abolished, to
set up Will and Pleasure in their room, under the Cant and Pretense of
Dispencing Power. Our Constitution was overthrown by the Trick of New Charters,
and by closetting, and corrupting Members of Parliament. Men were required,
under pain of the highest Displeasure, to consent, Some Considerations about
the most proper way of raising Money in the present Conjuncture. Printed October.
1691.
and concur to the sacrificing their Religion, and the Liberty of their
Country. The worthiest, honestest, and bravest Men in England, had been
barbarously murdered; and to aggravate the Injustice which was done them, all
bad been varnished over with a Color of Law, and the Formality of Trials; not
unlike the Case of Naboth and Ahab. Those whom the Law declared Traitors, were,
in defiance of the National Authority, introduced into our Councils, and the
Conduct of Affairs put into their hands. Our Universities were invaded by open
Force; those who were in the lawful possession of the Government of Colleges,
turned out, and Papists sent thither in their room: And if that Attempt had
thoroughly prospered, the Churches and Pulpits would soon have followed. It were
vain to go about to enumerate Particulars. In a word, the Nation was undone.
All was lost. The Judges were suborned, or threatened to declare, that the King
was Master of all the Laws; and the Bishops were required to publish this
New-created Prerogative in all the Churches of England by the Mouths of the
Clergy; which when some of them refused to do, representing to the King, with
the utmost submission and modesty, that neither Conscience nor Justice
permitted them to do what he desired, they were prosecuted at Law, as if they
had been guilty of some great Crime. Letters were written and intercepted, by
which it appeared evidently, that the change of our Religion was determined,
and that Popery was to be brought in with all speed, least the opportunity
should be lost. And for the better compassing this pious design, our Civil, and
Parliamentary Rights were to be taken away, in Ordine ad Spiritualia. And when
the Nation, and those who were concerned for it, being terrified by the
greatness of the danger, would have compounded so far, as to have taken away
the Penal Laws against Papists, and so have set them upon a Level with other
English Subjects, provided the Test might have been continued, and the
Government secured from falling into the hands of that Faction, all such offers
were despised and rejected with scorn: Nor would any thing content the Bigotry
and Arbitrary humor of those who were then in the Saddle, less than the total
enslaving of the Nation, and the Re-establishment of that Idolatrous Religion,
from which our Ancestors had freed themselves with so much Bravery and
Generosity in the beginning of the last Century.

In this deplorable Condition, His then Highness the Prince of Orange found
these Kingdoms, when he came to relieve us from the greatest Oppressions; He
heard the Voice of the People, that earnestly invited him over to their Rescue,
and taking it (as undoubtedly it was) for the Voice of God, complied, and God
has made us All happy with the desired success.

Had the late King James stuck firmly to the Interests of his People, He would
thereby have easily secured his own; and, if they could have found He had had
(what he assured both Houses of Parliament, King's Speech to both Houses of
Parliament, May 30. 1685.
in a Speech he made to them) A true English heart, as Jealous of the Honor of
the Nation, as they themselves could be, he might have carried, by God's
Blessing, and their Assistance, (as he then said) the Reputation of it yet
higher in the World, than ever it had been in the time of any of his Ancestors:
He wanted not some about him (at the first especially) that would gladly have
given him faithful Counsel, Those that were able to advise him well, and were
real Friends to Him, as they were true to their Religion, and to the Interest
of their Country; and A Wise Man, says my incomparable Author, Memoirs of
Philip de Comines, lib. 3. c. 5. p. 159.
in a Prince's Retinue is a great Treasure, and Security to his Master; if one
has the Liberty to speak truth, and the other the Discretion to believe him.

But, unhappy Prince! He was resolvedly bent, by the force of his own
Superstition, the Power and Influence of the Priests and Jesuits that
continually attended on him, and the Directions from France, upon the total
Destruction of our Reformed Religion, (that Pestilent Northern Heresy) our
Liberties and our Properties, and was upon the point of effecting that
Tremendous Design; but God in his Wise Providence, with Infinite Mercy and
Compassion to this almost Ruined Land and People, saw it meet to give check to
that Imperial Carreer, with a hitherto shall thou come, and no further.

HE REMOVES KINGS, AND SETS UP KINGS.

In this Volume, you have a full Account of our late happy Revolution, with
almost all the steps and measures that were taken in it, and a justification of
our present Settlement. 'Twas God's doing and it ought ever to be mavelous in
our eyes.

We have now a King and Queen professing the same Faith with our selves; who,
as He came over to preserve our Dearest Interests, the Protestant Religion, and
to restore to Us our invaded Laws and Liberties, found the Nation generally
disposed to receive him, as the Mighty Deliverer, under God, of this Church and
State. The hand of Heaven conducted him with safety up to London, and all the
Kingdom called him Blessed; and in a sense of Joy and Gratitude to Him and His
Royal Consort, The whole Body of the Nation by their Representatives in
Parliament, have recognized and acknowledged Their present Majesty's to be
their Lawful and Rightful Sovereign Liege Lord and Lady. And how could we do
less than own them for our King and Queen, who by such an amazing turn, have
redeemed from Slavery both our Souls and Bodies, if we pretend to any value for
our Holy Religion, or any English Love of Liberty?

We have a King of an Extraordinary Personal Valor and Conduct, that has very
often already ventured his Life, and still resolves to despise all difficulties
and hazards himself, that His People may reap the fruit of them in their own
Peace and Prosperity, and that the Protestant Religion may be established to us
and our Children to future Generations.

The Queen is as Supreme in Her Virtue as in Her Dignity, and has showed a
most Eminent Resolution, as well as a most Prudent Care in all the
Administrations of the Government, when the Absence of the King has obliged
Her to take the Exercise of the Regal Power upon Her.

So that the Nation may now hope to enjoy a lasting Felicity from the Royal
Protection of both Their Majesty's, whose constant endeavors we are assured
from themselves, will be employed to procure and support the Interest and
Honor of it, and the Benefit, Safety, and Ease of their People; they thoroughly
understanding the Truth of Mons. Gourville's Observation (who had been long
enough here in England, Memoirs of what past in Christendom, from the War begun
1672. to the Peace concluded 1679. p. 33, 34.
to know the Humor of our Court, and People, and Parliaments, to conclude)
Qu'un Roy d'Angleterre qui veut estre l'homme de son peuple, est le plus Grand
Roy du monde, mais s'il veut estre quelque chose d'avantage, par Dieu il n'est
plus rien, i. e. That a King of England, who will be the MAN of his People, is
the greatest King in World; but if he will be something more -- he is nothing
at all. I may venture therefore to Prophesy, that this King and Queen will take
the same care to continue, as they have already done, to make themselves the
DARLING of their People; and no Good English Man can wish for more, but that
this King and Queen may long Reign, and that the Tripple Alliance of their
Sacred Majesty's, their Parliaments, and their People, may never be dissolved.

Little needs be said concerning the usefulness of such Collections as these,
THAT formerly published having received sufficient Approbation from Persons of
Learning and Knowledge. The benefit of them is the same with what redounds from
a true History, not of Battles and Sieges, Births, Marriages, and Deaths of
Princes, which are temporary and momentary things, but of the Legal Government
of a Nation, struggling with Arbitrary Power and Illegal Proceedings, so far
forth, as it was invaded within the time mentioned in the Title.

A CATALOGUE OF THE TRACTS Contained in This Second Volume.
1. THE Earl of Clarendon's Speech about disbanding the Army, September 13.
1660. Fol. 1 2. The State of England, both at home and abroad, in order to the
Designs of France, considered. 6 3. Of the Fundamental Laws, or Politic
Constitution of this Kingdom. 22 4. London's Flames revived: Or, an Account of
several Informations exhibited to a Committee appointed by Parliament, Sept.
25. 1666. to inquire into the burning of London. With several other
Informations concerning other Fires in Southwark, Fetter-Lane, and elsewhere.
27 5. Votes and Addresses of the Honorable House of Commons assembled in
Parliament, made 1673. concerning Popery, and other Grievances. 49 6. A Letter
from a Parliament Man to his Friend concerning the Proceedings of the House of
Commons this last Session, begun the 13th of October, 1675. 53 7. A Speech made
by Sir William Scroggs, one of His Majesty's Sergeants at Law, to the Right
Honorable the Lord Chancellor of England, at his admission to the Place of one
of His Majesty's Justices of the Court of Common Pleas. 56 8. A Discourse upon
the Designs, Practices and Councels of France. 59 9. An Answer to a Letter
written by a Member of Parliament in the Country, upon the Occasion of his
reading of the Gazette of the 11th of December, 1679. wherein is the
Proclamation for further proroguing the Parliament till the 11th of November
next ensuing. 67 10. The Right Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury's Speech in
the House of Lords, March 25. 1679. 71 11. The Instrument or Writing of
Association that the true Protestants of England entered into in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth. 73 12. The Act of Parliament of the 27th of Queen Elizabeth in
Confirmation of the same. 74 13. A Word without doors, concerning the Bill for
Succession. 76 14. A Collection of Speeches in the House of Commons in the Year
1680. 81 15. A Copy of the Duke of York's Bill. 91 16. Some particular Matters
of Fact relating to the Administration of Affairs in Scotland under the Duke of
Lauderdale. 93 17. The Impeachment of the Duke and Duchess of Lauderdale, with
their Brother the Lord Hatton, presented to his Majesty by the City of
Edinburgh. The matters of fact particularly relating to the Town of Edinburgh,
humbly offered for His Majesty's information. 96 18. His Majesty's Declaration
for the dissolving of His late Privy Council, and for constituting a New One,
made in the Council Chamger at White Hall, April 20. 1679. 99 19. The M^ssage
from the King, by Mr. Secretary Jenkins, to the Commons on the 9th of November,
1680. 102 20. The Address to His Majesty from the Commons, on Saturday the 13th
of November, 1680. Ibid. 21. The Address of the Commons in Parliament to His
Majesty, to remove Sir George Jeffreys out of all public Offices. 103 22. His
Majesty's Message to the Commons in Parliament relating to Tangier. 104 23. The
Humble Address of the Commons assembled in Parliament, presented to His
Majesty, on Monday the 29th of November, 1680. in answer to that Message. ibid.
24. The Humble Address of the House of Commons, presented to His Majesty on
Tuesday the 21st of December, 1680. in answer to His Majesty's Gracious Speech
to both Houses of Parliament, upon the 15th day of the same December. 107 25.
The Report of the Committee of the Commons appointed to examine the Proceedings
of the Judges, etc. 109 26. The Report from the Committee of the Commons in
Parliament, appointed by the Honorable House of Commons, to consider of the
Petition of Richard Thompson of Bristol, Clerk, and to examine Complaints
against him. And the Resolution of the Commons in Parliament upon this Report,
for his Impeachment for High Crimes and Misdemeanors, on Friday the 24th of
December, 1680. 116 27. Articles of Impeachment of Sir William Scroggs, Chief
Justice of the Court of King's Bench, by the Commons in Parliament assembled in
their own Name, and in the name of all the Commons of England, of High Treason,
and other great Crimes and Misdemeanors. 119 28. The Humble Petition of the
Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London,
in Common Council assembled, on the 13th of January, 1680. to the King's Most
Excellent Majesty, for the sitting of the Parliament prorogued to the 20th then
instant, together with the Resolutions, Orders, and Debates of the said Court.
122 29. Vox Patriae, Or the Resentments and Indignation of the Freeborn
Subjects of England against Popery, Arbitrary Government, the Duke of York, or
any Popish Successor; being a true Collection of the Petitions and Addresses
lately made from diverse Counties, Cities and Buroughs of this Realm, to their
Respective Representatives, chosen to serve in the Parliament held at Oxford,
March 21, 1680. 125 30. The Speech of the Honorable Henry Booth, Esquire at
Chester, the 2d of March, 1680/1, (...) his being elected One of the Knights of
the Shire for that County to serve in the Parliament summoned to meet at Oxford
the 21st of the said Month. 147 31. An Account of the Proceedings at the
Sessions for the City of Westminster, against Thomas Whitfield, Scrievener;
John Smallbones, Woodmonger; and William Laud, Painter; for tearing a Petition
prepared to be presented to the King for the sitting of the Parliament; with an
Account of the said Petition presented on the then 13th Instant, and His
Majesty's Gracious Answer 150. 32. The Judgment and Decree of the University of
Oxford, passed in their Convocation, July 21, 1683. against certain pernicious
Books, and damnable Doctrines, destructive to the Sacred Persons of Princes,
Their State and Government, and of all Humane Society. 153 32. The Case of the
Earl of Argyle: Or an Exact and Full Account of his Trial, Escape and Sentence:
As likewise a Relation of several Matters of Fact, for better clearing of the
said Case. 151 33. Murder will out: Or, The King's Letter, justifying the
Marquess of Antrim; and declaring, that what he did in the Irish Rebellion, was
by direction from His Royal Father and Mother, and for the Service of the
Crown. 217 34. Vox Populi: Or, The Peoples claim to their Parliaments sitting,
to redress Grievances, and to provide for the Common safety, by the known Laws
and Constitution of the Nation. 219 35. The Security of English-mens Lives: Or,
The Trust, Power and Duty of the Grand Juries of England, explained according
to the Fundamentals of the English Government, and the Declarations of the same
made in Parliament by many Statutes. 225 36. The Speech and Carriage of Stephen
College before the Castle at Oxford, on Wednesday, Aug. 31. 1681. taken
exactly from his Mouth at the place of Execution. 255 37. The Speech of the
late Lord Russell to the Sheriffs, together with the Paper delivered by him to
them at the place of Execution, July 21. 1683. 262 38. To the King's Most
Excellent Majesty, the Humble Petition of Algernoon Sidney, Esquire. 266 39. The
very Copy of a Paper delivered to the Sheriffs upon the Scaffold on Friday,
Dec. 7. 1683. by Algernoon Sidney, Esquire, before his Execution there. 267 40. Of
Magistracy. 269. Of Prerogatives by Divine Right. 270. Of Obedience. 271. Of
Laws. 272. By Mr. Samuel Johnson. 41. Copies of two Papers written by the late
King Charles II. published by His Majesty's Command, Printed in the Year 1686.
273. 42. A Letter containing some Remarks on the Two Papers writ by His late
Majesty King Charles II. concerning Religion. 274 43. A Brief Account of
particulars occurring at the happy death of our late Sovereign Lord, K. Chapter 2d.
in regard to Religion, faithfully related by his then Assistant, Mr. Jo.
Huddleston. 280 44. Some Reflections on His Majesty's Proclamation of the
Twelfth of Feb. 1686/7. for a Toleration in Scotland, together with the said
Proclamation. 281 45. His Majesty's Gracious Declaration to all his Loving
Subjects for Liberty of Conscience. 287 46. A Letter containing some
Reflections on His Majesty's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience. Dated April
4. 1687. 289 47. A Letter to a Dissenter, upon Occasion of His Majesty's Late
Gracious Declaration of Indulgence. 294 48. The Anatomy of an Equivalent. 300
49. A Letter from a Gentleman in the City, to his Friend in the Country,
containing his Reasons for not reading the Declaration. 309 50. An Answer to
the City Minister's Letter from his Country Friend. 314 51. A Letter from a
Gentleman in Ireland, to his Friend in London, upon ocasion of a Pamphlet,
entitled, A Vindication of the Present Government of Ireland, under his
Excellency, Richard Earl of Tyrconnel. 316 52. A Plain Account of the
Persecution laid to the Charge of the Church of England. 322 53. Abbey, and
other Church Lands, not yet assured to such possessors as are Roman Catholics;
dedicated to the Nobility and Gentry of that Religion. 326 54. The King's Power
in Ecclesiastical matters truly stated. 331 55. A Letter writ by Mijn Here
Fagel, Pensioner of Holland, to Mr. James Stewart, Advocate, giving an Account
of the Prince and Princess of Orange's thoughts concerning the Repeal of the
Test, and the Penal Laws. 334 56. Reflections on Monsieur Fagel's Letter. 338
57. Animadversions upon a pretended Answer to Mijn Here Fagel's Letter. 343 58.
Some Reflections on a Discourse, called, Good Advice to the Church of England,
etc. 363 59. The ill effects of Animosities. 371 60. A Representation of the
Threatening Dangers impending over Protestants in Great Britain: With an Account
of the Arbitrary and Popish ends, unto which the Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience in England, and the Proclamation for a Toleration in Scotland, are
designed. 380 61. The Declaration of his Highness William Henry (by the Grace
of God, Prince of Orange, etc.) of the Reasons inducing him to appear in Arms
in the Kingdom of England, for preserving of the Protestant Religion, and for
restoring the Laws and Liberties of England, Scotland, and Ireland. 420 62. His
Highnesses Additional Declaration. 426 63. The then supposed Third Declaration
of his Royal Highness, pretended to be signed at his head Quarters at
Sherborn-Castle, November 28. 1688. but was written by another Person, tho yet
unknown. 427 64. The Reverend Mr. Samuel Johnson's Paper in the year 1686. for
which he was sentenced by the Court of King's Bench (Sir Edward Herbert being
Lord Chief Justice, and Sir Francis Wythens pronouncing the Sentence) to stand
Three times on the Pillory, and to be whipped from Newgate to Tyburn, which
barbarous Sentence was Executed. 428 65. Several Reasons for the establishment
of a standing Army, and Dissolving the Militia, by the said Mr. Johnson. 429
66. To the King's Most Excellent Majesty, the Humble Petition of William
Archbishop of Canterbury, and diverse of the suffragan Bishops of that Province
(then present with him) in behalf of themselves, and others of their absent
Brethren, and of the Clergy of their respective Diocesses, with His Majesty's
Answer. 430 67. The Petition of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, for the
calling of a free Parliament, together with His Majesty's Gracious Answer to
their Lordships. Ib. 68. The Prince of Orange's Letter to the English Army. 431
69. Prince George his Letter to the King. 432 70. The Lord Churchill's Letter
to the King. 432 71. The Princess Ann of Denmark's Letter to the Queen. 433 72.
A Memorial of the Protestants of the Church of England, presented to their
Royal Hignesses, the Prince and Princess of Orange. 433 73. Admiral Herbert's
Letter to all Commanders of Ships, and Seamen in His Majesty's Fleet. 434 74.
The Lord Delamere's Speech. 434 75. An Engagement of the Noblemen, Knights and
Gentlemen at Exeter, to assist the Prince of Orange, in the defense of the
Protestant Religion, Laws and Liberties of the People of England, Scotland and
Ireland. 435 76. The Declaration of the Nobility, Gentry and Commonalty at the
Rendezvous at Nottingham, November 22. 1688. 436 77. His Grace the Duke of
Norfolk's Speech to the Mayor of Norwich on the 1st of December, in the
Marketplace of Norwich. 437 78. The Speech of the Prince of Orange to some
principal Gentlemen of Somersetshire and Dorsetshire, on their coming to join
his Highness at Exeter, November. 15. 1688. 437 79. The True Copy of a Paper,
delivered by the Lord Devonshire to the Mayor of Darby, where he Quartered,
November. 21. 1688. 438 80. A Letter from a Gentleman at Kings-Lynn, December. 7.
1688. to his Friend in London. With an Address to his Grace the most Noble
Henry, Duke of Norfolk, Lord Marshall of England. Ibid. 81. His Grace's Answer,
with another Letter from Lynn-Regis, giving the D. of Norfolk's 2d. Speech
there, December. 10. 1688. 439 82. The Declaration of the Lord's Spiritual and
Temporal, in and about the Cities of London and Westminster, Assembled at
Guild Hall, December. 11. 1688. Ibid. 83. A Paper delivered to his Highness the
Prince of Orange, by the Commissioners sent by His Majesty to treat with him,
and his Highness's Answer, 1688. 440 84. The Recorder of Bristoll's Speech to
his Highness the Prince of Orange, Monday Jan. 7. 1688. 441. 85. The Humble
Address of the Lieutenancy of the City of London, to his Highness the Prince of
Orange, December. 12. 1688. 442 86. The Humble Address of the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London, in Common Council Assembled, to
his Highness the Prince of Orange. 443 87. The Speech of Sir Geo. Treby Knight,
Recorder of the Honorable City of London, to his Highness the Prince of
Orange, December. 20. 1688. Ibid. 88. His Highness the Prince of Orange's Speech
to the Scotch Lords and Gentlemen, with their Advice, and his Highness's
Answer; with a true Account of what past at their meeting in the Council
Chamber, at White Hall, Jan. 7. 1688/9. 444 89. The Emperor of Germany's
Account of K. James's Misgovernment, in joining with the K. of France (the
Common Enemy of Christendom) in his Letter to K. James. 446 90. The Declaration
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons Assembled at Westminster,
concerning the Misgovernment of K. James, and filling up the Throne. Presented
to K. William and Q. Mary, by the Right Honorable the Marquess of Hallifax,
Speaker to the House of Lords; with His Majesty's Most Gracious Answer
thereunto. 447 91. A Proclamation, Declaring William and Mary, Prince and
Princess of Orange, to be King and Queen of England, France, and Ireland, etc.
449 92. The Declaration of the Estates of Scotland, concerning the
Misgovernment of K. James the 7th. and filling up the Throne with K. William
and Q. Mary. 450 93. A Proclamation, Declaring William and Mary, King and Queen
of England, to be King and Queen of Scotland. Edinburgh, April 11. 1689. 452
93. The manner of the King and Queen's taking the Coronation Oath. 453 94. The
Coronation Oath of England. 454 The Coronation Oath of Scotland. Ibid.
95. Proposals humbly offered to the Lords and Commons in the present
Convention, for Settling of the Government. 455 96. The late Honorable
Convention proved a Legal Parliament. 457 97. The Present Convention, a
Parliament. 459 98. The Thoughts of a private Person, about the Justice of the
Gentlemen's undertaking at York, November. 1688. wherein is showed, That it is
neither against Scripture, nor Moral Honesty, to defend their Just and Legal
Rights, against the Illegal Invaders of them, occasioned then by some private
Debates, and now submitted to better Judgments. 461 99. An Enquiry into the
Measures of Submission to the Supreme Authority; and of the Grounds upon which
it may be lawful or necessary for Subjects to defend their Religion, Lives, and
Liberties. 483 100. The Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, no Badges of
Slavery. 489
THE Earl of Clarendon's Speech, ABOUT Disbanding the Army. SEPTEMBER 13. 1660.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THE King tells you that he has commanded me to say many particulars to you,
and the truth is, He has charged me, with so many, that I have great reason to
fear, that I shall stand in much need of His Mercy, for omitting many things He
has given me in Command, at least for delivering them in more Disorder and
Confusion, then Matters of such Moment and Importance ought to be to such an
Assembly, for which the King Himself has even a kind of Reverence, as well as
an extraordinary Kindness. I am to mention some things He has done already,
and many things He intends to do during this Recess, that you may see, how well
content soever he is, that you should have Ease, and Pleasure, and Refreshment,
he has designed Work enough for Himself.

The King has thanked you for the Provision you have made that there may be no
free Quarter during the time the Army shall be Disbanding, and has told you
what He will do with that Money you have given Him, if there should want
wherewithal to Disband it; And now I hope you will all believe, that His
Majesty will consent to the Disbanding: He will do so; And yet He does not take
it unkindly at their hands, who have thought that his Majesty would not Disband
this Army; It was a sober and a rational Jealousy; No other Prince in Europe
would be willing to Disband such an Army; an Army to which Victory is entailed,
and which, humanely speaking, could hardly fail of Conquest whithersoever He
should lead it; and if God had not restored His Majesty to that rare Felicity,
as to be without apprehension of Danger at home or from abroad, and without any
Ambition of taking from his Neighbors what they are possessed of; Himself
would never Disband this Army; an Army whose Order and Discipline, whose
Sobriety and Manners, whose Courage and Success has made it famous and
terrible over the World; an Army of which the King and His two Royal Brothers
may say, as the noble Grecian said of Aeneas, -- Stetimus tela aspera contra,
Contulimusque manus, experto credit, quantus
In clypeum assurgat, quo turbine torqueat hastam.


They have all three in several Countries found themselves engaged in the midst
of these Troops, in the heat and rage of Battle, and if any common Soldiers
(as no doubt many may) will demand the old Roman Privilege for having
encountered Princes single, upon my Conscience, he will find both Favor and
Perferment: They have all three observed the Discipline, and felt, and admired,
and loved the Courage of this Army, when they were the worse for it; and I have
seen them in a season when there was little else of comfort in their view,
refresh themselves with joy, that the English had done the great Work, the
English had got the Day, and then please themselves with the Imagination what
wonders they should perform in the head of such an Army: And therefore when His
Majesty is so entirely possessed of the Affection and obedience of this Army,
and when it has merited so much from Him, can it be believed, or imagined,
that He can without some regret part with them? No: My Lords and Gentlemen, He
will never part with them, and the only sure way never to part with them, is to
Disband them; should it be otherwise, they must be exposed to the daily
Importunity of His great Neighbors and Allies; and how could He refuse to lend
them His Troops, of which He has no use Himself? His Majesty knows they are
too good English men, to wish that a standing Army should be kept in the howels
of their own Country; that they who did but in Bello pacis gerere negotium,
and who, whilst an Army lived like good Husbandmen in the Country, and good
Citizens in the City, will now become really such, and take Delight in the
Benefit of that Peace they have so honestly and so wonderfully brought to pass:
The King will part with them, as the most indulgent Parents part with their
Children for their Education, and for their Perferment; He will prefer them to
Disbanding, and prefer them by Disbanding, and will always retain such a
Kindness for them, and such a Memory of the Service they have done him, that
both Officers and Soldiers, after they are Disbanded, shall always find such
countenance, favor, and reward from His Majesty, that He doubts not, but if he
should have Occasion to use their Service, they will again resort to Him with
the same Alacrity, as if they had never been Disbanded: And if there be any so
ill amongst them (as there can be but very few, if any) who will forfeit that
Favor and Protection they may have from Him, by any withstanding His Majesty's
Commands, and the full and declared sense of the Kingdom; His Majesty is
confident they will be as odious to their Companions, as they can be to any
other honest Men.

My Lords and Gentlemen, I am in the next place, by the Kings Command, to put
you in mind of the Act of Indemnity, not of any Grants or Concessions, or
Releases He made to you in that Act, I have nothing of that in charge; no
Prince has so excellent a memory to forget the Favors he does; but of what He
has done against you in that Act, how you may be undone by that Act, if you
are not very careful to perform the Obligations He has laid upon you in it:
the clause I am to put you in mind of, is this, And to the intent and purpose
that all names and terms of Distinction may be likewise put into utter
Oblivion, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person
or Persons, within the space of three Years next ensuing, shall presume so
maliciously to call or allege, or object against any other Person or Persons
any Name or Names, or other words of Reproach, any way leading to revive the
Memory of the late Differences, or the occasion thereof, That then every such
Person, so as aforesaid offending, shall forfeit, etc. It is no matter for the
Penalty, it is too cheap a one; the King wishes it had been greater, and
therefore has by His just Prerogative (and it is well for us He has such a
Prerogative) added another Penalty more insupportable, even His high
Displeasure against all who shall swerve from this Clause in the Act. Give me
leave to tell you, that as many Name or Names, or other words of Reproach are
expressly against the Letter, and punishable accordingly, so evil and envious
looks, murmuring and discontented hearts, are as directly against the Equity of
this Statute, a direct breach of the Act of Indemnity, and ought to be be
punished too; And I believe they may be so. You know Kings are in some sense
called Gods, and so they may in some degree be able to look into men's hearts;
and God has given us a King who can look as far into men's hearts as any Prince
alive; and he has great skill in Physiognomy too, you would wonder what
Calculations He has made from thence; and no doubt, if He be provoked by evil
looks, to make a further Enquiry into men's hearts, and finds those corrupted
with the Passions of Envy and Uncharitableness, He will never choose those
hearts to trust and rely upon. He has given us a Noble and Princely Example,
by opening and stretching His Arms to all who are worthy to be His Subjects,
worthy to be thought Englishmen, by extending His heart with a pious and
grateful joy to find all His Subjects at once in His Arms, and Himself in
theirs: and shall we fold our arms toward one another, and contract our hearts
with Envy and Malice to each other, by any sharp memory of what has been
unneighbourly or unkindly done heretofore? What is this but to rebel against
the Person of the King, against the excellent Example and Virtue of the King,
against the known Law of the Land, this blessed Act of Oblivion.

My Lords and Gentlemen, The King is a Suitor to you, makes it His Suit very
heartily, That you will join with Him in restoring the whole Nation to its
primitive Temper and Integrity, to its old good Manners, its old good Humor,
and its old good Nature; Good Nature, a Virtue so peculiar to you, so
appropriated by God Almighty to this Nation, that it can be translated into no
other Language, hardly practiced by any other People, and that you will by your
Example, by the Candor of your Conversation, by your Precepts, and by your
Practice, and by all your Interest, teach your Neighbors and your Friends, how
to pay a full Obedience to this Clause of the Statute, how to learn this
excellent Art of Forgetfulness.

Let them remember, and let us remember, how ungracious, how undecent, how ugly
the Insolence, the Fierceness, the Bruitishness of their Enemies appeared to
them; and we may piously and reasonably believe, that Gods Indignation against
them, for their want of Bowels, for their not being Englishmen, (for they had
the hearts of Pagans and Infidels (sent a Whirlwind in a moment to blow them
out of the World, that is, out of a capacity to do more mischief in the World,
except we practice their Vices, and do that our selves which we pretend to
detest them for: Let us not be too much ashamed, as if what has been done
amiss, proceeded from the humor and the temper, and the nature of our Nation.
The Astrologers have made us a fair excuse, and truly I hope a true one; all
the motions of these last twenty Years have been unnatural, and have proceeded
from the evil Influence of a malignant Star; and let us not too much despise
the Influence of the Stars: And the same Astrologers assure us, that the
Malignity of that Star is expired; the good Genius of this Kingdom is become
Superior, and has mastered that Malignity, and our own good old Stars govern
us again, and their Influence is so strong, that with our help, they will
repair in a Year, what has been decaying in twenty; and they only shall have
no excuse from the Star, who continue their Malignity and own all the ill that
is past to be their own, by continuing and improving it for the time to come.

If any body here, or any where else, be too much exalted with what he has
done, or what he has suffered, and from thence thinks himself waranted to
reproach others, let him remember the story of Nicephorus; it is an excellent
story and very applicable to such Distempers: He was a pious and a religious
man, and for his Piety and Religion was condemned to the fire; when he was led
to Execution, and when an old Friend who had done him injury enough, fell at
his feet and asked him Pardon; the poor Man was so elevated with the Triumph he
was going unto, with the Glory of Martyrdom, that he refused to be reconciled
unto him; upon which he was disapointed of his end; and for this
Uncharitableness, the Spirit of God immediately forsook him, and he apostatized
from the Faith. Let all those who are too proud of having been as they think
less faulty then other Men, and so are unwilling to be reconciled to those who
have offended them, take heed of the Apostasy of Nicephorus, and that those
fumes of Envy and Uncharitableness, and Murmuring, do not so far transport and
intoxicate them, that they fall into those very Crimes, they value themselves
for having hitherto declined.

But, My Lords and Gentlemen, whilst we conspire together, to execute
faithfully this part of the Bill, to put all old Names and Terms of Distinction
into utter Oblivion; let us not find new Names and Terms to keep up the same,
or a worse Disstinction: If the old Reproaches of Cavalier, and Roundhead, and
Malignant, be committed to the Grave; let us not find more significant and
better words, to signify worse things; let not Piety and Godliness grow into
terms of Reproach, and disstinguish between the Court, and the City, and the
Country; and let not Piety and Godliness be measured by a morosity in Manners,
an affectation of Gesture, a new mode and tone of Speaking; at least, let not
our Constitutions and Complexions make us be thought of a contrary Party; and
because we have not an affected austerity in our looks, that we have not Piety
in our hearts. Very merry Men have been very godly Men; and if a good
Conscience be a continual Feast, there is no reason but Men may be merry at it.

You, Mr. Speaker, have this Day made a noble Present to the King. Do you think
if you and your worthy Companions had brought it up with folded Arms, down-cast
Looks, with Sighs and other Instances of Desperation, it would not have been a
very melancholy Present? Have not you frank and dutiful Expressions, that
cheerfulness and vivacity in your Looks, rendered much more acceptable, much
more valuable? No Prince in Christendom loves a cheerful giver so well as God
Almighty does, and he of all Gifts, a cheerful Heart; and therefore I pray let
not a cloudy and disconsolate face be the only, or the best sign of Piety and
Devotion in the Heart.

I must ask your Pardon for misplacing much of this Discourse, which I should
have mentioned, when I came to speak of the Ministers Bill; they I hope will
endeavor to remove these new marks of Dinstinction and Reproaches, and keep
their Auditories from being imposed upon by such Characters and Descriptions.
The King has passed this Act very willingly, and done much to the end of this
Act before; yet has willingly admitted you to be Sharers and Partners with Him
in the Obligation: I may say confidently His Majesty has never denied His
Confirmation to any Man in Possession who has asked it; and they have all the
effect of it, except such who upon Examination and Enquiry, appeared not worthy
of it, and such who though they are pardoned, cannot yet think themselves
worthy to be preferred. His Majesty well knows that by this Act he has
gratified and obliged many worthy and pious Men, who have contributed much to
His Restoration, and who shall always receive fresh Evidence of His Majesty's
Favor and Kindness, but he is not sure that he may not likewise have gratified
some who did neither contribute to His coming in, nor are yet glad that he is
in; how comes it else to pass, that he receives such frequent informations of
Seditious Sermons in the City and the Country, in which all Industry is used
to alienate the Affections of the People, and to infuse Jealousies into them of
the King and His Government; They talk of introducing Popery, of evil
Counselors, and such other old Calumnies as are pardoned by this Act of
Indemnity.

His Majesty told You when he was last here, what Rigor and Severity He will
hereafter use, how contrary soever it is to his Nature in these Cases; and
conjured You, My Lords and Gentlemen, to concur with him in this just and
necessary Severity, which I am sure You will do with Your utmost Vigilance, and
that You will believe that too much ill cannot befall those who do the best
they can to corrupt His Majesty's Nature, and to extinguish His Mercy.

My Lords and Gentlemen, I told You I was to acquaint you with some things His
Majesty intends to do during this Recess, that You may see He will give no
intermission to His Own thoughts for the Public good, though for a time He
Dispences with Your Assistance.

He does consider the infinite Importance the Improvement of Trade must be to
this Kingdom, and therefore His Majesty intends forthwith to Establish a
Council for Trade, consisting of some Principal Merchants of the several
Companies; to which he will add some Gentlemen of Quality and Experience; and
for their greater Honor and Encouragement, some of my Lords of His own Privy
Council.

In the next Place, His Majesty hopes that a well-setled Peace, and Gods great
Blessing upon Him and You, this Nation will in a short time flourish to that
Degree, that the Land of Canaan did, when Esau found it necessary to part from
his Brother. -- For their riches were more, then that they might dwell
together, and the land wherein they were could not bear them, because of their
cattle: We have been Our selves very near this Pinnacle of happiness, and the
hope and Contemplation that We may be so again, disposes the King to be very
solicitous for the Improvement and Prosperity of His Plantations abroad, where
there is such large room for the Industry and Reception of such who shall
desire to go thither; and therefore His Majesty likewise intends to erect and
establish a Council for those Plantations, in which persons well qualified
shall be wholly intent upon the good and advancement of those Plantations.

There are two other particulars, which I am commanded to mention, which were
both mentioned and recommended to You by His Majesty in his Declaration from
Breda; The one, for the Confirmation of Sales, or other Recompense for
Purchasers; The other, for the composing those Differences and Distempers in
Religion, which have too much disturbed the Peace of the Kingdom. Two very
weighty particulars, in which His Majesty knows You have spent much time, and
concerning which, he should have heard from You before this time, if You had
not met with great difficulties in the Disquisition of either.

For the First, His Majesty has not been without much thought upon the
Argument, and has done much toward the Accommodation of many particular
Persons, and You shall not be at Your Journeys end, before His Majesty will put
that Business concerning Sales into such a way of Dispatch, that he doubts not
You will find a good Progress made in it before Your coming together again, and
I believe the Persons concerned, will be very much to blame, if they receive
not good Satisfaction; And some of You who stay in Town, shall be advised and
consulted with that Setlement.

The other, of Religion, is a sad Argument indeed; It is a Consideration that
must make every religious heart to bleed, to see Religion, which should be the
strongest obligation and cement of Affection, and brotherly kindness and
compassion made now by the Wranglings of passionate and froward Men, the ground
of all animosity, hatred, malice and revenge: And this unruly and unmanly
Passion (which no question the Divine Nature exceedingly abhors) sometimes and
I fear too frequently transports those who are in the right, as well those who
are in the wrong, and leaves the latter more excusable then the former, when
men who find their manners and dispositions very conformable in all the
necessary obligations of humane Nature, avoid one another Conversation, and
grow first unsociable, and then uncharitable to each other, because one cannot
think as the other does: And from this separation we entitle God to the
Patronage of, and Concernment in our Fancies and Distinction, and purely for
his sake hate one another heartily. It was not so of old, when one of the most
ancient Fathers of the Church tells us, That Love and Charity was so signal and
eminent in the Primitive Christians, that it even drew Admiration and Envy from
their Adversaries, Vide inquiunt ut invicim se diligunt! Their Adversaries in
that in which they most agreed, in their very prosecution of them, had their
Passions and Animosities amongst themselves; they were only Christians, that
loved, and cherished, and comforted, and were ready to die for one another:
Quid nunc illi dicerent Christiani, si nostra viderent tempora, says the
incomparable Grotius: How would they look upon our sharp and virulent
Contentions in the Debates of Christian Religion, and the bloody wars that have
proceeded from those Contentions, whilst every one pretended to all the Marks
which are to attend upon the true Church, except only that which is inseparable
from it, Charirity to one another.

My Lords and Gentlemen, This Disquisition has cost the King many a Sigh, many
a sad Hour, when he has considered the almost irreparable Reproach the
Protestant Religion has undergone, from the Divisions and Distractions which
have been so notorious within this Kingdom. What pains he has taken to compose
them, after several Discourses with learned and pious Men of different
Persuasions, you will shortly see, by a Declaration He will publish upon that
Occasion, by which you will see His great Indulgence to those who can have any
Protection from Conscience to differ with their Brethren. And I hope God will
so bless the Candor of His Majesty in the Condescentions he makes, that the
Church as well as the State, will return to that Unity and Unanimity, which
will make both King and People as happy as they can hope to be in this World.

My Lords and Gentlemen, I shall conclude with the Kings hearty thanks to you,
not only for what you have done toward Him, which has been very signal, but
for what you have done toward each other; for the excellent correspondence you
have maintained; for the very seasonable Deference and Condescension you have
had for each other, which will restore Parliaments to the Veneration they ought
to have. And since His Majesty knows, that you all desire to please him, you
have given him ample Evidence, that you do so; He has appointed me to give you
a sure Receipt to attain that good End, it is a Receipt of His own prescribing,
and therefore is not like to fail:

Be but pleased your selves, and persuade others to be so; contrive all the
ways imaginable for your own Happiness, and you will make Him the best pleased,
and the most happy Prince in the World.

THE State of ENGLAND, Both at HOME and ABROAD, In Order to The Designs of
France, CONSIDERED.
To the READER.
THIS Discourse being imaginarily Scened, and yet really performed out of the
Treasure of a very great Minister of State's Capacity; it was thought fit to be
Published now, and not before, because that Respect ought to be paid to the
Secret of his Majesty's Affairs, so as nothing should anticipate the King's own
Labors, to give the People Satisfaction in his due time touching the tender
Care that He is graciously pleased to take of all his Subjects in point of
Honor, Safety, Freedom, Union, and Commerce: which nothing could more advance
then the Conclusion of the Treaty newly made betwixt England and the States of
the United Provinces; which without Flattery may be demonstrated to Men of
Understanding to aim at nothing but the Good of His Subjects in general, exempt
from all manner of private Interest whatsoever. Blessed be God then that it is
so happily concluded; and that we have a King whom nothing can ever alienate
from the true Interest of his Realms, nor no corrupt Counselor (let him be
thought to be never so Powerful or Crafty in order to his own Advantages)
prevent the Wisdom and Integrity of such a Prince from prevailing above the
Artifices and Frauds of those who would persuade the Nation, (were they
competent Masters of their Art enough so to do) that those Counselors who are
not interested, can be less prudent or successful then such as did make it
their Business to appropriate all to themselves, and nothing to their Master.
The French King is much commended for his Parts and Activity; but let us see
him outdo the King of England in this particular of the Treaty, both in
Courage and Conduct, and then I shall be apt to attribute his Grandeur as much
to natural Abilities as extraordinary Fortune, but not before.

THE State of England, etc.
THE Adventure which happened unto me lately is of so extraordinary a nature,
and contains so many important Discoveries in relation to the public Good in
its Progress, that I should prove defective toward my Country, if I did not
heartily publish all the Passages, both touching the Occasion, and Effects of
what followed from this Accident:

Know then that a Peer of the Realm of England, and one whose Merit, Quality,
and the Place which he holds in the Administration of the Affairs of the
Kingdom are remarkable; did invite sundry of his Lordship's best Friends to a
magnificent Feast, and amongst the rest he had the kindness not to omit me out
of the number: where the excellence of the Cheer which he made to his Guests,
after a most noble manner put the whole Company into such a refined humor of
conversing together, that the Entertainment was but one entire pleasing Debate,
how to express our complete enjoying of each other. I was not wanting with the
uttermost of Vigor and Solace to uphold the Genious of this Conference. But as
the freest speakers do commonly come by the worst in Discourse, and are the
soonest exposed to enterfiering lashes; I found my self to be attacqued in so
many places at once with the swiftness of other Men's Reasons and Wits, who held
the opposite Arguments, that although I were something heated, yet there
remained unto me presence of mind enough (and success of Intervalls) to get
insensibly out of the Press, whilst the Disorder and Confusion lasted, (which
is usual at such Meetings) into another room. I retired then pursuing the
Opportunity, into a fair Gallery, which surprised my Eyes with the rich
Ornaments wherewith it was furnished; but not without trouble neither, and a
Curiosity beyond the Optics of the Place, which increased there; so as I was
diverted from any farther Consideration of the Furniture, because the Place
seemed to lie too near the Enemy, to dwell any longer upon those Objects.
Wherefore I went into another Chamber hard by, which instantly filled me with
new Apprehensions, by the means of several large Looking-Glasses hanging on the
Walls; which showed me my own proper Figure at length on every side, and from
thence imprinted in my wounded Imagination as many Adversaries as there were
angular Reflections out of each Mirror; that appeared to pursue me so
furiously, that I ran on violently with my head forwards, in order to some
Escape, to the door of another Chamber adjoining thereunto, which opened with
such Resistance, when I thrust against it, as if it had been forced with a
Petard: And thus falling in the Attempt, I was so stunned, that it was a good
while after before I could come to my self again. But at last having partly
recovered my spirits, I was surprised with a fresh astonishment as much amazed
me, as the former had done that I repeated: for when I began to open my eyes
half way, finding that till then they had been altogether unuseful to me, I
attributed the Disorder to want of Sight, often feeling, in regard of the
Darkness of the Room, to try whether they were still in my head or not. Yet
perceiving, betwixt Discerning and Doubting, that all I assayed of this kind
was to no purpose; after having deplored the bitterness of an imaginary Loss, I
groped on more and more in the dark until I chanced to come to an Alcone, where
feeling with my hands I took fast hold upon the Alcone, and grasped the Pillar
of a Bed, which had I not light upon, I must have fallen the second time. For,
thrusting hard against one of the Posts, the Counter-stroak of the Wood threw
me all along into the middle of a Couch, where I remained stretched forth like
a Coarse without any motion, in the same posture of a precipitate Swoon. And
then it was that the Vapors of my Body, which were disturbed by the first
Mistake, confusedly did stir through all the parts in the agitated fluctuancy
of a Storm; though by degrees growing to be undeceived, Sleep, which appeaseth
all the Mutinies in humane Creatures, did naturally and more agreeably seize
upon my Faculties, and compose the Tempest with perfect tranquillity of Mind and
animal Operations, as if I had never been so discomposed. It Is impossible to
tell you how long I continued in the State of this Interregnum betwixt Life and
Death, nor what Care the Company took to learn what was become of me, but in
vain; blaming me for having left them, or rather the War begun, using all sorts
of means to find where I was, and bring me back to the Combat.

I shall only tell you by the way, that about Sunset a great Noise was raised
by two of the servants of the House, who entered suddenly into the Chamber where
I lay; which assured me as I awakened that I was yet living; and the blazing of
the Waxtapers, which they set upon the Tables and Cup-boards, made me extremely
joyful at the Restoration of my sight, which in my Opinion till then was
absolutely gone from me. But then a third Apprehension seized on my Powers,
first, to be catch in such a Posture, and exposed to the innocent jests which
might be made by the Guests on the subject of my strange Disorder, and
precipated Flight from them. But as I sought my Eyes once more, to steal away
out of this Society for all Night, and not be seen by any Body, another noise
obliged me to keep close where I was upon the Bed, and draw the Curtains home,
not to be discovered. I was not long in this Concealment, when I saw come into
the same Place three Persons, whose Deserts in this Relation must be better
known than their Names, and the Importance of their Interest in the State, by
what I am going now to say of those particulars, because I am strictly obliged
not to reveal them. These strangers the Master of the House did very civilly
introduce into the Chamber, who without many Complements sat down on the seats
which were prepared for them near the Table. My Sleep had digested those Fumes,
and dissipated all the Clouds of my Understanding: therefore judging that the
cause that assembled such great Personages together there in this secret
Entertainment could not be but of the highest importance; both the Curiosity,
and the Shame of having them witnesses to my Disorder, obliged me to keep firm
to my Post, within the cover of the ^ed, and to lend an attentive ear to all
their Discourse. For the Master of the house began the Overture of the
Conference in the Terms following.

In that part which we do hold of the Government of the State, it is not enough
that a sincere Amity does link us in one band of Interest and Esteem
particularly to each other, if we be not also united in the same Judgment as to
all which concerns the Public Good. In our former Conferences we used to take
just Measures how to rectify things within the Realm; but now it rests with us
to agree upon some Maxims which are to be maintained in regard of Foreign
Matters, to the end that in these Rencounters, wherein we are to give Counsel,
we may act in all things with a perfect Concert, which no doubt will give a
great weight to the Resolutions which shall be formed thereupon, and the
present Case; since never have any Counselors treated of nicer Points, nor
more serious ones than those which are to be debated among us to day. The fire
is already kindled in our Neighborhood; the Monarchy of Spain is just upon the
brink of falling to the ground, if it be not succored; and France in a
conditition to avow the vast Design which that Crown has long meditated, as
well against the Peace of Europe, as the Commerce of our Navigations, if a
powerful Fence be not quickly made, to keep the French within their Bounds.
Wherefore all the rest of the Forces of Europe stand at gaze, expecting the
Result of what England does determine herein, considering us the
Counter-ballance, which time out of mind has held the Scales even betwixt
those two great Monarchies, for the Safety of all the rest. They wait but our
giving of the Sign, to join with us in the common Defense: and the better share
of them seek it from England; and the others have their Eyes open toward our
Conduct, to take their measures also by no other model but what we shall trace
out unto them.

There is no need of a Providence extraordinary enlightened, to judge which is
our true Interest in this Conjuncture; but the present State of our Affairs
does not leave us the same Facilities to follow it, in which we do abound as to
the Knowledge thereof.

Mean while the Mischief presses forwards, and does not afford Place nor Time
sufficient to expect a Benefit of other Vicissitudes, which run sufficiently
against us; nor to regulate our Resolutions by those Events, which take too
impetuous a part in the Cause on that side which we ought most to fear.
Therefore it is more than season to form our Fundamental Maxim, on which all
our Conduct is to move in this present Conjuncture; and at this very instant
decide, whether we will choose to be simple Spectators, or take some part to act
in this Tragedy; since the Resolution which we shall fix thereupon will be the
Center, from whence we must draw all our Lines afterward. Which is the proper
Point that we are to discourse of now among our selves here, before we do give
our Opinions on the whole matter to the Public; and in which particular I
desire the rather to be enlightened by your wise Reasonings by how much the more
I am assured, That the sole good of the State is the only Rule and Object of
all your Counsels.

As soon as ever he had uttered these words, one of the Three, after casting
down of his Eyes, and pondering what he was to say to the rest, with having
thought before he advised, began his Discourse thus:

If late Experience had not taught us enough to our cost, that it is much
easier to begin a War, than successfully to get out of it when once it is
commenced, I would enlarge my self on that Subject to represent unto you piece
by piece, the Dangers, Incommodities, and Losses which such a Resolution
usually does carry along with it; where frequently the Conqueror finds he is
more charged with Debts than with Trophies, and the People always have cause to
mingle their Acclamations with Tears, in the course of such expensive Triumphs;
since before any Edifice is begun, the Dimensions how to settle a solid
Foundation to undertake the War upon, should previously be considered, by
measuring our Means and Forces as well as those of the Enemy with whom we are
to fight; and the like touching their Power, whose Interest we intend to
embrace.

Our Forces and Means you all know are already exhausted with long and sharp
Wars, both at home and abroad; and by the Hand of God, which has been heavy
upon us in the late Pestilence, and in the Firing of the City of London:
wherefore it is but now that we begin by the means of Peace to breathe again;
which Peace also is not firmly established. Time then is requisite for us to
take breath and recover in, after so terrible an Agitation: nor can any thing
be so dangerous unto this State as a Relapse in the midst of Amendment. If the
noise of our Neighbors does awaken us, our Weariness likewise invites us to
seek some Repose: and in case there be danger to suffer the Growth of a
suspected Power, there will not be less peril in the checking of that Power
unprepared. You know, as well or better than I can tell you, the Condition of
the Revenue, and the excessive Expense of this Realm, which inevitably must
carry the War from home, unless we mean supinely to be destroyed: and therefore
of necessity must our Wings be suffered to grow again after this clipping,
before that we do offer to make a new Flight. You cannot be ignorant too, that
Commerce is the Soul and the Life of this Kingdom, which is the Channel from
whence the Abundance of it flows: And the Wealth which we formerly enjoyed, and
rendered us so considerable in the World, besides the fresh Experiment of the
Disorder and Interruption which the War brought into all the Traffic of the
Land, has made us clearly see, that for Merchant-mens Fleets to be changed
into Naval Armies, and the Substance of the People melted into Magazins
unusefully which might more profitably be employed in rich and gainful
Navigations, cannot be the proper Interest of England,

If we consider the present State of France, we shall find that all the rest of
Europe bow under that Power; and those who are the most concerned to succor
Spain, bleed at the Nose only, without being able to break the Impostume
within. The Intelligences of France and their Practices make their way every
where, either with Bribes or by Address; Victory waits still on all their
Motions, and by having redressed the Abuses of their Exchequer, they have laid
an unexhaustible Foundation of Money within themselves. Over and above that,
the French are a Nation, or rather a Seminary of Nobility and Soldiers, so
versed in the Trade of War, as this Provision puts them in a Posture never to
be savingly justled.

I grant, their Designs are Vast, and their Pretentions ill grounded; but how
can we take Cognizance of that? are we Knights-errant, to expose our Lives in
the revenging of other men's Quarrels; the large Interposition of Sea, which
divides us from the rest of the World, may shelter us enough from their
Attempts, without founding of our safety upon the Conservation of our
Neighbors.

But suppose we had such an abundance of Charity to spare, as to hazard our
own safety in favor of another's; we should at least be secured before hand,
that when we are at a second Charge of succouring them, it might prove
profitable unto them, otherwise the Mischief being grown to that point of
Extremity where now it rests, all insignificant Remedies of this Nature would
but anger them the more to no purpose. And Spain being deeply engaged in the
War of Portugal, which is alone able to give the Spaniards work enough, as the
Spanish Councels stand divided, and according to the slowness of their
Operations, their Treasure being likewise exhausted, and the principal Places
of Flanders in the Hands of the French, and those which remained unconquered
hardly in a Condition to make any Resistance when they shall be attackqued,
which disposes that Crown to seek a Peace with France on any Terms; and the
Propositions in order to a League Offensive and Defensive with them, which they
make to us, being tendered only to England as a wily Lure to oblige the French
to conclude it the sooner, out of an Apprehension that we may resolve to assist
Spain; why should we rashly, I pray, thrust our Sickle into this blighted Corn?

Indeed, when Inconveniences are visible on all sides of the Prospect of such
Treaties, the wisest Counsel sure is to suspend the Resoultion a while. For on
which part can we place our Interest thus, without incurring blame justly? The
Party of Spain is weak and unlucky; that of France is unjust, and contrary to
our Good: shall we then sacrifice our selves for Spain, which for three Years
together has stood idle, with their arms folded a cross, without so much as
proffering to help us, whilst three of the greatest Powers of Christendom let
one another Blood, and thus were only passive in our Ruin? Must we then join
with France, which were so lately combined with our Enemies to destroy us, and
that tore the Victory out of our hands when we had it sure? Shall we contribute
the Liquor of our Veins to facilitate their Progress, which ought to be so
redoubted by this Nation, and so become instrumental toward the erecting a
Colossus which must certainly tread us under foot with the Weight of it? All
these considerations, which I submit to your Prudence, oblige me to conclude,
that there being no part to be taken in this War which is not destructive; the
best will be to take no Part, but sit still, and observe how the Game is
played, and in the mean time to provide for the repairing of our Revenues, and
quieting of Disorders at home, by conciliating and re-uniting the minds of the
People, the re-establishment of Commerce, and to put our selves into such a
Condition, that the Conqueror may not be able to make a wrong use of his
Victory to our Prejudice. And in the mean time, not to remain altogether idle
in the common Danger of Europe, we may contribute our endeavors to obtain a
Peace, and by a happy Accommodation stop the course of these Conquests, which
gives us such just Jealousy.

He had scarce made an end of speaking, when a little murmr arose among the
rest of the Conferrers, which made me conceive that they did no ways approve of
what he did urge. Wherein I found that I was not deceived neither; because he
which sat right over against him, answered him presently after this manner.

If Peace were a Benefit which always did depend upon our own Choice, and if
War were not, ordinarily speaking, a Mischief as necessary as the other is; the
Question which we do treat of now might easily be resolved, and would not
require any longer Deliberation. But it is not enough to conserve Peace, to
have a pacifick Spirit, if our Neighbors likewise be not of the same
Disposition toward it; which in effect is to reckon, without the Host, by
founding the hopes of our future Quiet, barely on the Promises of our own
Moderation; since those which are the most in love with Peace, are oftentimes
involved in the opposite Agitation, whether they will or no, by some violent
motion of Fortune; and so frequently stumble upon War in the Flight which they
make from it, and thus suffocates the Peace by too much avoiding the War.

I do avow that the Reasons which were alleged before could not be answered,
if he who did so well deduce them, were able to assure us upon good Grounds,
that in keeping our selves Neuters in this War of the Low Countries, we might
be sheltered from the Storm of another War, both in the present and future
Tense of such Vicissitudes; or peaceably and long enjoy so happy a Tranquillity,
which makes him believe that we ought to despise, for that Speculation, all
manner of useful Occasions which Fortune does daily offer unto us. But in
truth, my Lord, would you venture to be caution thereupon to the State, and
pawn your Faith to the Kingdom, and your Honor concerning the Event? For my
own part, I hold you too wise and too quick-sighted, to imagine merely on the
Presumption of unsolid Hopes, that there can be the least shadow or color of
Safety remaining for us, if one of these two Monarchies which are at this time
Engaged in a War, should fall under the absolute Power of the other, or if they
do reunite again by an Agreement, in which possibly, as we have handled the
matter, we may very well not be comprehended. In case you will avow this Truth,
which all the World knows to be so, it follows that you must grant, that all
those inconveniences which were already alleged to keep us out of all kinds of
Engagement are not longer valid, when there is a indispensable necessity and
the Welfare and the Safety of the State are at Stake.

I shall not enlarge my self hereon, to represent unto you that our
Predecessors ever held this to be a fundamental Maxim of their Conduct, to
hold the Balance equal between these two Great Monarchies, and that on which
side soever they turned the Scales, Victory did usually follow that
Counterpoise, which never failed to put things into that just Temperament that
preserves the Health of this Realm. By which means in some sort they made
themselves the Arbitrators of Christendom, because by affording their Help unto
one of the two Parties, they became in effect Masters over them both, by still
keeping one of them at their Devotion, and in our Dependency, through the
prospect of those Succors which they do continually need from hence; and the
other, with the apprehension of this Assistance. For thus the English, what
with the force of their Arms, and the power of Arbitrating in Treaties, have
always been the Lawgivers to the Success both of their Friends and their
Enemies, by holding within the palms of their hands the Results of War and
Peace, finding both in the one and the other, those Advantages and Safeties
which this Nation most desired.

But laying aside these old absolete Maxims, from which notwithstanding wise
men will not willingly depart without the pressure of some invincible
Necessity, to come to the Circumstances of the present time: It is evident that
the War of the Low Countries cannot possible terminate otherwise than by the
Fall and Oppression of one of the two Parties, or by an Accommodation made
betwixt them. If they do agree, and that England has no share in the Treaty,
who will assure us that they will not unite for our Ruin; or at least, France,
which cannot remain long without War, will not turn their Arms against us? But
if Spain falls, we shall then be like Dancers of the Ropes that have lost their
Counterpoise, and so are ready to tumble down every step they make. What good
opinion soever we have of France, it cannot be denied, notwithstanding, that in
this Case, after the French have triumphed over Spain, they will be Masters
over our Fortune too; and that our being thus must entirely depend upon their
Moderation. For, Gentlemen, do you think that we can take rest securely upon so
weak a Foundation as the Giddiness of their Charity is? since it is certain that
the most Christian King has too much Ardour and Desire of Glory to dwell in
Idleness at home, after such a Conquest. And therefore seeing his Dominions and
Reputation notably increased, he will form to himself new Idea's of enlarging
the Bounds of his Empire both by Sea and Land, according to the knowledge which
we have of the diverse Inclinations to his Court; whereof some will put him on
to become Master of the Commerce of Europe, and employ those vast Treasures he
has heaped together in order to that Design this way; others, to engage him in
the finishing of his Conquests over all the Low Countries: and some likewise,
to begin by us to open the Path to the Subduing of all other States which may
probably oppose this Design. So that which Advice soever of these he does
embrace, 'twill be equally dangerous as to us here, and perpetually oblige us
to stand upon our Guard, with the Burden of a continued Expense on our backs,
as well as the Incommodities of a War, though we seem to be in Peace with him.

On this Position then I say, that the worst Party for England that can be
taken, whether by choice or necessity, is that of sitting Neuters. By uniting
with Spain we do follow our ancient Maxim and Interest, which has ever been
successful to this Nation, which is, to be still Masters of the Balance betwixt
these two Monarchies, as I urged before. Should we therefore embrace the Party
of France, we may hope for a considerable portion in the Spoils of Spain. And
both in the one and the other case we shall find our Surety and other
Advantages in the Treaties of Peace which shall be made. But by remaining
Neutral we must needs equally offend both; and so cannot eschew being exposed
friendless to the Resentments and the Ambition of the Conqueror, as well as the
Scorn and the Reproaches of all the rest of Christendom, for having insipidly
abandoned our proper Reason of State, without being either good or wicked in a
matter of such universal Concernment, whereby the name of Englishmen will
remain so much in the Oblivion of Europe, that no body will scarce remember
there is such a Nation in the World; excepting only those who have a mind to
Conquer us.

I read in the Scripture, so base a Character of none, as of them who are
neither hot nor cold: And able Statesmen have always reproved this kind of
Tepidness or Half-conduct, to be both unuseful and dangerous. Media via nec
Amicos parat, nec Inimicos tollit. Wherefore England must of necessity either
preserve the Low Countries, against the Usurpation of the French, which is our
Bulwark; or raise a new Fence, that shall shelter us from being conquered.

To preserve the first then, Spain must be assisted from hence; and to make a
new Rampart, we must divide the Spoil with France. Experience has sufficiently
shown us, that our Ports are not inaccessible; and Reason demonstrates, that
those can never be secure from the like Attempts, but by keeping a powerful
Fleet out at Sea, that we may be absolute Masters there. It Is a Maxim also
which admits neither of exception nor diminution, That a well-governed Kingdom
is obliged to arm when War is kindled in the Neighborhood. And though we
should resolve to take part neither with the one Interest nor the other; yet we
must be in a Posture to hinder the Torrent from coming upon our Land, that so
the Conqueror may not have a mind to extend his Conquests hitherwards. Here
then is the Charge of Arming, which on this Conjuncture is inevitable, the
equipping of a Fleet, and raising of Soldiers to be mutually entertained at
the charge of the People, if we do not speedily take some Party; and all this
Expense without Glory, or hope to get any fruit by so unprofitable a Counsel,
wherein our Soldiers will never learn the Discipline of War, or extract any
Utility from such Prizes, as being incapable after this manner to share in the
Booty, or in the Victories and Treaties of Accommodation, according to their
several events. Whereas by taking part either with Spain or France, the Charge
would be much less, because he whom we aid would largely contribute toward it;
and the Prizes gotten at Sea might help to discharge the Expense both of the
Naval and the Landforces. And thus would our Soldiers be exercised, and our
Nation make a noise again abroad, and regain the Reputation which we have of
late but too ignominiously lost in the World. For when our men shall be trained
up daily in strict Discipline beyond Seas, we shall by this means establish a
Seminary of good and able fighting men at the Cost of others, which will be the
firm Pillars of the Party, and render us considerable in the eyes of all our
Neighbors. Besides, this course may be a vent so to discharge the Realm of ill
humors, and a great company of Idle persons, which now, being without
Employment, are a burden to the Public, and who one day are capable too of
disturbing the domestic Tranquillity of the State: whereas, on the contrary,
what Success soever this War shall have, we shall always find our Account in
the end of an Accommodation, whereof, being thus prepared, we cannot fail of
having the principal benefit and part.

All these Considerations then seem unto me to be so convincing, that they do
oblige me absolutely to condemn the Opinion of Neutrality, as inconsistent with
our Glory, Safety, and Fundamental Reasons of State; by concluding positively,
that we ought to lend an ear to those Propositions which shall be made unto us
from all Parties, and embrace those which shall be found to be most agreeable
and convenient to the Interest of the Kingdom. And in the interim, to be the
more considered by both these great Parties, and better assured against all
manner of Attempts; my Advice is, That without any longer loss of time, a
strong Fleet should be presently got ready; and that as many days as we have to
spare before the next Campaign, since now every hour is precious that is not
well spent as to this purpose, may be employed to render us henceforwards
necessary unto them whose Cause we shall resolve to embrace, and as formidable
to those against whom we intend to declare: so that on both sides we may be the
Commanders of the whole Affairs, and give it respite or motion by the sole Rule
of the Interests of England.

After that he had spoken thus, I did observe by the Countenance of the other
two persons that had not yet spoken, that this Discourse did not displease
them; wherefore without any farther Reflection, one of them briskly began to
speak to this effect:

Your Reasons, said he, are so convincing, that I do not only render my consent
unto them without any Reply, but mean to make use of them to serve as the Bass
and Foundation of that Edifice which I have a long time meditated upon, in
order to the fundamental Maxims of State of this Nation. Therefore, without
more ceremony or delay, I see that we must act, and take one of the two
Parties. For any other Counsel would be dangerous and destructive, by exposing
of us to a thousand Inconveniences, which all the humane Prudence imaginable
cannot be capable of preventing or avoiding in process of time. I remain also
agreed with you, that in the choice of which Party we are to take, we ought not
to consider more than just what our own Interest properly is, which is the Rule
of that conduct of Monarchs, that, as the Soul and the Spirit vivifying the
whole Figure before us, gives it motion in the Body of the State.

It rests then to Form the Consequences upon these Principles, and decide which
of the two Parties is the most convenient. France offers Roses unto us; Spain
nothing but Thorns. The first presents us with a Scheme of Conquests without
Dangers; the last with prospect of Dangers without Profit. The one invites us
to be their Companions of assured Victories, of which they have already beaten
the way; the other does solicit us and implore our Aid only to help them out
of the mire, without any other Benefit than, as the old Proverb says, There Is
your labor for your pains, at the price of our Blood and Lives. If we shall
engage in the Assistance of Spain, in succouring them we run a Risco of being
lost our selves, without yet being able to re-establish them: but by joining
with France, we shall partake of the Spoils with them, which we can never by
force be able to take out of their hands: since the Progress of France is now
arrived at such a point of Effect, that all our Powers combined together are
not sufficient to stop it; and then both our Resistances and Succors will
serve but to ruin the Spaniards the sooner, and bring the Vengeance of the
French upon our own heads. And if Spain comes to sink under the Weight of the
War, all the burden of that Fall centers upon England alone. In fine, it is
agitated therefore singly as to this particular, Whether we will needs choose to
embark in a Vessel so driven with storms, or in a Ship which sails at ease with
full Sails, seconded with the favorable Gales of Fortune.

But in case all these material Objections cannot divert us from engaging in
the ill Fortune of the Spaniards, let us see on what Terms at least we can
assist them usefully. If we shall send Troops into the Low Countries to their
Aid, it is, in effect, to overwhelm them by the very weight and charge of those
Succors, and sacrifice so many of our own Subjects to Famine and Misery, as we
do thus send Soldiers unto them; because they have neither Country enough
left to Lodge them in when they come thither, nor the means to Entertain them
after once they are there.

If we succor them merely by Sea, that kind of help will not hinder France
from taking of their Towns in the mean time one by one; and so though we should
a little incommodate France, we shall not ease Flanders at all, and such an
Assistance will in Conclusion prove none, because it is an Application of the
Plaster too remotely, and on the wrong side of the Wound.

If then the Loss of the Low Countries be inevitable, let us do what we can;
were it not much better that we should have our share in the Parcels of so
great a Shipwreck, then to suffer France to ingross them all to themselves?
since supposing that we do divide Booties with the French on this Occasion, the
Places which by this means must necessarily fall into our hands will be so many
new Bulwarks to England, which may shelter us for the future against their vast
Designs, of which the Partisans of Spain make a Chimerical Monster, to
intimidate the English from taking part with their best and properest Interest
in the Case. But when once we are entered into a Communion of Conquests with
the French, the subduing of Flanders will serve us as Ladders to arrrive at
other Projects by, wherein we may probably hope to find our Profit and
Satisfaction mutually together, as well as the Pleasure of a just Revenge. I
set aside the Conquest of the Indies, which we could not fail to encompass,
whilst France does hold all the Forces of Spain in play both at Sea and Land,
and so occupied, that they will never be able to retain what they hold in the New
World, no more than that remainder of Territories which yet they stand
possessed of nearer hand.

Wherefore as to what regards the Interest of this Kingdom, what I have last
urged methinks might suffice to make you of my Opinion. And if we do
impartially consider that of the Royal Family, What can be more important and
convenient for it, than to have at their Devotion a Neighboring Power hard by,
which is so formidable, and that is able to protect them in a few hours from
all manner of Revolutions that they may (and perhaps not without cause neither)
apprehend at home, by thus commanding both the Treasures and the Armies of
France, whenever they shall have any need of them, to put a Bridle in the
mouths of all such as do seek to check their Authority?

I avow that our properest Interest were to hold the Balance equal between
Spain and France, if we could; but we should then have thought sooner of that,
whilst these matters were in a condition to be disputed: For at present, the
Weight of the Case inclining totally to one side, so that we can no longer
oppose France with Spain as a Barricado against their Designs, we must now
think how to become our selves the Counterpoise of France and the Defense of
Europe, by establishing of our Power beyond Seas on solid Foundations, that all
other Princes, may consider us hereafter as the only People who are capable of
resisting the Design of the Universal Monarchy; and so as France it self may
not be able impunitively to thwart England in this Resolution, because then our
Safety will be much more firmly settled by our own Strength than with the Force
of others; and all those who apprehend the Progress of France will conjoyn with
us, and become tied to the Fortune of England, as they would be at this instant
to Spain, if they saw that Monarchy in a Condition to be able to maintain them.

So that all those Reasons do oblige me to conclude, that we must no longer
hesitate on this point of taking part with France, and accept of those
Advantageous Offers which the French make unto us, both in respect of the
public Good of Christendom, as well as our own particular Security; since by
being united to them in a Knot of such inseparable Conditions, and on such a
Conjuncture of Affairs, because of which they dare refuse us nothing that we
ask, what need we fear from the opposite Conjunction of any other Parties?

All the Assistents at this Conference began to express Indignation against
this part of his Discourse, and showed by their Unquietness all the while that
he spoke thus, that they had much ado to keep from interrupting of him, or to
refrain from answering tumultuously, before that he had made an end. But as
they offered to reply in heat all at once, to deliver their thoughts on this
Subject, the Master of the House, who had not yet delivered his sense to the
Company, broke silence, and with a little smile, which had something in it
grave, and scornful, dexterously intermingled together, addressing himself to
him who had spoken with so much length just before, held on the Debate as
follows.

I know your Prudence, my Lord, too well (says he), and your Lordship's
disinteressed Zeal for the good of the State, to believe that you can mean
seriously what you have urged on the behalf of France; but rather am persuaded,
(and that easily too) that with an ingenious Artifice you have thus disguised
your own true Sentiments of this Case, the better to penetrate into the bottom
of our ours, and so give Opportunity to see clearlier through all the Reasons
and the Doubts which may be formed there upon touching this Matter, of which we
do now treat; since the truth of any Argument does never so well appear and
endure the light, as when it is sifted to the very root, and that the Reflection
thereof is exalted by the Opposition of the contrary sense. So that in
combating with your Opinion, I shall still think that we do not disagree, but
rather to dissent in the Exposition of a vain Phantasm, which you erected for
sport sake to divert us, and give the Company Recreation.

Allow me then to tell you, that this Project, upon which you have thus
exercised the accuteness of your Wit with so great a grace, is both
unprofitable and chimerical, no less then shameful and unjust, and ruinous
toward England to all intents and purposes whatsoever: whereas the Design of
succouring Spain is facil, honorable, profitable, necessary, and suitable to
the Fundamental Maxims of our State. And if you please to afford me never so
little attention, it will not be difficult for me to prove unto you very
clearly according to your own Judgment, what I shall propose of this Nature;
that we shall perfectly accord in one and the same Result, and convince you
fully of the Truth thereof.

The Design which you mention, is of the like nature, that it were to demolish
an old strong Edifice, to build an new Castle in the Air; or like his, who, to
renew his Youth, consented to be cut into pieces, and put his several members
into an Alembick of Glass. To follow your Counsel then, we must alter the whole
Constitution of our Politics, from innovated Interests and Foreign Maxims, by
turning all things upside down, even from the Accidents to the very Genius of
the Nation, and distill more modern Blood into the veins of the People, then
that which they have hereditarily received from Father to Son. But let us, I
beseech you, examine on what ground, and with what Materials this new Edifice
is to be raised. That Earth which you have proposed unto us to make it out of,
is a moving sort of Sand, or a Floating Island, in which we can never fix on
any firm Bottom. It Is upon France that you would have us establish our Fortune,
to found a Power which one day may counterbalance the Power of the French, or
at least shelter us from their vast Designs. Nay, you will needs have France
made the Instrument of a greatness in a Neighbor, which they ought to suspect,
if they be not besotted by so putting England into a state to be able e're long
to stop their Progresses, and erect a Bulwark in us against themselves. As if
France, that is our hereditary Enemy, and has so often tried what we are able
to do against the Enlarging of their Empire; who have graven deep in their
hearts the injury of the Title which (to their shame) England carries in all
public Treaties, and her Trophies in reference to that Crown; this very
France, which has no greater desire then to take the Dominion of the Sea from
us, and the Precedence in Commerce, will help us (as you believe) to conquer
the Indies, in which one third part of his Realm is interessed, and of which
they do suck away all the Marrow with the semination of their Baubles, by the
ill husbandry of the Spaniards; She who just now comes from Joining with our
Enemies against us, after she had first contrived how to broach the Quarrel
between England, and the States of the United Provinces under diverse false
motions; who snatched the Victory out of our hands, when we were morally
certain of beating the Dutch; who reduced the Bishop of Munster to a necessity
of separating from us in this War, after that he had received our Assistance in
large Sums of Money; debauched Denmark from our party; hindered the Swedes to
arm in our favor, and contrived the whole Fabric of that Affront which we
received in the River of Thames: Can you, after all these demonstrations of the
Rancour which they bear in their hearts against England, be so uningenuous as
to believe that the French will make a Bridge for us on the other side of the
Sea, as sincerely intending by this means to make us participate of their
conquests with them, or ever to unite in a sound Amity with our Interests? For
God's sake then disabuse your self, as soon as you can, out of this gross
Error, if it be so that it has got the least Fixation in your mind; since you
cannot cordially reason thus, or have the least hope of such an Incongruity in
the Reason of State of other Nations, without conceiving at the same time that
the French have lost both their Wits and Judgment; of which yet there is no
great reason why we should think, as they have handled us in this matter of
Negotiations of late: for therein I am sure that we do find them to have more
than common sense.

France indeed will be glad to have us for the Instruments of their Ambition,
but never for Companions of their Glory, or Rivals to their Greatness. The
French do, I confess, seek to make use of us to pull the Chestnut out of the
Fire, to save the burning of their fingers; but when that is done, the French
will not endure that we should eat any bit of the Kernel. And the work which
they do now make for us, both at home and abroad, is so incompatible with our
Interest and Designs, as well as their own, that their Professions toward us
at this time cannot possibly be sincere; except they be grown so kind on a
sudden, as to overthrow all their Fundamental Laws, and in favor of England
change the whole face of their Designs which they have hitherto been forming
upon Europe.

They pretend that the Low Countries are entirely fallen to them by the right
of Devolution, which France has forged to belong to its self. Then are all
those Provinces by consequence united to the French Crown, nor can their King
divide or alienate any part of them.

If this be true* to our advantage, though he would never so fain, but that it
must be subject still to return again to their Tribunal, they have annulled the
Renunciation of the Infanta of Spain, and thereby have formed a Right to the
Succession of that Monarchy, in case the young King should come to fail of a
Successor. So that the most Christian King can give us no share in the
dismembring of Spain, without doing prejudice to a Right which he pretends to
be acquired unalienably to his Crown, and whereof he himself may not otherwise
dispose.

Next, let us view the Materials which we are to have, to build this new
Edifice with. Either we must undertake this War at our own Charge, or at the
Expense of France. If it be undertaken at the Cost of France, we must be their
Hirelings (at best) as the Tartars be to the Ottomons; and cannot move one step
beyond What and How they will have us act: France, on these terms, will always
hold the Bridle in our Teeth, and the Cavessan upon our Noses, to make us stop,
turn and wind, in the middle of the Courses, just as they please. From the very
first moment that we shall grow burdensome unto them, they have but to
withdraw their Supplies, to make us fall headlong to the Ground; and then the
Share which we pretend in their Conquests does purely and arbitrarily depend on
their discretion.

But if we shall underake to carry on this Design out of our own proper Purse,
who shall furnish us with the Means of doing it? Do you believe that the
Parliament and the People will give away their Substance to act against the
true Interests of the Realm? and that they will Bleed, to quench the ambitious
Thirst of the French? or destroy Spain, from whence all the abundance of our
Commerce is derived; and which even at this Instant grants unto us such notable
Advantages by a Treaty which is solemnly ratified?

The part which France does offer us in the Conquests of Ostend and Neuport is
a vast Liberality indeed, but still of other folks Goods. It would become them
far better to restore back Dunkirk to England, which they cheated us of by
Surprise; or the Town of Callis, which they have dismembered from our ancient
Dominion. They take from us what is our own already, and present us with
nothing but what is not in their power to give; because they cannot bestow
either the Title or the Possession of what they do offer in this Kind upon us;
which if we will have, we must gain it by the Point of the Sword. And this
Train which they do show us, is of the same nature with that sort of
Temptations with which the Devil tempted our Savior from the top of the
Pinnacle. But do not you discover that this is a subtle Artifice to imbroil us
again in a now War with the States of the United Provinces, who have the
Interest to defend these two Places as much as if either Amsterdam or Flushing
were so designed upon? And without an absolute Naval Victory we can never hope
to conquer them; and such a Conquest at Sea too, as shall put the Hollanders
out of all manner of possibility to afford any Succors in this Case. This is a
very hard bone which France does cast in for us to gnaw, whilst they eat all
the Marrow of it. In fine, when the Arms of France, joined to our Forces, shall
have put us possession of these two Places; yet they will be totally unuseful to
England, when France is possessed of all the rest: Because thus the French will
shut us quite out of the whole Traffic of the Low Countries, and will be
always in a Condition to drive the English away from thence, unless we do
resolve continually to keep a Fleet at Sea for the conserving of them.

If this Design be hollow and visionary, it is not less shameful then airy and
full of Injustice. We have no manner of Pretention on the Monarchy of Spain,
nor is it our Genius to whet our Spirits to form Castles in the Clouds of
Chimerical Rights. What Glory can it be to our Arms to help to oppress a King
in Minority, of six years old, by surprise; only because we find him now to be
rudely attacqued and unprovided; on a frivolous Pretext, immediately after the
French had given the Queen his Mother, and his principal Ministers of State at
Madrid, such solemn assurances to the contrary, as well as at Paris, touching
the inviolable continuation of a good Peace and a sincere Friendship? The
manner which Spain has held and acted with us newly in relation to England,
when we were assaulted by three powerful Enemies at one time, ought to oblige
us, at least to be deaf to the artificial Allurements of France. For although
the French have tried by all the ways imaginable, and with Offers incomparably
more advantageous than those which they do make to us at present, to the end
that so they might have gained the Forces of Spain to unite with them to our
inevitable Oppression; yet was it never in their Power to shake the unalterable
Amity which the Spanish Nation have for us by a kind of natural Sympathy, which
one knows not how better to express than by the Immutability of it, whether we
do oblige or disoblige them. Would it not then be an Ingratitude totally
inconsistent with the Honor and the Hospitality of the English Temper, so soon
to forget this Kindness; since at the same instant that Spain was the deepliest
engaged against Portugal, they did notwithstanding openly oppose the Designs of
France which seemed to the prejudice of England, by refusing them (in
contemplation of us, firmly and with great Resolution) Passage for those Troops
of theirs which they sent to ruin the Bishop of Munster, our Ally and
Confederate then. We cannot complain of any Injury or Attempt wherein the
Spaniards have tampered against England. No League nor ancient Treaty does
oblige us to second the Designs of France; and we cannot conclude new Aliances
with the French to this purpose, without directly contravening that Treaty
which we have lately ratified with Spain. Let us see then what the Herald is to
say to the Spaniards that shall be sent to denounce War unto them on this
Occasion from England; or with what Reasons we shall be able to fill a
Manifesto which we would offer to the Public, whereby to justify the Causes
of this Rupture. Wherefore I leave the Care, my Lord, to you, being that you
seem to be the Author of this Counsel, to found it well in the point of
Justice. But pray, see that you perform it better and with more grace than the
Writer of the Queen of France's Prepensions has done.

I say farther yet, That this Design is both prejudicial and destructive; and
that it carries along with it most pernicious Consequences, as well in the
present time as the time to come. For from the very moment that we do break
with Spain, our Commerce will cease, with the Effects of all those great
Advantages which the Spaniards have By the Treaty last ratified at Madrid by
the Earl of Sandwich, His Majesty's Ambassador there.
newly granted unto us: and the Merchants of this Realm, who trade there, will
justly be confiscated; since all the Profit that we draw from thence must on
these terms infallibly redound in favor of the Hollanders, whilst our Arms do
busy the Spaniards in the Low Countries; and the French, as they do their
utmost against Spain, at the same instant will seize their principal Ports into
their Power, and thus become absolute Masters of the Commerce, by putting
themselves into a Posture to ere^^^ Do^^^nion over the (...), which we can
never afterward be able to resist. Not above three Years ag^ France was hardly
able* to set forth twenty Ships (that is to say, Men of War (...) ^ow they have
sixty large Vessels, ready furnished and well armed, and do apply all their
Industry and Pains in every part to augment the number. Could the Ghost of
Queen Elizabeth return back into the World again, she would justly reproach us
who are the Ministers of State here in England, for having abandoned her good
Maxims, by tamely suffering before our Eyes a Ma^itim Power to increase, which
she so diligently kept down throughout the whole Course of her Reign. Whereas
you are so far from opposing the Growth of this Power, that you rather seem to
desire England should facilitate the ways to make it grow the faster, and
render it yet more formidable than it is, by the Acquisition of the Sea Ports,
which in conclusion must infallibly bring France to be Mistress of the Commerce
of the Indies. All the World knows the vast quantity of Money and Arms which
the French have accumulated to that end alone out of the richest Purses of that
Kingdom. I agree to what has been said before very prudently in this
Conference, that our Power and Greatness does principally consist in the matter
of Commerce; and therefore I conclude even from thence, by an unerrable
Consequence, that Commerce ought to be the chief Object of our Jealousy, and
that we are bound to be as tender of the Conservation of this Benefit as of the
Apples of our Eyes. But then we must look far off how to prevent whatsoever may
hinder the Progress of Trade, or diminish the Abundance of this Commerce. We
have nothing to fear in this particular on the Account of Spain, which applies
little toward Traffic, and leaves almost all the Advantages thereof freely
to the English in their own proper Ports. But if this Interest should fall into
the Power of an industrious and active Nation, and a People covetous of Gain,
as the French are, we are not to expect any Share of the Utility, or to partake
with France therein; but rather that they will prescribe the Law of Commerce
unto the English, according to their own Will and Pleasure. As soon as ever
it is known that we do treat of Conjunction with France, one of these two things
must necessarily happen: either that Spain, finding it self incapable to resist
the Union of both Forces, will send a Blank to the French King to make such
Conditions with them as he thinks best, by conceding unto him all their Portion
in the Low Countries; or that all the rest of the Powers of Europe, justly
apprehending so terrible an Union, will join with Spain to stop the Torrent of
our Designs. In the first state of the Case then, we shall quickly find our
selves taken for persons deluded in this Negotiation, and France only gather
all the Fruit of the Couzenage; of which the Shame of having been so grossly
cheated can only remain to us, when the whole World discerns that the desire of
Prey has prevailed with England above the Faith of those solemn Treaties,
which we have made with the Crown of Spain: and thus shall we obtain no other
Advantage by having made such a false step, then to have facilitated the means
for France to unite all the Low Countries to that Crown without striking one
Blow, to the eternal and irreparable Damage of the Crown of England. For who
can assure us, that from the same instant when we do declare unto France our
intention to unite with them, the French, instead of uniting their Party with
England, will not rather prevail the sooner in their Pretensions with Spain, to
make the Spaniards, because of this Apprehension, disposed to accord to
whatsoever France shall demand? which is as the old Proverb says, To keep the
Mule at our Cost, and hold the stirrup unto the French; or play a ridiculous
part, in making use only of Scare-crows, and give a false Alarm to favor the
Designs of others.

Next, who shall secure us that after Spain has yielded, because of this
Apprehension, the Low Countries to the Disposition of France, That the
Spaniards and the French shall not then straightly unite together, to be
revenged of us, and bring us down? The affinity of Blood, Religion, and the
hopes which the Most Christian King may found to himself upon the Succession to
this Monarchy, (if the Renunciation of the Queen once comes to be annulled) are
strong Links that may very well unite them together; and the principal of the
Division which is at present betwixt them, having no other foundation but
reciprocal Jealousy touching the Equality of their Power, this Emulation will
expire as soon as ever that France does see Spain in a Condition to be no
longer able to dispute the Sovereign Arbitrage of Christendom with them; and
the cause of their Hatred being taken away, all the Effects thereof will cease
likewise. And then the common Interests of both will unite them in a Bond which
is inseparable any more, from whence our Ruin must infallibly arise: because
the Substance and Surety of England solely depends upon the Emulation of these
two Powers, as the Temperament of a humane Body consists in the Opposition of
the Elementary Qualities.

But what shall we say of the States of the United Provinces? Can we reasonably
believe that they will remain without Motion, or that they will not awaken at the
noise only of this Negotiation, which we shall carry on with France to the
Destruction of Spain? Since it is evident, they have no other course to take
than to prevent us, but by joining themselves with France before we have
finished this Treaty, or else to bind their Interests fast with the Spanish
Crown and the Empire on the first Occasion. And then are we excluded from our
Pretensions, and all the hopes of our vast Conquests, which we have fancied
unto our selves. And in the next place also shall we be replunged into a long
and dangerous War; from whence we came but just now, as it were, to escape with
so much difficulty and damage. France has yet proposed nothing unto us
directly touching the Ports of Ostend and Newport to be given to the English;
and it is apparent as to England, by sundry authentic Documents, that the
French have no mind to treat seriously with us on this Point, unless that they
do find us disposed to unite with Spain and the States of the United Provinces
for the common Defense. Whereas it is no less certain, that the French have
expressly made the very same Propositions, and more advantageous ones, unto the
said States, by soliciting them to re-combine with France in order to their old
Design of dividing the Low Countries mutually between each other, to the entire
Exclusion both of us and the Spaniards, being fully agreed as to this
particular, at the beginning of the War past.

Whereby it is clearly to be forseen, that France considers us no farther then
as the worst of their Prospects, and that the French will always be ready to
buy dearer the Amity of the States of the United Provinces than ours. Would it
not then be a great imprudence in us, to serve them as Instruments on such
disgraceful and disadvantagious Terms, to contribute toward the engaging of
the Hollanders to their Party? It being out of doubt, that the Jealousy which
we should so give them of our Negotiation with France would be a powerful
incitement to the States, to put them upon being before hand with us in this
Treaty, and cut the Grass after this manner under our feet. But admit all this
should cease, I do not see what Measures we can take at this time with France,
nor what Assurances or Precautions the French may give us in a Treaty, so as to
shelter England from the Danger of that known Maxim of theirs, which is, In all
Confederations to be bound by no other Rule but their Interest merely. I avow
that the Rupture of the Pyrenean Treaty frights me, and the remembrance of
their Proceeding held with us heretofore throughout all the Course of our late
War with Holland has made me so incredulous, that they must show me many
miracles, and evident ones too, before I shall be converted to have the least
good Opinion of the Sincerity of their Faith and Dealing.

That which you have alleged touching the Support which the Royal House of
England may particularly hope for from the Amity of France, is both a delicate
and a dangerous Stone to stir. The Glory and the Safety of our King does only
consist in the Love of his People, and a straight Union betwixt His Majesty and
his present Parliament, since He has no other sound Interest to rely upon but
that of the Kingdom, having need of no other Arms or Assistance. The hearty
affections of His Subjects and His own Royal Virtues will be as so many
Cittadels erected to maintain His Authority; and any other project is contrary
both to His Genious and His admirable Prudence. For all those who shall dare to
inspire any other thoughts into His Majesty, will infallibly undergo the weight
of His Displeasure, as Enemies to His Fame and Quiet. But at the Bottom of all,
what help can He rationally expect from France, should He come to need it,
(which God defend) after their unworthy abandoning of the King His Father in
His great Distress, and of the King which now is likewise, when the Wheel of
Fortune ran against them, even to the Exstirpation of the Royal Line, had not
He by whom Kings reign, wonderfully restored them to the Throne of their
Ancestors? It was that shameful Treaty which the French ratified with those
Usurpers then, that sacrificed Charles the First to the Ambition of the Tyrant
Oliver Cromwell, who had snatched the Scepter from the right Owners and
Proprietors thereof. Nay, to such a Degree was the Inhospitability of France
grown at that time, though His Father were thus execrably Murdered before the
Eyes of the French, our King's own Cousin-german refused Him a Retreat that
might be secure for His own Person. Therefore it is fit that the English should
be disabused once for all, by being better informed, since France is so far
from being assisting or useful unto us upon this Conjuncture, that in truth
they do seek only to increase our Divisions and Troubles.

For it is both their Interest and Maxim so to do: which Conduct has been
exactly and hereditarily observed in their Counsels for many Ages together,
(and newly in the last Civil War here) since all the Baits which they do
present unto us are but so many Apples of Discord, which the French Emissaries
cast up and down among us, purposely to embroil us with our Neighbors, or else
with one another.

Next, let us consider at present whether we shall find our Account better with
Spain. It Is evident that solid Reason of State does totally incline us to leave
that other way; and you cannot but all acknowledge this to be our true
Fundamental Maxim, whereby we may keep the Balance in aequilibrio; and that our
Safety does most consist in such an aequilibrium: why then should we swerve
from thence out of vain hopes, or quit the Body for the Shadow? The Interest of
Commerce no way invites us to take part with France: and this Truth is so
notorious to all the people of England, that there is no Eloquence able to
persuade them contrary to their own Experience therein. The Cause is just and
favorable: A young The King of Spain.
Pupil unworthily oppressed; a Peace so solemnly and piously established as
lightly violated by a Process of Cavils and Legerdemain, by a Proceeding
thereupon full of Surprisals and Violence, as well as Pretensions unjustly
revived after an Authentic Vide The Buckler of State and Justice, Art. 4.
Renunciation; are so many voices which speak to the Root of our Consciences,
to call us to that which we owe to Justice, Pity, good Neighborhood, the
Public Cause of Christendom, and our selves. For in this matter is concerned
no less than the Case of Royal Successions, which France will needs have
submitted to the Customs of ordinary Citizens, and the Conservation of that
Bulwark which is common to all these parts of Europe, against this Torrent
which threatens the whole Vicinity with a great Inundation, and the assuring
the Tranquillity of the Christian Republic against an unquiet Nation, that will
never desist from disturbing of it until their Insolence shall be abated.

The Foundation then being so solid, because we shall in this Opposition have
to treat with a Nation that makes profession of Honor and Generosity, which
has never yet been accused to be guilty of having violated any Public Treaty,
and that would rather The remarkable Integrity of Spain.
hazard the loss of their Monarchy than their Reputation; the Advantage is
both secure and considerable: whereas on the account of France we shall appear
but as little Accessories, and the French will carry us on as the First Motion,
only according to the rapidness of their Progress, by applying us merely in the
course of their Game to their own Ends: and thus shall we become the Ministers
of their Ambition, and be made use of like a pair of Stairs, on which they do
mean to tread in order to their obtaining the Universal Monarchy. In fine,
their Interests, if that we are still predestined to be thus grossly deluded,
must be the Rule of ours, and our future Conduct too and Operations. But in
taking part with Spain we shall be the Arbitrators of Peace and War, and
enabled to give the whole weight unto the Resolutions of each Party. Then will
France consider us with terror and the apprehension of what our Arms may do,
and Spain by the addition of our Succors. If we do desire Conquests, we cannot
hope for more lawful ones, nor easier Victories, than to reunite by this means
our ancient Dominion in France, which have formerly been dismembered from the
Crown of England. But if we shall limit our Designs to the sole establishment
of a Peace, we can find the Account both of Glory and Safety likewise therein:
since it appears by Authentic Letters of Monsieur de Lionn's writing, that
France is resolved to be content with Reason, as soon as ever they do see
England fixed to join with Spain and the States of the United Provinces. So
that it is in our choice whether to make an advantageous War, or procure an
honest Peace, at the first appearance of our preparations in Arms. Whereas, on
the contrary, it is evident by the Interception of the aforesaid Dispatches,
that they will despise all manner of Offices and Mediations that are not Armed,
but rather pursue vigorously their Course whither Fortune shall drive it on, so
long as they do meet with no powerful Obstacles in the way.

Therefore, because you seem to believe that Spain is reduced to so low a
Condition, that our Relief would be altogether unuseful to them, and serve for
nothing but to bring down the Vengeance of France exasperated upon us; for
God's sake, cure your self of this Pannick fear as soon as you can. It Is France
endeavors to erect a formidable Power, if she finds no Opposition in the
approaches thereunto; and Spain probably must sink under the burden, unless
that Crown be succored: though it is as true also, that the Mischief is easily
to be prevented, if Remedies be applied thereunto in due time, and before that
the Inconvenience root it self too deep. All the Advantage which France has
gained in this last Campaign, is no more than an effect of their Address, and
the overgrown Credulity of Spain, rather than of their Valor, and Power. All
the Places which they have conquered in Flanders, are but great Country-Towns,
where the People being ever the strongest, he that is Master of the Field
carries always the Keys of them at his Girdle, to enter when he pleases; and
the winning of one Battle recovers them back again.

France has constantly yielded in every thing where she has found a real
Resistance, without gaining any thing beyond what the fright of an incommodated
Multitude has helped them to acquire by such a Surprising Invasion. Spain has
yet great resorts to recur unto, provided only they can gain time, and the
means of making them meet together, and thus recover their Spirits. We know
that she has made Contracts for considerable Sums of Money, and that the
Spaniards are now about to put themselves in a way to be able shortly to
withstand the strongest Shocks of the War: and by the little Diversion of the
Forces of France which we may make without any prejudice to England, we can
certainly put Spain into a Condition of attacquing the French, as well as of
defending it self, and so shall we reduce France into a necessity of demanding
Peace. Spain is not unprovided of Friends nor Allies. The Emperor does already
make a great step in favor of the Circle of Burgundy, by taking of it entirely
under his Protection, as a Member of his Body. The States of the United
Provinces are not asleep, neither as to their own proper Interests upon this
Conjuncture, and after having tried in vain the sweeter ways of appeasing the
Tempest, they will not abandon themselves on so pressing an Occasion, being
that they do see well enough their Safety depends absolutely upon their
Resolution. We know that they desire a sincere Alliance with us, and that they
would make all the progresses necessary toward it, could they but discern in
us any real disposition not to reject the Offer. Sweden, which is weary to
serve but as an Instrument to the Interests of France, to the prejudice of
their own Affairs, will no doubt also follow our Motions: and the most part
(whom rather Fear than Love does tie unto the Motions of France) will
questionless take off the Mask, as soon as ever they shall see a considerable
Power on foot to protect them: France is a Body replete with ill humors, which
will easily degenerate into an universal Corruption, when the French are never
so little shaken. The Jealousy alone which our Fleet will give them, must
needs oblige them to employ the better part of their Troops to furnish their
Maritime Coasts; and consequently render them the weaker every where else.
Besides, it is plain that in this last Campaign, in which they thought to
swallow all up at a bit, they made all the Force that they were able, and yet
were not able notwithstanding to bring into the Field above Forty thousand men,
after having drawn out of their Garrisons and the Provision of their Towns all
the strength almost that they had there, whereby their Frontiers were left
naked. Judge then to what point they will be reduced, when they will be put both to
furnish their Places on all sides, and divide their Troops too, in Alsatia,
Italy, the County of or Catalonia.
Rossillon, and Flanders; and that in all these Countries they will meet with
Enemies to fight against, as well as a multitude of Malcontents at home, no
less formidable within the Center of their own proper Bowels. For thus they can
build no longer upon the strength of their Army, which is destroyed very near
already by Labor, Sickness, Diseases, and want of Pay. Wherefore they must
begin anew, and with fresh Charges raise more men, because the ill usage which
their Troops have received, does render them so barren of Soldiers, that they
are compelled to seek Recruits, and as it were beg Supplies, with vast sums of
Money, from other States. And this Imaginary Fountain of Treasure of theirs,
which here is thought to be un-exhaustible, will be found to have a bottom when
our Fleet does disturb their Commerce, Which is the same thing as our Banquer
and Farmers of the Customs.
the Credit which till then they may get with the Partisans, by means of
oppressing the People, with Tax upon Tax, will fail. The Men of Business and
the Natives, being pressed to unsupportable Extremities, will quickly either
cast off the yoke, or sink under the burden and the weight of those
Impositions. Their incapacity to hold out any longer, is well enough seen, by
the impossibility wherein they now find themselves to make good what they have
promised the Portugueses, whose Friendship has been formerly so necessary unto
them. And if Spain, as it is hoped that it may do, once shall take a Resolution
to be delivered of this intestine War with Portugal by some Accommodation, the
Spaniards will soon be in a Condition of being useful to their Allies, and
feared by their Enemies. But if we do suffer the Designs of France to pass by
undiscovered, and impunitively to permit them to conquer the Low Countries
toward the total oppression of Spain; then I cannot but avow that France thus
will be most terrible unto us. And in case at present we are afraid of drawing
their Revenge on our heads, then shall we have must juster cause to apprehend
the future effects of their Ambition. Wherefore at the Bottom of all these
Reasons, it seems to me that by the same Principle of Apprehension which you
have of the French, we are obliged to oppose these Progresses of theirs, which
if not stopped, would yet render them more redoubtable.

If so be that we do fear them in the Field, having so many Friends that do
tender their Alliance unto us, our fear were much more justifiable, if after
the rejecting of all those Offers, we alone were exposed to their mercy; or
that our moderation could exempt us from their Outrages, but on the contrary,
rather give the French better Conveniences of putting these Violences in
Execution, should such an insipid Counsel prevail; for they will never consider us
farther than we do make our selves Considerable. They have printed Books of
their Pretensions to England. Experience teaches us (even to this day) that
it is enough with them to ground a War, without giving them any other cause of
Hostility, That we have Scotland and Ireland.
Kingdoms belonging to this Monarchy which may very well fit their Designs;
which is enough to invite the French to attack them whilst England is weak.

History likewise does show us, how that all our Alliances with the house of
Burgundy have still been glorious and useful, and all those with France,
unfortunate and prejudicial. It Is ever more dangerous to go out of the beaten
Road, to travel through By-lanes, unknown, and dark untried Paths.

You Will easily agree with me, that the Union of the United Provinces with France
is the thing of all others which we ought the most to apprehend as fatal to our
Crown: and therefore, by consequence, nothing can be more safe for England than
to disunite them. Heaven furnishes us now with an occasion of doing that, which
we shall never be able to recover again, should it be neglected: and if we do
suffer it to slip away, we shall bring that Republic into a necessity of tying
this fatal Knot with France stronglier than ever it was fastened before. This
Union therefore above all others must be the Object of our Care, as it has of
late demonstratively been the cause of our Misfortunes.

I conclude then upon solid Foundations, without hesitating, That, in the first
place, we must necessarily take part in this War, either with Spain or France:
and next, that we must not engage blindfold, without taking right Measures
with those who have the same Interest that England has in the Case: thirdly,
that we must knit our Party firmly together, and get all the Advantages we can
in this Treaty with Spain, as well as all the Security possible with other
States; without yet exacting from Spain things which are intolerable unto them,
whom the loss of the Low Countries for fear of being reduced by the Exorbitancy
of our Demands, may plunge into a necessity of according to whatever France
shall require.

This Discourse being ended, I observed by their Countenances, that the two
Persons who spoke first applauded this Opinion, and that the third man was much
shaken. They had some farther speech together, but so softly, that I cannot
well collect the sense of it: after which all the Company embraced, and gave
one another their hand, with a reciprocal promise of secrecy, as well as an
Union in the same Design. And thus they separated each a several way, with
evidence of great satisfaction and friendship. And as soon as ever they were
gone, I slipped back insensibly again into the former obscurity near the Bed,
without being seen by any of the Domestics. And thus whilst these particulars
were fresh in memory, I did set them down in Paper, and all that I could
remember of their Discouse only to satisfy my own Curiosity, and the
Curiousness of my Friends.

OF THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS, OR Politic Constitution OF THIS KINGDOM.
FUndamental Laws are not (or at least need not be) any written Agreement like
Meer-stones between King and People, the King himself being a part (not party)
in those Laws, and the Commonwealth not being like a Corporation treated by
Charter, but treating it self. But the Fundamental Law or Laws is a settling of
the Laws of Nature and Common Equity (by common consent) in such a form of
Polity and Government, as that they may be administered amongst us with honor
and safety. For the first of which therefore, we are governed by a King: and
for the second, by a Parliament, to oversee and take order that that honorable
trust that is put into the hands of the King for the Dignity of the Kingdom, be
rightly executed, and not abused to the alteration of the Politic Constitution
taken up and approved, or to the destruction of that, for whose preservation it
was ordered and intended. A principal part of which honor, is that Royal
Assent he is to give for the Enacting of such good Laws as the People shall
choose, for they are first to consult their own safety and welfare, and then be
who is to be entrusted with it, is to give an honorable Confirmation to it,
and so to put an Impress of Majesty and Royal Authority upon it.

Fundamental Laws then are not things of Capitulation between King and People,
as if they were Foreigners and Strangers on to another, (nor ought they or any
other Laws so to be, for then the King should govern for himself, not for his
People) but they are things of Constitution, treating such a relation, and
giving such an Existence and being by an external Polity to King and Subjects,
as Head and Members, which Constitution in the very being of it is a Law held
forth with more evidence, and written in the very heart of the Republic, far
firmlier then can be by Pen and Paper, and in which sense we owe our Allegiance
to the King as Head (not only by power, but influence) and so part of the
Constitution, not as a party capitulating for a Prerogative against or contrary
to it, which whosoever seeks to set up, or side with, do break their
Allegiance, and rebel against the State, going about to deprive the King of his
juridical and lawful Authority, conferred upon him by the Constitution of this
State, under the pretense of investing him with an illegal and unconstitutive
Power, whereupon may follow this grand Inconvenience, The withdrawment of his
Peoples Allegiance, which, as a Body connexed with the Head by the Constitution
of this Kingdom, is owing to him; his Person in relation to the Body, as the
enlivening and quick^ing Head thereof, being sacred and taken notice of by the
Laws in that capacity, and under that notion is made inviolate.

And if it be conceived that Fundamental Laws must needs be only extant in
writing, this is the next way to bring all to confusion, for then by the same
Rule the King bids the Parliament produce those Laws that fundamentally give
them their being, privilege and power, (Which by the way is not like the Power
of inferior Courts, that are Springs of the Parliament, dealing between Party
and Party, but is answerable to their trust, this Court being it self
Fundamental and Paramount, comprehending Law and Fquity, and being entrusted by
the whole for the whole, is not therefore to be circumscribed by any other Laws
which have their being from it, not it from them, but only by that Law which at
first gave its being, to wit, (Salus Populi). By the same Rule I say the
Parliament may also entreat the King to produce those Laws that Fundamentally
give him his being, power and honor. Both which must therefore be determined,
not by Laws, for they themselves are Laws, yea the most supreme and fundamental
Law, giving Laws to Laws themselves, but by the received Constitution or
Polity, which they themselves are; and the end of their Constitution is the Law
or Rule of their Power, to wit, An honorable and safe Regiment of the
Commonwealth, which Two whosoever goes about to divide the one of them from
the other, breaks the fundamental constitutive Law or Laws and Polity of this
Kingdom, that Ordinance of Man which we are to submit unto; nor can or ought
any Statute or written Law whatsoever, which is of latter Edition and inferior
Condition, being but an Offspring of this Root, be interpreted or brought in*
Plea, against this primary and radical Constitution, without Guilt of the
highest Treason and destructive Enmity to the Publick-weal and Polity, because
by the very Constitution of this Kingdom, all Laws or interpretation of Laws
tending to Confusion or Dissolution, are ipso facto void. In this case we may
allude and say, That the Covenant which was 400 Years before the Law, an
after-Act cannot disanul it.

Ob. It may be objected, That this Discourse seems to make our Government to be
founded in Equity, not in Law, or upon that common rule of Salus Populi, which
is alike common to all Nations, as well as any: And so what Difference?

Ans. The Fundamental Laws of England are nothing but the Common Laws of Equity
and Nature reduced into a particular way of Policy, which Policy is the ground
of our Title to them, and interest in them: For though it is true, that Nature
has invested all Nations in an equal right to the Laws of Nature and Equity by
a common Bounty, without respect of Persons, yet the several Models of external
Government and Policy renders them more or less capable of this their common
Right: For though they have an equal Right in Nature to all the Laws of Nature
and Equity, yet having fundamentally subjected themselves by their Politic
Constitutions unto a Regal Servitude, by Barbarism or the like, they have
thereby much disabled and disvested themselves of that common Benefit. But on
the contrary, where the outward Constitution or Polity of a Republic is
purposely framed for the consirming and better conserving this common Right of
Nature and Equity (as in ours) there is not only a common Right, but also a
particular and lawful Power joined with this Right for its Maintenance and
Supportation. For whereas other People are without all supreme Power, either of
making Laws or raising Moneys, both these Bodies of Supremacy being in the
arbitrary hands only of the Sovereign Magistrate amongst many Nations, these
with us are in the hands of the supreme Government, (not Governor) or Court of
Judicature, to wit, the King and Parliament; here the People (like Freemen)
give Money to the King, he does not take it; and offers Laws to be enacted,
does not receive them so: Now in such a constituted Kingdom, where the very
Constitution its self is the fundamental Law of its own Preservation, as is
this mixed Regiment of ours, consisting of King and Parliament, as Head and
Body, comprehending Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy; there the fundamental
Laws are like fundamental Truths in these two Properties: First, they are
comprehended in a very little room, to wit, Honor and Safety; and Secondly,
they have their influence into all other inferior Laws which are to be
subjected to them, and correspondent with them, as lawful Children and natural
Branches.

Ob. But in Process of time there are many written Laws which seem at least to
contradict this fundamental Constitution, and are not they binding
notwithstanding it?

Ans. The Constitution of this Kingdom which gave its being, and which is the
radical and fundamental Law thereof, ought therefore to command in chief, for
that it never yields up its Authority to those inferior Laws, which have their
being from it, nor ought they which spring from it tend to the Destruction of
it, but on the contrary it is to derive its radical Virtue and Influence into
all succeeding Laws, and they like Branches are to make the root flourish, from
whence they spring, with exhibiting the lively and fructifying Virtue thereof,
according to the Nature and Seasons of succeeding times; things incident in
after-ages not being able to be foreseen, and particularly provided for at the
beginning, saving in the fundamental Law of Salus Populi, politickly
established; nor can any Laws growing out of that root, bear any other Fruit,
then such as the nature thereof dictates; for, for a particular branch to ruin
the whole Foundation by a seeming sense contrary to it, or differing from it,
is very absurd; for then how can it be said, Thou bear not the root, but the
root thee? Laws must always relish of, and drink in the Constitution or Polity
where they are made; and therefore with us, the Laws wherein the King is
nominated. and so seems to put an absolute Authority into his hands must never
so be construed, for that were with a breath to blow down all the Building at
once; but the King is there comprehended and meant under a two-sold Notion;
First, as trusted, being the Head, with that Power the Law conferred upon him,
for a Legal, and not an Absolute Purpose, tending to an honorable
Preservation, not an unnatural Dissolution. Secondly, as meaning him
juridically, not abstractly or personally, for so only the Law takes notice of
the King as a juridical Person; for till the Legislative Power be absolutely in
the King, so that Laws come down from him to his People, and go not up from
them to him, they must never be so interpreted: for as they have a juridical
being and beginning, to wit, in Parliament, so must they have a suitable
Execution and Administration, to wit, by the Courts, and legal Ministers, under
the Kings Authority, which according to the Constitution of this Kingdom, he
can no more suspend for the good of his People, than the Courts can theirs; or
if he do, to the public hazard, then have the Courts this Advantage, that for
public Preservation they may and must provide upon that Principle, The King
can do no Wrong, neither in witholding Justice, nor Protection from his People.
So that then Salus Populi being so principally respected and provided for,
according to the nature of our Constitution and Polity, and so being Lex legum,
or the Rule of all Laws branching thence, then if any Law do by Variation of
Times, Violence of Tyranny, or Misprision of Interpreters, vary therefrom, it
is a Bastard and not a Son, and is by the lawful Parents either to be reduced
or cast out, as gendring unto Bondage and ruin of the Inheritance, by
attempting to erect an absolute and arbitrary Government. Nor can this
equitable Exposition of particular Statutes taken from the Scope of the
politic Constitution be denied without overthrow of just and legal Monarchy,
(which ever tends to public Good and Preservation) and the setting up of an
unjust and illegal Tyranny, ruling, if not without Law, yet by abused Laws,
turning them as conquered Ordnance upon the People. The very Scripture it self
must borrow from its Scope and Principles for Explanation of particular Places,
else it will be abused and (as it is through that Default) unto Heresies. See
we not how falsely Satan quoted true Scripture to Christ when he tempted him,
only by urging the Letter without the Equity, or true Intention and Meaning? We
are to know and do things Verum vere, justum just, else we neither judge with
righteous Judgment, nor obey with just Obedience.

Ob. But is not the Parliament guilty of exercising an arbitrary Power, if
their Proceedings be not regulated by written Laws, but by Salus Populi?

Ans. For the Parliament to be bound up by written Laws, is both destructive
and absurd.

First, it is destructive, it being the Fundamental Court and Law, or the very
Salus Populi of England, and ordained, as to make Laws, and see them executed,
so to supply their Deficiency according to the present Exigency of things for
public Preservation by the Prerogative of Salus Populi, which is universally
in them, and but particularly in particular Laws and Statutes, which cannot
provide against all future Exigents, which the Law of Parliaments does, and
therefore are not they to be limits to this. And it would yet be further
destructive, by cutting the Parliament short of half its Power at once, for it
being a Court both of Law and Equity (as appears by the Power of making Laws,
which is nothing but Equity reduced by common Consent into Polity) when ever it
is circumscribed by written Laws, (which only is the Property of inferior
Courts) it cease to be supreme, and divests it self of that inherent and
uncircumscribed Power which Salus Populi comprehends.

Secondly, as it is destructive, so also it is absurd; for the Legislative
Power which gives Laws, is not to receive Laws, saving from the nature and end
of its own Constitution, which as they give it a being, so they endow it with
Laws of Preservation both of it self and the whole, which it represents.

I would not herein be mis-understood, as if the Parliament, when as it only
does the Office of inferior Courts, judging between Party and Party, were not
limited by written Laws: there I grant it is, because therein it only deals
between meum and tuum, which particular written Laws can and ought to
determine: so that its superlative and uncircumscribed Power I intend only as
relating to the Universe and the Affairs thereof, wherein it is to walk by its
fundamental Principles, not by particular Precepts or Statutes, which are made
by the Parliament, between King and People, not between People and Parliament:
they are ordained to be Rules of Government to the King, agreeing with the
Liberty and Property of the People, and Rules of Obedience to the People
without detainment of their Freedom by the Exercise of an illegal, usurped and
unconsented Power, whereunto Kings (especially in hereditary Monarchies) are
very prone, which cannot be suspected by a Parliament, which is
representatively the Public, entrusted for it, and which is like to partake
and share with the Public, being but so many private Men put into Authority
pro tempore, by common Consent, for common Good.

Nor is the Parliament hereby guilty of an arbitrary Government, or is it
destructive to the Petition of Right, when as in providing for Publick-weal, it
observes not the letter of the Law; First, because as aforesaid, that Law was
not made between Parliament and People, but by the People in Parliament between
the King and them, as appears by the whole tenor of it, both in the
complaining and praying parts, which wholly relate to the King. Secondly,
because of the common Consent, that in the representative Body (the Parliament)
is given thereunto, wherein England in her Polity imitates Nature in her
Instincts, who is wont to violate particular Principles for public
Preservation, as when light things descend, and heavy ascend, to prevent a
Vacuum: And Thirdly, because of the equitable Power which is inherent in a
Parliament, and for public Good is to be acted above and against any
particular Statute, or all of them: And Fourthly, because the end of making
that Law, to wit, the public Preservation, is fulfilled in the breaking of it,
which is lawful in a Parliament that is chosen by the whole for the whole, and
are themselves also of the Body, though not in a King, for therein the Law
says, Better a mischief than an inconvenience. But it may be objected, Though
it be not arbitrary for the Parliament to go against written Law, yet is it not
so when they go against the Kings Consent, which the Law, even the fundamental
Law, supposes in Parliamentary Proceedings; This has been answered, That the
King is juridically and according to the intention of the Law in his Courts, so
that what the Parliament consults for the public Good, That by Oath, and the
Duty of his Office, and Nature of this Polity he is to consent unto, and in
case he do deny it, yet in the Construction of the fundamental Law and
Constitutions of this Kingdom, he is conceived to grant it, supposing the Head
not be so unnatural to the Body that has chosen it for good and not for evil.

But it will be answered, Where is the Kings Negative Voice if the Parliament
may proceed without his Consent? I answer, That there is no known nor written
Law that gives him any; and things of that nature are willingly believed till
they be abused, or with too much Violence claimed. That his Majesty has
fundamentally a Right of Consent to the Enacting of Laws, is true, which (as
aforesaid) is part of that honorable Trust constituted in him: And that this
Royal Assent is an Act of Honor and not of Absolute and Negative Power or
Prerogative, appears by these following Reasons.

First, by his Oath at the Coronation mentioned in one of the Parliaments
Declarations where he does or should swear to confirm and grant all such good
Laws as his People shall choose to be observed, not has chosen, for First, The
word concedis in that Oath were then unnecessary, the Laws formerly Enacted
being already granted by foregoing Kings, and so they need no more Concession
or Confirmation, else we must run upon this Shelf, that all our Laws die with
the old King, and receive their being anew, by the new Kings Consent. Secondly,
hereby, the first and second Clause in that Interrogatory, viz. Concedis justas
leges and permittas protegendas, are confounded and do but idem repetere;
Thirdly, Quas Vulgus elegerit implies only the Act of the People in a
disjunctive sense from the Act or Consent of the King, but Laws already made
have more than Quas Vulgus elegerit, they have also the Royal Consent too, so
that that Phrase cannot mean them wherein the Act or Consent of the King is
already involved.

Secondly, by the Practice of requiring the Royal Assent even unto those very
Acts of Subsidies which are granted to himself and for his own use, which it is
supposed he will accept of, and yet Honoris gratia is his Royal Assent craved
and contributed thereunto.

Thirdly, by the Kings not sitting in Parliament to debate and consult Laws,
no^ are they at all offered him by the Parliament to consider of, but to
consent to, which yet are transmitted from one House to another, as well to
consult as consent to, showing thereby he has no part in the consultory part
of them (for that it belongs only to the People in Parliament to discern and
consult their own good,) but he comes only at the time of Enacting, bringing
his Royal Authority with him, as it were to set the Seal thereof to the
Indenture already prepared by the People, for the King is Head of the
Parliament in regard of his Authority, not in regard of his Reason or Judgment,
as if it were to be opposed to the Reason or Judgment of both Houses (which is
the Reason both of King and Kingdom) and therefore do they as consult, so also
interpret Laws without him, supposing him to be a Person replenished with
Honor and Royal Authority not skilled in Laws, nor to receive Information
either of Law or Council in Parliamentary Affairs from any, saving from that
supreme Court and highest Council of the King and Kingdom, which admits no
counterpoise, being entrusted both as the wisest Counsel and justest Judicature.

Fourthly, either the choice of the People in Parliament is to be the Ground
and Rule of the Kings Assent, or nothing but his Pleasure, and so all Bills
though never so necessary for public Good and Preservation, and after never so
much pains and consultation of both Houses, may be rejected, and so they made
mere Ciphers, and we brought to that pass, as neither to have no Laws, or such
only as come immediately from the King (who often is a man of Pleasure, and
little seen in public Affairs, to be able to judge) and so the Kingdoms great
Council must be subordinated either to his mere Will, and then what Difference
between a free Monarchy, and an absolute, saving that the one rules without
Council, and the other against it, or at the best but to a Cabinet Council
consisting commonly of Men of private Interests, but certainly of no public
Trust.

Ob. But if the King must consent to such Laws as the Parliament shall choose eo
nomine, they may then propound unreasonable things to him, as to consent to his
own Deposing, or to the lessening his own Revenue, etc.

Ans. So that the issue is, whether it be fitter to trust the Wisdom and
Integrity of our Parliament, or the Will and Pleasure of the King in this case
of so great and public Concernment. In a word, the King being made the
Fountain of Justice and Protection to his People by the fundamental Laws or
Constitution of this Kingdom, he is therefore to give life to such Acts and
Things as tend thereunto, which Acts depend not upon his Pleasure, but though
they are to receive their greater Vigor from him, yet are they not to be
suspended at pleasure by him, for that which at first was intended by the
Kingdom, for an honorable way of Subsistence and Administration must not be
wrested contrrry to the nature of this Polity, (which is a free and mist
Monarchy and not absolute) to its Destruction and Confusion, so that in case
the King in his Person should decline his Duty, the King in his Courts is bound
to perform it, where his Authority properly resides, for if he refuse that
Honor which the Republic by its fundamental Constitution has conferred upon
him, and will not put forth the Acts of it, for the end it was given him, viz.
for the Justice and Safety of his People, this hinders not but that they who
have as fundamentally reserved a Power of being and well-being in their own
hands by the Concurrence of Parliamentary Authority to the Royal Dignity, may
thereby provide for their own Subsistence, wherein is acted the Kings juridical
Authority though his personal pleasure be withheld, for his legal and juridical
Power is included and supposed in the very being, and consequently in the Acts
of Courts of Justice, whose being he may as well suspend as their Power of
Acting, for that without this is but a Cipher, and therefore neither their
being nor their acting so depend upon him, as not to be able to act and execute
common Justice and Protection without him, in case he deny to act with them,
and yet both so depend upon him, as that he is bound both in Duty and Honor,
by the Constitution of this Polity to act in them and they for him, so that
(according to that Axiom in Law) The King can do no wrong, because his
juridical Power and Authority is always to control his personal Miscarriages.

London's Flames Revivd: OR, AN ACCOUNT OF SEVERAL INFORMATIONS Exhibited to a
Committee appointed by PARLIAMENT, September the 25th, 1666. To Enquire into
the BURNING of LONDON. WITH Several other Informations concerning other Fires
in Southwark, Fetter-Lane, and elsewhere.
UPon the Second of September, 1666. the Fire began in London, at one Farriner
's House, a Baker, in Pudding-Lane, between the Hours of One and Two in the
Morning; and continued burning until the Sixth of September following,
consuming, as by the Surveyors appears in Print, Three hundred seventy three
Acres within the Walls of the City of London, and Sixty three Acres and Three
Roods without the Walls: There remains Seventy five Acres and Three Roods yet
standing within the Walls, unburnt. Eighty nine Parish Churches, besides
Chapels, burnt. Eleven Parishes within the Walls yet standing. Houses burnt,
Thirteen thousand and two hundred.

Per Jonas Moore Ralph Gatrix
Surveyors.


UPon the 18th Day of September, 1666. the Parliament came together: And upon
the 25th of the same Month, the House of Commons appointed a Committee to
enquire into the Causes of the late Fire; before whom the following
Informations were given in, and proved before the Committee; as by their Report
will more clearly appear, bearing date the 22th of January, 1666. and upon the
8th of February following, the Parliament was Prorogued, before they came to
give their Judgment thereupon.

Die Martis 25 Septembris 1666. 18 Car. 2.
Resolved, etc.

THat a Committee be appointed to enquire into the Causes of the late Fire, and
that it be referred to Sir Charles Harbord Mr. Sandys Col. Birch Sir Robert
Brook Sir Thomas Littleton Mr. Prin Mr. Jones Sir Solomon Swale Sir Thomas
Tomlins Mr. Seymour Mr. Finch Lord Herbert Sir John Heath Mr. Milward Sir
Richard Ford Mr. Robert Milward Sir William Lowther Sir Richard Vatley Sir
Rowland Beckley Sir Thomas Allen Mr. Whorwood Mr. Coventry Serj. Maynard Sir
John Talbot Mr. Morley Mr. Garraway Sir Francis Goodrick Col. Strangeways Sir
Edward Massey Sir Edmond Walpool Sir Robert Atkins Sir Thomas Gower Mr. Trevor
Sir Thomas Clifford Sir Henry Caesar Sir John Monson Sir John Charleton Lord
Ancram Mr. Pepis Sir Richard Everard Mr. Crouch Mr. Merrel Sir William Hickman
Sir Richard Brown Mr. Maynard


And they are to meet to Morrow, at Two of the Clock in the Afternoon, in the
Speaker's Chamber; and to send for Persons, Papers and Records.

William Goldsbrough, Cler. Dom. Com.


October 9. 1666.
Ordered, that these Members following be added to the Committee appointed to
Enquire into the Causes of the late Fire, viz. Sir John Pelham, Mr. Hugh
Buscowen, Mr. Giles Hungerford, Sir William Lewis, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Sir
John Brampstone, Mr. Milward, Mr. Buscowen, and all the Members that serve for
the City of London.

Will. Goldsbrough, Cler. Dom. Com.


October 16. 1666.
Ordered, That Mr. Davies, Sir Thomas Higgons, Mr. S. John, Sir Richard
Frankling, Sir Thomas Tomkins, Mr. Devereux, Mr. Millard, Mr. Lewis, Mr.
Dodswell, Sir James Thyn, Sir Edmond Pierse, Mr. Coleman, Sir Thomas Allen, Mr.
Giles Hungerford, Mr. Churchill, be added to the Committee appointed to enquire
into the Causes of the late Fire.

Will. Goldsbrough, Cler. Dom. Com.


THE Honorable Committee, according to the forementioned Orders of the House,
did meet in the Speaker's Chamber, and having chose Sir Robert Brook for their
Chairman, proceeded to receive many considerable Informations from diverse
credible Persons about the Matter wherewith they were entrusted, and thereupon
did at last agree that Sir Robert Brook should make the ensuing Report to the
Honorable House of Commons.

The Report of Sir Robert Brook, Chairman to the Committee that was appointed
by the House of Commons to Enquire into the Firing of the City of London; made
the Two and Twentieth of January, 1666.
IN a Letter from Alansen of the 23 of August 1666, New Style, written from one
Dural to a Gentleman lodging in the House of one of the Ministers of the French
Church in London, called Monsieur Herault, there were these Expressions.

Pray acquaint me with the truth of certain News which is common in this
Country, That a Fire from Heaven is fallen upon a City called Belke, situated
on the side of the River of Thames, where a World of People have been killed
and burnt, and Houses also consumed. Which seemed a word of Cabal, cast out by
some that were knowing, and others that might be ignorant of the signification
of it.

Mrs. Elizabeth Styles, informs, That in April last, in an eager Discourse she
had with a French Servant of Sir Vere Fan, he hastily replyd'd, You English
Maids will like the Frenchmen better, when there is not a House left between
Temple Bar and London Bridge. To which she answered, I hope your Eyes will
never see that. He replied, This will come to pass between June and October.

William Tisdale informs, That he being about the beginning of July at the
Greybound in St. Martins, with one Fitz Harris an Irish Papist, heard him say,
There would be a sad Desolation in September, in November a worse, in December
all would be united into one. Whereupon he asked him, where this Desolation
would be? He answered, In London.

Mr. Light of Ratcliff, having some Discourse with Mr. Lanhorn of the
Middle Temple, Barister, (reputed a zealous Papist) about February 15 last,
after some Discourse in Disputation about Religion, he took him by the hand,
and said to him, You expect great things in Sixty Six, and think that Rome will
be destroyed, but what if it be London?

Mr. Kitely of Barkin in Essex, informs, That one Mrs. Yazly, a Papist, of
Ilford in the said County, came unto his House, August the 13th. and being in
Discourse with his Mother, said, They say the next Thursday will be the hottest
Day that ever was in England. She replied, I hope the hottest season of the
Year is now past. To which she answered, I know not whether it be the hottest
for Weather or for Action. This Mrs. Yazly coming to the same House the Week
after the Fire, Mr. Kitely said to her with some trouble, I have often thought
of your Hot Thursday: to which she replied, It was not indeed upon the
Thursday, but it happened upon the Sunday was sevennight after. Mrs. Yazly
hearing this Evidence produced against her, endeavored to avoid the Words,
saying, That upon the 13th of August she did tell Mrs. Kitely, That they say
the next Thursday will be the darkest Thursday that ever was in England, but
not otherwise; which she affirms to have received from one Finchman, an old
Woman of Ilford; who being examined by a Justice of Peace to discover the truth
thereof, denied that ever she said any such words to Mrs. Yazly, or that she
had discoursed with her about any such Matter; and as to the subsequent Words,
she says Mrs. Yazly denies ever to have spoken them: But Mr. Kitely offered in
her presence (if it should be demanded) to bring his Mother and Wife to
testify the same.

William Ducket Esquire a Member of the House, informs, That one Henry Baker of
Chippenham in the County of Wilts, coming from Market with one John Woodman of
Kelloway in the same County, the Thursday before the Fire began in London, they
had some Discourse about the Buying of a Yoke of Fat Bullocks, wherein they
differed, because Woodman who was to Sell them was desired to keep them a while
in his hands; But the said Woodman denied so to do, for that as he alleged, he
could not stay in the Country till that time which Baker would have them
delivered to him in, and being asked whether he was a going, he refused to
tell, asking what he had to do to make that Question: Put riding a little
further, the said Woman expressed these Words, You have brave Blades at
Chippenham, you made Bonefires lately for beating the Dutch; but since you
delight in Bonefires, you shall have your Bellies full of them ere it be long:
Adding, That if he lived one Week longer, he should see London as sad a London,
as ever it was since the World began; and in some short time after, he should
see as bloody a time as ever was, since England was England. This Discourse was
not much taken notice of at that time it was spoken; but when the City of
London was burnt, the said Henry Baker gave this Information to the said Mr.
Ducket; and whereupon he issued out his Warrant to apprehend Woodman, but he
was gone out of the Country, and cannot be heard of since.

Robert Hubert of Roan in Normandy, who acknowledged that he was one of those
that fired the House of Mr. Farryner a Baker in Pudding-Lane, from whence the
Fire had its beginning, confessed that he came out of France with one Stephen
Peidloe about four Months before the Fire, and went into Sweden with him, where
he also staid with him as his Companion four Months, and then they came
together into England in a Swedish Ship called the Skipper, where he staid on
Board with the said Peidloe till that Saturday Night in which the Fire brake
out. When Peidloe taking him out of the Ship, carried him into Pudding-lane,
and he being earnest to know whither he would carry him, he would not satisfy
him till he had brought him to the place, and then he told him, that he had
brought three Balls, and gave him one of them to throw into the House. And he
would have been further satisfied in the Design, as he said, before he would
execute it: But Peidloe was so impatient that he would not hear him, and then
he did the Fact; which was, That he put a Fire-ball at the end of a long Pole,
and lighting it with a piece of Match, he put it in at a Window, and staid till
he saw the House in a Flame. He confessed that there were Three and twenty
Accomplices, whereof Piedloe was the Chief.

Mr. Graves a French Merchant living in St. Mary Axe, informed this Committee,
that he had known Hubert ever since he was four Years old, and has ever
observed him to be a Person of a mischievous Inclination, and therefore fit for
any villainous Enterprise; and because of his Knowledge he had of him, he went
to visit him in Prison, where when he saw him, he could not but commiserate the
Condition whereinto he had brought himself. And for his better Discovery of the
Fact, he told him, the said Hubert, that he did not believe he had done that of
which he confessed himself guilty. So which Hubert replied, Yes Sir, I am
guilty of it, and have been brought to it, by the instigation of Monsieur
Peidloe; but not out of any malice to the English Nation, but from a desire of
Reward which he promised me upon my Return into France.

It is observable, That this miserable Creature who confessed himself to the
Committee, to be a Protestant was a Papist, and died so. And as for the
aforesaid Peidloe, the said Mr. Graves informed, that he had had a full
knowledge of him, and knew him to a very Deboist Person, and apt to any wicked
Design. Moreover for a clear Conviction of the Guilt of the aforesaid Hubert,
Mr. Lowman, the Keeper of the White-Lion Prison, was appointed to set him upon
a Horse, and to go with him, and see if he could find out the place where he
threw the Fire-Ball. Upon which, Hubert with more readiness than they that were
well acquainted with the place, went to Pudding-Lane, unto the very place where
the House that was first fired, stood, saying, Here stood the House. The Jailer
endeavored to draw him from that belief, and putting him upon seeking another
place; but he positively persisted in what he had first said; and affirmed that
to have been the said House. It being intimated to the Committee, That
notwithstanding the Confession of the said Hubert, it was confidently reported,
the Fire in the forementioned Farryners House, began by Accident. The Committee
therefore sent for him the said Farryner before them, who being examined, said,
That it was impossible any Fire should happen in his House by Accident: For he
had after Twelve of the Clock that Night gone through every Room thereof, and
found no Fire but in one Chimney, where the Room was paved with Bricks, which
Fire he diligently raked up in Embers. He was then asked, Whether no Window or
Door might let in Wind to disturb those Coals? He affirmed there was no
possibility for any Wind to disturb them; and that it was absolutely set on
fire of Purpose.

Dawes Weymansel Esquire, one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, Informed,
That he saw a Man apprehended in the Time of the Fire, near the Temple, with
his Pockets stufit with Combustible Matter, made of Flax, Tow, and such like
Materials.

Doctor John Packer informs, That he saw a Person in the time of the Fire,
throw some Combustible Matter into a Shop in the Old Bailey, which he thinks
was the Shop of an Apothecary; and that immediately thereupon he saw a great
smoke, and smelt a smell of Brimstone, The Person that did this, immediately
run away; but upon the outcry of the People he was taken by the Guards.

Mr. Randal, Mr. Haslam, Mr. Humphrey Bowyer, do all agree, That they saw a
Person flinging something into a House near St. Antholins Church; and that
thereupon the House was on fire, and the smoke thereof infested the adjacent
Houses. And when this was done, there was No fire near the place.

Mr. Michael March, an Officer in the Trained Bands in a Company of Sir Richard
Browns's apprehended a Walloon in the time of the Fire, at the Nags-head in
Leaden Hall Street, with an Instrument like a Dark-Lanthorn, made (as is
conceived) to lay a Train of Powder, and it was filled with Gunpowder. There
were two more of the same Nation in his Company. They being asked to what use
they employed the same Instrument, would give no Account thereof.

Newton Killingworth Esquire informed, That he apprehended a Person during the
Fire, about whom he found much Combustible Matter, and certain black things, of
a long figure, which he could not endure to hold in his hand, by reason of
their extreme heat. This Person was so surprised at first, that he would not
answer to any Question; but being on his way to White Hall, he acted the part
of a Madman, and so continued while he was with him.

Sir John Maynard a Member of this House affirms, That he had some of that
Combustible Matter in his hands; and though it were in its natural Substance,
and unfired, yet the heat of it was scarcely to be endured by the touch.

Mr. Freeman of Southwark Brewer, (whose House was lately fired) informs, That
on the Day his House was fired (about a quarter of an hour before that
happened) a Paper with a Ball of Wildfire, containing near a pound weight
wrapped in it, was found in the Nave of a Wheel, in a Wheelers Yard, where lay a
great quantity of Timber. How his House was fired, he knows not; but this he
affirmed to the Committee, that it could not be by Accident, because there had
not been any Candle or Fire in the House where the Hay lay, that whole day; and
that the Hay being laid in very dry, and before Midsummer, could not possibly
be set on Fire within it self. Moreover he said, that the Hay-lost was on Fire
on the top of the House, and that the Fire spread from the one end of the Roof
to another in an instant.

Mr. Richard Harwood informs, That being near the Feathers Tavern by St. Paul's,
upon the Fourth of September, he saw something through a grate in a Cellar,
like Wildfire; by the sparkling and spitting of it, he could judge it to be no
other; whereupon he gave notice of it, to some Soldiers that were near the
place, who caused it to be quenched.

I had order from the Committee to acquaint you, that we traced several Persons
upon strong Suspicion (during the Fire) to the Guards, but could not make
further Discovery of them.

Thus far was the Report.

What follows was given into the Committee, but not by them reported to the
House at that time

IN Obedience to an Order directed to me, from the Honorable Committee of the
House of Commons, then sitting in the Speaker's Chamber, on the Second of
October, 1666. I did carry Robert Hubert to St. Katherines Tower by Water, to
let me know the place where the Swedish Ship lay, that brought him and other
Frenchmen from Stockholm, and he brought me to the Dock over against Mr.
Corsellis his Brewhouse, and did then verify to me and Mr. Corsellis, that the
Ship lay there, until such time as he with Mr. Peidloe and others did go and
set Fire to a House. And this Hubert did then further say, That Mr. Peidloe did
fix two Fireballs to a long Pole, and put them into a Window, and that he the
said Robert Hubert did fire one in the same manner, and put it in at the same
Window. But with all the inquiry and diligence that I could use, I could
neither find nor hear of any such Vessel. And from thence I carried the said
Robert Hubert to Tower Hill, and did then desire him to show me the House that
they did fire, and he said that it was near the Bridge. So we went along
Thames Street toward the Bridge; but before we came to the Bridge, the said
Robert Hubert said, that the House was up there (pointing with his hand up
Pudding-lane:) So I bid him go to the place, and he went along the Bricks and
Rubbish, and made a stand: Then I did ask one Robert Penny, a Wine-porter,
which was the Bakers House; and he told me, that was the house where the
aforesaid Robert Hubert stood. So I went to Robert Hubert, and stood by him,
and turned my Back toward the Bakers House, and demanded of him which House it
was that he fired, (directing to other Houses contrary to that house) but he
turning himself about, said, This was the house (pointing to the Bakers House)
that was first fired. Then by reason of his Lameness, I set him on a Horse, and
carried him to several other places, but no other place he would acknowledge;
but rode back again to the Bakers House, and said again, That was the House
(pointing at the Bakrs-house.) And this I do humbly certify to this Honorable
Committee.

By me John Lowman, Keeper of His Majesty's County-Goal for Surry.

SIR,
HEaring that you are Chairman to the Committee for examining the Fire of
London, I thought good to acquaint you with this Information that I have
received William Chapneys, a Hatband-maker, now living upon Horsly-down, was
upon Tuesday Morning, September, the 14th. 1666. In Shoe-lane, and there met
with a Constable who had apprehended a Frenchman whom he took firing a House
there with Fireballs, and charged the said Champneys to assist him, who
carried the said Frenchman to Salisbury Court, hoping there to have found a
Justice; but finding that place burning down, returned into Fleet Street, who
was presently called upon by the Commander of the Life Guard, to know what the
matter was: the Constable told him, he had apprehended a Frenchman firing a
House in Shoe-lane, he examined the Person, and committed him to the Guard, and
told the Constable, he would secure him, and carried him along with him. The
Constable asked him, whether he should go along with him, to give in his
Evidence: He replied, that he had done enough, and might go home. But what
became of the Frenchman, he knows not.

Your Humble Servant, S. G.

In a Letter directed from Ipswich, for the Honorable Sir Robert Brook, it is
intimated, That about the 30th of August, 1666. One of the Constables of Cotton
of Hartsmer Hundred, being about the Survey of that Town, about Hearth-money,
was told by one Mr. William Thomson, a Roman Catholic in that Town, That
though times were like to be sad, yet if he found any cause to change his
Religion, he would see he should not want: And further said to him, What will
you say, if you should hear that London is burnt?

The Affidavits touching a Frenchman, that said there were three Hundred of
them Engaged in Firing the City.
The Informations of Richard Cound of St. Giles in the Fields, Ironmonger;
William Cotes, Samuel Page, Francis Cogny, Edmond Daikns, and Richard Pardoe
taken the 8th Day of September, 1666. by Sir Justinian Lewen Knight, one of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, upon Oath, as
follows.

RIchard Cound says, That upon Tuesday night last about Twelve or one of the
Clock, there was a Frenchman brought by the Watch to this Informant's Father's
House, being at the Sign of the White-hart in King Street, taken as a
suspicious Person; The said Person being questioned by them, whether he was not
one of those that fired the City, or had any Hand therein, or any Privity or
Knowledge of any that had designed the same, or words to that effect; the said
Person answered a great while in a perverse manner, quite different from the
Question. But being further pressed to tell the truth, and being told, that if
he were guilty, it would be the only way to save his Life; he did at first
obstinately deny, that he knew any thing of any Plot. Whereupon a young Man
took the Prisoner aside, to the end of the Room, and after some private
Discourse between them, they both returned to this Informant and the rest of
the Company, and the said young Man spoke openly to us, in the hearing of the
Prisoner, That the said Frenchman and Prisoner had confessed, there were Three
hundred French- men that were in a Plot or Conspiracy to fire the City. Upon
which this Informant and others spoke to the said Frenchman in these Words, or
to the same effect: Well, Monsieur, you have done very well to confess what you
have done, and no doubt but you may have your pardon, if you will confess all
you know of this Plot: And thereupon further asked him, Are there no more than
Three hundred Persons in the said Plot? He answered, Theree are no more than
Three hundred Persons. Then we inquired who they were, and how he came to know
they were Three hundred,? To which he would give no direct answer, but put it
off with other extravagant Discourse. And being asked why he came to St.
Giles's Parish (where he was apprehended.) He told a Story, that he came from
Islington Fields, where his Masters Goods were; but the Goods were now removed,
he could not tell whither; and that his Master bid him go up and down the
Fields, but would not declare upon what Occasion, or for what end he was so to
do; and being asked whether there were Three hundred Persons engaged in this
Design or Plot? He replied that there were Three hundred engaged in it.

The several Informations of William Cotes of Cow-lane of London, Painter; of
Samuel Page of St. Giles in the Fields, Weaver; of Edmund Dakins of St. Giles
aforesaid, Bookseller; of Francis Cogky of St. Andrews, Holborn; of Richard
Pardoe, Victualler, taken upon Oath, etc. tend to the Confirmation of the
foregoing Relation.

An Extract of a Letter from Hydleburgh in the Palatinate, September, 29. 1666.
SIR,
YOurs of the Sixth current came on Wednesday to me, and brought the ill
tidings of the burning of London, constantly expected and discoursed of amongst
the Jesuits to my knowledge for these fifteen Years last past, as to happen in
this Year. In which they do also promise to themselves and others Introduction
of the public Exercise of the Catholic Religion. This Letter was sent to Mr.
Alton, who lives in New Gravel-lane in Shadwel, who negotiates the Business of
the Palatinate, and will produce the Original if there he Occasion.

The Information of John Chishul, Schoolmaster in Enfield.
UPon Friday August, 31. Mrs. St. George, and her eldest Daughter Susanna St.
George, both Popish Recusants, came to visit Mrs. Rebecca Eves, Widow, at her
House in Enfield; where speaking concerning the Session of Parliament drawing
nigh, Mrs. St. George told her, that some would hereafter be called to account
for a Plot. Being asked for what? She told her in her ear, For burning the
City. Mrs. Eves afterward hearing of the firing of London, (and going to a
place where she might behold it) met with Mrs. Susanna St. George, (and amongst
other Discourse) told her how much her Mothers words, which she spoke the
Friday before, did run in her thoughts; which she repeated to her Daughter, who
made this Reply, That her Mother was very apt to talk, and that she had been
fain to keep her Mother within doors during the Fire, fearing lest she should
talk.

After this (during the Fire) Mrs. Eves met with Mrs. Cook, another Popish
Recusant, and of the same Family; to whom she also related Mrs. St. George her
Words: who made this Return, That she was a worthy Woman to keep Council!

Also the Lady St. George at Enfield, in the Lord of Lincoln's House, declared
to Mrs. Rebecca Eves of the said Town, That within a few Days, the City of
London would be laid in ashes. This was spoken about two Days before the Fire
happened.

Mrs. Eves of Enfield her Examination before Mr. Jolliff and Mr. Marvel,
December, 20. 1666. concerning Mrs. St. George.
MRs. Rebecca Eves of Enfield, three or four Days, or within a Week before the
Fire, receiving a Visit in her own House, from Mrs. St. George (amongst other
Discourse) Mrs. St. George asked her, What News she heard? And if she knew when
the Parliament sat? Mrs. Eves replied, She thought, shortly. The other asked,
If she heard of any that were to be called in question before the Parliament?
Mrs. Eves said, About what? Mrs. St. George said, About a Plot. Mrs. Eves
asked, What Plot? Mrs. St. George answered, About firing the City. Mrs. Eves
said, I hope God will preserve the City; but People use not to be questioned
before the Fact be committed. So the Discourse was waved for that time.

At the time of the Fire, Mrs. Eves went out to look toward the Fire; and
mentioning Mrs. St. George, one in the Company replied behind her, (but she
cannot certainly fix the Person) A prime woman to keep Council! After the Fire,
Mrs. St. George her Daughter came to Mrs. Eves, who asked her, If she remembered
what her Mother had said? She said, My Mother is such a Woman, she will speak
what she thinks. Afterward she said, That she had much ado to keep her Mother
in at the time of the Fire, lest she should speak some things she should be
questioned for.

At the first Discourse, Mrs. Eves, her Daughter, and others of the Family were
present. Mr. St. George, his Wife, and Family, have since left Enfield. They
are all great Papists, and there are many more in the Neighborhood.

A Letter directed, and sent by the Post to Mr. Samuel Thurlton, in
Leicestshire, from a Person unknown, as follows; Dated, October, 1666.
My Friend,
YOur Presence is now more necessary at London, than where you are, that you
may determine how to dispose of your Estate in Southwark: For it is determined
by Humane Council (if not frustrated by Divine Power) that the Suburbs will
shortly be destroyed. Your Capacity is large enough to understand: Proceed as
your Genious shall instruct you.

Cave, Cave, Fuge, Vale.

SAturday the First of September, 1666, the Day before the Fire in London, came
one Urmstraw from Ireland, with a Letter from thence, to one Esquire Holeroft, at
Eastham in Essex, (being related to that Family by Marriage;) where he supped.
After which he asked the Esquire, If he had heard any thing of the Firing of
London? Who answered No. But Urmstraw said, He would shortly; for it was, or
would be so that Night. The Esquire answered, if it were, he hoped it might be
quenched again; as it had been many a time. But Urmstraw answered, No, it would
not be quenched; for it should be said of it, as of Troy: repeating a Latin
Verse,

N^ne Seges est ubi Troja fuit.
Now Corn grows where Troy-Town stood.
This Discourse was managed pleasantly by him; after which they went to their
Beds: And in the Morning, this Urmstraw enquires earnestly, Whether they had
heard of the Firing of London that Night? They answered, No. But he prayed him
to send one of the Family out, to enquire; and, doubtless, they would hear of
it. Upon which a Messenger was sent; who brought word from a Man that traveled
upon the Road, that it was on fire indeed. After Dinner, this Urmstraw desired
his Horse to be sadled that he might be gone. The Esquire entreats him to stay
till next Morning: But he answered, Therefore I would see London before it be
quite burnt; for I shall never see it more.

Sunday Morning, the Fire being begun in London, a Person coming from Deptford,
when he came to Barnaby-street end in Southwark, hears a Woman cry out against
a Frenchman, for throwing Fireballs; he runs after him, and lays hold of him.
He asked him, what Commission he had for so doing? He answered, That his
Commission was in his Constancy. The People coming in, they searched him, and
found Fireballs in his Pockets. He was delivered to the Guard in Southwark, but
heard of no more.

A Citizen being fired out of his House, had hired a Lodging in Queen street in
Covent Garden; and going up Holborn, there being a Crowd of People, steps in
amongst them, and hears a Woman say, that she had a hand in firing the City.
The People asked her, whether she was an Anabaptist? She said, No. Are you an
Independent? She said, No. Are you a Presbyterian? She said, No. Are you a
Roman Catholic? To which she would give no answer. The Citizen asked her, But,
Mistress; Had you a hand in burning the City? She answered, What would you have
me to say? I have confessed it already, and do deserve to die for it. This she
said, with great trembling; and seemed to be much troubled. The Citizen
enquired for a Constable: The People reply, There was one gone for. But a
Gallant comes, and takes her by the Arm, and leads her away: saying, He would
have her examined: And forthwith, another Gallant closes with him; and they
both carried her to the Griffin-Tavern in Holbourn. The Citizen follows them,
to see the Result of the Business: But they with the Master of the house, shut
out the Company (all but the Citizen, supposing him to be one of their own
Company,) but asking one the other concerning him, and finding him not of them,
put him out again. Whereupon, he goes to the next Company of Soldiers, and
enquires for their Captain: who replied, He was not there; but told him, Yonder
is my L. C. Unto whom the Citizen repaired; and acquainted his Lordship, That
there was a Woman apprehended (and rescued by a couple of Gallants) that had
confessed she had a hand in burning the City, and was at such a Tavern.
Whereupon the L. C. called to a Captain in the Street, and ordered him to go
with that Man, and apprehend the Woman that he should direct him to. Whereupon,
he goes with the Citizen, and takes her, with the first Gallant, who stood up
highly in her defense, and carries them both to an Alehouse on the other side
of the way. The Citizen perceiving that nothing would be done with her, leaves
his Name with the Captain, and where he might be found; but was never called
for, to justify the Words spoken by her.

A Woman standing in White-Chappel with a Company about her, was asked what the
matter was? She said, that she met two young Men in that place, and asked them
how it was with the Fire: They answered It Is now almost out, if it can be kept
so; but the Rogues renew it with their Fireballs. As says another Woman,
Young men if you have a heart to it, you may be hired to throw them. It was
asked her, What was become of the Woman that spoke thus? She answered, That she
had apprehended her, and delivered her to the under Beadle of White-Chappel
Parish. The Woman falling under the Accusation (not being able to deny it)
there being many Witnesses at that time that heard it: She was delivered to Sir
John Robinson but heard of no more.

One from France writes to his Correspondent in London, to know the truth of
what was muttered in Paris, Whether London was laid in ashes or no. The Letter
being dated a Week before the Fire began.

From Surrey in or near Darkin, a Person in ordinary habit, who was yet
observed to take place of all the Nobility and Gentry among the Papists, seeing
the People of Darkin mourn for the burning of the City, he spoke slightingly of
it, telling them, they should have something else to trouble themselves for;
and that shortly Darkin should be laid as low as London. Whereupon the People
made at him, and one Tr. H. a great Papist rescues him, and sends him away in
his Coach to London This was deposed before Sir Adam Brown, a Justice of Peace,
and a Member of Parliament.

These following Relations (for Substance) were delivered to Sir Robert Brooks,
Chairman of the Committee, a little before the Prorogation of the Parliament.
A true Relation made by one of the Grand Jury, at Hick 's-Hall, at a general
Quarter Sessions, presently after the Fire in London, who was upon Trial of
some of those that fired the City.
THat near West-Smithfield in Chicklane, there was a Man taken in the very Act
of firing a House, by the Inhabitants and Neighbors; and carrying him away
through Smithfield, to have him before a Justice for the Fact committed, the
King's Life Guard perceiving it, made up unto them, and demanded their Prisoner
from them; but they refused to let him go. The Lifeguard Men told them, That
he was one of the King's Servants, and said, We will have him. And thereupon
they drew out their Swords and Pistols, and rescued him out of the Peoples
hands by force of Arms.

A Bill of Indictment was brought against him, and two or three Witnesses did
swear unto it, and the Bill was found by the Grand Jury, who did carry it to
the Old Baily, and presented it to the Lord Chief Justice; but it came to no
further Trial, nor was ever seen after at the Old Baily, so far as this Person,
upon his best Enquiry, could ever hear, or learn.

Concerning an Housekeeper at So-ho, who fired his own Dwelling House.
FIrst he secured all his Goods in his Garden, and then went in and fired his
House; which when he had done, he endeavored to get away out at his Foredoor.
A Neighbor demanded of him, Who had fired his House? He answered, The Devil.
Upon that, his Neighbor bad him stand, or he would run his Halbert into his
Guts. His answer was, If you do, there are enough left behind me to do the
Work. Whereupon, he was secured, and a Bill of Indictment brought against him,
and about three Witnesses did swear to it: And his Son came in as Witness
against him; who was demanded by the Foreman, What he could say as to the
firing of his Father's House? He said, That his Father did fire it with a
Fire-ball. It was demanded of him, Whether he did fire it above stairs, or
below? He answered, Above stairs. The Bill was likewise found, but the
Petty-jury did not find him guilty.

A Maid was taken in the Street, with two Fireballs in her Lap: Some did
demand of her, Where she had them? She said, One of the King's Lifeguard threw
them into her Lap. She was asked, Why she had not caused him to be apprehended?
She said, That she knew not what they were. She was indicted for this, and the
Bill found against her, and turned over to the Old Baily; but no Prosecution
upon it.

In the time of the Fire, a Constable took a Frenchman firing an house, seized
on him; and going to a Magistrate with him, met his R. H. the D. Y. who asked
the Reason of the Tumult. One told him, that a Frenchman was taken firing a
House: His H. called for the Man, who spoke to him in French: The D. asked, Who
would attest it? The Constable said, I took him in the Act, and I will attest
it. The D. took him into his Custody, and said, I will secure him. But he was
heard of no more.

On Monday the third of September, there was a Frenchman taken firing a house;
and upon searching of him, Fireballs were found about him. At which time four
of the Lifeguard rescued the Frenchman, and took him away from the People,
after their usual manner in the whole time of the Fire.

One Mr. Belland, a Frenchman, living at Maribone, who bought great store of
Pastboard for a considerable time before the Fire of the City of London, to the
Quantity of twenty gross in one Shop, and much more elsewhere, was asked by a
Citizen, What he did with all that Past-board? He answered that he made
Fireworks for the King's Pleasure. The Citizen asked him. What does the King
give you? He replied, Nothing, only I have respect at Court: The Citizen said,
Take heed, Mr. Belland, you do not expend your Estate, and then lose your
Respect at Court, for you are at a great Charge. Belland answered, Sir, do you
think this a great matter? I use all this my self; But if you did see all the
great quantities I have made elsewhere in three several places, three, four,
and five miles off, you would say something. Another time the Stationer with
whom he dealt for the Past-board, being at his house in Maribone, and wondering
at the many Thousands of Fireworks, that lay piled up of several sorts, he
said, Sir, do you wonder at this? If you should see the quantity that I have
made elsewhere by other Men, you would wonder indeed.

The Sunday before the Fire began, this Belland came to the Shop where he was
wont to buy his Past-board, but the Stationer being not there, he desired a
Citizen (the Stationers's Neighbor) to speak to him, and to let him know that
he had much wronged him in disappointing him of the four Gross of Past-board
which he should have had of him, and said that he should not do his work by the
time; and that if he had it not by Tuesday night, it would come too late, he
should have no occasion for it after that (which was the Tuesday Night before
the Fire) Mr. Belland, (said the Citizen) What is the reason of your haste?
Have you any Show suddenly before the King? At which he blushed, and would give
no ^^swer. Says the Citizen, What kind of Fireworks do you make? only such as
will crack and run? Belland answered, I make of all sorts? some that will burn
and make no crack at all, but will fly up in a pure body of Flame, higher then
the top of Paul 's, and waver in the air, Says the Citizen, Mr. Belland, when
you make your Show, shall I see it? Yes, said Belland, I promise you, and gave
his hand upon it. Which Citizen in the time of the Fire being upon the Thames
in a ^oat, saw to his great Amazement, sundry Bodies of Fire, burning above the
Fire of the Houses as high again as Paul's, wavering in the Air, directly
according to Belland's Description.

And after the burning of the City, some Citizen agreed to go to Maribone, to
speak with this Belland; and by the way, met with his two Maids and his Boy;
and having some knowledge of them, asked for young Mr. Belland: who told them,
he was not at home, neither knew they where he was. But the Citizens observing,
that they carried with them Rabbets and Capons ready dressed, concluded they
were going to him, and told them so, whereat they were surly, and bade them go
look him, for they would not tell them where he was. Upon that, the Citizens
resolved to follow them, and did, till they came to Whitehall. The servants
went up Stairs, and down stairs, on purpose to have lost them, but could not,
for they kept close to them: And at last, one of the Maids went to a Door, and
knocked; crying out, They were dogged by two Men, that they could not be rid
of. With that, young Mr. Belland opened the Door, saying to one of the
Citizens, Sir, your Servant: How do you do? One of them answered, Both I, and
many thousand Families more, are the worse for you; for you, under pretense of
making Fireworks for the King, have destroyed a famous City, and ruined a
noble People. To which Belland replies, I make nothing but innocent things,
that will do no harm; for which I have a Patent from the King. But the Citizen
answered, If the King gave you a Patent, it was but for your self. Who
answered, No. Said the Citizen, What made you then to employ so many Men, in so
many Places? No, said Belland, I set no man to work; neither know I any Man
that makes of them, but my self; though he had often before said otherwise. While
they were thus discoursing, old Belland looks from under the Hangings; Sir,
said he, I hear you charge my Son with Suspicion of burning the City; I pray
you, speak lower, (casting his eyes about, fearing the Ladies, passing by,
might hear;) and said, My Son does nothing, but what he has a Patent from the
King for; and shall have an Order to sue any Man, that shall accuse him. And he
said, My Son is no Prisoner, but lodged here, to prevent him from the rage of
the Common People. Well, said the Citizen, You must give an Account for what
you have done: And so they shut the Door upon them. The Citizen went, and
enquired whose Lodgings they were; and were told, they belonged to a Lady.

The Information of Thomas Middleton Chyrurgeon, late Inhabitant of St. Brides,
London.
I The said Thomas Middleton do hereby certify. That upon the Sunday in the
Afternoon (the Day wherein the dreadful Fire brake out in Pudding-Lane, which
consumed the City) hearing the general Outcry, that the City was fired by
Papists and French, I repaired to the top of a Church-steeple, near the Three
Cranes, in the Vintrey; where my self, and several others, observed the Motion
of the Fire for two or three Hours together: And we all took Notice, that the
Fire did break forth out of several Houses, when the Houses which were then
burning were at a good distance from them every way. And, more particularly, I
saw the Fire break out from the inside of Lawrence Poultney-steeple, when there
was no Fire near it. These, and such like observations begat in me a
Persuasion, that the Fire was maintained by Design. Upon Monday, I repaired
again into the City, and found, as the Day before, that the Fire did break
forth in fresh Houses, at a great distance one from another. And as I was
returning home, passing through Watling-street, by a Tobacco Merchant's House,
I saw the Master of the House come down Stairs, driving a young Fellow before
him; saying to him, You Rogue, do you come to rob me? What did you do in my
Garret? Or Words to that purpose; and pusht him out of doors: All which I
observed, and he seemed to be a Trench-man: He was a short, black Fellow, of
about Two and twenty Years o^ Age: And as soon as he was out of the House, he
having a loose Coat on, in a way of privacy, shuffles something under his Coat;
whereupon, I laid hold of him, and said, Sirrah, What have you there? The
Fellow replied, What is that to you; the Master of the House knows me. Upon
that, I asked the Master of the House, whether he knew the Fellow: He answered,
He knew him not. Whereupon I search^d the ^ellow, and found a Horn of Powder
about him; and as soon as the Powder was discovered, he fell a rubbing of his
Hands, they being all black with Powder. He had also about him a Book
entitled, The Jewish Government. I charged him that he was a Frenchman,
because he spoke broken English, but he denied it, and did much vaunt himself.
There coming a Constable by with his Staff, I required him to carry him to
Prison, and I would assist him: So we conveyed him to Old-Bridewel; and by the
way, the People were ready to kill him; calling him French-Rascal. I prayed
them to forbear, for Justice would give him Reward. I told the Fellow, he would
be hanged; he made slight of it, saying, If I die, my Soul shall be saved, but
yours shall be damned. And when he was put into Bridewel, I desired that he
might be secured, and none sunered to speak with him, till he were examined
before a Magistrate, because the Tobacco Merchants house was presently burned
upon it. But so it happened on the next Day, that the fire came on, and
consumed my House and Goods; so that I was forced, with my Family, to ^^ee into
the Country; and what became of the Fellow, I know not; old Bridewel being
burnt also. And understanding that the Parliament has appointed a Committee to
enquire after the Actors in, and Fomentors of that terrible Fire; I thought
good to inform the Honorable Committee thereof, that they may send for the
Keeper of the said Bridewel, to know what became of the Fellow, that he might
receive Justice according to his Demerit. Thus much I thought my self obliged
to do, as in Duty bound to God and my Country; all which I am ready to affirm
upon Oath, when I shall be thereunto called.

Tho. Middleton.

IN the time of the Fire, near Bridewell, there was a Man sadly bemoaning the
great loss he was like to sustain (the Fire then being within Five or six
Houses of him) did beseech the People for God's sake (they having no Goods of
their own in danger) to come in and help him to throw out Trunks, Chests, Beds,
etc. out at a Window, having procured two Carts or Wagons to carry them away.
Whereupon I ran into his House with several others, broke down his Windows,
threw out his Goods, and loaded the Carts; and there being some Interval of
time before the return of the Carts, and seeing a Room wherein were many Books
and loose Papers (which seemed to be a Library) I went in and took down a Book,
which proved to be Ovid's Metamorphosis; and while I was looking upon it, there
came into the same Room an old Man of low stature, with a white Frock, who
looked also on the Book as it was in my Hand; I took him in my mind to be some
Groom come out of a Stable, and thought him to be presumptuously foolish,
supposing such a mean-like old Man ignorant of that Language in which the Book
was written, it being Latin; but I spoke not to him. In the mean time there
brake forth a Fire amongst the Papers which were behind us, there being none in
the Room but he and I. Whereupon the rest of the People coming in, cried out,
We had set the Room on Fire: And rushing in upon us, put out the Fire with
their Feet. Whereupon I took hold of the old Man by the Buttons under the
Throat, and said, How now, Father! it must either be you or I that must fire
these Papers. There was a small thing of a black matter, which looked like a
piece of Link, burning, which questionless set fire on the Papers, but it was
immediately trod out. A Tumult of People thronged in; and when I said, How now,
Father! and took hold on him, Parce mihi, Domini: The People which did not
understand it, cried out, He is a Frenchman, kill him; and with pulling of
him, his Peruke fell off; then appeared a bald Skull, and under his Frock he
had black Clothes, I think of Bishop-Sattin; whereupon he seemed to be a grave
Ecclesiastic Person. I had much ado to save him from the People, but at last
bronght him before the D. of Y. We found it his Pockets a Bundle of Papers
closed up with Wax like a Packet, which was delivered to the D. of Y. I know
not what was written in them, neither do I know what Countryman he was; but
methoughts he looked something Jesuitlike. This I am certain of, that when I
went into the Room there was no Fire in it, and it was fired when there was
none but he and I in it, yet I cannot say I saw him do it, though I cannot but
suspect he did it, and the rather because there were several Houses untouched
betwixt this House, and where the Fire was coming on, where the Papers in the
Library were thus on Fire as I have related. What became of this Fellow, after
we had delivered him to his R. H. I have not heard.

John Stewart.

Thus far concerning the Report and Informations about the Fire: Now follows a
true Account of what was represented to another Committee of Parliament,
touching the Insolency of Popish Priests and Jesuits, and the Increase of
Popery, etc.

At the Committee appointed to Certify Informations touching the Insolency of
Popish Priests and Jesuits, and the Increase of Popery.
Ordered, That these several Informations proceeded on, in Pursuance of the
said Power of the Committee, be reported to the House in reference to the
Insolency of the Popish Priests and Jesuits, and the Increase of Popery.
AS to the Increase of Popery Mr. Hancock, Minister of Chilmoth in Wilts,
Informs, That meeting, with one Mr. Thomson, about a Month since, coming from
Mass out of Somerset House Chapel, and discoursing to him about his Religion,
asked him, if there were many lately turned to it? Thomson answered, Thousands.
And being demanded, what Encouragement there was to it? Replied, There would be
a Change suddenly.

Report his Carriage to the Commitee.

Mr. Thomson being summoned before the Committee, did hehave himself very
insolently: They have commanded me to report it. Being asked, Whether he had
not a Shop in Somerset House where Popish Books and Popish Knacks were sold? He
said, he had; and that his Man sold such Books and Beads, and other things. And
said, There was one Crucifix, no Relics; but wished he had some good ones. He
said, that he was a Roman Catholic, and thanks God for it. He said, he was no
Priest, but wished he were in a Capacity to be one. He said, he had not taken
the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, nor would do it. He said, he would take
any Oath that any Christian Prince should require, but not the Oath of
Allegiance, intimating some mixture in it. He said, he had taken the Oath of
Allegiance to the King of Spain, and was a Subject to the King of Spain.

One Mr. Ash a Minister, late of Capel in Surrey, Informed, That being at
Caufield in Lancashire this last Summer, he saw great Resort on Sundays to
Caufield House, the House of a Papist; and asking some that were going thither,
what the Occasion was of their Resort thither, they told him they were going to
Mass, and that one Mr. Robinson a Priest did say Mass.

Mr. Ash did likewise Inform, that he thought the number of those that went to
Mass to that House on Sundays, was as great as the Protestants that went to the
Parish Church.

One Mr. Welden Deputy-Ordinary for Middlesex, did Inform, That in his
accustomed attendance on the Prisoners at Newgate, about the time of Execution,
Romish Priests, and particularly one Mr. Harvy a Jesuit, has constantly used
to resort to the Prison at those times, and does persuade the Prisoners to
become Papists; and that diverse have been altered in their Religion by them,
and turned to Popery.

Mr. Wootten Informs, That on October, 16. he went to Newgate, and meeting
with one Howard an Under-Keeper at the Door, desired to speak with Mr. Hubert
the Frenchman, who was then condemned: Howard told him that he could not speak
with him yet, for Mr. Harvey the Queen Mothers Confessor was in private with
him; and said, this Harvy used frequently to come to the Prison after
Condemnation, and that where one Prisoner died a Protestant, many died Papists.
Mr. Wootten said, that after some stay he saw Mr. Harvy come out from Mr.
Hubert, and then he was admitted to have Speech with him.

Mr. Cawdry, Keeper of Newgate, did Inform, That Mr. Harvy the Jesuit did
frequent the Prison at Newgate about the times of the Execution upon the
pretense of the Queens Charity, and did spend much time with the Prisoners in
private, and particularly, did so before the last Execution, night after night.
Mr. Cawdry said likewise of the nine that suffered, eight died Papists, whereof
some he knew were Protestants when they came into the Prison.

It appeared upon several Informations, that Mr. Harvy and other Priests, did
not only resort to Newgate at times of Execution; but likewise to the
White-Lion in Southwark, and other places in the Country, and used their
endeavors to pervert dying Prisoners.

Thomas Barnet, late a Papist, Informed, That when he was a Papist, and
resorted to Gentlemen's Houses in Barkshire that were Papists; there was almost
in every Gentleman's House a Priest, and instanced in diverse private Gentlemen
in that County. Others inform the like, in Sarrey.

Mr. Cottman did inform, That one Mr. Carpenter, late a Preacher at
Colledge-hill, did in Discourse tell Cottman, That the Judgments of God upon
this Kingdom by the Plague last year, and lately by the Fire in London, were
come upon this Land and People, for their forsaking the true Roman Catholic
Religion, and shaking off Obedience to the Pope, and that if they would return
to the Church of Rome, the Pope would rebuild the City at his own Charge.
Carpenter said likewise to Cottman, That if he would come and hear him Preach
the next Sunday at his House in Queen Street, he would give twenty Reasons to
prove, that the Roman Catholic was the true Religion, and his the false; and
that our Bible had a thousand falsities in it, and that there was no true
Scripture but at Rome, and their Church.

Carpenter at the Committee confessed, that he had formerly taken Orders from
the Church of Rome to be a Priest, but said he had renounced that Church and
taken Orders in England.

The next thing is the Information of their Insolency, and I shall begin with
their Scorning and Despising the Bible.

One Thomas Williams an Officer in Sir William Bowyer's Regiment, Informed,
That one Ashley a Papist, seeing a Woman read in a Bible, asked her why she
read in that Damnable Presbiterian Bible, and said, A Play-book was as good.

Thomas Barnet of Bingfield in Barkshire, Informed, That being at one Mr.
Young's House in Bingfield, at Bartholomew-tide last, Mr. Young said to the
Brother of this Thomas, in his hearing, That within two Years there should not
be a Protestant in England. Thomas Barnet, Informed further, That being at Mr.
Doncaster's House in Bingfield, one Mr. Thural, Son-in-Law, to Mr. Doncaster,
(and both Papists) said to this Informer, (who was then likewise a Papist,) The
People take me for a poor fellow, but I shall find a thousand or two thousand
pounds to raise a party of Horse, to make Mr. Hathorns and Mr. Bullocks fat
guts lie on the ground; for it is no more to kill an Heretic, than to kill a
Grasshopper, and that it was happy for him that he was a Catholic, for by that
means he shall be one that shall be mounted.

Mr. Linwood Scrivenner in White-Chappel, Informed, That about the Twentieth of
October last, meeting with one Mr. Binks a Papist, and discoursing with him,
Binks told him, That there was amongst the Papists as a great Design a^ ever
was in England, and he thought it would be executed suddenly. Being asked how
many Papists there were about London? He answered, About seven thousand, and in
England an hundred thousand were Armed.

Mr. Oaks a Physician dwelling in Shadwel, Informed, That a little after the
burning of London, one Mr. Carpenter a Minister, came to his House in
Tower-wharf, and spoke to him to this purpose: I will not say that I am a
Papist, but this I will say, that I had rather die the death of the Papists.
and that my Soul should be raised with their Resurrection, than either to be
Presbiterian, Independent or Anabaptist; and I tell you, the Papists have
hitherto been his Majesty's best Fortification; for when Presbiterians,
Independants and Anabaptists forsook and opposed him, then they stood by him,
and helped him; and he is now resolved to commit himself into their hands. And
take it upon my word in a short time, the Papists will lay you as low as that
house (pointing to an house that was demolished) for they are able to raise
Forty thousand men, and I believe, the next work will be cutting of Throats.
This was Sworn by Mr. Oaks, before Sir John Frederick, a Member of the House.

Mirian Pilkington being present when the Words were spoken does affirm them
all, save only those, That the King is resolved to commit himself into the
Papists hands. Those she does not remember.

Henry Young a Distiller of Hot-waters, informed, That about, April 1661. being
in the Jesuits College in Antwerp, one Powel, an English Jesuit persuaded
him to turn a Roman Catholic, and said, That if he intended to save his Life
and Estate he had best turn so, for within seven Years he should see all
England of that Religion. Young replied, That the City of London would never
endure it. Powel answered, That within five or six Years they would break the
Power and Strength of London in pieces, and that they had been contriving it
these twenty Years; and that if Young did live, he should see it done. The said
Young did likewise Inform, That shortly after his coming into England, one
Thomson and Copervel, both Papists, did several times say to him, That within
five or six Years at the farthest, the Roman Catholic Religion should be all
over in this Kingdom.

Jasper Goodwin of Darking, in the County of Surrey, Informed, That about a
Month since, one Edward Complin, a Papist, said to him, You must all be Papists
shortly; and that now he was not ashamed to own himself a Roman Catholic, and
to own his Priest (naming two that were in Darkin in the houses of two
Papists;) and likewise said, That in twenty four hours warning, the Roman
Catholics could raise thirty thousand Men, as well armed, as any Men in
Christendom.

William Warner of Darking Informed, That the said Edward Complin did tell him,
That the Roman Catholics in England, could in twenty four hours, raise thirty
thousand Horse and Arms: And upon saying so, pulled out his Crucifix and Beads,
and said, He was not ashamed of his Religion.

John Grawnger of Darking, Informed that about a Year since being in his House,
reading the Bible, one Thomas Collins a Papist, said to him, Are you still a
Church-goer? Had you not better turn Roman Catholic? If you stay till you are
forced none will abide you. And said further, That there was a Man beyond sea
had prophesied, That in sixty six, if the King did not settle the Romish
Religion in England, he would be banished out of the Kingdom, and all his
Posterity. And Collins further said, That he being lately turned a Roman
Catholic, he would not be a Protestant for all the World. He wished Graunger
again, in the hearing of his Wife, (which he affirmed to the Committee) to turn
his Religion; for all the said Prophecy would come to pass in Sixty six.

Robert Holloway of Darking aforesaid, informed, That one Stephen Griffin, a
Papist, said to him, That all the blood that had been shed in the late civil
War, was nothing to that which would be shed this year in England. Holloway
demanded a reason for these words, in regard the Kingdom was in peace, and no
likelihood of trouble; and said, Do you Papists intend to rise and cut our
throats when we are asleep? Griffin answered, That Is no matter, if you live,
you shall see it.

Ferdinand de Massido, a Portuguese, and some Years since a Romish Priest, but
turning Protestant, Informed, That one Father Taff a Jesuit, did the last year
tell him at Paris, That if all England did not return to the Church of Rome,
they should all be destroyed the next Year.

Mr. Samuel Cottman of the Middle Temple, Barister, Informed, That about two
Years since, one Mr. Jeviston, a Popish Priest, and called by the Name of
Father Garret, did persuade him to turn Papist, and he should want neither
Profit nor Preferment. Mr. Cottman objected, that he intended to practice the
Law, which he could not do if he turned Papist, because he must take the Oath
of Supremacy at his being called to the Bar; and if he were a Papist, he must
not take it. Mr. Jeviston replied, Why not take the Oath? It is an unlawful
Oath, and void ipso facto. And after some pause, said further First take the
Oath, and then I will convert you. He said further, The King will not own'
himself to be Head of the Church. And said further, You in England that set up
the Dutch to destroy our Religion, shall find that they shall be the Men to
PULL DOWN YOURS.

Mr. Stanley, an Officer to the Duke of Ormond in Ireland, Informed, That
coming out of Ireland with one Oriel (who owned himself of the Order of the
Jesuits, and commissioned from the Pope to be Lord Primate of Ireland, and
Archbishop of Armah) and falling into some Discourse with him, he told him,
That there had been a Difference between him and some other of the Jesuits in
Ireland, and that part of the Occasion was, that one Father Walsh, and some
other of the Jesuits there did dispense with the Papists in Ireland, to take
the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, by virtue of a standing Commission from
the Pope which he had to do it, during this King's Life; and Oriel thought they
ought not to do it by virtue of the standing Commission, but should take a new
Commission from the Pope every Year to do it. And likewise, That he brought
eight Boys out of Ireland, whom he intended to carry to Flanders, to breed up
in some of the Colleges there. And at his taking Shipping to go for Flanders,
he shaked his Foot toward England, terming it Egypt, and said He would not
return into England, till he came with 50 thousand Men at his heels.

A French Merchant being a Papist living in St. Michael's Lane, London, writes
in a Letter to his Friend, That a great number of Men and Arms were ready here,
if those he wrote to were ready there. He being upon the Intercepting of this
Letter, searched; forty Firelocks were found in his House, ready laden; which
were carried to Fishmongers-Hall, a Month or more before the Fire, and he
committed to Prison, but since released.

A Poor Woman retaining to one Belson's House, a Papist, about Darking in
Surrey, was follicited, that she and her husband would turn Roman Catholics;
which if they did voluntarily Now, they would be accepted of; but if they staid
a little longer, they would be forced whether they would or no; and then they
would not be esteemed. This was deposed before Sir Adam Brown, a Member of
Parliament.

A Complaint being made against a Sugar-Baker at Fox-hall, his House was
searched by Lieutenant Colonel Luntly, who found there several Guns, with such
Locks, as no Englishman who (was at the taking of them) could discharge;
together with Brass Blunderbusses and Fireworks, of a furious and burning
nature: Trial being made of a small part of them, the Materials were discerned
to be Sulphur, Aquavitae, and Gunpowder whatever else.

In a Letter to Sir John Frederick and Mr. Nathanail Heron, from Horsham in
Sussex, the 8th. of September, 1666. Subscibed Henry Chowne. Wherein is
mentioned, that the said Henry Chowne had thoughts to come to London that week,
but that they were in Distraction there concerning the Papists, fearing they
would show themselves all that day: And that he had been to search a Papist's
House within six miles of that place. He, with another Justice of Peace met the
Gentleman's Brother (who is a Priest) going to London, whom they searched, and
found a Letter about him, which he had received that Morning from his Sister,
twenty miles off from him; wherein is expressed, That a great Business is in
hand, not to be committed to Paper, as the times be.

Your Committee have thought fit to give no Opinion upon these Informations;
but leave the matter of Fact to your Judgments.

I am commanded to tell you, That your Committee have several other things of
this nature under their Inquiry.

AS a further Instance of the audacious and insolent Behavior of these Popish
Recusants, take the following Copy of Verses made, and then scattered abroad by
some of their Party in Westminster Hall, and several other places about the
City, and elsewhere in the Kingdom.


COvre la feu, ye Hugonots,
That have so branded us with Plots;
And henceforth no more Bonfires make,
Till ye arrive the Stygian Lake^:
For down ye must, ye Heretics,
For all your hopes in sixty six.
The hand against you is so steady,
Your Babylon is fallen already.
And if you will avoid that hap,
Return into your Mothers lap;
The Devil a Mercy is for those,
That Holy Mother Church oppose.
Let not your Clergy you betray,
Great Eyes are open, and see the way.
Return in time if you will save
Your Souls, your Lives, or ought you have.
And if you live till sixty seven,
Confess you had fair Warning given.
Then see in time, or ay be blind;
Short time will show you what is behind.
Dated the 5th Day of November, in the Year 1666. and the First Year of the
Restoration of the Church of Rome in England.
NOt long after the Burning of London, Mr. Brook Bridges, a young gentleman of
the Temple, as he was going to attend Divine Service in the Temple-Church, in a
Pew there, found this following Paper; which immediately, either by himself, or
a Relation of his, was delivered to Sir William Morris, one of his Majesty's
Principal Secretaries of State: The Contents of the Paper are as follows.

A Warning to Protestants.
I Who have been a Papist from my Infancy, till of late; and in Zeal for their
horrid Principles, had too great a share in the Firing of the City; and did
intend to do further Mischief to the Protestants, of which I am now, and ever
shall be a Member, do upon Abhorrence of that Villainy and Religion that has
moved me to it, declare to all Protestants the Approach of their sudden Ruin,
that it may be prevented, if it be not too late.

When, I together with other Papists, both French, Irish, and English, fired
the City; others were employed to Massacre the Protestants, we thinking thereby
to destroy the Heads of your Religion; but the Massacre was disappointed by the
Fear of him who was the chief Agent in this Villainy. And the Fire not having
done all its Work, they have often endeavored to fire the remaining part. They
intend likewise to land the French upon you, to whose Assistance they all
intend to come, and for that purpose are stored with Arms; and have so far
deceived the King, that they have the Command of most part of the Army, and the
Seaports. The French intend to land at Dover, that Garrison being most Papists:
And the Papists in England, have express Command from Rome, to hasten their
Business before the next Parliament, and to dispatch. Therefore as you love
your Lives and Fortunes, prevent your Ruin, by disarming all the Papists in
England, especially C. L. -- from the Tower, and the L. D. -- and all his
Adherents and Soldiers, from Dover, and by disarming all Papists. I have such
an Abhorrence, that I would willingly undergo any Punishment for it; and
declare my self openly, were I not assured that I could do you more good in
concealing my Name for the present. Delay not from following these Directions,
as you love your Lives; and be not deceived by any Pretenses whatsoever.

An Impartial Account of some Informations taken before several Justices of the
Peace, concerning the several Fires happening of late in and near the City of
London.
ABout the latter end of June, and in July, one Joseph Harrison came several
times to the Greyhound-Inn in Holborn, pretending to enquire for Letters for
himself; and about the beginning of July comes into the said Inn, and meeting
Mr. Atkins, the Master of the said Inn, He the said Harrison asked him for a
Can of Beer; whereupon Mr. Atkins ordered his Man to draw two Cans, drinking
one himself, and giving the other to Harrison: After which, the said Harrison
took Mr. Atkins by the Hand, and lead him out of his own Yard into Holborn, and
by the Rails in the Street, the said Harrison advised the said Atkins to put
off his House and dispose of his Goods as soon as he could; for within Three
Weeks or a Month, there would be great and dreadful Fires in and about London.
Mr. Atkins asked him, How he knew so? The said Harrison replied, If you will
not believe me, you may chose: and so left him.

One Monday, July the 25th. Mr. Atkins his Wife hearing of the Fire at the
George-Inn in Southwark, went to her Mother at the Talbot-Inn in Southwark; the
backpart of which said Inn is adjoining to the George-Inn, and was likewise on
Fire; and being there, she espied the aforesaid Joseph Harrison in the Yard,
and remembering the aforesaid Advice to her Husband, desired some Persons that
were next her, to lay hold on him; which being done, he was conveyed to a
Foot-Company that stood in Arms near the said Inn, judging that the nearest
place to secure him. After which, Sir John Smith, one of the Sheriffs of
London, was acquainted with the whole matter. Upon which he, with the L. C.
went to the said Company, and in the hearing of several, gave Charge to the
Captain of the said Company to keep him safe until they had time to examine
him. After the Fire was put out, some went to enquire after the Prisoner, and
the Captain told them, The L. C. had dicharged him.

The next Day being Tuesday, a Person was informed that the said Harrison
taught School in Thread-Needle Street, and that he boasted of his Deliverance,
and said, That the L. C. was pleased to honor him so far as to take him in his
Barge with him to White Hall, and bad him but be patient a while, and he should
have Satisfaction from the Persons that had troubled him. But hearing where to
find him, Endeavors were used to retake him, and accordingly was accomplished
on Wednesday, July, 27. and had before the Worshipful Sir John Frederick, who
sent him to Bishopsgate, and ordered him to be brought before the Lord Mayor
and Court of Aldermen the next day to be examined. Before whom were these
following things proved against him upon Oath.

1. THat he has had frequent Correspondency with Jesuits and Papists.

2. That he has spoken to several of his Acquaintance to go with him to Popist
Meetings, declaring that he knew of many.

3. That he has been persuaded to turn Mendicant Friar, and has been offered
a Stipend to turn to the Romish Religion.

4. That he knew there would be diverse great and dreadful Fires in and about
London within a Month.

5. That he advised Friends to rid their Hauds of all their Concerns in and
about London, for there would be a great Consumption of houses there.

6. That when he was in the Custody of the Foot-Company aforesaid, Mr. Atkins
aforesaid, affirming to swear the former Article; he threatened him, if he did,
it should cost him the best House he had.

7. That he said there were forty thousand French Papists lately come over, to
his Knowledge; besides many that were amongst us already.

8. The Lord Mayor asking him, Who persuaded him to turn Catholic? He
answered, The King's Under-Barber, Phillips.

After which, he told the Court, That when he was apprehended for these things,
my L. C. discharged him, and took him with him in his Barge to White Hall. He
further told the Court, That he was some time an Assistant to Mr. Lovejoy,
Schoolmaster at Canterbury, and that he had Letters Testimonial of his good
Behavior from the Dean of Canterbury: Upon which my Lord Mayor remembering that
he had seen him with Mr. Lovejoy, and said, that Mr. Lovejoy told him, That he
was an idle Rogue. And so he was committed to Newgate.

On Saturday the 30th. of July, it was further deposed upon Oath by Thomas Roe,
before Sir John Frederick, as follows.

The Information of Thomas Roe of Bernard-Inn Gent. taken the 3th. of July,
1670. by Sir John Frederick, Alderman, one of His Majesty's Justices of Peace
in the City of London, upon Oath, as follows.
THomas Roe says, that he has for at least twelve or thirteen Years last past
been acquainted with one Joseph Harrison, who was examined lately at the
Guild Hall, London, before the Honorable the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen,
upon Suspicion of his being a Conspirator in the firing the City and Suburbs in
several parts thereof.

Thomas Roe, and Joseph Harrison, having been School-fellows at Eaten College,
and being thereby acquainted; Joseph Harrison has several times lately been
with him, and advised him to withdraw his Concerns, and remove above twenty
miles out of the City; for that the City, and twenty miles round, would be
suddenly destroyed and laid wast (or to that purpose.) Whereupon Thomas Roe
asked him, Whether he were privy to any such Conspiracy, or concerned in its
Agitation? pressing him with diverse Arguments to discover what he was
acquainted with of that kind. Harrison replied, That he had no personal and
positive Knowledge thereof. Thomas Roe demanded upon what ground then he did
thus advise him? Joseph Harrison replied, That he was sometimes conversant
among some Papists, and perceived a Plot or Design was carrying on by them
against the City of London, and the Protestant Religion; which Plot or Design,
said he the Papists call, The Game of Trap, or, do you understand Trap ad
Crucem, which is the Watchword amongst them. Further, Joshua Harrison said,
that he was informed of those things by some German Protestants, and that he
had Offers of Fifty Pounds per annum, made him by some Jesuits and Papists to
turn to their Religion; but he had refused it, and would not embrace the Romish
Religion.

Thomas Roe further says, That about five Weeks since, he walked through
New-Cheap-side, and from thence into Mark-Lane, with Joseph Harrison, in
company with Mr. Mosely (a Gentleman belonging to Bernards-Inn likewise) and
one of his Acquaintance, together with another Man, a Stranger to Thomas Roe.
Upon their first associating, Harrison said unto him, That he would not
discover himself to be an Englishman, but pretend himself to be a German or
Italian (whether of the two he does not well remember) and that he might not
detect himself, spoke in the Company as Occasion offered in Latin. But leaving
the place where they tarried in Mark-lane, going toward Bishopsgate-street,
Mr. Harrison told Mr. Roe secretly, That he believed that Mr. Mosely understood
the Game of Trap by some Signs he had observed from him, and that he would try
him. Then going altogether into a house, about the end of Thr^adneedle-street,
Mr. Harrison (having by this time discovered himself to be an Englishman, said
Trap, and made a Cross over his Face with his Finger, directing himself to Mr.
Mosely: Whereupon Mr. Mosely did also say Trap, crossing his Forehead and Face
two or three times, and with a quick motion drew his Finger over his own
Throat. Upon which Mr. Roe asked Mr. Mosely what was the meaning of Trap? But
he refused to tell. Mr. Roe urging him again, He replied, He would not; saying,
You are not of my Religion. Then Mr. Mosely asked Mr. Harrison what his Name
was? (for he knew him not by Name) he answered, Harrisons Mr. Mosely replied, I
never saw your Name. Mr. Harrison made answer, It is Don Olanso del Harrisonio;
if so, says Mr. Mosely, I have seen your Name.

After this, Mr. Mosely and the other stranger being parted, and Mr. Roe and
Mr. Harrison being-alone: said Harison, I told you Mr. Mosely did understand
Trap; you may see there is a List of the Trap-Gamesters, Now whether Mr.
Mosely's Imitation of Mr. Harrison was feigned or real, Mr. Roe could not
distinguish: But as they two were passing through Cheape-side homewards, Mr
Harrison looking upon the New Buildings, said, To what purpose do they build
this poor city, it will be again destroyed; at the same time he pointed at two
several Persons, saying, That is a Trap-Gamester, and there goes another
Trap-Gamester.

Mr. Roe further Informs, That since the last Term, Mr. Harrison told him, he
would write all the Rogueries of the Trap-Game and Gamesters in a Play; and
that he would undertake to show him Twenty six Papists Meetings in and about
the City and Suburbs of London; but said he some of them are very private, and
if you be discovered not to be a Papist, (you will peradventure) be poisoned or
stabbed.

Mr. Roe does further say, That when the said Harrison advised him to remove
with all his Concerns about twenty Miles from London, that the said Roe asked
him if Windsor were not far enough, it being both their native place, and about
the distance? The said Harrison answered, Not; reflecting upon the Castle. And
further, Harrison told Mr. Roe That the Jesuits could, by a Composition of
Ingredients, make such a Matter, the fume of which would corrupt any Man's
Intellects; and that he the said Harrison could do it.

A Faithful Account of the Apprehending of a Scothman, some time since by
William Colburne, at the Cross-keys in Fleet Street, as follows.
A Scotch-man pretending great Respect he had for William Colburne aforesaid,
came to him, and advised him, That by all means he should remove his Goods out
of London, and dispose of his House. William Colburne asked him, For what
reason? The Scotch-man replied, Because that he, with many others, were
employed to set the remainder of London on Fire; and that they would set it on
Fire in several places at one time: And Chancery-lane-end (which is near the
aforesaid Colburne's house) they intended to set first on fire. Upon which,
William Colburne apprehended him; and being brought to his Trial, he was
sentenced to stand in the Pillory; and did accordingly, three times; once at
the End of Chancery Lane, and twice in, or about the Old Exchange.

Much more might be said, but that our aim is, to be as brief as is consistent
with the truth of the Matter of Fact in our Narrative. Therefore we refer any
that desire further Satisfaction, in every particular, to William Colburne
aforesaid, who will fully inform them.

An Account of the Firing of Mr. Delanoy 's House, near Pepper-Alley, in
Southwark, January 1679/^0. by John Satterthwait, a Papist, as appears by the
Oath of Margaret Clarke, then Servant to Mr. Delanoy, who was in by the said
Satterthwait, to assist him in the Burning of her Masters House, and suffered
Death for the same.
I Margaret Clark, being shortly to suffer Death for that which I have
deserved, and am much humbled for, and desire to lie low before God, under the
sense of my own Guilt, do give the World an Account of the truth of my Case;
for I would not be guilty (...) a Lie, now I am to appear before my Judge
within a few Minutes. Therefore I do say, and shall declare the truth of the
Matter, as I shall answer it before my Lord, and Judge.

Upon the 26th of January 1679/80. John Satterthwait came to me, as I was going
out of my Master's Gate, and did desire me to tell him whether my Master and
Mistress were at home? And I answered him, No. And he told me, That he hoped he
should have an Opportunity to speak with me, for he had something to say. And I
answered him, If he had any thing to say, I should be so civil to give him the
hearing when I had time (for then I was in haste.) Then he came, the next Day,
with the same Request; and I returned the Answer. Then the third time, being
Wednesday, he came again, and used great Importunity; and expressed some
Kindnesses, as if he had been a Suitor; and prevailed with me to go into the
Borough with him to an Alehouse, where were two Men more of his Company: And
after some little Discourse, he propounded to me this wicked and horrid Design,
which I was to have been engaged in with them; that is, to let them into my
Master's house, to set it on fire: And for a Reward, they promised me two
thousand Pounds; which Sum I was to receive at the Fleece-Tavern in Holborn,
enquiring for a Room in the said Tavern, called the Figure Nine. Then coming
out of the Alehouse, they would fain have had me away with them; saying, Come
let us take Coach, and go into Fleet Street; for, said they, there we have a
Priest of ours, who lodges at a Grocer's, that shall confess you, and give you
the Sacrament. I told him, I could not possibly go then.

So this John Satterthwait went homewards with me, almost to my Master's house,
and as we went along, he charged me that I should not divulge it to any Person
in the World living; for if I did, I should certainly die for it (and that
quickly) in this World, and be damned in the other.

Then he came on the next Day, and gave me the same Charge to keep it secret.

And then, on Saturday, he came and enquired of me, the best time that he might
come to do this most horrid and devilish Action; saying, Would not Four or Five
of the Clock be a good time? And I said, Yes.

Accordingly he came, and conveyed himself into the Dye-house, or thereabouts,
while Nine or ten of the Clock that Evening; about which time the Fire was
discovered.

Whereupon, with the Fear and Dread he had put upon me, I did deny it to the
Company that came in to quench it; but after that, he was there, whom I saw
amongst the rest of the Company: But I had much Horror upon my Conscience, and
after some short time, I confessed the whole Crime, for which I now die. And my
Examination before Justice Reading, and Justice Freeman was all true.

And this I affirm, and do desire all Protestants to believe, that John
Satterthwait kindled those three Fires in my Master's House: First, in the
Dye-house, by the Pump: Secondly, in the Buttery: And Thirdly in the Garret.
Which last Fire he kindled, whilst the People were putting out the other.

See the large Account of this, called, A Warning to Servants, and a Caution to
Protestants, Printed in the Year. 1680.

An Account of the Firing Mr. Robert Bird 's House, in Fetter-Lane, April the
10th. 1679. by the Persuasion of Nicholas Stubbs, a Papist.
ELizabeth Oxley, Servant to Mr. Robert Bird, upon her Examination says, That
about Michaelmas last, she was acquainted with Nicholas Stubbs, who had several
times used many Persuasions to turn her Papist; and after her showing a liking
to it, and that he supposed she embraced that Persuasion, in his Discourse to
her at several times, he told her, that before the 28th of June next, she
should see all the Protestants destroyed that were in England; that the Pope
should be King over England, that all that would turn to the Popish Religion
should live far better than now they did; that all the Land were Heretics, and
it were a meritorious Act to destroy them; and that all such as were Papists
should have Marks upon their Hats whereby to distinguish them from Protestants,
that they might not be destroyed amongst them: Adding, that the Nation do
believe that all things will be over before the 23d. Day of June, but they
would be deceived, for all should be destroyed at or before that time. That the
D. of Y. was the bravest Prince living, and that he was gone out of the Kingdom
lest the Heretics should cut off his Head, and he would not return till they
were destroyed; that the Lords in the Tower would not one of them suffer, for
they would come off well euough, being to be tried by the Lords; and that the
Scaffolds were set up for fashion sake. That she telling the said Stubbs that
she was hired to live with one Mr. Bird about the middle of Fetter-Lane, he
used Persuasions to her at several times to set Fire on her Masters house;
telling her, if she would do it, he would give her 5 l. and gave her half a
Crown, and said, he would have other Houses in Holborn, Fired at the same time
by others: That she being with the said Stubbs on Sunday before the said Fire,
promised to Fire her Masters House on Thursday or Friday night following, and
accordingly on Thursday night she took a Candle and set Fire to her Masters
Papers in his Study, which were in a kind of a Press; and they being on a Light
Fire, she shut the Doors and went up Stairs into her own Chamber in the top of
the House, and packed up her own things, and undressed her self, lest her
Master should suspect her, and there stayed till a great knocking was at the
Door, and the Watchmen crying out Fire; whereupon she run down Stairs and
cried Fire, and her Master gave her the Keys to open the Door; which done, all
Hands were employed to quench the Fire. And she says, she did not set Fire on
her Master's house out of any Malice to him, nor with intent to rob him, but
merely to carry on the Design which Stubbs had proposed to her, and out of
hopes of his Reward.

Nicholas Stubbs upon his Examination, owns, and sets forth to have used
Discourses to the said Elizabeth as she declares in her Examinations; and
says, he did persuade her to fire her Masters house, and was to give her five
Guineas for doing it, besides half a Crown in Hand: And says, that one Father
Gyfford a Priest and his Confessor had put him upon this Business, and told him
it was no sin to Fire all the houses of Heretics and Hugonots.

That he acquainted Flower alias Darby, and one Roger (...) another Irish man
that Lodged at the Coach and Horses in the same Street. That the said Father
Gyfford promised him a 100 l. for the same, and told him he was to have the
Money from the Church. That they used to meet the said Gyfford and other two
Persons in St. James Fields in the dark of the Evening, and to discourse of
these Matters; and that the several Informations that he had given the said
Elizabeth Oxley, he had from the said Father Gyfford; and says Flower and
Roger (...) told the said Stubbs, they would carry on the said Fire, and that
they had Fireballs for that purpose, and that they would fire other houses in
Holborn at the same time: That he was at the Fire in the Temple, but was not
engaged to do any thing in it. And said, that Gyfford told him that there were
English, French and Irish Roman Catholics enough in London to make a very good
Army; and that the King of France was coming with 60000 Men, under pretense to
show the Dauphin his Dominions; but it was to lay his Men at Deep, Bulloign,
Callis and Dunkirk, to be in an hours Warning to be Landed in England, and he
doubted not but it would be by the middle of June, and by that time all the
Catholics here will be in readiness; all were to rise in order to bring him
in. That the Papists here were to be distinguished by Marks in their Hatts;
that the said Father Gyfford doubted not but he should be an Abbot or a Bishop,
when the work was over, for the good service he has done. That at their
Meeting Father Gyfford used to tell them, it was no more sin to kill a Heretic
then a Dog, and that they did God good Service, in doing what Mischiefs they
could by firing their houses. That it was well Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was
Murdered, for he was their Devilish Enemy; That Coleman was a Saint in Heaven
for what he had done. And says, he is fearful he shall be Murdered for this
Confession, Father Gyfford having sworn him to Secrecy, and told him he should
be Damned if he made any Discovery, and should be sure to be killed; and that
he should take the Oaths, because he was a Housekeeper; and that it was no
sin. And says, That Gyfford and Roger (...) told him, when their Forces meet,
about the middle of June, then have at the --

VOTES and ADDRESSES Of the Honorable House of Commons ASSEMBLED IN
PARLIAMENT, Made this present Year 1673, Concerning Popery and other Grievances.
March. 29. 1673. The Parliaments Address to his Majesty for the Removal of
Grievances in England and Ireland.
WE your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, conceiving our selves bound in necessary Duty to your Majesty, and
in Discharge of the Trust reposed in us truly to inform your Majesty of the
Estate of your Kingdom. And though we are abundantly satisfied that it has
been your Royal Will and Pleasure that your Subjects should be governed
according to the Laws and Customs of this Realm, yet finding that, contrary to
your Majesty's gracious Intention, some Grievances and Abuses are crept in. We
crave Leave humbly to represent them to your Majesty's Knowledge and Desire.

1. That the Imposition of 12 d. per Chaldron upon Coals for the providing of
Convoys, by Virtue of an Order from Council, dated the 15th. of May, 1672, may
be recalled, and all Bonds taken by Virtue thereof cancelled.

2. That your Majesty's Proclamation of the 24th of December, 1672, for
preventing of Disorders which may be committed by Soldiers, and whereby the
Soldiers now in your Majesty's Service are in a manner exempted from the
ordinary Course of Justice, may likewise be recalled.

3. And whereas great Complaints have been made out of several parts of this
Kingdom of diverse Abuses committed in Quartering of Soldiers, That your Majesty
would be pleased to give Order to redress those Abuses; and in particular that
no Soldiers be hereafter Quartered in any private Houses; and that due
Satisfaction may be given to the Innkeepers or Victuallers where they lie
before they remove.

4. And since the continuance of Soldiers in this Nation, will necessarily
produce many Inconveniences to your Majesty's Subjects, We do humbly present it
as our Petition and Advice, That when this present War is ended, all your
Soldiers which have been raised since the last Session of Parliament, may be
Disbanded.

5. That your Majesty would be likewise pleased to consider of the
Irregularities and Abuses in pressing Soldiers, and to give Order for the
Prevention thereof for the future.

6. And although it has been the Course of former Parliaments to desire
Redress in their Grievances before they proceeded to give a Supply; yet we have
so full Assurance of your Majesty's Tenderness and Compassion toward your
People, that we humbly prostrate our selves at your Majesty's feet with these
our Petitions, desiring your Majesty to take them into your Princely
Consideration, and to give such Orders for the Relief of your Subjects, and the
Removing these Pressures, as shall seem lest to your Ro^al Wisd^m.

Address touching Ireland.
WE your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, taking into Consideration the great Calamities which have formerly
befallen your Majesty's Subjects of the Kingdom of Ireland, from the Popish
Recusants there, who for the most part are professed Enemies to the Protestant
Religion and the English Interest; and how they make use of your Majesty's
gracious Disposition and Clemency, are at this time grown more insolent and
presumptuous than formerly, to the apparent Danger of that Kingdom, and your
Majesty's Protestant Subjects there, the Consequence whereof may likewise prove
very fatal to this your Majesty's Kingdom of England, if not timely prevented.
And having seriously weighed what Remedies may be most properly applied to
those growing Distempers, do in all Humility present your Majesty with these
our Petitions.

1. That for the Establishment and Quieting the Possessions of your Majesty's
Subjects in that Kingdom, your Majesty would be pleased to maintain the Act of
Settlement, and Explanatory Act thereupon, and to recall the Commission of
Enquiry into Irish Affairs, bearing Date the 17th of January last, as
containing many new and extraordinary Powers not only to the Frejudice of
particular Persons, whose Estates and Titles are thereby made liable to be
questioned; but in a manner to the Overthrow of the Acts of Settlement; And if
purs^^d, may be the Occasion of great Charge and Attendance to many of your
Subjects in Ireland, and shake the Peace and Security of the whole.

2. That your Majesty would give Order that no Papist be either continued or
hereafter admitted to be Judges, Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Coroners or
Mayors, Sovereigns or Portrieves in that Kingdom.

3. That the Titular Popish Archbishops, Bishops, Vicars-General, Abl^^s, and
all other exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by the Popes Authority, and in
particular Peter Talbot pretended Archbishop of Dublin, for his notorious
Disloyalty to your Majesty, and Disobedience and Contempt of your Laws, may be
commanded by Proclamation forthwith to depart out of Ireland, and all other
your Majesty's Dominions or otherwise to be prosecuted according to Law. And
that all Convents, Seminaties, and Public Popish Schools may be dissolved and
suppressed, and the Secular Priests commanded to depart under the Penalty.

4 That no Irish Papist be admitted to inhabit in any part of that Kingdom,
unless duly licensed according to the aforesaid Acts of Settlemen^; and that
your Majesty would be pleased to recall your Letters of the 26th of February,
1671. And the Proclamation thereupon, whereby general License is given to such
Papists as inhabit in Corporations there.

5. That your Majesty's Letters of the 28th of September, 1672. and the Order
of Council thereupon, whereby your Subjects are required not to prosecute any
Actions against the Irish for any Wrongs or Injuries committed during the late
Rebellion, may likewise be recalled.

6. That Colonel Talbot (who has notoriously assumed to himself the Title of
Agent of the Roman Catholics in Ireland) be immediately dismissed out of all
Command Military and Civil, and forbidden Access to your Majesty's Court.

7. That your Majesty would be pleased from time to time out of your Princely
Wisdom to give such further Order and Directions to the Lord Lieutenant, or
other Governor of Ireland for the time being, as may best conduce to the
Encouragement of the English Planters and Protestants Interest there, and the
Suppression of the Insolencles and Disorders of the Irish Papists there.

These our humble Desires we present to your Majesty, as the best means to
preserve the Peace and Safety of that your Kingdom, which has been so much of
late in Danger by the Practices of the said Irish Papists, particularly Richard
and Peter Talbot; and we doubt not but your Majesty will find the happy Effects
thereof, to the great Satisfaction and Security of your Majesty's Person and
Government, which of all earthly things is most dear to your Majesty's most
Loyal Subjects.

Ordered, October 20. 1673.
THat an Address be made to his Majesty by such Members of this House as are of
his Majesty's Privy Council to acquaint his Majesty, that it is the humble
desire of this House, that the intended Marriage of his Royal Highness with the
Duchess of Modena be not consummated; and that he may not be Married to any
Person but of the Protestant Religion.

And the same Day the Parliament was Prorogued till Monday next.

The Address of the Parliament to his Majesty.
WE your Majesty's most Humble and Loyal Subjects the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, being full of Assurance of your Majesty's gracious
Intentions to provide for the Establishment of Religion, and the Preservation
of your People in Peace and Security; and foreseeing the dangerous Consequences
which ^ay follow the Marriage of his Royal Highness the Duke of York with the
Princess of ^^^dena, or any other of the Popish Religion, we hold our selves
bound in Conscience ^^d Duty to represent the same to your Sacred Majesty, not
doubting but these constant Testimonies which we have given your Majesty of our
true and loyal Affections to your Sacred Person will easily gain a Belief, that
these our humble Desires proceed from Hearts still full of the same Affections
toward your sacred Majesty, and with intentions to establish your Royal
Government upon those true Supports of the Protestant Religion, and the Hearts
of your People, with all Humility desiring your Majesty to take the same into
your Princely Consideration, and to relieve your Subjects from those Fears and
Apprehensions which at present they lie under from the Progress has been made
in that Treaty.

We do therefore humbly entreat your Majesty to consider, that if this Match do
proceed, it will be a means to disquiet the Minds of your Protestant Subjects
at home, and to fill them with endless Jealousies and Discontents; and will
bring your Majesty into such Alliances abroad, as will prove highly
prejudicial, if not destructive to the Interest of the very Protestant Religion
it self.

And we find by sad Experience that such Marriages have increased and
encouraged Popery in this Kingdom, and given opportunity to Priests and Jesuits
to propagate their Opinions, and seduce great Numbers of your Majesty's
Subjects.

And we do already observe how much the Party is animated with the hopes of
this Match, which were lately discouraged by your gracious Concessions in the
last Meeting in this Parliament.

That we greatly fear this may be an Occasion to lessen the Affections of the
People to his Royal Highness, who is so nearly related to the Crown; and whose
Honor and Esteem we desire may always be entirely preserved.

That for another Age more at the least this Kingdom will be under the
continual Apprehensions of the Growth of Popery, and the Danger of the
Protestant Religion.

Lastly, We consider that this Princess having so near a Relation and Kindred
to many Eminent Persons of the Court of Rome, may give them great Opportunities
to promote their Designs, and carry on their Practices among us, and by the
same means penetrate into your Majesty's most Secret Counsels, and more easily
discover the State of the whole Kingdom.

And finding that by the Opinions of very Learned Men, it is generally admitted
that such Treaties and Contracts by Proxies are dissolvable, of which there are
several Instances to be produced, We do in all humbleness beseech your Majesty
to put a stop to the Consummation of this intended Marriage.

And this we do the more importunately desire, because we have not yet the
Happiness to see any Issue of your Majesty's that may succeed in the Government
of these Kingdoms, which Blessings we most heartily pray Almighty God in his
due time to bestow upon your Majesty and these Kingdoms, to the unspeakable Joy
and Comfort of all your Majesty's Subjects, who desire nothing more than to
continue under the Reigns of your Majesty, and your Royal Posterity for ever.

October, 30. 1673.
Mr. Secretary Coventry brought from his Majesty an Answer to the Address
presented to him touching the Duke of York as follows.

C. R.

HIS Majesty having received an Address from the House of Commons, presenting
their humble Desire that the intended Marriage betwixt his Royal Highness and
the Princess of Modena may not be Consummated, Commanded this Answer to be
returned, That he perceived the House of Commons have wanted a full Information
of this Matter, the Marriage not being barely intended, but Completed
according to the Forms used amongst Princes, and by His Royal Consent and
Authority; Nor could He in the least suppose it disagreeable to His House of
Commons, His Royal Highness having been in the view of the World for several
Months engaged in a Treaty of Marriage with another Catholic Princess, and yet
a Parliament held during the time, and not the least Exception taken at it.

An Address ordered to be presented to His Majesty concerning a Marriage
between his Royal Highness and the Princess of Modena, and a Committee
appointed to* that purpose.

A Committee appointed for preparing a Bill for a general Test, to distinguish
between Protestants and Papists; and those that shall refuse to take it, be
incapable to enjoy any Office Military or Civil; or to sit in either Houses of
Parliament, or to come within five miles of the Court.

The House adjourned till Monday.

October, 31. 1673.
Resolved, That the House considering the present Condition of the Nation, will
not take into any further Debate the Consideration of any Aid or Supplies, or
Charge upon the Subjects, before the time of Payment of the eighteen Months
Assessment, granted by a late Act of Parliamert, Entitled, An Act for raising
the Sum of Twelve hundred thirty eight thousand and seven hundred and fifty
Pounds, for the Supply of his Majesty's present Occasions, be expended; Except
it shall appear that the Obstinacy of the Dutch shall render it necessary; Nor
before this Kingdom be effectually Secured from Popery and Popish Counsels, and
the other present Grievances be (...). And,

An Address ordered to be presented to His Majesty for a Fast to be observed
throughout the Nation, and a Committee appointed for that purpose.

A further Address to be presented to his Majesty concerning the Marriage of
the Duke of York with the Duchess of Modena, And the Privy Counselors of this
House to attend His Majesty to know His Pleasure, when he will be attended
therewith.

And they Adjourned till to Morrow in the Afternoon.

November, 3. 1673.
A Report from the Committee appointed for that purpose was made for an Address
to be presented to His Majesty, to appoint a General Fast to be observed
throughout the Nation; and the Concurrence of the Lords to be desired thereto.

The standing-Army voted a Grievance.

A Committee appointed to prepare an Address to be presented to his Majesty, to
show how this Standing-Army is a Grievance; and then adjourned till Three of
the Clock in the Afternoon. Mr. Speaker and the House went to attend His
Majesty at Whitehall with the Address; who returning, Mr. Speaker reports, That
it was a Matter he would take into his present Consideration, and would return
speedily an Answer.

And then the House Adjourned, till to Morrow Morning eight of the Clock.

November, 4. 1673.
The House of Commons having Ordered an Address to be made to his Majesty,
showing that the Standing-Army was a Grievance, and a Burden to the Nation; and
did intend that Day to wait on his Majesty to present it: But his Majesty was
in his Robes in the House of Peers, and the Lords hastening to him, the
Black-Rod being sent to the Commons-House to Command the Speaker and the
Commons to come to his Majesty to the House of Peers; but it so happened that
the Speaker and the Black-Rod met both at the Commons-House door; the Speaker
being within the House, the Door was commanded to be shut, and they cried to
the Chair, others said the Black-Rod was at the Door to command them to wait on
the King to the House of Peers: but the Speaker was hurried to the Chair. Then
was moved, 1. That our Alliance with France was a Grievance. 2. That the evil
Counsel about the King was a Grievance to this Nation. 3. That the Lord
Lauderdale was a Person that was a Grievance to this Nation, and not fit to be
entrusted or employed in any Office or Place of Trust, but to be removed.


Whereupon they cried, To the Question. But the Black-Rod knocking very
earnestly at the Door, the Speaker rose out of the Chair, and went away in a
Confusion.

A LETTER FROM A PARLIAMENT MAN to his FRIEND, Concerning the Proceedings of
the House of Commons This last Session, begun the 13 of October, 1675.
SIR,
I See you are greatly Scandalized at our slow and confused Proceedings. I
confess you have cause enough, but were you but within these Walls for one half
Day, and saw the strange Make and Complexion that this House is of, you would
wonder as much that ever you wondered at it: For we are such a pied Parliament,
that none can say of what Color we are; for we consist of old Cavaliers, old
Roundheads, Indigent Courtiers, and true Country Gentlemen; the two latter are
most numerous, and would in probability bring things to some Issue, were they
not clogged with the humorous uncertainties of the former. For the old Cavalier
grown Aged, and almost past his Vice, is damnable Godly, and makes his doting
Piety more a Plague to the World, then his youthful Debauchery was: For he is
so much a Byggot to the Bishops, that he forces his Loyalty to strike Sail to
his Religion, and could be content to pare the Nails a little of the Civil
Government, so you would but let him sharpen the Ecclesiastical Tallons; which
behavior of his so exasperates the Roundhead, that he on the other hand cares
not what Increases the Interest of the Crown receives, so he can but diminish
that of the Miter: so that the Roundhead had rather enslave the Man, than the
Conscience; The Cavalier rather the Conscience than the Man, there being a
sufficient stock of Animosity as proper matter to work upon.

Upon these therefore the Courtier mutually plays: For if any Anticourt motion
be made, he gains the Rounhead either to oppose or absent, by telling them, If
they will join him now, he will join with them for Liberty of Conscience. And
when any Affair is started on the behalf of the Country he assures the
Cavaliers, If they will then stand by him, he will then join with them in
promoting a Bill against the Fanatics. Thus play they on both hands, that no
Motion of a public nature is made, but they win upon the one or other, of
them; and by this Art gain a Majority against the Country Gentlemen, which
otherwise they would never have: Wherefore it were happy that we had neither
Roundhead nor Cavalier in the House; for they are each of them so Prejudicate
one against the other, that their sitting here signifies nothing but their
Fostering their old Venom, and lying at Catch to snap every Advantage to bear
down each other, though it be in the Destruction of their Country.

For if the Roundheads bring in a good Bill, the old Cavalier opposes it, for
no other reason, but because they brought it. So that as the poor English
Silk-weavers, are feign to hire a Frenchman to sell their Ribbons: So are the
Roundheads a Cavalier, to move for those Bills they desire should pass; which
so sowers the Roundhead, that he revenges that Carriage upon any Bill the
Cavalier offers, and the Rage and the Passion of the one and other, are so
powerful, that it blinds them both, that neither perceives the Advantage they
give the Courtier, to abuse both them and their Country too: so that if either
of them do any Good, it is only out of pure Envy against the other. Thus you
see how we are yoked, and seeing this, you may cease your Admiration that we
offer at all, and do just nothing.

Nor is this Division alone of the House all we have to lament (for Death, that
common Cure, does now every Day lessen this evil) but that which is more our
Misery, is, that those Gentlemen who are truly for the Good of their Country,
will not be persuaded to stand upon the sure Basis of Rational Principles (like
Workmen too presumptive of their Judgments that will not build by Rule) but
rather affect the most loose Standing on the Sandy Foundation of Heat and
Humor: By reason of which they often do as much Harm as Good, and yet perceive
it not; this is the sore evil we are under. For I would not doubt the Countries
carrying it from the Court in every Vote, let the Courtiers use all the Art
they could, would the Country Gentlemen but give themselves the trouble to
enform their understandings a little, and not suffer themselves to be hurried
by a heedless Inadvertency into Vulgar Notions. Which, if well examined, are
directly contrary to their honest Intentions; for lack of which they totally
mistake their Interests, fall foul on their Friends, support their Enemies, and
carry on the Designs of the Court whilst they aim at the Service of their
Country. For if they would take the pains but to think what is the greatest
Enemy in the World, English Law and Liberty always had, still has, and ever
must have; It may be the result of such a Thought would say, it was Encroaching
Prerogative. Well, if then they would but beg from themselves but so much
Seriousness, as to think this second Thought, to check this Prerogative, which
is so dangerous an Enemy to our Laws and Liberties, peradventure that Thought
would answer, In suppressing all they could its Creatures and Dependants, and
supporting such, whose Interest it is to keep Prerogative within its just
bounds. Now could they but be prevailed with but to think a third Thought, it
would land them at the full and satisfactory Solution of the Question, and will
hold in every thing. But I will put it in a Case wherein we are most apt to
Err, and wherein we reckon it no less than Piety to play the Fool, to the end
you may see how miserably we are cheated and abused, by sucking in the untried
Notions that Education, the Arts of others, or our own Ignorance have imposed
upon us.

The third Thought therefore shall be this: Which are most the Creatures and
Supporters of boundless Prerogative, Prelates or Dissenting Protestants? The
Answer to which must, and can be no otherwise, The Prelates. Well then, if we
would now reduce this to Practice, and say, The greatest Friends to Prerogative
are the Prelates, the greatest Enemies to our Laws and Liberties is
Prerogative. The only way therefore to restrain Prerogative, is to do, What? To
fortify and strengthen the Yoke of the Prelates over the Neck of the People?
No: (Surely this were an odd and a barbarous kind of reasoning) But to give
Liberty to Dissenting Protestants, as the best means to keep up the Balance
against boundless Prerogative. For these must, and never can be otherwise
(unless by Accident, and by Mistake) than Friends to Liberty: But the Prelates
neither are, nor can be otherwise then Creature to Prerogative, for all their
Promotions, Dignities, and Domination depends upon it.

The same might be said concerning the only ancient and true Strength of the
Nation, the Legal Militia, and a Standing Army. The Militia must, and can never
be otherwise than for English Liberty, 'cause else it does destroy it self; but
a Standing Force can be for nothing but Prerogative, by whom it has its idle
Living and Subsistence. I could instance also in many other Particulars, but
our Inadvertency in this, is Demonstration enough how much we are cheated by
the common and hackney Notions imposed upon us? and this is almost the cause of
all the Error we commit. For missing our true Footing, you see we have run in
the mistaken Notion of being for the Church so long, till we have almost
destroyed the State, and advanced Prerogative so much by suppressing
Nonconformity, that it is well nigh beyond our reach or power to put a check to
it, and had not Time, and but an indifferent Observation, showed us how much we
were abused in this matter: and that a Lay-Conformist and a Fanatic can live
as quietly and neighbourly together (would the Prelates but suffer them) as any
in the world, we had ruined our selves past all recovery. For by our ^ouying up
the Bishops in their harsh and irreconcilable Spirit, instead of healing we
have so fed and nourished the Discontents throughout the Kingdom, that I think
nothing keeps the Fire from Flaming out a fresh in another intestine War, but
the bare Circumstance of Opportunity only; and how long that will be able to
restrain Passions that are made wild by Oppression, is worthy a very serious
Consideration; and therefore there is hardly any thing more a wonder to wise
men, then to see the Clergy run at this rate upon the Dissenters: wherefore
since the Nonconformists have given so large and ample a Testimony of their
willingness to live Peaceably, if yet notwithstanding the Clergy will not
suffer them to be quiet in their Families and their Houses, I doubt, they may
at one time or other, drive them into the Field, and then it may exceed their
Divine Art to conjure them down again; for he sees but little, that sees not
the English Temper is better to be led then driven. And therefore I think it
would not be more a Vanity, to compel the Ladies to wear Queen Elizabeth's Ruff,
then to force the Nonconformists to be dressed in her Religion.

Nor yet are these all the Arts we are under: For we have a Gang that Huff, and
bear themselves high on the Country side, but earn only for the Court; these
lay out their Craft in putting the House upon little trifling things, and spend
and waste the Mettle thereof, upon such pitiful Pickadilloes, as it is next to
shame for an English Parliament so much as to mention. These start a fierce
Dispute about some little Matter, and keep a bluster as if none were such
faithful Patriots as they, when they do it on purpose only to while out the
Time, and thin the House, by tiring the honest Country Gentry in so tedious,
fruitless and trifling Attendance. Do but move things worthy a Parliament; as
that we may have our ^^d known Rights of Annual Parliaments ascertained: That
none that are or shall be bribed by any Place or Office shall ever sit in this
House: That Parliaments ought not to be Prorogued, Adjourned or Dissolved, till
all Petitions are heard, and the Grievances of the People redressed; with many
things more of as great Importance; O then, forsooth, their pretended Loyalty
(which in plain English is easily understood) will not abide such unmannerly
and clownish Debates as these, and twenty such little shreds of Nonsense are
impertinently urged instead of Argument.

But further, these Countrey-Court Engines, after they have taken the Measures
of the House, at the opening of every Session, by our Thanks for the gracious
Speech, which being the true Pulse of the House; if it happen to come so hard
as speaks us but faint and cool to the one thing necessary, (the matter of
Money) then they know what will follow, that the Court will get no Grist that
Sessions; and though the Court in Indignation could turn them home on the
Morrow, yet it must consult its Reputation a little, restrain its Resentments,
and suffer them to sit about a six Weeks, or two Months, and then they assure
the Court, since they can get no good by them, they shall take no harm; and
therefore to stop them from some worthy Undertaking, they by their feigned Zeal
against Court Corruptions, put them upon Impeaching some Treasurer, Councellor
or Minister of State; and having spent half our time about this, the rest is
spent for the Clergy upon Church-Work, which we have been so often put upon and
tired with these many Sessions: Though Partiality unbecomes a Parliament, who
ought to lay the whole Body that we represent alike easy, Nonconformists, as
well as Conformists, for we were chosen by both, and with that Intention that
we should oppress neither. To lay one part therefore of the Body on a Pillow,
and the other on a Rack, sorts our Wisdom little, but our Justice worse. You
now see all our Shapes, save only the Indigents, concerning whom I need say but
little, for their Votes are publicly saleable for a Guinea, and a Dinner every
Day in the Week, unless the House be upon Money or a Minister of State: For
that is their Harvest; and then they make their Earnings suit the Work they are
about, which inclines them most constantly as sure Cliants to the Court. For
what with gaining the one and saving the other, they now and then adventure a
Vote on the Country side; but the dread of Dissolution makes them strait tack
about. The only thing we are obliged to them for, is, that they do nothin
Gratis, but make every Tax as well Chargeable to the Court, as burthensom to
the Country, and save no Man's Neck, but they break his Purse. And yet when all
is said, did but the Country Gentry rightly understand the Interest of
Liberty, Let the Courtiers and Indigents do what they could, they might yet at
last deserve the Name of a worthy English Parliament; which that we may do, is
not more passionately your Desire, then it also is of,

SIR, Your most Humble Servant. T. E.

A SPEECH MADE BY Sir William Scrogg, ONE OF HIS Majesty's Sergeants at Law, To
the Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor Of ENGLAND, AT HIS Admission to
the Place of One of His Majesty's Justices of the Court of Common Pleas.
My Lord,
THAT the King's Favor is the Effect of the Duty I have paid him, (which your
Lordship is pleased to call Service) is the most welcome and pleasing part of
his Kindness; and I trust we shall still see such Times that no Man shall hope
to have it, or keep it on any other Account. The right Application of Rewards
and Punishments, is the steady Justice of a Nation; where though the Rewards of
Kings exceed what a Subject can merit. they should never reach him that
demerits. To return Good for Evil may be an Obligation of Charity; It is never
of Bounty. And the taking off (as they call it) of an Ambitious, and therefore
a Factious Man, by Favors, is the worst way to stop or open his Mouth; for he
will whisper one way louder, then he will speak the other: And when you think
you gain one Enemy you make many.

On such an Occasion as this, I think it very proper to give your Lordship some
Account what Considerations I have had, in order to the Discharge of my Duty in
this Place, since the King's first Intimations of his Pleasure.

And that respects Matters, either as they stand betwixt the King and his
People, or betwixt Man and Man.

As for the First, I know that the Law gives such Prerogatives to the King,
that to endeavor more were to desire worse; and it gives to the People such
Liberties, that more would be Licentious.

What then has a Man to do that has Courage enough to be Honest, but to Apply
his Understanding to the Ministration of those Laws justly to both: wherein I
may say, that the Cases will be rare that will be difficult in themselves. They
may be made so from sinister Causes; when Men thinking to serve a Turn, or like
Pilate, to please the People, deliver up that which is Right to be Crucified.
Then they are fain to rack their Fancies to make good their Faults. This makes
such nice Distinctions, and such strained Constructions, till they leave
nothing plain in the World. Whereas in truth the Duty we owe to the King and
his People, is like the Duty we owe to God, not hard to understand, whatever it
is to Practice.

This Court, My Lord, it is true, is properly a Court of Meum and Tuum, where
Prerogative and Liberty are seldom Plaintiffs or Defendants, but yet it is
certain, that even in private Causes, Matter of Government many times
intervenes, and the Public is concerned by Consequence. And therefore I think
it fair, and like English Honesty and Plainness, something to unveil one's self
in that particular, that Men may know beforehand what they may expect. And
herein I do declare, I would no more wrong or lessen the People's Liberties,
then I would sacrifice up my Son. But then I will no more derogate from the
King's Prerogative, then I would betray my Father.

My Lord, In time when Faction is so bold as to be barefaced; and false and
seditious News is openly talked, and greedily embraced; when the King's
reasonable Demands are disputed, and turned into Cavils, and those that oppose
'em talk confidently; and those that should maintain 'em speak fearfully and
tenderly; when the Reverence we owe to the King is paid to the People; the
Government is beset, the King is in Danger, and there is nothing wanting but
Opportunity.

But when to prevent that Opportunity, Men are afraid, and hold it dangerous to
avoid the Danger; when we dare not call a Crime by its right name; and for
some, find none; and a Mischief must be effected, before we will think it one:
When dangerous Attempts are minced, and by some trivial difference Treason is
distinguished into a Trespass; when Men are forward and ventrous enough in what
thwarts the Government, but in supporting it, seem grave and cautious, nice and
timorous, and so filled with Prudentials, till they are as wise as fear can
make 'em: The Law is enervated, and becomes useless to its greatest end, which
is, the Preservation of the whole.

It Is true, in Public Causes, the same Integrity is necessary as in Private;
But that is but part of a Judge's Duty. He must be Magnanimous as well as
Virtuous. And I acknowledge it to be a main and principal part of my Duty, as
it relates to the King and his People, with hearty Resolution to suppress all
open Force and private Confederacies; not thinking any thing little that
attempts the Public Safety; for when the Motives are small, the Danger is
greater; when Discontents exceed their Causes.

And for the Discharge of my Duty betwixt Party and Party, it is impossible to
be performed without these two Cardinal Virtues, [Temper] and [Cleanness of
Hands] Temper comprehends Patience, Humility and Candor. It seems to me that
Saying, Be quick to hear, and slow to speak, was made on purpose for a Judge.
No Direction can be apter, and no Character becomes him better: and he that
would not be said to have but one Ear, methinks should be ashamed to have none.
And I appeal to your Lordships Experience, if a patient Attention, accompanied
with indifferent Parts, and a Competency in the Law, with a mind fairly
disposed for Information or Conviction, will not, as to Use and common Benefit,
exceed the profoundest Knowledge, and most towering Understanding, that is
attended with an impetuous Haste, either out of a glory of Speaking, or too
great a fullness of himself.

And for Humility, Though I will not say that every Impatient Man is proud,
(because that may arise from other Causes) yet every proud Man is impatient,
sometimes of Information, always of Contradiction; and he must be violent to
maintain his own Imperiousness.

Harshness is a needless and unbecoming Provocation: It makes Men hate where
they should fear and reverence: And yet by Gentleness I understand, not
Tameness, but Moderation; not without Rebukes, but without Taunts.

For Corruption, that Perverter of Law and Destruction of Property, that leaves
in the World neither Bonum nor Equum; for when he does Right, he does not
Justice; and he that sells Justice, will sell Injustice. It Is not only to be
avoided, but abhorred; and not alone in its direct Approaches, but in Relatives
and Servants, those By-ways of Bribery; and it becomes every man so manifestly
to detest, that it may scare even the Attempt: for no Man is sufficiently safe
unless to his Power he avoids the Suspicion as well as the Fault. Practice does
one and that which makes me speak this, a public Profession against it, is the
way to do the other.

And where Gifts prevail not; yet if Fear, Relation or Popularity sway, it is
the same thing. If there be a Bias put to a Man, it matters not of what it is
made. Nay, these are worse than Corruption by Money; for there both sides may
have the same Tools, when a Man cannot make himself a Kin, nor his Cause
Popular.

And now give me leave, My Lord, to show why I thought it fit, nay extremely
necessary to say something on the particulars I have mentioned.

First, to satisfy your Lordship and the World I undertake not this Place
without due Considerations of the Duty belongs to it. Next, It is some Tie upon
a Man not to commit those Errors he has in Public declaimed against: for he
must add Impudence to his Crime, to have his own words fly in his face, with
which every Man will upbraid, and no Man can excuse him.

My Lord, In a Discourse on such an Occasion as this, where Men are concerned
in Point of Interest, (for so they are when a Judge is made) my Aim is not to
say what will please their Humors, but what should satisfy their Minds:
Neither am I so vain as to think I shall do that with all; nor much concerned
though it fall out so. If Reputation and a good Name can be got by doing my
Duty, it is welcome; but if it must be sought by other Arts, I will be no
Seeker; especially considering that the Applause of the Multitude, that
Contingent Judge of Good and Bad, rather attends the Vain than the Virtuous,
and is oftener sought by such too. The Approbation of the Wise, which are the
Few; and of the Honest, by which I intend, Men heartily affected to the
Government, I acknowledge I earnestly covet: for them that are otherwise, I
court not their good Opinion, because I fear not their bad; and would not draw
that Suspicion upon my self, that Men may say, What Ill has he done, that those
Men speak so well of him? I never was of their Party, nor never will be. And to
be even with them, I think as meanly of them as they do of Loyalty; whose
Misfortunes are more to be esteemed than their Triumphs. The good Words of such
as truly love their Country, (which no Man ever did that does not love his
Prince) indeed I highly prize, and will endeavor to deserve; though your
Lordship at this time has been beforehand with me in that Particular, by
bestowing them upon me first; and so many, that I am ashamed I have been no
better to have made 'em good: But because your Lordship is willing and able to
render any Man much better then he is, they ought to be esteemed as the Proceed
of a Generous Nature, and an Indulgent Prudence; which by telling me what I am,
does but kindly insinuate what I should be.

My Lord, I will waste no more of your Time, though I omit those usual Returns
of formal Thanks; for they are of course; or extreme wondering at the great
Surprizals of the Kings Favor; and those humble, yet high Debasements of ones
Self, which look like Modesty but is a sort of Bravery.

My Thanks shall be paid in (what the KING likes best) Service to His People.
The wonder will cease by that time I get to the Bench: and my Defects are best
confessed by endeavoring to amend them.

A DISCOURSE UPON THE Designs, Practices and Counsels OF FRANCE.
SIR,
YOU gave me a Brief, and a Pertinent Deduction the other Day, of the French
Practices and Designs; the Progress of their Arms, and the Methods of their
Proceedings: Together with a Scheme of the inevitable Ruin and Slavery that
threatens Europe, without a speedy and a powerful Conjunction against them.

After this general Contemplation of the present State of Christendom; you were
pleased to take a particular Prospect of the Interest of this Nation; and how
far we are to reckon our selves concerned in the Common Calamity: Coming at
last to this Conclusion, That England cannot reasonably expect to stand long,
after the Loss of Holland and Flanders. For the Support of this Opinion,
(besides the Force of your own Reasoning) you referred me to several Historical
and Political Treatises upon the Subject; which I have diligently examined, and
made use of, in this following Discourse; wherein I take the Freedom to give
you my Thoughts upon the whole matter.

Your first Charge upon the French, was, Breach of Faith: and you pitched upon
the Cases of Spain, and Portugal; the barbarous usage of the Duke of Lorain;
and the Nulling of the most Christian Queens Renunciation upon Marriage; (which
was the very Foundation of the Pyrenean Treaty) by a pretended Devolution of
the Spanish Netherlands, in the Right of that Match: Their underhand Tampering
of Denmark and Swede, to draw the One from us, and hinder the Other from
joining with us; the Influence they had upon our Disgrace at Chatham; their
playing Booty on both sides, betwixt England and Holland in the Dutch-war: and
to these Instances, (which are all so notorious that they need no expounding)
you might have added a thousand more of the like Quality. But these may suffice
for a seasonable and a necessary Caution, and without the Helps of Aggravation
and Clamor; especially that extraordinary Action of destroying the Queens
Renunciation, and then invading the Spanish Netherlands upon it: An Action
hardly to be paralelled in the Story of the whole World, for a Concurrence of
so many enormous Circumstances. There was in it, The Public Faith of the two
Crowns; which is the only Security of Government, and the Bond of Humane
Society: There was in it The Solemnity of an Oath at the very Altar; which is
the most Sacred Tie of a Christian: There was also The highest Profession, and
Assurance of Friendship imaginable; which is accounted one of the most binding
Obligations betwixt Man and Man: And then there was a Brother, a Cousin, and an
Infant in the Case; which makes it Matter of Humanity and Honor. And yet all
these Cords were as easily broken as Bulrushes. This single President may
serve, however, for a warning to all Princes and States, not to leave
themselves at the mercy of Men of such Principles. But his most Christian
Majesty is not the only Prince that has been abused by Corrupt and Ambitious
Ministers.

Your next observation was, That they are the greatest Intermedlers in the
World, in other Peoples Affairs, that they embroil all wherever they come; and
that there is hardly any Rebellion, but they are in the bottom of it. For their
Money walks in all the Courts and Councils of Christendom; nay, and beyond it
too: For it is said that the last Grand Vis^er was their Pensioner. Was it not
France that debauched Scotland first; and afterward England into the late
Rebellion? Nay, did they not stand still, and look on, to see the C^owning of
the Work which they themselves began, in the Execrable Murder of the late
King? and did they not refuse to our Gracious and Persecuted Sovereign -- even
a Retreat in their Dominions? How did they prolong the War in Portugal? What
Havoc have they made in Poland, and what work in Hungary? And are they not
this Day in Counsel with the Port against the Empire, and undermining the
Bulwark of Christendom? How have they dashed England against Holland; blinded
the Eyes of several Princes of the Empire; and baffled all Mediations toward a
General Peace? Did they not formerly, under the Color of Protecting Germany,
cut off Alsatia from the Empire? and in a word, this has been their Practice
wheresoever they have come: They covet Harbors in Spain, (says the Admirable
Baron de^ Isola) Leagues in the Empire; Factions in Poland; Wars in England and
Holland; Passes into Italy; and the Sovereign Arbitrage every where. Their
Quiet consists in the Trouble of all others, and their Advantage is in the
Public Calamities. Nor have they any other way, then by dividing, and
weakening of the parts, to master the whole, which is the Capital Design. And
if so, There Is no Fence against a Common Enemy, but a Common Union.

It is already made appear, by what is above said, how dangerous they are to
Mankind. The next hint you gave me, was to consider on it, Whether the English
may reasonably expect any better Quarter from them, then other People: in which
point, I shall only lay the matter before you, and leave you the Judge on it.

The Four main Interests of a Nation, are Religion, Reputation, Peace, and
Trade. For the First of these; we shall neither fare the better, nor the worse;
but lose just as much for being of another Communion, as his Catholic Majesty
gets by being of the same. The Question now on Foot is a Communion of State,
not of Faith. The Alcoran and the Gospel go hand in hand; and at the same time,
the Protestants are protected in Hungary, and persecuted in France. To say
nothing of the Encouragements they give there to the Jansenists, which may, for
ought we know, prove the greatest Blow to the Church of Rome that ever it
received since the Reformation. But what do I talk of Religion, in a Cause that
is dipped in Christian Blood, and in the Tears of Widows and Orphans? A Cause
that is propagated by Sacrilege, Rapes, Depopulation, Slavery, Oppression, and
at least a Million of Lives sacrificed to it already? The very Thought of it is
enough to strike the Soul of any Man with Horror and Indignation.

If you would see how tenderly they have handled us in the Business of
Reputation: Pray do but cast an Eye upon the Character of an Englishman in
their Politic de France.

Quant a ce qui est des Anglois, ils n'ont aucuns amiss, ce sont des gens sans
Foy, sans Religion, sans Probite, sans Justice aucune, defians, legers au
dernier point, Cruels, Impatiens, Gourmands, Superbes, Audacieux, Avares,
Propres pour les coups de main, et pour une promte execution, mais incapables
de conduire une Guerre avec judgment. Leur Pais est assez bon pour vivre, mais
il n' est pas assez rich pour leur fournir les moyens de sortir, and de fair
aucune conqueste: aussi n' ont ils jamais rien conquis, except L' Irelande,
don't les habitans sont fobiles, and mauvais Soldats, etc. i. e. As for the
English, they are a People without Friends, without Faith, Religion, Honesty or
Justice; Distrustful, and Fickle to the highest Degree imaginable, Cruel,
Impatient, Gluttonnous, Proud, Audacious; they will do well enough for a Rubber
at Cuffs, or a sudden Exploit, but they understand nothing at all of the
Government of a War. The Country is passable enough for them to live in; but
not rich enough to offer at any Conquest abroad; nor did they ever make any,
but upon the Irish, which are a weakly People, and ill Soldiers.

I think it were not amiss in this place, to desire our Impertinent Undertaker
to turn back to the History of Philip de Valois. and he shall there find there
that our Edward the III. made a Shift with one Army to beat 60000 French, and
leave betwixt Thirty and forty Thousand of them upon the place; and with
another Army in the Bishopric of Durham to defeat as many Scots, and cut off
15000 of them too. And it must not be here omitted, that this Scotch Army was
also animated by French Counsels. I would not willingly run out a Letter into a
Volume, so that all other Reflections apart, I shall only add, that if the
English had not once recovered the Field, and another time made it good in two
of the greatest Actions of late that have yet passed betwixt the Imperialists
and the French, it is the Opinion of Wise Men, that the later would not have had
much to brag of upon the Success of this War. And this in some degree is
acknowledged by the Author of a French Relation of the Actions betwixt the two
Armies in 1675, 1676, and 1677, (how Romantical soever in other Cases).
Speaking of the Battle under the Command of the Count de Lorge, after the Death
of the Vicount Turenne, these are his words, Et a render justice aux Anglois,
and aux Irlandois, on peut dire, qu'on leur doit une bonne party de cette
victoire: That is to say, And to give the English and Irish their due, France
is indebted to them in a large measure for this Victory. But now to our
Politician again: Ils se haissent les uns les autres, and sont en division
continuelle, soit pour la Religion, soit pour le Government. The English, says
he, hate one another, and are still quarrelling, either about Religion or
Government.

These Indecencies would almost make a Man call them Names; but let us pass
without one angry word, from the Interest of our Reputation, to that of our
Peace, and enquire how they stand affected to us upon that point. To say, that
England has not for a long time had any Troubles either at home or abroad,
which the French have not promoted, or improved to their own advantage; is to
say no more than that they deal with us, as they do with all the World beside;
so that we must even have recourse again to their Politics for some particular
Mark of their Favor, where you shall find that our State-Mountebank has not
yet shown all his Tricks, but puts himself with a very grave and fore-casting
Countenance upon the very Project of our Ruin: Une Guerre de France, de trois
ou quatre ans contre eux les ruinera entierement, ainsi il semble qu'il ne faut
point fair de paix avec eux qu' a des Conditions qui nous soient tres
avantageuses. A War (says he) of three or four Years with France, would
absolutely destroy the English; so that methinks we should not entertain any
Peace with them, but upon very profitable Terms. And then a little after: In
fine, says he, the way to undo the English, is to make them keep an Army on
foot; and there is no fear of their Landing in France, but to their certain
destruction, unless they should be invited by a Rebellion; without which, their
Troops will in a short time most undoubtedly fall foul one upon another. To
keep them upon continual Expense, it is but giving them the Alarm upon the Isles
of Jersey, and Guernsey, Wight, and Man, Ireland, and the Cinque Ports; by
which means, they will be put upon the Charge of Fortifications and Garrisons,
which will persuade the People that the King intends to set up a Standing Army,
and an Arbitrary Government. So long as this holds, the Nation will never be at
quiet, but torment themselves with Fears and Jealousies, which may be easily
fomented by Letters in Cipher, to such or such particular Persons; and in such
sort to be intercepted as shall be found convenient. These Letters may give a
Hint of a Descent in Ireland, and elsewhere, which would dispose the Irish, who
mortally hate the English, to a Revolt; and among the suspicious Multitude they
would pass for Gospel. This Contrivance would make the Scots also to bethink
themselves of recovering their Liberty; where there must be Parties made, and
the Sects encouraged one against another; especially the Roman Catholics must
be fairly handled, and private Assurance given (in the Name of the King of
England) to the Benedictins, (who are easy enough to be imposed upon) that
they shall be restored to all their former Benefits, according to the Printed
Monasticon; which will presently make the Roman Catholics declare themselves;
and the Monks will move Heaven and Earth for the bringing of Matters about: But
then Care must be taken to carry on the Report, that the King is of the Romish
Religion; which will distract the Government, and throw all into an Absolute
Confusion.

From hence we may gather: First, What Opinion the French have of us. Secondly,
That it is not only their Desire and Study, but a formed Design to embroyl us.
Thirdly, That they will stick at nothing neither, to compass that End, be it
never so foul. Fourthly, This Libeller has traced us out the very Methods of
their working: As by amusing the People with forged Letters of Intelligence,
where the first Author of the Plot must miraculously discover it. By filling
the Peoples Heads with Fears and Jealousies, and leaving no Stone unturned in
England, Scotland, and Ireland, to stir up a Rebellion. Why has he not advised
the Poisoning of all our Fountains too? which would have been a Course of as
much Christianity and Honor. But that this Trifler may not glorify himself
too much in his wondrous Speculations, take Notice, that he is only the
Transcriber, not the Author of this goodly Piece, for the Original was betwixt
Richlieu and Mazarine; and it amounts to no more in effect, than an imperfect
History of the French Dealings with us for a long time, and particularly in our
late Troubles.

To come now from his most unmannerly Malice, to his Reason of State; if I am
not mistaken: England might longer subsist in a War with France, than France
could in a Peace within it self (the heaviest of all Judgments, when a Nation
must be wicked upon necessity). And again, when he says, That England cannot
hurt France by a Descent, unless called in by a Rebellion. He never considers,
That if England had an Army a-foot, and stood inclined to make use of it that
way, we should not be long without an Invitation. For we see what the
Bourdelois, etc. did upon their own Bottom, and without any Foreign
Encouragement; and the whole Business miscarried only for want of a vigorous
Second. Lastly, Give me leave to say, that he has extremely over-shot himself
in one thing more; for though this has been realty the Practice of the French,
and is at this day the very Model and Rule by which their Emissaries govern
themselves; it should yet have been kept as the greatest Secret in the World:
for the owning of these Inglorious Artifices in Public, makes it one of the
grossest Libels that ever was written against the French Government: to say
nothing of his oversight in disobliging the Roman Catholics, and laying Snares
to trepan them.

The Question of Trade has been so beaten already, that there remains little to
be added to it. Nor in truth needs it, since it is agreed on all hands, that
the French set up for an Universal Commerce, as well as for an Universal
Monarchy. And in effect, the one is but a necessary consequent upon the other.
Nor is it enough, it seems, for us to be designed upon by them, without lending
them our Hands toward the Cutting of our own Throats: For upon a sober and
judicious Estimate, we are Losers by our Trade with France, at least a Million
and an half per Annum. I shall conclude this Head with one passage more out of
our Pelitiques of France: (And you will say it is a pleasant one too, but it must
be under the Rose) Upon a presupposal of Mischief that is a Brewing in England:
Now, says he, it will be our Business to renew our Alliance with Holland; we
can wheedle them into an Opinion, that they are the only Men that understand
the Knack of Trade, so that they shall have that to themselves: the Talent of
the French, alas! lies another way; and there is no forcing of any thing against
Nature: and that now is the ^ick of time to crush their Competitors for the
Northern Seas. So that we are all of us to be served with the same Sauce; but
it is some degree of Honesty yet, when they tell the World what they are to
trust to.

Now to sum up all that is said: If the French can dispense with Oaths, and
Solemn Contracts: If it be their Custom, and a Branch of their Policy, to fish
in troubled Waters: If they hate us, as Englishmen, and are not for us, as
Reformed Catholics: If they do all they can to wound us in our Reputation, our
Peace, and our Trade, we may take for granted, that they will destroy us to all
purposes if they can, which naturally leads me to an Enquiry, how far we are in
their Power, or likely so to be, that we may take our Measures accordingly.

It will not stand with the brevity I propose in this Paper, to give you a
Geographical, or an Historical Account of Places or Actions: But in as few
words as I can, I am to present you with a general View of the present State of
Christendom, with a regard to the Power of France; and then to consider how far
England may be concerned in the Common Fate. Here it was that you and I brake
off in our last Discourse; so that in the prosecution of it, I must try to walk
without leading, (saving only the helps that I have gathered from certain
Tracts which I have read, upon his Recommendation) wherein I shall steer a
middle course, betwixt some that overvalue the Strength of France, and others
that will have it to be less than indeed it is.

That the Arms of France are at this day formidable to all Christendom, is not
to be deuied, and Tacitus gives you the reason of it, in the Case of the Romans
and the Britains, Rarus (says he) ad propulsandum commune Periculum conventus:
ita, dum singuli pugnant, universi vincuntur. There must be a common force to
oppose a common danger; they struggled one by one, till they were all
destroyed. The French (no doubt of it) are a Wea^^y, a Populous, and a Military
Nation. But it must be allowed, that they are more indebted for their
Greatness, to the Slips and Oversights of others, (and this without
disparagement too) than they are to their proper Conduct and Valor. The
advance they made into Flanders in 1667, was introduced by the Spaniards
trusting to their Assurances of Friendship, and rather imputable to an excess
of Charity, than any want of Precaution; though it seemed not very likely, that
they should march with Horse. Foot, and Cannon, only to go a Birding. Through
these and the like Arts they have raised themselves to that dangerous height
where now we behold them; taking all Advantages of the unsettled Condition of
Spain; the Divisions of the Empire, and the Factions in Holland, and of all
other Mistakes in point of Foresight and Resolution elsewhere. You know very
well, the Conquests they have made upon the United Provinces, the Spanish
Netherlands; a considerable part of Germany with the Terror and Devastation
that accompanies them everywhere: The Progress of their Arms in Catalonia,
Sicily, the WestIndies, etc. Now what may be the Consequences of this
over-growing Power, and how to prevent them, is the matter in Question.

AS it is without Dispute, that the French aim at Universal Dominion, (which is
only a more plausible Cover for that Universal Slavery which must create it) so
is it accounted as indubitable a Principle, that the Conquest of Flanders must
be the Foundation of it. And according to this Maxim it is, that they take
their Measures; for they have ^ade themselves Masters of the Outworks already
in Valenciennes, Cambray and St. Omer; three places of very great Strength and
Importance: And it is generally believed by the recalling of their Troops from
the Rhine, and bending the Flower of their Force that way, that they will push
for the rest this Campania. If they carry it, (as probably they will, without
the speedy Addition of some powerful Alliance) take notice, I beseech you of
that which naturally follows. In the first place, the Charge and the Hazard of
that War is over, which in Garrisons, and in the Field, has put his Most
Christian Majesty to expense of keeping near 100000 Men in Pay: (which will
then be at Liberty to fall in upon the Empire. (Beside, what has been expended
in Management, as the French call it, which in honest English is down right
Corruption. Secondly, This Acquisition will furnish the French King with Men
and Moneys, for an Army of Fifty thousand Men, (and no better Soldiers in
Europe.) Thirdly, what will become of the Duke of Brandenburg, if the French
shall fall into Cleves, and Mark, with a matter of Forty or Fifty thousand Men
more, and from thence into Pomeren, and Prussia? Fourthly, the whole Patrimony
of the Empire, from the Rhine to the Frontiers of France, s^^l by an inevitable
Consequence into the hands of the French^; as they have already swallowed the
three Bishoprics of Metz, Toul and Verdun. So that the Imperial Army will be
forced over the Rhine, and there probably kept in play, and upon the bare
De^^^sive, by the Princes of the French Interest; while in the mean time, the
Princes of ^^^^phalia will be reduced to an absolute Necessity of ranging
themselves under the French Protection and changing their Party. And what can
then be expected from Holland, after what they have suffered already, and under
their present Despairs but to content themselves with such Conditions as France
will give them? For after the loss of Cleves and Flanders, their Case is wholly
desperate, unless England should vigorously interpose to their Relief. And the
State of the Empire is neither better nor worse than that of their Neighbors;
for they must all submit their Necks to the same Yoke. When matters are brought
to this Pass, they have before them, England, Spain and Italy; the Cloud is
gathered already, and it is wholly at their Choice where it shall break.

There are a great many People, I know, that promise themselves mighty things
from the event of another Campania, for want I fear of consulting the Chart;
and the almost insuperable Difficulties that lie in the way; The means they
propose are either by carrying the War into France, by way of Revulsion, or by
forcing the French upon a Capital Battle; The former Proposition seems First
very impracticable; and Secondly, of little or no Advantage, if it could be
effected. It must be considered that beyond Mentz, Coblentz and Treves, the
Imperialists have no Magazine at all beside that betwixt Treves and France (a
part of Luxenburg excepted) is absolutely in the Enemies Power. Now how should
an Army subsist there, that must over and above, pass through a Country of
about twenty Leagues, that is wholly laid waste, and in ashes, and without any
Cattle in it, or any other sort of necessary Provision?

Put the Case now that the Imperialists should break through all these
Difficulties, and carry an Army even into the Lorrain it self, the Country of
Metzin or Burgundy, (which would take them up the best part of a Summer too)
all the strong holds are in the hands of the French, and the Country laid so
desolate, that there is no living for an Army there. When it is come to this,
they must resolve either upon a Battle or Siege. If the former, The French are
at liberty whither they will Fight, or no, and there is no compelling of them;
for they are among their strong holds; and all is their own both behind them,
and on each side, and the Country either burnt or deserted. But carry it
farther yet, and suppose the French forced upon the Risque of a Battle, First,
the Imperialists are not sure to get the better of it. And Secondly, What if
they should? Nay to the Degree of an entire Victory? All that would be expected
more for that Year, would be only to take in some considerable Post, and make
good the ground they had gotten for the next Campaign: For it would be a
madness to p^^sue their Victory into the heart of an Enemies Country, and leave
so many Garrisons upon their backs, which would undoubtedly cut off all their
Convoys and starve them.

But this is still the supposing of a Thing not to be supposed; for the French
in this Case, would stand upon the Defensive, and not to come to a Battle. Or
in case they should, and he worsted; they have Men enough in Garrison for
Recruits, that would immediately reinforce them.

Now on the other side, what if the Imperialists should chance to be routed?
The Garrisons which the French hold in Lorrain, Burgundy and Alsatia, would in
such Case, totally destroy that broken Army, and cut out such work in Germany,
as has has not been known in the Empire for many Ages.

In this extremity, let us suppose that the Empire should yet bring another
Army into the Field; and try the Issue of a Second Battle, and miscarry: And
that the disaffected Princes of the Empire, should declare themselves for the
Enemy; all that part of Germany that lies within two or three Days Journey of
the Rhine, would be irrecoverably lost; a great part of it being so harrased
already, that it is not able so much as to furnish an Army upon a March, much
less for a Winter Quarter.

Now to the Business of a Siege, the French have taught us, by Philipsburg and
Mastricht, that they want neither Skill to fortify a Place, nor Courage to
defend it. So that without a great loss of Time and Men, it cannot be expected
that the Imperialists should make themselves Masters of any considerable Place:
and when they shall have carried it; what will a Town in Lorain, or Burgundy
signify to the saving of the Spanish Netherlands, which if once lost, are
hardly ever to be retriv'd?

Now taking this for granted; if England does not step in with all the Speed
and Vigor imaginable, see what will be the end on it, First, That the French,
being Masters of all the Posts, Passes and Strongholds in Lorrain and
Burgundy, may dodge and trifle the Imperialists at Pleasure; and make them
spend out the Year without any Advantage to the Netherlands. The way would have
been for the Imperialists to have pressed with an Army of 50000 Men directly into
the Body of France, and the Confederate Troops in the Low Countries, to have
made another Inrode by the way of Picardy or Bologne; but since the taking of
Valenciennes, Cambray and St. Omer, there is no possibility of piercing France
that way, So that a very small Army now upon the Spanish Netherlands, with the
help of the French Garrisons, is sufficient to amuse and tire out the whole
Force of Spain, and Holland upon that Quarter.

Secondly, France being thus secured on that side will unquestionably fall in
with all their Power upon the Empire; unless diverted by the Alarm they have
now received from England. Now admitting this to be the Condition of France,
let any Man of Sense judge what Good the Imperial Army can do to the
Netherlands (upon which single point depends the Fortune of Christendom.) What
if they should March up to the Borders of France with 50000 Men? Will not the
French encounter them there with as many, or more? And with this odds too, that
the Imperialists suffer a thousand Incommodities in their March through a
ruined Country; Whereas the French have good Quarters, and plenty of all things
at hand, watching the others Motions and emproving all Advantages against them.

Thirdly, In this Posture of Affairs, the Confederates must never expect to do
any great Matter upon the French, in these Provinces unless they do very much
out number them.

And it is likewise to be considered, that these Troubles falling out in the
Minority of his Catholic Majesty, the Distractions of that Government, the
Revolt of Sicily, and great Disorders upon the Frontiers of Spain; the
Netherlands have been much neglected, till the Elevation of his Highness Don
Joan of Austria to the Dignity of Prime Minister. And that it is not possible
for him, by reason of the many Exigencies of that Crown nearer home, to send
any considerable Succor to the Low Countries, otherwise then by Supplies of
Money: So that by that time the Imperialists and the Hollanders are got into
their Winter Quarters, or at least, before they take the Field again, the
French from time to time will be ready with fresh Troops out of their Garrisons
to prosecute their Conquests; which by Degrees must needs break the hearts of
the poor Inhabitants, when they find that neither their Faith, nor their
Courage, is able any longer to protect them. And when that Day comes, what by
their Armies, and what by other Influences, the French will have as good as
Subjected Two thirds of Europe. And there will also occur these farther
Difficulties. First, No body knows where the French will begin their Ataque;
which will oblige the Spaniard and Hollander to strengthen all their Garrisons
as far as their Men will reach. Secondly, When the Spanish and Holland Troops
shall be so dispersed, wheresoever the French sit down, they must then give
themselves for lost, for want of an Army to relieve them; beside their furious
and obstinate manner of Assault, for they care not how many Men they lose, so
they carry the place. (And then most of the Men too are made Prisoners of War.)
Nor is the Season of the Year any Discouragement to them neither; witness their
First Irruption into Burgundy, and the restless Activity of their Troops even
at this Instant.

So soon as their work in Flanders is over (which only England under Heaven, is
able to prevent or Check) the French will have an Army of at least 50000 Men
about Lorain, Luxenburg and Burgundy to face the Imperialists, and at the same
Time with as many more perhaps they will seize upon the Duchy of Juliers, and
of Cleves, and from thence pass the Rhine, to countenance those that are of the
French Cabal, on the side of Westphalia; and so in due time, several other
Princes of the Empire. It is remarkable that in Three Years War against the
Confederates, his most Christian Majesty has not only stood his ground, without
losing so much as one Inch of his Ancient Patrimony, but actually and almost
without Opposition, taken several Towns, and some entire Provinces, from the
Principals of the Confederacy; And made himself almost as considerable at Sea,
as he is at Land; Not only in the Mediterranean, and upon the Coasts of Spain
and Italy, but in America too: where he has laid a Foundation of great Mischief
both to England and Holland, in the point of Commerce; if not timely prevented.
And he does little less by his Money, than by his Arms; for he pays all, and
with French Money, under pretext of Neutrality, maintains considerable Armies
in the very heart of the Empire; which, it is feared, will be ready enough upon
any distaster, to join with the Common Enemy. It is the French Court that
manages the Counsels of Poland, and they govern the Swisse no less; who, by the
Conquest of the Franche County are made little better then slaves. And yet by a
fatal Blindness that Republic still furnishes the French with the best of
their Soldiers, and helps forward the Destruction of Europe, never dreaming
that they themselves are to be undone too at last.

But it is no great matter, you will say, to impose upon the Swisse (which are a
heavy and Phlegmatic People) but the French Charms have bewitched even Italy
it self; though a Nation the most Clear-sighted, and suspicious of all others.
For their Republics lie as quiet, as if they were asleep; though the Fire is
already kindled in Sicily, and the Danger brought home to their own Doors. It
is a wonder, that they lay things no more to heart, considering, First, the
Passages the French have to favor their Entry. Secondly, That they are many
and small States, weak, and easily to be corrupted, if not so already. Thirdly,
that though they have been formerly very brave, and many particulars remain so
still, yet in the generality they are soft and effeminate. And Fourthly, that
the French is there the Master of the Seas. These Reflections methinks might
convince any Man of the Condition they are in. And certainly they that were not
able to defend themselves against Charles the Eighth, will be much less able to
encounter Lewis the 14th: Or if he gets in, to drive him out again, as they did
the Other. For they must do it wholly upon their own Strength, having only the
Turk in Condition to help them. For Germany and Spain are sunk already; And the
Swisse will neither dare to venture upon it, nor are they able to do it, if they
had a mind tot.

As for Spain, it is neither Populous, nor fortified, and perhaps want of
Provisions may keep it from an Invasion. And yet for all that with a Body of
Thirty or Forty Thousand Men by the way of Fontaraby, and as many by Catalonia,
the French may (if they please) in two Campania's make themselves Masters of
Navarre, Arragon, Catalonia, and Valentia: and then it is but fortifying the
Frontiers, and making his Catholic Majesty a Tributary in Castile; Who must
content himself to take what they please to give him, over and above, in
consideration of his Dominions in Italy, and the Spanish Indies: A Possibility
that England and Holland shall do well to think of: For when he has the Mines
in his Power, and Europe under his Feet, there will be no contending.

After this, they have only the Swisse or the English, to fall upon next: For
the Former, they are neither fortified nor united in Affections or Religion.

As for England; They are a People not naturally addicted to the French,
sensible of their Honor, and of their Interest, and the whole World is
convinced of their Courage. They are United under the Government of a Gracious
Prince; and their Concerns are at this Instant lodged in the hands of the most
Loyal and Publick-spirited Representatives that ever acted in that Station;
beside the Strength of the Island by Situation: So that the French would find
it a hard matter, either to make a Conquest here, or if they should surprise
it, to keep it. But yet they have finer Ways to Victory than by Force of Arms;
and their Gold has done them better Service than their Iron.

What have we now to do then, but in a Common Cause, to arm against a Common
Oppression? This is the time, or never, for Italy to enter into a League for
their Common Safety, and not only to keep, but, if possible, to force the
French from their Borders; while the Imperial Army holds the Capital Power of
France in Play?

And this is the time too, for the Swisse to recall all their Troops out of the
French Service, and to strike a general League also for the Recovery of
Burgundy, the only Outwork of their Liberties, and to expel the French
Garrisons, and deliver the places into the hands of the Right Owners.

And will it not concern Poland as much as any of the rest; that stands and
falls with the Empire, as the Defense of Christendom against the Turks, and
whose own turn is next.

This Alarm methinks should call off the Princes from the Acquisitions they
have made upon part of the Swedes Possessions in the Empire, to the Assistance
of the Spanish Netherlands; and make all the French Mercenaries in the Empire,
to bethink themselves of returning from the Delusions which either the French
Artifice or Money has imposed upon them. He that has no regard for the Head,
will have less for the Dependences, when he has them at his Mercy.

Nay the very French themselves should do well to contemplate the Slavery that
is now prepared for them. Their Laws and Liberties are trampled upon; and till
the French Government be reduced to the Bounds of its Ancient Constitution,
neither the People, nor their Neighbors, can ever be secure.

In this dangerous Crisis of Affairs, it has pleased Divine Providence to leave
England the Arbitress of the Fate of Europe; and to annex such advantages to
the Office, that the Honor, the Duty, and Security of this Nation seem to be
wrapped up together. In the Point of Honor, what can be more Generous, than to
succor the Miserable and the Oppressed, and to put a stop to that Torrent that
threatens Christendom with an Universal Deluge? Beside the Vindication of our
selves for those Affronts and Indignities, both Public and Private, that we
have suffered upon our own Account. And then in matter of Duty: It is not only
Christendom, but Christianity itself, that lies at stake. For in the Ruin of
the Empire, the Turks work is done to his hand, by breaking down the only Fence
that has preserved us all this while from the Incursions of the Ottoman Power.
Now as nothing can be more glorious than at all hazards, to hinder the effusion
of more Christian Blood, and to save Christendom itself from Bondage; it is so
much our Interest too, that we our selves are lost without it. And as the
Obligation is reciprocal, so the Resolution is necessary: The choice we have
before us being only this, Either to unite with our Neighbors for a Common
Safety, or to stand still and look on, the tame Spectators of their Ruin, till
we fall alone. This is so demonstrative, that if we do not by a powerful
Alliance and Diversion, prevent the Conquest of Flanders (which lies already a
gasping) we are cut off from all Communication with the rest of Europe, and
cooped up at home, to the irrecoverable loss of our Reputation and Commerce;
for Holland must inevitably follow the Fate of Flanders, and then the French
are Masters of the Sea; Ravage our Plantations, and infallibly possess
themselves of the Spanish Indies, and leave us answerable for all those
Calamities that shall ensue upon it: which as yet, by God's Providence, may be
timely prevented. But he that stills the raging of the Sea, will undoubtedly
set Bounds to this overflowing Greatness: having now, (as an Earnest of that
Mercy) put it into the Hearts of our Superiors to provide seasonably for the
Common Safety, and in proportion also to the Exigence of the Affair; knowing
very well, that things of this Nature are not to be done by halves.

We have to do with a Nation of a large Territory; abounding in Men and Money;
their Dominion is grown absolute, that no Man there can call any thing his own,
if the Court says Nay to it. So that the sober and industrious part, are only
Slaves to the Lusts and Ambition of the Military. In this Condition of
Servitude, they feel already what their Neighbors fear, and wish as well to
any Opportunity, either of avoiding, or of casting off the Yoke: which will
easily be given by a Conjunction of England and Holland at Sea: and almost
infallibly produce these effects: First, It will draw off the Naval Force of
France from Sicily, America, and elsewhere, to attend this Expedition.
Secondly, The Diversion will be an Ease to the Empire and the Confederates,
from whence more Troops must be drawn to encounter this Difficulty, than the
French can well spare. Thirdly, It will not only encourage those Princes and
States that are already engaged, but likewise keep in awe those that are
disaffected, and confirm those that waver.

It Is true, this War must needs be prodigiously expensive; but then in
probability it will be short: And in Cases of this Quality, People must do as
in a Storm at Sea, rather throw part of the Lading overboard, than founder the
Vessel. I do not speak this, as supposing any difficulty in the Case, for the
very contemplation of it has put fire into the Veins of every true Englishman;
and they are moved as by a sacred impulse, to the necessary, and the only means
of their Preservation. And that which Crowns our hopes, is, that these generous
Inclinations are only ready to execute what the Wisdom of their Superiors
shall find reasonable to Command. I need not tell you how jealous the People of
England are of their Religion and Liberties; to what degree they have
contended, even for the shadow of these Interests; nor how much Blood and
Treasure they have spent upon the Quarrel. Could any Imposture work so much;
and can any Man imagine that they will be now less sensible, when they see
before their eyes a manifest Plot upon their Religion; their Liberties invaded,
their Traffic interrupted; the Honor, and the very Being of their Country at
stake; their Wives and Children exposed to Beggary and Scorn; and in
Conclusion, The Privilege of a Freeborn Englishman exchanged for the
Vassalage of France?

An ANSWER to a LETTER written by a Member of Parliament in the Country, upon
the occasion of his Reading of the Gazette of the 11th of December, 1679;
wherein is the Proclamation for further Proroguing the Parliament, till the
11th of November next ensuing.
SIR,
I Received your Letter, when I was engaged in much other business, which will
excuse me that I have not returned an Answer sooner, and that is done no better
now: You desire me to let you know what that Judgment is which my Lord
Chancellor acquainted my Lord Mayor and his Brethren with, and what my thoughts
are upon it: And that I may obey you in both, I will first Transcribe that
Case, as it is reported by Justice Crook, that being already put into English,
whereas the Case in Moor is in French.

MEmorandum, That by Command from the King, all the Justices of England, Cro.
Ja. f. 37. Nov. 100. Moor 755.
with diverse of the Nobility, viz. The Lord Ellesmere Lord-Chancellor, the Earl
of Dorset Lord-Treasurer, Viscount Cranbourn Principal Secretary, the Earl of
Nottingham Lord Admiral, the Earls of Northumberland, Worcester, Devon, and
Northampton, the Lords Zouch, Burghley, and Knowles, the Chancellor of the
Duchy, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of London, Popham Chief
Justice, Bruce Masters of the Rolls, Anderson, Gaudy, Walmesley, Fenner,
Kingsmil, Warburton, Savel, Daniel, Yelverton and Snigg, were assembled in the
Star Chamber, where the Lord Chancellor, after a long Speech made by him
concerning Justices of the Peace, and his Exhortation to the Justices of
Assize, and a Discourse concerning Papists and Puritans, declaring how they
both were Disturbers of the State, and that the King intending to suppress
them, and to have the Laws put in execution against them; demanded of the
Justices their Resolutions in three things: First, Whether the Deprivation of
Puritan-Ministers by the High Commissioners, for refusing to conform themselves
to the Ceremonies appointed by the last Canons, was lawful? Whereto all the
Justices answered, That they had conferred thereof before, and held it to be
lawful, because the King has the Supreme Ecclesiastical Power, which he has
delegated to the Commissioners, whereby they had the Power of Deprivation by
the Canon Law of the Realm. And the Statute of 1 Eliz. which appoints
Commissioners to be made by the Queen, does not confer any new Power, but
explain and declare the Ancient Power. And therefore they held it clear, That
the King without Parliament might make Orders and Constitutions for the
Government of the Clergy, and might deprive them if they obeyed not. And so the
Commissioners might deprive them. But they could not make any Constitutions
without the King: And the divulging of such Ordinances by Proclamation is a
most gracious Admonition: And forasmuch as they have refused to obey, they are
lawfully deprived by the Commissioners ex Officio, without Libel Et ore tenus
convocati. Secondly, Whether a Prohibition be grantable against the
Commissioners upon the Statute of 2 H. 5. if they do not deliver the Copy of
the Libel to the Party; Whereto they all answered, That that Statute is
intended where the Ecclesiastical Judge proceeds ex Officio and ore tenus.
Thirdly, Whether it were an Offense punishable, and what Punishment they
deserved, who framed Petitions, and collected a multitude of hands thereto, to
prefer to the King in a public cause, as the Puritans had done, with an
intimation to the King, That if he denied their Suit, many thousands of his
Subjects would be discontented? Whereto all the Justices answered, That it was
an Offense finable at Discretion, and very near to Treason and Felony in the
Punishment: For they tended to the raising of Sedition, Rebellion, and
Discontent among the People: To which Resolution all the Lords agreed. And then
many of the Lords declared, That some of the Puritans had raised a false Rumor
of the King, how he intended to grant a Toleration to Papists: Which Offense
the Justices conceived to be heinously finable by the Rules of the Common Law,
either in the Kings Bench, or by the King and his Council; or now since the
Statute of 3 H. 7. in the Star Chamber. And the Lords severally declared how
the King was discontented with the said false Rumor, and had made but the Day
before a Protestation unto them, that he never intended it, and that he would
spend the last drop of Blood in his Body before he would do it; and prayed,
that before any of his Issue should maintain any other Religion than what he
truly professed and maintained, that God would take them out of the World.

I doubt not but yourself, and every English Protestant, will join with this
Royal Petitioner, and will heartily say Amen.

But you desire to know if I think the Resolution of the Judges in this case
ought to deter us from humbly Petitioning his Majesty, that this Parliament may
effectually sit on the 26th. day of January next. In order to this, give me
leave to observe to you, As it is most certain, that a great Reverence is due
to the Unanimous Opinion of all the Judges, so there is a great difference to
be put between the Authority of their Judgments when solemnly given in Cases
depending before them, and their sudden and extrajudicial Opinions. The Case of
Ship Money it self, is not a better proof of this, than that which you have now
read, as you will now see, if you consider distinctly what they say to the
several Questions proposed to them.

As to their Answer to the first Question, it much concerns the Reverend Clergy
to enquire whither they did not mistake in it? And whether the King by his
Proclamation, can make new constitutions, and oblige them to obedience under
the Penalty of Deprivation? Should it be so, and should this unhappy Kingdom
ever suffer under the Reign of a Popish Prince, he might easily rid himself of
such obstinate Heretics, and leave his Ecclesiastical Preferments open for Men
of better Principles: He will need only to publish a Proclamation, that Spittle
and Salt should be used in Baptism, that Holy Water should be used, and Images
set up in Churches; and a few more such things as these, and the Business were
effectually done. But if you will believe my Lord Chief Justice Cook, 12. Co.
19. 12. Co. 49.
he will tell you that it was agreed by all the Judges upon Debate. Hill. 4to
Jacobi, that the King cannot change his Ecclesiastical Law; and you may easily
remember since the whole Parliament declared, That he could not alter or
suspend them.

I have the uniform Opinion of all the Judges given upon great Deliberation,
Co. Mag. Char. 616.
Mich. 4to. Jac. to justify me, if I say that our Judges here were utterly
mistaken in the Answer which they gave to the second Question, I will not cite
the numerous subsequent Authorities, since every man knows that it is the
constant practice of Westminster Hall at this Day to grant Prohibitions, upon
refusal to give a Copy of Articles, where the Proceedings in the Ecclesiastical
Courts are ex Officio.

You see there was a kind of ill Fate upon the Judges this day, as usually
there was when met in the Star Chamber, and that they were very unfortunate in
answering two of the three Questions proposed to them; let us go on to consider
what does principally concern us at present, their Answer to the last Question.

You have just done reading it, and therefore I need not repeat to you either
the Doubt or the Solution of it; but one may be allowed to say modestly, that
it was a sudden Answer: It Is possible the Lords then present were well enough
informed, when they were told that such kind of Petitioning was an Offense next
to Treason and Felony; but I dare be so bold as to say, That at this Day, not a
Lawyer in England would be the wiser for such an Answer; they would be
confounded, and not know whether it were Misprision of Treason, which seems an
Offense nearest to Treason, or Petty-larceny, which seems nearest to Felony.

You will be apt to tell me that I mistake my Lords the Judges, and they spoke
not of the nature of the crime, but the manner of the Punishment; but this will
mend the matter but little; for since the Punishments of those two Crimes are
so very different, you are still as much in the dark as ever, what these
ambiguous words mean.

Well, but we will agree, that the Crime about which the Enquiry was made, was
a very great one. When Men arrive to such Insolence, as to threaten their
Prince, it will be but little excuse to them to call their Menaces, by the soft
and gentle Name of Petitions.

But you would know for what, and in what manner we are at present to Petition;
13 Car. 2. c. 5
and I will give you a plain and infallible Rule. It is the Statute 13 Car. 2.
c. 5.

Be it enacted, etc. that no person or persons whatsoever, shall solicit,
labor, or procure the getting of hands, or other consent of any persons above
the number of twenty, or more, to any Petition, Complaint, Remonstance,
Declaration, or other Addresses to the King, or both, or either Houses of
Parliament, for alteration of matters established by Law in Church or State,
unless the matter thereof have been first consented to, and ordered by three or
more Justices of the County, or by the major part of the Grand Jury of the
County, or Division of the County, where the same matter shall arise at their
public Assizes, or General Quarter Sessions, or if arising in London, by the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons in Common Council assembled; and that no
person or persons whatsoever shall repair to His Majesty, or both, or either of
the Houses of Parliament, upon Pretense of presenting or delivering any
Petition, Complaint, Remonstrance, or Declaration, or other Addresses,
accompanied with excessive Number of People, not at any one time with above the
Number of ten Persons, upon the Pain of incurring a Penalty, not exceeding the
Sum of 100 l. in Money, and Three Months Imprisonment, without Bail or
Mainprize for every Offense; which Offense to be prosecuted at the Court of
King's Bench, or at the Assizes, or general Quarter Sessions, within six Months
after the Offense committed, and proved by two or more credible Witnesses.

Here you observe the Parliament, who set themselves directly to obviate all
the Inconveniences which might arise to the Government from tumultuous
petitioning, will not allow that great Numbers should join in Petitions, for
alteration of the Laws (because it is possible ill Men should abuse such
Liberty) unless the matter of the Petition be con^^^ted to in such a manner as
the Act directs; but in all other Cases they leave the Subjects to their
undoubted Liberty, as well knowing that from thence there could arise no
possible Inconvenience; but on the contrary, that to bar the People of that
humble way of making their Wants known, might force them upon worse ways of
doing it.

And therefore I must tell you, that you do my Lord Chancellor great Injustice
if you think his Speech tends to deter Men from all manner of petitioning: No,
that wise and eloquent Lord, who receives every day so many Petitions, will I
suppose be content the King should receive some too. It never yet was thought
It is the Right of all People that apprehend themselves aggrieved to approach
his Majesty by Petition. Mr. Finch's Argument in the Trial of the Seven
Bishops. f. 105. The Subjects have a Right to Petition the King in all their
Grievances, so say all our Books of Law, and so says the Statute 13 Car. 2.
Sergeant Levinz in the same Trial fol. 121.

It was one Article against the Earl of Strafford, That he Issued out a
Proclamation and Warrant of Restraint, to inhibit the Kings Subjects to come to
the Fountain, their Sovereign, to deliver their Complaints of their Wrongs and
Oppressions. Rushw. in his Trial 721.


seditious or tumultuous in any Government, for the Subjects in an humble
manner to beg, That he who has the only Power to do it, would redress their
Grievances: It Is the way by which we apply our selves to the King of Heaven,
who knows all our Wants, and yet expects from us that we should daily express
them to him in humble Petitions. And the Wisdom of the Church, which has
appointed Liturgies, and Forms of Common Prayer seems to instruct us, that God
is pleased when huge Numbers join in the same Petition. Why should not then
suppliant Subjects, with like Humility, and in like manner address themselves
to the God on Earth? Especially since Kings cannot know our Desires, or our
Grievances, till we our selves inform them what they are. I remember some
wicked Counselors of Darius did once obtain a Law to be made, that none should
Petition any one but the King for thirty Days; but there never yet was found so
absurd a Statesman as to advise a Law, that Subjects should not supplicate
their Prince. It Is probable it would be well for some Favorites, who are near
a King, if such a Right could be taken from the People, for then all their
false Suggestions and Informations might pass undiscovered; but it is impossible
that a King should long be safe in such a Condition. I will suppose a malicious
Statesman, intending to raise a Jealousy in the Mind of the Sovereign, should
inform him in dangerous times, that he was not beloved by his People, and that
he was not to trust them: How could the Subjects in such a Case recover the
Prince's good Opinion, in the Absence of a Legal Representative, but by humble
and affectionate Addresses? Or suppose some good Protestant Prince should be so
unfortunate, as to have some Counselors near him who are concealed; and
others, whose Crimes make them fear Parliaments; it is easy to suppose, that
the one sort will be filling his Ears with Stories, that a great part of his
Kingdom are inclined to Popery; and the other sort, that the best of his
Subjects are quite out of Love with Parliaments, as factious and seditious
Assemblies. Into what unfortunate Circumstances, would such a Prince be apt to
fall, if his People were percluded from Addressing themselves, and opening
their Desires to him!

I might go on to trouble you with infinite Instances of this Nature, but there
is no want of any in so plain a case: It Is the Doctrine of our Church, that the
only Arms of Subjects, are Prayers, Petitions, Supplications and Tears; and
they are no Friends either to the King or Church, H^b. 220. Wrenhams Case. Vet.
Magn. Chart. Exil. Hugi. De Spencer. 51.
who would disarm us of these. My Lord Chief Justice Hobbart tell us, That it
is lawful for any Subject to petition to the King for Redress in an humble and
modest manner; for (says he) Access to the Sovereign must not be shut up in
case of the Subjects Distresses. It was one of the Crimes for which the
Spencers were banished by Parliament, that they hindered the King from receiving
and answering Petitions from great Men, and others.

And as it is our unquestionable Right, Be the Right of the Subject never so
clear, manifest and acknowledged by all; yet if his own be detained from him by
the King, he has no other Writ or Account to recover, but a mere Petition,
Supplicare Celsitudini, etc. A Learned Judge's Argument about Impositions.
Printed, 1641. p. 26.
so in all Ages the Usage has been by Petition, to inform our King of our
Grievances. In the Reign of King Ed. 2. and Ed. 3. Petitions were frequent for
Redress of public Grievances, and for Parliaments, especially out of Ireland
(though that is a conquered Nation) as may be seen in the close Rolls of the
Reigns of those two Kings. One Instance I will give you for your Satisfaction,
but I will tire you with no more, for that would be endless.

It Is Claus. 10. Ed. 2. M. 28. Claus. 10. E. 2. M. 28. intus Pro communitate
Hiberniae.
Intus pro Communitate Hiberniae. Rex Dilect. and fideliter suis Justa
Cancellar. and Thesaur. suis Hib. salutem ex part populi nostri terrae
praedict. per Petitionem suam coram nobis and Concilio nostro exhibitum nobis
est cum instantia supplicare, quod cum, etc.

In the 5th. year of King Richard the II. the whole Body of the Realm
petitioned, Cooks Jurisdiction of Courts p. 79. Burarts History of the
Reformation. Page 231. Procl. Dat. 7. Feb. 11. Jac.
that the most wise and able men within the Realm might be chosen Chancellors.

King Henry the 8. told his Subjects then in Arms against him in Yorkshire,
that they ought not to have rebelled, but to have applied themselves to him by
Petition.

King James by a Proclamation published in the 12th. year of his Reign, begins
thus: The Complaints lately exhibited to us by certain Noblemen, and others of
our Kingdom of Ireland, suggesting Disorders and Abuses, as well in the
Proceedings of the late begun Parliament, as in the Martial and Civil
Government of the Kingdom, We did receive with extraordinary Grace and Favor.

And by another Proclamation in the 12th. year of his Reign, Procl. 12 Jac.
he declares, That it was the Right of his Subjects to make their immediate
Addresses to him by Petition; and in the 19th. year of his Reign he invites his
Subjects to it.

And in the 20th year of his Reign, Procl. Dat. 10 July 19. Jac. Procl. Dat.
14. Feb. 20. Jac.
he tells his People, that his own, and the Ears of his Privy Council did still
continue open to the just Complaints of his People; and that they were not
confined to Times and Meetings in Parliament, nor restrained to particular
Grievances; not doubting but that his loving Subjects would apply themselves to
his Majesty for Relief; to the utter abolishing of all those private
whisperings and causless Rumors, which without giving his Majesty any
Opportunity of Reformation by particular knowledge of any Fault, serve to no
other purpose but to occasion and blow abroad Coffeehouse.

It appears, Lords Journ. Anno 1640.
that the House of Lords both Spiritual and Temporal, Nemine contradicente,
Voted Thanks to those Lords who Petitioned the King at York, to call a
Parliament.

And the King by his Declaration Printed in the same year, Declar. 1644.
declares his Royal Will and Pleasure, That all his Loving Subjects who have
any just cause to present or complain of any Grievances or Oppressions, may
freely Address themselves by their humble Petitions to his Sacred Majesty, who
will graciously hear their Complaints.

Since his Majesty's happy Restoration, Temp. Car. 2.
the Inhabitants of the County of Bucks made a Petition, That their County
might not be overrun by the Kings Deer; and the same was done by the County of
Surry on the same Occasion.

It Is time for me to conclude your trouble: I suppose you do no longer doubt
but that you may join in Petition for a Parliament, since you see it has been
often done heretofore: nor need you fear how many of your honest Countrymen
join with you, since you hear of Petitions by the whole Body of the Realm; and
since you see, both by the Opinions of our Lawyers, by the Doctrine of our
Church, and by the Declarations of our Kings, That it is our undoubted Right to
Petition. Nothing can be more absurd than to say, That the number of the
Supplicants makes an innocent Petition an Offense; on the contrary, if in a
thing of this Public concernment, a few only should address themselves to the
King, it would be a thing in it self ridiculous; the great end of such
Addresses being to acquaint him with the general desires of his People, which
can never be done unless multitudes join. How can the Complaints of the
diffusive Body of the Realm reach his Majesty's Ears in the absence of a
Parliament, but in the actual concurrence of every individual Person in
Petition? for the personal application of multitudes, is indeed unlawful and
dangerous.

Give me leave, since the Gazette runs so much in your mind, Stat. 13. Car. 2.
c. 5.
to tell you (as I may modestly enough do, since the Statute directs me) what
answer the Judges would now give if such another Case were put to them, as was
put to the Judges 2 Jacobi.

Suppose the Nonconformists at this day (as the Puritans then did) should
solicit the getting of the hands of Multitudes to a Petition to the King for
suspending the Execution of the Penal Laws against themselves; the present
Judges would not tell you that this was an Offense next to Treason or Felony,
nor that the Offenders were to be brought to the Council Board to be punished;
but they would tell you plainly and distinctly, That if the hands of more
Persons than twenty were solicited or procured to such a Petition, and the
Offenders were convicted upon the Evidence of two or more credible Witnesses
upon a Prosecution in the King's Bench, or at the Assizes or Quarter Sessions,
within six Months, they would incur a Penalty not exceeding a 100 l. and three
Months Imprisonment, because their Petition was to change a matter established
by Law. But I am sure you are a better Logician than not to see the difference
which the Statute makes between such a Petition which is to alter a thing
established by Law, and an innocent and humble Petition. That a Parliament may
meet according to Law, in a time when the greatest Dangers hang over the King,
the Church, and the State.

The Right Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury 's Speech in the House of Lords,
March 25. 1679.
My Lords,
YOU are appointing of the Consideration of the State of England to be taken up
in a Committee of the whole House, some day next Week. I do not know how well
what I have to say may be received, for I never study either to make my Court
well, or to be Popular; I always speak what I am commanded by the Dictates of
the Spirit within me.

There are some other Considerations that concern England so nearly, that
without them you will come far short of Safety and Quiet at Home: We have a
little Sister, and she has no Breasts, what shall we do for our Sister in the
day when she shall be spoken for? If she be a Wall, we will build on her a
Palace of Silver, if she be a Door, we will enclose her with Boards of Cedar.
We have several little Sisters without Breasts, the French Protestant Churches,
the two Kingdoms of Ireland and Scotland; The Foreign Protestants are a Wall,
the only Wall and Defense to England; upon it you may build Palaces of Silver,
glorious Palaces. The Protection of the Protestants abroad, is the greatest
Power and Security the Crown of England can attain to, and which can only help
us to give Check to the growing Greatness of France. Scotland and Ireland are
two Doors, either to let in Good or Mischief upon us; they are much weakened by
the Artifice of our cunning Enemies, and we ought to enclose them with Boards
of Cedar.

Popery and Slavery, like two Sisters, go hand in hand, sometimes one goes
first, sometimes the other in a doors, but the other is always following close
at hand.

In England, Popery was to have brought in Slavery; in Scotland, Slavery went
before, and Popery was to follow.

I do not think your Lordships or the Parliament have Jurisdiction there. It is
a Noble and Ancient Kingdom; they have an illustrious Nobility, a Gallant
Gentry, a Learned Clergy, and an Understanding, Worthy People; but yet we
cannot think of England as we ought, without reflecting on the Condition
therein. They are under the same Prince, and the Influence of the same
Favorites and Councils; when they are hardly dealt with, can we that are the
Richer expect better usage? for it is certain, that in all Absolute Governments,
the poorest Countries are always most favorably dealt with.

When the Ancient Nobility and Gentry there cannot enjoy their Royalties, their
Shrevaldoms, and their Stewardaries which they and their Ancestors have
possessed for several hundreds of years; but that now they are enjoined by the
Lords of the Council to make Deputations of their Authorities to such as are
their known Enemies.

Can we expect to enjoy our Magna Charta long under the same Persons, and
Administration of Affairs? If the Council Table there can Imprison any Nobleman
or Gentleman for several years, without bringing him to Trial, or giving the
least Reason for what they do; can we expect the same Men will preserve the
Liberty of the Subject here?

I will acknowledge, I am not well versed in the particular Laws of Scotland;
but this I do know, that all the Nothern Countries have, by their Laws an
undoubted and inviolable Right to their Liberties and Properties; yet Scotland
has outdone all the Eastern and Southern Countries, in having their Lives,
Liberties and Estates subjected to the Arbitrary Will and Pleasure of those
that Govern. They have lately plundered and harrassed the richest and
wealthiest Countries of that Kingdom, and brought down the Barbarous
Highlanders to devour them; and all this without almost a colorable Pretense
to do it: Nor can there be found a Reason of State for what they have done; but
that those wicked Ministers designed to procure a Rebellion at any Rate, which
as they managed, was only prevented by the miraculous Hand of God, or otherwise
all the Papists in England would have been Armed, and the fairest Opportunity
given in the just time for the Execution of that Wicked and Bloody Design the
Papists had; and it is not possible for any Man that duly considers it, to
think other, but that those Ministers that Acted that, were as guilty of the
Plot, as any of the Lords that are in question for it.

My Lords, I am forced to speak this the plainer, because, till the Pressure be
fully and clearly taken off from Scotland, it is not possible for me, or any
Thinking Man to believe that Good is meant us here.

We must still be upon our Guard, apprehending that the Principle is not
changed at Court, and that these Men that are still in Place and Authority,
have that Influence upon the Mind of our Excellent Prince, that he is not, nor
cannot be that to us, that his own Nature and Goodness would incline him to.

I know your Lordships can order nothing in this, but there are those that hear
me, can put a perfect Cure to it; until that be done, the Scottish Weed is like
Death in the Pot, Mors in Olla; But there is something too, now I consider,
that most immediately concerns us; their Act of Twenty two thousand Men to be
ready to invade us upon all Occasions. This, I hear, that the Lords of the
Council there have treated as they do all other Laws, and expounded it into a
standing Army of Six thousand Men. I am sure we have Reason and Right to
beseech the King that that Act may be better considered in the next Parliament
there. I shall say no more for Scotland at this time, I am afraid your
Lordships will think I have said too much, having no concern there; But if a
French Nobleman should come to dwell in my House and Family, I should think it
concerned me to ask what he did in France: for if he were there a Felon, a
Rogue, a Plunderer, I should desire him to live elsewhere; and I hope your
Lordships will do the same thing for the Nation, if you find the same cause.

My Lords, give me leave to speak two or three Words concerning our other
Sister Ireland: thither, I hear, is sent Douglas's Regiment, to secure us
against the French. Besides, I am credibly informed, that the Papists have
their Arms restored, and the Protestants are not many of them yet recovered
from being the suspected Party; the Sea-Towns as well as the Inland, are full
of Papists: That Kingdom cannot long continue in the English Hands, if some
better Care be not taken of it. This is in your Power, and there is nothing
there, but is under your Laws; therefore I beg that this Kingdom at least may
be taken in consideration, together with the State of England: For I am sure
there can be no Safety here, if these Doors be not shut up and made sure.

THE INSTRUMENT OR Writing of Association, THAT THE True Protestants of ENGLAND
entered into, IN THE Reign of Q. Elizabeth.
FOrasmuch as Almighty God has Ordained Kings, Queens and Princes, to have
Dominion and Rule over all their Subjects, and to preserve them in the
Possession and Observation of the true Christian Religion, according to his
holy Word and Commandment: And in like sort, that all Subjects should Love,
Fear and Obey their Sovereign Princes, being Kings or Queens, to the utmost of
their Power; at all times to withstand, pursue and suppress all manner of
Persons that shall by any means intend and attempt any thing dangerous or
hurtful to the Honor, States, or Persons of their Sovereigns.

Therefore we whose Names are or shall be subscribed to this Writing, being
Natural Born Subjects of this Realm of England, and having so gracious a Lady,
our Sovereign Elizabeth, by the Ordinance of God, our most rightful Queen,
Reigning over us these many Years with great Felicity, to our inestimable
Comfort: And finding lately by diverse Depositions, Confessions, and sundry
Advertisements out of Foreign Parts from credible Persons, well known to her
Majesty's Council and to diverse others; That for the furtherance and
Advancement of some pretended Title to the Crown, it has been manifested that
the Life of our gracious Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, has been most
dangerously to the Peril of her Person; if Almighty God her perpetual Defender,
of his Mercy had not revealed and withstood the same. By whose Life we and all
other her Majesty's True and Loyal Subjects, do enjoy an inestimable benefit of
Peace in this Land; do for the Reasons and Causes before alleged not only
acknowledge our selves most justly bound with our Lives and Goods for her
Defense, in her Safety, to persecute, suppress and withstand all such
Intenders, and all other her Enemies, of what Nation, Condition and Degree
whatsoever they shall be, or by what Council or Title they shall pretend to be
her Enemies, or to attempt any Harm upon her Person; but do further think it
our bounden Duties for the great Benefit of Peace, Wealth, and Godly
Government, we have more plentifully received these many Years, under her
Majesty's Government, then any of our Forefathers have done in any longer time
of any other Progenitors, Kings of this Realm.

Do declare, and by this Writing make manifest, our bounden Duties to our said
Sovereign Lady for her Safety. And to that end, We, and every of us, First
Calling to Witness the Name of Almighty God, do Voluntarily and most willingly
bind our selves, every one of us to the other, jointly and severally in the
Band of one Firm and Loyal Society. And do hereby Vow and Promise by the
MAJESTY OF ALMIGHTY GOD, That with our whole Powers, Bodies, Lives and Goods,
and with our Children and Servants, We, and every of us, will faithfully serve
and humbly obey our said Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, against all States,
Dignities and Earthly Powers whatsoever; and will as well with our joint and
particular Forces during our Lives, withstand, offend, and pursue, as well by
Force of Arms, as by all other means of Revenge; all manner of Persons of what
State soever they shall be, and their Abettors, that shall attempt any Act,
Council, or Consent to any thing that shall tend to the Harm of her Majesty's
Royal Person, and will never desist from all manner of Forcible Pursuit against
such Persons, to the utter Extermination of them, their Counselors, Aiders and
Abettors.

And if any such wicked Attempt against her most Royal Person, shall be taken
in hand, or procured, whereby any that have, may or shall pretend Title to come
to this Crown, by the untimely Death of her Majesty so wickedly procured (which
God for his Mercy sake forbid) may be avenged; We do not only bind our selves
both jointly and severally never to Allow, Accept, or Favor any such pretended
Successor, by whom, or for whom any such detestable Act shall be Attempted or
Committed, as unworthy of all Government in any Christian Realm or Civil State.

But do also further Vow and Protest as we are most bound, and that in the
Presence of the Eternal and Everlasting God, to Prosecute such Person and
Persons to Death with our joint or particular Forces, and to ask the utmost
Revenge upon them that by any means we or any of us can devise and do, or cause
to be devised and done for their utter Overthrow and Extirpation.

And to the better Corroboration of this our Loyal Band and Association, We do
also testify by this Writing, that we do confirm the Contents hereof by our
Oaths corporally taken upon the Holy Evangelist, with this express Condition;
That no one of us shall for any respect of Persons or Causes, or for Fear or
Reward, separate our selves from this Association, or fail in the Prosecution
thereof, during our Lives, upon pain of being by the rest of us prosecuted, and
suppressed as perjured Persons, and as Public Enemies to God, our Queen, and to
our Native Country. To which Punishment and Pains we do voluntarily submit
ourselves, and every of us, without Benefit of any Color or Pretense.

In Witness of all which Premises to be inviolably kept, we do to this Writing
put our Hands and Seals; and shall be most ready to accept and admit any other
hereafter, to this Society and Association.

The ACT of Parliament of the 27th of Queen Elizabeth in Confirmation of the
same.
FOrasmuch as the good Felicity and Comfort of the whole Estate of this Realm
consists (only next under God) in the Surety and Preservation of the Queens
most excellent Majesty: And for that it has manifestly appeared, that sundry
wicked Plots and Means have of late been devised and laid as well in Foreign
Parts beyond the Seas, as also within this Realm, to the great indangering of
his Highness most Royal Person, and to the utter Ruin of the whole Commonweal,
if by Gods merciful Providence the same had not been revealed: Therefore for
preventing of such great Perils as might hereafter otherwise grow, by the like
detestable and divilish Practices, at the humble Suit and earnest Petition and
Desire of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same Parliament, Be it
Enacted and Ordained, if at any Time after the end of this present Session of
Parliament, any open Invasion or Rebellion shall be had or made, into or within
any of Her Majesty's Realms or Dominions, or any Act attempted, tending to the
hurt of her Majesty's most Royal Person by or for any Person that shall or may
pretend any Title to the Crown of this Realm, after her Majesty's Decease: or
if any thing shall be compassed or imagined, tending to the hurt of her
Majesty's Royal Person, by any person or with the Privity of any person that
shall or may pretend Title to the Crown of this Realm; that then by Her
Majesty's Commission under Her Great Seal, the Lords and other of Her Highness
Privy Council, and such other Lords of Parliament to be Named by her Majesty,
as with the said Privy Council shall make up the Number of Four and twenty at
the least, ving with them for their Assistance in that behalf such of the
Judges of the Courts of Record at Westminster, as Her Highness shall for that
purpose assign and appoint, or the more part of the same Council, Lords and
Judges, shall by virtue of the Act, have Authority to examine all and every the
Offenses aforesaid, and all Circumstances thereof, and thereupon to give
Sentence or Judgment, as upon good proof the matter shall appear unto them: And
that after such Sentence or Judgment given, and Declaration thereof made and
published by Her Majesty's Proclamation under the Great Seal of England, all
persons against whom such Sentence or Judgment shall be so given and published,
shall be excluded and disabled for ever to have or claim, or to pretend to have
or claim the Crown of this Realm, or of any Her Majesty's Dominions, any former
Law or Statute whatsoever to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding: And that
thereupon All Her Highness Subjects shall and may lawfully by virtue of this
Act, and Her Majesty's Direction in that behalf, by forcible and possible means
pursue to Death every such wicked person, by whom or by whose means assent or
privity, any such Invasion or Rebellion shall be in Form aforesaid denounced to
have been made, or such wicked Act attempted, or other thing compassed or
imagined against Her Majesty's Person, and all their Aiders, Comforters and
Abettors.

And if any such detestible Act shall be Executed against her Highness most
Royal Person, whereby Her Majesty's Life shall be taken away (which God of his
great mercy forbid:) that then every such person, by or for whom any such Act
shall be executed, and their Issues being any wise assenting or privy to the
same, shall by virtue of this Act be excluded and disabled for ever to have or
claim, or pretend to have or claim the said Crown of this Realm or of any other
Her Highness Dominions, any former Law or Statute whatsoever to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding. And that all the Subjects of this Realm, and all
other Her Majesty's Dominions, shall and may lawfully by virtue of this Act, by
all forcible and possible means pursue to Death every such wicked Person, by
whom or by whose means, any such detestible Fact shall be in Form hereafter
expressed denounced to have been committed, and also their Issues being any way
assenting or privy to the same, and all their Aiders, Comforters, and Abettors
in that behalf.

And to the end that the intention of this Law may be effectually Executed, if
Her Majesty's Life shall be taken away by any violent or unnatural means (which
God defend:) Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Lords
and others which shall be of Her Majesty's Privy Council at the time of such
Her Decease, or the more part of the same Council, joining unto them for their
better Assistance five other Earls, and seven other Lords of Parliament at the
least, (foreseeing that none of the said Earls, Lords or Council be known to be
persons that may make any Title to the Crown,) those persons which were Chief
Justices of either Bench, Master of the Rolls, and Chief Baron of the Exchequer
at the time of Her Majesty's Death, or in Default of the said Justices, Master
of the Rolls, and Chief Baron, some other of those which were Justices of some
of the Courts of Records at Westminster, at the time of Her Highness Decease,
to supply their Places or any Four and twenty or more of them, whereof Eight to
be Lords of the Parliament, not being of the Privy Council, shall to the
uttermost of their Power and Skill examine the cause and manner of such Her
Majesty's Death, and what persons shall be any way Guilty thereof, and all
Circumstances concerning the same, according to the true meaning of this Act,
and thereupon shall by open Proclamation publish the same, and without any
delay by all forcible and possible means prosecute to Death, all their Aiders
and Abettors: And for the doing thertof, and for the withstanding and
suppressing of all such Power and Force, as shall any way be levied or stirred
in Disturbance of the due Execution of this Law, shall by virtue of this Act,
have Power and Authority not only to raise and use such Forces as shall in that
behalf be needful and convenient, but also to use all other means and things
possible and necessary for the maintenance of the same Forces, and prosecution
of the said Offenders. And if any such Power and Force shall be levied or
stirred in Disturbance of the due Execution of this Law, by any person that
shall or may pretend any Title to the Crown of this Realm, whereby this Law may
not in all things be fully Executed, according to the effect and true meaning
of the same: That then every such person shall by virtue of this Act be
therefore excluded and disabled for ever to have or claim, or to pretend to
have or claim the Crown of this Realm, or of any other Her Highness Dominions,
any former Law or Statute whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid; and all and every the
Subjects of all Her Majesty's Realms and Dominions, shall to the uttermost of
their Power, aid and assist the said Council and all other the Lords and other
Persons to be adjoined to them for Assistance, as is aforesaid, in all things
to be done, and executed according to the effect and intention of this Law: And
that no Subject of this Realm shall in any wise be impeached in Body, Lands or
Goods, at any time hereafter for any thing to be done or executed according to
the Tenor of the Law, any Law or Statute heretofore made to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding.

And whereas of late many of Her Majesty's good and faithful Subjects have in
the Name of God and with the Testimonies of good Consciences by one Uniform
manner of Writing under their Hands land Seals, and by their several Oaths
voluntarily taken, joined themselves together in one Bond and Association to
withstand and revenge to the uttermost all such malicious Actions and Attempts
against Her Majesty's most Royal Person: Now for the full Explaining of all
such Ambiguities and Questions as otherwise might happen to grow by reason of
any sinister or wrong Construction or Interpretation to be made or inferred of
or upon the words or meaning thereof, Be it Declared and Enacted by the
Authority of this present Parliament, That the same Association and every
Article and Sentence therein contained, as well concerning the Disallowing;
Excluding or Disabling any Person that may or shall pretend any Title to come
to the Crown of this Realm, as also for the pursuing and taking Revenge of any
person for any such wicked Act or Attempt as is mentioned in the same
Association, shall and ought to be in all things expounded and adjudged
according to the true intent and meaning of this Act, and not otherwise, nor
against any other person or persons.

A Word without Doors concerning the BILL for SUCCESSION.
SIR,
I AM very sensible of the great Honor you were pleased to do me in your last,
which I received immediately after our late unhappy Dissolution; but could have
wished you would have laid your Commands on some more able Person, to have
given you Satisfaction in the matter you there propose relating to the Duke,
who, you seem to insinuate, was like (if the Parliament had continued) to have
received hard measure. I must ingeniously confess to you, I was not long since
perfectly of your Opinion, and thought it the highest Injustice imaginable, for
any Prince to be debarred of his Native Right of Succession upon any pretense
whatsoever. But upon a more mature Deliberation and Enquiry, I found my Error
proceeded principally from the falso Notions I had took up of Government it
self, and from my Ignorance of the Practi^^^ of all Communities of Men in all
Ages, whenever Self-preservation and Necessity of their Affairs obliged them to
declare their Opinion in Cases of the like Nature: To the knowledge of all
which, the following Accident I shall relate to you, did very much contribute.

My Occasions obliging me one day to attend the coming of a Friend in a
Coffee-house near Charing Cross, there happened to sit at the same Table with
me Two Ingenious Gentlemen, who according to the Frankness of Conversation now
used in the Town, began a Discourse on the same Subject you desire to be more
particularly informed in; and having Extolled the late House of Commons as the
best number of Men that had ever sat within those Walls; and that no House had
ever more vigorously maintained and asserted English Liberty and Protestant
Religion, than they had done, as far as the nature of the things that came
before them, and the Circumstances of time would admit (to all which I very
readily and heartily assented;) they then added, That the great Wisdom and Zeal
of that House had appeared in nothing more, than in Ordering a Bill to be
brought in for debarring the Duke of Y. from inheriting the Crown* A Law they
affirmed to be the most just and reasonable in the World, and the only proper
Remedy to establish this Nation on a true and solid Interest, both Relation to
the present and future Times.

To which I could not but Reply, That I begged their Pardon if I differed from
them in Opinion; and did believe, that how honestly soever the House of Commons
might intend in that matter, yet that the point of Succession was so Sacred a
thing, and of so high a Nature, that it was not subjected to their Cognizance:
That Monarchy was of Divine Right: That Princes succeeded by Nature and
Generation only, and not by Authority, Admission, or Approbation of the People;
and consequently, that neither the Merit or Demerit of their Persons, nor the
different influences from thence upon the People, were to be respected or had
in consideration; but the Commonwealth ought to obey and Submit to the next
Heir, without any further Inquisition; and if he proved a Worthy, Virtuous, and
Just Prince, it was a great Happiness; if Unjust, Barbarous, and Tyrannical,
there was no other Remedy, but Prayer, Patience and an entire Submission to so
difficult a Dispensation of Gods Providence.

I had no sooner ended my Discourse, but one of the Gentlemen (that was the
most serious in the Company) seeing me a Young Man, gravely Replied; That he
could not but be extremely concerned to hear that such pernicious Notions
against all lawful Government, had been taught in the World: That he believed
they were in me purely the Effects of an University-Education; and that it had
been my Misfortune to have had a very high Churchman for my Tutor, who had
endeavored (as it was their constant Practice to all Young Gentlemen under
their Care) to debauch me with such Principles as would enslave my mind to
their Hierarchy, and the Monarchical part of the Government, without any Regard
at all to the Aristocratical and Popular; and that fat Parsonages,
Prebendships, Deanaries, and Episcopal Sees, were the certain and constant
Rewards of such Services: That the Place we were in, was a little too Public
for Discourses of this Nature; but if I would accept of a Bottle of Wine at the
next Tavern, he would undertake to give me juster measures; adding it was pity
so hopeful a Gentleman should be tainted with bad Principles. My Friend coming
in at the same Time, proved to be one of their particular Acquaintance; and
both he and I readily complied with so generous a motion.

We had no sooner drank a Glass round, but the Old Gentleman was pleased to
renew his Discourse, and said it was undoubtedly true, that the inclination of
Mankind to live in Company (from whence come Towns, Cities, and Commonwealths)
did proceed of Nature, and consequently of God the Author of Nature: So
likewise Government and the Jurisdiction of Magistrates in general (which does
necessarily flow from the living together in Society) is also of Nature, and
ordained by God for the common Good of Mankind; but that the particular Species
and Forms of this or that Government, in this or that manner; To have many,
few, or one Governor; or that they should have this or that Authority, more or
less, for a longer, or a shorter time; or whether ordinarily by Succession or
by Election: All these things (he said) are Ordained and Diversified by the
particular positive Laws of every Country, and are not Established either by
Law Natural or Divine, but left by God unto every Nation and Country, to pitch
upon what Form of Government they shall think most proper to promote the common
good of the whole, and best adapted to the Natures, Constitutions, and other
Circumstances of the People; which accordingly for the same Reasons may be
altered or amended in any of its parts, by the mutual Consent of the Governors
and Governed, whenever they shall see reasonable cause so to do; all which
appears plainly, both from the diversity of Governments extant in the World,
and by the same Nations living sometimes under one sort of Government, and
sometimes under another. So we see God himself permitted his peculiar People
the Jews to live under diverse Forms of Government; as First, under Patriarchs,
then under Captains, then under Judges, then under Highpriests, next under
Kings, and then under Captains and Highpriests again, until they were
conquered by the Romans, who themselves also first lived under Kings, and then
Consuls, whose Authority they afterward limited by a Senate, by adding
Tribunes of the People; and in extraordinary Emergencies of the Commonwealth
they were governed by Dictators, and last of all by Emperors. So that it is
plain no Magistrate has his particular Government, or an Interest of Succession
in it, by any Institution of Nature, but only by the particular Constitution of
the Commonwealth within it self. And as the kinds of Government are different,
so also are the measures of Power and Authority in the same kind, in different
Countries.

I shall begin, (said he) with that of the Roman Empire, which though it be the
first in Dignity among Christian Princes, yet it is so restrained and limited
by the particular Laws of the Empire, that he can do much less in his State,
than other Kings in theirs. He can neither make War, nor exact any Contribution
of Men or Money, but by the Consent of all the States of the German Diet: And
as for his Children and Relations, they have no Interest or Pretense to
succeed, but only by Election, if they shall be thought worthy. Nay, the
chiefest Article the Emperor swears to keep at his Admission to that Honor,
is, That he shall never endeavor to make the Dignity of the Empire Hereditary
to his Family.

In Spain and in France, the Privileges of Kings are much more eminent, both
in Power and Succession; their Authority is more absolute, every Order of
theirs having the Validity of a Law, and their next of Blood does ordinarily
inherit, though in a different manner. In Spain the next Heir cannot succeed
but by the Approbation of the Nobility, Bishops, and States of the Realm. In
France the Women are not admitted to succeed, let them be never so lineally
descended. In England our Kings are much more limited and confined in their
Power, than either of the two former; for here no Law can be made but by
Consent and Authority of Parliament; and as to the Point of Succession, the
next of kin is admitted, unless in extraordinary Cases, and when important
Reason of State require an Alteration: And then the Parliaments of England
(according to the ancient Laws and Statutes of the Realm) have frequently
directed and appointed the Succession of the Crown in other manner than in
course it would have gone; of which I shall give you some Examples in Order.

But first let us look abroad, and see how things have been carried as to this
Point in other Countries.

Amongst the Jews the Law of Succession did ordinarily hold; and accordingly
Rehoboam the Lawful Son and Heir of Solomon, after his Fathers Decease, went to
Sichem to be crowned and admitted by the People; and the whole Body of the
People of Israel being there gathered together, did (before they would admit
him their lawful King) make unto him certain propositions for taking away some
heavy Taxes that had been imposed on them by his Father Solomon, which he
refusing to gratify them in, and following the Advice of Young Men, Ten of the
twelve Tribes immediately chose Jeroboam, a Servant of Rehoboham's, a mere
Stanger, and of mean Parentage, and made him their King; and God approved
thereof, as the Scriptures in express Words do testify: For when Rehoboam had
raised an Army of One hundred and fourscore thousand Men, intending by force of
Arms to have justified his Claim, God appeared unto Semaiah, and commanded him
to go to Rehoboam, and to the House of Jadah and Benjamin, saying, Return every
man to his house, for this thing is of me, says the Lord. So that since God
did permit and allow this in his own Commonwealth, which was to be the Pattern
for all others, no doubt he will approve the same in other Kingdoms, whenever
his Service and Glory, or the Happiness of the Weal-publick shall require it.

The next instance, I shall give you, shall be in Spain, where Don Alonso de la
Cerda having been admitted Prince of Spain in his Father's Lifetime (according
to the Custom of that Realm) married Blanoha Daughter of Lewis the First King
of France, and had by her two Sons Named Alonso and Hernando de la Cerda; but
their Father (who was only Prince) dying before Alonso the Ninth then King, he
recommended them to the Realm as lawful Heirs apparent to the Crown: But Don
Sancho their Fathers Younger Brother, who was a great Warrier, and Surnamed El
Bravo, was admitted Prince, and they, put by, in their Grandfathers Lifetime,
by his and the States Consent; and this was done at a Parliament held at
Sagovia, in the Year 1276. And in the Year 1284, ( Alonso the Ninth being dead)
Don Sancho was aknowledg'd King, and the Two Princes Imprisoned; but at the
Mediation of Philip the Third, King of France, their Uncle, they were set free,
and Endowed with considerable Revenues in Land, and from them do descend the
Dukes De Medina Celi at this Day; and the present King of Spain that is in
Possession, descends from Don Sancho.

In France, Lewis the Fourth, had Two Sons, Lothairin, who succeeded him, and
Charles whom he made Duke of Lorrain. Lothairin dying, left an only Son named
Lewis, who dying without Issue after he had reigned Two Years, the Crown was to
have descended on his Uncle Charles Duke of Lorrain. But the States of France
did exclude him, and chose Hugo Capetus, Earl of Paris, for their King; and in
an Oration made by their Ambassador to Charles of Lorrain, did give an Account
of their Reasons for so doing, as it is related by Belforest a French
Historian, in these very words:

Every Man knows (Lord Charles) that the Sucession of the Crown and Kingdom
of France, according to the ordinary Rights and Laws of the same, belongs
unto you, and not unto Hugh Capet now our King: But yet the same Laws which do
give unto you such Right of Succession, do judge you also unworthy of the same,
for that you have not endeavored hitherto to frame your Life according to the
Prescript of those Laws, nor according to the Use and Custom of the Kingdom of
France, but rather have allied your self with the Germans our old Enemies, and
have accustomed your self to their vile and base Manners. Wherefore since you
have abandoned and forsaken the ancient Virtue, Amity, and Sweetness of your
Country, your Country has also abandoned and forsaken you; for we have chosen
Hugh Capet for our King, and have put you by, and this without any Scruple in
our Consciences at all; esteeming it for better and more just to live under
Hugh Capet, the possessor of the Crown, with enjoying the ancient use of our
Laws, Customs, Privileges, and Liberties, than under you the next Heir by
Blood, in Oppressions, strange Customs, and Cruelty: For, as they who are to
make a Voyage in a Ship on a dangerous Sea, do not so much respect whether the
Pilot claims Title to the Ship or no, but rather, whether he be skilful,
valiant, and like to bring them in safety to their ways end; even so our
principal care is, to have a good Prince, to lead and guide us happily in this
way of Civil and Politic Life; which is the end for which Princes are
appointed. And with this Message ended his Succession and Life, he dying not
long after in Prison.

And now I shall come home, and give you an Instance or two in England, since
the Conquest, and so conclude.

William Rufus, second Son of William the Conqueror, by the assistance of
Lanfrank, Archbishop of Canterbury, who had a great opinion of his Virtue and
Probity, was admitted King by the consent of the Realm, his elder Brother
Robert Duke of Normandy being then in the War at Jerusalem: William dying, his
younger Brother Henry, by his ingenuity and fair carriage, and by the
assistance of Henry Earl of Warwick, who had greatest interest in the Nobility,
and Maurice Bishop of London, a leading-man amongst the Clergy, obtained also
the Crown: And Robert Duke of Normandy was a second time excluded. And though
this King Henry could pretend no other Title to the Crown than the Election and
Admission of the Realm, yet he defended it so well, and God prosper'd him with
success, that when his elder Brother Robert came to claim the Kingdom, by force
of Arms, he beat him in a pitch'd-Battel, took him Prisoner, and so he died
miserable in Bonds.

King Henry had one only Daughter, named Maud, or Matilda, who was married to
the Emperor, and he dying without Issue, she was afterward married to Geofry
Plantagenet Earl of Anjou in France, by whom she had a Son named Henry, whom
his Grandfather declared Heir-apparent to the Crown in his Lifetime; yet after
his Death, Henry was excluded, and Stephen Earl of Bulloine, Son of Adela,
Daughter of William the Conqueror, was by the States thought more fit to Govern
than Prince Henry, who was then but a Child. And this was done by the
persuasion of Henry Bishop of Winchester, and at the solicitation of the Abbot
of Glastenbury, and others, who thought they might do the same lawfully, and
with a good Conscience, for the public Good of the Realm.

But the Event did not prove so well as they intended; for this occasioned
great Factions and Divisions in the Kingdom; for the quieting of which, there
was a Parliament held at Wallingford, which passed a Law, That Stephen should
be King only during his Life, and that Prince Henry and his Offspring should
succeed him; and by the same Law debarred William Son of King Stephen from
inheriting the Crown, and only made him Earl of Norfolk.

Thus did the Parliament dispose of the Crown in those days, which was in the
year 1153, which sufficiently proves what I have asserted.

The sum of all I have said amounts to this: That Government in general is by
the Law of Nature, and consequently the Ordinance of God; but that the
different forms of Government, whether to reside in One, Few, or Many; or
whether it shall be continued by Succession or by Election, together with the
different measures and limitations of Power and Authority in Governors of the
same kind in several Countries; all these things, I say, are ordained by, and
purely depend upon positive and humane Laws: From whence it will necessarily
follow, That the same human Authority (residing in King, Lords and Commons,
here in England) which gave Being to those Laws for the good of the Community,
is Superintendent over them, and both may and ought to make any Addition to, or
Alteration of them, when the public Good and Welfare of the Nation shall
require it; unless you will admit, That an Human Authority establishing any
thing intentionally, for the common good of the Society, which in tract of
time, by reason of unforeseen circumstances and emergencies, proves destructive
of it, has by that Act concluded it self, and made that accidental Evil moral
and unchangeable, which to affirm is senseless and repugnant.

And now, Sir, I hope by this time (said the old Gentleman) you begin to think
that the Bill for disabling the Duke, was not so unjust and unreasonable as was
pretended; and that the course of Succession (being founded upon the same
bottom with other Civil Constitutions) might likewise as justly have been
altered by the King, Lords, and Commons, as any other Law or Custom whatever.

And here I might conclude; but because a late Pensionary Pen has publicly
arraigned the Wisdom, Loyalty, and Justice of the Honorable House of Commons,
on the account of this Bill, I will ex abundanti add a word or two more to that
particular.

Whereupon he plucked a Paper out of his Pocket, entitled, Great and weighty
Considerations relating to the Duke and Successor of the Crown, etc. Which as
soon as he had read unto us, You see here (said he) the true Temper of those
men, of whom I first gave you caution: There never was an Endeavor (though in
a Legal and Parliamentary way) after any Reformation either in Church or State,
but the Promoters of it were sure to be branded by them with the odious
imputations of Fanaticism and Faction. Nay, if the Country-Electors of
Parliament Men, will not pitch upon such Rakehells of the Nation as are usually
proposed by them, but, on the contrary, make use of their Freedom and
Consciences in choosing able, upright, and deserving persons; and if good men
thus chosen, do but (according to their Duty in the House) enquire into public
Grievances, pursue in a legal course notorious Offenders, and consult and
advise the Security of the Government and Protestant Religion, the high
Churchman immediately swells, and in a passion tells you, That all this
proceeds from the old Phanatick Leven, not yet worn out amongst the People;
That we are going back again to Forty One, and acting over afresh the Sins of
our Forefathers.

Thus ignorantly do they complement the Times and Persons they endeavor to
expose, by appropriating to them such Virtues as were common to good men in all
Ages. But enough of this.

In the next place, pray observe how hypocritically the Considerer puts this
Question, viz.

Whether Protestant Religion was not settled in this Nation by the same mighty
hand of God, that established Jeroboam in the Kingdom of Israel? [And then
adds] Whether we (like that wicked King) should so far despair of God's
Providence in preserving the work of his own Hands, as never to think it safe,
unless it be established on the Quicksands of our own wicked Inventions? [
viz. the Bill against the Duke.]

And throughout his whole Discourse, he frequently calls all Care of preserving
our Religion, a Mistrust of God's Providence; and on that score calls out to
the Nation, O ye of little Faith, etc. Now I will allow him, That the least
Evil is not to be done, that the greatest and most important Good may ensue:
But that the Bill for disabling the Duke is highly justifiable both by the Laws
of God and Constitution of our Government, I think, by my former Discourse, I
have left no room to doubt: And the Considerer having scarce attempted to prove
the contrary, it is preposterously done of him to give us his Use of Reproof,
before he has cleared his Doctrine.

However, I owe him many thanks for putting me in mind how Protestant Religion
was first established here in England; it was indeed by the mighty Hand of God,
influencing the public Councils of the Nation, so that all imaginable care was
taken, both by Prince and People, to rescue themselves from under the Romish
Yoke; and accordingly most excellent Laws were made against the usurpation and
tyranny of that Man of Sin. Our noble Ancestors, in those days, did not
palliate a want of Zeal for their Religion, with a lazy pretense of trusting in
God's Providence; but, together with their Prayers to, and Affiance in Heaven,
they joined the Acts of their own Duty, without which (they very well knew)
they had no reason to expect a Blessing from it.

But now be pleased to take notice of the Candor of this worthy Considerer;
nothing less will serve his turn, than the proving all the Voters for the Bill
guilty of the highest Perjury; For (says he) they have all sworn in the Oath of
Allegiance to bear Faith and true Allegiance to His Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors; but the Duke is Heir, ergo, etc. A very hopeful Argument indeed!
But what if it should happen, (as it is neither impossible nor very improbable
to imagine it) that the next Heir to the Crown should commit Treason, and
conspire the Death of the present Possessor, and for this Treason should not
only be attainded by Parliament, but executed too: Pray, Mr. Considerer, would
the Parliament in this case be guilty of Murder and Perjury? I am confident you
will not say it. If therefore the next Heir become obnoxious to the Government
in a lower degree, why may not the same Authority proportion the Punishment,
and leave him his Life, but debar him of the Succession? This I say only to
show the absurdity of his Argument.

My Answer is this: No man can bear Allegiance to two persons at the same time;
nor can Allegiance be ever due to a Subject, and therefore my Obligation by the
word [ Heir] in the Oath, does not commence till such Heir has a present Right
to, or actual Possession of the Crown, which if he never attains, either by
reason of Death, or any other Act that incapacitates and bars him, then can my
Obligation to him by the word Heir in the Oath never have a beginning.

But besides all this, it cannot be denied but Mr. Considerer's Doctrine does
bring great Inconveniences on Succession; for the next Heir (by his way of
arguing) is let loose from all the Restrictions and Penalties of Humane Laws;
and has no other ties upon him, not to snatch the Crown out of the Hands of the
Possessor, than purely those of his own Conscience, which is worthy Mr.
Considerer's highest Consideration.

I shall only take notice of one Objection more, and then conclude, (fearing I
have too much trespassed on your Patience already.)

It Is very hard (says he) that a man should lose his Inheritance because he is
of this or that Persuasion in Matters of Religion.

And truly, Gentlemen, were the Case only so, I should be entirely of his mind:
But alas! Popery (whatever Mr. Considerer is pleased to insinuate) in not an
harmless innocent Persuasion of a Number of Men, differing from others in
matters relating to Christian Religion; but is really and truly a different
Religion from Christianity it self. Nor is the Inheritance he there mentions,
an Inheritance only of Black-Acre and White Acre without any Office annexed,
which requires him to be par Officio: But the Government and Protection of
several Nations, the Making War and Peace for them, the Preservation of their
Religion, the Disposal of Public Places and Revenues, the Execution of all
Laws, together with many other things of the greatest Importance, are in this
Case claimed by the Word Inheritance; which if you consider, and at the same
time reflect upon the Enslaving and Bloody Tenants of the Church of Rome, more
particularly the Hellish and Damnable Conspiracy those of that Communion are
now carrying on against our Lives, our Religion, and our Government; I am
confident you will think it as proper for a Wolf to be a Shepherd, as it is for
a Papist to be the Defender of our Faith, etc.

The Old Gentleman had no sooner ended his Discourse, but I returned him my
hearty Thanks, for the Trouble he had been pleased to give himself on this
Occasion; and I could not but acknowledge he had given me great Satisfaction in
that Affair; what it will give thee, Charles, I know not, I am sure I parted
from him very Melancholy for having been a Fool so long. Adieu,

I am thy Affectionate. I. D.

A Collection of Speeches IN THE House of Commons In the Year. 1680.
The Lord L. Speech.
My Lords,
MAny have been the Designs of the Papists to subvert this poor Nation from the
Protestant Religion to that of the Sea of Rome, and that by all the undermining
Policies possibly could be invented, during the Recess of Parliament even to
the casting the Odium of their most Damnable Designs on the Innocence of his
Majesty's most Loyal Subjects. We have already had a taste of their Plottings
in Ireland, and find how many unaccountable Irish Papists dally arrive, which
we have now under Consideration. My Lord Dunbarton, a great Romanist, has
Petitioned for his stay here, alleging several Reasons therein, which in my
Opinion make all for his speedy Departure; for I can never think his Majesty
and this Kingdom sufficiently secure, till we are rid of those Irish Cattle,
and all others besides; for I durst be bold to say, that whatsoever they may
pretend, there is not one of them but have a destructive Tenet, only they want
Power, not Will to put it in force.

I would not have so much as a Popish Man nor a Popish Woman to remain here,
nor so much as a Popish Dog, or a Popish Bitch, no not so much as a Popish Cat
that should pur or mew about the King. We are in a Labyrinth of Evils, and must
carefully endeavor to get out of them; and the greatest danger of all amongst
us are, our conniving Protestants, who notwithstanding the many Evidences of
the Plot, have been industrious to revile the Kings Witnesses; and such an one
is R -- L'E -- who now disappears, being one of the greatest Villains upon the
Earth, a Rogue beyond my Skill to delineate, has been the Bugbear to the
Protestant Religion, and traduced the King and Kingdoms Evidences by his
notorious scribbling Writings, and has endeavored as much as in him lay, to
eclipse the Glory of the English Nation; he is a dangerous rank Papist, proved
by good and substantial Evidence, for which since he has walked under another
disguise, he deserves of all Men to be hanged, and I believe I shall live to
see that to be his State. He has scandalized several of the Nobility, and
detracted from the Rights of his Majesty's great Council the Parliament, and is
now fled from Justice, by which he confesses the Charge against him, and that
shows him to be guilty.

My humble Motion is, that this House Address to his Majesty, to put him out of
the Commission of Peace, and all other Public Employments for ever.

Speeches in the Honorable House of Commons.
Mr. Speaker.
IN the Front of Magna Charta it is said, Nulli negabimus, nulli differimus
Justitiam, we will defer or deny Justice to no Man; to this the King is Sworn,
and with this the Judges are entrusted by their Oaths. I admire what they can
say for themselves, if they have not read this Law, they are not fit to sit
upon the Bench; and if they have, I had almost said, they deserve to lose their
Heads.

Mr. Speaker. The State of the poor Nation is to be deplored, that in almost
all ages, the Judges, who ought to be Preservers of the Laws, have endeavored
to destroy them; and that to please a Court-Faction: they have by Treachery
attempted to break the Bonds asunder of Magna Charta, the great Treasury of our
Peace; it was no sooner passed, but a Chief Justice in that day persuades the
King he was not bound by it, because he was under Age when it was passed. But
this sort of Insolence the next Parliament resented, to the ruin of the
pernicious Chief Justice. In the time of Richard the Second, an unthinking
dissolute Prince, there were Judges that did insinuate into the King, that the
Parliament were only his Creatures, and depended on his Will, and not on the
Fundamental Constitutions of the Land; which Treacherous Advice proved the
Ruin of the King, and for which all those evil Instruments were brought to
Justice. In his late Majesty's Time, his Misfortunes were occasioned chiesly by
the Corruptions of the Long Robe; his Judges by an Extrajudicial Opinion give
the King Power to raise Money upon an extraordinary Occasion without
Parliament, and made the King Judge of such Occasions. Charity prompts me to
think they thought this a Service to the King, but the sad Consequences of it
may convince all Mankind, that every illegal Act weakens the Royal Interest;
and to endeavor to introduce Absolute Dominion in these Realms, is the worst
of Treasons, because, whilst it bears the Face of Friendship to the King, and
Designs to be for his Service, it never fails of the contrary effect.

The two great Pillars of the Government are Parliaments and Juries; it is this
gives us the Title of Freeborn Englishmen: for my Notion of Free-English-men
is this, that they are ruled by Laws of their own making, and tried by Men of
the same Condition with themselves. The Two great and undoubted Privileges of
the People have been lately invaded by the Judges that now sit in
Westminster Hall; they have Espoused Proclamation against Law; they have
discountenanced and opposed several legal Acts, that tended to the sitting of
this Honorable House; they have grasped the Legislative Power into their own
Hands, as in that Instance of Printing; the Parliament was considering that
matter, but they in the interim made their private Opinion to be Law, to
supersede the Judgment of this House; They have discharged Grand Juries on
purpose to quel their Presentiments, and shelter great Criminals from Justice;
and when Juries have presented their Opinion for the sitting of this
Parliament, they have in disdain thrown them at their Feet, and told them, they
would be no Messengets to carry such Petitions; and yet in a few days after,
have encouraged all that would spit their Venom against the Government; they
have served an Ignorant and Arbitrary Faction, and been the Messengers of
Abhorrences to the King.

Mr. Speaker. What we have now to do, is to load them with shame, who have bid
defiance to the Law; they are guilty of Crimes against Nature, against the
King, against their Knowledge, and against Posterity. The whole frame of Nature
does loudly and daily petition to God their Creator; and Kings, like God, may
be addressed to in like manner by Petition, not Command. They likewise knew it
was lawful to petition; Ignorance can be no Plea, and their Knowledge
aggravates their Crimes. The Children unborn are bound to curse such
Proceedings, for 'twas not petitioning, but Parliaments they abhorred. The
Atheist pleads against a God, not that he disbelieves a Deity, but would have
it so. Tresilian and Belknap were Judges too, their Learning gave them Honor,
but their Villainies made their Exit by a Rope. The end of my Motion therefore
is, That we may address warmly to our Prince against them, let us settle a
Committee to enquire into their Crimes, and not fail of doing Justice upon them
that have perverted it; let us purge the Fountain, and the Streams will issue
pure.

November the 17th. being appointed for consideration of His Majesty's Message,
the Order being read, it was moved by a worthy Member,
THAT as long as Popery hangs over us, we could do nothing, and we ought to
represent our condition to the King; and then, when we had secured our Religion
and Property, we should be ready to do any thing that might make the King happy
and great.

A Second. I am sorry that Tangier (that is, a Supply) is moved for, at so
unseasonable a time; I confess, Tangier is of great moment, but we have now in
hands that which is of greater moment than ten Tangiers put together. The
consideration of that, before we are secure in our Religion at home, is as when
an Enemy was landed we should afterward go to fortify the Coasts of Kent. And
being told us by His Majesty, we should secure our selves against Popery, by
all ways but meddling with the Succession, and should rest there, we are
prevented of what is our preservation: And the providing for Tangier now, will
be the weakening of our Security. When Tangier was put into the hands of the
English first, there was an Article that there should continue a Popish Church,
and the Religion that belonged to it to continue their Lives, but not to be
replenished with new. And if it be inquired into, I believe it will be found
the number of them is not yet decreased. It is not long since there was a
Popish Governor there, many Papists and Soldiers gone thither lately from
Ireland. It is not a little Sum that will do what is needful there; and if it
should be a considerable one that should be given for it, it may be made use of
to raise an Army there; so that we run into a great Inconveniency by providing
for it; I think we ought to consider well of it before we do: And yet I am not
for sullenly saying, we will raise no Money, but for clearly stating the Case
by an Address to the King.

A Third. I am only to acquaint you, That Tangier is not to be maintained
without your Support.

A Fourth. All things are to be considered comparatively, and if it be made an
Argument against the Duke's Bill, that is at the Head of an Army in Scotland,
and that in Ireland there are ten Papists to one Protestant, his great interest
in the Fleet, and being Admiral, and Tangier being a Seminary of Papists, then
sure you have a special Argument to take Tangier into your Consideration, and
Money may be for that Service. But then this Parliament do not ask Petitions of
Grace, but of Right. And will you part with your Money without any Security?
You have often done so, and what are you the better for it? I long for the
time, when we may give Money to make the King great; but if things must go on
as they do, I am for a plain Bargain, to know what we shall have for our Money.
For my part, I only desire our Security; but if we should give Money, I suppose
you will take care what hands we put it in, and there ought to be a Trust: Let
us Address His Majesty.

A Fifth. We are told Tangier is of Importance, it is a Nursery of Papists: And
we are likewise told, The Irish sent thither a part of the Irish Army, and they
take the Oath, that is no Security: Was not the Lord Bellassis Governor of
Tangier and Hull, and the Pensioners Captain, all at a time, and took the
Oaths; those Soldiers, for ought I know, may be brought hither, and the asking
for a Supply for it at this time, is very unreasonable, because Parliaments
have been put off two or three years, and whilst there are people that dare
make a difference between the King and this House, we shall never be safe. Let
us represent our Condition as boldly as may stand with good manners. It is not
to be endured, to see the Duke preferred before the King, as he was; as if
Arguments of his Greatness and Power were Arguments strong enough to hinder the
Bill: He has violated the Law, and we needed not to have gone this way to
work, if we could have had Justice against him; but he is too great for that,
let us Address His Majesty.

A Smith. If Tangier be wholly under the Duke's Care and Protection, and such a
Seminary for Papists as has been represented, I think no motion to have a
Supply for it is unseasonable, and am against it; order the bringing in the
state of it.

A Seventh. I spoke the fence of the City formerly, and do so now again, and in
the name of the greatest part of the Commonalty of the City of London, and we
do declare, That we are ready to give Money, half we have, nay all, and be
content to set up again, and get new Estates, if we can but be secured. The
burning of London, justly laid upon the Papists, and keeping Watch since the
Plot, has cost the City above 100000 l. The City of London is the Bulwark of
our Religion: And is it not said, the Duke is at the head of 30 or 40000 men?
The Lieutenancy and Justices, how are they molded for his turn. And if you do
nothing now in this House, we must all, without any more ado, try to make a
Peace with him as well as we can, I Will never do it: And will you, for the sake
of one man, destroy three Kingdoms?

An Highth. He moved, that the Representation might declare, That we see no
Security, but removing the Duke of York.

A Ninth. We discoursing of Tangier at this time, is like Nero's Fiddling
whilst Rome was consuming by Fire: If it be in a good condition, we cannot help
it; if in a bad one, we are not in a posture to do it. Pray consider the
condition by what is past, when King Henry the Eighth was for Supremacy, the
Kingdom was for it; when King Henry the Eighth was against it, the Kingdom was
against it. When King Edward the Sixth was a Protestant, the Kingdom was so;
when Queen Mary was a Papist, the Kingdom was so; when Queen Elizabeth was a
Protestant, the Kingdom so again; Regis ad exemplum, etc. And I believe, even
in King Edward the Sixth's time, the Bishops themselves would not have been for
throwing out such a Bill as this. And if King Edward had promised any thing for
the preservation of the Protestant Religion, so that Mary might succeed, the
Pope would no way have contrived so great a Favor. The bidding us prevent
Popery, and the letting alone a Popish Successor, is as if a Physician should
come to a man in a Pleurisy, and tell him, he may make use of any Remedies but
letting of Blood; the Party must perish, that being the only Cure. I am not at
present for giving of Money, that being to the State as Food to the Stomach; if
that be clean, meat turns to good Nourishment; but if it be out of order, it
breeds Diseases: And so it is in the State, if that be not in order too. We
have been often deceived, and by the same men again. Was not 200000 l. given
for the Fleet in 74, and was any of it employed that way? Money given for an
actual War with France, employed for a dishonorable Peace. Never so many
Admirals, and so few Ships to guard us; never more Commissioners of the
Treasury, and so little Money; never so many Counselors, and so little Safety:
Let us address His Majesty.

A Tenth. I Will never be for giving of Money for promoting Popery, and a
Successor a public Enemy to the Kingdom, and a Slave to the Pope: Whilst he
has 11 to 7 in the Council, and 63 to 31 in the House of Lords, we are not
secure. And if my own Father had been one of the 63, I should have voted him an
Enemy to the King and Kingdoms; and if we cannot live Protestants, I hope we
shall dye so.

The Eleventh. Redress our Grievances first, and then, and not till then,
Money. Tangier never was, nor will be a place of Trade. Tituan and Sally so
near, they will never trade with us to destroy themselves, and can never be for
our Advantage. And I have many years wondered at the Council that have been for
the keeping of it; and am of opinion, that Popery may be aimed at by it, and
that our Councils are managed at Rome, from whence I saw a Letter from a
Friend, dated the 21th. of October, with the Heads of the King's Speech in it,
to this effect, That His Majesty would command them not to meddle with the
Succession; That he would ask no Money; That he would stand upon the
Confirmation of the Lord Danby's Pardon; and, That the keeping of Tangier was
to draw on Expenses, and was it not, would be for the blowing of it up.

Twelfth. I am for a Representation.

Thirteenth. I remember, before the last Session of Parliament, there was a
Council held at Lambeth, and there hatched a Bill against Popery. It was for
the breeding of Children of a Popish Successor, which admitted the thing; and
it was called a Bill against Popery, but we called it the Popish Bill. I am for
the Church of England, but not for the Churchmen of the late Bishop of St.
Asaph, on his Deathbed, good man, could hardly forbear declaring himself,
which his Epitaph did (Ora pro Anima) ordered to be written upon his Tomb. We
are told the other day, we ought to make the Duke a Substantive to stand by
himself; That there was less danger of a General without an Army, than an Army
without a General. And I have read in Pliny which was most to be feared, an
Army of Lions with an Hare to their General, or an Army of Hares with a Lion to
their General? and it was concluded, that an Army of Hares with a Lion to their
General, was most to be feared of the two. His Majesty is enclosed by a sort of
Monsters, who endeavor to destroy, and I hope to move against them before we
rise; and though we have lost our last Bill, we have not lost our Courage and
Hearts.

Fourteenth. His Majesty desires your Advice and Assistance, it is seldom,
which is very kind, and though you shall think fit not to give the latter, it is
but mannerly to give the first. And I hope you will not resent any Injury, if
any there were done by the House of Lords on the King, who though he cannot
cure all ill in one day, he can ruin all. And I acquaint you, there is a very
great Weight laid upon this Session of Parliament, and upon the agreeing of the
King with the People, on which depends the Welfare of the Protestants abroad,
and hope you will not go about to Remonstrate now.

Fifteenth. If you had sent the Duke's, Lord Craven's, and Mulgrave's Regiment
to Tangier, it would supply the Place with Men, and Disband the Lord Oxford's
Regiment, and the Money on those employed, would bear much of the share of this.

Then the House Resolved to appoint a Committee to draw up an Address upon the
Debate of this House, to represent His Majesty the State and Condition of the
Kingdom, in Answer to His Majesty's Message about Tangier. The SPEECHES of
several Learned and Worthy Members of the Honorable House of Commons, for
Passing the Bill against the Duke of York.
Mr. Speaker,
THE Gentleman that spoke last, seems to intimate that we ought to have a due
regard to the Kings Brother, and consider what infinite disadvantages will
accrue to us, if we are too hasty in our Resolutions, as before the Duke is
found guilty, to proceed to pass a Bill for Exclusion; for that nothing but War
and Bloodshed can be expected from it; therefore he says we ought to be
moderate, and find out a Medium to secure the Protestant Religion,
notwithstanding the Duke may be a Papist. Now Gentlemen, I give you the
Dictates of my Heart, without either Passion or Prejudice, and should be as
willing as any Person to agree with what that Gentleman has proposed, if any
such Reason can be brought to enforce it. For my part, I think it absolutely
impossible that this Kingdom can be safe, or the Protestant Religion succeed
under a Popish Successor; for do but Review the Ancient and Modern Histories,
and you shall find how Protestants have lived under a Popish King; have they
not been Massacred, Butchered and Enslaved in Germany, France, and in our own
Countries, notwithstanding all the Laws, Vows and Promises to the contrary? Are
not the Tenets of the Papists destructive to the Protestant Religion, which is
Heresy, and that Faith is not to be kept with such? See the barbarous Usage of
the Protestants in Piedmont, and in Queen Mary's Time; How then can we expect
any better success? for by how much a Popish Prince seems to be Religious, by
so much ought he to be looked upon desperately dangerous; for since the Papists
make such Plotting and Designing to subvert our Religion under a Protestant
Prince, how much more will they act against us under a Popish Successor? For to
think to Restrain a Prince under the Power of a penal Law, thereby to secure
Religion, is no more than to tie Sampson with Cords; for will not the Courteors
be flattered by their Prince, to imitate the same Religion with him? and then
will not we Protestants be discountenanced, and none but Priests and Jesuits
have Dominion over us? For my part, if you pass not this Bill, we shall all
agree to have our Throats cut; and I have no patience at all for that: you see
how the Duke of York being a Papist, they have all the dependency on him, and
hope to perfect their Villainies. Therefore take away this General, and this
Army may be secured; and then being united at home, we need not fear what all
the Papists in the World can do unto us, when we fight for the maintenance of
our Laws and Religion by Exclusion of a Popish Prince, and rather withstand any
Violence that shall be brought against us, than be in Danger every day to have
our Throats cut by those that are amongst us. One Gentleman was pleased to say,
that it was a Papist Jesuits Bill, and that which they brand the Papists
withal, (viz) Deposing of Princes. I do say as to that, That we do not Depose
James D. of Y. but as being a Papist, considering the sad Consequence that will
ensue; for should we admit a Papist, we should give away the Crown, for he
would only have the Title, the Pope would be our Sovereign. And we ought to
prevent any such Usurpers, who no doubt would make havoc of our Estates, if he
spares us our Lives. To tell us that Exclusion will cause a Civil War, I am of
the contrary Opinion; for it will be more conducing to the Preservation of the
Kings Person and Government, our Laws, Lives and Religion, to be Unanimous.
Whereas Oppression, Fire and Faggot, might cause People to Rebel and be
Mutunous, when the other would be a means to unite us. As I will give you a
reason why we cannot restrain him otherwise, or use moderation toward him; for
suppose I were riding a full speed on the Road on a secure Horse, a Gentleman
passing by, desired me to be moderate, for that I would kill my Horse, when at
the same time he knows that if I slacken my pace, I shall have my throat cut by
thieves that are swiftly pursuing me; therefore I cannot be moderate in this
case, unless I will fling away my Life. And I will lay down another Similitude,
that is, if I were Sailing to the East Indies, and passing the Equinoctial
Line, most of the Seamen were distempered through Heat, and on their sick
Beds, but it being told them, that the Ship is in danger of sinking, for there
springs a Leak, upon which they all arise, and instantly fall to Pump; but the
Chyrurgeon acquaints them, that if they do not work more moderately, they will
get the Calenture, and so destroy themselves; but they give him only the
Hearing, knowing that if they cease never so little, they are all drowned in
the Deep: therefore in this case there can be no Moderation. And to give an
Instance in Holy Writ, Moses was a meek and mild Man, and a moderate Man, but
seeing an Egyptian and an Israelite fighting, he immediately slew the Egyptian,
for he knew it was to no purpose to be moderate with him; and afterward seeing
two Israelites fighting, endeavored to part them, telling them, they were
Brethren, and ought to be moderate; so we must place it upon the right Object,
and not suffer our selves and Posterity to be irrecoverably undone.

Another Speech by a Worthy Gentleman.
Mr. Speaker,
NO Man has a greater Veneration for the Royal Family than my self, to which I
am obliged both in gratitude and Duty, I am bold to say that I have a great
esteem and honor for the D. of Y. Yet I must before the passing of this Bill
(to dissent from that worthy Gentleman that thinked it a Bill of Rigor, for it
is as I conceive, a Bill of Grace and Mercy) Vote for it, as a Favor for the
D. I am sure it is so to the Royal Family, they cannot be safe till the Bill be
passed; in tenderness to one Branch we must endanger the whole.

That worthy Gentleman that moved last, seems to intimate, that the passing
this Bill is against our Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy: I admire his
Mistake, and it is the first time I ever heard the Protestant Oaths cited to
justify a Popish Successor: it is urged we are sworn to the King, his Heirs
and lawful Successors; it is true, we are so, but not obliged to any in the
Kings life time but himself, for that were Treason: He has no Heirs or
Successors by Law during his own Life, Non est Here Is viventis. We are likewise
told, we are designing a Bill to UNITE the Protestant Interest, but will divide
it, because many true Protestants are for the true Heir, and for the D. of Y.
if he be so, which may occasion the Effusion of much Blood amongst us.

Mr. Speaker,
UNITY is desired by all, yet let us be glad to divide from such Men, for when
this Bill is passed, their false Loyalty will be a Crime, and we know not what
Character to give it, and what Punishment to assign them; LOYALTY is a
Correspondency and Submission to the Law, it is that surrounds the King, and
makes his Person Sacred.

It is hinted that we must Impeach the Duke, I should be for that if he did not
withdraw, I will not say fly from Justice; if we Impeach him being absent, we
can only Attaint him, and should he survive the King, and be then Lawful Heir,
the Descent of the Crown takes off all Attainders, and such Proceedings were
only an Illusion, and would indeed involve us in Blood.

Let us disable him, it is absolutely necessary, without it is impossible to
salve. I perceive no Gentleman here has confidence to deny the Loyalty of the
Fact, or excuse the black Crimes that appear before us. Why do they not answer
the Evidence that is now come in? If it be false, contradict it; if true, what
is the Reason of this Debate? Is not the King alive? Is not all Loyalty due to
him? Love hates a Competitor, much more a Crown.

A Speech spoke by the same Worthy Member, upon the Irish Informations, given
in at the Bar in Writing.
THIS is not so much a Discovery as a Confirmation of the Discovery of the
Plot, although some inconsiderate Men are apt to give Credit to the dying Words
of some Men. This agrees exactly with Oats his first Discovery. It adds to the
strength of what Coleman's Letters imported; but so deplorable is our
Condition, we are in danger, we see the Knife is even at our Throats, but none
seeks to take it out of our Enemies hand.

You have Witnesses against a Great Person, one before, another now; he is a
Lord, a Privy Counselor, and sits in Council still: My Lord of Tyrone, he is
in the Gate House, but not secured: There is one Informant tells you they
received Encouragement from the D. of Y. and that he promised them Assistance:
I call not the Truth of this in question, but we see they make use of these
great Names: so that even in this Kings time, we are not secure a day without
the Bill. They have Reason to believe that a Popish Successor will assist them
in their Rebellion.

Now we see why our Ministers made a Peace; We thought our Security to be in
the French Kings being involved in a War: Now I say, the reason of the Nimeguen
Plenipotentiaries making a Peace is seen, to have the French King be at Liberty
to send Men into Ireland. Here you have a full Confirmation of this Evidence;
We see our danger both at home and abroad, and what posture we are in, if any
means be left for our Security.

Let these Depositions be Printed that the Country may see our Danger: if we
will not Impeach the Earl of Tyrone presently; if he should write into Ireland,
I am afraid he will find too much Favor there: consider the Case of this Lord
the Privy Councellor; he is a great Man, and a Lawyer; if I thought we could
not reach him, we would not go about to Impeach him. Agree with the Lords in
their Vote, and desire them to agree with you, that the Papists may not draw
their Encouragement from a Popish Successor.

Another Speech by a Person of Honor.
Mr. Speaker,
I Have not hitherto troubled you, and am so sensible of my own inabilities in
comparison of so many wiser and abler Men in this House; that it is with great
unwillingness, I rise up to speak; but when I hear the Honor and Justice of
this House called in question, as it was by that Honorable Member which spoke
last; I cannot I confess bear it with patience, but must (as I think it my
Duty) endeavor to vindicate the Justice of the House: for I must profess Sir,
that in my Judgment this Bill is so far from an unjust thing, that it is rather
a Favor to him, since if he were proceeded against by Impeachment for the
Crimes he is accused of by several Witnesses, he might perhaps forfeit more
than a Crown; which for our Safeties only we go about to exclude him from
enjoying: And since it is undoubtedly in the Power of Parliaments to dispose of
such Successions, it seems very hard with me to tax this House with Unjustice
for so doing, upon so great reason and necessity as now requires it.

I will not Sir, at all deny the many great Services (mentioned by that
Honorable Member,) the Duke has done the Nation at Sea, nor will I say any
thing at all in Derogation of any one of them, but yet I do not think he fought
for us when he was asleep.

There are several things Sir, wherein this Nation has been betrayed, I will
not say any of them directly upon him, but when I think of some of them, I am
very much startled and know not well what to believe, for when I consider that
in the Fire of London, there were several outlandish Men taken in the very act
of Firing a House, and being delivered to the Guard, were presently set at
Liberty by the Officer that commanded it, and that such a Man should ever since
not only continue, but increase in the Duke's Favor to the greatest Degree
imaginable, I must confess I do not like it, and I think it looks very ill.

When I also think of the general Design which plainly appears to have been
carried on all along, to destroy the People, and to weaken the Nation as much
as possible, as apapears by the Treachery was used at Chatham, and the French's
standing still while the Dutch and we cut one another Throats, this also in my
Judgment is very ill nor does it appear better that it was taken ill, that the
D. of Monmouth when he was sent into Scotland, did not cut those poor miserable
Peoples Throats. (But that Prince had too much humanity and discretion than to
do it.) But I do not particularly charge any Person with these.

There are many things Sir, spoken of by the witnesses you have heard relating
to the Duke, as also several things in the Letters you have heard read, I shall
not repeat any of them: I will only tell you a Passage comes into my mind, and
I do not tell it for the sake of the Story, but that it appears to me by it,
that the Duke was either somewhat concerned in the Plot, or at least to hinder
the discovery of it; for the D. speaking publicly to all that were round him,
of one Le Fair that was accused by Mr. Bedloe, to have been one of Sir E. B.
Godfreys Murderers, and one of the Queens servants, he said that could not be,
because there was no such Man as Le Fair about the Queen, but yet it so fell
out they say, that in some little time after there was a Bond found, under this
Man's own hand, and he proved to be one of the Queens Servants, and run away
upon this Business.

Now Sir, if this were so, it is impossible the other should be true, and if a
Prince, or any Man speaks an untruth, it is a fault so hateful to me, that I
must confess I know not what to call it, nor what Name to give it, (It is the
Devil.)

I shall trouble you Sir, with one thing more which comes into my mind, and if
true, is as bad as any thing can be: There was Sir, a French Protestant came
over to the King to make Proposals for the Interest of the Protestant Religion
--

Here a Person of Honor standing up, said, He never heard a Prince so
Reflected upon in his life: Upon which the House cried, Go on, Go on: The
Gentleman answered,

Mr. Speaker,
I wonder that Noble Lord should thus interrupt me, for I have not positively
affirmed any thing at all of the Duke, though I have said nothing but what in
my Judgment I thought might be truth, and I shall not change my mind for his
being displeased at it; but however I am very well satisfied to say no more,
but only, that I remember that Honorable Person by the Bar, told us, he would
not speak to the prudential part against the Bill, and truly Sir, I think he
has kept his Word very exactly: and that, whereas another Member before him
objected, That it was possible the Duke might turn Protestant, I would only
answer, that I do not think it possible, that any Person that has been bred up
in the Protestant Religion, and has been weak enough (for so I must call it)
to turn Papist, should ever after (in that respect) be wise enough to turn
Protestant, and therefore Sir, upon the whole matter, my humble Motion is, That
the Bill may pass.

Debates in the House of Commons, Jan. 7. 1680. upon His Majesty's Message.
The First Speech by an Honorable Gentleman.
HIS Majesty's relies not only on the Dictates of his own Judgment, but is
confirmed by the Judgment of the House of Lords; but many of them have gained
their Honor by Interest rather than Merit. His Majesty has given no Answer to
several of your Addresses; when you say nothing can secure you but this Bill,
that he should propose other means; but if we have not the Bill, we are
deprived of the means to preserve His Majesty's Life, Person and Government. I
never knew that Tangier was more considerable than all the Three Kingdoms: Is
it time to be silent, or not? Why is all this stir for a Man that desires the
Throne before His Majesty is dead? He is in all the Plot, either at one end or
other: who took evidence of London Fire? Arbitrary Power was at the end; and no
Religion like Popery to set up: That I will pay the Duty and Allegiance of an
Englishman, to an English Prince: But Popery and Arbitrary Power must be
rooted out. Can you hope for any Good while this Man is Heir, an Apostate from
his Religion; his Government is the most dangerous: Our Ministers of State give
us little hopes from Whitehall; I hope they will be Named; First set a Brand on
all them that framed the Answer, and all them that shall lend Money by way of
Anticipation; desire him to take Advice of His Parliament, rather then private
Men, or to let us go home, and attend His Service when he shall again call for
us.

The Second Speech by another Person of Hour.
I am afraid we are lost, we have done our Parts, showed our selves good
Subjects; but some stand between the King and us to promote the Duke of York's
Interest; Those that advised the King not to pass the Bill, deserve to be
Branded.

The Third Speech by an Honorable Gentleman.
We have made the modestest Request that ever People did in such a time of
Danger: we have neither passed a Bill, nor obtained a kind Answer; our Trust
must be in our Votes: When the King bid us look into the Plot, like
well-meaning Countrey-Gentlemen, we looked into the Tower; we should have
looked into Whitehall, There the Plot is hatched, cherished and brought up: It
would be well, if all against the Bill were put out of Council, and all of this
House were put out of Commission that were for it: I had rather the Moors had
Tangier, the French King Flanders, than the Pope had Eugland.

The Fourth Speech by a Person of Honor.
I think the Debate is upon a Message from the King; and the most especial part
is about the Bill; I concur with that Noble Person, rather than with all the
rest; But begin with the first, his Majesty has suffered us twice to address
upon the Bill; yet the Lords have not admitted one Conference; I believe every
man came unwillingly into this Bill; have any that were against it proposed any
thing for our Security, if they will, let them stand up, and I will sit down: I
have advised with Men that know the Laws, Religion and Government; they say, if
you will preserve this Government, this Law, this Bill must pass: We have
received no expedient from the Lords; the State of the Nation lies at their
Door: they sit to hear Causes, they mind you of Mr. Seymour, but say nothing of
the Bills. In Richard the Second his Time, some Lords were said to be Lords in
the King's Pocket, but had no shoulders to support him. It Is plain our evil
comes from evil Ministers. There are some that will have a Prince of one
Religion on the Throne, to rule the People of another; a Popish Prince and a
Protestant Kingdom, will any Ministers of parts, unless they have an
indifferency of Religion, think this consistent? I dedicate my Allegiance to
the King, they to another Person, so the Kingdom must be destroyed, either this
limited Monarchy must stand, or come to Blood; on the other side Water-Monarchy
is absolutely supported by little men of no Fortune, and he that takes mean and
low men to make Ministers of, sets up for Popery and Arbitrary Government: The
King has Counsels born; if you have a Popish Prince, and a Protestant
Parliament, will the King ever concur with them in matters of Religion and
Property, are not your Estates sprinkled with Abbey-Lands? If he asks Money,
will you trust him? must Foreigners comply with a Prince that in effect has no
People? We must be overcome with France and Popery, or the Body will get a new
Head, or the Head a new Body.

The Fifth Speech by a Person of Honor.
The House was unwilling at first to enter into a Debate about Expedients, and
I am not prepared to propound them; any thing you have heard proposed by the
King in Print, if you had them they will do you no harm: One day you say the
King had been a good Prince, if he had good Company and good Councils; no great
Complement to the King, he offers you any thing but the Bill, I humbly make my
motion to try it.

The Sixth Speech by an Honorable Gentleman.
I think it becomes that Gentleman very well to be of the Opinion he is, though
no man else in this House. I wish the D. was of that Opinion his Father desired
him. The Lords rejected the Bill, but I am afraid the King solicited, or else
they would not; it is some men's interest to be for the D. but while they are at
Court, we shall never have it: Foreign Persons have given Influence at Court,
the French Ministers access to Court, inclines me to believe some body is paid
for it: The Court is a Nurcery of Vice; they transmit them into the Country,
and none but such men are employed.

The Seventh Speech by an Honorable Gentleman.
The Question now before you is, Whether any other means be effectual besides
the Bill; I have heard none proposed in this Parliament; the last Parliament
thought not fit to debate them, they were so weak, but has this Plot been no
longer than 1678. We gave 250000 l. to fight the Dutch, and assist them that
had a Design to subdue us, and the Protestant Religion, which is not well
settled. Have all the Laws been put in Execution against the Papists? But a few
Apprentices going to pull down a Bawdy House, with a Red Cloth on a Pole, was
made Treason, but what has been done with the Plot in the intervals of
Parliament. The Lords have confirmed the King in his Opinion; but did not the
Proviso for the D. come from the Lords House; I believe the Lords do not fear
him; but I believe the Plot is more dangerous than ever. To rely upon any
Remedy but this Bill, will expose your Selves and your Religion.

The Eighth Speech by an Honorable Gentleman.
You have heard several Propositions, but first make an end of one. It is long
since we thought in this House we were not secure without the Bill, some have
not yet considered of it, and I think we never shall. To make an Act of
Association against the D. is to say, Let him be lawful King, and then fight
against him. Another way is Banishment, if it be during the Kings life; truly
you run into more dangers, rather then remove them; if you talk of Banishment
during the D. Life, that is Exclusion: if the D. be a Papist, exclude all
Papists from inheriting. Some talk of an Act pass, they would not satisfy
their Consciences, I am sure a Vote to Exclude him will not. Popery increases
upon hopes the D. may come to the Crown? we ought to take care of this
Presumption; Will not Papists expect to have their Religion established when
the D. is next: I wonder men will pretend to plead for Loyalty to one, that
they may never come to use it; some say, Cannot the D. change his Religion?
Must not the Two Houses join? Did not Queen Mary do it, Regis ad Exemplum, most
will conform. To make Arguments of this Bill is to lessen it; the King bids you
go on to other things; let us declare all other things are ineffectual without
this Bill; We cannot think our selves safe; to rely on any thing else, is not
only insufficient but dangerous.

The Ninth Speech by an Honorable Gentleman.
Now I see the House is full, so considerate, I am bound to give my Thoughts.
The Reason, the Verity of the Bill has formerly been debated, and Precedents
are Printed to show it has been done. It will be a Reproach to us when dead in
our Graves, if we do not whatever any Parliament did to preserve Religion. When
we received the Kings Message, I was persuaded he was overruled by other men;
for he says, What shall come in a Parliamentary Way; how comes the King to
know what is done in Parliament? When Clifford set up barefaced for Popery, he
brought the King to come frequently to the House of Lords. Cranmer says, That
King Henry the Eighth, passed the Act of 6 Articles in an Un-Parliamentary way,
by the Kings coming and soliciting. Henry the Fourth in a Record called, The
Indemnity of the Peers and Commons, the King being in haste for Money, sends a
Message, desires he may debate the matter with them, they return Answer,
Parliaments ought to debate free. It Is entered into the Rolls, That the King
shall neither come to one House or other: Danby's soliciting could not move
them, the King comes and he prevails: Some Lords have little Estates, some
little Consciences, some less Religion. The King calls it an Opinion, and tells
you he is confirmed in it by the House of Lords; he may come to take up other
Resolutions, if the Parliament go away and leave this work undone: The King is
in the highest Danger, though some men think they shall be accounted Loyal for
opposing an Act of Parliament; it is but a Nickname. King James in his Speech,
1603, thought it his Security to comply with his Parliament: Nay, He would
betray his Country and Posterity in not doing it. Remember what care the last
King took to have his Posterity maintain the Protestant Religion. Remember
Queen Mary broke her Word for Conscience sake every day; a Security would draw
me from the Bill. Queen Elizabeth's Association against the Queen of Scots in
the Act of Parliament was an Exclusion, she was but a Woman, but had wise
Counselors; Prelates then did not fear the frown of a Prince. Surely when the
King sees so many Gentlemen of this House so firm, he will take their Advise,
and Prorogue them, and then pass the Bill. I find not a Man that has
understanding, but says, We are undone without it; We have not Compounded yet
for our Throats, as some at Whitehall have done, there is no next best; the
only way to preserve the Protestant Religion is to pass the Bill, what is as
secure as this, must be amounting to Exclusion; We cannot save his Personal
Dignity, but with the loss of our Laws and Lives too. I would to God the King
knew how well this House does love him.

The Tenth Speech by an Honorable Gentleman.
Consider whether the Dis-inheriting of a lawful Prince be Injustice or not; or
whether we ought not rather to trust to the Providence of Almighty God.

The Eleventh Speech by an Honorable Gentleman.
I should be glad the last Gentleman would make it good, that we are to trust
to the Providence of Almighty God, rather than do, as he supposes, an unlawful
Act; but can he prove it unlawful; can the King, Lords and Commons do an
unlawful Act? must we not have a Supreme Power? But to hint it to something, is
to say, it is not Supreme; was there not Machinations every year against Queen
Elizabeth, but she took away the Scotch Queen. I wonder we have this Answer,
till I consider who is at the Kings Ear, and have had an Interest carried on so
long. The denial of this, is the denial of every thing; you see where there are
diverse Medicines, yet but one conducing to the end; you shall have a Popish
King, if that be allowed, with Power to compel and corrupt you, you shall have
what you will to protect you, but you shall be under the power of one to
destroy you. The Frogs must have a Government, but they must have a Stork for
their King. Samson's Locks will be grown again by that time he comes in; There
is a Lion in the Lobby, keep him out say I, no says some, open the Door, we
will chain him when he is come in: Would you have a King that would neither
court you nor protect you; you would have a Parliament to make Judges and
Bishops, then sure the Long-House will be Jure divino; you can have no Security
under the Copes of Heaven without this Bill.

A Copy of the Duke of YORK 's Bill.
WHereas James Duke of York is notoriously known to have been perverted from
the Protestant to the Popish Religion; whereby not only great Encouragement
has been given to the Popish Party to enter into, and carry on most Devilish
and Horrid Plots and Conspiracies for the Destruction of His Majesty's Sacred
Person and Government, and for the Extirpation of the True Protestant Religon:
But also if the said Duke should succeed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm;
nothing is more manifest than that a Total Change of Religion within these
Kingdoms would ensue. For the Preservation whereof, Be it Enacted by the King's
Most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled,
and by the Authority of the same; That the said James Duke of York shall be,
and is by the Authority of this present Parliament, Excluded, and made for ever
incapable to Inherit, Possess or Enjoy the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and of
the Kingdoms of Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories to them, or either
of them belonging, or to have, exercise or enjoy any Dominion, Power,
Jurisdiction or Authority in the same Kingdoms, Dominions, or any of them. And
be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the said James Duke
of York shall at any time hereafter, challenge, claim, or attempt to possess,
or enjoy, or shall take upon him to use or exercise any Dominion, Power, or
Authority, or Jurisdiction within the said Kingdoms, or Dominions, or any of
them, as King or Chief Magistrate of the same; That then he the said James Duke
of York, for every such Offense, shall be deemed and adjudged guilty of High
Treason; and shall suffer the Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures, as in case of
High Treason: And further, That if any Person or Persons whatever shall assist
or maintain, abett, or willingly adhere unto the said James Duke of York, in
such challenge, claim or attempt; or shall of themselves attempt, or endeavor
to put or bring the said James Duke of York into the Possession or Exercise of
any Regal Power, Jurisdiction or Authority within the Kingdoms and Dominions
aforesaid; or shall by Writing or Preaching, advisedly publish, maintain or
declare, That he has any Right, Title or Authority to the Office of King or
Chief Magistrate of the Kingdoms and Dominions aforesaid, that then every such
Person shall be deemed and adjudged guilty of High Treason; and that he suffer
and undergo the Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That he the said James
Duke of York shall not at any time, from, and after the Fifth of November 1680,
return or come into, or within any of the Kingdoms or Dominions aforesaid; And
then he the said James Duke of York shall be deemed and adjudged guilty of High
Treason; and shall suffer the Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures as in case of
High Treason; And further, That if any Person or Persons whatsoever shall be
aiding or assisting unto such Return of the said James Duke of York, That then
every such Person shall be deemed and adjudged guilty of High Treason; and
shall suffer as in Cases of High Treason.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That he the said James
Duke of York, or any other Person being guilty of any of the Treasons
aforesaid, shall not be capable of, or receive Benefit by any Pardon, otherwise
than by Act of Parliament, wherein they shall be particularly named; and that
no Nole prosequi, or Order for stay of Proceedings shall be received or allowed
in, or upon any Indictment for any of the Offenses mentioned in this Act.

And be it further Enacted and Declared; And it is hereby Enacted and Declared,
That it shall and may be lawful to, and for any Magistrates, Officers and other
Subjects whatsoever of these Kingdoms and Dominions aforesaid; and they are
hereby enjoined and required to apprehend and secure the said James Duke of
York, and every other Person offending in any of the Premises, and with him or
them in case of Resistance to fight, and him or them by Force to subdue: For
all which Actings, and for so doing, they are, and shall be by virtue of this
Act saved harmless and indemnified.

Provided, and it is hereby Declared, That nothing in this Act contained, shall
be construed, deemed or adjudged to disenable any other Person from inheriting
and enjoying the Imperial Crown of the Realms and Dominions aforesaid; (other
than the said James Duke of York.) But that in case the said James Duke of York
should survive his now Majesty, and the Heirs of his Majesty's Body; The said
Imperial Crown shall descend to, and be enjoyed by such Person or Person
successarily during the Life of the said James Duke of York, as should have
inherited and enjoyed the same in case the said James Duke of York were
naturally dead, any thing contained in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That during the Life of
the said James Duke of York, this Act shall be given in charge at every Assizes
and General Sessions of the Peace within the Kingdoms, Dominions and
Territories aforesaid; and also shall be openly Read in every Cathedral Church,
and Parish Church, and Chapels within the aforesaid Kingdoms, Dominions and
Territories, by the several respective Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and Readers
thereof, who are hereby required immediately after Divine Service in the
Fore-noon to read the same twice in every year, that is to say, on the 25th. of
December, and upon Easter Day, during the Life of the said James Duke of York.

This BILL was Read Three Times, and Passed, and sent up to the Lords for their
Concurrence.

Some particular Matters of Fact relating to the Administration of Affairs in
Scotland under the Duke of LAUDERDALE.
Humbly offered to Your Majesty's Consideration, in Obedience to Your Royal
Commands.
1. THE Duke of Lauderdale did grossly misrepresent to your Majesty the
Condition of the Western Countries, as if they had been in a state of
Rebellion, though there had never been any opposition made to your Majesty's
Authority, nor any Resistance offered to your Forces, nor to the execution of
the Laws. But he purposing to abuse your Majesty, that so he might carry on his
sinistrous Designs by your Authority, advised your Majesty to raise an Army
against your peaceable Subjects; at least did frame a Letter, which he sent to
your Majesty to be signed by your Royal Hand to that effect; which being sent
down to your Council, Orders was thereupon given out for raising an Army of
Eight or Nine thousand men, the greatest part whereof were Highblanders; and
notwithstanding that, to avert threatening, the Nobility and Gentry of that
Country did send to Edinburgh, and for the security of the Peace did offer to
engage, that whatsoever should be sent to put the Laws in execution, should
meet with no affront; and that they would become Hostages for their safety: yet
this Army was marched and led into a peaceable Country, and did take free
Quarters according to their Commissions, and in most places levied great Sums
of Money, under notion of dry Quarters, and did plunder and rob your Subjects;
of which no redress could be obtained, though Complaints were frequently made:
all which were expressly contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom.

2. In their Quarters it was apparent that regard was only had to the Dukes
private Animosities; for the greatest part of those places that were most
quartered on and destroyed, had not been guilty of the Field-Conventicles
complained of, and many of the places that were most guilty were spared upon
private Considerations.

3. The Subjects at that time were required to subscribe an exorbitant and
illegal Bond, which was impossible to be performed by them; that they, their
Wives and Children and Servants should live orderly according to Law, not go to
Conventicles, or entertain vagrant Preachers, with several other particulars;
by which Bond, those that signed it were made liable for every Man's fault that
lived upon their Ground.

4. Your Majesty's Subjects were charged with Laborrows denounced Rebels; and
Captions were issued out for seizing their persons upon their refusing to sign
the aforesaid Bond: and the Nobility and Gentry there who have ever been
faithful to your Majesty, and had appeared in Arms for suppressing the last
Rebellion, were disarmed upon Oath. A Proclamation was also issued, forbidding
them upon great Penalty to keep any Horses above four Pounds ten groats price.

5. The Nobility and Gentry of the Shire of Air were also indicted at the
instance of your Majesty's Advocate of very high Crimes and Misdemeanors:
whereof some did import Treason. These Indictments were delivered them in the
Evening, to be answered by them the next Morning upon Oath: and when they did
demand two or three days time to consider of their Indictments, and crave the
benefit of Lawyers to advise with in matters of so high concernment; and also
excepted to their being put to swear against themselves in matters that were
Capital, which was contrary to all Law and Justice; those their desires were
rejected, though the like had never been done to the greatest Malefactor in the
Kingdom. And it was told them, they must either swear instantly, or they would
repute them guilty and proceed accordingly.

6. The Noblemen and Gentlemen knowing themselves innocent of all that had been
surmised against them, did purge themselves by Oath of all the particulars that
were objected to them, and were thereupon acquitted. And though the Committee
of the Council used the severest manner of enquiry to discover any Seditious or
Treasonable Designs, which were pretended as the grounds of leading in that
Army into those Countries; yet nothing could ever be proved: so false was that
Suggestion concerning a Rebellion then designed that was offered to your
Majesty, and prevailed with you for sending the aforementioned Letter.

7. The Oppressions and Quarterings still continued. The Noblemen and Gentry of
those Countries went to Edinburgh to present to your Council the heavy Pressure
that they and their people lay under, and were ready to offer to them all that
in Law or Reason could be required of them for securing the peace. The Council
did immediately upon their appearing there, set forth a Proclamation requiring
them to depart the Town within three days upon all highest pains: and when the
Duke of Hamilton did petition for leave to stay two three or days longer for
some very urgent Affairs, that was refused him.

8. When some Persons of Quality had declared to the Duke of Lauderdale that
they would go to represent their condition to your Majesty, if they could not
have Justice from your Ministers; for preventing that, a Proclamation was set
forth, forbidding all the Subjects to depart the Kingdom without License; that
so your Majesty might not be acquainted with the said condition of your
Subjects from making their application to your Majesty, no less contrary to
your Majesty's true Interest (who must always be the Refuge of his People) than
to the natural right of the Subject.

The former Particulars relate to the Invasion of the Rights of great numbers
of your Subjects all at once. What follow, have indeed only fallen on some
single persons; yet are such, that your whole People apprehend they may be all
upon the slightest occasions brought under the like Mischiefs.

1. The Council has upon many occasions proceeded to a new kind of Punishment,
of declaring men incapable of all public Trust; concerning which your Majesty
may remember what Complaints the said Duke made, when during the Earl of
Middleton's Administration, he himself was put under, and incapacitated by an
Act of Parliament. The Words of his Paper against the Earl of Middleton are
[Uncapacitating] was to whip with Scorpions, a punishment to rob men of their
Honor, and to lay a lasting stain upon them and their Posterity. And if this
was complained of, when done by the highest Court of Parliament, your Majesty
may easily conclude, it cannot be done in any lower Court. But yet
notwithstanding it is become of late years an ordinary Sentence in Council,
when the least Complaints are brought against any, with whom the Duke of
Lauderdale and his Brother are offended.

Instances of this are:

The declaring Thirteen worthy Citizens of Edinburgh incapable of public
Trust, against whom no Complaint was ever made to this day. as your Majesty
will perceive by a Paper more fully concerning that Affair. The true cause of
it was, that those men being in the Magistracy, that Duke and his Brother could
not get a vast Bribe from them out of the Towns-money, which was afterward
obtained when they were removed.

The Provost of Glascow, Aberdeen and Jadburgh were put under the same
Sentence, for signing a Letter to your Majesty in the Convention of the
Buroughs with the rest of that Body, which Letter was advised by him who is
now your Majesty's Advocate, as that which had nothing in it which could bring
them under any guilt; and yet those three were singled out of the whole number,
and incapacitated, besides an high Fine and long Imprisonment, as to your
Majesty will more fully appear by another Paper.

Sir Patrick Holme of Polworth being sent by the Shire of Berwick to complain
of some illegal Proceedings, and to obtain a legal remedy to them, which he did
only in the common Form of Law, was also declared incapable of public Trust,
besides many months Imprisonment.

The Provost of Linlythgo being complained of for not furnishing some of your
Forces with Baggage Horses, was called before the Council, and because he said
they were not bound in Law to furnish Horses in such manner, he was immediately
declared incapable of public Trust, and was both fined and imprisoned.

There are also fifty of the Town of St. Johnstons incapacitated upon a very
slight pretense, so that it is very impossible for them to find a sufficient
number of Citizens for the Magistracy of that Town.

2. Your Subjects are sometimes upon slight, and sometimes upon no grounds
imprisoned, and often kept Prisoners many Months and years, nothing being
objected to them, and are required to enter themselves Prisoners; which is
contrary to Law. It was in the former Article expressed, that many of these
Persons declared incapable of public Trust, did also suffer Imprisonment; and
besides these instances, Lieutenant General Drummond, (whose eminent Loyalty
and great Services are well known to your Majesty,) was required to enter
himself Prisoner in the Castle of Dunbarton, where he was kept one year and a
half; and was made a close Prisoner for nine months of that time, and yet
nothing was ever objected to him to this day to justify that Usage.

The Lord Cardross was for his Ladies keeping two Conventicles in her own House
(at which he was not present) fined 110 l. and has now been kept prisoner four
years in the Castle of Edenburg, where he still remains; although he has often
petitioned for his Liberty; and Sir Patrick Holme has been now a second time
almost one year, and nothing is yet laid to his charge.

Besides these illegal Imprisonments, the Officers of your Majesty's Forces
frequently carry Warrants with them for apprehending persons that are under no
legal Censure, nor have been so much as cited to appear; which has put many of
your Subjects under great fears, especially upon what was done in Council three
years ago: Captain Carstairs (a man now well enough known to your Majesty) did
entrap one Kirkton, an outed Minister, into his Chamber at Edinburgh, and did
violently abuse him; and designed to have extorted some money from him: The
noise of this coming to the Ears of one Baily, Brother-in-law to the said
Kirkton, he came to the house, and hearing him cry Murder, Murder, forced open
the Chamber door, where he found his Brother-in-law and the Captain grapling;
the Captain pretended to have a Warrant against Kirkton, and Baily desired him
to show it, and promised, that all obedience should be given to it: But the
Captain refusing to do it, Kirkton was rescued. This was only delivering a man
from the hands of a Robber, which Nature obliges all men to do; especially
when joined with so near a Relation. The Captain complained of this to the
Council, and the Lord Hatton with others were appointed to examine the
Witnesses: And when it was brought before the Council, the Duke of Hamilton,
Earls of Mereton, Dumfrize and Kinkarden, the Lord Cocheren, and Sir Archibald
Primrose, then Lord Register, desired, that the Report of the Examination might
be read; but that not serving their ends, was denied. And thereupon those Lords
delivered their Opinion, that fithence Carstares did not show any Warrant, nor
was clothed with any public Character, it was no opposing of your Majesty's
Authority in Baily, so to rescue the said Kirkton; yet Baily was for this fined
in 6000. Marks, and kept long a Prisoner.

Those Lords were upon that so represented to your Majesty, that by the Duke of
Lauderdale's procurement, they were turned out of the Council, and all command
of the Militia. And it can be made appear, that the Captain had at that time no
Warrant at all against Kirkton, but procured it after the Violence committed:
And it was ante-dated, on design to serve a turn at that time. This manner of
Proceedings has ever since put your subjects under sad apprehensions.

There is one particular further offered to your Majesty's consideration,
concerning their way of using Prisoners.

There were 14 men taken at a Field Conventicle, who without being legally
Convict of that or any other crimes, were secretly and in the night taken out
of Prison upon a Warrant signed by the Earl of Lynlythgo, and the Lord Hatton
and Collington, and were delivered to Captain Maytland, who had been Page to
the Duke of Lauderdale, but was then a French Officer, and was making his
Levies in Scotland, and were carried over to the service of the French King in
the year 1676.

3. The Council has upon many occasions, proceeded to most unreasonable and
Arbitrary Fines, either for slight offenses, or for offenses where the Fine is
regulated by Law, which they have never considered, when the persons were not
acceptable to them: So the Lord Cardross was Fined in 1111 l. for his Ladies
keeping two Conventicles in his house, and Christning a Child by an outed
Minister without his knowledge. The Provost formerly mentioned, and Baily with
many more, were also fined without any regard to Law.

The Council has at several times proceeded to the taking of Gentlemen's
Dwelling-houses from them, and putting Garrisons in them, which in time of
peace is contrary to Law. In the year 75. It was designed against twelve of
your Majesty's Subjects, and was put in Execution in the houses of the Earl of
Calender, the Lord Cardrosse, the Lady Lumsden, etc. and was again attempted in
the year 78. the Houses belonging to the Leirds of Cosnock, Blagan, and Rowal,
and were possessed by Soldiers, and declared Garrisons. Nor did it rest there,
but Orders were sent from the Council, requiring the Countries about those
Houses, to furnish them for the Soldiers use, and to supply them with
necessaries, much contrary to Law. It was against this, that Sir Patrick Holme
came to desire a remedy; and common Justice being denied him, he used a legal
Protestation in the ordinary Form of Law, and was thereupon kept for many
Months a Prisoner, and declared incapable of all public trust, etc.

There is another particular, which because it is so odious, is unwillingly
touched: yet it is necessary to inform your Majesty about it; for thereby it
will appear, that the Duke of Lauderdale and his Brother have in a most solemn
manner broken the public faith that was given in your Majesty's name.

One Mitchel being put in Prison upon great suspicion of his having attempted
to murder the late Arch Bishop of St. Andrews, and there being no Evidence
against him, Warrant was given by the Duke of Lauderdale (then your Majesty's
Commissioner) and your Council to promise him his life if he would confess;
Whereupon he did confess, and yet some years after, that person, who indeed
deserved many deaths, if there had been any other Evidence against him, was
upon that confession, convicted of the Crime, and the Duke of Lauderdale and
his Brother being put to it by him, did swear, that they never gave or knew of
any assurance of life given him: And when it was objected, that the promise was
upon Record in the Council books, the Duke of Lauderdale did in open Court,
where he was present only as a Witness, and so ought to have been silent,
threaten them, if they should proceed to the Examination of that Act of
Council, which, as he then said, might infer perjury on them that swore: and so
did cut off the proof of that defense, which had been admitted by the Court as
good in Law, and sufficient to save the Prisoner, if proved. Thus was that man
hanged upon that Confession only, though the promise that drew it from him,
does appear upon Record, and can be proved by good and clear Evidence. And from
this your Majesty may judge, what credit may be given to such men.

We do not at present enlarge on other particulars, though of great importance;
such as Monopolies, selling places of Honors, turning men of known integrity
out of their Employments, to which they had a good and just right during their
lives: the profits of one of the most considerable of these, being sequestered
for sometime, and applied for the Duchess of Lauderdales use: the treating
about, and receiving of great bribes by the Duke and Duchess of Lauderdale,
and the Lord Hatton, and particularly from the Towns of Edenborough, Abberdeen,
Lynlythgo, and many others, for procuring from your Majesty Warrants for
illegal impositions within these Towns: the manifest and public perverting of
Justice in the Session: besides the most signal abuses of the Mint and Copper
Coin, that are most grievous to all your Subjects. But the number of these is
so great, and they will require so many Witnesses, to be brought hither for
proving them, that we fear it would too much trouble your Majesty now to
examine them all: but your Majesty shall have a full account of them afterward.

One thing is humbly offered to your Majesty, as the root of these and many
other oppressions, which is, that the Method of governing that Kingdom for
several years has been, That the Lord Hatton and his adherents frame any
Letter that they desire from your Majesty to your Council, and send it to the
Duke of Lauderdale, who returns it signed; and this is brought to the Council:
upon which if at any time a debate arises concerning the matter of that
Letter, as being against or with Law; and when it is proposed, that a
representation of that should be made to your Majesty; then the Lord Hatton in
his insolent way, calls to have it put to the question, as if it were a crime
to have any Warrant either debated or represented to your Majesty, which is
procured by the Duke of Lauderdale or himself; and this is ecchoed by his
Party, and by this means any further debating is stopped.

There are some other particulars relating to these heads, that are to be
offered to your Majesty in other Papers, which are not added here, lest your
Majesty should now be troubled with too long a Paper.

The Impeahment of the Duke and Duchess of Lauderdale, with their Brother My
Lord Hatton, Presented to His Majesty by the City of Edenbourgh. The matters of
Fact particularly relating to the Town of Edenbourgh, humbly offered for your
Majesty's Information. Before the Matter of Fact be spoken to, it is necessary
that your Majesty be informed of one thing upon which this whole Affair has
moved.
THe City of Edenbourgh had at several times given considerable sums of Money
to the Duke of Lauderdale, amounting to upward of Twelve Thousand pounds
Sterlin, and the Lord Hatton, Brother to the said Duke, being enraged by that
their former practice, and being arrived to great height and influence in the
Administration of Your Majesty's Affairs in Scotland, did thereupon resolve on
a Design of getting Money for himself also from them, as will appear to your
Majesty by the following Narration; but the Magistrates at that time, and such
others as had then the Principal Influence in the Administration of Affairs in
that Town, being honest Men of good Fortunes, and not to be brought to comply
with his Design, he bethought himself of all ways to vex them; and knowing they
did much value the Prosperity of the Town, he thought that the first means for
promoting that his Design, was to have them threatened with removing Your
Majesty's Public Judicatures from that City to Sterlin, and persuaded his
Brother the Duke of Lauderdale to move Your Majesty to that purpose; but being
disappointed of that project by Your Majesty's Royal Wisdom, Your Majesty
looking upon it as if it were to declare to the World that You were jealous of
so great a Part of that Your Ancient Kingdom, he bethought himself of new ways
to accomplish his Design, for which he judged nothing so proper and effectual,
as to disturb them in the choice of their Magistrates and Town-Counsel; and by
all means possible to get some of his own choosing, fit for his own ends,
brought into the Administration of the Affairs of that City. In order to which,
being impatient of any longer delay, he laid hold of what follows, being the
first occasion that offered, though a very frivolous one.

At Michaclmas 1674, The said City of Edenbourgh being to go about the Election
of their Magistrates for the ensuing year, there was procured a Letter from
Your Majesty to Your Privy Counsel, commanding them to forbid the Magistrates
and Town Counsel to proceed in their Elections, but to continue the Magistrates
that then were, till Your Majesty's further pleasure should be known; the
reason suggested to Your Majesty for it, was taken from this Circumstance, That
the Election ought to be made upon the Tuesday after Michaelmas, and (it
happening this year that Michaelmas fell to be on a Tuesday) they were resolved
to proceed to their Elections upon Michaelmas-day.

Though this was a very small Matter, and upon very good and prudent
Considerations, resolved, as will afterward appear, yet was it represented to
Your Majesty as a Factious Design, and an Innovation of dangerous Consequence,
tending to create and maintain Faction in that City, contrary to Your Majesty's
Service. Your Majesty's foresaid Letter being intimated to the Magistrates and
Town-Counsel, they did immediately give exact obedience to the same.

They did also represent to Your Majesty's Privy Council, the Rights that they
had for choosing their own Magistrates, which had been granted to them by many
of Your Majesty's Royal Ancestors, and confirmed by many Parliaments; by virtue
of which they humbly conceived they ought to be suffered to proceed in their
Elections.

They did also represent to Your Majesty's Privy Council, the Reasons which had
moved them to resolve of making their Elections on the said Tuesday, being
Michaelmas day, which in short were, that by their Constitution they were
obliged upon the Friday before Michaelmas to make the List out of which the
Magistrates are to be chosen; after the doing of which there is a Surcease and
Vacation of all ordinary Courts of Judicature within the Town, and the whole
time is spent by the Common People and Tradesmen of the Town, in Rioting and
Drinking, until the Elections be finished, which in this case would have been
Twelve days; which they did in Prudence think they ought to shorten, not
conceiving it contrary in the least to the established Rules of their Election.

2. On these things they did humbly crave Your Majesty's Privy Council would be
pleased to represent to Your Majesty, that thereby they might be freed from the
suspicion of any Factious Design, with which they were charged by the said
Letter.

This being, through the Influence of the Lord Hatton, refused by the Privy
Council, they dispatched a Gentleman to the Duke of Lauderdale, with Letters
and Instructions full of Respect and Submission to his Grace.

The Gentleman at his first arrival found Duke Lauderdale very kind, and was
made believe he should be quickly dispatched with Answers according to his
Desire; but some Delays having fallen in, the Duke of Lauderdale fell likewise
upon thoughts of getting Money from the Town upon this occasion, and therefore
pretending still more and more kindness to the said Gentleman; he did first by
some Insinuations let fall to him his expectation, and at last flatly asked him
if he had not brought a heavy Purse with him; which when he understood, he was
not to expect, he changed his Method, and grew harsher; and having detained him
Five or Six Weeks, he the said Duke entered into Consultation with his old
Friend Sir Andrew Ramsey, how to order the Affair. By his Advice he did write a
Letter and sent Proposals to the said Town, That they should give Bond and
Security, That the Townsmen should live regularly as to all matters
Ecclesiastical in the largest extent, as the same is determined by the late
Acts of Parliament; and to keep the Town free of all sorts of Tumults, either
of Man or Woman: Judging that this was impossible for them to perform, and
unfavourable to attempt, and that therefore it would oblige them to make offers
of Money.

This Letter was all the Gentleman could obtain, and having gone back to
Scotland and delivered it to the Magistrates, they were so far from being
carried in the Design, that they were glad of that opportunity to witness their
Zeal to serve Your Majesty; for they did very heartily comply with what was
proposed concerning the Bonds and Securities demanded; and immediately urged
that Your Majesty's Ofcers and Lawyers would cause draw such Bonds and
Securities as was fit for the purpose; offering good Security for great sums
of Money for the performance. But this not being the thing truly intended,
their ready Compliance with it, set them yet farther off from their desired
Settlement, and served for no other intent than to cause the Lord Hatton to
double his diligence to find out new means to mollest them; to which end it was
alleged by him, that they had of old forfeited their Privileges and Liberties
by some great Misdemeanour, and that therefore they had not right to choose
their own Magistrates, for which he would needs have their Records searched;
and accordingly they themselves, with their Books and Records, were in a most
unusual manner brought often before him and his Friends, though they had not
Authority for it, to the great Disturbance and Annoyance of the Citizens, by
being abundantly jealous of their Liberties, were with no small care kept
within the due Bounds of Moderation, by the Loyalty and Vigilance of their
Magistrates.

They the said Magistrates, finding how they were used at home by the Lord
Hatton, did again apply themselves to the Duke of Lauderdale, both by private
Letters to the Duke of Lauderdale and his Duchess, from some of the most
eminent of them, full of Assurances of particular Respect to their Graces, and
by a public Letter to him from the whole Town-Council, offering Bond and
Security to him in the terms proposed by his forementioned Letter. But this
could not prevail, it being objected to them, from some frivolous things the
Lord Hatton had scraped together out of their old Records, that they had lost
their Liberties, and that the right of choosing their Magistrates did no more
belong to them.

Then did they produce their Charters, and did convincingly clear all Mistakes,
and evidently make appear that the right of choosing their own Magistrates did
remain to them undoubtedly and entirely.

All these things being cleared and open, they expected to be restored to the
free exercise of their Election in their accustomed manner. They were still
kept off with Delays, until the Lord Hatton, in pursuance of his Design, fell
a practicing with some few of themselves, who did undertake with his
assistance, to get such Elected as were fit for his ends; whereupon he writes
to his Brother the Duke of Lauderdale to move Your Majesty for a Letter, and
accordingly the Letter was procured from Your Majesty upon the Seventh of
August 75; wherein Your Majesty, after reciting Your former Orders in that
Affair, did declare, that You were well informed of their Obedience to Your
Commands, and of their dutiful Carriage in Your Concerns; and therefore
ordained them, the next day after the Receipt of the Letter, to convene their
whole Council, after their accustomed manner, and out of the Lists already
made, to Elect the Lord Provost, Bailies, and other Officers.

According to which Letter, they did the next day proceed to their Elections,
but instead of those whom the Lord Hatton expected they would have chosen, they
did Elect some men of good Fortunes and Integrity, not at all fit for his
purpose (these who had engaged to him not being men of that esteem or influence
as to be able to carry his Design as they had undertaken.)

The new Magistrates and Council, did immediately after their Election,
acquaint Your Majesty with their Procedure, and gave Your Majesty great
Acknowledgments and Assurances of their care of the Peace of the Town, and of
Your Majesty's Service in all Matters, both Ecclesiastical and Civil.

The said Lord Hatton being exceedingly enraged at this Act of theirs, did by
Advice of Sir George Mackynge, now Your Majesty's Advocate, send a Letter to
the Duke of Lauderdale; to which he procured Your Majesty's Hand upon the 25th
of the same month of August, by which Your Majesty ordered Your Privy Council
to intimate to the Magistrates and Town-Council, that it was Your Royal
Pleasure that there should be turned out of the Town-Council and declared
incapable of any Public Trust in the said Town, Twelve of the most eminent of
the same Men with whom your Majesty had expressed your self so well pleased, and
whose Actings your Majesty had approved, by your Letter of the Seventh of the
said Month.

This was accordingly executed by the Privy Council, without ever so much as
calling before them the said Persons, though great Crimes were laid to their
Charge, as being Factious Persons, and mis-representing your Majesty's
Proceedings, without mentioning any particular Fact of theirs which could
import any such Crime. And though they be threatened by the said Letter to be
pursued for these great Crimes, and that your Majesty's Advocate is commanded
in the same to insist against them, yet could they never obtain from your
Majesty's Privy Council that they should be tried for these things, though by a
Petition signed by the whole Twelve, they did represent the great Prejudice
they sustained both in their Reputation and Trade, by being kept under such
Threatenings; and therefore did humbly offer themselves to the strictest and
severest Trial. To which Petition they never received any Answer.

To make appear to your Majesty that these things were done for private and
finistrous Designs, and not upon account of the ill effectedness, or factious
Dispositions of the Men, as was pretended; Your Majesty is humbly prayed to
take notice of these Particulars following.

First, There are three of the most considerable of these very Persons who had
been charged with so great Crimes, admitted since that time, by bribing the
Duchess of Lauderdale, into a Trust in your Majesty's Affairs in Scotland,
more eminent and considerable than any Trust the Town of Edinburgh can confer,
viz. The paying off your Majesty's Forces, and bringing in your Majesty's
Excise.

Secondly, No sooner were these Twelve Men turned out of the Town-Council, but
after many great and essential Informalities (with the recital of which it is
needless to trouble your Majesty) they elected for Magistrates Men of no
Reputation, either for Parts, Estate, or Honesty: And though these Bonds and
Securities, which had been demanded from the others, and consented to by them,
was formerly pretended to be of great importance for your Majesty's Service,
yet they were not so much as once demanded, either by the Duke of Lauderdale,
or the Lord Hatton, from these Men who were now chosen.

Thirdly, These new Magistrates were not long in their Seats, when off comes
the Mask, and the true design of getting Money appears. For by an Act of the
Town-Council there is about 5000 l. Sterlin disposed on amongst their nameless
Friends, which were the Duke of Lauderdale, the Lord Hatton, and some other of
their Friends. A great Sum to be got from that City, considering that the Duke
of Lauderdale had got before that about 12000 l. Sterlin from them.

The Duchess of Lauderdale, did also since that time endeavor to get more
Money from them, and did with great Wrath threaten the Magistrates in plain
Terms, for not giving her a Present, notwithstanding all the Good she said she
had done for them, reckoning the Favors your Majesty has at any time been
pleased to bestow upon them, as done by her self.

Thus has that poor Town been abused, and does now lie, having Magistrates
without either Conduct or Courage, in a time when the Disorders of that Nation
does require Persons to be employed there of eminent Fidelity and Capacity to
serve your Majesty.

His Majesty's Declaration for the Dissolution of his late Privy Council, And
for Constituting a New one, made in the Council Chamger at White- Hall, April
the twentieth, 1679.
By His Majesty's Special Command.
My Lords,
HIS Majesty has called you together at this time, to communicate unto you a
Resolution he has taken in a matter of great Importance to his Crown and
Government, and which he hopes will prove of the greatest Satisfaction and
Advantage to his Kingdoms in all Affairs hereafter, both at Home and Abroad;
and therefore he doubts not of your Approbation, however you may seem concerned
in it.

In the first place, His Majesty gives you all Thanks for your Service to him
here, and for all the good Advices you have given him, which might have been
more frequent, if the great number of this Council had not made it unfit for
the Secrecy and Dispatch that are necessary in many great Affairs. This forced
him to use a smaller number of your in a Foreign Committee, and sometimes the
Advices of some few among them (upon such Occasions) for many Years past. He is
sorry for the ill success he has found in this Course, and sensible of the ill
Posture of Affairs from that, and some unhappy Accidents, which have raised
great Jealousies and Dissatisfaction among his good Subjects, and thereby left
the Crown and Government in a Condition too weak for those Dangers we have
reason to fear both at home and abroad.

These his Majesty hopes may be yet prevented by a Course of wise and steady
Counsels for the future, and these Kingdoms grow again to make such a Figure as
they have formerly done in the World, and as they may always do, if our Union
and Conduct were equal to our Force. To this end he has resolved to lay aside
the use he may have hitherto made of any single Ministry or private Advices, or
Foreign Committees for the general direction of his Affairs, and to constitute
such a Privy Council, as may not only by its number be fit for the Consultation
and Digestion of all business both Domestic and Foreign, but also by the
Choice of them out of the several Parts this State is composed of, may be the
best informed in the true Constitutions of it, and thereby the most able to
counsel him in all the Affairs and Interests of this Crown and Nation. And by
the constant Advice of such a Council, his Majesty is resolved hereafter to
govern his Kingdoms; together with the frequent use of his Great Council of
Parliament, which he takes to be the true ancient Constitution of this State
and Government.

Now for the greater Dignity of this Council, his Majesty resolves their
constant number shall be limited to that of Thirty. And for their greater
Authority, there shall be Fifteen of his chief Officers who shall be Privy
Counselors by their places. And for the other Fifteen, he will choose Ten out
of the several Ranks of the Nobility, and Five Commoners of the Realm, whose
known Abilities, Interest and Esteem in the Nation, shall render them without
all suspicion of either mistaking or betraying the true Interests of the
Kingdom, and consequently of advising him ill.

In the first place therefore, and to take care of the Church, his Majesty will
have the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Bishop of London for the time being; and
to inform him well in what concerns the Laws, the Lord Chancellor, and one of
the Lord Chief Justices; For the Navy and Stores (wherein consists the chief
Strength and Safety of the Kingdom) the Admiral and Master of the Ordnance; for
the Treasury, the Treasurer and Chancellor of the Exchequer (or whenever any of
these Charges are in Commission, then the first Commissioner to serve here in
their room) the rest of the Fifteen, shall be the Lord Privy Seal, the Master
of the Horse, Lord Steward and Lord Chamberlain of his Household, the Groom of
the Stole, and the two Secretaries of State. And these shall be all the Offices
of his Kingdom to which the Dignity of Privy-Counsellor shall be annexed. The
others his Majesty has resolved, and hopes he has not chosen ill. His Majesty
intends besides, to have such Princes of his Blood as he shall at any time call
to this Board, being here in Court. A President of the Council whenever he
shall find it necessary, and the Secretary of Scotland, when any such shall be
here. But these being uncertain, he reckons not of the constant number of
Thirty, which shall never be exceeded.

To make way for this new Council, his Majesty has now resolved to Dissolve
this old one, and does hereby Dissolve it, and from this time excuses your
farther attendance here, but with his repeated Thanks for your Service
hitherto, and with the assurance of his Satisfaction in you so far, that he
should not have parted with you, but to make way for this new Constitution,
which he takes to be, as to the Number and Choice, the most proper and
necessary for the uses he intends them. And as most of you have Offices in his
Service, and all of you particular Shares in his Favor and good Opinion, so he
desires you will continue to exercise and deserve them, with the same Diligence
and good Affections that you have hitherto done, and with confidence of his
Majesty's Kindness to you, and of those Testimonies you shall receive of it
upon other occasions.

Therefore upon the present Dissolution of this Council, his Majesty appoints
and commands all those Officers he has named, to attend him here to morrow at
Nine in the Morning, as his Privy Council, together with those other Persons he
designs to make up the number, and to each of whom he has already signed
particular Letters to that purpose, and commands the Lord Chancellor to see
them issued out accordingly, which is the Form he intends to use, and that
hereafter they shall be signed in Council, so that nothing may be done
unadvisedly in the Choice of any Person to a Charge of so great Dignity and
Importance to the Kingdom.

Names of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
HIS Highness Prince Rupert. William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. Heneage
Lord Finch, Lord Chancellor of England. Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury, Lord
President of the Council. Arthur Earl of Anglesey, Lord Privy Seal. Christopher
Duke of Albemarle. James Duke of Monmouth, Master of the Horse. Henry Duke of
Newcastle. John Duke of Lauderdale, Secretary of State for Scotland. James Duke
of Ormond, Lord Steward of the Household. Charles Lord Marquess of Winchester.
Henry Lord Marquess of Worcester. Henry Earl of Arlington, Lord Chamberlain of
the Household. James Earl of Salisbury. John Earl of Bridgewater. Robert Earl of
Sunderland, one of his Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State. Arthur Earl of
Essex, first Lord Commissioner of the Treasury. John Earl of Bath, Groom of the
Stole. Thomas Lord Viscount Falconberg. George Lord Viscount Hallifax. Henry
Lord Bishop of London. John Lord Roberts. Denzil Lord Holles. William Lord
Russel. William Lord Cavendish. Henry Coventry, Esquire one of his Majesty's
Principal Secretaries of State. Sir Francis North Knight, Lord Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas. Sir Henry Capell, Knight of the Bath, first Commissioner of
the Admiralty. Sir John Ernle Knight, Chancellor of the Exchequer. Sir Thomas
Chicheley Knight, Master of the Ordnance. Sir William Temple Baronet. Edward
Seymour Esquire. Henry Powle Esquire.


Whitehall, April 11. 1679.
HIS Majesty being this day in Council, did cause such of the aforementioned
Lords, and others, who were then present, to be Sworn Privy-Counsellors; which
being done, they took their places accordingly.

His Majesty was also pleased to declare that he intended to make Sir Henry
Capell, Knight of the Bath. Daniel Finch Esquire. Baronets. Sir Thomas Lee, Sir
Humphrey Winch, Sir Thomas Meers,
Edward Vaughan, and Edward Hales. Esquires.
Commmissioners for the Execution of the Office of Lord High Admiral of England.

And his Majesty being afterward come into the House of Peers, in his Royal
Robes, and the House of Commons attending, his Majesty was pleased to make this
Speech,

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Thought it requisite to acquaint you with what I have done now this day;
which is, That I have Established a new Privy Council, the Constant number of
which shall never exceed Thirty.

I have made choice of such Persons as are Worthy and able to Advise Me, and am
Resolved in all My Weighty and Important Affairs, next to the Advice of my
Great Council in Parliament (which I shall very often Consult with) to be
Advised by this Privy Council.

I could not make so great a Change without acquainting both Houses of
Parliament.

And I desire you all to apply your selves heartily, as I shall do, to those
things which are necessary for the good and safety of the Kingdom, and that no
time may be lost in it.

The Message from the King, by Mr. Secretary Jenkins to the Commons, on the 9th
of November. 1680.
CHARLES R.

HIs Majesty desires this House, as well for the satisfaction of His People, as
of Himself, to expedite such Matters as are depending before them, relating to
Popery, and the Plot; and would have them rest assured, That all Remedies they
can tender to his Majesty, conducing to those Ends, shall be very acceptable to
him; Provided they be such as may consist with preserving the Succession of the
Crown in its due and legal course of Descent.

The Address to his Majesty from the Commons, Saturday, November 13. 1680.
May it please your most Excellent Majesty,
WE, Your Majesty's most Loyal and Obedient Subjects, the Commons in this
Present Parliament assembled, having taken into our most serious Consideration
Your Majesty's Gracious Message brought unto us the ninth day of this instant
November, by Mr. Secretary Jenkins, do with all thankfulness acknowledge Your
Majesty's Care and Goodness in inviting us to expedite such Matters as are
depending before us relating to Popery and the Plot. And we do, in all
Humility, represent to Your Majesty, that we are fully convinced that it is
highly incumbent upon us, in discharge both of our Duty to. Your Majesty, and
of that great Trust reposed in us, by those whom we represent, to endeavor, by
the most speedy and effectual ways, the Suppression of Popery within this Your
Kingdom, and the bringing to public Justice all such as shall be found Guilty
of the Horrid and Damnable Popish Plot. And though the Time of our Sitting
(abating what must necessarily be spent in the choosing and presenting a
Speaker, appointing Grand Committees, and in taking the Oaths and Tests
enjoined by Act of Parliament) has not much exceeded a Fortnight; yet we have
in this Time not only made a considerable Progress in some things which to us
seem, and (when presented to Your Majesty in a Parliamentary way) will, we
trust, appear to Your Majesty, to be absolutely necessary for the Safety of
Your Majesty's Person, the effectual Suppression of Popery, and the Security of
the Religion, Lives, and Estates of Your Majesty's Protestant Subjects. But
even in relation to the Trials of the Five Lords impeached in Parliament for
the Execrable Popish Plot, we have so far proceeded, as we doubt not but in a
short time we shall be ready for the same. But we cannot (without being
unfaithful to Your Majesty, and to our Country, by whom we are entrusted) omit,
upon this occasion, humbly to inform Your Majesty, that our Difficulties, even
as to these Trials, are much increased by the evil and destructive Councels of
those Persons who advised Your Majesty, first, to the Prorogation, and then, to
the Dissolution of the last Parliament; at a time when the Commons had taken
great pains about, and were prepared for those Trials. And by the like
pernicious Councels of those who advised the many and long Prorogations of the
present Parliament, before the same was permitted to sit; whereby some of the
Evidence which was prepared in the last Parliament may possibly (during so long
an Interval) be forgotten or lost, and some Persons, who might probably have
come in as Witnesses, are either dead, have been taken off, or may have been
discouraged from giving their Evidence. But of one mischievous Consequence of
those dangerous and unhappy Councels we are certainly and sadly sensible,
namely, That the Testimony of a material Witness against every of those Five
Lords (and who could probably have discovered and brought in much other
Evidence about the Plot in general, and those Lords in particular) cannot now
be given viva voce. Forasmuch as that Witness is unfortunately dead between the
Calling and the Sitting of this Parliament: To prevent the like, or greater
Inconveniences for the future, We make it our most humble Request to Your
Excellent Majesty, that as You tender the Safety of Your Royal Person, the
Security of Your Loyal Subjects, and the Preservation of the True Protestant
Religion, You will not suffer your Self to be prevailed upon by the like
Councels to do any thing which may occasion in consequence (though we are
assured never with Your Majesty's Intention) either the deferring of a full and
perfect Discovery and Examination of this most wicked and detestable Plot, or
the preventing the Conspirators therein from being brought to speedy and
exemplary Justice and Punishment. And we humbly beseech your Majesty to rest
assured (notwithstanding any Suggestions which may be made by persons, who, for
their own wicked purposes, contrive to create a distrust in your Majesty of
Your People,) That nothing is more in the Desires, and shall be more the
Endeavors of us, Your faithful and loyal Commons, than the promoting and
advancing of your Majesty's true Happiness and Greatness.

The Address of the Commons in Parliament to his Majesty, to remove Sir George
Jeffreys out of all Public Offices.
WE your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects the Commons in Parliament
assembled, having received a Complaint against Sir George Jeffreys Knight, your
Majesty's Chief Justice of Chester, and heard the Evidence concerning the same,
and also what he did allege and prove in his Defense. And being thereupon
fully satisfied that the said Sir George Jeffreys, well knowing that many of
your Loyal Protestant Subjects, and particularly those of your Great and Famous
City of London, out of Zeal for the Preservation of the Protestant Religion,
your Majesty's Royal Person and Government, and in hopes to bring the Popish
Conspirators to speedy Justice, were about to Petition to your Majesty in an
Humble, Dutiful and Legal way, for the Sitting of this Parliament, the said Sir
George Jeffreys not regarding his Duty to your Majesty, or the welfare of your
People, did on purpose to serve his own private Ends, and to create a
Misunderstanding between your Majesty and your Good Subjects, though disguised
with pretense of Service to your Majesty, maliciously declared such
Petitioning, sometimes to be Tumultuous, Seditious and Illegal, and at other
times did presume publicly to insinuate and assert, as if your Majesty would
deprive your Citizens of London of their Charters, and diverse other
Privileges, Immunities and Advantages, and also of your Royal Favor in case
they should so Petition, and also did publicly declare that in case they
should so Petition, there should not be any Meeting or Sitting of Parliament,
thereby traducing your Majesty, as if you would not pursue your Gracious
Intentions, the rather because they were grateful to your good Subjects, do, in
most humble manner beseech your Majesty to remove the said Sir George Jeffreys
out of the said Place of Chief Justice of Chester, and out of all other Public
Offices and Employments under your Majesty.

His Majesty by Mr. Secretary Jenkins was pleased to return Answer to this
Address, That he would consider of it.

His Majesty's Message to the Commons in Parliament, Relating to Tangier.
CHARLES REX.

HIs Majesty did in His Speech, at the opening of this Session, desire the
Advice and Assistance of His Parliament, in relation to Tangier: The Condition
and Importance of the Place obliges His Majesty to put this House in mind
again, that He relies upon them for the support of it, without which it cannot
be much longer Preserved. His Majesty does therefore very earnestly Recommend
Tangier again to the due and speedy Consideration and Care of this House.

The Humble Address of the Commons in Parliament assembled, Presented to His
Majesty, Monday 29th. day of November 1680. in Answer to that Message.
May it please your Most Excellent Majesty,
WE Your Majesty's most Obedient and Loyal Subjects, The Commons in Parliament
Assembled, having with all Duty and Regard taken into our serious Consideration
Your Majesty's late Massage relation to Tangier, cannot but account the present
Condition of it, as Your Majesty is Pleased to represent in Your said Message,
(after so vast a Treasure expended to make it Useful) not only as one
Infelicity more added to the afflicted Estate of Your Majesty's Faithful and
Loyal Subjects, but as one result also of the same Councels and Designs which
have brought Your Majesty's Person, Crown and Kingdoms into those great and
imminent Dangers, with which at this day they are surrounded; And we are the
less surprised to hear of the Exigencies of Tangier, when we remember that
since it became a part of Your Majesty's Dominions, it has several times been
under the Command of Popish Governors, (particularly for some time under the
Command of a Lord Impeached, and now Prisoner in the Tower for the Execrable
and Horrid Popish Plot) That the Supplies sent thither have been in great part
made up of Popish Officers and Soldiers, and that the Irish Papists amongst the
Soldiers of that Garrison, have been the Persons most Countenanced and
Encouraged.

To that part of your Majesty's Message which expresses a reliance upon this
House for the support of Tangier, and a recommendation of it to our speedy
care, We do with all humility and reverence give this Answer, That although in
due Time and Order, we shall omit nothing incumbent on Us for the preservation
of every part of your Majesty's Dominions, and advancing the prosperity and
flourishing Estate of this your Kingdom; yet at this time, when a Cloud which
has long threatened this Land is ready to break upon our heads in a storm of
Ruin and Confusion, to enter into any further consideration of this matter;
especially to come to any resolutions in it, before we are effectually secured
from the imminent and apparent Dangers arising from the Power of Popish Persons
and Councils, We humbly conceive will not consist either with our Duty to your
Majesty, or the Trust reposed in Us by those we represent.

It is not unknown to your Majesty how restless the Endeavors, and how bold
the Attempts of the Popish Party, for many years last past, have been, not only
within this, but other your Majesty's Kingdoms, to introduce the Romish, and
utterly to extirpate the true Protestant Religion. The several Approaches they
have made toward the compassing this their Design (assisted by the Treachery
of perfidious Protestants,) have been so strangely successful, that it is matter
of Admiration to Us, and which we can only ascribe to an Overruling
Providence, that your Majesty's Reign is still continued over Us, and that We
are yet assembled to consult the means of our preservation; This bloody and
restless Party not content with the great Liberty they had a long time enjoyed
to exercise their own Religion privately amongst themselves, to partake of an
equal Freedom of their persons and Estates with your Majesty's Protestant
Subjects, and of an Advantage above them, in being excused from chargeable
Offices and Employments, has so far prevailed, as to find countenance for an
open and avowed practice of their Superstition and Idolatry, without control,
in several parts of this Kingdom. Great swarms of Priests and Jesuits have
resorted hither, and have here exercised their Jurisdiction, and been daily
tampering to pervert the Consciences of your Majesty's Subjects. Their Opposers
they have found means to disgrace, and if they were Judges, Justices of the
Peace, or other Magistrates, to have them turned out of Commission: and in
contempt of the known Laws of the Land, they have practiced upon people of all
Ranks and qualities, and gained over diverse to their Religion; some openly to
profess it, others secretly to espouse it, as most conduced to the service
thereof.

After some time they became able to influence matters of State and Government,
and thereby to destroy those they cannot corrupt. The continuance or
Prorogation of Parliaments has been accommodated to serve the purposes of that
Party. Money raised upon the People to supply your Majesty's extraordinary
Occasions, was by the prevalence of Popish Councils employed to make War upon a
Protestant State, and to advance and augment the dreadful Power of the French
King, though to the apparent hazard of this, and all other Protestant
Countries. Great numbers of your Majesty's Subjects were sent into, and
continued in the service of that King, notwithstanding the apparent Interest of
your Majesty's Kingdoms, the Addresses of the Parliament, and your Majesty's
gracious Proclamations to the contrary. Nor can We forbear to mention, how that
at the beginning of the same War, even the Ministers of England were made
Instruments to press upon that State, the acceptance of one demand, among
others, from the French King for procuring their peace with him, that they
should admit the public exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion in the United
Provinces, the Churches there to be divided, and the Romish Priests maintained
out of the public Revenue.

At home, if Your Majesty did at any time by the Advice of Your Privy Council,
or of Your two Houses of Parliament, Command the Laws to be put in Execution
against Papists, even from thence they gained advantage to their Party, while
the edge of those Laws was turned against Protestant Dissenters, and the
Papists escaped in a manner untoucht. The Act of Parliament, enjoining a Test
to be taken by all Persons admitted into any Public Office and intended for a
security against Papists coming into Employment, had so little effect, that
either by Dispensations, obtained from Rome, they submitted to those Tests, and
held their Offices themselves, or those put in their places, were so favorable
to the same Interests, that Popery it self has rather gained than lost ground
since that Act.

But that their business in hand might yet more speedily and strongly proceed,
at length a Popish Secretary (since Executed for his Treasons) takes upon him
to set afoot and maintain correspondencies at Rome (particularly with a Native
Subject of Your Majesty's, promoted to be a Cardinal) and in the Courts of
other Foreign Princes (to use their own form of Speech) for the subduing that
Pestilent Heresy, which has so long domineered over this Northern World; that
is, to root the Protestant religion out of England, and thereby to make way the
more easily to do the same in other Protestant Countries.

Toward the doing this great Work, (as Mr. Coleman was pleased to call it)
Jesuits (the most dangerous of all Popish Orders to the Lives and Estates of
Princes) were distributed to their several Precincts within this Kingdom, and
held joint Councils with those of the same Order in all Neighbor Popish
Countries: Out of these Councils and Correspondencies was hatched that damnable
and hellish Plot, by the good Providence of Almighty God brought to light above
two Years since, but still threatening us; wherein the Traitors impatient of
longer delay, reckoning the prolonging of Your Sacred Majesty's Life (which God
long Preserve) as the Great Obstacle in the way to the Consummation of their
hopes, and having in their prospect a Proselyted Prince immediately to succeed
in the Throne of these Kingdoms, resolved to begin their Work with the
Assassination of Your Majesty, to carry it on with Armed Force, to destroy Your
Protestant Subjects in England, to Execute a second Massacre in Ireland, and so
with ease to arrive at the suppression of our Religion, and the subversion of
the Government.

When this Accursed Conspiracy began to be discovered, they began the
smothering it with the Barbarous Murder of a Justice of the Peace, within one
of Your Majesty's own Palaces, who had taken some Examinations concerning it.

Amidst these distractions and fears, Popish Officers, for the Command of
Forces were allowed upon the Musters by special Orders (surreptitionsly
obtained from Your Majesty) but Counter-Signed by a Secretary of State, without
ever passing under the Tests prescribed by the aforementioned Act of
Parliament. In like manner above fifty new Commissions were granted about the
same time to known Papists, besides a great number of desperate Popish
Officers, though out of Command, yet entertained at half pay. When in the next
Parliament the House of Commons were prepared to bring to a legal Trial the
principal Conspirators in this Plot, that Parliament was first Prorogued, and
then Dissolved. The Interval between the Calling and Sitting of this Parliament
was so long, that now they conceive Hopes of covering all their past Crimes,
and gaining a seasonable time and advantages of practicing them more
effectually.

Witnesses are attempted to be corrupted, and not only promises of Reward, but
of the Favor of your Majesty's Brother, made the Motives to their Compliance.
Diverse of the most considerable of your Majesty's Protestant Subjects have
Crimes of the highest nature forged against them, the Charge to be supported by
Subornation and Perjury, that they may be destroyed by Forms of Law and Justice.

A Presentment being prepared for a Grand Jury of Middlesex, against your
Majesty's said Brother the Duke of York, (under whose Countenance all the rest
shelter themselves) the Grand Jury were in an unheard of and unpresidented, and
illegal manner discharged; and that with so much haste, and fear lest they
should finish that Presentment, that they were prevented from delivering many
other Indictments by them at that time found against other Popish Recusants.
Because a Pamphlet came forth Weekly, called, The Weekly Packet of Advice from
Rome, which exposes Popery (as it deserves) as ridiculous to the People, a new
and arbitrary Rule of Court was made in your Majesty's Court of King's Bench
(rather like a Star Chamber than a Court of Law) That the same should not for
the future be Printed by any Person whatsoever.

We acknowledge your Majesty's Grace and Care in issuing forth diverse
Proclamations since the Discovery of the Plot, for the banishing Papists from
about this great City, and Residence of your Majesty's Court, and the
Parliament; but with trouble of Mind we do humbly inform your Majesty, That
notwithstanding all these Prohibitions, great Numbers of them, and of the most
dangerous Sort, to the Terror of your Majesty's Protestant Subjects, do daily
resort hither, and abide here. Under these and other sad Effects and Evidences
of the Prevalency of Popery, and its Adherents, We Your Majesty's Faithful
Commons found this your Majesty's distressed Kingdom, and other parts of your
Dominions laboring, when we assembled.

And therefore from our Allegiance to your Majesty, our Zeal to our Religion,
our Faithfulness to our Country, and our Care of Posterity, We have lately,
upon mature deliberation, proposed one Remedy of these Great Evils, without
which (in our Judgments) all others will prove vain and fruitless, and (like
all deceitful Securities against certain Dangers) will rather expose your
Majesty's Person to the greatest hazard, and the people, together with all
that is valuable to them as Men or Christians, to utter Ruin and Destruction.
We have taken this Occasion of an Access to your Majesty's Royal Presence,
humbly to lay before your Majesty's great Judgment and Gracious Consideration
this most dreadful design of introducing Popery, and, as necessary consequences
of it, all other Calamities, into your Majesty's Kingdoms. And if after all
this, the private Suggestions of the subtle Accomplices of that Party and
Design should yet prevail, either to elude or totally obstruct the faithful
Endeavors of Us your Commons for an Happy Settlement of this Kingdom, We shall
have this remaining Comfort, That we have freed our selves from the Guilt of
that Blood and Desolation which is like to ensue. But our only Hope, next under
God, is in your Sacred Majesty, That by your Great Wisdom and Goodness, we may
be effectually secured from Popery, and all the Evils that attend it; and that
none but persons of known Fidelity to your Majesty, and Sincere Affections to
the Protestant Religion, may be put into any Employment, Civil or Military;
that whilst we shall give a Supply to Tangier, we may be assured we do not
augment the Strength of our Popish Adversaries, nor increase our own Dangers.
Which Desires of your faithful Commons, if your Majesty shall graciously
vouchsafe to grant, We shall not only be ready to assist your Majesty in
Defense of Tangier, but do whatsoever else shall be in our Power to enable your
Majesty to protect the Protestant Religion and Interest, at Home and abroad,
and to Resist and Repel the Attempts of your Majesty's and the Kingdoms Enemies.

The Humble Address of the House of Commons presented to His Majesty upon
Tuesday the 21. Day of December, 1680. In Answer to His Majesty's Gracious
Speech to both Houses of Parliament, upon the 15th Day of the same December.
May it please Your most Excellent Majesty.
WE your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, have taken into our serious Consideration your Majesty's
Gracious Speech to both your Houses of Parliament, on the 15th of this instant
December; and do with all the grateful Sense of Faithful Subjects, and sincere
Protestants, acknowledge your Majesty's great Goodness to us, in renewing the
Assurances you have been pleased to give us of your readiness to concur with us
in any means for the Security of the Protestant Religion, and your Gracious
Invitation of us to make our Desires known to your Majesty.

But with grief of Heart we cannot but observe, that to these Princely Offers
your Majesty has been advised (by what Secret Enemies to Your Majesty and your
People, we know not) to annex a Reservation, which if insisted on, in the
instance to which alone it is applicable, will render all your Majesty's other
Gracious Inclinations of no effect or advantage to us. Your Majesty is pleased
thus to limit your promise of concurrence in the Remedies which shall be
proposed, that they may consist with preserving the Succession of the Crown in
its due and legal course of Descent. And we do humbly inform your Majesty, that
no Interruption of that Descent has been endeavored by us, except only the
Descent upon the Person of the Duke of York, who by the wicked Instruments of
the Church of Rome, has been manifestly perverted to their Religion. And we do
humbly represent to your Majesty, as the Issue of our most deliberate Thoughts,
and Consultations, that for the Papists to have their hopes continued, that a
Prince of that Religion shall succeed in the Throne of these Kingdoms, is
utterly inconsistent with the Safety of your Majesty's Person, the Preservation
of the Protestant Religion, and the Prosperity, Peace and Welfare of your
Protestant Subjects.

That your Majesty's Sacred Life is in continual danger, under the prospect of
a Popish Successor, is evident, not only from the Principles of those devoted
to the Church of Rome, which allow that an Heretical Prince (and such they term
all Protestant Princes) Excommunicated and deposed by the Pope, may be
destroyed and murdered; but also from the Testimonies given in the prosecution
of the Horrid Popish Plot, against diverse Traitors Attainted for designing to
put those accursed Principles into practice against your Majesty.

From the expectation of this Succession, has the number of Papists in your
Majesty's Dominions so much increased within these few years, and so many been
prevailed with to desert the true Protestant Religion, that they might be
prepared for the Favors of a Popish Prince, as soon as he should come to the
possession of the Crown: and while the same Expectation lasts, many more will
be in the same danger of being perverted.

This it is that has hardened the Papists of this Kingdom, animated and
confedederated by their Priests and Jesuits, to make a common Purse, provide
Arms, make application to Foreign Princes and solicit their Aid for imposing
Popery upon us; And all this even during your Majesty's Reign, and while your
Majesty's Government, and the Laws were our protection.

It is your Majesty's Glory and true Interest, to be the Head and Protector of
all Protestants, as well abroad as at home: But if these Hopes remain, what
Alliances can be made for the advantage of the Protestant Religion and
Interest, which shall give confidence to your Majesty's Allies, to join so
vigorously with your Majesty, as the State of that Interest in the World now
requires, while they see this Protestant Kingdom in so much danger of a Popish
Successor; by whom at the present, all their Councils and Actions may be
eluded, as hitherto they have been, and by whom, if he should succeed) they are
sure to be destroyed?

We have thus humbly laid before your Majesty, some of those great Dangers and
Mischiefs which evidently accompany the expectation of a Popish Successor. The
certain and unspeakable Evils which will come upon your Majesty's Protestant
Subjects and their posterity, if such a Prince should inherit, are more also
than we can well enumerate.

Our Religion, which is now so dangerously shaken, will then be totally
overthrown; Nothing will be left, or can be found to protect or defend it.

The execution of old Laws must cease, and it will be vain to expect new ones.
The most sacred Obligations of Contracts and Promises (if any should be given)
that shall be judged to be against the interest of the Romish Religion, will be
violated; as is undeniable, not only from Argument and Experience elsewhere,
but from the sad experience this Nation once had on the like occasion.

In the Reign of such a Prince, the Pope will be acknowledged Supreme (though
the Subjects of this Kingdom have sworn the contrary) and all Causes, either as
Spiritual, or in order to Spiritual Things, will be brought under his
Jurisdiction.

The Lives, Liberties, and Estates of all such Protestants, as value their
Souls and their Religion more than their secular Concernments, will be adjudged
forfeited.

To all this we might add: That it appears in the discovery of the Plot, that
Foreign Princes, were invited to assist in securing the Crown to the Duke of
York; with Arguments from his great Zeal to establish Popery, and to extirpate
Protestants (whom they call Heretics) out of his Dominions; and such will
expect performance accordingly.

We further humbly beseech Your Majesty, in Your great Wisdom to consider,
Whether in case the Imperial Crown of this Protestant Kingdom, should descend
to the Duke of York; the opposition which may possibly be made to his
possessing it, may not only endanger the farther descent in the Royal Line, but
even Monarchy it self.

For these Reasons, we are most humble Petitioners to your most Sacred Majesty,
That in tender commiseration of your poor Protestant people, Your Majesty will
be graciously pleased to depart from the Reservation in Your said Speech; and
when a Bill shall be tendered to your Majesty, in a Parliamentary way, to
disable the Duke of York from inheriting the Crown, Your Majesty will give your
Royal Assent thereto; and as necessary to fortify and defend the same, that
your Majesty will likewise be graciously pleased to Assent to an Act whereby
your Majesty's Protestant Subjects may be enabled to Associate themselves for
the defense of your Majesty's Person, the Protestant Religion, and the Security
of your Kingdoms.

These Requests we are constrained Humbly to make to your Majesty as of
absolute Necessity, for the safe and peaceable Enjoyment of our Religion.

Without these things the Alliances of England will not be valuable, nor the
People encouraged to contribute to your Majesty's Service.

As some farther means for the Preservation both of our Religion and Propriety;
We are Humble Suitors to your Majesty, that from henceforth such Persons only
may be Judges within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, as are Men
of Ability, Integrity, and known Affection to the Protestant Religion. And that
they may hold both their Offices and Sallaries, Quam diu se been gesserint.
That (several Deputy Lieutenants and Justices of the Peace, fitly qualified for
those Employments, having been of late displaced, and others put in their room,
who are Men of Arbitrary Principles, and Countenancers of Papists and Popery)
such only may bear the Office of a Lord Lieutenant as are Persons of integrity
and known Affection to the Protestant Religion. That Deputy Lieutenants and
Justices of the Peace may be also so qualified, and may be moreover Men of
Ability, of Estates and interest in their Country.

That none may be Employed as Military Officers, or Officers in your Majesty's
Fleet, but Men of known Experience, Courage and Affection to the Protestant
Religion.

These our Humble Requests being obtained, we shall on our part be ready to
Assist your Majesty for the Preservation of Tangier, and for putting your
Majesty's Fleet into such a Condition as it may preserve your Majesty's
Sovereignty of the Seas, and be for the Defense of the Nation.

If your Majesty has or shall make any necessary Allyances for defense of the
Protestant Religion, and Interest and Security of this Kingdom, this House will
be ready to Assist and stand by your Majesty in the support of the same.

After this our humble Answer to your Majesty's Gracious Speech, we Hope no
evil Instruments whatsoever shall be able to lessen your Majesty's Esteem of
that Fidelity and Affection we bear to your Majesty's Service; but that your
Majesty will always retain in your Royal Breast, that Favorable Opinion of us
your Loyal Commons, that those other Good Bills which we have now under
Consideration, Conducing to the Great Ends we have before mentioned; as also
all Laws for the Benefit and Comfort of your People, which shall from time to
time be tendered for your Majesty's Royal Assent, shall find acceptance with
your Majesty.

The Report of the Committee of the Commons appointed to Examine the
Proceedings of the Judges, etc.
THis Committee being Informed, that in Trinity-Term last, the Court of
King's Bench discharged the Grand Jury, that served for the Hundred of
Ossulston, in the County of Middlesex, in a very unusual manner; proceeded to
enquire into the same, and found by the Information of Charles Umfrevil, Esquire
Foreman of the said Jury, Edward Proby, Henry Gerard, and John Smith,
Centlemen, also of the said Jury, That on the 21st of June last the Constables
attending the said Jury, were found Defective, in not presenting the Papists as
they ought, and thereupon were ordered by the said Jury to make further
Presentiments of them on the 26. following, on which Day the Jury met for that
purpose; when several Peers of this Realm, and other Persons of Honor and
Quality, brought them a Bill against James Duke of York, for not coming to
Church: But some exceptions being taken to that Bill, in that it did not set
forth the said Duke to be a Papist, some of the Jury Attended the said persons
of Quality to receive satisfaction therein. In the mean time, and about an Hour
after they had received the said Bill, some of the Jury attended the Court of
King's Bench with a Petition, which they desired the Court to present in their
Name unto His Majesty for the Sitting of this Parliament. Upon which the Lord
Chief Justice Scrogs raised many Scruples, and on pretense that they were not
all in Court (though twenty of the Jury had subscribed the Petition) sent for
them, saying, he would dispatch them presently The Jury being come, and their
Names called over, they renewed their Desire that the Court would present their
Petition: But the Chief Justice asked, if they had any Bills? they Answered,
They had, but the Clerks were drawing them into Form: Upon which the Chief
Justice said, They would not make two Works of one Business: and the Petition
being Read, he said, This was no Article of their Charge, nor was there any Act
of Parliament that required the Court to deliver the Grand Jury's Petitions:
That there was a Proclamation about them; And that it was not reasonable the
Court should be obliged to run on their Errands: And he thought it much, that
they should come with a Petition to alter the Kings Mind declared in the News
Books. The Jury said, They did it not to Impose on the Court, but (as other
Juries had done) with all Submission they desired it: But the Court refused,
bidding the Crier return them their Petition: And Mr. Justice Jones told them,
They had meddled with Matters of State, not given them in Charge, but presented
no Bills of the Matters given in Charge. They answered as before, They had many
before them, that would be ready in due time. Notwithstanding which, the said
Justice Jones told them, They were Discharged from further Service. But Philip
Ward (the Clerk that attended the said Jury) cried out, No, No, they have many
Bills before them; for which the Court understanding (as it seems to this
Commit) a secret Reason, which the Clerk did not, reproved him, Asking if he
or they were to give the Rule there? The Crier then told the Court, They would
not receive their Petition; the Chief Justice bid him let it alone; so it was
left there, and the Jury returned to the Courthouse, and there found several
Constables with Presentiments of Papists and other Offenders, as the Jury had
directed them on the 21st before, but could not now receive the said
Presentiments, being discharged. Whereby much business was obstructed, though none
of the said Informants ever knew the said Jury discharged before the last day
of the Term, which was not till Four days after. And it further appears to
the Committee, by the Evidences of Samuel Astrey, Jasper Waterhouse, and Philip
Ward, Clerks, that have long served in the said Court, That they were much
surprised at the said discharging of the Jury, in that it was never done in
their Memory before; and the rather, because the said Waterhouse, as Secondary,
constantly enters on that Grand Jury's Paper that the last day of the Term is
given them to return their Verdict on, as the last day but one is given to the
other Two Grand Juries of that County, which Entry is as follows; Trinit.
Middlesex. Ossulston Hundred
32. Car. 2. Juratores habent diem ad Veredictum suum reddendum usque diem
Mercurii proxime post tres Septimanas, sancte Trinitatis.



Being the last day of the Term, and so in all the other Terms the last day is
given, which makes it appear to this Committee, That they were not in truth
Discharged for not having their Presentiments ready, since the Court had given
them a longer day, but only to obstruct their further Proceedings: And it
appears by the Evidence aforesaid to this Committee, that the four Judges of
that Court were present at the Discharging of the said Jury, and it did not
appear that any of them did Dissent therein; upon Consideration whereof, the
Committee came to this Resolution.

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this Committee, That the Discharging of
the Grand Jury of the Hundred of Ossulston, in the County of Middlesex, by the
Court of King's Bench in Trinity-Term last, before the last day of the Term, and
before they had finished their Presentiments, was Illegal, Arbitrary, and an High
Misdemeanour.

This Committee proceeded also to inquire into a Rule of the Court of
King's Bench, lately made against the publishing a Book called, The weekly
Packet of Advice from Rome; or The History of Popery: and Samuel Astrey. Gent.
examined thereupon, informed this Committee, that the Author of the said Book
Henry Carr, had been informed against for the same, and had pleaded to the
Information: But before it was Tried, a Rule was made on a Motion, as he
supposes, against the said book: All the Judges of that Court (as he
remembers) being present, and none dissenting. The Copy of which Rule he gave
into this Committee, and is as follows.

Dies Mercurij proxime post tres Septimanas, sancte Trinitatis. Anno 32 Car. 2.
Regis.

Ordinatum est quod liber intitulat, The Weekly Packet of Advice from Rome,
or, The History of Popery, non ulterius Imprimatur vel publicetur per aliquam
Personam quamcunque Per Cur.

And this Commit admiring that Protestant Judges should take offense against
a Book whose chief design was to expose the Cheats and Foppery of Popery,
enquired further into it, and found by the Evidence of Jane Curtis, that the
said Book had been Licensed for several Months, that her Husband paid for the
Copy, and entered it in the Hall-Book of the Company: But for all this, she
could not prevail by these Reasons with the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs to
permit it any longer; who said, 'Twas a Scandalous Libel, and against the
King's Proclamation, and he would ruin her if ever she printed it any more.
And soon after she was served with the said Rule, as the Author and other
Printers were; and by the Author's Evidence it appears, That he was taken and
brought before the said Chief Justice by his Warrant above a year since, and
upon his owning he writ part of that Book, the Chief Justice called him Rogue,
and other ill names; saying, he would fill all the Goals in England with such
Rogues, and pile them up as men do Faggots; and so committed him to prison,
refusing sufficient Bayl, and saying, he would Goal him to put him to charges;
and his Lordship observed his word punctually therein, forcing him to his
Habeas Corpus, and then taking the same Bayl he refused before; upon which,
this Committee came to this Resolution.

Resolved, That it is the opinion of the Committee, that the Rule made by the
Court of King's Bench in Trinity Term last, against printing a Book called, The
Weekly Packet of Advice from Rome, is Illegal and Arbitrary.

And the Committee proceeded further, and upon Information that a very great
latitude had been taken of late by the Judges, in imposing Fines on the persons
found Guilty before them, caused a Transcript of all the Fines imposed by the
King's Bench since Easter Term in the 28th of His Majesty's Reign, to be brought
before them from the said Court by Samuel Astrey Gent. by perusal of which, it
appeared to this Committee, That the quality of the Offense, and the Ability of
the person found Guilty, have not been the Measures that have determined the
quantity of many of these Fines, which being so very numerous, the Committee
refer themselves to those Records as to the general, instancing in some
particulars, as follows.

Upon Joseph Brown of London Gent. on an Information for publishing a printed
Book called, The Long Parliament Dissolved; in which is set forth these words:
Trinit. 29, Car. 2.
Nor let any man think it strange, that we account it Treason for you to sit
and Act contrary to our Laws: for if in the first Parliament of Richard the
second, Grimes and Weston for lack of Courage only were adjudged guilty of High
Treason for surrendering the places committed to their trust; how much more you,
if you turn Renegadoes to the people that entrusted you, and as much as in you
lie surrender not a little pitiful Castle or two, but all the legal defense the
people of England have for their Lives, Liberties, and Properties, at once.
Neither let the vain presuasion delude you, That no persident can be found,
that one English Parliament has hanged up another; tho paradventure even that
may be proved a mistake; for an unpresidented Crime calls for an unpresidented
punishment; and if you shall be so wicked to do the one, or rather endeavor to
do (for now you are no longer a Parliament) what ground of Confidence you can
have that none will be found so worthy to do the other, we cannot understand,
and do faithfully promise, if your unworthiness provoke us to it, that we will
use our honest and utmost endeavors (whenever a new Parliament shall be
called) to choose such as may convince you of your mistake: the old and
infallible Observation, That Parliaments are the pulse of the people, shall
lose its esteem: or you will find, that this your presumption was over fond;
however it argues but a bad mind to sin, because it is believed it shall not be
punished. The Judgment was, That he be fined 1000 Marks, be bound to the good
behavior for seven years, and his name struck out of the Roll of the
Attorneys, without any offense alleged in his said Vocation. And the
publishing this Libel consisted only in superscribing a Packet, with this
enclosed to the East Indies. Which Fine he not being able to pay (living only
upon his practice) he lay in prison for three years, till His Majesty
graciously pardoned him, and recommended him to be restored to his place again
of Attorney, by His Warrant dated the 15. of December. 1679. Notwithstanding
which, he has not yet obtained the said Restoration from the Court of Kings
Bench.

Upon John Harrington of London, Gent. for speaking these words in Latin thus:
Hill. 29 and 30. Car. 2.
Quod nostra Gubernatio de tribus statibus consistibat, and si Rebellio
eveniret in regno, and non accideret contra omnes tres status, non est
Rebellio. A Fine of 1000 l. Sureties for the Good behavior for seven years,
and to recant the words in open Court; which Fine he was in no capacity of ever
paying.

Upon Benjamin Harris of London, Stationer, Hill. 31 and 32. Car. 2.
on an Information for printing a Book called, An Appeal from the Country to
the City, setting forth these words: We in the Country have done our parts, in
choosing for the generality good Members to serve in Parliament: but if (as our
two last Parliaments were) they must be dissolved or prorogued whenever they
come to redress the grievances of the Subject, we may be pitied, not blamed, if
the Plot takes effect; and in all probability it will. Our Parliaments are not
then to be condemned, for that their not being suffered to sit, occasioned it.
Judgment to pay 500 l. Fine, stand on the Pillory an hour, and give Sureties
for the good behavior for three years. And the said Benj. Harris informed this
Committee, That the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs pressed the Court then to add to
this Judgment his being publicly whipped; but Mr. Justice Pemberton holding up
his hands in admiration at their severity therein, Mr. Justice Jones pronounced
the Judgment aforesaid; and he remains yet in prison, unable to pay the said
Fine.

Notwithstanding which Severity in the cases forementioned, this Committee has
observed the said Court has not wanted in other cases an extraordinary
Compassion and Mercy, though there appeared no public reason judicially in the
Trial; as in particular:

Upon Thomas Knox Principal, Hill. 31. and 32. Car. 2.
on an Indictment of Subornation and Conspiracy against the Testimony and life
of Dr. Oats for Sodomy; and also against the Testimony of William Bedloe; a
Fine of 200 Marks, a years Imprisonment, and to find Sureties for the good
behavior for three years.

Upon John Lane, for the same offense, a Fine of 100 Marks, Exd. Ter.
to stand in the Pillory for an hour, and to be imprisoned for one year,

Upon John Tasborough Gent. Par. 32. Car. 2.
on an Indictment for Subornation of Stephen Dugdale, tending to overthrow the
whole Discovery of the Plot: The said Tasborough being affirmed to be a Person
of good Quality, a Fine of 100 l.

Upon Ann Price for the same offense, 200 l. Eod. Ter. Trin. 32. C. 2.


Upon Nathaniel Thompson and William Badcock, on an Information for Printing
and Publishing weekly a Libel, called The true Domestic Intelligence, or News
both from City and Country, and known to be Popishly affected, a Fine of 3, 6,
8, on each of them.

Upon Matthew Turner, Stationer, on an Information for vending and publishing a
Book, Eod. Ter.
called the Compendium, wherein the Justice of the Nation in the late Trials of
the Popish Conspirators, even by some of these Judges themselves, is highly
Arraigned; and all the Witnesses for the King horribly asperst: and this being
the common notorious Popish Bookseller of the Town, Judgment to pay a Fine of
100 Marks, and is said to be out of Prison already.

Upon Loveland, Trin. 32. C. 2.
on an Indictment for a Notorious Conspiracy and Subornation against the Life
and Honor of the Duke of Buckingham, for Sodomy, a Fine of 5 l. and to stand
an hour in the Pillory.

Upon Edward Christian, Mich. 32. C. 2.
Esquire for the same offense, a Fine of 100 Marks, and to stand an hour in the
Pillory. And upon Arthur Obrian, for the same offense, a Fine of 20 Marks, and
to stand an hour in the Pillory.

Upon Consideration whereof, this Committee came to this Resolution:

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this Committee, That the Court of King's-
Bench (in the Imposition of Fines on Offenders of late years) has acted
Arbitrarily, Illegally and Partially, favoring Papists, and persons Popishly
affected, and excessively oppressing His Majesty's Protestant Subjects.

And this Committee being informed, That several of His Majesty's Subjects had
been committed for Crimes Bailable by Law, although they then-tendred
sufficient Sureties, which were refused, only to put them to vexation and
charge, proceeded to enquire into the same, and found that not only the
forementioned Henry Carr had been so refused the common Right of a Subject, as
is abovesaid; but that George Broom, being a Constable last year in London,
and committing some of the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs's Servants for great
Disorders, according to his Duty, he was in few days arrested by a Tipstaff,
without any London Constable, and carried before the said Chief Justice by His
Warrant, to answer for the committing of those persons abovesaid; but being
there, was accused of having spoken irreverently of the said Chief Justice; and
an Affidavit read to him to that purpose, which was falsely (as the said George
Broom affirms) Sworn against him by two persons that use to be common Bail in
that Court, and of very ill Reputation. Upon which he was committed to the
Kings's- Bench, though he then tendered two able Citizens and Common-Council-men
of London to be his Bail: And he was forced to bring his Habeas Corpus, to his
great Charge, before he came out: When the Marshal, Mr. Cooling, exacted 5 l.
of him, of which he complained to the Chief Justice, but had no other Answer,
But he might take his Remedy at Law. But the said Marshall, fearing he should
be questioned, restored him two Guinies of it.

And further this Committee was informed by Francis Smith, Bookseller, That
about Michaelmas was Twelvemonth he was brought before the said Chief Justice
by his Warrant, and charged by the Messenger, Robert Stephens, That he had seen
some parcels of a Pamphlet, called, Observations on Sir George Wakeman' s
Trial, in his Shop: Upon which the Chief Justice told him, he would make him an
Example, use him like a Boar in France, and pile him and all the Booksellers
and Printers up in Prison, like Faggots; and so committed him to the Kings's-
Bench: Swearing and Cursing at him in great fury. And when he tendered Three
sufficient Citizens of London for his Bail, alleging Imprisonment in his
circumstances would be his utter ruin; the Chief Justice replied, The Citizens
looked like sufficient persons, but he would take no Bail; and so he was forced
to come out by Habeas Corpus, and was afterward informed against for the same
matter, to his great charge and vexation. And a while after Francis (the Son of
the said Francis Smith) was committed by the said Chief Justice, and Bail
refused, for selling a Pamphlet, called, A New Years Gift for the said Chief
Justice, to a Coffee-house; and he declared to them he would take no Bail, for
he would ruin them all.

And further it appeared to this Committee, that the said Chief Justice (about
October was twelve month) committed in like manner Jane Curtis, she having a
Husband and Children, for selling a Book called, A Satyr against Injustice,
which his Lordship called a Libel against him; and her Friends tendering
sufficient Bail, and desiring him to have mercy on her Poverty and Condition;
he swore by the Name of God she should go to Prison; and he would show no more
mercy than they could expect from a Woolf that came to devour them; and she
might bring her Habeas Corpus and come out so: Which she was forced to do; and
after informed against and prosecuted to her utter ruin, four or five Terms
after.

In like manner it appeared to this Committee, that about that time also,
Edward Berry (Stationer of Gray's- Inn) was committed by the said Chief
Justice, being accused of selling The Observations on Sir George Wakeman 's
Trial; and though he tendered 1000 l. Bail, yet the Chief Justice said, he
would take no Bail, he should go to Prison, and come out according to Law. And
after he with much Trouble and Charge got out by Habeas Corpus, he was forced
by himself, or his Attorney, to attend five Terms before he could be
discharged, though no Information was Exhibited against him in all that time.
In Consideration whereof, and of others of the like Nature, (too tedious here
to relate) this Committee came to this Resolution.

Resolved,

That it is the Opinion of this Committee, That the refusing sufficient Bail in
these Cases, wherein the Persons Committed were Bailable by Law: Was Illegal,
and a High Breach of the Liberty of the Subject.

And this Committee being informed of an extraordinary kind of a Charge, given
at the last Assizes at Kingston (in the County of Surrey) by Mr. Baron Weston,
and proceeding to examine several Persons then and there present: It was made
appear to this Committee, by the Testimony of John Cole, Richard Mayo, and John
Pierce, Gentlemen, and others (some of whom put down the said Barons words in
Writing immediately) that part of the said Charge was to this effect: He
inveighed very much against Farel, Luther, Calvin, and Zuinglius, condemning
them as Authors of the Reformation: Which was against their Princes minds, and
then adding to this purpose, Zuinglius set up his Fanaticism, and Calvin built
on that blessed Foundation: And to speak truth, all his Disciples are seasoned
with such a sharpness of Spirit, that it much concerns Magistrates to keep a
strait hand over them: And now they are restless, amusing us with Fears, and
nothing will serve them but a Parliament: For my part, I know no Representative
of the Nation but the King; all Power Centers in him: It Is true, he does
entrust it with his Ministers, but he is the sole Representative; and I-faith,
he has wisdom enough to entrust it no more in these Men, who have given us such
late Examples of their Wisdom and Faithfulness. And this Committee taking the
said matter into their Consideration, came to this Resolution.

Resolved,

That it is the Opinion of this Committee, That the said Expressions in the
Charge given by the said Baron Weston, were a Scandal to the Reformation, in
Derogation of the Rights and Privileges of Parliaments, and tending to raise
Discord between his Majesty and his Subjects.

And this Committee being informed by several Printers and Booksellers, of
great Trouble and Vexation given them unjustly by one Robert Stephens, (called
a Messenger of the Press) the said Stephens being examined by this Committee,
by what Authority he had proceeded in that manner, produced two Warrants under
the Hand and Seal of the Chief Justice Scroggs, which were, In haec verba:

Angl. ss.
WHereas There are diverse ill disposed Persons who do daily Print and Publish
many Seditious and Treasonable Books and Pamphlets, endeavoring thereby to
dispose the minds of his Majesty's Subjects to Sedition and Rebellion. And also
infamous Libels reflecting upon particular Persons, to the great scandal of his
Majesty's Government. For Suppressing whereof, his Majesty has lately issued
out his Royal Proclamation. And for the more speedy suppressing the said
Seditious Books, Libels and Pamphlets, and to the end that the Authors and
Publishers thereof may be brought to their punishment.

These are to will and require you, and in His Majesty's Name to charge and
command you, and every of you, upon sight hereof, to be Aiding and Assisting
unto Robert Stephens, Messenger of the Press, in the seizing on all such Books
and and Pamphlets as asoresaid, as he shall be informed of, in any Booksellers
or Printers Shops or Warehouses, or elsewhere whatsoever, to the end they may
be disposed as to Law shall appertain; Also if you shall be informed of the
Authors, Printers, or Publishers of such Books or Pamphlets as are
abovementioned, you are to Apprehend them, and have them before one of His
Majestiees Justices of the Peace, to be proceeded against according to Law.
Dated this 29th day of November, 1679.

To Robert Stephens Messenger of the Press, and to all Mayors, Sheriffs,
Bailiffs, Constables, and all other Officers and Ministers whom these may
concern. WILLIAM SCROGGS.


Angl. ss.
WHereas The King's Majesty has lately Issued out His Proclamation for
Suppressing the Printing and Publishing Unlicensed News-Books, and Pamphlets of
News: Notwithstanding which, there are diverse Persons who do daily Print and
Publish such Unlicensed Books and Pamphlets.

These are therefore to Will and Require You, and in His Majesty's Name to
Charge and Command You, and every of You, from Time to Time, and at all Times,
so often as You shall be thereunto required, to be Aiding and Assisting to
Robert Stephens, Messenger of the Press, in the Seizing all such Books and
Pamphlets as aforesaid, as he shall be informed of, in any Book-seller's Shop,
or Printer's Shop or Warehouses, or elsewhere whatsoever, to the end they may
be disposed of as to Law shall appertain. Likewise, if You shall be Informed of
the Authors, Printers, or Publishers of such Books and Pamphlets, You are to
Apprehend them, and have them before Me, or one of His Majesty's Justices of
the Peace, to be proceeded against as to Law shall appertain. Dated this 28th
Day of May, Anno Dom. 1680.

To all Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and all other Officers and
Ministers whom these may concern. WILLIAM SCROGGS.


To Robert Stephens, Messenger of the Press.
Upon view whereof this Committee came to this Resolution.

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this Committee, That the said Warrants are
Arbitrary and Illegal.

And this Committee being informed of certain Scandalous Discourses, said to be
uttered in public places by the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, proceeded to
Examine Sir Robert Atkins, late one of the Justices of the Common Pleas,
concerning the same, by whom it appears, That at a Sessions-Dinner at the
Old-Bayly (in the Maiorality of Sir Robert Clayton) who was then present, the
said Chief Justice took occasion to speak very much against Petitioning,
condemning it as resembling 41, as Factious and tending to Rebellion, or to
that effect; to which the said Sir Robert Atkins made no Reply, suspecting he
waited for some Advantage over him: But the Chief Justice continuing and
pressing him with the said Discourse, he began to justify Petitioning as the
Right of the People, especially for the Sitting of a Parliament, which the Law
requires, if it be done with Modesty and Respect. Upon which the Chief Justice
fell into a great passion; and there is some reason to believe, that soon after
he made an ill Representation of what the said Sir Robert had then spoke unto
his Majesty. And this Committee was further informed, That the said Sir Robert
Atkins being in Circuit with the said Chief Justice at Summer Assizes was
Twelvemonth, at Monmouth^, (Mr. Arnold, Mr. Price, and Mr. Bedlow being then
in company) the Chief Justice fell severely in public upon Mr. Bedlow, taking
off the Credit of his Evidence, and alleging he had over-shot himself in it,
or to that effect; very much to the Disparagement of his Testimony: And the
said Sir Robert defending Mr. Bedlow's Evidence and Credit, he grew extreme
Angry and Loud, saying to this Effect, That he verily believed Langhorn died
Innocently. To which the said Sir Robert replied, He wondered how he could think
so, who had condemned him himself, and had not moved the King for a Reprieve
for him. All which matters of Discourse this Committee humbly Submit to the
Wisdom and Consideration of this House, without taking upon them to give any
Opinion therein.

And this Committee proceeded further to inquire into some Passages that
happened at Lent Assizes last for the County of Somerset, at the Trial of
Thomas Dare, Gent. there, upon an Indictment for saying falsely and seditiously,
That the Subjects had but two means to Redress their Grievances, one by
Petitioning, the other by Rebellion: And found, that though by his other
discourse when he said so, that it appeared plainly he had no Rebellious
intent, in that he said, Then God forbid there should be a Rebellion, he would
be the first Man to draw his Sword against a Rebel; yet he was prosecuted with
great violence: And having pleaded Not Guilty, he moved Mr. Justice Jones (who
then sat Judge there) that he might try it at the next Assizes, for that Mr.
Searle (who was by at the speaking of the words, and a material Witness for his
Defense) was not then to be had, and an Affidavit to that purpose was made and
received. But the said Justice Jones told him, That was a Favor of the Court
only, and he had not deserved any Favor, and so forced him to try it
presently. But the Jury, appearing to be an extraordinary one, provided on
purpose, being all of persons that had highly opposed Petitioning for the
Sitting of this Parliament, he was advised to withdraw his Plea; and the said
Justice Jones encouraging him so to do, he confessed the words, denying any Evil
Intention, and gave the said Justice an account in writing of the Truth of the
whole matter, and made a submission in Court, as he was directed by the said
Justice: Who promised to recommend him to His Majesty, but imposed a Fine of
500 l. on him, and to be bound to the Good Behavior for three years; Declaring
also, That he was turned out from being a Common-Councellor of the Corporation
of Taunton in the said County, on pretense of a Clause in their Charter, giving
such a power to a Judge of Assize. And the said Thomas Dare remains yet in
Prison for the said Fine; in which matter of the Trial aforesaid, this
Committee desires to refer it self to the Judgment of this House.


The Resolutions of the House of Commons upon the said Report.
I.
THat it is the Opinion of this House, That the Discharging of the Grand Jury
of the Hundred of Oswalston, in the County of Middlesex, by the Court of
King's- Bench in Trinity Term last, before the last day of the Term, and before
they had finished their Presentiments, was Arbitrary and Illegal, destructive to
public Justice, a manifest Violation of the Oaths of the Judges of that Court,
and a means to subvert the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and to introduce
Popery.

II.
That it is the Opinion of this House, That the Rule made by the Court of
King's- Bench in Trinity Term last, against Printing of a Book, called, The
Weekly Packet of Advice from Rome, is Illegal and Arbitrary thereby, usurping
to themselves Legislative Power, to the great Discouragement of the
Protestants, and for the Countenancing of Popery.

III.
That it is the Opinion of this House, That the Court of King's- Bench in the
Imposition of Fines on Offenders, of late Years, have acted Arbitrarily,
Illegally, and Partially, favoring Papists and Persons Popishly affected, and
excessively oppressing His Majesty's Protestant Subjects.

IV.
That it is the Opinion of this House, That the refusing sufficient Bail in
these Cases, wherein the Persons committed were Bailable by Law, was Illegal,
and a high Breach of the Liberties of the Subject.

V.
That it is the Opinion of this House, That the said Expressions in the Charge
given by the said Baron Weston, were a Scandal to the Reformation, and tending
to raise Discord between His Majesty and His Subjects, and to the Subversion of
the Ancient Constitution of Parliaments, and of the Government of this Kingdom.

VI.
That it is the Opinion of this House, That the said Warrants are Arbitrary and
Illegal.

The Resolutions of the Commons, for the Impeachment of the said Judges.
Resolved,

THat Sir William Scroggs, Knight, Chief Justice of the Court of King's- Bench,
be Impeached upon the said Report, and the Resolutions of the House thereupon.

Resolved,

That Sir Thomas Jones, one of the Justices of the said Court of King's- Bench,
be Impeached upon the said Report, and Resolutions of the House thereupon.

Resolved,

That Sir Richard Weston, one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer, be
Impeached upon the said Report, and Resolutions of the House thereupon.

Ordered,

That the Committee appointed to prepare an Impeachment against Sir Francis
North, Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, do prepare Impeachments
against the said Sir William Scroggs, Sir Thomas Jones, and Sir Richard Weston,
upon the said Report and Resolutions.

Ordered,

That the said Report, and several Resolutions of this House thereupon, be
printed; and that Mr. Speaker take care in the Printing thereof apart from this
Days other Votes.

The Report from the Committee of the Commons in Parliament, appointed by the
Honorable House of Commons, to Consider the Petition of Richard Thompson of
Bristol, Clerk; And to Examine Complaints against him. And the Resolution of
the Commons in Parliament upon this Report, for his Impeachment of high Crimes
and Misdemeanors. Friday, December. 24. 1680.
At the Committee appointed to take into Consideration the Petition of Richard
Thompson, Clerk; and to Examine the Complaints against him.
In the First Place,
THe Committee read unto the said Thompson, the Heads of the Complaint against
him; Which (for the most part) he denying, desired to have his Accusers brought
Face to Face: Whereupon the Committee proceeded to the Examination of
Witnesses, to prove the said Complaint.

The First Witness Examined, says,
That there being a great Noise and Rumor, that Mr. Thompson had prepared a
Sermon to be Preached on the Thirtieth of January, 1679. the said Witness went
to the said sermon, and did hear Mr. Thompson publicly declare, That the
Presbyterians were such Persons, as the very Devil Blush't at them; and that
the Villain Hamden grudged, and made it more Scruple of Conscience, to give
Twenty Shillings to the KING, for supplying his Necessities (by Ship Money and
Loan) which was His Right by Law, than to raise Rebellion against Him: And that
the Presbyterians are worse (and far more Intolerable) than either Priests or
Jesuits.

The Second says,
That hearing a great Talk and Noise spread of a Sermon to be Preached by Mr.
Thompson, on the Thirtieth of January, 1679. was minded to hear the same, and
accordingly did; at which he writ some Notes; amongst which, he says; That Mr.
Thompson openly preached, That the Devil Blush't at the Presbyterians; and that
the Villain Hamden grudged more to give the KING Twenty Shillings, which was
his just due by Law, (Ship Money and Loan) than to raise Rebellion against Him;
and that a Presbyterian-Brother, qua talis, was as great a Traitor by the
Statute, as any Priest or Jesuit whatsoever.

That he heard, that Mr. Thompson said; That he hoped the Presbyterians would
be pulled out of their Houses, and the Jails filled with them: and wished their
Houses burnt.

The Third says,
That he was Cited to the Bishop's Court, to Receive the Sacrament last Easter:
but being out of Town at that Time, did Receive it at a Place called Purl in
Wiltshire; and that a Month after he came Home, Was again Cited to the said
Court; and he did accordingly appear, and told the Court, That he hoped his
Absence and Business might be accepted for a Lawful Excuse: Upon which, Mr.
Thompson immediately said, That they would proceed to Excommunicate him. Upon
which, this Informant produced his Certificate, of which the Chancellor
approved, and said, It was Lawful. Hereupon Mr. Thompson said, That his
Receiving the Sacrament from any other Minister, than the Minister of the
Parish wherein he dwelled, Was Damnation to his Soul: and that he would
maintain this Doctrine.

The Fourth says,
That being at Bristol-Fair, he heard a great talk and noise of a Satyr-Sermon
prepared, and designed to be Preached by Mr. Thompson against the
Presbyterians, on the Thirtieth of January, 1679; and that very many resorted
to hear him: In which Sermon, the said Mr. Thompson declared and said, That
there was a great Talk of a Plot: but (says he) a Presbyterian is the man: And
further added, That the Villain Hamden, scrupled to give the King 20s. upon
Ship Money and Loan, which was his due by law, but did not Scruple, to raise
Rebellion against Him.

The Fifth says,
That Mr. Thompson in a Sermon preached the Thirtieth of January, 1679. did
say, That the Presbyterians did seem to outvie Mariana, and that Calvin was
the first that Preached the King-Killing Doctrine; and that after he had quoted
Calvin often, said, If this be true, then a Presbyterian-Brother, qua talis, is
as great a Traitor as any Priest or Jesuit; And that then he condemned all the
Proceedings of Parliaments.

The Sixth says,
That the said Mr. Thompson had uttered many scandalous words concerning the
Act for Burying in Woollen; affirming, That the makers of that Law, were a
Company of Old Fools and Fanatics, and that he would bring a Schoolboy,
should make a better Act than that, and Construe it when he had done.

The Seventh says,
That Mr. Thompson in a Sermon by him Preached (while Petitions for the sitting
of this Parliament were on Foot) speaking of a Second Rebellion by the Scotch,
who had Framed a Formidable Army, and came as far as Durham to deliver a
Petition forsooth: and that they seemed rather to Command, than Petition their
Sovereign to grant; And Comparing that Petition with the then Petition on Foot,
greatly inveighed against it, and scoffed much at it.

The Eighth says,
That Mr. Thompson (when the Petition was on foot for the sitting of this
Parliament) used at the Funeral Sermon of one Mr. Wharton these words (pointing
at the Dead said) That he was no Schismatical Petitioning Rebel, and that by
his instigations, the Grand Jury of Bristol made a Presentment of their
detestation against Petitioning for the sitting of the Parliament: that he said
Mr. Thompson had told him, that he was Governor to Mr. Narbor, when he was
beyond Sea; and said, That he had been very often (and above one hundred times)
at Mass, in the great Church at Paris, and usually gave half a Crown to get a
Place to hear a certain Doctor of that Church, and that he was like to be
brought over to that Religion; and that when he went beyond Sea, did not know
but that he might be of that Religion before his return. That he is very
Censorious, and Frequently casts evil Aspersions against several Divines at
Bristol of great Note, viz. Mr. Chetwind, Mr. Standfast, Mr. Crosman, Mr.
Palmer and others, saying, That such as went to their Lectures, were the Brats
of the Devil.

The 9th, That Mr. Thompson in his preaching inveighed bitterly against
Subscribing Petitions for Sitting of this Parliament, saying, That it was the
Seed of Rebellion, and like to Forty one; and that the Devil set them on work,
and the Devil would pay them their Wages; saying, That before he would set his
hand to such Petitions, he would cut it off, yea and cut them off.

The 10th, says, That about two years since, being in the Chancel of St.
Thomas's Church in Bristol, where Queen Elizabeth's Effigies is, Mr. Thompson
pointing his Finger to it, said, That she was the worst of Women, and a most
lewd and infamous Woman: Upon which this Informant replied, He never heard any
speak ill of her; thereupon Mr. Thompson said, She was no better than a
Church-Robber, and that Henry the 8th begun it, and that she finished it.

The 11th, Row, says, That in the year 1678, he waited on the Mayor to
Church, and that Mr. Thomson who was there, railed at Henry the Eighth, saying,
He did more hurt in Robbing the Abbey Lands, than he did good by the
Reformation. That after Dinner Mr. Thompson comes to this Informant, and claps
his Hands on his Shoulders, saying, Hah Boy, had Queen Elizabeth been living,
you needed not to have been Swordbearer of Bristol. The said Row asked him
why? He replied, She loved such a lusty Rogue (so well) as he was; and he would
have been very fit for her Drudgery at White Hall.

The 12th. says, That he heard a great noise of a Sermon to be preached by Mr.
Thompson on the 30th of January, 1679, to the second part of the same Tune: And
that he was present at the same Sermon, in which Mr. Thompson said, There was a
great noise of a Popish Plot, but, says he, Here is nothing in it but a
Presbyterian Plot; for here they are going about to Petition for the sitting of
the Parliament, but the end of it will be to bring the Kings Head to the block,
as they have done his Father.

The 13th. says, That in January last, or thereabouts, there was a Petition
going about for the sitting of this Parliament, When Mr. Thompson in Red^liff
Church, in his Sermon, said, It was a Seditious and Rebellious Petition, and
rather than he would sign it, his Hand should be cut off.

The 14th. says, The Eighth day of April, he going to pay Mr. Thompson his
Dues, speaking concerning the Meeters in private; Mr. Thompson said, He would
hall them out and fill the Gaols with them, and hoped to see their Houses afire
about their Ears in a short time; and this he the said Thompson doubled again
and again.

The 15th, says, That about December 1679, Mr. Thompson came to visit his
Mother, being sick, and discoursing of Religion, The said, Thompson said, If he
were as well satisfied of other things, as he was of Justification, Auricular
Confession, Penance, Extreme Unction, and Crisme in Baptism, he would not have
been so long separated from the Catholic Church. And further affirmed, That
the Church of Rome was the True Catholic Church. He further endeavored to
prove Extreme Unction, and Auricular Confession, as well as he could, out of
the Epistles. Further, he has heard him say, The King was a Person of mean and
soft Temper, and could be led easily to any thing, but yet a Solomon in vices;
but that the Duke of York, was a Prince of a brave Spirit, would be faithful to
his Friends, and that it was our own Faults that he was a Roman Catholic, in
that we forced him to fly into France, where he embraced that Religion: About
the same time, he the said Thompson, said the Church would be Militant, but
greatly commended the Decency of Solemnizing the Mass in France; and that it
was performed with much more Reverence and Devotion than any other Religion
does use. He further heard him say in a Sermon, about the time of Petitioning,
he would rather cut off his hand than Sign it, and had many bad Expressions of
it; that it was, the Seed of Rebellion and like 40 and 41: And further, the
said Mr. Thompson at one Sandford's Shop door in Bristol, speaking of Bedlow,
said, That he was not to be believed, because Bedlow had, said he, meaning Mr.
Thompson, was at St. Omers, where Mr. Thompson said he was not; and that Bedlow
was of a bad Life, and in many Plots, and not to be credited in any thing he
said: And that in another Discourse he commended the Romish Clergy for their
single Life, and is himself so; and did at the same time Vilify and Rail at the
English Clergy for Marrying; saying, It was better for a Clergyman to be
Guelt, than to Marry, and that the Calvinists in France were Letcherous
Fellows, and could scarce be two years a Priest without a Wife. About the time
and after the Election of Sir John Knight to this Parliament, Mr. Thompson
said, he was not fit to be believed, and as bad as any Fanatic. He further
said in the Pulpit at St. Thomas's, that after Excommunication by the Bishop,
without Absolution from the Spiritual Court, such a one was surely Damned; and
he would pawn his Soul for the Truth of it.

Mr. Thompson after the Evidence given by every particular Person Face to Face,
was asked to every one, If he had any Questions to ask, before they called
another? Who answered, He should not say any thing at present. When the
Witnesses before mentioned, were all Examined, Mr. Thompson being desired to
make his Defense, and declare whether he were Guilty of the Matters laid to his
charge; did for the greatest part confess words spoken to that effect; and in
other things endeavored to turn the words with more favor toward himself;
but the Witnesses being of great Credit, and many more being ready to have made
good the same things, the Committee looked upon the business to be of a high
Nature, and therefore ordered the matter to be reported specially; leaving it
to the Wisdom of the House.

The Resolution of the House of Commons upon the said Report.
Resolved, Nemine contradicente,
THat Richard Thompson Clerk, has publicly defamed his Sacred Majesty,
preached Sedition, vilified the Reformation, promoted Popery, by asserting
Popish Principles, decrying the Popish Plot, and turning the same upon the
Protestants; and endeavored to subvert the Liberty and Property of the
Subject, and the Rights and Privileges of Parliament; and that he is a Scandal
and Reproach to his Function.

And that the said Richard Thompson, be impeached upon the said Report and
Resolution of the House. And a Committee is appointed to prepare the said
Impeachment, and to receive further Instructions against him; and to send for
Persons, Papers, and Records.

Articles of Impeachment of Sir William Scroggs, Chief Justice of the Court of
King 's-Bench, by the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, in their
own Name, and in the Name of all the Commons of England, of High Treason; and
other great Crimes and Misdemeanors.
I.
THat he the said Sir William Scroggs, then being Chief Justice of the Court of
King's- Bench, has traitorously and wickedly endeavored to subvert the
Fundamental Laws, and the Established Religion and Government of this Kingdom of
England; and instead thereof, to introduce Popery, and an Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Government, against Law; which he has declared by diverse Traitorous,
and Wicked Words, Opinions, Judgments, Practices and Actions.

II.
That he, the said Sir William Scroggs, in Trinity Term last, being then Chief
Justice of the said Court, and having taken an Oath duly to Administer Justice,
according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, in pursuance of his said
Traitorous Purposes, did, together with the rest of the said Justices of the
same Court, several days before the end of the said Term, in an Arbitrary
manner discharge the Grand Jury which then served for the Hundred of Oswaldston
in the County of Middlesex, before they had made their Presentiments, or had
found several Bills of Indictment, which were then before them; whereof the
said Sir William Scroggs was then fully informed: and that the same would be
tendered to the Court upon the last day of the said Term, which day then was,
and by the known Course of the said Court, has always heretofore been given
unto the said Jury for the delivering in of their Bills and Presentiments, by
which sudden and illegal Discharge of the said Jury, the Course of Justice was
stopped maliciously and designedly, the Presentiments of many Papists and other
Offenders were obstructed; and in particular, a Bill of Indictment against
James Duke of York, for absenting himself from Church, which was then before
them, was prevented from being proceeded upon.

III.
That whereas one Henry Carr, had for some time before Published every week a
certain Book, Entitled The weekly Packet of advice from Rome: Or, the History
of Popery, wherein, the Superstitions and Cheats of the Church of Rome were
from time to time exposed; he the said Sir William Scroggs, then Chief Justice
of the Court of King's Bench, together with the other Judges of the said Court,
before any Legal Conviction of the said Carr of any Crime, did in the same
Trinity Term, in a most Illegal and Arbitrary manner, make, and cause to be
entered, a certain Rule of that Court, against the Printing of the said Book, in
Haec Verba.

Dies Mercurii proxime post tres Septimanas Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 32 Car.
II. Regis.
ORdinatum est quod Liber intitulat' The weekly Packet of Advice from Rome: Or,
The History of Popery, Non ulterius imprimatur vel publicetur per aliquam
personam quamcunque.

Per Cur'
And did cause the said Carr, and diverse Printers, and other Persons to be
served with the same; which said Rule and other Proceedings were most
apparently contrary to all Justice, in Condemning, not only what had been
written without hearing the Parties, but also all that might for the future be
written on that Subject; A manifest countenancing of Popery, and discouragement
of Protestants; an open Invasion upon the Right of the Subject, and an
encroaching and assuming to themselves a Legislative Power and Authority.

IV.
That he the said Sir William Scroggs, since he was made Chief Justice of the
King's- Bench, has, together with the other Judges of the said Court, most
notoriously departed from all Rules of Justice and Equality, in the Imposition
of Fines upon Persons convicted of Misdemeanors in the said Court; and
particularly in the Term of Easter last past, did openly declare in the said
Court, in the Case of one Jessop, who was convicted of Publishing False News,
and was then to be sined, That he would have regard to Persons and their
Principles, in imposing of Fines, and would set a Fine of 500 l. on one Person
for the same Offense, for the which he would not Fine another 100 l. And
according to his said Unjust and Arbitrary Declaration, he the said Sir Will.
Scroggs, together with the said other Justices, did then impose a Fine of 100
l. upon the said Jessop, although the said Jessop had before that time proved
one Hewit to be convicted as Author of the said false News; and afterward, in
the same Term, did fine the said Hewit upon his said Conviction, only five
Marks. Nor has the said Sir Will. Scroggs, together with the other Judges of
the said Court, had any regard to the Nature of the Offenses, or the Ability of
the Persons, in the imposing of Fines; but have been manifestly partial and
favorable to Papists, and Persons affected to, and promoting the Popish
Interest, in this time of imminent Danger from them: And at the same time have
most severely and grievously oppressed his Majesty's Protestant Subjects, as
will appear upon view of the several Records of Fines set in the said Court: By
which arbitrary, unjust, and partial Proceedings, many of his Majesty's Liege
People have been ruined, and Popery countenanced under color of Justice; and
all the Mischiefs and Excesses of the Court of Star Chamber, by Act of
Parliament suppressed, have been again, in direct opposition to the said Law,
introduced.

V.
That he the said Sir Will. Scroggs, for the further accomplishing of his said
traitorous and wicked Purposes, and designing to subject the Persons as well as
the Estates of his Majesty's Liege People, to his lawless Will and Pleasure,
has frequently refused to accept of Bail, though the same were sufficient, and
legally tendered unto him by many Persons accused before him, only of such
Crimes for which by Law Bail ought to have been taken; and diverse of the said
Persons being only accused of Offenses against himself; declaring at the same
time, That he refused Bail, and committed them to Gaol only to put them to
Charges; and using such furious Threats as were to the terror of his Majesty's
Subjects, and such scandalous Expressions as were a dishonor to the
Government, and to the Dignity of his Office. And particularly, That he the
said Sir Will. Scroggs, did in the Year 1679, commit and detain in Prison, in
such unlawful manner; among others, Henry Carr, George Broom, Edw. Berry,
Benj. Harris, Francis Smith Sen. Francis Smith Jun. and Jane Curtis, Citizens
of London: Which Proceedings of the said Sir Will. Scroggs, are a high Breach
of the Liberty of the Subject, destructive to the Fundamental Laws of this
Realm, contrary to the Petition of Right, and other Statutes; and do manifestly
tend to the introducing of Arbitrary Power.

VI.
That he the said Sir Will. Scroggs, in further Oppression of his Majesty's
Liege People, has since his being made Chief Justice of the said Court of
Kings- Bench, in an Arbitrary manner, granted diverse general Warrants for
Attaching the Persons and Seizing the Goods of his Majesty's Subjects, not
named or described particularly in the said Warrants: By means whereof, many of
his Majesty's Subjects have been vexed, their Houses entered into, and they
themselves grievously oppressed, contrary to Law.

VII.
Whereas there has been a Horrid and Damnable Plot, contrived and carried on
by the Papists, for the Murdering the King, the Subversion of the Laws and
Government of this Kingdom, and for the Destruction of the Protestant Religion
in the same; All which the said Sir William Scroggs well knew, having himself
not only Tried, but given Judgment against several of the Offenders;
nevertheless, the said Sir Will. Scroggs did at diverse times and places, as
well sitting in Court, as otherwise, openly Defame and Scandalize several of
the Witnesses, who had proved the said Treasons against diverse of the
Conspirators, and had given Evidence against diverse other Persons, who were
then untried, and did endeavor to disparage their Evidence, and take off their
Credit, whereby, as much as in him lay, he did traitorously and wickedly
suppress and stifle the Discovery of the said Popish Plot, and Encourage the
Conspirators to proceed in the same, to the great and apparent Danger of his
Majesty's Sacred Life, and of the well-established Government and Religion of
this Realm of England.

VIII.
Whereas the said Sir William Scroggs being advanced to be Chief Justice of the
Court of King's- Bench, ought by a sober, grave, and virtuous Conversation, to
have given a good Example to the King's Liege People, and to demean himself
answerable to the Dignity of so Eminent a Station; yet he, the said Sir William
Scroggs, on the contrary, by his frequent and notorious Excesses and
Debaucheries, and his Profane and Atheistical Discourses, does daily affront
Almighty God, dishonor his Majesty, give countenance and encouragement to all
manner of Vice and Wickedness, and bring the highest scandal on the public
Justice of the Kingdom.

All which Words, Opinions, and Actions of the said Sir William Scroggs, were
by him spoken and done, traitorously, wickedly, falsely and maliciously, to
alienate the Hearts of the King's Subjects from his Majesty, and to set a
Division between him and them, and to subvert the Fundamental Laws, and the
Established Religion and Government of this Kingdom, and to Introduce Popery,
and an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government, and contrary to his own knowledge,
and the known Laws of the Realm of England; and thereby he the said Sir William
Scroggs has not only broken his own Oath, but also as far as in him lay, has
broken the King Oath to his People; whereof he the said Sir William Scroggs
representing his Majesty in so high an Office of Justice, had the Custody, for
which the said Commons do Impeach him the said Sir William Scroggs of the
High Treason against our Sovereign Lord the King, and his Crown and Dignity,
and other the High Crimes and Misdemeanors aforesaid.

And the said Commons by Protestation saving to themselves the Liberty of
Exhibiting at any time hereafter, any other Accusation or Impeachment against
the said Sir William Scroggs, and also of Replying to the Answer that he shall
make thereunto, and of Offering proofs of the Premises, or of any other
Impeachments or Accusations that shall be by them exhibited against him as the
Case shall (according to the Course of Parliament) require. Do pray that the
said Sir Will. Scroggs, Chief Justice of the Court of King's- Bench, may be put
to Answer to all and every the Premises, and may be committed to safe Custody:
and that such Proceedings, Examinations, Trials, and Judgments, may be upon him
had and used as is agreeable to Law and Justice, and the Course of Parliaments.

Resolved, That the said Sir William Scroggs be Impeached upon the said
Articles.

The Humble Petition of the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Commons of the City of London, in Common Council Assembled, on the Thirteenth
of January, 1680. To the King's most Excellent Majesty, for the Sitting of this
present Parliament, Prorogued to the Twentieth Instant. Together with the
Resolutions, Orders, and Debates of the said Court.
Commune Concil' tent' in Camera Guildhall Civitatis London Die Jovis decimo
tertio die Januarii Anno Domini 1680. Annoque Regni Domini nostri Carol'
Secundi nunc Regis Angl' etc. Tricesimo secundo, coram Patient' Ward Mil'
Major' Civitatis London, Thoma Aleyn Mil' and Bar', Johanne Frederick Mil',
Johanne Lawrence Mil', Georgio Waterman Mil', Josepho Sheldon Mil', Jacobo
Edwards Mil', and Roberto Clayton Mil', Aldermannis, Georgio Treby Ar'
Recordatore dictae Civit', Johanne Moore Mil', Willielmo Pritchard Mil',
Henrico Tulse Mil', Jacobo Smith Mil', Roberto Jeffery Mil, Johanne Shorter
Mil', Thoma Gould Mil', Willielmo Rawsterne Mil', Thoma Beckford Mil', Johanne
Chapman Mil', Simone Lewis Mil', Thoma Pilkington Ar' Ald'ris, and Henrico
Cornish Ar' Ald'ro ac unum vicecom' dictae Civitatis, necnon Major' part
Comminarior' dictae Civitatis in Communi Concil' tunc and ibidem Assemblat'.
THis Day the Members that serve for this City in Parliament, having
communicated unto this Court a Vote or Resolution of the Honorable House of
Commons, whereby that House was pleased to give Thanks unto this City for their
manifest Loyalty to the King, their Care, Charge, and Vigilance for the
Preservation of his Majesty's Person, and of the Protestant Religion. This
Court is greatly sensible of the Honor thereby given to this City, and do
declare, That it is the fixed and uniform Resolution of this City to persevere
in what they have done, and to contribute their utmost Assistance for the
Defense of the Protestant Religion, His Majesty's Person, and the Government
Established.

It was now unanimously Agreed and Ordered by this Court, That the Thanks of
this Court be given to the Members that serve for this City in Parliament, for
their good Service done this City, and their Faithfulness in discharging their
Duties in that Honorable and great Assembly.

Upon a Petition now Presented by diverse Citizens and Inhabitants of this City,
representing their Fears from the Designs of the Papists and their Adherents,
and praying this Court to acquaint his Majesty therewith, and to desire, That
the Parliament may sit from the Day to which it stands Prorogued, until they
have sufficiently provided against Popery and Arbitrary Power. This Court,
after some Debate and Consideration had thereupon, did return the Petitioners
Thanks for their Care and good Intention herein; And did thereupon nominate and
appoint Sir John Lawrence, Sir Robert Clayton, Knights and Aldermen, Mr.
Recorder, Sir Thomas Player Knight. Mr. John Du Bois, John Ellis Esquire and Mr.
Michael Godfrey Commoners, to withdraw, and immediately to prepare a Petition
to his Majesty upon the Subject matter of the said Petition; who accordingly
withdrawing, after some time returned again to this Court, and then presented
the Draught of such a Petition to his Majesty. The Tenor whereof follows, Viz.

To the King's most Excellent Majesty, etc.
After reading whereof, It is agreed and ordered by this Court ( Nemine
Contradicente,) That the said Petition shall be presented to his Majesty this
Evening, or as soon as conveniently may be. And the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor is desired to present the same, accompanied with Sir John Lawrence, Sir
Joseph Sheldon, Sir James Edwards, Knights and Aldermen, Mr. Recorder, Deputy
Hawes, Deputy Da^^l, John Nichols, John Ellis, Esquires, Mr. Godfrey, and Capt.
Griffith Commoners, who are now nominated and appointed to attend upon his
Lordship at the Presenting thereof.

Ward Mayor.
Commune Concil' tent' 13 Januarii 1680. Annoque Regis Car. II. 32.
IT is Agreed and Ordered by this Court, (Nemine Contradicente) That the Humble
Petition to His Majesty from this Court, now read and agreed upon, shall be
presented to His Majesty this Evening, or as soon as conveniently may be. And
the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor is desired to Present the same, accompanied
with Sir John Lawrence, Sir Joseph Sheldon, and Sir James Edwards, Knights and
Aldermen, Mr. Recorder, Deputy Hawes, Deputy Daniel, John Nichols, John Ellis,
Esquires, Mr. Godfrey, and Capt. Griffith, Commoners, who are now nominated and
appointed to attend upon his Lordship at the Presenting thereof.

Wagstaffe.

To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Petition of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London, in Common Council Assembled,
Most Humbly shows,
THat Your Majesty's great Council in Parliament, having in their late Session,
in pursuance of Your Majesty's Direction, entered upon a strict and impartial
Inquiry into the horrid and execrable Popish Plot, which has been for several
years last past, and still is, carried on for destruction of Your Majesty's
Sacred Person and Government, and extirpation of the Protestant Religion, and
the utter Ruin of Your Majesty's Protestant Subjects; and having so far
proceeded therein, as justly to attaint upon full Evidence, one of the five
Lords impeached for the same, and were in further Prosecution of the remaining
Four Lords, and other Conspirators therein.

And as well the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, as the Commons in Your said
Parliament assembled having Declared, That they are fully satisfied, that there
now is, and for diverse years last past, has been a horrid and Treasonable Plot
and Conspiracy contrived and carried on by those of the Pupish Religion in
Ireland, for Massacring the English, and subverting the Protestant Religion,
and the Ancient established Government of that Kingdom.

And Your said Commons having Impeached the Earl of Tyrone, in order to the
bringing him to Justice for the same; And having under Examination other
Conspirators in the said Irish Plot.

And Your said Commons having likewise impeached Sir William Scroggs, Chief
Justice of Your Majesty's Court of Kings Bench, for Treason and other great
Crimes and Misdemeanors, in endeavoring to subvert the Laws of this Kingdom by
his Arbitrary and Illegal proceedings; And having voted Impeachments against
several other Judges for the like Misdemeanors.

Your Petitioners considering the continual Hazards to which Your Sacred Life,
and the Protestant Religion, and the Peace of this Kingdom are exposed, while
the Hopes of a Popish Successor, gives Countenance and Encouragement to the
Conspiratours in their wicked Designs. And considering also the Disquiet and
Dreadful Apprehensions of Your good Subjects, by reason of the Miseries and
Mischiefs which threaten them on all parts; as well from Foreign Powers, as
from the Conspiracies within Your several Kingdoms, against which no sufficient
Remedy can be provided but by Your Majesty and Your Parliament, were extremely
surprised at the late Prorogation, whereby the Prosecution of the Public
Justice of the Kingdom, and the making the Provisions necessary for the
Preservation of Your Majesty, and Your Protestant Subjects, has received an
interruption. And they are the more affected herewith, by reason of the
Experience they have had of the great Progress, which the emboldned
Conspirators have formerly made in their Designs, during the late frequent
Recesses of Parliament. But that which supports them against Despair, is the
Hopes they derive from Your Majesty's Goodness, That Your Intention was, and
does continue by this Prorogation, to make way for Your better Concurrence with
the Counsels of Your Parliament.

And Your Petitioners humbly hope, That Your Majesty will not take Offense,
that your Subjects are thus Zealous, and even impatient of the least Delay of
the long hoped for Security, whilst they see your precious Life invaded, the
true Religion undermined, their Families and innocent Posterity likely to be
subjected to Blood, Confusion, and Ruin; and all these Dangers increased, by
reason of the late Endeavors of Your Majesty, and Your Parliament, which have
added Provocation to the Conspirators, but have had little or no Effect toward
securing against them; And they trust Your Majesty will graciously accept this
Discovery and Desire of their Loyal Hearts to preserve Your Majesty, and
whatever else is dear to them, and to strengthen Your Majesty against all
Popish and Pernicious Counsels, which any ill affected Persons may persume to
offer.

They do therefore most humbly Pray, That Your Majesty will be graciously
pleased (as the only means to quiet the Minds, and extinguish the Fears of Your
Protestant People, and prevent the imminent Dangers which threaten Your
Majesty's Kingdoms, and particularly this Your Great City, which has already
so deeply suffered for the same) to permit Your said Parliament to Sit, from
the Day to which they are Prorogued, until by their Counsels and Endeavors
those good Remedies shall be provided, and those just Ends attained, upon which
the Safety of Your Majesty's Person, the preservation of the Protestant
Religion, the Peace and Settlement of Your Kingdoms, and the Welfare of this
Your Ancient City, do so absolutely depend. For the pursuing and obtaining of
which good Effects, Your Petitioners unanimously do offer their Lives and
Estates.

And shall ever Pray, etc.

Vox Patriae: Or, the Resentments and Indignation of the Freeborn Subjects of
England, against Popery, Arbitrary Government, the Duke of York, or any Popish
Successor; being a true Collection of the Petitions and Addresses lately made
from diverse Counties, Cities, and Boroughs of this Realm, to their respective
Representatives, chosen to serve in the Parliament held at Oxford, March 21,
1680.
HE was certainly no Fool, that first said, Parliaments were the Pulse of the
People: It Is from thence Wise State-Physitians take their Diagnosticks. What
Sentiments our late Parliament had of our Modern Affairs, is obvious in their
Printed Votes and Addresses. Nor will it be less plain, what is the Common
Sense of the Body of the People in this Juncture of iminent Danger, if the
Unanimous Addresses from so many considerable parts of England be regarded.

No sooner was the late Parliament surprizingly Prorogued, Jan. 10. 1680/1, in
the very Crisis of Business, and when they had so many excellent Bills before
them, and had made so hopful a Progress in unvailing the horrid Popish Plot
(which still like an Ill Spright, haunts and Night-mares us) and in bringing
Criminals to Justice, but presently the whole Nation was startled, and
forthwith (as Convulsions are first perceived in the Head) the same Day a
considerable Number of Eminent Citizens of London Presented the following
Address to their Major.

To the Right Honorable Sir Patience Ward, Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of
London.
WE the Citizens of the said City (on behalf of our selves and others our
Fellow Citizens) being very apprehensive of the great and iminent Dangers that
this Metropolis, and the whole Protestant Intrest are exposed to, by the Horrid
and Devilish Designs of the Papists and their Adherents: And being sensible
that they are increased and heightened by the Surprising Prorogation of this
present Parliament, do most humbly recommend to your Lordship the Particulars
hereunder mentioned.

I. That your Lordship will be pleased to cause the several Watches of this
City to be doubled this Night, and so to continue, and cause some Housekeepers
to watch in person, and a sufficient Ward to be kept by Day.

II. To cause the several Chains in the several Streets of this City to be put
up this Night, and so to continue.

III. That your Lordship will be pleased to keep the Keys of the several Gates
of this City this Night, and so to continue.

IV. To cause the several Gates of this City to be kept Locked up every Lord's
Day and permit the several Wicket-Doors only to be opened.

V. That your Lordship will not permit any Body of Armed Soldiers, greater or
less (other than the Trained Bands of this City) to march through any part of
the same.

VI. That your Lordship will forthwith Order a Meeting of the Common Council of
this City.

Which his Lordship was pleased favorably to receive and read, and then gave
the Gentlemen answer, That he was very apprehensive of the Danger of this City,
and had done something already to have full Watches, and intended to go out
himself to see that they were kept; and assured them, that he would seriously
consider their Desires, and take all the care that lay in him, to prevent the
Danger that so threatened them.

The very same day, and before it was possible the news, or thoughts of any
Prorogation could reach so far, the Grand Jury of Shropshire, in the name and
behalf of themselves and that whole County, thought fit to express their hearty
Concurrence with, and thanks to the then House of Commons for their Zealous
Proceedings against the most Dangerous Popish Interest in the Terms following:

To the Honorable Ric. Newport, Esquire and Sir Vincent Corbet, Bar. Knights of
the Shire in this present Parliament for the County of Salop, Jan. 10. 1680.
WHereas the Honorable the Commons in this Parliament assembled, have to the
great satisfaction of the Nation, caused their Votes to be published, thereby
letting the Kingdom know the Candor and Integrity of their Proceeding, which
they desire may be examined in the face of the Sun: but fully satisfying us
with what Wisdom, Constancy and Courage in this time of iminent danger, they
have endeavored to secure our King, our Religion, the Government and our
Liberties: We the Grand Jury Impannelled for the Body of this County of Salop,
being extremely sensible how worthily you have discharged the Trust reposed in
you, and finding our Opinions therein seconded by the Unanimous Resolution of
the rest of our County, do believe our selves in all Justice obliged, humbly to
testify unto you, how much we rejoice in the Proceeding you have made, how
heartily we concur with your wise Resolutions, and how earnestly we desire they
may be brought to perfection, and in particular the Bill to Exclude the D. of
York. That so we and our Posterity may be delivered from the apparent Danger of
Popery and the necessary Consequences thereof, Tyranny and Oppression, and
remain Free Protestant Subjects; to acknowledge evermore the Service and
Obligation we owe to Patriots that have served us so faithfully.

Signed by all the Members of the Grand Jury; being 17 of the most considerable
Gentlemen of the County.

January, 13. 1680/1. A Common Council being held at Guild Hall, several
Eminent Citizens Presented the following Petition.

To the Right Honorable Sir Patience Ward, Knight. Lord Mayor of the City of
London, and the Right Worshipful the Aldermen and Commons in Common Council
Assembled.
The humble Petition of the Citizens and Inhabitants of the said City,
Shows,
THat we being deeply sensible of evils and mischiefs hanging over this Nation
in general, and this City in particular, in respect of the danger of the Kings
Person, the Protestant Religion, and our well established Government, by the
continued hellish and damnable designs of the Papists and others their
adherents: And, knowing no way (under heaven) so effectual to preserve His
Royal Majesty (and us) from the utter ruin and destruction threatened; as by the
speedy sitting of this present Parliament, the surprising Prorogation of which
greatly adds to, and increases the just fears and jealousies of your
Petitioners minds.

We your Petitioners do therefore beseech your Lordship, and this Honorable
Court, to acquaint His Majesty with these our fears and apprehensions; and that
it is our humble and earnest desire, (as well as yours) that His Majesty would
be pleased (for the utter defeating the wicked and bloody purposes of our
Enemies) to permit this present Parliament which stands Prorogued to the 20th
of this instant January, then to Assemble and continue to sit until they have
effectually secured us against Popery, and Arbitrary Power, and Redressed the
manifold, Grievances which at present we groan under, and for our immediate
security, that you will be pleased to order whatsoever else shall be thought
necessary and expedient by your Lordship and this Honorable Court in this time
of imminent danger for the safety of this great City.

And your Petitioners shall ever Pray, etc.

The Address of the Freeholders of the County of Middlesex, to Sir William
Roberts Knight, and Nicholas Raynton Esquire Knights of the Shire.
WE the Freeholders of this County, have (in great Confidence of your
Integrity, Wisdom and Courage) now chosen You to Represent Us in the next
Parliament, to be holden at Oxford, on the 21st. Day of this present March. And
although we do not in the least question your Faithfulness to the true Interest
of this Nation, nor your Prudence in the Management thereof: yet esteeming it
greatly our Duty, in this unhappy Juncture, wherein our Religion, Lives,
Liberties, Properties, and all that is dear unto us, are in such iminent
danger, to signify our pressing Dangers unto You. And accordingly we do
request, That in the next Parliament, wherein we have chose You to Sit, and
Act, That You will with the greatest Integrity, and most undaunted Resolution,
join with, and assist the other Worthy Representatives and Patriots of this
Nation, in the searching into, and preventing the Horrid and Hellish Vill^nies,
Plots and Designs of that wicked and restless sort of People, the Papists, both
in this, and the Neighboring Kingdoms. And making some honorable Provision
for the Discovery thereof;

In securing to us the Enjoyment of the True Protestant Religion, and the well
established Government of this Kingdom. In Promoting the happy, and long prayed
for Union among all His Majesty's Protestant Subjects. In Repealing the 35th of
Elizabeth, the Corporation-Act, and all other Acts, which upon experience have
proved injurious to the true Protestant Interest. In Asserting the Peoples
unquestionable Rights of Petitioning. In removing our just Fears, by reason of
the great Forces in this Kingdom, under the Name of Guards, which the Law has
no knowledge of. In preventing the Misery, Ruin, and utter Destruction, which
unavoidably must come upon this and the neighboring Nations, if James Duke of
York, or any other Papist shall ascend the Royal Throne of this Kingdom. And
lastly, in securing to us our Legal Right of Annual Parliaments; which (under
God) will unquestionably prove the highest security of all that is good and
desirable to us and our Posterity after us. Always assuring our selves, that
you will not in any wise consent unto any Money-Supply, until we are
effectually secured against Popery and Arbitrary Power.

And particularly we desire you to give the most hearty Thanks of this County
to that Noble Peer, the Earl of Essex, and by him to the rest of those Noble
and Renowned Peers, who were pleased lately, and so seasonably, to offer their
Petition and Advice to His Majesty. In the pursuance of all which Needful,
Worthy and Excellent Ends, we shall, as in duty bound, stand by you with our
Lives and Fortunes.

A Letter of Thanks from the Grand Jury of the County of Worcester, to the
Knights of this Shire; Dated, Jan. 12. 1680.
Honored Sirs,
WE the Grand Jury of the County of Worcester, at the General Quarter Sessions
of the Peace held for the said County the 11th. day of Jan. in the 32d year of
the King's Majesty's Reign, do hereby, in the behalf of our selves and the
County for which we serve, return you our most hearty Thanks for your constant
and unwearied Attendance upon the Service of His Majesty and your Country in
this present Parliament, in a Time of such iminent danger; And especially of
your concurrence in those Methods that have been taken for the Security of His
Majesty's Sacred Person, the Protestant Religion, and the Properties of His
Majesty's Subjects, against the Hellish Plots of the Papists and their
Adherents. And we do humbly request your continuance therein, and shall ever
pray for the preservation of the Person of our most Gracious Sovereign, and
that God will direct and unite his Councils; and upon all occasions testify
that we are,

Honored Sirs, Your very Humble, Obliged, and Thankful Servants.

This was signed by all the said Grand Jury, and directed, to the Honorable
Colonel Samuel Sandys, and Thomas Foley Esquires, Members of this present
Parliament.

A Letter from the Ancient and Loyal Borough of North-Allerton in Yorkshire,
Dated Jan. 14. 1680. to their Burgesses in Parliament.
Honored Sirs,
THe unexpected and sudden News of this Day's Post, preventing us from sending
those due Acknowledgments which the greatness of your Services for Public
Good, have merited from us, we have no better way (now left us) to express our
Gratitude, and the highest Resentments of your Actions before, and in your last
Sessions of Parliament, than to manifest our Approbation thereof, by an
Assurance, that if a Dissolution of this present Parliament happen, since you
have evidenced so sufficiently your Affections to His Majesty's Royal Person,
and Endeavors for the preserving the Protestant Religion, our Laws and
Liberties, we are now resolved, if you are pleased to continue with us, to
continue you as our Representatives: And do therefore beg your Acceptance
thereof; and farther, that you will continue your Station during this
Prorogation, faithfully assuring you, that none of us desire to give, or
occasion you the Expense or Trouble of a Journey in order to your Election (if
such happen) being so sensible of the too great expense you have been at
already, in so carefully discharging the Trust and Confidence reposed in you,
by, Gentlemen,

Your Obliged and Faithful Friends and Servants. Signed by the Burgesses and
Electors of North-Allerton, and directed to Sir Gilbert Gerrard, and Sir Henry
Calverly, Burgesses for the Borough of North-Allerton in Yorkshire.

The same day the Grand Jury of Reading Presented the following Paper to the
Mayor of that Town.

Berkshire ss.
The Petition of the Grand Jury of the Borough of Reading, at the Sessions
holden at the said Borough, Jan. 14. 1680.
To the Right Worshipful the Mayor and Aldermen of the Town and Borough of
Reading,
The Humble Petition of the Grand Jury of the said Town, in behalf of
themselves and others the Inhabitants of the same,
Shows,
THat your Petitioners are deeply sensible of the Great and Iminent Dangers and
Mischiefs that threaten Us, as well as the whole Nation, by the implacable
Malice and Endeavor of our Enemies, to introduce Popery and Arbitrary
Government, to Subvert the Protestant Religion, and our well-establisht Laws,
and to deprive us of our undoubted Rights and Liberties.

We therefore humbly entreat you, that you would take it into your
consideration, that no Person whatsoever may be employed, encouraged, or
empowered to act in any wise in this Corporation, that has been Voted and
Deemed in Parliament a Betrayer of the Rights of the People of England.

And your Petitioners shall Pray, etc.

Soon after the Amazing Dissolution happened, and His Majesty having then
Declared his pleasure to Summon and Hold the next Parliament, not at
Westminster, which in all Ages has been generally the usual place of Convening
those Assemblies (as being most conveniently situate near the Metropolis of the
Kingdom, where all Persons may be much better accommodated than elsewhere) but
at the City of Oxford; several Noble Lords thought it their Duty humbly to
Represent the Inconveniences which in their apprehensions would attend such
chargeable Removal, and submissively to offer their Advice to His Majesty, to
alter that Resolution, in the following Petition; which being presented to His
Majesty by that Noble Peer, of approved Loyalty and Prudence, the Right
Honorable the Earl of Essex; His Lordship being accompanied with several other
Lords at the Delivery thereof, thus expressed himself.

The Earl of Essex's Speech, at the Delivering the following Petition to His
most Sacred Majesty, Jan. 25. 1680.
May it please your Majesty,
THe Lords here present, together with diverse other Peers of the Realm, taking
notice that by Your late Proclamation, Your Majesty has declared an intention
of calling a Parliament at Oxford; and observing from History and Records, how
unfortunate many Assemblies have been, when called at a Place remote from the
Capital City; as particularly the Congress in Henry the Second's time at
Clarendon; Three several Parliaments at Oxford in Henry the Third's time, and
at Coventry in Henry the Sixth's time; With diverse others which have proved
very fatal to those Kings, and have been followed with great mischief on the
whole Kingdom: And considering the present posture of affairs, the many
jealousies and discontents, which are amongst the People, We have great Cause
to apprehend, that the consequences of a Parliament now at Oxford may be as
fatal to Your Majesty and the Nation, as those others mentioned have been to
the then Reigning Kings, and therefore we do conceive that we cannot answer it
to God, to Your Majesty, or to the People, If we, being Peers of the Realm,
should not on so Important an Occasion humbly offer our advice to Your Majesty;
that if possible, Your Majesty may be prevailed with, to alter this (as we
apprehend) unseasonable Resolution The Grounds and Reasons of our Opinion, are
contained in this our Petition, which We humbly Present to Your Majesty.

To the King's most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Petition and Advice of the
Lords under-named, Peers of the Realm.
Humbly Shows,
THat whereas Your Majesty has been pleased, by diverse Speeches, and Messages
to Your Houses of Parliament, rightly to represent to them the Dangers that
Threatened Your Majesty's Person, and the whole Kingdom, from the Mischievous,
and wicked Plots of the Papists, and the sudden Growth of a Foreign Power, unto
which, no stop or remedy could be Provided, unless it were by Parliament, and
an Union of Your Majesty's Protestant Subjects, in one Mind, and one Interest.

And the Lord Chancellor, in Pursuance of Your Majesty's Commands, having more
at large Demonstrated the said Dangers to be as great, as we in the midst of
our Fears could Imagine them: and so pressing, that our Liberties, Religion,
Lives, and the whole Kingdom would be certainly Lost, if a speedy Provision
were not made against them.

And Your Majesty, on the 21st. of April, 1679. Having called unto your
Council, many Honorable and Worthy Persons, and declared to them and the whole
Kingdom, That being sensible of the evil Effects of a single Ministry, or
private Advice, or Foreign Committee, for the General Direction of your
Affairs; Your Majesty would for the future Refer all things unto that Council,
and by the constant Advice of them, together with the frequent use of your
great Council, the Parliament, Your Majesty was hereafter Resolved to Govern
the Kingdoms; We began to hope we should see an end of our Miseries.

But to our unspeakable Grief and Sorrow, we soon found our Expectations
Frustrated. The Parliament, then subsisting, was Prorogued and Dissolved,
before it could perfect what was intended for our Relief and Security; and
though another was thereupon called, yet by many Prorogations it was put off,
till the 21st. of October past; and notwithstanding Your Majesty was then again
pleased to acknowledge, that neither Your Person, nor Your Kingdom could be
safe, till the matter of the Plot was gone through, It was unexpectedly
Prorogued on the 10th. of this Month, before any sufficient Order could be
taken therein; all their Just and Pious Endeavors to save the Nation were
overthrown; the good Bills they had been Industriously preparing to Unite all
Your Majesty's Protestant Subjects brought to naught; The discovery of the
Irish Plot stifled; The Witnesses that came in frequently more fully to declare
That, both of England and Ireland, discouraged. Those Foreign Kingdoms and
States, who by a happy conjunction with us, might give a Check to the French
Power, disheartened, even to such a Despair of their own Security against the
growing greatness of that Monarch, as we fear may induce them to take new
Resolutions, and perhaps such as may be fatal to us: The Strength and Courage
of our Enemies both at home and abroad increased; and our selves left in the
utmost danger of seeing our Country brought into utter Desolation.

In these Extremities, we had nothing under God to comfort us, but the Hopes,
that Your Majesty (being touched with the Groans of Your perishing People)
would have suffered Your Parliament to meet at the Day unto which it was
Prorogued: and that no further interruption should have been given to their
Proceedings, in Order to their saving of the Nation. But that failed us too:
For then we heard that Your Majesty, by the private suggestion of some Wicked
Persons, Favorers of Popery, Promoters of French Designs, and Enemies to Your
Majesty and the Kingdom (without the Advice, and as we have good Reason to
believe, against the Opinion, even of Your Privy Council) had been prevailed
with to Dissolve it, and to call another to meet at Oxford, where neither Lords
nor Commons can be in Safety, but will be daily exposed to the Sword of the
Papists, and their Adherents, of whom too many are crept into Your Majesty's
Guards. The Liberty of speaking according to their Consciences, will be thereby
Destroyed, and the Validity of all their Acts and Proceedings consisting in it,
left Disputable. The Straitness of the Place, no way admits of such a concourse
of Persons, as now follows every Parliament; the Witnesses which are necessary
to give Evidence against the Popish Lords, such Judges, or others whom the
Commons have Impeached, or had resolved to Impeach, can neither bear the Charge
of going thither, nor trust themselves under the Protection of a Parliament,
that is it self Evidently under the power of Guards and Soldiers.

The Premises considered, We Your Majesty's Petitioners, out of a Just
Abhorrence of such a dangerous and pernicious Council, (which the Authors have
not dared to avow) and the direful Apprehensions of the Calamities and
Miseries, that may ensue thereupon; do make it our most Humble Prayer and
Advice, That the Parliament may not sit at a Place, where it will not be able
to Act with that Freedom, which is necessary; and especially, to give unto
their Acts and Proceedings, that Authority which they ought to have amongst the
People, and have ever had, unless Impaired by some Awe upon them, (of which
there wants not Precedents:) And that Your Majesty would be graciously pleased,
to Order It to Sit at Westminster (it being the usual Place, and where they may
Consult and Act with Safety and Freedom.)

And your Petitioness shall ever Pray, etc. Monmouth, Kent, Huntington,
Bedford, Salisbury, Clare, Stanford, Essex, Shaftsbury, Mordant, Evers, Paget,
Gray, Herbert, Howard, Delamer.


The Counties and Corporations throughout England, were generally so well
satisfied with the Proceedings of the Honorable House of Commons in the last
Parliament, That as soon as they heard of the Dissolution, they Resolved to
choose the very same respective Persons again, and contrived to make their
Elections, without putting the Gentlemen chosen to any Charge; Thereby to crush
that Pernicious Custom of overruling Debauchery, at Choice of Members, which
had not only scandalized the Nation, but almost impoyson'd and destroyed the
very Constitution of our Parliaments.

A Letter from the famous Town of Kingston upon Hull, to Sir Michael Wharton
Knight. and William Gee Esquire Burgesses for that Town in the late Parliament.
Worthy Gentlemen,
WE understand you have signified to us our Magistrates your willingness to
represent in the ensuing Parliament, and that they have gratefully accepted of
your generous Offer, which if they had communicated to us, our joint compliance
would have been readily manifested: for we are so sensible of your integrity in
the late Parliament, by your indefatigable care and pains, in endeavoring the
security of His Majesty's Sacred Person, as also our Religion and Property,
that we cannot but rejoice that you are pleased again to offer us that
kindness, which your former good Service has engaged us to become Suitors for.
We do therefore return you our hearty thanks, and you may be confident, without
your appearance, or the least charge, to have all our Suffrages Nemine
contradicente, and will, as our Obligations bind us, stand by your Proceedings,
as becomes Loyal Subjects and true Englishmen; subscribing our selves,

Your obliged and affectionate Friends and Servants, etc.

Which was subscribed by Matthew Johnson Esquire Sheriff of the said Town, and 122
more of the most Eminent Burgesses and Electors.

Another Letter from Lewis in Sussex on the like Occasion.
To their late Worthy Representatives Richard Bridger, and Thomas Pellam
Esquires.
Gentlemen,
WE are sensible of the great Trouble and Charge you have been at, as our
Representatives, and of your great Care and Constancy; for which we return you
our hearty Thanks; with our earnest Request, that you would be pleased once
more to favor us in the same capacity: And you will thereby much Oblige

Your Faithful Friends and Servants.

This was Subscribed by near 150 of the Inhabitants of Lewis aforesaid.

On the 4th. of February, The City of London Assembled in Common Hall,
consisting of several Thousand Livery-Men; having by an Unanimous Voice,
Elected their Old Representatives, Returned them their Thanks in a Paper there
Publicly Read, and Approved of with a General Consent.

The Address of the City of London.
To the Honored Sir Robert Clayton, Knight, Thomas Pilkington, Alderman, Sir
Thomas Player, Knight, and William Love, Esquire late (and now chosen) Members of
Parliament for this Honorable City of London.
WE the Citizens of this City in Common Hall Assembled, having Experienced the
great and manifold Services of you our Representatives in the Two last
Parliaments, by your most faithful and unwearied Endeavors to Search into and
discover the depth of the horrid and hellish Popish Plots, to preserve His
Majesty's Royal Person, the Protestant Religion, and the well established
Government of this Realm; to secure the Meeting and Sitting of frequent
Parliaments, to Assert our undoubted Rights of Petitioning, and to punish such
who would have Betrayed those Rights, to promote the happy and long-wished for
Union amongst all His Majesty's Protestant Subjects, to Repeal the 35th. of
Elizabeth, and the Corporation-Act; and especially for what Progress has been
made toward the Exclusion of all Popish Successors, and particularly of James
Duke of York, whom the Commons of England (in the two last Parliaments have
Declared, and we are greatly sensible is) the Principal Cause of all the Ruin
and Misery impending these Kingdoms in general, and this City in particular.
For all which, and other your constant and faithful Management of our Affairs
in Parliament, we offer and return to you our most hearty Thanks, being
confidently assured that you will not consent to the granting any Money-Sudply,
until you have effectually Secured us against Popery and Arbitrary Power;
Resolving (by Divine Assistance) in pursuance of the same Ends, to stand by you
with our Lives and Fortunes.

And likewise there was offered another Paper directed to the Sheriffs,
purporting their Thanks to the several Noble Peers for their late Petition and
Advice to His Majesty; which was as follows:

To the Worshipful Slingsby Bethel and Henry Cornish Esquires, Sheriffs of the
City of London and Westminster.
WE the Citizens of the said City, in Common Hall Assembled, having read, and
diligently perused the late Petition and Advice of several Noble Peers of this
Realm to His Majesty, whose Counsels we humbly conceive are (in this unhappy
Juncture) highly seasonable, and greatly tending to the Safety of these
Kingdoms. We do therefore make it our most hearty Request, that you (in the
Name of this Common Hall) will return to the Right Honorable the Earl of
Essex, and (by him) to the rest of those Noble Peers, the Grateful
Acknowledgment of this Assembly.

Which being Read, and Approved of by a General Acclamation, the Sheriffs
promised to give their Lordships the Thanks of the Common Hall, in pursuance of
their Request.

The Address of the City of Westminster, Febr. 10. 1680/1.
To the Honored Sir William Poultney, and Sir William Waller, Knights,
Unanimously Elected Members of the ensuing Parliament for the Ancient City of
Westminster.
WE the Inhabitants of this City and the Liberties thereof, Assembled,
retaining a most grateful and indelible Sense of your prudent Zeal in the late
Parliament, in searching into the depth of the horrid and hellish Plots of the
Papists against His Majesty's Royal Person, the Protestant Religion, and the
Government of the Realm, and in endeavoring to bring the Authors of Wicked
Counsels to condign punishment: And remembering also your faithful discharge of
that great Trust reposed in you, in vindicating our undoubted Right of
Petitioning His Majesty, That Parliaments may Sit for the Redress of our
Grievances, which Hereditary Privilege some Bad Men would have wrested out of
our Hands; upon whom you have set such a just Brand of Ignominy, as may deter
them from the like Attempts for the time to come: And further reflecting upon
your vigorous Endeavors to secure to us and our Posterity the Profession of
the True Religion, by those Just, Legal and Necessary Expedients, which the
great Wisdom of the Two last Parliaments fixed upon, and adhered to; Do find
our selves obliged to make our open Acknowledgement of, and to return our
hearty Thanks for your eminent Integrity and Faithfulness, your indefatigable
Labor and Pains in the Premises, not once questioning but you will maintain
the same good Spirit and Zeal to secure His Majesty's Royal Person, and to
preserve to us the Protestant Religion (wherein all good Subjects have an
Interest) against the secret and subtle Contrivances and open Assaults of the
Common Enemy: as also our Civil Rights and Properties against the Encroachments
of Arbitrary Power. In pursuance of which Great and Good Ends, we shall always
be ready, as we are obliged, to adhere to you our Honored Representatives,
with the utmost hazard of our Persons and Estates.

City of Chichester, the same Day.
After the Unanimous Choice of John Braman and Richard Farington Esquires, (who
served for that City in the late Parliament) they had the Sense of that Eminent
City delivered to them by a Worthy Person, in the Name, and by the Consent of
the rest, in the following Speech.

Gentlemen,
THe Faithful discharge of the like high Trust we formerly gave you, is the
true Inducement of our choosing you again; And as we heartily thank you for your
past worthy Behavior in Parliament, and in a particular manner, for your being
for the Bill of Exclusion; for the Bill of Uniting all His Majesty's Subjects,
for Vindicating our (almost lost) Right of Petitioning for frequent
Parliaments, and for your endeavor to call those wretched Pensioners to an
Account, that betrayed the Nation in the late Long Parliament; So we pray you
to persevere in your faithful Service of us, until the Nation be thoroughly
secured against Popery and Arbitrary Power. And since that Famous and Renowned
Bulwark of the Protestant Religion, the ever-to-be-honoured City of London,
have commanded their Sheriffs to present their Thanks to the true English and
Noble Earl of Essex, and by him to the rest of those Right Honorable Peers,
for their late Excellent Petition and Advice to His Majesty; so we being
willing to imitate so Good and Great an Example, do desire you in our names, to
present in like manner, our humble and hearty Thanks to the said Earl, and
those Noble Lords.

Borough of Colchester, February 15. 1680/1.
After the Election made, a great Number of the Free-Burgesses of this
Corporation agreed upon the following Address to be presented to their
Representatives.

To the Honorable Sir Harbottle Grimston Baronet, and Samuel Reynolds Esquire now
chosen Burgesses for our Corporation of Cochester, in the County of Essex.
WE the Free-Burgesses of the said Corporation, being deeply sensible of the
unspeakable danger threatening His Majesty's Life, and the Protestant Religion,
and the well established Government of this Kingdom, from the Hellish Designs
of the Papists, and their wicked Adherents: And that our Religion and
Liberties, can only, under God, be secured to us and our Posterity, by wholesome
Advice in Parliament; Have now chosen you to represent us there, in confidence
of your Integrity and Courage, to discharge so great a Trust in this time of
Imminent Danger. And we do desire you to allow us to speak our steadfast
Resolution (with utmost hazard of our Lives and Fortunes) to show our
Approbation of what shall be resolved in Parliament, for maintaining the
Protestant Religion, and our Liberties, against Popery, and Arbitrary
Government. And we hope you will endeavor to the utmost of your Power, to
disable James Duke of York, and all other Popish Pretenders, from Inheriting
the Imperial Crown of this Realm: And we shall pray for your good success.

Here we cannot but inform the Reader, That the Notorious Thompson in his
Popish Intelligence of the 15th of March, would insinuate as if there were no
such Address, by Printing a Story, That the Mayor, Aldermen and some others of
this Town, being Assembled on February 28. 1680/1. A Printed Paper purporting
to be the manner of the Election, and containing also an Address made to the
Members, etc. was read amongst them, and that none of the Assembly would own
his Consenting to or making that Paper or Address; Touching which it must be
Noted. 1. That the Mayor and several of these Gentlemen, were disobliged by
being Out-Voted, and much offended, because they could not carry it for their
Friend Sir Walter Clarges, and so had no Reason to Address to the Members duly
and fairly Elected, because they had vigorously appeared for a contrary Party.
2. That there are in that Pamphlet in relating the manner of the Election some
galling Truths, or if you please Reflections, which possibly had better been
spared, and therefore no wise man would own the making it. But for the Address
it self it is certain, That it was agreed upon, consented unto, and will be
Justified by the far greater part of the Electors of this Ancient and Eminently
Loyal Borough, of which 'twas thought fit here to give this brief Account, for
obviating any slanderous Objection that might be made on that occasion.

The Address of the Gentlemen and Freeholders of Bedford.
To the Right Honorable the Lord Russel, and Sir Humphrey Munnox, Elected
Knights for that Shire, on the 14th, of February, 1680/1.
WHen it pleased His Majesty to summon His Peers and Commons of this His Realm
to meet Him at Westminster, in the last Parliament, we accordingly then Chose
You to Act on our behalf. And being abundantly satisfied, not only in Your
Courage, Integrity and Prudence in general; but also in Your particular Care,
and faithful conscientious Endeavors: (1.) To assert our Right of Legal
Petitioning for Redress of our just Grievances, and to punish those who were
studious to betray it: (2.) To secure the Meeting, and Sitting of frequent
Parliaments (already by Law provided for) for the preservation of our Lives,
Liberties and Estates; and for the support of His Sacred Majesty; and even of
the Government it self: (3.) To Repeal the Act of the 35th of Elizabeth,
whereby all true Protestants might possibly, in case of a Popish Successor
(from which God of his infinite Mercy defend us) be liable to utter Ruin,
Abjuration, and perpetual Banishment. (.4) To secure his Majesty's Royal
Person, the Protestant Religion, and well Established Government of this Realm.
(5.) To destroy and root out Popery. (6.) To use the most effectual means
conducing to so good an End; viz. The Exclusion of a a Popish Successor, both
by name, and otherwise. We have therefore now chosen you again to represent us
in like manner in this Parliament called to be held at Oxford, in full Trust
and Confidence, that with the same Courage and Integrity you will persevere in
the same good Endeavors, pursuing all things that (by joint consent of your
Fellow Members) shall be found for our public Good and Safety. And in full
assurance that you will not consent to the disposal of any of our Moneys, till
we are effectually secured against Popery, and Arbitrary Power, do resolve (by
Divine Assistance) to stand by you therein.

The Address of the Gentry and Freeholders of the County of Suffolk, to their
Representatives Chosen the 14th of February, 1680/1. presented to them by Sir
Philip Skippon, in the name and by consent of the rest of the Electors.
To the Honorable Sir Sam. Barnardiston, and Sir Will. Spring, Baronets,
Knights of the Shire for the County of Suffolk.
Gentlemen,
WE the Freeholders of this County having chosen you our Representatives in
the last Parliament, in which we had satisfactory Demonstration of your Zeal
for the Protestant Religion, of your Loyalty to his Majesty's Person and
Government, and of your faithful Endeavors for the Preservation of the Laws,
our Rights and Properties; we now return you our most hearty Thanks, and have
unanimously chosen you to represent this County at the Parliament to be holden
at Oxford the 21st of March next: And though we have not the least distrust of
your Wisdom to understand, or of your Integrity and Resolution to maintain and
promote our common Interests now in so great hazard, yet we think it meet (at
this time of imminent Danger to the King and Kingdom) to recommend some things
to your Care; And particularly we do desire,

1. That (as hitherto you have, so) you will vigorously prosecute the Execrable
Popish Plot, now more fully discovered and proved by the Trial of William late
Viscount Stafford.

2. That you will promote a Bill for excluding James D. of York, and all Popish
Successors from the Imperial Crown of this Realm; as that which under God may
probably be a present and effectual means for the preservation of his Majesty's
Life, (which God preserve) the Protestant Religion, and the well-established
Government of this Kingdom.

3. That you will endeavor the frequent meetings of Parliaments, and their
sitting so long as it shall be requisite for the dispatch of those great
Affairs for which they are convened, as that which is our only Bulwark against
Arbitrary Power.

4. That you will endeavor an happy and necessary Union amongst all his
Majesty's Protestant Subjects, by promoting those several good Bills which were
to that end before the last Parliament.

And that till these things be obtained, which we conceive necessary even to
the Being of this Nation, you will not consent to bring any Charge upon our
Estates; And we do assure you that we will stand by you with our Lives and
Fortunes in Prosecution of the good ends before recited.

The Address of the Town of Hertford, February 21. 1680/1.
To the Right Worshipful Sir William Cooper Baronet, and Sir Thomas Bide Knight.
WE the Freemen and Inhabitants of the Borough of Hertford, in the County of
Hertford, having unanimously Chosen You our Representatives to Sit in the next
ensuing Parliament to be holden at Oxford the 21st of March next, cannot but
with all Thankfulness acknowledge your most faithful Endeavors, and unwearied
Pains in serving us in the last Parliament, searching into and discovering the
late damnable Hellish Popish Plot; The preservation of His Majesty's Person,
the Protestant Religion, and the well established Government of the Realm; To
secure the Meeting and Sitting of frequent Parliaments; to assert our undoubted
Right of Petitioning, and to punish such who would have betrayed those Rights;
To promote a happy Union amongst all His Majesty's Protestant Subjects; to
Repeal the Act of the 35th of Queen Elizabeth, and the Corporation Act; and
particularly for what Progress has been made in the Bill of Exclusion of all
Popish Successors, the principal Cause of all the Miseries and Ruin impending
these Kingdoms in general; beseeching You as now our Representatives, to
prosecute the same good Ends and Purposes, until the Nation shall be thoroughly
secured against Popery and Arbitrary Power, both in Church and State. And
further, in imitation of the ever Renowned City of London, We Request You in
our behalf, to present our humble Acknowledgements to the Right Honorable the
Earl of Essex, and by him to all the rest of those Right Honorable Peers, for
their late Excellent Petition and Advice to His Majesty; and for all the rest
of all their Faithful Services and Endeavors they have performed for the
Protestant Interest of the Nation.

The Address of the Gentry and Freeholders of the County of Essex.
To Sir Henry Mildmay and John Lemot Honeywood Esquire Unanimously Re elected
Knights for the Shire, Feb. 22. 1680/1.
Gentlemen,
THe Faithful Discharge of that Trust we formerly gave You, is the true
Inducement of our Choosing You again to be our Representatives, being abundantly
satisfied not only in Your Care and Prudence in General, but also in Your
Particular Care and Unwearied Diligence in Your Conscientious Endeavors to
secure His Majesty's Royal Person, the Protestant Religion, and Government of
the Realm; To Unite all His Majesty's Protestant Subjects; To Repeal the Act of
the 35th of Elizabeth; To Assert our just and ancient Rights and Privileges,
and particularly that of Petitioning; and to punish those who were studious to
betray them: For Your two excellent Addresses, and Publishing Your Votes;
Endeavoring to secure the Meeting and Sitting of Frequent Parliaments; To
destroy and root out Popery, by securing us against all Popish Successors, and
particularly by passing a Bill against James Duke of York, without which we are
highly sensible, that all other means will be ineffectual, and the Peace and
Safety of the Kingdom and government (it self) left in great danger; it being
inconsistent with our Oath, by which we swear against the Pope's Supremacy,
whilst a Popish King himself owns it; and it being against the Essence of
Government, that People should obey him, who, by his Principles, (as a Papist)
is bound to destroy them.

And as we do heartily thank You for Your past worthy Behavior herein, so we
have chosen You to Act on our behalf in the next Parliament to be holden at
Oxford, in full trust and considence, that with Courage and Integrity, You will
persevere in the same good Endeavors, pursuing all things that shall be found
for our Public Good and Safety.

And in full Assurance that You will not consent to the disposal of any of our
Moneys, till we are effectually secured against Popery and Arbitrary Power; And
until the Fleet and Garrisons are settled in the hands of such as are Persons
of known Loyalty and Fidelity to the King and Kingdom, and true Zeal and
Affection for the Protestant Religion, and we do resolve (by Divine Assistance)
to stand by You therein with our Lives and Fortunes.

It Is observable, That this Address being openly read to their Representatives,
and confirmed by the Unanimous and loud Acclamations of the Freeholders, for
further demonstration that it was the Sense of each individual person of that
Numerous Assembly, it was offered, that so many as agreed to it, should say Ay;
upon which, they all cried out Ay, Ay. And if any were otherwise minded, they
were desired to express their Dissent by saying No: At which there was Altum
Silentium, not one to be heard saying No.

The Address of the Gentry and other Freeholders of the County of Surrey,
being in number about 2000, Feb. 23. 1680/1.
To Arthur Onslow and George Evelin Esquires, elected Knights for this County,
in the ensuing Parliament, whose Session is appointed at Oxon, the 21st of the
following Month.
WE the Freeholders of the County of Surrey, having in the two former
Parliaments chosen you to be our Representatives, and being fully satisfied in
your Faithfullness and Care to preserve the Protestant Religion, His Majesty's
Royal Person, the good Government of the Nation by Law, and in securing our
Rights and Liberties; for your real Endeavors herein, we jointly return our
hearty Thanks, and have now chosen you again, to be our Representatives in this
Parliament. And though we have not the least Suspicion or Doubt of your Wisdom
and Integrity, in Acting for our Common Good (now, as we apprehend, in great
danger) yet we judge it expedient to discover our Minds and hearty Desires, in
the Particulars following, (viz.)

I. That you will continue vigorously to prosecute the horrid Popish Plotters,
and endeavor they may be brought to condign punishment, especially all
Sham-Plotters, which we esteem the worst of Villains.

II. That you will insist on a Bill for excluding all Popish Successors to the
Crown, which (we believe) an effectual Means (under God) for preserving the
Protestant Religion, His Majesty's Life and Tranquillity, with the well
established Government of the Kingdom, and securing it to our Posterity.

III. That you endeavor passing a Bill for Regulating Elections, and the
Frequency of Parliaments (for dispatch of those weighty Affairs of the Nation,
that shall from time to time be before them) which we judge the best prevention
of an Arbitrary Power.

IV. That you perservere in Asserting our Right of Legal Petitioning, for
removing our just Grievances, and pass a Bill (if there be no Law) to punish
such that shall obstruct it.

V. That you will use your utmost Endeavors to bring in a Bill against
Pluralities of Church Livings, Non-residency, and Scandalous Ministers, of
which there are too many in most Counties.

VI. That you will endeavor to preserve His Majesty's Person, to root out
Popery, and prevent Arbitrary Government, and use your utmost Endeavors to
unite His Majesty's Protestant Subjects.

VII. Lastly, That you will not consent to any Money-Bill, till the foresaid
Particulars be effected; and in so doing, we hereby promise to stand by you
with our Lives and Fortunes.

The Address of the Freeholders of the County of Leicester.
To the Right Honorable Benet Lord Sherrard, and Sir John Hartopp, Baronet; as
it was audibly read in Court by the Sheriff, and unanimously approved of by the
said Freeholders, immediately after their Election, 24 Febr. 1680/1.
WE the Freeholders of the County of Leicester, having chosen you to be our
Representatives in the Two last Parliaments, being highly sensible of the care
you have taken to secure his Majesty's Royal person, the Protestant Religion,
our Liberties and Properties: as also your Endeavors further to discover and
prosecute the horrid Popish Plot spread over the Realm of England, and others
of His Majesty's Dominions, with your zealous promoting an happy Union of all
good Protestants in this Land, not only by good and wholesome Laws for that
End, but by Repealing those which were destructive to it; and especially for
your persisting in the Exclusion of James Duke of York, and all other Popish
Successors from inheriting the Imperial Crown of England; which we esteem the
only Security under God, of His Majesty's Person and Dominions; Likewise, your
Vindicating our fundamentally Right of Petitioning His Majesty for frequent
Sitting of Parliaments, by your particular Marks of Displeasure laid upon the
Opposers of it: For all which, and other good Laws you were about to make, we
give you most hearty Thanks. And having now again Unanimously chosen you for
the ensuing Parliament, if you shall continue the prosecution of the
aforementioned absolutely necessary Things, we shall stand by you with our
Lives and Fortunes.

The Address of the Gentry and Freeholders of the County of York, publicly
read in Court, and fully consented to by the whole Assembly, by a general
Acclamation at their Election, March 2.
To the Right Honorable Charles Lord Clifford, and Henry Lord Fairfax.
May it please your Lordships,
THe Assurance we had of your Fidelity and Activity, for the Service of our
King and Country, in the Parliament which began at Westminster the 6th. of
March 1678. Was the only Reason of our Choice of you to Represent us in the
last Parliament, and our experience of your Faithfulness and Diligence in the
same Service the last Parliament, is the only Ground of our uncontradicted
Choice of you again this Day into the same Trust, for the ensuing Parliament,
appointed to meet at Oxford the 21th. instant. And we judge it our Duty, as
good Protestants, Loyal Subjects, and True Englishmen, not only to express our
hearty Concurrence with you in, but also to return you our real and public
Thanks for the many good Things you did, and were about to do in both the last
Parliaments; and more especially, for your seasonable Addresses to His Majesty,
your Necessary Votes, Resolutions, Orders, and Bills, whereby you have
endeavored,

1. To preserve the Protestant Religion, His Majesty's Person, and the Kingdoms
of England and Ireland from the many Dangers which threaten them.

2. To Exclude a Popish Successor.

3. To Unite all His Majesty's Protestant-Subjects.

4. To purge out the Corruptions which abound in Elections of Members to serve
in Parliament. And,

5. To secure us for the future against Popery and Arbitrary Power.

And we entreat you to proceed in a Parliamentary way to the Accomplishment of
these Excellent Things; and we assure you, that these things being done, we
shall with great chearfullness be willing to supply His Majesty (to the utmost
of our Ability) with Money, for the securing of His Interest and Honor, both
at home and abroad.

A Letter agreed upon by the Mayor and Inhabitants of the Borough of
Bridgwater, to be sent to their Burgesses chosen on the 26th of February.
Sir Halswel Tynt, and Sir John Malet,
WE greet you both with our most humble and hearty Service, and by these inform
you, that on Saturday the 26th. past, with all becoming Calmness and Fairness,
we Elected you to be our Burgesses and Representatives in the ensuing
Parliament.

We do also Unanimously approve of that great Care and indefatigable Industry
which the last Parliament took, in and toward the securing of the Protestant
Religion (than which nothing is more dear to us) His Majesty's Sacred Person
and Government, together with the Vindication and Preservation of our Native
Rights, Liberties and Privileges; For their utmost Endeavor to bring the
Betrayers of the same, together with all the principal Conspirators in that
most damnable and hellish Popish Plot, to condign punishment, not omitting our
grateful Acknowledgments of those many Good Bills which they had prepared; And
moreover, for all those worthy Votes, Resolutions and orders made and past in
that most Loyal, and never-tobe-forgotten Parliament, whereof one of you in the
last, and both of you in former Parliaments (to our great comfort and
encouragment) approved your selves faithful Members.

We do also humbly and heartily Desire and Petition you to follow their good
Precedent and Example in this ensuing Parliament, to do your utmost to secure
the King's Person, with the Protestant Religion (which we apprehend, with deep
sense of mind, to be in imminent Danger) from all Popish Attempts and
Conspiracies whatsoever; As also to take Care for the Exclusion and Prevention
of any Popish Successor from inheriting the Imperial Crown of this Realm.

In the firm and faithful Discharge of that great Trust we have reposed in you,
(whereof we do not in the least doubt) withal confidently believing, That you
will not charge our Estates, till we are effectually secured from Popery and
Arbitrary Government; We do assure you, That we will stand by you with our
Lives and Fortunes: And we shall ever pray for your good Success.

The Sense of the Gentry and Freeholders of the County of Nottingham, to Sir
Scroop How and John White, elected Knights of the Shire there, Febr. 22. as it
was delivered in the following Speech made by a worthy Gentleman, in the Name,
and by and with the Consent and Approbation of the whole Company of Electors.
Gentlemen,
WE give you hearty Thanks for your good Service in the late Parliaments, and
for accepting the same Trust again; And we desire you to persevere in the same
steps you have before made for the Preservation of His Majesty's Royal Person,
against the wicked Attempts of the Hellish Plotters; And for the Defense of
Religion and Property, against Popery and Arbitrary Power; and that you would
be sparing of our Money, until those things are effectually secured, and a sure
Foundation laid of an happy Union between the King and his People, by the
removal of those Evil Instruments, who, through private Interest and Ambition,
make it their business to divide their Affections.

The Barkshire Address, to the Gentlemen Unanimously Elected to serve for that
County, Feb. 28. 1680/1.
To the Worshipful William Barker, and Richard Southby, Esquires, now Chosen to
be the Representatives of the County of Berks.
WE the Freeholders of this County, being abundantly satisfied of your
Faithful Discharge of the great Trust we reposed in you in the last Parliament,
in your Care and constant Attendance, is the true Inducement of our Choosing you
again this Day to be our Representatives in this Parliament to be holden at
Oxford, and do return you our hearty Thanks,

1. That you have asserted our Right of the Legal Petitioning for Redress of
our just Grievances, and punishing those who labor to betray it.

2. For endeavoring to preserve his Majesty's Royal Person, the Protestant
Religion, and the Established Government of this Realm.

3. In using the most effectual Means conducing to so good an End, (viz.) the
Excluding of James Duke of York, or any Popish Successor, from ever Inheriting
this Crown, being the only way (as we imagine) under God, to destroy and root
Popery out of this Realm.

4. For endeavoring the frequent Meeting and Sitting of Parliaments (already
by Law provided,) for the preservation of our Lives, Liberties, and Estates;
for the support of his Majesty, and the Government it self.

5. For Repealing the 35th of Queen Elizabeth, whereby all true Protestants
might not be liable to utter Ruin, and perpetual Banishment.

6. For your Inspection into the Illegal and Arbitrary Proceedings of the
Courts in Westminster Hall, as destructive to public Justice, and violating
the Rights of the Subjects; and in effect to subvert the Ancient Constitution
of Parliaments, and the Government of this Kingdom.

7. That you labored for an Happy and Necessary Union amongst all his
Majesty's Protestant Subjects, as being the surest way to defend the true
Religion from all the evil Attempts of our Popish Adversaries.

8. For Repealing the Corporation Act.

And now our Request is, That you will not consent to any Money-Bill, till the
aforesaid particulars be thoroughly effected; and, in so doing, we do hereby
engage to stand by you with our Lives and Fortunes.

The Address of the Town of Dover.
To Thomas Papillon, and William Stokes, Esquires, the late and now new elected
Members to serve in Parliament, for the Town and Port of Dover in the County of
Kent.
WE the Mayor, Jurats, and Commonalty of the said Town of Dover, having duly
considered the good Abilities, and great Faithfulness of you who have been our
Representatives in the two preceding Parliaments, and have therein given
demonstration of your Loyalty to his Majesty, and for the Security of his
Majesty's Kingdoms, do with all gratefulness return you our hearty thanks, and
do pray that in pursuance of the Trust we have now again reposed in you, you
will with the same Candor and Faithfulness, endeavor the Security of his
Majesty's Person, the Protestant Religion, and his Majesty's Protestant
Subjects, by your utmost endeavors for the perfecting of those good Bills that
were before you in the last Parliament; in prosecution of which we will stand
by you with our Lives and Fortunes.

The Address of the Borough of New Castle under Line, as it was read in the
Town Hall by the Recorder, and fully consented to by the Inhabitants, March the
3d.
To the Right Worshipful Sir Thomas Bellot, Bar. and William Loveson Gower, Esquire
now Chosen Burgesses for the Borough of New Castle under Line.
WE the Mayor, Aldermen and Free-Burgesses, Inhabitants of the aforesaid
Borough, being deeply sensible of your faithful Discharge of the great Trust
reposed in you the two last Parliaments, and of the unspeakable Danger
threatening his Majesty's Life, the Protestant Religion, and the
well-established Government of this Kingdom, from the Hellish Designs of the
Papists, and their Adherents. And that our Religion and Liberties can only
(under God) be secured to us and our Posterities by the wholesome Advice of
Parliaments, have now chosen you again to represent us in the next ensuing
Parliament to be held at Oxford, March 21st. instant, in confidence of your
continued Faithfulness, Integrity and Courage still to Discharge so great a
Trust, especially in this time of so imminent Danger.

And we do hereby declare, That to our utmost power (though with the hazard of
our Lives and Fortunes) we will maintain and approve of what shall be resolved
in Parliament for the maintaining the Protestant Religion against Popery and
Arbitrary Government.

And we also (having already had such Experience of your Affections to the
Kingdoms Interest) hope that you will not consent to the Disposal of any of our
Moneys till we are effectually setured against Popery; and then a Charge upon
us to the half of what we enjoy will be cheerfully accepted by us.

And, we hope, that you will also endeavor, to the utmost of your Power, to
disable James Duke of York, and all other Popish Pretenders, from Inheriting
the Imperial Crown of this Realm. And thereby you will lay a firm Obligation
upon us, who will heartily and unfeignedly pray for your good Success in so
weighty an undertaking.

Signed Ralph Wood, Mayor, Nath. Beard, and Will. Middleton, Justices, and by
the Aldermen, and Capital Burgesses, and above 200 more of the Chief
Inhabitants with their own hands.

The Address of the Gentry and other Freeholders of the County of Sussex.
To Sir Will. Thomas, and Sir John Fagg, presented them upon their being
elected Knights for the County, at Lewis, March the 3d.
Gentlemen,
HAd we not heard well of Your Fidelity in discharging former Public Trusts,
we had not this day called You to the same Employ; for they that betray, or
neglect our service once, shall never receive our Trust again; And though we
have no intention to limit or circumscribe the Power we have laid in You, yet
we must desire, (and with that earnestness as becomes those that beg for no
less than the life of their King, Government, Religion, Laws, Liberties and
Properties; yea the very Lives and beings of all the Protestants in the World,)
That You would please as our Representatives, to have an especial regard to
these particulars following.

1. That you would effectually secure His Majesty's Royal Life, and the Lives
of all His Majesty's Protestant Subjects, by a firm and Legal Association.

2. That You would repeat the Endeavors of the Two former Worthy Parliaments;
in barring the Door against all Popish Successors to the Crown; and in
particular against James Duke of York, and Arbitrary Government.

3. That You would be incessant in Your Endeavors for uniting His Majesty's
Protestant Subjects.

4. That You would further search into the bottom of those Damnable and Hellish
Plots of the Papists, that have been laid against His Majesty's Life, the
Protestant Religion, and Government, and to bring those Horrid Criminals to
Justice.

5. That You would not forget those Execrable Villains, that by receiving
Pension, betrayed our Trusts, and our Liberties in the late Long Parliament,
but do such Exemplary Justice on them, that all others for the future may fear,
and do no more so wickedly.

And in doing these Great things, and all others that You shall judge necessary
for the Peace, Safety and Prosperity of the Nation, we shall not only stand by
you as Thankful Acknowledgers of Your Service, but reckon it our Duty (if any
hazard threaten you) to defend You as Worthy Patriots, with our Lives and
Fortunes.

The Cheshire Address.
To the Honorable Henry Booth, Esquire and Sir Robert Cotton, Knight. and Bar. being
chosen Knights for that County, March the 7th. Immediately after their
Election, the Right Honorable the Lord Colchester, and the Lord Brandon,
presented then a Paper, containing the Sentiments and Desires of the Gentry and
Freeholders, in these words:
WE the Gentry and Freeholders of the County Palatine of Chester, who have by
a free and unanimous Consent Re-elected You to be our Representatives in
Parliament, do thankfully acknowledge Your joint Integrity and concurrence with
the Worthy and Eminent Members of the Last, who in so Signal (and never to be
forgotten) a manner of Petitioning, promoted the Union, Support and Growth of
the True Protestant Religion Established by Law; And the only Expedient (we
think) to perpetuate these to our Posterity, is to adhere to what the late
Parliament designed relating to the Duke of York, and all Popish Successors; to
provide for the Defense and Safety of His Majesty's Person; vigorously to
pursue the Discovery of the horrid Popish Plot; and to punish all
Sham-plotters, whom we esteem the worst of Villains, without which His Majesty
can neither be easy, nor secure. These with those great and Excellent things
then under their Considerations, make us confident of Your Sincerity and
Proceedings; which that they may be successful, is our prayer, and will be the
support of all those who wish the happiness of His Majesty, and these
distressed Kingdoms. We likewise desire the Votes may continue to be Printed,
that till the effects of your endeavors (on which depends the happiness both
of Church and State) are accomplished, we may be truly acquainted with your
proceedings.

The Northamptonshire Address, March the 8th.
To John Parkhurst and Miles Fleetwood, Esquires, then elected Knights for that
County.
Gentlemen,
THat we are extremely satisfied of Your faithful and honest discharge of the
great Trust reposed in You by this County of Northampton in the last
Parliament, is most evident, by our Hearty Thanks we now return You, and by our
Unanimous Electing of You again, to serve for us in the next Parliament to be
holden at Oxford.

Gentlemen, We find by Experience, you so well judge of the sense of our
Country, that we need not tender You our Thoughts in many Particulars. Only,
as the Preservation of His Majesty's Sacred Person, the Protestant Religion,
and our Properties, are of the greatest Concern, and most dear unto us, So more
especially we recommend them unto you, desiring You to use Your utmost
Endeavors.

1. That there may be a more full and perfect Discovery of that most Hellish
Popish Plot, and all other Sham-Plots.

2. That we may be secured against a Popish Successor.

3. That there may be found means of Uniting His Majesty's Protestant Subjects,
against the Common Enemy.

Gentlemen, In pursuance of these good Ends, and such others, as You shall
think conducing to the happiness of the King and Kingdom, We shall stand by You
with our Lives and Fortunes.

The Address of the Town of Taunton, March 11th.
To Edmund Prideaux and John Trenchard, Esquires.
Worthy Sirs,
WE do most Heartily acknowledge Your great Wisdom, Courage, and Faithfulness,
in the Discharge of the Trust, by Us Reposed in You, as Members of the late
Dissolved Parliament, whose Worthy Endeavors for the Happiness of the King and
Kingdom, exceedingly Rejoiced the hearts of True English and Protestant
Spirits, and will make them Famous to Posterity.

And now Sirs, having a full assurance of Your Perseverance in the same good
Works, we have persumed again, to make Choice of You, as Our Representatives in
the Ensuing Parliament, desiring Your Acceptance of that great Trust. And
begging You, as that wherein the Glory of God, the Interest of the Protestant
Religion, the Safety and Welfare of the King and Kingdom is highly concerned,
to Prosecute (as shall be Guided by the Wisdom of that Honorable House,) these
following Particulars, viz.

1. That some effectual course may be taken for the Safety of His Majesty's
Sacred Person and Government, which have been and still are in extreme danger,
by the abominable Plots and Atempts of Papists.

2. That further Search be made into the Horrid Popish Plot, and the Plotters
and Abettors thereof brought to condign Punishment.

3. That You will join with the rest of that Honorable House (whereof You are
now Chosen to be Members) in repeating the Endeavors of the Two last Worthy
Parliaments, to bar all Papists (and especially James Duke of York) from the
exercise of the Royal Authority of this Kingdom.

4. That You will with all diligence endeavor the Uniting of His Majesty's
Protestant Subjects, and the Repealing those severe Laws that are obstructive
thereof.

5. That all good Endeavors be used for the securing of our Religion and
Property, and the just Rights and Privileges of the Subject.

6. That some Law may be made for the preventing of the Excesses and
Exorbitances in the Elections of Members of Parliament, and of undue Returns;
And that some effectual Provision may be made for the meeting of frequent
Parliaments, and for their sitting to redress Grievances, and to make such
wholesome Laws as shall be necessary for the welfare of this Nation.

7. That some effectual course be taken to give a check to Profaneness and
Debauchery, which threaten Ruin, or at least exceeding great Prejudice to the
Kingdom.

In prosecuting of all which worthy Acts, we shall endeavor your Defense with
our Lives and Fortunes.

The Humble Address of the Young Men of the Borough of Taunton.
To Edmund Prideaux and John Trenchard, Esquires, who were Unanimously chosen
by the Inhabitants, to be Representatives of the said Borough, to serve in this
Parliament, which is to Sit at Oxford, March 21, 1680/1.
SIRS,
THough we are not immediately Concerned in the Electing Members to Serve in
Parliament; yet being deeply sensible that we shall bear an equal share with
others in the same Common Danger, and Universal Slavery, which Hell and Rome
have been, and still are with joint and unwearied Endeavors, attempting to
involve these Protestant Nations in; we cannot without charging our selves with
unparalleled Ingratitude, omit the returning you our hearty Thanks for that
good and eminent Service you did both us and the Nation in the late Dissolved
Parliament; That you did with such inflamed Zeal, with such undaunted Courage
and Resolution, endeavor the Security of our Religion, Liberty and Property,
against that cursed Popish Faction, who were the Invaders of them; particularly
we deem our selves infinitely obliged for the great Care you manifested in the
preservation of His Majesty's Sacred Person, in your strenuous prosecution of
the Horrid and Damnable Popish Plot, and in that your Attempts were so Brisk
and Vigorous from the preventing of an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Power (which we
cannot but Unanimously abhor) Liberty and Property being an Inheritance, which
as Englishmen, we are born unto. And above all, we commend your Courage and
Prudence in prosecuting that happy Expedient of Excluding a Popish Successor
from Inheriting the Imperial Crown of this Realm; without which we judge it
utterly impossible, that the Protestant Religion can be secured to us, or that
our necks can be long free from that Romish Yoke, which neither we nor our
Fathers were able to bear: And now since it has pleased our Gracious King to
Issue forth His Royal Proclamation, signifying His pleasure to meet His People
again in Parliament, We cannot but Address our selves to you the
Representatives of this Borough, Humbly Requesting, That you would, according
to the Trust Reposed in you, Vigorously prosecute those Counsels that have a
Tendency to an happy Settlement of Affairs both in Church and State;
particularly, our Unanimous Request to you is,

1. That forasmuch as the late Horrid and Hellish Plot has according to the
Votes of the preceding Parliaments, received Life and Countenance from James
Duke of York, you would expedite a Bill for the utter Incapacitating him ever
to sway the Scepter of these Kingdoms, and that the Bill of Association may be
annexed, whereby all His Majesty's Subjects may be enabled to oppose him or any
of his Accomplices, in case he should attempt to possess himself of the same.

2. To take such Measures as your Wisdom shall agree upon for the Uniting of
the Protestant Interest in these Nations.

3. That the Artillery and Militia of the Nation be settled in the Hands of Men
of known Integrity, Courage and Conduct; and that all Papists and Popishly
affected Persons now in places of Public Trust, be Discharged (which if
effected) may be ameans to prevent those great Fears and Jealousies which are
apt otherwise to be nourished amongst us.

4. That you proceed to the Trial of the Popish Lords, together with all other
Criminal Offenders, and go on sifting to the bottom that Execrable Plot, which
has been, and we must fear still is carried on, to take away His Majesty's
Life (whom God long preserve) to root out the Fundamental Laws of this Realm,
as also to introduce Popery into the Church, and Tyranny into the State.

5. That you take Cognizance of the Illegal and Arbitrary Proceedings of
Courts, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, as you have begun, that so the Laws
may not be wrested against the Protestant Dissenters, nor stretched in favor
of Popish Recusants; As also to consider the unpresidented Finings and
Imprisonings, whereby many of His Majesty's truly Loyal Subjects have been
grievously oppressed.

6. That you would speedily think of some good Expedient for the Regulating of
Elections, as also for Removing of those Oaths and Tests, which have proved no
small hinderance to diverse Worthy Protestants, from being Useful Instruments in
Serving their King and Country in Church and State.

These things, worthy Sirs, we humbly offer to your Considerations, not as
Directors, but Remembrancers, out of a Principle of Loyal Zeal for his
Majesty's Security, and our Countries Tranquillity: And assure your selves in
the Prosecution of these truly Noble Designs, we will defend you with our Lives
and Fortunes; accounting our dearest Blood a Tribute due to the Safety of our
King and Country, when called for, in their Defense.

The Address of the Ancient Town of Winchelsea, ( a Branch of the Cinque Ports.)
To their Barons Sir Steven Lenord and Creswel Draper Esquire, elected in their
absence, March 4. and ordered by the Mayor and Jurates to be presented to them;
the said Mr. Draper serving for them in the last Parliament.
Mr. Draper,
YOu may assure your self, That we are very highly satisfied with your
unwearied Pains; as also, of your honest Discharge of the great Trust we
reposed in you in the last Parliament, by our hearty Thanks we now return you,
and by our Unanimous Electing you again to serve for us in the next Parliament
to be holden at Oxford.

And Gentlemen, as for you both,

WE know you are so sensible of our Condition, that we need not tender you our
Thoughts in many particulars; only the Preservation of his Sacred Majesty's
Person, our Religion, and Properties, which are of the greatest Concern, and
most dear unto us: And especially in order thereunto, we commend unto you, and
desire you to use your utmost Endeavors,

1. That there may be a full and perfect Discovery of that most Hellish and
Damnable Popish Plot in England and Ireland, and all other Sham-Plots, which
have been wickedly Contriving and Acting for many years past.

2. That effectual Means be used for Uniting all his Majesty's Protestant
Subjects against the common Enemy, both at home and abroad.

3. That all effectual Means and Ways may be provided to secure us against a
Popish Successor: and particularly against James Duke of York.

4. That you will endeavor, as far as in you lies, That a Law may be made for
putting our Free-Lands and Houses under a Voluntary Register, that thereby this
Kingdom may be a just and honorable Fund, whereby Moneys may be taken up upon
all urgent Occasions, and so prevent the great Ruins we now lie under, for
want thereof.

5. That you will use your utmost Endeavors to put a Brand upon those
abominable Monsters, which were the Pensioners in the late Long Parliament;
that thereby the Generations to come may be deterred from Attempting the like
unheard of Villainy.

6. That you will vigorously and carefully represent to the rest of your Fellow
Members, the present Condition of the Royal Navy, as also of the Stores,
Castles and Forts, which are, under God, the Bulwarks of England; and that such
effectual Ways and Means may be found out and prosecuted for the better
Securing and Improving the Navy; as also, That none may be employed therein,
but such Persons who are of known Integrity and Loyalty both to the King and
Nation; and that all Debauched and Unskilful Persons now employed, may be
removed, and Men fearing God, loving Truth, and hating Covetousness, may be put
into their Places; that so our present Fears may be abated, and thereby the
dreadful growing Power of France may be timely checked.

Gentlemen, In the pursuance of these good Ends, and such other as you shall
think conducing to the Happiness of the King and Kingdom, we shall stand by you
with our Lives and Fortunes.

There were many more Addresses, of like Nature and Purport, made from diverse
other Parts of the Realm; true Copies of which are not yet come to our hands:
But, indeed, the Re-election of so many of the former Members, is it self a
general Address, and loudly speaks it. The Voice of the People, which we trust,
will be ratified by the Voice of Heaven. No Popish Successor, no French Slavery.

THE SPEECH Of the Honorable Henry Booth, Esquire Spoken in Chester, March 2.
1680/1. at his being Elected one of the Knights of the Shire for that County,
to serve in the Parliament, Summoned to meet at Oxford the Twenty first of the
said Month.
Gentlemen and Countrymen,
I Must acknowledge that God has been good unto me from my Cradle to this
moment, and of all his Providence to me, there is none for which I have
greater reason to bless his Holy Name, than that he has enabled me to govern
my self and actions so, as to gain your good opinion and kindness; and I cannot
but own I have your favor accompanied with all the obliging Circumstances
imaginable: for the first time that you were pleased to command my Service was
in the Eighteen Years Parliament, upon the death of Sir Foulk Lucy, who had
served you faithfully in that Parliament; and though I was raw and unacquainted
with those affairs, and without any Trial of my Integrity, you ventured all you
had in my hands at a time when England was in danger to be lost for want of a
Vote: For that Parliament chiefly consisted of such as sold their Country for
private advantage, and would have sold their King too, if they could have made
a better market; I served you some time in that parliament, at last it was
Dissolved, and a new one called, and then as if you had approved of what I did,
you thought fit to employ me again in that Service; though you laid him aside
who had been my Colleague; that Parliament continued not long, but was
Dissolved, and a new one called; and then again a third time you thought me fit
to represent you in Parliament, though as you had done before you set him aside
whom you had sent along with me, and Chose a new one in his room; but why you
did me so Singular an honor as to continue me in your Service two Parliaments
together, and did not the like to the other Gentlemen, it is not for me to give
the reasons of it, those are best known to your selves. This is now the fourth
time that I have waited on you on the like occasion, and it is not a lessening
of your former kindness, that you have not changed my former Partner; but
rather a Confirmation of it, because that the first time you have continued him
is when he appears to be of my opinion; and that which still adds weight to
your kindness is, that notwithstanding all this stir, this bustle, this
unnecessary Charge and expense, all the Stories by which I have been traduced,
you have not been prevailed upon to withdraw or diminish your favor.

Gentlemen, I humbly beg your Patience to speak a few words in answer to what
they say of me, lest by Silence I may seem to cry Amen to their reports and
Stories; the first thing they reported, was, that I would not stand again, but
would decline your Service: but withal they give no reason for it, only it is
so because they said it; but what reason there is to contradict them now who
said so the last time, and how true it was you well remember. So that this
being the Second time that they have told you the self same falsehoods, I hope
for the future that others will believe them as little as you have done. It was
reported that I was killed without giving any reasons or circumstances, and
that to this also they expected an implicit belief; I wish they are not for an
implicit faith in all things. It was truly an excellent Artifice to threap you
out of your Votes; yet had I been killed, had it been for your Service, I
should have thought my self well bestowed, and rather meet than avoid the
occasion of my Death. They tell you also that I (...) very obnoxious to the
King, but they do not tell you that I am restored to any former Station of my
Commission of the Peace, without seeking or desiring it, it cannot be imagined
that his Majesty would be so Gracious to a man of whom he has an ill opinion,
and it is a reflection to his Majesty to think he will do a thing of that
Nature out of any regard whatsoever, but when a thing carries its weight and
reasons with it, so that by this you may discern how all their reports are
grounded, being rather the effects of their desires than that the thing is
truly so.

It seems the Gentlemen are much displeased that this County have frequently
commanded those of my Family to serve them in Parliament, they call it an
entailing upon the Family, but they are not pleased to vouchsafe the reasons
why the Son may not be employed as well as the Father, in case he proves as fit
for it; but the truth is they would govern you, and are angry that you will be
your own chusers; yet whether in this they design to serve you or their own
ends, I submit to your Judgment; but as to my own particular, they think the
County highly -- that I have served you in several Parliaments. Alas Gentlemen,
I know I am much inferior in Parts and Learning to a great many, but in
saithfulness to your interest, I will submit to no man; but if you would
observe it, they would impose that upon you which they would not have done to
themselves. If they have a Servant who has served them faithfully, they would
not take a new one in his room because they have entertained him several years;
but you must change your Members as often as you have new Parliaments, though
they serve you well, and you ought to hate them because they would have it so;
for they give no better reasons for it; but whether they seek your good or
their private regard, I leave to you to determine.

A Reverend Gentleman at Northwich was pleased to tell you, that you must not
choose the same Members again, for if you did, the King and parliament would not
agree. I wonder how long he has been one of the King's Cabinet Council, that
he can tell so well before; if we may believe the greatest Ministers, they say
otherwise, and that the King out of his gracious disposition to his people will
deny himself in that which is most dear, rather than break with his people, so
that either he or they are out; and I am not convinced that he is infallible,
and am apt to believe that he is in the wrong, since I have observed that they
are for the most part mistaken, who take upon them to judge of matters when
they are at so great a distance from White Hall, though it may be remembered
that this Gentleman has an affair at London, that requires his presence much
oftener than he is pleased to afford it; and but that great wits are unhappy in
short memories, that Gentleman could not have forgot that if the Parliament had
continued, one of his Cloth had been severely reproved for meddling with matters
not belonging to his Function, I mean Mr. Thompson of Bristol, and I hear there
is so great a number of the last House chosen, and like to be chosen, that his
fault will be remembered, which by the way, Gentlemen, is the Judgment of you in
your choice of me, you doing that which the rest of the Nation has done, and
where any change is, it is only to reject those that were Pensioners, or else
vehemently suspected to be Mercenaries. But I could wish it were not the
opinion of too many, that the way to recommend themselves as true Sons of the
Church is to Preach seldom, and meddle with State affairs more.

I hear some have taken offense, because at Northwich I did commend the last
House of Commons; truly, Gentlemen, I only gave it as my Opinion, and till the
contrary does appear, I must believe that for Riches, Integrity, Learning,
Experience, and all things that are expedient for members of that House,
England never had a better; and why the parliament was Dissolved I know not,
for they who advised it, have neither dared to own it, nor the reasons for it.
There is one thing I could not but take notice of, in the opposition that has
been made against me. If you will observe, they are the persons that were most
inveterate one against another in the dispute between Sir Philip Egerton and my
Cousin Cholmondley; but to oppose me they are united as one man. If their
new-made Friendship be sincere, and they have this way to do it, I am very glad
I have been the occasion of their reconciliation; but if in this matter alone
they are cemented, then it does discover upon what Principles they act, and
they are to be blamed, and not the Gentlemen who were set up to oppose me; for
I believe them both to be very worthy men, one of them is my Neighbor, and I
will do him what Service I can; and for the other he shall find me a Gentleman
if he has occasion to use me.

Gentlemen, I have as well as I can repeated the particular charges against me^
I had but a short time to recollect my self: there remains yet a general Charge
which I desire to speak to; and truly it is an heavy charge, a charge not to be
born if I were guilty of it. They say I am an evil man as to the King and
Church; I wish my accusers had either so much power or will to serve the King
or Church as I have; and because I do not know my self to be guilty as to
either of them, I hold my self obliged to say something in my Vindication.

I know not where I ever gave my Vote to impair the King's Prerogative; for
this is my Principle, and ever has been my Opinion, that the King's
Prerogative, when rightly used, is for the good and Benefit of the People; and
the Liberties and Properties of the People are for the support of the Crown and
King's Prerogative, when they are not abused; but this blessed Harmony may
sometimes be disordered either by the influence of some ill Counsel about the
King, who to obtain their own ends, do not care to ruin their King and Master;
or else from the restless Spirits of some ambitious men of broken fortunes, who
hope to repair them out of other men's Estates. But It seems that I and the
House of Commons are much to blame, because by one of our Votes we forbid the
People to lend Money upon the Revenue by way of anticipation: I never knew it
was a Crime to pass a Vote the Law had justified, for the Law will maintain
every part of that Vote; and therefore I need say no more of it, and besides
this is not a place to argue it in. As for my part i will do my best to preserve
the King's Prerogative, and the way to do it is neither to add nor to diminish;
for to make a King absolute is not to support but pull down his prerogative,
for the King holds his Prerogative by the Law, and if that be destroyed, the
Title is to be disputed by the Sword, and he that has the sharpest will prove
to have the best right. As to the Church I am for it as it is now Established
under Episcopacy, but I would have them to be such as St. Paul to Tim. in his
first Book and 3 chap. describes, and when they live accordingly, I have as
great a reverence for them as any man, but when they live otherwise they prove
to be -- and a ruin of the Church, and ought to be abhorred of all true
Christians. And for Ceremonies I take them not to be necessary to Salvation,
but for decency and order sake, and I conceive, this Ceremony is so much the
more necessary, as it tends to the more effectual uniting of protestants, and
to preserve Peace and concord in the Church: I am of opinion the Church is in
danger, and I Will do my best to support it, and as the case stands we must
either bring in Protestants or Papists; I am for bringing in Protestants, and
that is my Crime; but you are pleased to judge me to be in the right. Now I
will no longer doubt of my opinion, I am sure he that is against bringing in
Protestants is for bringing in Papists; and whether it be more profitable to
support the Church by uniting of those who differ in Ceremonies, or those who
differ in Fundamentals, I think is very plain. Is he a wise man who if his
house be falling, by reason of too much weight upon the roof, will lay more
upon it, rather than propt it up and take off some of the weight? So they who
take the Church to consist of Ceremonies, must pardon me that I am not of their
opinion, since the word of God warrants no such thing, and my reason tells me
that they are too much interested in the cause to be fit judges: for with them
he is accounted a good Son of the Church, who keeps a great stir about
Ceremonies, though he live never so ill a life, and perhaps is drunk when he
performs his Devotion: but if a man seem to be indifferent as to Ceremonies,
and make them no more than indeed they be, yet in Practice Conforms more than
he that makes a great noise about them, though he live never so godly a life,
and as near as he can to the rule of God's word, yet he is a Fanatic and an
enemy to the Church; but God Almighty tells us he will have mercy and not
Sacrifice.

Gentlemen They who accuse me for an enemy to the King and Church have left you
out of the story; but I hope I shall not forget you, but remember on whose
errand I am sent; and as I have hitherto stuck to your interest, I hope nothing
will draw me aside from it, and if I know my own heart, I am persuaded that
neither rewards, threats, hopes nor fears will prevail upon me. I desire
nothing but to promote God's glory and the interest of the King and people, and
if it shall please God to let me see the Protestant Religion and Government
established, I shall think I have lived long enough, and I shall be willing at
that instant to resign my breath. Gentlemen, I thought good to say this to you,
and I thank you for your patience, and hope I shall so behave my self in your
Service, that I shall make it appear I am sensible of the honor you have done
me.

I humbly thank you all.

An Account of the Proceedings at the Sessions for the City of Westminster,
against Thomas Whitfield, Scrivener; John Smallbones, Woodmonger; and William
Laud, Painter; for Tearing a Petition prepared to be presented to the King's
Majesty, for the Sitting of the Parliament. With an Account of the said
Petition, presented on the 13th instant, and His Majesty's Gracious Answer.
IT being the undoubted Right of the Subjects of England, Vide the Resolutions
of the Law, Cook. Jurisdict. of Courts 79. Hobart. 220. Vel. Magna Chart. Exl.
Spencer. 51. Vide the Proclamations of K. Charles I.
and warranted by the Law of the Land, and the general Practice of all former
Times, in an humble manner to apply themselves to His Majesty, in the Absence
of Parliaments, by Petition; for the Redress of their Grievances, and for the
obtaining such things as they apprehend necessary or beneficial, to the safety
and well being of the Nation. And it being their Duty to which they are bound,
by the expres, words of the Oath of Allegiance, I do Swear from my Heart, That
I will hear Faith and true Allegiance to His Majesty, His Heirs, and
Successors, and Him and Them will Defend to the uttermost of my power against
all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against His or
Their Persons, Their Crown and Dignity. And will do my best endeavor to
disclose and make known unto His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, all
Treasons and Traiterous Conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of, to be
against him or any of them.
to represent to Him any danger which they apprehend Threatening His Royal
Person or His Government; diverse Persons in and about the City of Westminster,
considering the too apparent and unspeakable Danger His Majesty and His
Kingdoms are in, from the Hellish Plots and Villainous Conspiracies of the
Bloody Papists and their Adherents; and conceiving no sufficient (or at least
so fit) Remedy could be provided against it, but by the Parliament, by whom
alone several Persons accused of these accursed Designs, can be brought to
Trial, did prepare and sign a Petition; humbly representing to His Majesty, the
imminent danger His Royal Person, the Protestant Religion, and the Government
of this Nation were in; from that most damnable and hellish Popish Plot,
branched forth into several the most Horrid Villainies: For which several of
the principal Conspirators stand impeached by Parliament, and thereby humbly
praying that the Parliament might Sit upon the 26th of January, to try the
Offenders, and to Redress the important Crievances, no otherways to be
redressed; of which Thomas Whitfield, John Smallbenes, and William Laud,
Inhabitants in Westminster, taking notice, upon the 20th day of December last,
they sent to Mr. William Horsley, who had signed and promoted the Petition, and
in whose custody it was, to bring or send it to them, for that they desired to
sign it: And thereupon Mr. Horsley attended them, and producing the Petition,
in which many Persons had joined, he delivered it at their request to be by
them read and signed; but Mr. Whitfield immediately tore it in pieces, and
threw it toward the Fire; and Smallbones catching it up, said, That he would
not take 10 s. for the Names, and then they declared that they sent for it for
that very purpose, and owned themselves all concerned in the design.

Upon Mr. Horsley's complaint hereof to a Justice of the Peace, a Warrant was
granted against them, and they being taken thereupon, after examination of the
matter, were bound to appear and answer it at the next quarter Sessions of the
Peace for the City of Westminster; and upon Friday the 9th. of January instant
the Sessions being holden, and there being present several Justices of the
Peace that are eminent Lawyers, the matter was brought before them, and the
Grand Jury Indicted the said Whitfield, Smallbones, and Laud as follows,
(viz.)

The City, Borough, and Town of Westminster in the County of Middlesex.
THe Jurors for our Sovereign Lord the King upon their Oath do present, that
whereas the Subjects and Liege People of the Kings and Queens of this Realm of
England, by the Laws and Customs of the Realm, have used and been accustomed to
represent their Public Grievances by Petition, or by any other submissive way;
And that the 20th. day of December in the one and Thirtieth Year of the Reign
of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc. at the Parish of
St. Martin's in the Fields, within the Liberty of the Dean and Chapter of the
Collegiate Church of St. Peter, of the City, Borough and Town of Westminster in
the County of Middlesex; a Petition written in paper, was prepared and
Subscribed with the hands of diverse the said King's Subjects and Liege People,
(to the Jury unknown) and to our said Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second
Directed, and to our said Sovereign Lord the King to be Presented and
Delivered; by which Petition it was shown, that whereas there had been and was
a most damnable Plot against the Royal Person of our said Sovereign Lord the
King, the Protestant Religion, and well Established Government of this Realm;
for which Plot several of the Principal Conspirators were impeached by
Parliament, and whereby it was humbly prayed that the Parliament which was
prorogued to the 26th. day of January next ensuing in the said Year, might then
sit to Try the Offenders, and to redress the pressing Grievances not otherwise
to be Redressed. And that Thomas Whitfield, late of the said Parish of St.
Martin's in the Fields, in the Liberty aforesaid, and the County aforesaid,
Yeoman, John Smallbones late of the said Parish, within the Liberty aforesaid,
in the County aforesaid, Woodmonger, and William Laud late of the Parish
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, Yeoman; being persons ill-affected, and
Contriving, Devising and Intending as much as in them lay, to hinder the
sitting of the said Parliament, as was prayed by the said Petition, and also to
hinder the Trial of the said Offenders, and Redressing the said Grievances, the
said 20th day of December in the said one and Thirtieth Year of the Reign of
our said Sovereign Lord the King, as Rioters and Disturbers of the Peace of our
Sovereign lord the King, for the Disturbing of the Peace of our said Sovereign
Lord the King, with Force and Arms at the said Parish within the Liberty
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, Unlawfully and Riotously did Assemble
themselves; and being so then and there assembled, with Force and Arms then and
there Unlawfully, Riotously and Injuriously, the said Petition being delivered
by one William Horsley to them, the said Thomas Whitfield, John Smallbones and
William Laud at their Request, and for the subscribing their Names thereunto if
they should think fit, did Tear in pieces, in contempt of our said Sovereign
Lord the King, and of his Laws, to the evil Example of all others in the like
Cases offending, and against the Peace of our said Sovereign Lord the King his
Crown and Dignity.

The Names of the Grand Jury that found the Bill, are these, William Jacob,
Thomas Trevor, Erasmus Brown, Henry Dugley, Richard Street, John Henly, John
Weston, Martin Frogg, John Pierce, Robert Pinke, Nathanael Wilkinson, Edward
Whitefoot, John Gentle, Thomas Harris, William Fortune, Roger Higdon, James
Harrold, Cornelius Rickfield, George Wright, Apothecary, Walter Wright,
Apothecary, Adam Langley. Apothecary,


Upon Wednesday the 7th of this instant January, many Gentlemen and eminent
Citizens, who had been concerned for managing the Petition for the Sitting of
the Parliament, upon the 26th. instant, met together and agreed upon the method
of finishing the same, and of nominating fit Persons for the Presenting it to
His Majesty, which being accordingly done; these Gentlemen following, (viz.)

Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Baronet, Son-in-Law to the late Bishop of Durham, Francis
Charlton, Esquire John Ellis, Esquire John Smith, Esquire Johnson of Stepney, Esquire Ellis
Crispe, Esquire Anthony Selby, Esquire Henry Ashurst, Esquire Tho. Smith, Esquire


Gentlemen of good Worth and Estates, and several of whom have been eminent
Sufferers for His Majesty, did this 13th. of January, attend His Majesty with
it at Whitehall, when being introduced to His Royal Presence, Sir Gilbert
Gerrard kneeling, presented this Petition;

To the King's most Excellent Majesty, The humble Petition of Your Majesty's
most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, Inhabitants in and about the City of London,
whose Names are here-under subscribed,
Shows,
THat whereas there has been, and still is, a most Damnable and Hellish Popish
Plot, branched forth into the most Horrid Villianies against Your Majesty's
most Sacred Person, the Protestant Religion, and the well Established
Government of this Your Realm, for which several of the principal Conspirators
stand now impeached by Parliament.

Therefore in such a time when Your Majesty's Royal person; as also the
Protestant Religion and the Government of this Nation are thus in most imminent
Danger,

We Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Obebient Subjects, in the deepest sense of
our Duty, and Allegiance to Your Majesty, Do most humbly and earnestly pray,
That the Parliament, which is prorogued until the 26th. day of January, may
then sit, to Try the Offenders, and to redress all our most important
Grievances, no otherwise to be redressed,

And Your Petitioners shall ever pray for Your Majesty's long and prosperous
Reign.

(...) expressed himself to this effect, Sir I have a Petition from many
thousands of your Majesty's Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, in and about Your City
of London, which I (...) in their Names, and desire Your Majesty would be
pleased to read it.

To which His Majesty gave this Gracious answer, I know the substance of it
already, I am Head of the Government, and will take care of it, and then
received the Petition, it being a great Roll of above 100 Yards in length, and
carried it away in His Hand.

The Judgment and Decree of the University of Oxford, passed in their
Convocation, July 21. 1683. against certain Pernicious Books and Damnable
Doctrines, destructive to the Sacred Persons of Princes, their State and
Government, and of all Human Society.
Published by Command.
Although the barbarous Assassination lately enterprized against the person of
his Sacred Majesty and his Royal Brother, engage all our thoughts to reflect
with utmost detestation and abhorrence of that execrable Villainy, hateful to
God and Man; and pay our due acknowledgements to the Divine Providence which by
extraordinary methods brought it to pass, that the breath of our Nostrils, the
anointed of the Lord, is not taken in the pit which was prepared for him: and
that under his shadow we continue to live, and enjoy the Blessings of his
Government: Yet, notwithstanding we find it to be a necessary duty at this time
to search into and lay open those impious Doctrines, which having of late been
studiously disseminated, gave rise and growth to those nefarious attempts: and
pass upon them our solemn public Censure and Decree of Condemnation.

Therefore to the honor of the holy and undivided Trinity, the preservation of
Catholic truth in the Church: and that the King's Majesty may be secured from
the attempts of open and bloody enemies, and the machinations of Traitorous
Heretics and Schismatics: We the Vice Chancellor, Doctors, Proctors, and
Masters Regent and not Regent, met in Convocation in the accustomed manner,
time and place, on Saturday the 21 of July in the Year 1683. concerning certain
Propositions contained in diverse Books and Writings published in English, and
also in the Latin tongue, repugnant to the holy Scriptures, Decrees of
Councils, Writings of the Fathers, the Faith and Profession of the Primitive
Church: and also destructive of the Kingly Government, the safety of his
Majesty's Person, the Public Peace, the Laws of Nature, and bonds of humane
Society: By our Unanimous assent and consent have Decreed and Determined in
manner and form following:

Proposition 1. All Civil Authority is derived originally from the People.

2. There is a mutual compact, tacit or express, between a Prince and his
Subjects; and that if he perform not his duty, they are discharged from theirs.

3. That if lawful Governors become Tyrants, or govern otherwise than by the
Laws of God and Man they ought to do, they forfeit the Right they had unto
their Government.

Lex Rex. Buchanan de Jure Regni. Vindiciae contra tyrannos. Bellarmine de
Conciliis, de Pontifice. Milton. Goodwin. Baxter, H. C.

4. The Sovereignty of England is in the three Estates, viz. King, Lords, and
Commons. The King has but a coordinate Power, and may be overruled by the
other two.

Lex Rex. Hunton of a limited and mixed Monarchy. Baxter H. C. Polit. Catech.

5. Birthright and proximity of Blood give no title to Rule or Government, and
it is Lawful to preclude the next Heir from his Right of Succession to the
Crown.

Lex Rex. Hunt's Postscript. Doleman. History of Succession. Julian the
Apostate. Mean Tekel.

6. It is Lawful for Subjects, without the Consent, and against the Command of
the Supreme Magistrate, to enter into Leagues, Covenants, and Associations, for
defense of themselves and their Religion.

Solemn League and Covenant. Late Association.

7. Self-preservation is the Fundamental Law of Nature, and supersedes the
Obligation of all others, whenever they stand in competition with it.

Hobbs de Cive. Leviathan.

8. The Doctrine of the Gospel concerning patient suffering of Injuries, is not
inconsistent with violent resisting of the higher Powers in case of Persecution
for Religion.

Lex Rex. Julian Apostat. Apolog. Relat.

9. There lies no Obligation upon Christians to Passive Obedience, when the
Prince Commands any thing against the Laws of our Country: And the Primitive
Christians chose rather to die than resist, because Christianity was not yet
settled by the Laws of the Empire.

Julian Apostate.

10. Possession and strength give a right to Govern, and Success in a Cause or
Enterprise proclaims it to be Lawful and Just; to pursue it is to comply with
the Will of God, because it is to follow the Conduct of his Providence.

Hobbs. Owen's Sermon before the Regicides, Jan. 31. 1648. Baxter, Jenkin's
Petition, October. 1651.

11. In the state of Nature there is no difference between good and evil, right
and wrong; the state of Nature is a state of War, in which every Man has a
right to all things.

12. The Foundation of Civil Authority is this natural right, which is not
given, but left to the Supreme Magistrate upon Men's entering into Societies,
and not only a Foreign Invader, but a Domestic Rebel, puts himself again into
a state of nature, to be proceeded against, not as a Subject but an Enemy: And
consequently acquires by his Rebellion the same right over the Life of his
Prince, as the Prince for the most heinous Crimes has over the Life of his own
Subjects.

13. Every Man, after his entering into a Society, retains a right of defending
himself against Force, and cannot transfer that right to the Commonwealth,
when he consents to that Union whereby a Commonwealth is made; and in case a
great many Men together have already resisted the Commonwealth, for which
every one of them expects Death, they have liberty then to join together to
assist and defend one another. Their bearing of Arms subsequent to the first
breach of their Duty, though it be to maintain what they have done, is no new
unjust act; and if it be only to defend their Persons, is not unjust at all.

14. An Oath superadds no obligation to pact, and a pact obliges no further
than it is credited: And, consequently, if a Prince gives any Indication that
he does not believe the Promises of Fealty and Allegiance, made by any of his
Subjects, they are thereby freed from their subjection; and, notwithstanding
their Pacts and Oaths, may lawfully rebel against, and destroy their Sovereign.

Hobbs de Cive. Leviathan.

15. If a People that by Oath and Duty are obliged to a Sovereign shall
sinfully dispossess him, and, contrary to their Covenants, choose and covenant
with another; they may be obliged by their latter Covenant, notwithstanding
their former.

Baxter H. C.

16. All Oaths are unlawful, and contrary to the Word of God.

Quakers.

17. An Oath obliges not in the sense of the Imposer, but the Takers.

Sheriffs Case.

18. Dominion is founded in Grace.

19. The Powers of this World are Usurpations upon the Prerogative of Jesus
Christ, and it is the Duty of God's People to destroy them, in order to the
setting Christ upon his Throne.

Fifth-Monarchy Men.

20. The Presbyterian Government is the Scepter of Christ's Kingdom, to which
Kings as well as others are bound to submit; and the King's Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical Affairs asserted by the Church of England is injurious to
Christ, the sole King and Head of his Church.

Altar Damascenum. Apolog. relat. Hist. Indulgen. Cartwright. Travers.

21. It is not lawful for Superiors, to impose any thing in the Worship of God
that is not antecedently necessary.

22. The duty of not offending a weak Brother is inconsistent with all human
Authority of making Laws concerning indifferent things.

Protestant Reconciler.

23. Wicked Kings and Tyrants ought to be put to Death, and if the Judges and
inferior Magistrates will not do their office, the Power of the Sword devolves
to the People; if the major part of the People refuse to exercise this Power,
then the Ministers may Excommunicate such a King, after which it is lawful for
any of the Subjects to kill him, as the People did Athaliah, and Jehu Jezabel.

Buchanan. Knox. Goodman. Gilby. Jesuits.

24. After the sealing of the Scripture-Canon, the People of God in all ages
are to expect new Revelations for a rule of their Actions, Quakers and other
Enthusiasts.
and it is lawful for a private Man, having an inward motion from God, to kill
a Tyrant Goodman.
.

25. The example of Phineas is to us instead of a Command; for what God has
commanded or approved in one Age, must needs oblige in all.

Goodman. Knox. Naphtali.

26. King Charles the First was lawfully put to Death, and his Murderers were
the blessed Instruments of God's Glory in their Generation.

Milton. Goodwin. Owen.

27. King Charles the First made War upon his Parliament; and in such a case
the King may not only be resisted, but he cease to be King.

Baxter.

We decree, judge and declare all and every of these Propositions to be False,
Seditious and Impious; and most of them to be also Heretical and Blasphemous,
infamous to Christian Religion, and destructive of all Government in Church and
State.

We farther decree that the Books which contain the foresaid Propositions and
impious Doctrines, are fitted to deprave good Manners; corrupt the Minds of
unwary Men, stir up Seditions and Tumults, overthrow States and Kingdoms, and
lead to Rebellion, murder of Princes, and Atheism it self: And therefore we
interdict all Members of the University from the reading the said Books, under
the Penalties in the Statutes expressed.

We also order the before-recited Books to be publicly burnt, by the hand of
our Marshal in the Court of our Schools.

Likewise we order that in perpetual memory hereof, these our Decrees shall be
entered into the Registry of our Convocation, and that Copies of them being
communicated to the several Colleges and Halls within this University, they be
there publicly affixt in the Libraries, Refectories, or other fit Places,
where they may be seen and read of all.

Lastly, We command and strictly enjoin all and singular Readers, Tutors,
Catechists and others, to whom the care and trust of Institution of Youth is
committed, that they diligently instruct and ground their Scholars in that most
necessary Doctrine, which in a manner is the Badge and Character of the Church
of England, of submitting to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake,
whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors as unto them that are
sent by him, for the Punishment of evil doers, and for the Praise of them that
do well: Teaching that this Submission and Obedience is to be clear, absolute
and without exception of any state or order of Men: Also that all
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions and giving of Thanks be made for all Men,
for the King and all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all Godliness and Honesty; for this is good and acceptable in
the sight of God our Savior. And in especial manner that they press and oblige
them humbly to offer their most ardent and daily Prayers at the Throne of Grace
for the preservation of our Sovereign Lord King Charles, from the attempts of
open Violence, and secret Machinations of perfidious Traitors: That he the
Defender of the Faith, being safe under the defense of the most High, may
continue his Reign on Earth, till he exchange it for that of a late and happy
Immortality.

The Case of the Earl of Argyle: Or, an exact and full Account of his Trial,
Escape, and Sentence. As likewise a Relation of several Matter of Fact, for
better clearing of the said Case.
Edinburgh, 30. May, 1682. SIR,
THE Case of the late Earl of Argyle, which, even before the Process led
against him, you was earnest to know, was at first, I thought, so plain, that I
needed not, and grew afterward so exceedingly mysterious, that I could not,
for some time, give you so perfect an account of it, as I wished: But this time
being still no less proper, the exactness of my Narrative will, I hope, excuse
all delays.

The design against him being now so clear, and the grounds founded on so
slender, that to satisfy all unbiased Persons of his Integrity, there needs
no more, but barely to represent matter of Fact; I should think shame to spend
so many words, either on arguments, or relation, were it not lest to strangers
some mystery might still be suspected to remain concealed: And therefore to
make plain what they can hardly believe, though we we clearly see it.

At His Royal Highness arrival in Scotland, the Earl was one of the first to
wait upon him, and until the meeting of our last Parliament, the World
believed, the Earl was as much in his Highness favor, as any entrusted in His
Majesty's affairs, in this Kingdom.

When it was resolved, and His Majesty moved to call the Parliament, the Earl
was in the Country, and at the opening of it, he appeared as forward as any in
His Majesty's, and his Highness service, but it had not sat many days when a
change was noticed in his Highness, and the Earl observed to decline in his
Highness favor.

In the beginning of the Parliament, the Earl was appointed one of the Lords of
the Articles, to prepare matters for the Parliament, and named by his Highness
to be one of a Committee of the Articles for Religion, which, by the custom of
all Scots Parliaments, and His Majesty's instructions to his Commissioner, at
this time, was the first thing treated of: In this Committee there was an Act
prepared for securing the Protestant Religion; which Act did ratify the Act
approving the Confession of Faith, and also the Act containing the Coronation
Oath, appointed by several standing Acts of Parliament, to be taken by all our
Kings, and Regents, before their entry to the exercise of the Government.

This Act was drawn somewhat less binding upon the Successor, as to his own
profession, but full as strictly tying him to maintain the Protestant Religion,
in the public profession thereof, and to put the Laws concerning it in
execution, and also appointing a further Test, beside the former, to exclude
Papists from places of public trust; and because the fines of such as should
act, without taking the Test, appeared no better then discharged, if falling in
the hands of a Popish Successor, and some accounting any limitation worse than
an exclusion, and all being content to put no limitation on the Crown, so it
might consist with the safety, and security of the Protestant Religion, it was
ordained, that all such fines, and forfaultures should appertain the one half
to the informers, and the other half should be bestowed on pious uses,
according to certain Rules expressed in the Act.

But this Act, being no wise pleasing to some, it was laid aside, and the
Committee discharged any more to meet, and instead of this Act, there was
brought in to the Parliament, at the same time, with the Act of Succession, a
short Act, ratifying all former Acts made for the security of the Protestant
Religion, which is the first of the printed Acts of this Parliament.

At the passing of this Act, the Earl proposed that these words, And all Acts
against Popery, might be added, which was opposed by the Advocate, and some of
the Clergy, as unnecessary, but the motion being seconded by Sir George
Lockhart, and the then President of the Session, now turned out, it was yielded
to, and added without a Vote, and this Act being still not thought sufficient,
and several Members desiring other additions, and other Acts, a promise was
made by his Royal Highness, in open Parliament, that time, and opportunity
should be given, to bring in any other Act, which should be thought necessary
for further securing the Protestant Religion: But though several persons, both
before and after passing the Act for the Test (here subjoyned) did give in
memorials, and overtures, yet they were never suffered to be read, either in
Articles, (...) Parliament, but in place of all, this Act for the Test was
still obtruded, and nothing of that nature suffered to be heard, after once
that Act past, though even at passing it the promise was renewed.

As for the Test, it was first brought into the Parliament without mentioning
the Confession of Faith, and, after several hours debate, for adding the
Confession of Faith, and many other additions, and alterations, it was past at
the first presenting, albeit it was earnestly pressed, by near half the
Parliament, that it might be delayed till next morning, the draught being so
much changed and interlined, that many, even of the most engaged in the Debate,
did not sufficiently understand it, and though they took notes, knew not
precisely how it stood. And this was indeed the Earls case in particular, and
the cause why, in Voting, he did forbear either to approve, or disapprove.

His part in the debate was, that, in the entry of it, he said, that he
thought, as few Oaths should be required as could be, and these as short and
clear as possible: That it was his humble opinion, that a very small alteration
in these Acts, which had been used these twenty years, might serve, for it was
manifest, and he attested the whole Parliament upon it, That the Oath of
Allegiance, and Declaration, had effectually debarred all Fanatics from
getting into places of trust, all that time: It was true some Papists had
swallowed the Oath of Allegiance, and therefore a word or two only of addition,
to guard against them, was all he judged necessary.

And there after, where in the close of the Act, The Kings Sons, and Brothers,
were intended to be dispensed with from taking the Test, he opposed the
exception, and said, it was our happiness that King and People were of one
Religion, and that they were so by Law: That he hoped the Parliament would do
nothing to loose what was fast, nor open a gap for the Royal Family to differ
in Religion, their example was of great consequence, one of them was as a
thousand, and would draw the more followers, if once it appeared to the people
that it were honorable, and a privilege to be of another Religion: And
therefore he wished, if any exception were, it might be particular for his
Royal Highness; but his Highness himself opposing this, the Earl concluded with
his fear, that if this exception did pass, it would do more hurt to the
Protestant Religion than all the rest of that Act, and many other Acts could do
good.

Whilst these Acts, about Religion, were in agitation, his Highness told the
Earl one day in private, to beware of himself, for the Earl of Errol, and
others, were to give in a Bill to the Parliament, to get him made liable to
some debts they pretended to be Cautioners in for his Father, and that those
that were most forward in His Majesty's service must be had a care of: The Earl
said, he knew there was no ground for any such Bill, and he hoped neither the
Earl of Errol, nor any other, should have any advantage of him, upon any head
relating to His Majesty's service. His Highness told others likewise, he had
given the Earl good advice.

But shortly after the abovementioned debates, there were two Bills given into
the meeting of the Articles, against the Earl, one by the Earl of Errol, the
other by His Majesty's Advocate, who alleged he did it by command, for
otherwise he acknowledged it was without his line. The Earl of Errol's claim
was, that the Earl of Argyle might be declared liable to relieve him, and
others, of a debt, wherein, they alleged, they stood bound as Cautioners, for
the late Marquess of Argyle, the Earl's Father. To which the Earl answered,
that he had not got his Fathers whole Estate, but only a part of it, and that
expressly burdened with all the debts he was liable to pay; whereof this
pretended debt was none, and that the Marquess of Huntly, who at that time was
owing to the Marquess of Argyle 35000 l. Sterling. had got 4000 l. Sterling. of
yearly Rent, out of the Marquess of Argyle's forfaulture, without the burden of
any debt; so that both by Law, and Equity, the Earl could not be liable, the
Marquess of Huntly, and not he, having got that which should bear this relief,
and which should indeed have paid the far greatest part of the Marquess of
Argyle's debt, the same having been undertaken for Huntly by Argyle, either as
Cautioner for Huntly, or to raise money to pay his debt: Besides that the Earl
of Errol can never make it appear, that he, or his Predecessors, were bound,
for the Marquess of Argyle in the third part of the sums, he acclaims; yet some
were much inclined to believe Errol on his bare assertion.

His Majesty's Advocates claim was, to take from the Earl his heritable Offices
of Sheriff, etc. especially that of Justice-General of Argyle-Shire, the isles,
and other places, which last is nevertheless only a part of the general
Justitiary of all Scotland, granted to his Predecessors, some hundred of years
ago, for honorable, and onerous causes, and constantly enjoyed by them until
expressly surrendered, in his late Majesty's hands, for a new Grant of the
abovementioned Justitiary of Argyle, etc. And this new Grant was also
confirmed by many Acts of Parliament, and particularly by His Majesty's Royal
Father, of Blessed Memory, in the Parliament holden by him Anno 1633. As
likewise by His Majesty that now is (whom God long preserve) his new Gift and
Charter, after several Debates before him in Anno 1663. and 1672. Which new
Gifts and Charters were again ratified by a special instruction from His
Majesty in the Parliament 1672. So that albeit several late Gifts of Regality
granted to the Marquess of Athol, Marquess of Queensberry, and others, may be
questioned, because granted since the Acts of Parliament discharging all such
Gifts in time coming, yet the Earl of Argyl's rights are good, as being both of
a far different nature, and granted long before the said Acts of Parliament,
and in effect the Earl his rights are rather confirmed by these prohibitive
Acts, because both anterior to, and excepted from them as appears by the Act
Salvo Jure 1633. Wherein the Earls rights are particularly and fully excepted
in the body of the printed Act.

When these things appeared so plain as not to be answered, It was alleged
that upon the forfaulture of the late Marquess of Argyl, his Estate was annexed
to the Crown, and so could not be gifted to the Earl by His Majesty, (wherein
they soon discovered a design to forfault him, if any pretense could be found)
But the Act of Forfaulture being read, and containing no such thing, but on the
contrary a clear power left to His Majesty to dispose of the whole, and the
Earl telling them plainly, that these that were most active to have his Father
forfaulted, were very far from desiring his Estate to be annexed to the Crown,
seeing it was in expectation of Gifts out of it they were so diligent, that
pretense of the annexation was past from, but yet the design was no wise given
over, for there was a proposition made, and a Vote carried in the Articles,
that a Committee should be appointed, with Parliamentary power, to meet in the
intervals of Parliament, to determine all controversies could be moved against
any of the Earls rights; Which was a very extraordinary device, and plainly
carried by extraordinary influences.

Upon this the Earl applied to the Parliament, where this Vote was to be
brought, and having informed the Members of his right, and the consequences of
such a new Judicature, he had good hope to get the Vote ranversed, when his
Royal Highness on second thoughts judged it fit to put a stop to it, and
excused himself, Saying, It was his not being acquainted, and but lately in
affairs, had made him go along with it, for he found it did plainly impugn His
Majesty's prerogative, and might be of ill consequence, and indeed it is plain
enough. I^ would have exposed the Marquess of Huntly's gift, which proceeded on
the same forfaulture, as well as the Earl of Argyl's, to the same, and far
greater hazard, as some came to be sensible, when they heard all. You see here
at what rate the Earl was pursued, and on what grounds, before his taking of
the Test came in hand.

After the Parliament was adjourned, there was a new design to apply to His
Majesty for a Commission, of the same nature, for reviewing all the Earls
rights, and to deprive him of his heritable Offices, and, if possible, to
burden him with more Debts then his Estate was worth.

Upon which, the Earl waited on his Highness, and informed him more
particularly, offering to make it appear, by unquestionable rights and
evidences, that his Estate was not subject to any such review, as was intended,
and that it might breed the Earl great trouble, but could have no effect in
Law. To which his Highness Answered, That a review could do no hurt; The Earl
said, If a Commission for a review were granted, something must be intended,
and something must be done, and it was very like that some of these put into
such a Commission would be his Enemies, at least small Friends, and therefore
entreated that if any intended to quarrel his rights, they and he and all their
debates might be remitted to the Ordinary Judicatories: And indeed he had
reason, to desire, it might be so, the Ordinary Judicatories being established
by the ancient Laws of the Kingdom, not in order or with respect to particular
Causes, and Persons, but for the general, equal and impartial administration of
Justice to all. Whereas the granting particular Commissions, for Trying and
Judging such and such Cases, and Persons, cannot but expose to the just
contrary inconveniences, there being certainly a vast difference betwixt a Man's
finding a Judge indifferently constitute, and his having one expressly and
particularly appointed, for his single affair, who might possibly think himself
Commissionate, rather to serve a turn, in an arbitrary way, then to administer
fair Justice: But all this prevailed not, Only his Highness said, The
Commission should not be expede until the Earl knew the Names of the Persons
insert in it: Whereunto the Earl Answered, That there might be many Persons,
against whom he could make no legal exception, whom yet he might have very good
reason to decline to be his particular Judges, and to have his rights taken
from the ordinary Judges, and committed to their examination, and all he might
possibly gain by excepting would be to irritate; Adding that as to his
heritable Offices, he had undoubtedly right to them, and they were rather
honorable, then of advantage, that his family had them for faithful services
to the Crown; and because they had served more faithfully then their
Neighbors, and been more useful then others, in keeping the Country in peace,
from Thieves and Robbers, therefore all the broken Men and their Patrons, were
Enemies to him, and his Family, and desirous to have these Offices out of his
hand, but he resolved to do as he had always done, to put himself in His
Majesty's will, and if His Majesty were resolved to have back all heritable
Offices, and should think fit after hearing him to have back his, His Majesty
should have them, either freely or for a just value: For though, they rendered
the Earl no free yearly Rent, as the Earl used them, yet he might be a sufferer
in the want of them, if the Country were left open to Thieves and Robbers,
which he hoped His Majesty would repair. His rights (as he had said in
Parliament) were unquestionable, and often times confirmed; Yet he was willing
to surrender them all on his knee to His Majesty, but was not willing to have
them torn from him with an affront by any other.

Upon this his Highness was pleased, to allow the Earl a time, to go to the
Country, to bring his Papers, and he was put in hopes no Commission should pass
till his return, which was indeed observed.

In the mean time, the Earl did writ to the Earl of Murray, His Majesty's
Secretary, that he might have leave, to wait upon His Majesty, which His
Majesty did graciously and readily grant; The Earl purposing, at his return to
Edinburgh, to beg the same favor of his Highness: But he found this motion
more fatal to him then he could have at first expected so innocent a design
could prove: For it was at first told him, he could not have access to kiss His
Majesty's hand without taking the Test; then it dropped out, that it was ill
taken, His Majesty was at all addressed to, for leave to kiss his hand: And at
length it became plain, that taking the Test would not clear the way.

As the Earl was on his return to Edinburgh, to wait upon his Highness, and
come the length of Glasgow, he got the news, that the late President of the
Session, and He were both turned out of it, and at his arrival at Edinburgh,
several meetings of Council were appointed only to occasion his taking of the
Test: But the Earl having gone some miles out of Town, was not present. At last
a meeting of the Council was appointed expressly, and one of the Clerks ordered
to warn the Earl particularly to be present; whereof the Earl being advertised
before the Clerk came to him, he waited on his Highness, and had the honor of
an opportunity after Supper, to speak to his Royal Highness, in his
Bedchamber: The Earl told his Highness, he was now returned, to make good his
word, and to show those Writts and Rights he had promised: But Sir (said the
Earl) I have heard by the way of alterations, and that I am turned out of the
Session: His Highness said, it was so: The Earl asked what next? His Highness
said, he knew no more. The Earl said, he had never sought that, nor any place,
and he knew that place was at His Majesty's dispose, and it might soon be
better filled: But said the Earl, if it be to express a frown, it is the first
I have had from His Majesty this Thirty years; I know I have Enemies, but they
shall never make me alter my Duty, and Resolution to serve His Majesty; I have
served His Majesty in Arms, and in his Judicatures, when I knew I had Enemies
on my right hand, and on my left, and I will do so still. But if any have
power, to render His Majesty or your Highness jealous of me, it will make my
Service the more useless to both, and the less comfortable to my self: His
Highness said, he knew no more then what he had said; the Earl then said, it
was late, and he would wiat on his Highness some other time, about these
matters: But the thing that at present presses (says the Earl) is, That I hear
one of the Clerks of Council is appointed to tell me to be at the Council, to
morrow, I conceive, to take the Test; Pray, what is the haste? may not I, with
Your Highnesses favor, have the time allowed by the Act of Parliament? His
Highness said, No. The Earl urged it again, but in vain: And all the delay, he
could obtain, was till Thursday the Third of November, the next Council day in
course. The Earl said he was the less fond of the Test, that he found, that
some that refused it were still in favor, and others that had taken it turned
out, as the Register, at which His Highness only laughed: But Sir, [said the
Earl,] how comes Your Highness to press the Test so hastily? Sure there are
some things in it Your Highness does not ^ver much like: Then said His
Highness, angerly, and in a passion: most true, that Test was brought into the
Parliament, without the Confession of Faith: But the late President caused put
in the Confession, which makes it such as no honest Man can take it: The Earl
said he had the more reason to advise: Whereby you may see, whether his
Highness then thought, the Confession was to be Sworn to in the Test, or not.

After this the Earl waited several times on his Highness, and made new
attempts for the favor of a delay, but with no success: What passed in
private, shall not be repeated except so far as is absolutely necessary to
evince the Earl his innocence, and to show that in what he did he had no ill
design, nor did, in the least prevaricate, or give any offense willingly, but
was ready to comply, as far as he could, with a good conscience; It was in this
interval, that the Earl spoke with the Bishop of Edinburgh, and saw his
Vindication of the Test, and all the Explanations I here send you, only the
Councils explanation was not yet thought on: And that all the Bishop did then
urge the Earl with, beyond what is in his Vindication, was to have a care of a
noble Family, and to tell him, that the opposing the exception of the Kings
Sons, and Brothers, from taking the Test, had fired the kiln.

At the last upon Wednesday, the second of November, late, the Earl waited on
his Highness, and did in the most humble, and easy expressions he could
devise, decline the present taking of the Test; but if his Highness would needs
have a present answer, he begged his favor, that he would accept of his
refusing it in private, which was denied again: Then, he said, if his Highness
would allow him time, to go home and consider, he would either give
satisfaction, or the time prescribed by the Act of Parliament would elapse, and
so he would go off in course, and without noise. But this also his Highness
absolutely refused: Upon which the Earl asked, what good his appearing in
Council, to refuse there, would do? His Highness was pleased to answer, that he
needed not appear, but to employ some friend to speak for him; and his Highness
himself named one. This the Earl yielded to, as the best of a bad choice, and
said, he should either use the person named by his Highness, or some other
Relation that were a Councellor, and in Town: And, in compliance with his
Highness pleasure, the next morning, the Earl drew a Letter, for a Warrant to
the same Person his Highness had named, for declaring his mind in Council;
wherein he expressed his constant resolution to continue a true Protestant, and
Loyal Subject, which were the true ends of the Test: But the Letter concluding
on a delay of taking the Oath, and his Highness having given some indication,
how little pleasing that office was to him, neither that friend, nor any other
would, by any means, accept of it.

Upon this the Earl drew a second, and shorter Letter, to any that should that
day preside in Council; but after much discourse, it being suggested, that an
explanation would be allowed, and the shorter the better, the Earl first drew
one, suitable to his own thoughts; and it being thought too long, did instantly
shorten it, and put it into his Pocket, but withal said he would not offer it,
till he knew his Highness pleasure, lest his Highness might take it ill that
any had prevailed more with him, then himself; and therefore the Earl did
refuse to go to the Council, or out of his Chamber, till he had his
approbation. A little after a Coach was sent for the Earl, and it was told him,
in the Room without the Council Chamger, that the Bishop of Edinburgh had spoke
to his Highness, and signified to him, that the Earl was willing to take the
Test, with an Explanation, and that the Bishop said, it would be very kindly
accepted. These were the express words, and then (and not till then) the Earl
went into the Council, and delivered (that is pronounced) his Explanation close
by his Highness, and directly toward him; so loud, and audible, that some in
the furthest corner of the Room acknowledged they heard it: Whereupon the Oath
was administered, and the Earl took it; and his Highness with a well satisfied
Countenance, and the honor of a smile, Commanded him to take his place: And
while he sat by his Highness (which was his honor to do that day) his Highness
spoke several times privately to him, and always very pleasantly.

And the Earl has since protested to his friends, that he thinks his Highness
was, at the time, well pleased, though some others, that wished the Earl out of
the Council, appeared surprised, and in some confusion.

The first thing came to be treated of in Council, after the Earl had taken his
Seat, was the Councils Explanation, at that time intended, and resolved to be
allowed to the Clergy only, and no other, and withal not to be printed: To
which the Earl refused to Vote, which was afterward made a ground of
Challenge. A little after, it being the Post Night, the Earl stepped out, and
went to his Lodging, and though he acknowledges, he did not decline to give
some friends an account of what had past, yet he was so far from spreading
Copies of his Explanation, at taking the Oath, that he flatly refused to give a
kind, and discreet friend, then in his Chamber, a Copy of it, lest it might go
abroad: And the words being few, and publicly spoke, it is not strange they
might be, almost perfectly repeated, as, it is known, the Clerks pretended to
do; but the ^^ings Advocate having past from the accusation of Spreading, this
is only mentioned to evidence how singly studious the Earl was to satisfy his
own Conscience, and how tender of giving offense, for I can say truly for him,
he was never heard to dissuade any to take the Test, nor to disparage it, after
it past in an Act; only he refused to take it himself, without an Explanation,
which to firetch to a Crime is beyond all example. I confess, he never cried it
up as super excellent, or Divine, a some have done that can alter their tone,
and decry it as much, when ever there shall be occasion.

The next morning the Earl waited on his Highness, expecting yesternights
countenance, and indeed nothing less than what he met with; for beginning to
speak with his Highness in private, his Highness interrupted him, and said he
was not pleased with his Explanation. The Earl said, he did not presume to give
it till his Highness allowed him: His Highness acknowledged, that the Bishop of
Edinburgh had told him, that the Earl intended an Explanation: But (says his
Highness) I thought it had been some short one, like Earl Queensburries: The
Earl answered that his Highness heard what he said: His Highness said, he did,
but he was surprised: Then the Earl said, he had said the same thing, in
private, to his Highness, wherewith he, at that time, appeared satisfied: And
the Earl being about to say more, in his own vindication, his Highness
interrupting him said, well it is past with you, but it shall pass so with no
other, which words, the Earl thought, did both confirm the Councils acceptance,
and his explanation, and sufficiently clear him of all offense, if he had
incurred any.

And whatever has been his Highness resolution, or the Earls misfortune since,
the Earl is persuaded that his Highness was resolved then to push the affair no
further; for though some had still the same animosities, and prejudices against
the Earl, yet hitherto they had not adventured to undertake to extract, and
forge such Crimes, out of his words, as afterward they did: And it was not,
till private suggestions were made, that Advocates were asked (as they were) if
these words could be stretched to Treason; and that (when the ablest denied)
the Kings Advocate complied, and was ordered to draw the Indictment, and some
Judges were engaged, and secured about it, as will appear, when ever His
Majesty thinks it his Interest to take an exact trial of that whole affair.

The Earl did think (as I just now said) his Highness saying, it was past as to
him, was enough; he was resolved to say no more for justifying himself, but
seeing he is so hardly pressed, and his life, and honor at the stake, it is
hoped his Highness will not disown what the Earl has hitherto so respectfully
concealed, and is now no less necessary to be spoke out for his vindication.
And that is, that besides that his Highness did allow the Earl to explain, and
did hear his explanation in Council, and approve it: The Earl did twice in
private, once before, and once after his Oath in Council, repeat, to his
Highness, the same words, that the Treason is now founded on: (viz.) That the
Earl meant not to bind up himself, to wish, and endeavor, in a lawful way, and
in his station, any alteration, he thought to the advantage of Church and
State, not repugnant to the Protestant Religion, and his Loyalty; and that his
Highness was so far from charging them with Treason, that he said, plainly,
both times, the Earls scruples were unnecessary, and that the Test did not bind
him up as he imagined; adding further, the last time, that the Earl had cheated
himself, for notwithstanding the explanation, he had taken the Test. To which
the Earl only answered, that then his Highness should be satisfied. Now, after
all this, that Treason should be so earnestly searched for, and so groundlessly
found, in those words, is it not strange beyond all example? Could it be
Treason for the Earl to say, He will not bind up himself, where his Highness
says so often, and so plainly, It was not intended that he, or any man, should be
bound up?

What past the next day, after the Earl had taken the Test, and was received by
the Council, is also proper for you to know. The Earl, being to take it as one
of the Commissioners of the Treasury, it was commonly thought that he, and the
other Commissioners, were to take it in the Exchequer; but after Ten of the
Clock, about two hours after the Earl had parted from his Highness, one told
him there was a design upon him, to make him swear once more before the
Council: And accordingly, at Twelve, there was an extraordinary Council called
in the Abbey, and there it was found, That the Commissioners of Treasury, as
Officers of the Crown, were to take the Test before the Council; and it was
told the Earl, that the Exchequer could not, that day, sit without him. And to
make the matter more solemn, it was resolved that the Council should meet that
Afternoon, and that his Highness should be present: So as soon as they were
met, the Oath was tendered, and the Earl offering to take it, and saying only
these words, as before, the Earl of Roxburgh, never heard to speak in Council
till then, stood up behind his Highness Chair, and with Clamor, asked what was
said: To whom his Highness was pleased to turn and inform him; upon which
Roxburgh, prepared for the purpose, desired, that what the Earl of Argyle had
said, the day before, might be repeated: Which the Earl, seeing a design upon
him, did at first decline, till he was peremptorily put to it by his Highness,
and he being Ingenuous, and thinking no course more proper to prevent mistakes
of words, he said he had a Note of what he had said in his Pocket, which his
Highness called for very earnestly, and Commanded him to produce; which be
done, and the Paper read, so secure was the Earl of his Innocence, that he was
willing, upon the first motion, to sign it: But the then new President of the
Session, now Chancellor, and the new Register, could not agree, whether it was
fit, or not, the Treason not yet appearing, when read in Council, as when they
had talked of it in private; so the Earl was removed, and then called in, and
after these two had whered, and adjusted their Inventions, he was desired
positively to sign the Paper he had given in. To which he answered, he meant
well, and truly did see no ill in the Paper, why he might not, and if the words
did please them then, as they did when they were first pronounced, he would do
it: But, if they found the least matter of displeasure in them, he would
forbear: Whereupon being again removed, and called in, he was told, he had not
given the satisfaction required by the Act of Parliament, in taking the Test:
And so could not sit in the Council, and somewhat more was added, as if the
matter drew deeper, but the particular words I do not know: To which the Earl
said, that he judged, all the Parliament meant was to exclude Refusers of the
Test from Places of trust: And if he were judged a Refuser, he submitted, but
could conceive no greater danger in the matter, for he had served His Majesty
faithfully within doors, and was resolved to do so without doors, and so he
made his obeisance, and went out. Next morning, being Saturday, November 5. The
Earl waited on his Royal Highness, and among other things, told his Highness,
he was strangely surprised, that the saying He could not bind up himself in his
station and in a lawful way, etc. as was contained in that Paper, was looked on
as a Crime, seeing he had said the same words to his Highness formerly in
private, without any offense, to which His Highness gave no answer, hut held
his peace which made the Earl make bold, to put him to remember his own words,
and to ask him, what he had said, when the Earl formerly spoke to him: Then His
Highness was pleased to say, he had forgot what he had said: To which the Earl
answered, the worse indeed for me; But Sir, here are the same words, I formerly
said, without offense, what says Your Highness now? What ill is in them? Let me
know and I will vindicate my self. And all his Highness at this Second time
said, was, what has been above remarked, That they were unnecessary words,
that the Earl scrupled needlessly, that he was not tied up by that Oath, as he
imagined; And after a pause added, As I have already told you, Well, you have
cheated your self, you have taken the Test: To which the Earl replied, he hoped
then his Highness was satisfied, (as above) his Highness then began to
complain, that the Earl, the little while he sat in Council, after he had taken
the Oath, had not gone along to approve the Councils explanation: The Earl said
he had not heard the debate: And therefore, it was reasonable, to excuse him
from Voting. His Highness returned, a little warmly, that the Earl knew the
Case well enough (which indeed was not unlike, and yet not at all strange, that
the Earl could not Vote, for that explanation, seeing he could not but know,
the Parliament did intend the Confession should be Sworn: And that he himself
had taken it in that sense, as all others had done, before that explanation
past in Council) but the Earl replying nothing, his Highness continued, That
the Earl, and others bad designed to bring trouble upon an handful of poor
Catholics, that would live peaceably, however they were used, but it should
light upon others.

A little after, His Highness commanded the Earl not to go out of Town, till he
waited on him, which the Earl said he should obey: But notwithstanding thereof,
one of the Clerks of the Council was sent to the Earl, that same night, late,
to intimate to him, not to go out of Town, till the Council should sit, upon
the Tuesday thereafter.

Upon Monday, the Seventh of November, the Earl waited on His Highness again,
and told him, he was surprised to get such a message from the Council, after
His Highness had laid his own Commands upon him, and asked what the Councils
meaning could be: His Highness was pleased to say, he knew nothing, but
referred all to themselves, at their meeting.

Upon Tuesday, the Eight of November, when the Council met, without ever
calling the Earl, an Order was sent to him, by one of their Clerks, to enter
himself Prisoner in the Castle of Edinburgh, before Twelve of the Clock the
next day, with a warrant to the Deputy Governor, to keep him Prisoner, wherein
the word Sure-firmance was struck out, which appeared to have been fairly writ:
This Order the Earl received, and obeyed it, with great submission, entering
all alone in an Hackney-Coach: And when some of his Relations, and Persons of
quality, offered to go along with him, he refused, saying, that if he were
pursued at the instance of any other, he would accept of their civility but
seeing he was pursued, at the instance of His Majesty's Advocate, he would go,
in the most humble way that he could think on, and have no body concerned but
himself.

But all this did not hinder the Council, to write to his Majesty the Letter
hereafter insert, giving Judgment, before Trial, without any hearing, and
seeking leave to proceed to a process, which they likewise proceeded in, before
any return came, as likewise, about the very Date of this Letter, they emitted
their explanation of the Test: Albeit in their Letter, they assert, That they
had been very careful not to suffer any to take the Test with glosses and
explanations.

The Earl, some days after his entering Prisoner into the Castle of Edinburgh,
did write a Letter to his Royal Highness, telling him, that he had obeyed his
Highness, and the Councils Order, in entering Prisoner in that place, that he
had not written sooner, least he might be thought too impatient of his
punishment, which appeared to be the effects of an high displeasure, which, he
hoped, he no wise deserved; that he was resolved to continue in all duty, and
obedience to His Majesty, and his Royal Highness, and never to fail in any
profession thereof he had made; and begged to know what satisfaction was
expected, and where, and how, he might live with his Highness favor.

This Letter, at First, seemed to please, and, the Earl heard, it did, but the
only answer, directly returned, was Summonds charging the Earl, with leasing
making, and depraving of Laws, before any return from His Majesty: And after a
return came, another Summonds, with sound of Trumpet, containing Perjury and
Treason, added to the former crimes: Notwithstanding all which, fair weather
was made, and it was given out, and likewise intimated to the Earl, by a
particular message from one of the Club, that no more was designed, but to
humble the Earl, and to take his heritable and other Offices from him, and his
Family, and when his Highness was told it was hard measure, by such a process,
and on such pretensions, to threaten Life, and Fortune; his Highness said,
Life, and Fortune? God forbid.

What happened after these things, and how the process was carried on, follows
now in order: And for your more clear, and distinct information, I have sent
you, several very necessary and useful Papers, with Indexes on the Margin,
pointing at such Passages, as more remarkably concern this affair

The TEST, Containing the Oath to be taken by all Persons in public Trust.
I Solemnly Swear, in the presence of the Eternal God, whom I invoke as Judge,
and Witness of the sincere intention of this my Oath, That I own, and sincerely
profess the true Protestant Religion, contained in the Confession of Faith,
Recorded in the first Parliament of King James the VI, and that I believe the
same to be founded on, and agreeable to the written Word of God. And I promise
and swear, That I shall adhere thereunto,
during all the days of my Life time; and shall endeavor to Educate my
Children therein; And shall never consent to any change or alteration contrary
thereto, and that I disown and renounce all such Principles, Doctrins, or
Practices, whether Popish, or Fanatical, which are contrary unto, and
inconsistent with the said Protestant Religion, and Confession of Faith. And
for testification of my obedience to my most gracious Sovereign, Charles the
II. I do affirm, and swear by this my solemn Oath, that the Kings Majesty is
the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, over all Persons, and in all Causes,
as well Ecclesiastical as Civil: And that no Foreign Prince, Person, Pope,
Prelate, State or Potentate, has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Preheminency, or Authority, Ecclesiastical or Civil, within this
Realm. And therefore I do utterly renounce, and forsake all Foreign
Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities, and Authorities: And do promise, that
from henceforth I shall bear Faith, and true Allegiance to the Kings Majesty,
his Heirs and lawful Successors; and to my power shall assist and defend all
Rights, Jurisdictions, Prerogatives, Privileges, Preferments and Authorities
belonging to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and lawful Successors. And I further
affirm and swear by this my solemn Oath, That I judge it unlawful for Subjects,
upon pretense of Reformation, or any other pretense whatsoever, to enter into
Covenants or Leagues, or to Gonvocate, Conveen, or Assemble in any Councils,
Conventions or Assemblies, to Treat, Consult, or Determine in any matter of
State, Civil or Ecclesiastic, without His Majesty's special Command, or
Express License had thereto; or to take up Arms against the King, or these
Commissionate by him. And that I shall never so rise in Arms, or enter into
such Covenants or Assemblies: And that there lies no obligation on me from the
National Covenant, or the Solemn Leag^e and Covenant (commonly so called) or
any other manner of way whatsoever, to endeavor any Change or Alteration in
the Government, either in Church or State, as it is now established by the Laws
of this Kingdom. And I Promise and Swear, That I shall, with my utmost power,
Defend, Assist and Maintain His Majesty's Jurisdiction foresaid against all
deadly. And I shall never decline His Majesty's Power and Jurisdiction, as I
shall answer to God. And finally, I affirm and swear, That this my solemn Oath
is given in the plain genuine sense, and meaning of the words, without any
equivocation, mental reservation, or any manner of evasion whatsoever; and that
I shall not accept or use any dispensation from any creature whatsoever; So
help ne God.

The Bishop of Aberdeen, and the Synods Explanation of the Test.
WE do not hereby swear to all the particular Assertions and Expressions of the
Confession of Faith, mentioned in the Test, but only to the uniform Doctrine of
the Reformed Churches contained therein:

II. We do not hereby prejudge the Churches Right to, and Power of making any
alteration in the said Confession, as to the ambiguity and obscure expressions
thereof, or of making a more unexceptionable frame.

III. When we swear, That the King is Supreme Governor over all Persons, and
in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastic as Civil; and when we swear to assert and
defend all His Majesty's Rights and Prerogatives, this is reserving always the
intrinsic unalterable power of the Church, immediately derived from Jesus
Christ, to wit, the power of the Keys consisting in the preaching of the Word,
administration of the Sacraments, ordaining of Pastors, exercise of Discipline,
and the holding of such Assemblies as are necessary for preservation of Peace
and Unity, Truth and Purity in the Church; and withal, we do hereby think, that
the King has a power to alter the Government of the Church at his pleasure.

IV. When we swear, That it is unlawful for Subjects to meet or convene, to
treat or consult, etc. about matters of State, Civil, and Ecclesiastic, this
is excepting meetings for Ordination, public Worship and Discipline, and such
meetings as are necessary for the conservation of the Church, and true
Protestant Religion.

V. When we swear, There lies no obligation on us, etc. to endeavor any change
or alteration in Government, either in Church or State, we mean by Arms, or any
seditious way.

VI. When we swear, That we take the Test in the plain and genuine sense of the
words, etc. we understand it only in so far as it does not contradict these
Exceptions.

The Explanation of the Test, by the Synod and Clergy of Perth.
BEcause our Consciences require the publishing and declaring of that express
meaning we have in taking the Test, that we be not mis-interpreted to swear it
in these glosses which men uncharitable to it, and enemies to us, are apt to
put upon it; and because some men, ill affected to the Government, who are
daily broachers of odious and calumnious Slanders against our Persons and
Ministry, are apt to deduce inferences and conclusions from the alleged
ambiguity of some Propositions of the Test, that we charitably and firmly do
believe were never intended by the Imposers, nor received by the Takers.
Therefore to satisfy our Consciences, and to save our Credit from these unjust
imputations, we expressly declare, That we swear the Test in this following
meaning.

I. By taking the Test, we do not swear to every Proposition and Clause
contained in the Confession of Faith, but only to the true Protestant Religion,
founded upon the Word of God, contained in that Confession, as it is opposed to
Popery and Fanaticism.

II. By swearing the Ecclesiastic Supremacy, we swear it as we have done
formerly, without any reference to the assertory Act. We also reserve entire
unto the Church, its own intrinsic and unalterable power of the Keys, as it
was exercised by the Apostles, and the pure primitive Church, for the first
three Centuries.

III. By swearing, That it is unlawful to Convocate, convene or assemble in any
Council, Conventions or Assemblies, to treat, consult, etc. in any matter of
State, Civil or Ecclesiastic, as we do not evacuate our natural Liberty,
whereby we are in freedom, innocently without reflection upon, or derogating to
Authority, or persons entrusted with it, to discourse in any occasional meeting
of these things; so we exclude not those other meetings which are necessary for
the well-being and Discipline of the Church.

IV. By our swearing it unlawful to endeavor any change or alteration in the
Government, either of Church or State, we mean, that it is unlawful for us to
endeavor the alteration of the specific Government of Monarchy, in the true
and lineal Descent, and Episcopacy.

V. When we swear in the genuine and literal sense, etc. we understand it so
far as it is not opposite, or contradictory to the foresaid exceptions.

They were allowed to insert after the Oath, before their Subscriptions, these
words, or to this purpose:

We underwritten do take this Oath, according to the Explanation made by the
Council, approved by His Majesty's Letter; and we declare, we are no further
bound by this Oath.

EDINBVRGH, The sederunt of the Council. Sederunt vigesimo secundo Die
Septembris, 1681.
His Royal Highness, etc.

Montrose, Errol, Marshall, Mar, Glencarne, Winton, Linlithgow, Perth,
Strathmore, Roxburgh, Queensberry, Airley, Kintore, Breadalbane, Lorne,
Levingston, Bishop of Edinburgh, Elphinston, Rosse, Dalziel, Treasurer Deputy
Praeses, Advocate, Justice Clerk, Collin^oun, Tarbet, Haddo, Lundie.


This day the Test was subscribed by the above-written Privy-Councellors, and
by the Earl of Queensberry, who coming in after the rest had taken it, declared
that he took it with the Explication following.

The Earl of Queensberries Explanation of the Test when he took it.
HIS Lordship declared, that by that part of the Test, That there lies no
obligation -- to endeavor any change, or alteration in the Government, etc. He
did not understand himself to be obliged against Alterations, in case it should
please His Majesty to make alterations of the Government of Church or State.

HALYRVDEHOVSE.
Sederunt vigesimo primo Die Octobris, 1681.
His Royal Highness, etc. Winton, Perth, Strathmore, Queensberry, Ancram,
Airley, Lorne, Levingston, Bishop of Edinburgh, Treasurer Deputy Praeses,
Register, Advocate, Collintoun.


This day the Bishop of Edinburgh having drawn up a long Explication of the
Test, to satisfy the many Objections and Scruples moved against it, especially
by the conformed Clergy, presented it to the Council for their Lordships
Approbation, which was ordered to be read; but the Paper proving prolix, and
tedious, his Highness, after reading of a few Leaves, interrupted, saying very
wittily, and pertinently, That the first Chapter of John with a Stone will
chase away a Dog, and so break it off. Yet the Bishop was afterward allowed to
print it, if he pleased.

Sederunt quarto Die Novembris, 1681.
His Royal Highness, etc. Montrose Praeses, Perth, Ancram, Levingston,
President of Session, Advocate, Winton, Strathmore, Airley, Bishop of
Edinburgh, Treasurer Deputy, Lundie. Linlithgow, Roxburgh, Balcaras,
Esphynstoun, Register,


This day the Eari of Argyle being about to take the Test, as a Commissioner of
the Treasury, and having upon Command produced a Paper bearing the sense in
which he took the Test, the precedeing day, and in which he would take the
same, as a Commissioner of the Treasury; Upon consideration thereof, it was
resolved, that he cannot sit in Council, not having taken the Test, in the
sense and meaning of the Act of Parliament, and therefore was removed.

The Earl of Argyle's Explication of the Test when he took it.
I Have considered the Test, and I am very desirous to give obedience as far as
I can. I Am confident the Parliament never intended to impose contradictory
Oaths: Therefore I think no Man can explain it but for himself. Accordingly I
take it, as far as it is consistent with it self and the Protestant Religion.
And I do declare, That I mean not to bind up my self in my station and in a
lawful way, to wish and endeavor any alteration I think to the advantage of
Church or State, not repugnant to the Protestant Religion and my Loyalty. And
this I understand as a part of my Oath.

But the Earl finding, as has been narrated, this his Explication though
accepted, and approven by his Highness and Council the day before, to be this
day carped and offended at, and advantages thereupon soughtand designed against
him, did immediately draw up the following Explanation of his Explication, and
for his own vindication did first communicate it to some privately, and
thereafter intended to have offered it at his Trial for clearing of his
defenses.

The Explanation of his Explication.
I Have delayed hitherto to take the Oath, appointed by the Parliament to be
taken, by the first of January next: But now being required, near two Months
sooner, to take it, this day peremptorily, or to refuse. I have considered the
Test, and have seen several Objections moved against it, especially by many of
the Orthodox Clergy, notwithstand whereof, I have endeavored to satisfy my
self with a just Explanation, which I here offer, that I may both satisfy my
conscience, and obey Your Highness, and Your Lordships commands in taking the
Test; though the Act of Parliament do not simply command the thing, but only
under a Certification which I could easily submit to, if it were with Your
Highness favor, and might be without offense, but I love not to be singular,
and I am very desirous to give obedience in this and every thing, as far as I
can, and that which clears me is, that I am confident what ever any Man may
think, or say, to the prejudice of this Oath, the Parliament never intended to
impose contradictory Oaths; and because their sense, (they being the framers
and imposers) is the true sense, and that this Test enjoined is of no private
interpretation, nor are the Kings Statutes to be interpreted but as they bear,
and to the intent they are made, Therefore I think no Man, that is, no private
Person, can explain it for another, to amuse or trouble him with (it may be)
mistaken glosses: But every Man, as he is to take it, so is to explain it for
himself, and to endeavor to understand it, (notwithstanding all these
exceptions) in the Parliament, which is its true and genuine sense, I take it
therefore notwithstanding any scruple made by any as far as it is consistant
with it self, and the Protestant Religion which is wholly in the Parliaments
sense, and their true meaning; which [being present] I am sure, was owned by
all to be the securing of the Protestant Religion, founded on the Word of God,
and contained in the Confession of Faith Recorded J. 6 p. 1. c. 4. And not out
of scruple as if any thing in the Test did import the contrary, but to clear my
self from all cavils; as if thereby I were hand up further then the true
meaning of the Oath. I do declare that by that part of the Test, that there
lies no obligation on me, etc. I mean not to bind up my self, in my station,
and in a lawful way, still disclaiming all unlawful endeavors, to wish, and
endeavor any alteration I think, according to my conscience, to the advantage
of Church, or State, not repugnant to the Protestant Religion, and my Loyalty;
and by my Loyalty, I understand no other thing then the words plainly bear, to
wit the duty and allegiance of all Loyal Subjects, and this explanation I
understand as a part not of the Test or Act of Parliament, but as a qualifying
part of my Oath that I am to Swear, and with it I am willing to take the Test,
(...) Your Royal Highness, and Your Lordships allow me, or otherwise, in
submission to Your High (...), and the Councils pleasure, I am content to be
held as a refuser at present.

The Councils Letter to His Majesty, Concerning their having committed the Earl
of Argyle.
May it please your Sacred Majesty,
THE last Parliament having made so many and so advantageous Acts, for securing
the Protestant Religion, the Imperial Crown of this Kingdom, and Your Majesty's
Sacred Person (whom God Almighty long preserve) and having for the last, and as
the best way for securing all these, appointed a Test to be taken by all who
should be entrusted with the Government; which bears expressly, That the same
should be taken in the plain and genuine sense and meaning of the words; We
were very careful, not to suffer any to take the said Oath or Test, with their
own Glosses or Explications: But the Ear^ of Argyle having, after some delays,
come to Council, to take the said Oath, as a Privy-Councellor, spoke some
things which were not then heard, nor adverted to, and when his Lordship at his
next offering to take it in Council, as one of the Commissioners of Your
Majesty's Treasury, was commanded to take it simply, he refused to do so; but
gave in a Paper, showing the only sense in which he would take it, which Paper
we all considered, as that which had in it gross and scandalous Reflections
upon that excellent Act of Parliament, making it to contain things
contradictory and inconstant; and thereby depraving Your Majesty's Laws,
misrepresenting Your Parliament, and teaching Your Subjects to evacuate and
disappoint all Laws and Securities that can be enacted for the preservation of
the Government; suitable to which his Lordship declares in that Paper, That he
means not to bind up himself from making any alterations he shall think fit,
for the advantage of Church or State; and which Paper he desires may be looked
upon as apart of his Oath, as if he were the Legislator, and able to add a part
to the Act of Parliament. Upon serious perusal of which Paper we found our
selves obliged to send the said Earl to the Castle of Edinburgh, and to
transmit the Paper to Your Majesty, being expressly obliged to both these by
Your Majesty's express Laws. And we have commanded your Majesty's Advocate to
raise a pursuit against the said Earl, for being Author, and having given in
the said Paper: And for the further prosecution of all relating to this Affair,
we expect Your Majesty's Commands, which shall be most humbly and faithfully
obeyed by

Edinburgh, Nov. 8. 1681. Your Majesty's most Humble, most Faithful, and most
Obedient Subjects and Servants Sic Subscribitur, Glencairne, Winton,
Linlithgow, Perth, Roxburgh, Ancram, Airlie, Levingstoun, Jo. Edinburgen: Ross,
Geo. Gordoun, Chapter Maitland, G. Mekenzie, Ja. Foulis, J. Drumond.

November. 15. 1681.
The Kings Answer to the Councils Letter.
C. R.

MOst dear, etc. Having in one of your Letters directed unto us, of the 8.
Instant received a particular account of the Earl of Argyle's refusing to take
the Test simply, and of your proceedings against him, upon the occasion of his
giving in a Paper, showing the only sense in which he will take it, which had
in it gross and scandalous Reflections upon that excellent late Act of our
Parliament there, by which the said Test was enjoined to be taken; we have now
thought fit to let you know, that as we do hereby approve these your
Proceedings, particularly your sending the said Earl to our Castle of
Edinburgh; and your commanding our Advocate to raise a Pursuit against him for
being Author of, and having given in the said Paper; so we do also authorize
you to do all things that may concern the further prosecution of all relating
to this Affair. Nevertheless, it is our express Will and Pleasure, That before
any Sentence shall be pronounced against him, at the Conclusion of the Process,
you send us a particular account of what he shall be found guilty of, to the
end that, after our being fully informed thereof, we may signify our further
pleasure in this matter. For doing whereof, etc.

But as notwithstanding the Councils demanding by their Letter His Majesty's
allowance for prosecuting the Earl, they before any return caused His Majesty's
Advocate to exhibit an Indictment against him, upon the points of slandering
and depraving, as has been already remarked; so after having received His
Majesty's answer, the design grows, and they thought fit to order a new
Indictment, containing beside the former points, the Crimes of Treason and
Perjury, which accordingly was exhibited, and is here subjoyned, the difference
betwixt the two Indictments being only in the particulars above noted.

The Copy of the Indictment against the Earl of Argyle.
Archibald Earl of Argyle,
YOU are Indicted and Accused, That albeit by the Common Law of all
well-governed Nations, and by the Municipal Laws and Acts of Parliament of this
Kingdom; and particularly, by the 21st, and by the 43d Act, Par. 2 James 1. and
by the 83d Act, Par. 6. James 5. and by the 34th Act, Par. 8. James 6. and the
134th Act, Par. 8. James 6. and the 205th Act, Par. 14. James 6. All
Leasing-makers, and tellers of them, are punishable with tinsel of Life and
Goods; like as by the 107th Act, Par. 7. James 1. it is statuted, That no man
interpret the Kings Statutes otherwise than the Statute bears, and to the
intent and effect that they were made for, and as the makers of them
understood, and who so does in the contrary, to be punished at the Kings will.
And by the 10th Act, Par. 10. James 6. it is statuted, That none of His
Majesty's Subjects presume or take upon him publicly to declare, or privately
to speak or write any purpose of reproach or slander of His Majesty's Person,
Estate or Government, or to deprave his Laws, or Acts of Parliament, or
misconstrue his proceedings, whereby any mistaking may be moved betwixt his
Highness, his Nobility, and loving Subjects, in time coming, under pain of
death, certifying them that does in the contrary, they shall be reputed as
seditious and wicked Instruments, enemies to his Highness, and to the
Commonwealth of this Realm, and the said pain of death shall be executed
against them with all rigor, to the example of others: And by the second Act,
Ses. 2. Par. 1. Char. 2. it is statuted, That whosoever shall by Writing,
Libelling, Remonstrating, express, publish, or declare any words or sentences,
to stir up the people to the dislike of His Majesty's Prerogative and
Supremacy, in causes Ecclesiastic, or of the Government of the Church by
Archbishops and Bishops, as it is now settled by Law, is under the pain of
being declared incapable to exercise any Office Civil, Ecclesiastic, or
Military, within this Kingdom, in any time coming. Like as by the fundamental
Laws of this Nation, by the 130th Act, Par. 8. James 6. it is declared, That
none of His Majesty's Subjects presume to impugn the Dignity or Authority of
the three Estates, or to procure innevation or diminution of their Power and
Authority, under the pain of Treason. And that it is much more Treason in any
of His Majesty's Subjects, to presume to alter Laws already made, or to make
new Laws, or to add any part to any Law by their own Authority, that being to
assume the Legislative Power to themselves, with His Majesty's highest, and
most incommunicable Prerogative. Yet true it is, that albeit His Sacred Majesty
did not only bestow on you the said Archibald Earl of Argyle, those vast Lands,
Jurisdictions and Superiorities, justly forfaulted to His Majesty by the Crimes
of your deceased Father, preferring your Family to those who had served His
Majesty against it, in the late Rebellion, but also pardoned and remitted to
you the Crimes of Leasing-making, and misconstruing His Majesty's and his
Parliaments proceedings against the very Laws above-written, whereof you were
found guilty, and condemned to die therefore, by the High Court of Parliament,
the 25th of August, 1662. and raised you to the Title and Dignity of an Earl,
and being a Member of all His Majesty's Judicatures. Notwithstanding of all
these, and many other favors, you the said Archibald Earl of Argyle, being put
by the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council to take the Test, appointed by the
Act of the last Parliament, to be taken by all persons in public Trust, you,
instead of taking the said Test, and swearing the same in the plain genuine
sense and meaning of the words, without any equivocation, mental reservation,
or evasion whatsoever, you did declare against, and defame the said Act; and
having, to the end you might corrupt others by your pernicious sense, drawn the
same in a Libel, of which Libel you dispersed, and gave abroad Copies, whereby
ill impressions were given of the King and Parliaments proceedings, at a time
especially when His Majesty's Subjects were expecting what submission should be
given to the said Test; and being desired the next day to take the same, as one
of the Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury, you did give into the Lords of
His Majesty's Privy Council, and owned twice, in plain judgment before them,
the said defamatory Libel against the said Test and Act of Parliament,
declaring, That you had considered the said Test, and was desirous to give
obedience as far as you could, whereby you clearly insinuated, that you was not
able to give full obedience. In the second Article of which Libel you declare,
That you were confident the Parliament never intended to impose contradictory
Oaths, thereby to abuse the people with a belief, that the Parliament had been
so impious as really and actually to have imposed contradictory Oaths, and so
ridiculous, as to have made an Act of Parliament (which should be most
deliberate of all humane actions) quite contrary to their own intentions; after
which you subsumed, contrary to the nature of all Oaths, and to the Acts of
Parliament above cited, that every man must explain it for himself, and take it
in his own sense, by which not only that excellent Law, and the Oath therein
specified, which is intended to be a Fence to the Government, both of Church
and State, but all other Oaths and Laws shall be rendered altogether useless to
the Government. If every man take the Oaths imposed by Law in his own sense,
then the Oath imposed is to no purpose, for the Legislator cannot be sure that
the Oath imposed by him will bind the takers according to the design and intent
for which he appointed it, and the Legislative Power is taken from the
Imposers, and settled in the taker of the Oath, and so he is allowed to be the
Legislator, which is not only an open and violent depraving of His Majesty's
Laws and Acts of Parliament, but is likewise a settling of the Legislative
Power on private Subjects, who are to take such Oaths. In the third Article of
that Paper you declare, That you take the Test in so far only as it is
consistent with it self, and the Protestant Religion; by which you maliciously
intimate to the people, That the said Oath is inconsistent with it self, and
with the Protestant Religion, which is not only a down right depraving of the
said Act of Parliament, but is likewise a misconstruing of His Majesty's and
the Parliaments proceedings, and misrepresenting them to the people in the
highest degree, and in the tenderest points they can be concerned; and
implying, that the King and Parliament have done things inconsistent with the
Protestant Religion, for securing of which that Test was particularly intended.
In the Fourth Article you do expressly declare, that you mean not by taking the
said Test, to bind up your self from wishing and endeavoring any alteration in
a lawful way that you shall think fit, for advancing of Church and State;
whereby also it was designed by the said Act of Parliament and Oath, That no
man should make any alteration in the Government of Church and State, as it is
now established; and that it is the Duty of all good Subjects, in humble and
quiet manner, to obey the present Government. Yet you not only declare your
self, but by your example you invite others to think themselves loosed from
that Obligation, and that it is free for them to make any alteration in either,
as they shall think fit, concluding your whole Paper with these words, ( And
this I understand as a part of my Oath); which is a treasonable invasion upon
the Royal Legislative Power, as if it were lawful for you to make to your self
an Act of Parliament, since he who can make any part of an Act may make the
whole, the Power and Authority in both being the same. Of the which Crimes
above mentioned, you the said Archibald Earl of Argyle are Actor, Art and Part;
which being found by the Assize, you ought to be punished with the pains of
Death, fort^ulture and escheat of Lands and Goods, to the terror of others to
commit the like hereafter.

An Abstract of the several Acts of Parliament upon which the Indictment
against the Earl of Argyle was grounded.
Concerning raisers of Rumors betwixt the King and his people, Chap. 20.1.
Statutes of King Robert 1.
IT is defended and forbidden, That no man be a Conspirator, or Inventer of
Narrations or Rumors, by the which occasion of discord may arise betwixt the
King and his people. And if any such man shall be found, and attainted thereof,
incontinent be shall be taken and put in Prison, and there shall be surely
kept up; ay, and while the King declare his will anent him.

Act 43. of Par. 2. King James 1. March 11. 1424. Leasing-makers forfault Life
and Goods.
ITem, It is ordained by the King and whole Parliament, that all Leasingmakers,
and tellers of them, which may engender discord betwixt the King and his people
wherever they may be gotten, shall be challenged by them that power has, and
ryne L^^e and Goods to the King.

Act 83. Par. 6. James 5. Dec. 10. 1540. Of Leasing-makers.
ITem, Touching the Article of Leasing-makers to the Kings Grace, of his
Barons, great men, and Leiges, and for punishment to be put to them therefore,
the Kings Grace, with advice of his three Estates, ratifies and approves the
Acts and Statutes made thereupon before, and ordains the same to be put in
execution in all points; and also Statutes and ordains, That if any manner of
person makes any evil Information of his Highness to his Barons and Leiges,
that they shall be punished in such manner, and by the same punishment as they
that make Leasings to his Grace of his Lords, Barons, and Leiges.

Act 134. Par. 8. James 6. May 22. 1584. Anent Slanderers of the King, his
Progenitors, Estate and Realm.
FOrasmuch as it is understood to our Sovereign Lord, and his three Estates
assembled in this present Parliament, what great harm and inconveniency has
fallen in this Realm, chiefly since the beginning of the Civil troubles
occurred in the time of his Highness minority, through the wicked and
licentious, public and private speeches, and untrue calumnies of diverse of his
Subjects, to the disdain, contempt and reproach of His Majesty, his Council and
proceedings, and to the dishonor and prejudice of his Highness, his Parents,
Progenitors and Estate, stirring up his Highness's Subjects thereby to
misliking, sedition, unquietness, and to cast off their due obedience to His
Majesty, to their evident peril, tinsil and destruction; his Highness
continuing always in love and clemency toward all his good Subjects, and most
willing to seek the safety and preservation of them all, which wilfully,
needlessly, and upon plain malice, after his Highness's mercy and pardon often
times before granted, has procured themselves, by their treasonable deeds, to be
cut off as corrupt Members of this Commonwealth. Therefore it is statute and
ordained by our Sovereign Lord, and his three Estates in this present
Parliament, that none of his Subjects of whatsoever Function, Degree or
Quality, in time coming shall presume, or take upon hand, privately or
publicly, in Sermons, Declanations, and familiar Conferences, to utter any
false, slanderous, or untrue Speeches, to the disdain, reproach, and contempt
of His Majesty, his Council and proceedings, or to the dishonor, hurt or
prejudice of his Highness, his Parents and Progenitors, or to meddle in the
Affairs of his Highness, and his Estate present, bygone, and in time coming,
under the pains contained in the Acts of Parliament anent makers and tellers of
Leasings, certifying them that shall be tried contraveeners thereof, or that
hear such slanderous Speeches, and reports not the same with diligence, the
said pain shall be executed against them with all rigor, in example of others.

Act 205. Par. 14 King James 6. June 8. 1594. Anent Leasingmakers, and Authors
of Slanders.
OUR Sovereign Lord, with advice of his Estates in this present Parliament,
ratifies, approves, and for his Highness and Successors, perpetually confirms
the Act made by his Noble Progenitors, King James the First, of Worthy Memory,
against Leasing-makers, the Act made by King James the Second, entitled,
Against Leasing-makers, and tellers of them; the Act made by King James the
Fifth, entitled, Of Leasing-makers; and the Act made by his Highness's self,
with advice of his Estates in Parliament, upon the 22d. day of May, 1584.
entitled, For the punishment of the Authors of Slanders, and untrue Calumnies
against the Kings Majesty, his Council and proceedings, to the dishonor and
prejudice of his Highness, his Parents, Progenitors, Crown and Estate; as also
the Act made in his Highness's Parliament holden at Linlithgow, upon the 10th
of December, 1585. entitled, Against the Authors of slanderous Speeches or
Writs; and statutes and ordains all the said Acts to be published of new, and
to be put in execution in time coming, with this addition, That whoever hears
the said Leasings, Calumnies or slanderous Speeches or Writs to be made, and
apprehends not the Authors thereof, if it lies in his power, and reveals not
the same to his Highness, or one of his Privy Council, or to the Sheriff,
Steward or Bailiff of the Shire, Stewards in Regality or Royalty, or to the
Provost, or any of the Bailiffs within Burgh, by whom the same may come to the
knowledge of his Highness, or his said Privy Council, where through the said
Leasing makers, and Authors of slanderous Speeches may be called, tried and
punished according to the said Acts: The hearer, and not apprehender, [if it
lie in his power] and concealer, and not revealer of the said Leasing makers,
and Authors of the said slanderous Specches or Writs, shall incur the like pain
and punishment as the principal Offender.

Act 107. Par. 7. King James 1. March 1. 1427. That none interpret the Kings
Statutes wrongously.
ITem, the King by deliverance of Council, by manner of Statute, forbids, That
no man interpret his Statutes otherwise than the Statutes bear, and to the
intent and effect that they were made for, and as the maker of them understood;
and who so does in the contrary, shall be punished at the Kings will.

Act 10. Par. 10. King James 6. Dec. 10. 1585. Authors of slanderous Speeches
or Writs should be punished to the Death.
IT is statuted and ordained by our Sovereign Lord and three Estates, that all
his Highness's Subjects content themselves in quietness and dutiful obedience
to his Highness and his Authority, and that none of them presume, or take upon
hand publicly to declaim, or privately to speak or write any purpose of
reproach or slander of His Majesty's Person, Estate, or Government, or to
deprave his Laws and Acts of Parliament, or misconstrue his proceedings,
whereby any misliking may be moved betwixt his Highness and his Nobility, and
loving Subjects in time coming, under the pain of Death, certifying them that
do in the contrary, they shall be reputed as seditious and wicked Instruments,
enemies to his Highness, and the Commonwealth of this Realm, and the said pain
of Death shall be executed upon them with all rigor, in example of others.

Act for preservation of His Majesty's Person, Authority and Government, May
1662.
-- And further it is by His Majesty and Estates of Parliament declared,
statuted and enacted, That if any person or persons shall by writing, printing,
praying, preaching, libelling, remonstrating, or by any malicious or advised
speaking, express, publish or declare any words or sentences, to stir up the
people to the hatred or dislike of His Majesty's Royal Prerogative and
Supremacy, in Causes Ecclesiastical, or of the Government of the Church by
Archbishops and Bishops, as it is now settled by Law -- That every such person
or persons so offending, and being legally Convicted thereof, are hereby
declared incapable to enjoy or exercise any place or employment, Civil,
Ecclesiastic, or Military, within this Church and Kingdom, and shall be liable
to such further pains as are due by the Law in such Cases.

Act 130. Par. 8. James 6. May 22. 1584. Anent the Authority of the three
Estates of Parliament.
THE Kings Majesty considering the Honor and the Authority of his Supreme
Court of Parliament, continued past all memory of man unto their days, as
constitute upon the free Votes of the three Estates of this ancient Kingdom, by
whom the same, under God, has ever been upholden, Rebellious and Traitorous
Subjects punished, the Good and Faithful preserved and maintained, and the Laws
and Acts of Parliament (by which all men are governed) made and established.
And finding the Power, Dignity and Authority of the said Court of Parliament,
of late years, called in some doubt, at least, some curiously traveling to
have introduced some Innovation there anent, His Majesty's firm will and mind
always being as it is yet, That the Honor, Authority, and Dignity of his said
three Estates shall stand and continue in their own Integrity, according to the
ancient and laudable custom bygone, without any alteration or diminution:
Therefore it is statuted and ordained, by our said Sovereign Lord, and his said
three Estates in this present Parliament, That none of his Leiges or Subjects
presume, or take upon hand to impugn the Dignity and Authority of the said
three Estates, or to seek or procure the innovation or diminution of the Power
and Authority of the same three Estates, or any of them in time coming, under
the pain of Treason.

The Earl of Argyle 's first Petition for Advocates, or Council to be allowed
him.
To his Royal Highness, His Majesty's High Commissioner, and to the Right
Honorable the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council. The Humble Petition of
Archibald Earl of Argyle.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioner being Criminally Indicted before the Lords Commissioners
of Justitiary, at the instance of His Majesty's Advocate, for Crimes of an high
Nature: And whereas in this Case no Advocate will readily plead for the
Petitioner unless they have your Royal Highness's, and Lordships, Special
License and Warrant to that effect, which is usual in the like Cases.

It is therefore humbly desired, that Your Royal Highness, and Lordships, would
give special Order and Warrant to Sir George Lockhart, his ordinary Advocate,
to consult and plead for him in the foresaid Criminal Process, without
incurring any hazard upon that account, and your Petitioner shall ever pray.

Edinburgh, November. 22. 1681.
The Councils Answer to the Earl of Argyl's first Petition, about his having
Advocates allowed him.
HIS Royal Highness, his Majesty's High Commissioner, and Lords of
Privy Council, do refuse the desire of the above-written Bill, but allows any
Lawyers the Petitioners shall employ, to consult and plead for him in the
Process of Treason, and other Crimes, to be pursued against him at the instance
of His Majesty's Advocate Extr. By me,

Will. Paterson.

The Earl of Argyl's second Petition for Council to be allowed him.
To His Royal Highness, His Majesty's High Commissioner, and to the Right
Honorable the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council. The humble Petition of
Archibald Earl of Argyle.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioner having given in a former Petition, humbly representing,
That he being Criminally Indicted before the Lords Commissioners of Justitiary,
at the instance of His Majesty's Advocate, for Crimes of an high Nature: And
therefore desiring that Your Royal Highness, and Lordships, would give special
Warrant to Sir George Lockbart, to consult and plead for him: Whereupon your
Royal Highness, and Lordships did allow the Petitioner to make use of such
Advocates as he should think fit to call. Accordingly your Petitioner having
desired Sir George Lockhart to consult and plead for him, he has as yet
refused your Petitioner. And by the 11. Patliament of King James the VI. Cap.
38. As it is the undeniable privilege of all Subjects, accused for any Crimes,
to have liberty to provide themselves of Advocates, to defend their Lives,
Honor, and Lands, against whatsoever accusation; so the same Privilege is not
only by Parliament 11. King James the VI. Cap. 90. Farther asserted and
confirmed, but also it is declared, That in case the Advocates refuse the
Judges are to compel them, least the party accused should be prejudged: And
this being an affair of great importance to your Petitioner, and Sir George
Lockhart having been not only still his ordinary Advocate, but also by his
constant converse with him is best known to your Petitioners Principles; and of
whose eminent abilities and fidelity your Petitioner (as many others have) has
had special proof all along in his Concerns, and has such singular confidence
in him that he is most necessary to your Petitioner at this occasion.

May it therefore please Your Royal Highness and Lordships to interpose your
Authority, by giving a special Order and Warrant to the said Sir George
Lockhart, to consult and and plead for him in the said Criminal Process,
conform to the tenor of the said Acts of Parliament, and constant known
practice in the like Cases, which was never refused to any Subject of the
meanest quality, even to the greatest Criminals. And your Royal Highness's, and
Lordships Answer is humbly craved.

Edinburgh, November. 24. 1681.
The Councils Answer to the Earl of Argyle 's second Petition.
HIS Royal Highness, His Majesty's High Commissioner, and Lords of Privy
Council, having considered the foresaid Petition, do adhere to their former
Order, allowing Advocates to appear for the Petitioner in the Process foresaid.
Extr. By me,

Will. Paterson.

The Earl of Argyle 's Letter of Attorney, constituting Alexander Dunbar his
Procurator, for requiring Sir George Lockhart to plead for him.
WE Archibald Earl of Argyle, do hereby substitute, constitute and ordain
Alexander Dunbar, our Servitor, to be our Procurator, to pass and require Sir
George Lockhart Advicate to consult, and plead for us in the Criminal Process
intended against us, at the instance of His Majestics Advocate; and to compear
with us, before the Lords Commissioners of Justitiary, upon the 12th of
December next, conform to an Act of Council, dated the 22d. of November. instant,
allowing any Lawyers that we should employ, to consult and plead for us in the
said Process, and to another Act of Council of the 24th of November. instant,
relative to the former, and conform to the Acts of Parliament. In witness
whereof, we have Subscribed these presents, at Edinburgh-Castle, Nov. 26. 1681.
before these Witnesses, Duncan Camphell Servitor to James Glen Stationer in
Edinburgh, and John Thom, Merchant in the said Burgh.

ARGYLE.
Witnesses. Duncan Camphell, John Thom, Witnesses.



An Instrument whereby the Earl of Argyle required Sir George Lockhart to
appear and plead for him.
Apud Edenburgum vigesimo sexto die Mensis Novembris, Anno Domini millesimosex.
centesimo octuagesimo primo, and Anno Regni Car. 2. Regis trigesimo tertio.
THE which day, in presence of me Notar public, and Witnesses under
subscribed, compeared personally Alexander Dunbar, Servitor to a Noble Earl,
Archibald Earl of Argyle, as Procurator, and in name of the said Earl, conform
to a Procuration subscribed by the said Earl at the Castle of Edinburgh, upon
the twenty first day of November, 1681. making and constituting the said
Alexander Dunbar his Procurator, to the effect underwritten: and past to the
personal presence of Sir George Lockhart Advocate, in his own Lodging in
Edinburgh, having and holding in his hands an Act of His Majesty's Privy
Council, of the date the 22d of November, 1681. instant, proceeding upon a
Petition given in by the said Earl of Argyle, to the said Lords, showing, That
he being Criminally Indicted before the Lords Commissioners of Justitiary, at
the instance of His Majesty's Advocate, for Crimes of an high Nature, and
whereas in that Case no Advocates would readily plead for the said Earl, unless
they had his Royal Highness's, and their Lordships special License and Warrant
to that effect, which is usual in the like Cases: And by the said Petition
humbly supplicated, that his Highness and the Council, would give special Order
and Command to the said Sir George Lockhart, the said Earls ordinary Advocate,
to consult and plead for him in the foresaid Criminal Process, without
incurring any hazard upon that account. His Royal Highness, and Lords of the
said Privy Council, did refuse the desire of the said Petition, but allowed any
Lawyers the Petitioner should employ, to consult and plead for him in the
Process of Treason, and other Crimes to be pursued against him, at the instance
of His Majesty's Advocate. And also the said Alexander Dunbar, having and
holding in his hands another Act of the said Lords of Privy Council, of the
date the 24th of the said month, relative to, and narrating the said first Act,
and proceeding upon another supplication given in by the said Earl to the said
Lords, craving, That his Royal Highness, and the said Lords would interpose
their Authority, by giving a positive and special Order and Warrant to the said
Sir George Lockhart, to consult and plead with him in the foresaid Criminal
Process, conform to the tenor of the Acts of Parliament mentioned and
particularized in the said Petition, and frequent and known practice in the
like cases, which was never refused to any Subjects of the meanest quality. His
Royal Highness, and Lords of Privy Council, having considered the foresaid
Petition, did by the said Act adhere to their former Order, allowing Advocates
to appear for the said Earl in the Process foresaid, as the said Acts bear, and
produced the said Acts and Procuratory foresaid to the said Sir George
Lockhart, who took the same in his hands, and read them over successive; and
after reading thereof, the said Alexander Dunbar Procurator, and in name and
behalf foresaid, solemnly required the said Sir George Lockhart, as the said
Noble Earls ordinary Advocate, and as a Lawyer and Advocate, upon the said
Earls reasonable expense, to consult and advise the said Earls said Process, at
any time and place the said Sir George should appoint to meet thereupon,
conform to the foresaid two Acts of Council, and Acts of Parliament therein
mentioned, appointing Advocates to consult in such matters; which the said Sir
George Lockhart altogether refused: Whereupon the said Alexander Dunbar, as
Procurator, and in Name foresaid, asked and took Instruments, one or more, in
the hands of me Notary public undersubscribed. And these things were done
within the said Sir George Lockhart's Lodging, on the South side of the Street
of Edinburgh, in the Lane-Mercat, within the Dining Room of the said Lodging
betwixt Four and Five hours in the Afternoon, Day, Month, Year, Place, and of
His Majesty's Reign, respective foresaid, before Robert Dicksone, and John
Lesly, Servitors to John Camphell, Writer to His Majesty's Signet, and Dowgall
Mac. Alester, Messenger in Edinburgh, with diverse others, called and required
to the Premises.

Ita esse Ego Johannes Broun, Notarius publicus, in Premissis requisitus,
Attestor Testantibus his meis signo and subscriptione manualibus solitis and
consuetis. Broun.
Witnesses. Robert Dicksone, Dowgall, Mac. Alester, John Lesly,



December. 5. 1682.
The Opinion of diverse Lawyers concerning the Case of the Earl of Argyle.
WE have considered the Criminal Letters, raised at the instance of His
Majesty's Advocate against the Earl of Argyle, with the Acts of Parliament
contained and narrated in the same Criminal Letters, and have compared the same
with a Paper, or Explication, which is libelled to have been given in by the
Earl to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, and owned by him, as the
sense and explication in which he did take the Oath imposed by the late Act of
Parliament. Which Paper is of this tenor: I have considered the Test, and am
very desirous to give chedience as far as I can, etc. And having likewise
considered that the Earl, after he had taken the Oath, with the explication and
sense then put upon it, it was acquiesced to by the Lords of Privy Council, and
he allowed to take his place, and to sit and Vote. And that, before the Earls
taking of the Oath, there were several papers spread abroad, containing
objections, and alleging inconsistencies and contradictions in the Oath, and
some thereof were presented by Synods and Presbyteries of the Orthodox Clergy,
to some of the Bishops of the Church. It is our humble Opinion, that seeing the
Earls design and meaning in offering the said Explication was allenarly for the
clearing of his own Conscience, and upon no facrious or seditious design; and
that the matter and import of the said paper is no contradiction of the Laws
and Acts of Parliament, it does not at all import any of the Crimes libelled
against him, viz. Treason, Leasing making, depraving of His Majesty's Laws, or
the Crime of Perjury, but that the glosses and inferences put by the Libel upon
the said paper are altogether strained and unwarrantable, and inconsistent with
the Earls true design, and the sincerity of his meaning and intention, in
making of the said Explication.

Wednesday the 12th of December, the day of compearance assigned to the Earl
being now come, he was brought by a guard of Soldiers from the Castle to the
place appointed for the Trial, and the Justice Court being met and fenced, the
Earl, now Marquess of Queensberry, then Justice-General, the Lords Nairn,
Collingtoun, Forret, Newtoun and Hirkhouse, the Lords of Justitiary sitting in
Judgment, and the other formalities also performed, the Indictment above set
down Number. 24. was read, and the Earl spoke as follows.

The Earl of Argyle's Speech to the Lord Justice General, and the Lords of the
Justitiary, after he had been arraigned, and his Indictment read.
My Lord Justice General, etc.
I Look upon it as the undeniable privilege of the meanest Subject to explain
his own words in the most benign sense; and even when persons are under an ill
Character, the misconstruction of words in themselves not ill can only reach a
presumption or aggravation but not any more.

But it is strange to allege, as well, as I hope, impossible, to make any that
know me believe, that I could intend any thing but what was honest and
honorable, suitable to the Principles of my Religion and Loyalty, tho I did
not explain my self at all.

My Lord, I pray you be not offended that I take up a little of your time, to
tell you I have from my Youth made it my business to serve His Majesty
faithfully, and have constantly, to my power, appeared in his Service;
especially in all times of difficulty, and have never joined, nor complied with
any Interest or Party, contrary to His Majesty's Authority, and have all along
served him in his own way, without a frown from His Majesty these thirty years.

As soon as I passed the Schools and Colleges, I went to travel to France and
Italy, and was abroad 1647, 1648, and till the end of 1649.

My first appearance in the World, was to serve His Majesty as Colonel in his
Foot-Guards; and tho at that time all the Commissions were given by the then
Parliament, yet I would not serve without a Commission from His Majesty, which
I have still the Honor to have by me.

After the misfortune of Worcester, I continued in Arms for His Majesty's
Service, when Scotland was overrun with the Usurpers, and was alone with some
of my Friends in Arms in the Year 1652. and did then keep up some appearance of
opposition to them: And General Major Dean coming to Argyleshire, and planting
several Garrisons, he no sooner went away but we fell upon the Garrisons he had
left, and in one day took two of them, and cut off a considerable part of a
third, and carried away in all about three hundred Prisoners. And in the end of
that year, I sent Captain Shaw to His Majesty, with my humble Opinion how the
War might be carried on who returned to me with Instructions and Orders, which
I have yet lying by me.

After which, I joined with those His Majesty did Commissionate, and stood out
till the last, that the Earl of Middleton, His Majesty's Lieutenant General,
gave me Orders to Capitulate, which I did without any other Engagements to the
Rebels, but allowing persons to give Bail for my living peaceably, and did at
my Capitulating relieve several Prisoners by exchange, whereof my Lord Granard,
out of the Castle of Edinburgh, was one.

It is notarly known, that I was forefaulted by the Usurpers, who were so
jealous of me, that contrary to their Faith, within eight months after my
Capitulation, upon pretense I keep'd Horses above the value, they seized on me,
and kept me in one Prison after another, till His Majesty's happy
Restoration, and this only because I would not engage not to serve His
Majesty, tho there was no Oath required.

I do with all gratitude acknowledge His Majesty's goodness, bounty, and Royal
favors to me, when I was pursued before the Parliament in the year 1662. His
Majesty was graciously pleased not to send me here in any opprobrious way, but
upon a bare verbal Parole; upon which I came down Post, and presented my self a
Fourthnight before the day. Notwithstanding whereof I was immediately clapped up
in the Castle, but having satisfied His Majesty at that time, of my entire
Loyalty, I did not offer to plead by Advocates. And His Majesty was not only
pleased to pardon my Life, and to restore me to a Title and Fortune, but to put
me in trust in his Service, in the most eminent Judicatories of this Kingdom,
and to heap favors upon me, far beyond what ever I did or can deserve, tho I
hope His Majesty has always found me faithful and thankful, and ready to
bestow all I have, or can have for his Service. And I hope never has had, nor
ever shall have ground to repent any favor he has done me. And if I were now
really guilty of the Crimes libelled, I should think my self a great Villain.

The next occasion I had to show my particular zeal to His Majesty's Service,
was in Anno 1666. when the Insurrection was made that was represt at
Pentland-Hills. At the very first, the intercourse betwixt this place and me
was stopped, so that I had neither Intelligence nor Orders from the Council, nor
from the General, but upon a Letter from the now Archbishop of St. Andrews,
telling me there was a Rebellion like to be in the three Kingdoms, and bidding
me beware of Ireland and Kintyre. I brought together about two thousand men; I
seized all the Gentlemen in Kintyre that had not taken the Declaration, tho I
found them peaceable. And I sent a Gentleman to General Dalziel, to receive his
Orders, who came to him just as they were going to the Action at Pentland, and
was with him in it, and I kept my men together till his return. And when I met
with considerable trouble from my Neighbors, rebelliously in Arms, and had
Commissions both on public, and private accounts, have I not carried dutifully
to His Majesty, and done what was commanded with a just moderation, which I can
prove under the hands of my enemies, and by many infallible demonstrations?

Pardon me a few words: Did I not in this present Parliament show my readiness
to serve His Majesty and the Royal Family, in asserting vigorously the lineal
legal Succession of the Crown, and had a care to have it expressed in the
Commissions of the Shires and Burghs I had interest in? Was I not for offering
proper Supplies to His Majesty and his Successor? And did I not concur to bind
the Landlords for their Tenants, although I was mainly concerned? And have I not
always kept my Tenants in obedience to His Majesty?

I say all this, not to arrogate any thing for doing what was my Honor and
Duty to His Majesty; but if after all this, upon no other ground but words that
were spoken in absolute innocence, and without the least design, except for
clearing my own Conscience, and that are not capable of the ill sense wrested
from them by the Libel, I should be further troubled, what assurance can any of
the greatest Quality, Trust, or Innocence, have that they are fecure?
Especially considering, that so many Scruples have been started, as all know,
not only by many of the Orthodox Clergy, but by whole Presbyteries, Synods, and
some Bishops, which were thought so considerable, that an eminent Bishop took
the pains to write a Treatise, that was read over in Council, and allowed to be
Printed, and a Copy given to me, which contains all the expressions I am
charged for, and many more that may be stretched to a worse sense.

Have I not showed my zeal to all the ends of the Test? How then can it be
imagined that I have any sinister design in any thing that I have said? If I
had done any thing contrary to it all the course of my life, which I hope shall
not be found, yet one act might pretend to be excused by a habit. But nothing
being questioned but the sense of words misconsirued to the greatest height,
and stretched to imaginary insinuations, quite contrary to my scope and design,
and so far contrary, not only to my sense, but my principles, Interest, and
duty, That I hope my Lord Advocate will think he has gone too far on in this
Process, and say plainly what he knows to be truth by his acquaintance with me,
both in public and private; viz. That I am neither Papist nor Fanatic, but
truly loyal in my principles and practices.

The hearing of this Libel would trouble me beyond most of the sufferings of my
Life if my innocence did not support me, and the hopes of being vindicated of
this and other Calumnies before this public and Noble Auditory.

I leave my Defenses to these Gentlemen that plead for me, they know my
innocence, and how ground less that Libel is.

I shall only say, As my Life has most of it been spent in serving and
suffering for his Majesty, so whatever be the event of this Process, I resolve,
while I breath, to be loyal and faithful to His Majesty. And whether I live
publicly or in obscurity, my head, my heart nor my hand, shall never be
wanting where I can be useful to His Majesty's Service. And while I live, and
when I die, I shall pray, That God Almighty would bless His Majesty with a
long, happy, and prosperous Reign; and that the lineal legal successors of the
Crown may continue Monarchs of all His Majesty's Dominions, and be Defenders of
the True Primitive, Christian, Apostolic, Catholic, Protestant Religion,
while Sun and Moon endure.

God save the King.
The Kings own Letter to this Nobleman when he was Lord Lorn.
Collogne, December 20. 1654. My Lord Lorn,
I Am very glad to hear from Middleton, what affection and zeal you show to my
Service, how constantly you adhere to him in all his distresses, and what good
Service you have performed upon the Rebels. I assure you, you shall find me
very just, and kind to you in rewarding what you have done and suffered for me;
and I hope you will have more Credit and Power with those of your Kindred and
Dependants upon your Family, to engage them with you for me, than any body else
can have to seduce them against me; and I shall look upon all those who shall
refuse to follow you as unworthy of any protection hereafter from me, which you
will let them know. This honest Bearer, M -- will inform you of my Condition
and Purposes, to whom you will give Credit; and he will tell you, That I am
very much.

Your very affectionate Friend, C. R.

General Middleton's Order to the Earl of Argyle, who was then Lord Lorn, for
capitulating with the English, wherein he largely expresses his Worth and
Loyalty.
John Middleton, Lieutenant General, next and immediate under His Majesty, and
Commander in chief of all the Forces raised, and to be raised, within the
Kingdom of Scotland.
SEeing the Lord Lorn has given so singular proofs of clear and perfect
Loyalty to the Kings Majesty, and of pure and constant affection to the good of
His Majesty's Affairs, is never hitherto to have any ways complied with the
Enemy, and to have been principally instrumental in the enlivening of this late
War, and one of the chief and first movers in it, and has readily, cheerfully,
and gallantly engaged, and resolutely and constantly continued active in it,
notwithstanding the many powerful disswasions, discouragements, and oppositions
he has met withal from diverse hands, and has in the carrying on of the
Service shown such signal Fidelity, Integrity, Generosity, Prudence, Courage,
and Condect, and such high Virtue, Industry, and Ability, as are suitable to
the Dignity of his Koble Family, and the Trust His Majesty reposed in him, and
has not only stood out against all temptations and enticements, but has most
nobly crossed and repressed designs and attempts of deserting the Service, and
persisted loyally and firmly in it to the very last, through excessive toil and
many great difficulties, misregarding all personal inconveniences, and choosing
the loss of Friends, Fortune, and all private Concernments, and to endure the
utmost extremities rather than to swerve in the least from his Duty; or taint
his Reputation with the meanest shadow of disloyalty and dishonor. I do
therefore hereby testify and declare, That I am perfectly satisfied with his
whole Deportments, in relation to the Enemy, and this late War; and do highly
approve them, as being not only above all I can express of their worth, but
almost beyond all parallel. And I do withal hereby both allow, and most
earnestly desire, and wish him, to lose no time in taking such course for his
safety and preservation by Treaty, and Agreement, or Capitulation, as he shall
judge most fit and expedient for the good of his Person, Family, and Estate,
since inevitable and invincible necessity has forced us to lay aside this War.
And I can now no other way express my respects to him, nor contribute my
endeavor to do him. Honor and Service. Intestimony whereof I have signed and
sealed these Presents at Dunveagave, the last day of March, 1655.

JOHN MIDDLETON.

Another Letter from the Earl of Middleton, to the same purpose,
Paris, April 17. 1655. My Noble Lord,
I Am hopeful, that the Bearer of this Letter will be found one who has been a
most faithful Servant to your Lordship and my kind Friend, and a sharer in my
Troubles. Indeed I have been strengthened by him to support and overcome many
difficulties. He will acquaint you with what has past, which truly was strange
to both of us, but your own Re-encounters will lessen them. My Lord, I shall be
faithful in giving you that Character which your Worth and Merit may justly
challenge. I profess it is, next to the ruin of the Service, one of my
chiefest Regrets that I could not possibly wait upon you before my going from
Scotland, that I might have settled a way of Correspondence with you, and that
your Lordship might have understood me better than yet you do; I should have
been plain in every thing, and indeed have made your Lordship my Confessor: and
I am hopeful the Bearer will say somewhat for me, and I doubt not but your
Lordship will trust him. If it shall please God to bring me safe from beyond
Sea, your Lordship shall hear from me by a sure hand. Sir To. M. will tell you
a way of corresponding. So that I shall say no more at present, but that I am
without possibility of change.

My Noble Lord, Your Lordships most Faithful, and most Humble Servant, JO.
MIDDLETON.

A Letter from the Earl of Glencairn, testifying his esteem for this Noble
Person, and the sense he had of his loyalty to the King, when few had the
Courage to own him.
My Lord,
LEst it may be my misfortune, in all these great Revolutions, to be
misrepresented to your Lordship, as a person unworthy of your favorable
Opinion (an Artifice very frequent in these times) I did take occasion to call
for a Friend and Servant of yours, the Lord of Spanie, on whose discretion I
did adventure to lay forth my hearts desire, to obviate in the bud any of these
misunderstandings. Your Lordships true worth and zeal to your Countries
happiness, being so well known to me, and confirmed by our late suffering
acquaintance. And now finding how much it may conduce to these great ends we
all with that a perfect Unity may be amongst all good and honest-hearted
Scotchmen, tho there be few more insignificant than my self; yet my zeal for
those ends obliges me to say, that if your Lordships health and affairs could
have permitted you to have been at Edinburgh in these late times, you would
have seen a great inclination and desire amongst all here of a perfect Unity,
and of a mutual respect to your Person, as of chief eminence and worth. And I
here shall set it under my Hand, to witness against all my Informers, that none
did with more passion, nor shall with more continued zeal, witness themselves
to be true Honourers of you, than he who desires infinitely to be esteemed,

My Lord, Your most Humble Servant, GLENCAIRN.
What I cannot well write I hope this discreet Gentleman will tell you in my
Name: and I shall only beg leave to say, that I am your most Noble Ladies
Humble Servant.



After the reading of which order and letters, which yet the Court refused to
record, The Earl's Advocate or Council Sir George Lockhart said in his defense
as follows.

Sir George Lockhart 's Argument and Plea for the Earl of Argyle.
SIR George Lockhart for the Earl of Argyle alleges, That the Libel is not
Revelant, and whereupon he ought to be but to the knowledge of an Inquest. For,

It is alleged in the general, That all Criminal Libels, whereupon any persons
Life, Estate, and Reputation can be drawn in question, should be founded upon
clear, positive, and express Acts of Parliament, and the matter of Fact, which
is libelled to be the Contravention of those Laws, should be plain, clear, and
direct Contraventions of the same, and not argued by way of Implications and
Inferences. Whereas in this Case, neither the Acts of Parliament, founded upon,
and libelled, can be in the least the foundation of this Libel: nor is the
Explication which is pretended to be made by the Panel, at the time of the
taking of his Oath (if considered,) any Contravention of those Laws; which
being premised, and the Panel denying the Libel, as to the whole Articles and
Points therein contained, it is alleged in special,

That the Libel, in so far as it is founded upon the 21st. Chap. Stat. 1.
Robert 1. and upon 83d. Act, Par. 6. James 5. the 43d. Act, Par. 2. James 1.
and upon the 83d. Act, Par. 10. James 5. and upon 84th. Act, Par. 8. James 6.
and upon the 10th. Act, Par. 10. James 6. and upon the 2d. Act, Par. 1. Ses. 2.
of His Sacred Majesty, and inferring thereupon, That the Panel, by the
pretended Explication given in by him to the Lords of His Majesty's
Privy Council, as the sense of the Oath he had taken, does commit the Crime of
Leasing-making, and depraving His Majesty's Laws: The Inference and subsumption
is most unwarrantable and the Panel, tho any such thing were acknowledged or
proved, can never be found guilty of contraveening these Acts of Parliament. In
respect it is evident, upon perusal and consideration of these Acts of
Parliament, that they only concern the case of Leasing-making tending to
Sedition, and to beget Discord betwixt His Majesty and His Subjects, and the
dislike of His Majesty's Government, and the reproach of the same. And the said
Laws, and Acts of Parliament were never understood or libelled upon, in any
other Sense. And all the former Acts of Parliament, which relate to the crime
of Leasing-making in general terms, and under the qualification foresaid, as
tending to beget discord betwixt his Majesty and his Subjects, are explained
and fully declared, as to what is the true meaning and import thereof, by the
134th. Act, Par. 8. James 6. which relates to the same Crime of Leasing-making,
and which is expressly described in these terms, To be wicked and licentious,
public and private Speeches, and untrue Calumnies to the disdain and contempt
of His Majesty's Council and Proceedings, and to the dishonor and prejudice of
his Highness and his Estate, stirring up his Highness's Subjects to misliking,
and Sedition, and unquietness which being the true sense and import of the Acts
of Parliament made against Leasing-makers, there is nothing can be inferred
from the Pannel's alleged Explication, which can be wrested or construed to be
a Contravention of these Laws: In respect,

First, It is known by the whole tenor of his Life, and graciously acknowledged
by His Sacred Majesty, by a Letter under His Royal Hand, that the Panel did
ever most zealously, vigorously, and faithfully promote and carry on His
Majesty's Service and Interest, even in the worst and most difficult times:
Which is also acknowledged by a Pass under the Earl of Middleton's hand, who
had then a special Commission from His Majesty, for carrying on His Majesty's
Service in this Kingdom, as Lieutenant General under His Majesty; and by a
Letter under the Earl's hand, of the date^ both which do contain high
expressions of the Pannels Loyalty, and of the great Services he had performed
for His Majesty's interest, and His Majesty, as being conscious thereof, and
perfectly knowing the Pannels Loyalty, and his zeal, and faithfulness for his
Service, did think fit to entrust the Panel in Offices and Capacities of the
greatest trust of the Kingdom. And it is a just and rational presumption, which
all Laws makes and infers, That the words and expressions of persons, who by
the tenor and course of their Lives have expressed their Duty and Loyalty to
His Majesty's Interest, are ever to be interpreted and understood in meliorem
partem. And by way of Implication and Inference, to conclude and and infer
crimes from the same, which the user of such words and expressions never mean'd
nor designed, is both unreasonable and unjust.

2. As the foresaid Acts of Parliament made against Leasing makers, and
depravers of His Majesty's Laws, only proceed in the terms aforesaid, where the
words and speeches are plain, tending to beget discord between the King and his
Subjects, and to the reproach and dislike of his Government, and when the same
are spoke and vented in a subdolous, pernicious, and fraudulent manner: So they
never were, nor can be understood to proceed in the case of a person offering
in the presence of a public Judicature (whereof he had the honor to be a
Member) his sincere and plain meaning and apprehension of what he conceived to
be the true sense of the Act of Parliament imposing and enjoining the Test:
There being nothing more opposite to the Acts of Parliament made against
Leasing-making, and venting and spreading abroad the same upon seditious
designs, than the foresaid plain and open declaration of his sense and
apprehension, what was the meaning of the said Act of Parliament. And it is of
no import to infer any crime; and much less any of the crimes libelled, albeit
the Panel had erred and mistaken in his apprehension of the Act of Parliament.
And it were a strange extention of the Act of Parliament made against
Leasing-makers, requiring the qualifications foresaid, and the Acts against
depraving His Majesty's Laws, to make the Panel, or any other person guilty
upon the mistakes and misapprehensions of the sense of the Laws, wherein men
may mistake and differ very much, and even eminent Lawyers and Judges. So that
the Acts of Parliament against Leasing making, and depraving His Majesty's
Laws, can only be understood in the express terms and qualifications foresaid.
Like as it neither is libelled, nor can be proven, that the Panel, before he
was called and required by the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council to take
Oath, did ever, by word or practice, use any reproachful speeches of the said
Act of Parliament, or of His Majesty's Government: But being required to take
the Oath, he did humbly, with all submission, declare what he apprehended to be
the sense of the Act of the Parliament, enjoining the Test, and in what sense
he had freedom to take the same.

3. The Act of Parliament enjoining the Test does not enjoin the same to be
taken by all persons whatsoever, but only prescribes it as a qualification
without which persons could not assume or continue to act in public Trust:
Which being an Oath to be taken by so solemn an invocation of the Name of
Almighty God, it is not only allowable by the Laws and customs of all Nations,
and the Opinion of all Divines, and Casuists, Popish or Protestant, but also
commended, that where a Party has any scrupulosity, or unclearness in his
conscience, as to the matter of the Oath, that he should exhibit and declare
the sense and meaning in which he is willing and able to take the Oath. And it
is not at all material, whether the scruples of a man's conscience, in the
matter of an Oath, be in themselves just or groundless, it being a certain
maxim, both in Law and Divinity, that Conscientia etiam erronea ligat: And
therefore tho the Panel had thought fit, for the clearing and exoneration of
his own conscience, in a matter of the highest concern as to his peace and
repose, to have expressed and declared the express sense in which he could take
the Oath, whether the said sense was consistent with the Act of Parliament or
not, yet it does not in the least import any matter of reproach or reflection
upon the justice or prudence of the Parliament in imposing the said Oath: but
alenarly does evince the weakness and scrupulosity of a man's conscience, who
neither did, nor ought to have taken the Oath but with an explanation that
would have saved his conscience to his apprehension. Otherwise he had grossly
sinned before God, even tho it was Conscientia errans. And this is allowed and
prescribed by all Protestant Divines, as indispensibly necessary, and was never
thought to import any crime, and is also commended even by Popish Casuists
themselves, who tho they allow, in some cases, of mental reservations and
equivocations, yet the express declaration of the sense of the party is allowed
and commended, as much more ingenious: and tutius Remedium Conscientiae ne
illaqueeter, as appears by Bellarmine de Juramento, and (...) upon the same
Title de Interpretatione Juramenti; and Lessius, that famous Casuist, de
Justitia and Jure, Dubitatione 8, 9. utrum si quis salvo animo aliquid
Juramento promittat obligetur, and quale peccatum hoc sit. And which is the
general opinion of all Casuists, and all Divines, as may appear by Amesius, in
his Treatise de Conscientia, Sanderson de Juramento, Praelectione secunda. And
such an express Declaration of the sense and meaning of any party, when
required to take an Oath, for no other end but for the clearing and exoneration
of his own Conscience, was never in the opinion of any Lawyer, or any Divine,
construed to be the Crime of Leasing-making, or of defamatory Libels, or
depraving of public Laws, or reproaching or misconstruing of the Government:
but on the contrary, by the universal suffrage of all Protestant Divines, there
is expressly required, in Cases of a scrupulous Conscience, an abhorrence and
detestation of all reserved senses, and of all Amphibologies and Equivocations,
which are in themselves unlawful and reprobate, upon that unanswerable Reason,
that Juramentum being the highest Act of Devotion and Religion, in eo
requiritur maxima simplicitas; and that a party is obliged, who has any
scruples of Conscience, publicly and openly to clear and declare the same.

4. Albeit it is not controverted, but that a Legislator, imposing an Oath, or
any public Authority, before whom the Oath is taken, may, after hearing of the
Sense and Explication which a person is willing to put upon it, either reject
or accept of the same, if it be conceived not to be consistent with the genuine
sense of the Oath: Yet tho it were rejected, it was never heard of, or
pretended, that the offering of a sense does import a Crime, but that
notwithstanding thereof, Habetur pro Recusante, and as if he had not taken the
Oath, and to be liable to the certification of Law, as if he had been a Refuser.

5. The Panel having publicly, and openly declared the sense in which he was
free to take the Oath, it is offered to be proved that he was allowed, and did
accordingly proceed to the taking of the Oath, and did thereafter take his
place, and sit and Vote, during that Sederunt of Privy Council. So as the
pretended Sense and Explication, which he did then emit and give, can import no
Crime against him.

6. It is also offered to be proved, that before the Panel was required to
take the Oath, or did appear before his Royal Highness, and Lords of
Privy Council, to take the same, there were a great many Papers spread abroad
from persons and Ministers of the Orthodox Clergy; and as the Panel is
informed, some thereof presented to the Bishops of the Church, in the name of
Synods and Presbyteries, which did, in downright terms, charge the Test and
Oath with alleged contradictions and inconsistencies. And for satisfaction
whereof some of the Learned and Reverend Bishops of the Church did write a
learned and satisfying Answer, called A Vindication of the Test, for clearing
the Scruples, Difficulties and Mistakes that were objected against it. And
which Vindication and Answer was exhibited, and read before the Lords of His
Majesty's Privy Council, and allowed to be printed, and from which the Panel
argues.

1. That it neither is, nor can be pretended in this Libel, that the alleged
Explication, wherein he did take the Oath, does propose the scruples of his
Conscience in these terms, which were proposed by the Authors of these
Objections, which do flatly and positively assert, that the Oath and Test do
contain matters of inconsistency and contradiction, whereas all that is
pretended in this Libel, with the most absolute violence can be put upon the
words, is arguing Implications and Inferences, which neither the words are
capable to bear, nor the sincerity of the Earls intention and design, nor the
course of his bypast life can possibly admit of. And yet none of the persons
who were the Authors of such papers were ever judged or reputed Criminal or
Guilty, and to be prosecuted for the odious and infamous Crimes libelled, of
Treason, Leasing-making, Perjury, and the like.

2. The Panel does also argue from the said matter of Fact, that the alleged
Explication libelled, can neither in his intention and design, nor in the
words, infer or import any Crime against him, because, before his being
required, or appearing to take the Oath, there were spread abroad such Scruples
and Objections, by some of the Orthodox Clergy and others, so that the Earl can
never in any sense be construed in his Explication wherein he took the Oath, to
have done it animo infamandi, and to declaim against the Government, for the
Scruples and Objections that were spread abroad by others, were a fair and
rational occasion why the Earl in any sense or explication which he offered
might have said, that he was confident the Parliament never intended to impose
contradictory Oaths; and this is so far from importing the insinuation and
inferen^ made by the Libel, that thereby the Parliament were so impious as to
impose contradictory Oaths, as on the contrary, considering the circumstances
forementioned, that there were papers spread abroad, insinuating, That there
were inconsistencies and contradictions contained therein, the said expression
was an high Vindication of the Honor and Justice of the Parliament, against
the Calumnies and Mis-representations which were cast upon it, and was also a
just Rise for the Panel, for the clearing and exonoration of his own
Conscience, in the various senses and apprehensions which he found were going
abroad as to the said Test, humbly to offer his sense, in which he was clear
and satisfied to take the Oath.

7. To the Libel, in so far as it is founded upon the Act of Parliament, viz.
Act 130. Par. 8. James 6. declaring, That none should presume to impugn the
Dignity or Authority of the three Estates of Parliament, or procure any
Invasion or diminution thereof, under the pain of Treason; as also in so far as
it is pretended in the Libel, That the Panel by offering the sense and
explication libelled, has assumed the Legislative power, which is
incommunicable, and has made a Law, or a part of a Law.

It is answered, The Libel is most groundless and irrelevant, and against which
the Act of Parliament is opponed, which is so plain and evident upon the
reading thereof, that it neither is, nor can be subject to the least
cavillation: And the plain meaning whereof is nothing else but to impugn the
Authority of Parliaments, as if the King and Parliament had not a Legislative
Power, or were not the highest Representative of the Kingdom; or that any of
the three Estates were not essentially requisite to constitute the Parliament.
And besides, there is nothing more certain, than that the occasion of the said
Act its being made was in relation to the Bishops and Clergy; and there is
nothing in the pretended Explanation, that can be wrested to import the least
Contravention of the said Act, or to be an impugning of the three Estates of
Parliament, or a seeking any innovation therein. And it is admired, with what
shadow of Reason it can be pretended, that the Panel has assumed a Legislative
power, or made a part of a Law, seeing all that is contained in the alleged
Explication libelled, is only a Declaration of the Earls sense in which he was
satisfied to take the Oath, and so respected none but himself, and for the
clearing of his own Conscience, which justly indeed the Word of God calls a Law
to himself, without any incroaching upon the Legislative power. And where was
it ever debated, but that a man in the taking of an Oath, if as to his
apprehensions he thought any thing in it deserved to be cleared, might declare
the same, or that his exhibiting, at the time of the taking of the Oath, his
sense and explication wherein he did take it, was ever reputed or pretended to
be the assuming of a Legislative power, it being the universal practice of all
Nations to allow this liberty; and which sense may be either rejected or
accepted, as the Legislator shall think fit, importing no more but a parties
private sense, for the exoneration of his own Conscience? And as to that Member
of the Libel founded upon Act 19. Par. 3. Queen Mary, it contains nothing but a
Declaration of the pain of Perjury, and there is nothing in the Explication
libelled, which can in the least be inferred as a Contravention of the said
Act, in respect if it should be proved, That the Panel, at the time of the
taking of the Oath, did take it in the words of the said Explication, as his
sense of the Oath, it is clear that the sense being declared at the time of
taking the Oath, and allowed as the sense wherein it was taken, the Panel can
only be understood to have taken it in that sense. And although public
Authority may consider whether the sense given by the Panel does satisfy the
Law or not, yet that can import no more though it was found not to satisfy,
but to hold the Panel as a Refuser of the Oath; but it is absolutely
impossible to infer the Crimes of perjury upon it, being as is pretended by the
Libel, the ^annel did only take it with the Declaration of the Sense and
Explication Libelled.

8. As the Explication libelled does not at all import all, or any of the
Crimes contained in the said Libel, so by the common principles of all Law,
where a person does emit words for the clearing and exoneration of his own
Conscience, although there were any ambiguity, or unclearness, or involvedness, in
the tenor or import of the expressions or words, yet they are ever to be
interpreted, Interpretatione benigna and favorabili, according to the general
Principles of Law and Reason. And it never was, nor can be refused to any
person to interpret, and put a congruous sense upon his own words, especially
the Panel being a person of eminent Quality, and who has given great
demonstration, and undeniable evidences of his fixed and unalterable Loyalty to
His Majesty's Interest and Service, and, at the time of emitting the said
Explication, was invested and entrusted in public Capacities. And it is a just
and rational interpretation and caution which Sanderson, that judicious and
eminent Casuist, gives, Praelect. 2. That dicta and facta principum, parentum,
rectorum, are ever to be looked upon as benignae Interpretationis, and that
Dubia sunt interpretanda in meliorem partem. And there is nothing in the
Explication libelled, which, without detortion and violence, and in the true
sense and design of the Panel, is not capable of this benign Interpretation
and construction, especially respect being had to the Circumstances wherein it
was emitted and given, after a great many Objections, Scruples, and alleged
Inconsistencies, were owned, vented and spread abroad, which was a rise to the
Earl for using the expressions contained in the pretended Declaration libelled.

10. These words whereby it is pretended the Panel declares, he was ready to
give obedience as far as he could, first, do not in the least import, That the
Parliament had imposed any Oath which was in it self unlawful, but only the
Pannels scrupulosity and unclearness in matter of Conscience. And it is hoped
it cannot be a Crime, because all men cannot go the same length. And if any
such thing were argued, it might be argued ten times more strongly from a
simple refusing of the Oath, as if any thing were enjoined which were so hard
that it is not possible to comply with it: And yet such implications are most
irrational and inconsequential, and neither in the case of a simple and
absolute refusing of the Oath, nor in the Case of an Explication of the parties
sense, wherein he is willing to take the Oath, is there any impeachment of the
Justice, and prudence of the Legislator, who imposes this Oath, but singly a
declaration of the scrupulosity and weakness of the party, why he cannot take
the Oath in other terms; and such Explications have been allowed by the Laws
and Customs of all Nations, and are advised by all Divines, of whatsoever
principles, for the solace and security of a Man's Conscience.

2. As to that point of the Explication libelled, That I am confident the
Parliament never intended to impose contradictory Oaths; it respects the former
answer, which, considering the plain and downright Objections that were spread
abroad, and made against the Oath, as containing inconsistencies and
contradictions, was an high Vindication of the Justice and prudence of the
Parliament.

3. As to these words, And therefore I think no body can explain it but for
himself. The plain and clear meaning is nothing else, but that the Oath being
imposed by Act of Parliament, it was of no private interpretation; and that
therefore every man who was to take it, behooved to take it in that sense which
he apprehended to be the genuine sense of the Parliament: And it is impossible,
without impugning common sense, that any man could take it in any other fence,
it being as impossible to see with another man's eyes as to see with his
private Reason. And a man's own private sense, and apprehension of the genuine
sense, was the only proper way wherein any man could rationally take the Oath.

And as to these words, That he takes it as far as it is consistent with it
self and the Protestant Religion. The Panel neither intended nor expressed more,
but that he did take it as a true Protestant, and he hopes all men have taken
it as such.

And as to that Clause, wherein the Panel is made to declare, That he does not
bind up himself in his Station, in a lawful way, to wish and endeavor any
alteration he thinks to the advantage of Church or State, not repugnant to the
Protestant Religion and his Loyalty.

It is answered, There is nothing in this expression that can import the least
Crime, or give the least umbrage for any mistake, For,

1. It is most certain, it is impossible to elicite any such thing from the
Oath, but that it was the intention of the Parliament, That persons,
notwithstanding of the Oath, might concur in their stations, and in a lawful
way, in any Law to the advantage of Church and State. And no rational man ever
did, or can take the Oath in other terms, that being contrary to his Allegiance
and Duty to His Sacred Majesty and Prince.

2. There is nothing in the said expression which does touch in the least point
at any alteration in the Fundamentals of Government, either in Church or State,
but on the contrary, by the plain and clear words and meaning, rather for its
perpetuity, stability and security. The expression being cautioned to the
utmost scrupulosity, as that it was to be done in a lawful manner; that it was
to be to the advantage of Church or State; that it was to be consistent with
the Protestant Religion, and with his Loyalty, which was no other but the Duty
and Loyalty of all faithful Subjects; and which he has signally and eminently
expressed upon all occasions. So that how such an expression can be drawn to
import all or any of the Crimes libelled, passes all Natural Understanding.

And as to the last words, And this I understand as a part of my Oath, which is
libelled to be a treasonable Invasion, and assuming of the Legislative power.
It is answered, it is most unwarrantable; and a parties declaring the sense and
meaning in which he was free to take an Oath, does not at all respect or invade
the Legislative power, of which the Panel never entertained a thought, but has
an absolute abhorrence and detestation of such practices. But the plain and
clear meaning is, That the sense and explication was a part of his Oath, and
not of the Law imposing the Oath, these being as distant as the two Poles; and
which sense was taken off the Earls hands, and he accordingly was allowed to
take his place at the Council Board, and therefore repeats the former general
Defenses.

And to convince the Lords of Justitiary, that there is nothing in the
pretended explication libelled which can be drawn to import any Crime, even of
the lowest size and degree, and that there is no expression therein contained
that can be detorted or wrested to import the same, is evident from the learned
Vindication published and spread abroad by an eminent Bishop, and which was
read in the face of the Privy Council, and does contain expressions of the same
nature, and to the same import contained in the pretended Explication, libelled
as the ground of this Indictment libelled against the Panel. And it is
positively offered to be proven, That these terms were given in, and read, and
allowed to be printed, and (without taking notice of the whole tenor of the
said Vindication, which the Lords of Justitiary are humbly desired to peruse,
and consider, and compare the same with the Explication libelled) the same
acknowledges, that scruples had been raised and spread abroad against the
Oath; and also acknowledges, that there were expressions therein that were
dark and obscure; and likewise takes notice, that the Confession ratified Par.
1. James 6. to which the Oath relates, was hastily made, and takes notice of
that Authority that made it, and acknowledges in plain terms, that the Oath
does not hinder any regular endeavor to regulate or better the Established
Government, but only prohibits irregular endeavors and attempts to invert the
substance or body of the Government; and does likewise explain the Act of
Parliament anent His Majesty's Supremacy, that it does not reach the alteration
of the external Government of the Church. And the Panel and his Proctors are
far from insinuating in the least, that there is any thing in the said
Vindication but what is consistent with the exemplary Loyalty, Piety and
Learning of the Writer of the same. And tho others perhaps may differ in their
private opinion, as to this interpetation of the Act of Parliament anent the
Kings Supremacy, yet it were most absurd and irrational to pretend that whether
the mistake were upon the interpretation of the Writer, or the sense of others,
as to that point, that such mistakes or misapprehensions, upon either hand,
should import or infer against them the Crimes of Leasing making, or depraving
His Majesty's Laws: For if such Foundations were laid, Judges and Lawyers had a
dangerous employment, there being nothing more ordinary than to fall into
differences and mistakes of the sense and meaning of the Laws and Acts of
Parliament. But such Crimes cannot be inferred, but with and under the
qualifications above mentioned, of malicious and perverse designs, joined with
licentious, wicked and reproachful speeches spread abroad, to move Sedition and
dislike of the Government. And the said Laws were never otherwise interpreted,
nor extended in any case. And therefore the Explication libelled, neither as
taken complexly, nor in the several expressions thereof, nor in the design of
the ingiver of the same, can in Law import against him all or any of the Crimes
libelled.

In like manner the Panel conjoyns with the grounds abovementioned the
Proclamation issued forth by His Majesty's privy Council, which acknowledges
and proceeds upon a Narrative, that scruples and jealousies were raised and
spread abroad against the Act of Parliament enjoining the Test. For clearing
and satisfaction whereof the said Proclamation was issued forth, and is since
approved by His Sacred Majesty.

The Kings Advocates Argument and Plea against the Earl of Argyle.
HIS Majesty's Advocate, for the foundation of his Debate, does represent, That
His Majesty, to secure the Government from the Rebellious Principles of the
last Age, and the unjust Pretexts made use of in this, from Popery, and other
Jealousies; as also to secure the Protestant Religion, and the Crown, called a
Parliament; and that the great security resolved on by the Parliament was this
excellent Test, in which, that the old juggling Principles of the Covenant might
not be renewed, wherein they still swore to serve the King in their own way,
the Parliament did positively ordain, That this Oath should be taken in the
plain genuine meaning of the words, without any evasion whatsoever.
Notwithstanding whereof, the Earl of Argyle, by this Paper, does invent a new
way, whereby no man is at all bound to it. For how can any person be bound, if
every man will only obey it as far as he can, and as far as he conceives it
consistent with the Protestant Religion, and with it self, and reserve to
himself, notwithstanding thereof, to make any alteration that he thinks
consistent with his Loyalty? And therefore His Majesty's Advocate desires to
know, to what the Earl of Argyle, or any man else, can be bound by this Test?
what the Magistrate can expect, or what way he can punish his Perjury? For if
he be bound no farther than he himself can obey, or so far as this Oath is
consistent with the Protestant Religion or it self, quomodo constat, to whom or
what is he bound? And who can determine that? Or against what alteration is the
Government secured, since he is Judge of his own alteration? So that that Oath,
that was to be taken without any evasion, is evaded in every single word or
Letter; and the Government as insecure as before the Act was made, because the
taker is no farther bound than he pleases. From which it cannot be denied, but
his Interpretation destroys not only this Act, but all Government, since it
takes away the security of all Government, and makes every man's Conscience,
under which Name there goes ordinarily in this Age Humor and Interest, to be
the rule of the takers obedience. Nor can it be conceived to what purpose Laws
but especially Oaths, needed to be made, if this were allowed; or how this
cannot fall under the 197th. Act, Par. 7. James 6. whereby it is statuted, That
no man interpret the Statutes otherwise than the maker understood. For what can
be more contrary to the taking of them in the makers sense, than that every man
should obey as far as they can, and be allowed to take them in a general sense,
so far as they are consistent with themselves, and the Protestant Religion,
without condescending wherein they do not agree with the Protestant Religion?
and that they are not bound not to make any alteration which they think good
for the States? For all these make the rule of obedience in the taker, whereas
the positive Law makes it to be in the maker. Or how could they be punished for
Perjury after this Oath? For when he were quarrelled for making alterations
against this Oath; and so to be perjured, he might easily answer, That he took
this Oath only in so far as it was consistent with the Protestant Religion, and
with a Salvo, that he might make any alteration that he thought consistent with
his Loyalty. And as to these Points, upon which he were to be quarrelled, he
might say, he did not think them to be inconsistent with his Loyalty, think we
what we pleased, and so needed not to be perjured, except he pleased to decide
against himself, for in these Generals he reserves to himself to be still
Judge. And this were indeed a fine security for any Government. And by the same
rule that it looses this Oath, it shows a way of loosing all Oaths and
Obedience, and consequently strikes at the root of all Laws, as well as this;
whereas to shun all this, not only this excellent Statute 107. has secured all
the rest, but this is common Reason: And in the opinion of all Divines, as well
as Lawyers in all Nations, Verba juramenti intelliguntur secundum mentem and
intentionem ejus, cui fit juramentum. Which is set down as the grand position,
by Sanderson (whom they cite) page 137. and is sounded upon that Mother-Law,
Leg. 10. Cui interrogatus f.f. de interrogationibus in Jure faciendis; and
without which no man can have sense of Government in his head, or practice it
in any Nation. Whereas on the other hand there is no danger to any tender
Conscience, since there was no force upon the Earl to take the Oath, but he
took it for his own advantage, and might have abstained.

2. It is inferred from the above-written matter of Fact, That the Earl is
clearly guilty of contravention of the 10. Act, Parl. 10 James VI. whereby the
Leiges are commanded not to write any purpose of Reproach of His Majesty's
Government, or misconstrue his proceedings, whereby any misliking may be raised
betwixt his Highness, his Nobility, or his people. And who can read this paper,
without seeing the King and Parliament reproached openly in it? For who can
hear, that the Oath is only taken as far as it is consistent with it self and
the Protestant Religion, but must necessarily conclude, that in several things
it is inconsistent with it self, and the Protestant Religion? For if it were
not inconsistent with it self and the Protestant Religion, why this Clause at
all but it might have been simply taken? For the only reason of hindering it to
be taken simply, was because of the inconsistency: ergo, there behooved
necessarily to be an inconsistency. And if there be any inconsistency with the
Protestant Religion, or any contradiction in the Oath it self, can there be any
thing a greater reproach on the Parliament, or a greater ground of mislike to
the people? And whereas it is pretended, That all Laws and Subsumptions should
be clear, and these are only inferences. It is answered, That there are some
things which the Law can only forbid in general; and there are many inferences
which are as strong and natural, and reproach as soon, or sooner, than the
plainest defamations in the world do, for what is openly said of reproach to
the King, does not wound him so much as many seditious insinuations have done
in this Age and the last: So that whatever was the Earls design (albeit it is
always conceived to be unkind to the Act, against which himself debated in
Parliament) yet certainly the Law in such cases is only to consider what effect
this may have amongst the people; and therefore the Acts of Parliament, that
were to guard against the misconstruing of His Majesty's Government, do not
only speak of what was designed, but where a disliking may be caused, and so
judges ab effectu: And, consequentially to the same emergent reason, it makes
all things tending to the raising of dislike, to be punishable by the Act 60.
Parl. 6. Q. Mary; and the 9. Act, Parl. 20. James VI. So that the Law designed
to deter all men by these indefinite and comprehensive expressions: And both in
this and all the Laws of Leasing-making, the Judges are to consider what falls
under these general and comprehensive words. Nor could the Law be more special
here, since the makers of Reproach and Slander are so various that they could
not be bound up, or expressed in any Law: But as it evidently appears, that no
man can hear the words expressed, if he believe this paper, but he must think the
Parliament has made a very ridiculous Oath, inconsistent with it self, and the
Protestant Religion, the words allowing no other sense, and having that natural
tendency; even as if a man would say, I love such a man only in so far as he is
an honest man, he behooved certainly to conclude, that the man was not every
way honest: So if your Lordships will take measures by other Parliaments, or
your Predecessors, ye will clearly see, That they thought less than this a
defaming of the Government, and misconstruing His Majesty's proceedings. For in
Balmerino's Case, the Justices find an humble Supplication made to the King
himself to fall under these Acts now cited. Albeit as that was a Supplication,
so it contained the greatest expressions of Loyalty, and offers of Life and
Fortune that could be expressed, yet because it insinuates darkly, That the King
in the precedeing Parliament had not favored the Protestant Religion, and they
were sorry he should have taken Notes with his own hands of what they said,
which seems to be most innocent, yet he was found guilty upon those same very
Acts; And the Parliament 1661. found his Lordship himself guilty of
Leasing-making, tho he had only written a Letter to a private Friend, which
requires no great care nor observation, (but this paper which was to be a part
of his own Oath does) because after he had spoken of the Parliament in the
first part of this Letter, he thereafter added, That the King would know their
Tricks; which words might be much more applicable to the private persons
therein designed, than that the words now insisted on can be capable of any
such Interpretation. And if either Interpretations, upon pretext of exonering
of Conscience, or otherwise, be allowed, a man may easily defame as much as he
pleases. And have we not seen the King most defamed by Covenants entered into
upon pretense to make him great and glorious, by Remonstrances made to take
away his Brother and best Friend, upon pretense of preserving the Protestant
Religion, and his Sacred person? And did not all who rebelled against him in
the last Age declare, That they thought themselves bound in duty to obey him,
but still as far as that could consist with their respect to the Protestant
Religion, and the Laws and Liberties, which made all the rest ineffectual? And
whereas it is pretended. That by these words, I take the same in as far as it
is consistent with it self and the Protestant Religion, nothing more is meant,
but that he takes it as a true Protestant: His Majesty's Advocate appeals to
your Lordships, and all the Hearers, if upon hearing this expression they
should take it in this sense, and not rather think that there is an
inconsistency. For if that were possible to be the sense, what need he say at
all, As far as it is consistent with it self? Nor had the other part, As far as
it is consistent with the Protestant Religion, been necessary, for it is either
consistent with the Protestant Religion, or otherwise they were Enemies to the
Protestant Religion, that made it. Nor are any Lawyers or others in danger, by
pleading or writing, for these are very different from, and may be very easily
pleaded without defaming a Law, and an Oath, when they go to take it. But if
any Lawyer should say, in pleading or writing, That the Test was inconsistent,
or, which is all one, that it were not to be taken by any man, but so far as it
was consistent with it self, and the Protestant Religion, no doubt this would
be a crime even in pleading, tho pleading has a greater allowance than
deliberate swearing has. And as there is nothing wherein there is not some
inconveniency, so the inconveniency of defaming the Government is much greater
than that of any private man's hazard, who needs not err except he please.

Whereas it is pretended, That before the Earl gave in this Explication, there
were other Explications spread abroad, and Answers read to them in Council, and
that the Council it self gave an Explication. It is answered, That if this
paper be Leasing-making, or misconstruing His Majesty's proceedings, and
Treasonable, as is contended, then a thousand of the like offenses cannot
excuse it. And when the King accused Noblemen, Ministers, and others, in the
year 1661. for going on in the Rebellions of that Age, first with the
Covenanters, and then with the Usurpers, it was found no Defense, That the
Nation was overgrown with those Crimes, and that they were thought to be
duties in those days. Yea, this were to invite men to offend in multitudes. And
albeit sometimes these who follow the examples of multitudes, may thereby
pretend this as an excuse to many, yet this was never a formal defense against
Guilt, nor was ever the chief of the Offenders favorable on that Head. And it
is to be presumed, That the Earl of Argyle would rather be followed by others,
than that he would follow any example. But His Majesty's Advocate does
absolutely decline to debate a point that may defame a constant and standing
Act of Parliament, by leaving upon record a memory of its being opposed. Nor
were this Relevant, except it could be said, the Council had allowed such
Explications which reflected upon the King and the Government: For the writing
an answer is no allowance, but a condemning: Nor can the Council allow any more
than they can remit: And tho it may justly be denied that the Council heard
even the Earls own Explanation, yet the hearing or allowing him to sit is no
Relevant Plea, because they might very justly have taken a time to consider how
far it was fit to accuse upon that Head. And it is both just and fit for the
Council to take time, and by express Act of Parliament, the negligence of the
King, Officers does not bind them. For if this were allowed, Leading men in the
Council might commit what Crimes they pleased in the Council, which certainly
the King may quarrel many years after. And tho all the Council had allowed him
that day, any one Officer of State might have quarrelled it the next day. As to
the Opinion of Bellarmine, Sanderson, and others, it is ever contended, that
the principles of the Covenant agree very well with those of the Jesuits, and
both do still allow Equivocations and Evasions. But no solid, Orthodox Divine
ever allowed, That a man who was to swear without any Evasion, should swear so
as he is bound to nothing, as it is contended the Earl is not, for the Reasons
represented. And as they still recommend, That when men are not clear they
might abstain, as the Earl might have done in this case, so they still
conclude, That men should tell in clear terms what the sense is by which they
are to be bound to the State: Whereas the Earl here tells only in the general,
and in most ambigious terms, That he takes it as far as he can obey, and as far
as it is consistent with the Protestant Religion, and that he takes it in his
own sense, and that he is not bound by it from making alterations, but as far
as he thinks it for the advantage of Church or State; which sense is a thousand
times more doubtful than the Test, and is in effect nothing but what the taker
pleases himself.

As to the Treason founded on, His Majesty's Advocate founds it first upon the
Fundamental and Common Laws of this and all Nations, whereby it is Treason for
any man to make any alteration he shall think for the advantage of Church or
State, which he hopes is a principle cannot be denied in the general. And
whereas it is pretended, That this cannot be understood of mean alterations,
and of alterations to be made in a lawful way: It is answered, That as the
thing it self is Treason, so this Treason is not taken off by any of these
qualifications, because he declares, he will wish and endeavor any alteration
he thinks fit; and any alteration comprehends all alterations that he thinks
fit: Nam propositio indefinita aequipollet universali. And the word any is
general in its own nature, and is in plain terms a reserving to himself to make
alterations, both great and small. And the restriction is not, all alterations
that the King shall think fit, or are consistent with the Laws and Acts of
Parliament; but he is still to be Judge of this, and his Loyalty is to be the
Standard. Nor did the Covenanters in the last Age, nor do these who are daily
executed, decline that they are bound to obey the King, simply, but only that
they are bound to obey him no otherwise than as far as his Commands are
consistent with the Law of God, of Nature, and of this Kingdom, and with the
Covenant: And their Treason lies in this. And when it is asked them, Who shall
be judge in this, they still make themselves Judges. And the reason of all
Treason being, that the Government is not secure, it is desired to be known,
what way the Government can be secured after this paper, since the Earl is
still Judge how far he is obliged, and what is his Loyalty. And if this had
been sufficient, the Covenant had been a very excellent paper, for they are
there bound to endeavor, in their several stations, to defend the Kings
person; but when the King challenged them, how they came to make War against
him, their great Refuge was, That they were themselves still Judges as to that.
And for illustrating this power, the Lords of Justitiary are desired to
consider, Quid Juris, if the Earl, or any man else, should have reserved to
himself, in this Oath, a liberty to rise in Arms, or to oppose the lineal
Succession, tho he had added, In a lawful manner; for the thing being in it
self unlawful, this is but sham, and Protestatio contraria facto. And if these
be unlawful, notwithstanding of such additions, so much more must this general
reservation, of making any alterations, likewise be unlawful, notwithstanding
of these additions. For he that reserves the general power of making any
alteration, does, a fortiori, reserve power to make any alteration tho never so
fundamental. For all particulars are included in the General; and whatever may
be said against the particulars, may much more strongly be said against the
general.

2. The 130. Act, Par. 8. James VI, is expressly founded on because nothing can
be a greater diminution of the power of the Parliament, than to introduce a way
or means whereby all their Acts and Oaths shall be made insignificant and
ineffectual, as this paper does make them, for the Reasons represented. Nor are
any of the Estates of Parliament secure at this rate, but that they who
reserved a general power to make all alterations, may, under that ^eneral, come
to alter any of them.

3. What can be a greater impugning of the Dignity and Authority of
Parliaments, than to say, That the Parliament has made Acts for the security of
the Kingdom, which are in themselves ridiculous, inconsistent with themselves
and the Protestant Religion?

And as to what is answered against invading the Kings Prerogative, and the
Legislative power in Parliaments, in adding a part to an Oath or Act, is not
relevantly inferred, since the sense of these words, And this I understand as a
part of my Oath, is not to be understood as if any thing were to be added to
the Law, but ^^ly to the Oath, and to be an interpretation of the Oath. It is
replied, That after this, no man needs to add a Caution to the Oath in
Parliament. But when he comes to take the Oath, do the Parliament what they
please, he will add his own part. Nor can this part be looked upon as a sense,
for if this were the sense before this paper, he needed not understand it as a
part of it, for it wanted not that part. And in general, as every man may add
his own part, so the King can be secure of no part. But your Lordships of
Justitiary are desired to consider, how dangerous it would be in this Kingdom,
and how ill it would sound in any other Kingdom, That men should be allowed to
reserve to themselves liberty to make any alteration they thought fit in Church
or State, as to the legality of which, they were themselves to be Judges; and
how far, from degree to degree, this at last may come to absolute Anarchy, and
how scandalous a thing, as well as unsecure, this new way may look in an Age
wherein we are too much tracing the steps of our rebellious Progenitors in the
last, whose great defection and error was, That they thought themselves, and
not the King, the Authors of Reformation in Church and State. And no man ever
was barred by that, that the way he was upon was not a lawful way; for if it be
allowed to every man to take his own way, every man will think his own way to
be the lawful way.

As to the Perjury, it is founded on this, First, That Perjury may be
committed, not only by breaking an Oath, but even in the swearing of it, viz.
To swear it with such Evasions as make the Oath ineffectual; for which
Sanderson is cited, page 138. Alterum Perjurii genus est novo aliquo excogitato
Commento Juramenti vim declinare, aut eludere, and Jurans tenetur sub p^na
Perjurii implere Secundum Intentionem deferentis; both which are here. For the
Earl being bound by the very Oath, to swear in the genuine meaning, without any
evasion, he has sworn so as he has evaded every word, there being not one word
to which it can be said particularly he is bound, as is said. And it is
undeniable, that he has not sworn in the sense of the makers of the Law, but in
his own sense, which is Perjury, as is said. And consequentially, whatever
sense may be allowed in ambiguous Cases, yet there can be none where the Paper
clearly bears Generals: And where he declares, That he takes it in his own
sense, His Majesty's Advocate declares, he will not burden himself, that Copies
were dispersed, tho it is certain, since the very Paper it self by the giving in
is chargeable with all that is above charged upon it.

Sir John Dalrymple's Defense and Plea for the Earl of Argyle, by way of Reply
upon the King's Advocate.
SIR John Dalrymple replies for the Panel, That since the solid grounds of Law
adduced in the Defenses have received no particular Answers, in relation to the
common consent of all Casuists, viz. That a party who takes an Oath is bound in
Conscience to clear and propose the terms and sense in which he does understand
the Oath; Nor in relation to the several Grounds adduced concerning the legal
and rational Interpretation of dubious Clauses. And since these have received
no Answers, the Grounds are not to be repeated: but the Proctors for the Panel
do farther insist on these Defenses.

1. It is not alleged, That any Explanation was given in by the Panel to any
person, or any Copy spread, before the Panel did take the Test in Council: So
that it cannot be pretended, That the many Scruples that have been moved
concerning the Test, did arise from the Pannel's Explication: But on the
contrary, all the Objections that are answered, and obviated in the Pannel's
Explication, were not only privately muttered, or were the thoughts of single
or illiterate persons, but they were the difficulties proposed by Synods and
Presbyteries, long before the Panel came from home, or was required to take
the Test: So that the general terms of the Acts of Parliament founded upon in
the Libel are not applicable to this Case: For as these Laws, in relation to
Leasing-makers, are only relative to atrocious wilful Insinuations, or
misconstructions of His Majesty's Person or Government, or the open depraving
of his Laws, so the restrictive Cause, whereby sedition or misconstructions may
be moved, raised, or engendered betwixt His Majesty and his Liedges, cannot be
applied to this Case, where all these Apprehensions and Scruples were on foot,
and agitated long before the Pannel's Explanation.

As it cannot be pretended, That any new dust was raised by the Pannel's
Explanation, so it is positively offered to be proved, That there is not one
word contained in this Explanation, but that either these individual words, or
much worse, had been publicly proposed, and verbatim read in Council, without
the least discouragement, or the least objection made by any Member of the
Council. And where a Writing, ex proposito read in so high a Court, was
universally agreed upon, without the alteration of a Syllable, how can it be
pretended, That any person thereafter using the said individual terms in any
Explanation, and far easier terms, that they shall incur the high and infamous
Crimes libelled? And the question is not here, Whether the Council was a proper
Judicature to have proposed, or imposed a sense, or allowed any Explanation of
the Test to be published; but that it is impossible that a sense they allowed,
or being publicly read before them, and which the Kings Advocate did not
control, that this should import Treason, or any Crime: And tho the Pannels
Advocate will not pursue or follow the Reply that has been made to this point,
yet certainly no man of sober sense will think that it is fit to insinuate that
so high a Judicature might have authorized or acquiesced in such Explanations
as the Liedges thereafter should be entrapped to have used.

If the Panel had officiously or ulteroneously offered a sense or Explanation
of His Majesty's Laws, which the Laws themselves could not have born, it might
justly have been alleged, that he was extra ordinem, and meddling in a matter
he was not concerned in, but where the Act of Council did enjoin, and he was
required and cited to that effect, It could neither be constructed as
ostentation, or to move or encourage Scruples or Resistance, but it was
absolutely necessary, either for to have refused the Test, or else to have
declared what he thought to be the true and genuine meaning of it. And there
being so many objections publicly moved and known, his Explanation was nothing
else but to clear, That he did not look upon these Scruples and Objections
moved by others as well sounded and rational in themselves; and therefore he
was able to take the Test in that sense the Council had heard or allowed. And
it is not controverted, that the sense of the Legislator is the genuine sense
both of Laws and Oaths: And if a person were only interpreting the meaning of
either a Law or an Oath imposed, he should deprave and misconstruct the Law and
Oath, if he rendered it wittingly and willingly in terms inconsistent with the
meaning of the imposer: But there is a great difference betwixt taking of
Oaths, and interpreting Oaths; For when a man comes to take an Oath, except his
particular sense did agree with the genuine meaning of the imposer, he cannot
take that Oath, tho he may very well interpret and declare what is the sense of
the Legislator, which he may know, and yet perhaps not be able to take the Oath.

And therefore when there is any doubtfulness in an Oath, and a party is bound
to take it, if then he gives in an Explication of the sense which in his
private judgment does apprehend to be the genuine meaning, if that private
sense be disconform to the Legislators sense in the Oath, then the Imposer of
the Oath, or he that has power to offer it to the party, if he consider the
parties sense disconform, he ought to reject the Oath, as not fulfilling the
intent of the Law imposing it.

But it is impossible to state that as a Crime, That a party should neither
believe what is proposed in the Oath, nor be able to take it; And he can run no
farther hazard, but the penalty imposed upon the Refuser. And therefore in all
Oaths there must be a concourse both of the sense imposed by Authority, and of
the private Sense, Judgment or Conscience of the party. And therefore if a
party should take an Oath in the Sense proposed by Authority contrary to his
own sense, he were perjured: whereby it is evident that the sense of Authority
is not sufficient, without the acquiescence and consent of the private person.
And therefore it is very strange, why that part of the Pannel's Explanation
should be challenged, that he takes it in his own Sense, the posterior words
making it as plain as the light, that that sense of his own is not what he
^pleases to make of the Oath, for it bears expressly, that no body can explain
it but for himself, and reconcile it as it is genuine, and agrees in its own
sense: So that there must be a Reconciliation bewixt his own sense and the
genuine sense, which upon all hands is acknowledged to be the Sense of
Authority. And if the Panel had been of these lax and debaucht Principles,
that he might have evaded the meaning and energy of the Oath, by imposing upon
it what sense he pleased, certainly he would have contented himself in the
general refuge of Equivocation, or Mental Reservation, and he would never have
exposed his sense to the world, in which he took this Oath, whereby he became
absolutely fixed and determined to the Oath, in that particular sense, and so
had no latitude of shuffling off the Energy or Obligation of the Oath. And it
is likewise acknowledged, That the Cases alleged in the Reply are true, viz.
That the person is guilty of Perjury, si aliquo novo Commento he would elude
his Oath, or who does not fulfill the Oath in the sense of the Imposer. But that
does not concern this Case: For in the foresaid Citation, a person, after he
has taken an Oath, finding out some new conceit to elude it he is perjured: but
in this Case the Panel did at, and before his taking the Test, declare the
t^^^s in which he understood it; So that this was not novo aliquo commento to
elude it. And the other Case, where a party takes it in the sense of Authority,
but has some subterfuge, or concealed Explanation, it is acknowledged to be
Perjury. But in this Case there was no concealed Explanation, but it was
publicly expressed, and an Explanation given, which the Panel designed, and
understood as the meaning of Authority, and had ground to believe he was not
mistaken, since upon that Explanation he was received and allowed to sit and
vote in Council.

And as to that part of the Reply, that explains the Treason, there can be no
Treason in the Pannel's Case, because the express Act of Parliament founded
upon does relate only to the Constitution of the Parliament: And I am sure His
Majesty's Advocate cannot subsume in the^e terms: And therefore in the Reply he
recurs to the general Grounds of the Law, That the usurping of His Majesty's
Authority, in making a part of the Law; and to make alterations in general, and
without the King, are high and treasonable words or designs, and such as the
party pleases, and such designs as have been practiced the late times. And that
even the adjection of fair and safe words, as in the Covenant, does not secure
from treasonable Designs; and that it was so found in Balmerino's Case, tho it
bear a fair Narrative of an humble Supplication.

It is replied, That the usurpation of making of Laws is undoubtedly
treasonable; but no such thing can be pretended or subsumed in this Case: For
albeit the Panel declares his Explanation to be a part of his Oath, yet he
never meaned to impose it as even a part of the Law, or that his Explanation
should be a thing distinct, or a separate part of his Oath. For this
Explanation being but exegetick of the several parts of the Oath, it is no
distinct thing from the Oath, but declared to be a part of the Oath de natura
rei. And it was never pretended, That he that alleged any thing to be de
natura rei, did say, That that was distinct and separate, which were a
contradiction. And therefore the Argument is retorted, the Panel having
declared, this Explanation was, de natura rei, implied in the Oath, he
necessarily made this Explanation no addition or extention of the Oath. So that
for all this Explanation, the Oath is neither broader nor longer than it was.

And as to these words, I do not mean to bind up my self in my station, and in
a lawful way, to wish and endeavor any alteration I think to the advantage of
Church or State, not repugnant to the Protestant Religion, and my Loyalty. It
is a strange thing how this Clause can be drawn in question, as treasonable,
when it may with better Reason be alleged, That there is not good Subject but
is bound to say it. And albeit the words to endeavor in my station, be words
contained in the Covenant, yet that is no Reason, why two words in the Covenant
may not be made use of in another very good and loyal sense. And there is no
man that shall have the honor either to be entrusted by His Majesty in his
Council, or any other Judicature, or to be a Member of Parliament, but he is
bound by his Loyalty to say the same thing. And there was never a Clause more
cautiously expressed, for the words run, to endeavor any alteration I shall
think to the advantage of Church and State. And tho that was sufficient, yet
the Clause is so cautiously conceived, that it contains another Restriction,
not repugnant to Religion and his Loyalty. So that except it could be alleged,
That a man by lawful means, to the advantage of Church and State, consistent
with his Religion and Loyalty, could make treasonable alterations, and
invasions upon the Government and Monarchy, which are the highest
Contradictions imaginable, there can be nothing against the Panel. And albeit,
the Clause, any alterations, might, without the Restrictions and Qualifications
foresaid, be generally extended, yet the preceding words of lawful way, and
the rational Interpretation of the emission of words especially before a solemn
Judicatory leaves no place or shadow to doubt, that these alterations were no
fundamental or treasonable alterations, but such as the frailty of humane
Affairs and Constitutions, and vicissitude of things and circumstances do
constantly require in the most exact Constitutions under Heaven. And the clause
does not so much as import, that there is a present necessity of alteration,
but it was a necessary and rational prospect, That albeit at present all things
under Heaven had been done to secure the Religion and Government, yet there
might occur Cases that would require new helps, alterations, and remedies. And
it is not pretended in this Case for the Panel, That he desires to alleviate,
or take off words truly treasonable, or having an ill design, by the mixing of
fair and safe, dutiful and submissive Expressions, which indeed are
Protestations contrariae facto. For there is nothing in his Explanation, that
either in his design, or in the words themselves, being rationally and
naturally interpreted, can infer the Crimes libelled, or any of them. And the
Pannel's known Principles, and known Practices do not only clear that Loyalty
that he has professed before the Lords of Justitiary, and instructed by
unquestionable Docuements, but they put him far from the suspicion of these
damnable Principles related in the Reply, Of which the whole tract of his Life
has been an entire evidence of his abhorrency and detestation. And in the last
place, It is thought strange, why that should be represented as an affront or
disgrace to the Government, That the Parliament imposed a Test which the Panel
is not able to take simply. And it is not pretended, That he has defamed,
written or spoken against the Test it self, or for the inconvenience of it; but
only that he has not been able to see the good ground upon which it may be
simply taken. And this were to condemn him for want of sight or sense, when the
Law has punished no man for not taking the Test, but only turned him out of
the Government. And it is as strange an Inference, That because the Panel
declares, He believes the Parliament meaned no Contradiction and would take the
Test, in as far as it is consistent, that therefore he said, the Parliament
imposed Contradictions: Which is so far from a rational Induction, that the
Contradiction of these Subsumptions, in all congruity of Language and Sense, is
necessarily true. And therefore the last part of that Clause, in so far as it
is consistent, is a Consequence inferred upon the former: viz. I believe the
Parliament designed to impose no Contradictions: ergo, I take the Test as
consistent, and in so far as it must be consistent, if the Parliament did not
impose Contradictions, as certainly they have not; and to convince the world,
that in this sense this Explanation is receivable, it was proposed in Council,
and allowed, and therefore without the highest reflection, it cannot now be
quarrelled.

Sir George Lockhart 's second Plea for the Earl of Argyle, by way of Reply
upon the King's Advocate.
SIR George Lockhart Duplies, That the Defender repeats and oppones his former
Desences, which are no ways eluded, nor satisfied by the Reply made by His
Majesty's Advocate. And although it be easy for the Kings Advocate, out of his
zeal, to pretend and argue Crimes of the highest Nature upon Inferences and
Consequences neither consistent with the Pannel's designs nor with his words
and expressions, yet there cannot be a more dangerous foundation laid, for the
security and interest of the Government, and the security and protection of the
Subjects, than that Crimes should be inferred but from clear, evident, and
express Laws, and plain palpable Contravention of these Laws, it being both
against the Laws of God and Man, that a Man should be made an Offender for a
word, and especially for expressions which according to Sense and Reason, and
considering the time and place where they were spoken by the Panel. viz. as a
Member of His Majesty's Privy Council, and in presence of his Royal Highness,
and the Members of Council, and when required to take the Test, were safe and
Innocent: and it were against all Law and Reason, to suppose that the Panel
either did, or designed to do any thing which may, or did import the Crimes
libelled against him. And whereas it is pretended, That the Oath required and
imposed by Act of Parliament was for the security of the Government; and that
the Panel by his Explanation does evade the Oath, by taking it only so far as
it is consistent with the Protestant Religion, and his own Loyalty, whereof he
was Judge. It is answered, That the pretense is most unwarrantable, and the
security of His Majesty's Government is not at all endangered (as God forbid it
should,) tho the Panel, and a Thousand more had simply refused the Test, or
had taken it in a sense which does not satisfy the Law; it being competent to
public Authority to consider, whether the Pannels Oath, in the terms of the
Explication wherein he did take it, does satisfy the Act of Palriament or not;
And if not, there can be no rational consequence inferred thereupon, but that
he is holden as a Refuser of the Oath, and liable to the Certification of the
Act of Parliament, of not assuming and continuing in any public Trust: And no
more was intended or designed by the Act of Parliament it self, than strictly
to make the Oath in the true and genuine sense and meaning of the Parliament,
an indispensible qualification of persons admitted to public Trust. So that it
is not at all material to dispute, whether the Pannel's Explication can be
looked upon as a full satisfaction of the Act, which whether it should or not,
it can import no Crime against him, it not being consistent with Sense and
Reason, that a person who absolutely refuses the Test, upon the scrupulosity
of his Conscience, albeit he be not capable of public Trust, should be,
notwithstanding, looked upon as guilty of no Crime: and yet another who was
willing to go to a greater length, albeit he did demur and scruple as to the
full length, that he should be reputed criminal and guilty of a Crime.

2. The Panel repeats and conjoyns with this the grounds above mentioned,
contained in his Defenses, viz. That neither the Crimes libelled, nor any other
Crime, were ever pretended or made use of against any others, who did spread
abroad Objections of an high nature which yet were so favorably looked upon,
as to be construed only to proceed from scrupulosity of Conscience, as also the
satisfaction endeavored is in such terms, and by such condescensions, as do
take in, and justify the whole terms of the Explication libelled.

It is of great moment, and whereof the Lords of Justitiary are desired to take
special notice, both for clearing the absolute innocence of the Pannel's
meaning and intention, and to take off all possible misconstruction that can be
wrested or detorted from the tenor and expressions of the libelled Explication.
That the Panel was put to, and required to take the Oath, before the Lords of
His Majesty's Privy Council did pass and publish their Proclamation explaining
the Oath, and declaring the genuine sense and meaning thereof, namely, That it
did not tie to the whole Articles of the Confession of Faith, ratified by Act
of Parliament, James 6. and which, as to several Articles thereof, had
occasioned the scruples, and difficulties, and alleged inconsistency and
contradiction betwixt the last part of the Oath and the said Confession, and
betwixt some of these Articles, and the Current of the Protestant Doctrine,
received and contained in the Syntagma of the Protestant Confessions. And
therefore if the Panel at that time did think fit, for the clearing and
exoneration of his own Conscience, to use the expressions in the Explication
libelled, and yet with so much duty and confidence of the Parliaments Justice,
as to their meaning and intention, That the Parliament never intended to impose
contradictory Oaths; and that he did take it so far as it was consistent with
it self, and the Protestant Religion, not knowing then, whether the whole
Confession was to be reputed a part of the Oath, and doubting there-anent; and
which the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council and his Sacred Majesty by his
approbation since, have thought a difficulty of so great moment as it was fit
to clear the same by a public Proclamation; How now is it possible, that any
Judicatory under Heaven, which proceeds upon the solid grounds of Law and
Reason, and who (it cannot be doubted) will have a just regard to the
intrinsic Principles of Justice, and to all men's security; that they can now
believe all, or any of the Crimes libelled, should be in the least inferred
from all, or any of the expressions contained in the said Explication? But that
on the contrary it was a warrantable allowance, and Christian practice,
condemned by the Law and Custom of no Nation, That having scruples in the
matter of an Oath which should be taken in Truth, Judgment and Righteousness,
and upon full deliberation, and with a full assurance and sincerity of mind,
That he did plainly, openly, and clearly declare the sense in which he was
willing to take it; and if Authority did allow it as the genuine sense of the
Oath, the Panel to be holden as a Taker of the Oath: And if upon farther
consideration, Authority think not, that habetur pro Recusante, and a Refuser
of the Oath, but no ways to be looked upon as a criminal or guilty person.

And the Panel repeats and conjoyns with this point of the Reply, that point
in his Defense, whereby he positively offers to prove, 1. That his Explication,
and the sense wherein he took the Oath, was heard, and publicly given and
received in Council, and the Panel thereafter allowed to take his place, and
sit and vote in that Sederunt.

2. The Panel also offers positively to prove, That the tenor and terms of his
Sense and Explication wherein he did take the Oath, is contained in that Solid,
Learned, and Pious Vindication, written by the Bishop of Edinburgh, in answer
to the Objections and alleged inconsistencies and contradictions in the Oath,
and which Vindication was publicly read in Council; and so far approved, that
it was allowed to be printed and published, and was accordingly dispersed and
spread abroad. And it is not of the least import, that the Proclamation of the
Lords of Privy Council, although it does often allow the same to be taken by the
Clergy, yet at the same time they expressly declare the genuine sense and
meaning of the Parliament not to comprehend the whole Articles of the
Confession, which was not cleared before the Pannel's taking his Oath.

And whereas it is pretended, That the Acts of Parliament libelled upon,
against Leasing-makers, depravers of His Majesty's Laws, do obtain and take
place, wherever there are any words or expressions that have a tendency in
themselves, or by a natural consequence, and rational inferences, to reflect
upon the Government, or misconstrue His Majesty's Proceedings; and that the
Explication libelled is such, and that it was found so in the Case of
Balmerino, albeit it was drawn up by way of humble Petition and Address to His
Majesty, and with great Protestations and Expressions of Loyalty. It is
answered, The Acts of Parliament libelled upon are oponed, and the 43d. Act,
Par. 8. James 6. and the other Acts, making the depraving of His Majesty's Laws
to be Crimes, do expressly require, that Speeches so judged be perverse and
licentious Speeches ex natura sua probrosa and reproachful, and spoke animo
defamandi, and which could not receive any other rational Construction, which
cannot in the least be applied to, or subsumed upon the words, or Explication
given in by the Panel. And Law and Reason never infers or presumes a Crime,
where the thing is capable of a fair and rational Construction, and where it
was done palam and publicly, and in presence of His Majesty's High
Commissioner, and Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, whereof the Panel had
the honor to be a Member: Persons committing and designing to commit Crimes,
making use of Times, and Places, and Companies of another nature, on whom their
suggestions and insinuations may prevail. But it is a violence to the common
Reason of mankind, to pretend, that a person of the Pannel's Quality, having
the honor to serve His Majesty in most eminent Capacities, and devoted to His
Majesty's Interest and Service, beyond the strictest ties of Duty and
Allegiance, by the transcendent Favors he had received, that the Panel in
those Circumstances, and in presence of his Royal Highness and Lords of Privy
Council, should design to declame, and defacto, declame against, and defame His
Majesty's Government: To suppose this is absolutely contradictory to the common
Principles and Practices of Law, and common Topics of Reason.

And as to Balmerino's Case, it is answered, That the Lords of Justitiary are
humbly desired to call for, and peruse the said Petition, and Books of
Adjournal, which was certainly a defamatory Libel of His Majesty's Father, of
blessed Memory, and of the States of Parliament in the highest degree, being
expressly, that there was nothing designed but an innovation of the Protestant
Religion, and the subversion and over-turning the Liberties and Privileges of
the Parliament, and the Constitutions of the Articles, and other things of that
kind, which made certainly of it self a most villainous and execrable Libel,
containing the highest Crimes of Treason and Perduellion, and was not capable
of any good sense or interpretation, but was absolutely pernicious and
destructive: So that it is in vain to pretend, that the said Libel did contain
Prefaces and Protestations of Loyalty, which no Law regards, even in simplici
injuria and maledicto, tho committed by a private person, cum praefatione salvo
honor, or the like, and which were certainly ridiculous to sustain in a Libel
concerning Crimesof Treason.

And whereas it is pretended, That tho others were guilty of these Crimes, it
does not excuse the Earl: that the Lords of Privy Council cannot remit Crimes;
and the neligence of the Kings Officers cannot prejudg his Interest. It is
answered, The Panel is very confident, that neither the Lords of His Majesty's
Privy Council, consisting of persons of eminent Loyalty and Judgment, nor His
Majesty's Officers, were capable of any such escape as is pretended: and if the
tenor of the Pannel's Explication did in the least import the high and infamous
Crimes libelled, as beyond all peradventure it does not, it were strange, how
the same being contained in the aforesaid Vindication, and the whole Clauses
thereof justified, that this should have been looked on as no Crime, and
allowed to be published. And the Panel neither does, nor needs to make farther
use thereof, but to convince all dis-interested persons, that his Explication
can import no Crime.

And whereas it is pretended, That the Crime of Treason is inferred from the
fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and from that Clause of the Pannel's
Explication, whereby he declares, he is not bound up by any thing in this Oath
not to endeavor any alteration in a lawful way: which being an indefinite
proposition is equipollent to an universal, and is upon the matter coincident
with a Clause which was rebellious in its consequences contained in the Solemn
League and Covenant. It is answered, That it is strange, how such a plain and
innocent Clause, whereby, beyond all question, he does express no more than was
naturally imported the Crime of Treason, which no Lawyer ever allowed except
where it was founded upon express Law and Luce Meridiana Clarior: And indeed if
such stretches and inferences can make men guilty of Treason no man can be
secure. And the words in the Pannel's Declaration are plain and clear (yet non
sunt cavillanda) and import no more, but that, in his station, and in a lawful
way, and consistent with the Protestant Religion, and his Loyalty, he might
endeavor any alteration to the advantage of Church and State. And was there
ever any loyal or rational Subject, that does, or can doubt, that this is the
natural import of the Oath? And indeed it were a strange Oath, if it were
capable of another sense, and being designed for the security of the
Government, should bind up men's hands to concur for its advantage. And how was
it possible, that the Panel, or any other in the capacity of a
Privy-Councellor, or a Member of the Parliament, would have satisfied his Duty
and Allegiance in other terms? And whereas it is pretended that there was the
like case in the pretended League and Covenant, it is answered, The Assertion
is evidently a Mistake; and tho it were, the Argument is altogether
inconsequential: For that League and Covenant was treasonable in it self, as
being a Combination entered into without His Majesty's Authority, and was
treasonable in the glosses that were put upon it, and was imposed by absolute
violence on the Subjects of this Kingdom. And how can the Panel be in the
least supposed to have had any respect to the said League and Covenant, when he
had so often taken the Declaration, disowning and renouncing it, as an unlawful
and sinful Oath, and concurred in the many excellent Laws and Acts of
Parliament made by His Majesty, condemning the same as seditious and
treasonable? And whereas it is pretended. That the Panel is guilty of Perjury,
having taken the Oath in another sense than was consistent with the genuine
sense of the Parliament, and that by the Authority cited he does commento
eludere Juramentum, which ought always to, be taken in the sense of him that
imposes the Oath: It is answered, The Pretense is most groundless, and Perjury
never was, nor can be inferred, but by the commission, or omission of something
directly contrary to the Oath. And although it is true, That where an Oath is
taken, without any Declaration of the express sense of the persons who take it,
it obliges sub poena Perjurii, in the sense, not of the taker, but of the
imposer of the Oath, because expressing no Sense, Law and Reason presumes there
is a full acquiescence in the sense and meaning of the imposer of the Oath: and
then if an Oath be not so taken, he that takes it is guilty of Perjury. Yet
there was never Lawyer nor Divine, Popish or Protestant, but agree in this,
That whatever be the tenor of the Oath, if before the taking thereof, the party
in express terms does publicly and openly declare the sense in which he takes
it, it is impossible it can infer the Crime of Perjury against him in any other
sense, this not being Commentum excogitatum, after the taking of the Oath. And
if this were not so, how is it possible in Sense and Reason, that ever any
Explication or Sense could solve the Scruples of a man's Conscience? For it
might be always pretended, That notwithstanding of the express sense wherein he
took it, he should be guilty of Perjury from another sense. And that this is
the irrefragable opinion of all Divines, of whatever peswasion, is not only
clear from the Authority abovementioned, even those who allow of reserved
senses, but more especially by the universal suffrage of all Protestant
Divines, who tho they do abominate all thoughts of Subterfuges or Evasions,
after taking of the Oath, yet they do always allow and advise for the safety
and security of a doubting and scrupulous Conscience, that they should express
and declare, before the taking of the Oath, the true sense and meaning wherein
they have freedom to take it; and for which Sandersone de Juramento is cited,
Prelct. 6. Sect. 10. page 75. where his words are, Sane ut inter Jurandum omnia
recte fiant, expedit ut de verborum sensu inter omnes parts quarum interest
liquido constet, quod veteribus dictum, liquido Jurare. And an Oath being one
of the highest Acts of Devotion, containing Cultum Latriae, there is nothing
more consonant to the Nature of all Oaths, and to that Candor, Ingenuity, and
Chrstian simplicity, which all Law and Religion requires in such cases.

The Kings Advocate's Third Plea against the Earl of Argyle.
HIS Majesty's Advocate conceives he has nothing to answer as to depraving,
Leasing-making, and mis-interpreting, etc. save that this Oath was only
designed to exclude Recusants; and consequently, the Panel may thereby be
debarred from his Offices, but not made guilty of a Crime. To which he
Triplies, 1. If ever the Earl had simply refused, that had been true, but that
did not at all excuse from defaming the Law, for a defamer is not punished for
refusing, but for defaming.

2. It he had simply refused, the Government had been in no more hazard, but if
men will both retain their places, and yet take the same in such words as
secure not the Government, it were strange to think, that the design of the Law
being to secure against men's possessing who will not obey, that yet it should
allow them possession who do not obey. Nor is the refuser here in a better case
than the Earl, and others, who offered to obey, because it is the defaming the
Law, as ridiculous, and inconsistent with that Protestant Religion: and
Leasing-making betwixt the King, the Nobility, and the people, the
misconstruing, and misrepresenting, as has been formerly urged, that puts the
Earl in a worse condition. And all those arguments might be as well urged for
any who had uncontrovertedly contravened these Acts, as for the Panel.

Whereas it is pretended, That the King emitted a Proclamation to satisfy
Dissenters; it is answered, That the Proclamation was designed for none who had
been Members of Parliament, and so should have known the sense; but it was
designed for mere ignorants, not for such as had defamed the Law, which is
still here charged upon the Panel.

As to the Article of Treason, it is conceived, That it is unanswerably founded
upon the Common Law, discharging all men to make alteration of the Government;
as to which there needs no express Statute, that being the very essence of
Government, and needing no Laws. Like as it falls positively under all the Laws
that discharge the assuming the Royal or Legislative power, for to alter the
Government, is inseparably united to the Crown. Like as the Subsumption is as
clear, the express words not bearing, That the Earl reserves to himself a power
to propose to His Majesty any alterations, or to concur to serve His Majesty in
making alterations; but owning in most general and arbitrary terms, to wish and
endeavor any alteration he should think fit for the advantage of Church or
State, and not determining any thing that could bind him otherwise than
according to his own pleasure, for the word (lawful) is still subjected to
himself, and has subjoyned to it, as he should think fit, which governs the
whole proposition; and in that sense, and as the words are here set down, the
greatest Rebel in Scotland will subscribe that Explanation, for there is no man
but will restrict himself to a lawful obedience, provided he be Judge of the
lawfulness. And seeing all Oaths proposed for the security of Government,
require a certain depending upon the Legislator, and not upon the Taker, it is
impossible that that end could be attained by any qualification, how special
soever, which is made to depend absolutely upon the Taker, and not upon the
Legislator. And we have often seen, how little security there is in those
specious words, the very Covenant it self having not only the very words
above-repeated, but attesting all the world to be witnesses to their Loyalty
and Sincerity. And as to the former instances, viz. Rising in Arms, or opposing
the lawful Successor, there is no Covenanter in Scotland, but will say, he will
do neither, but in a lawful way, and in his station, and in a way consistent
with his Loyalty, for a man were mad to say otherwise; but yet when they come
to explain this, they will only do it as they think fit, and will be Judges
themselves, and then will tell us, That defensive Arms are lawful, and that no
Popish Successor should succeed, nor no Successor unless he subscribe the
Covenant. And whereas it is pretended, That no clause in the Test does exclude
a man from making alterations, it is answered, That the alterations which the
Test allows are none at all but in subordination to Authority. And as to the
two points above mentioned, it excludes all alterations as to these points. And
as to the making fundamental alterations, this reservation allows to make any
alteration, and consequently fundamental alterations; to preclude which
Libertinism, this excellent Law was invented.

Whereas it is pretended, That the Panel designs not to add any thing as a
part of the Law, but as a part of his Oath, it is duplied, Since the Oath is a
part of the Law, whoever adds to the Oath, adds to the Law.

Whereas it is pretended, That the Crime of Perjury cannot be inferred here,
because all Divines allow, That the Taker of an Oath is still allowed to
declare in what sense he takes the Oath; and that this is clear from Sanderson,
p. 175. It is triplied, That where there are two dubious senses, Lawyers and
Divines allow. That the taker should clear himself, which of the two he should
take; which is very just, because to which soever of the two he determines
himself, the Legislator in that case is sure of him. But here it is not
pretended, That there are two senses; nor does the Panel declare in which of
the two he takes it, or in what clear sense at all he takes it, which is indeed
liquido Jurare. But here the Panel neither condescends, what particular clause
of the Test is unclear; nor after he has condescended upon the Articles, does
he condescend upon the sense, but in general mysterious words, where he can
neither be followed, or found out, he only takes it in so far as it is
consistent with it self, and the Protestant Religion, reserving the squaring
all by his own Loyalty, as he did in the beginning declare, That he took it in
his own sense, by which general sense, neither is the Government secure of any
thing it does enjoin, nor could he be punished if he transgressed. Nor can it
be doubted, but Perjury may be inferred by any equivocal or evading sense,
inter Jurandum, as well as by breaking an oath afterward; which is very clear
from Sanderson, p. 138. The words whereof are alterum perjurii genus est inter
Jurandum detorquere verba; and which is farther clear by the 28. page, but
above all, from the principles of Reason, and the necessity of Commerce and
Government: For if men may adhibit such glosses, even whilst they swear, as may
make the Oath useless, what way will either Government or Commerce be
maintained? And he deceives as much that deceives in swearing salvis verbis, as
he who after he has sworn, does break the Oath. Nay, and more too, because the
breaking may come from forgetfulness, or other accidents, but the evading by
general Clauses, which bind no man, does from the first instance originally
make all Oaths useless and dangerous, and that this interpretation eludes the
Oath absolutely, is very clear from what has been formerly debated. For it may
be argued, That the Earl broke the Oath in so far, as the first day he swears
the Oath, which bears to be without any evasion (and must be so,
notwithstanding of whatever he could say:) And the next day he gives in this
evasion, which is a downright violation of that Oath, and inconsistent with
it. Nor was this Oath forced, but voluntarily emitted, to keep his own places.
And it was the greater Crime that it was done in the Council, because that was
to make it the more public, and consequently, the more to misrepresent the
Government.

After this debate, which, according to the custom of the Court, was verbatim
dictate by the Advocates of either side, and written by the Clerk, and so took
up much time; and the Court having sat, at least twelve hours, without
intermission, it adjourned till the next day, being Tuesday the 13th. of
December, at Two of the Clock in the Afternoon: And then the Earl being again
brought to the Bar, the following Interloquutour (that is Judgment and
Sentence) of the Lords of Justitiary, on the foregoing debate, was read, and
pronounced in open Court.

Edinburgh, December 12. 1681.
The Interloquutour of the Lords of Justitiary.
THE Lords, Justice General, and Commissioners of the Justitiary, having
considered the Libel and Debate, they sustain the defense proponed for the Earl
of Argyle, the Panel, in relation to the perjury Libelled, viz. That he
emitted this Explanation at, or before his taking the Test, first before his
Royal Highness, His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Lords of His Majesty's
Privy Council, relevant, to elude that Article of the Libel.

The Lords sustain the Libel, as being founded upon the Common Law, and
Explication Libelled, and upon Act 130. Parl. 8. James VI. to infer the pain of
Treason.

They likewise sustain the Libel, as founded upon the 10. Act Parl. 10. James
VI. to infer the pain of Death; and likewise sustain that part of the Libel
anent Leasing making, and Leasing-telling, to infer the particular pains
mentioned in the several Acts Libelled.

And repel the whole other defenses, duplies, and quadruplies, and remits the
Libel, with the defenses anent the Perjury, to the knowledge of an Assize.

Thereafter the Assize, that is the Jury, being constitute and sworn, viz.

List of the Assizers.
Marquess Montross, E. Middleton, E. Airlie, E. Perth, P. Cr. E. Dalhousie, E.
Roxburgh, P. C. E. Dumfries, E. Linlithgow, P. Cr. Lord Lindoors, Lord
Sinclare, Lord Bruntisland, Lord of Gosfoord, Lord of Claverhouse, Lord of
Balnamoon Lord of Park Gordon.
HIS Majesty's Advocate adduced four Witnesses, to prove the points of the
Indictment, remitted to the knowledge of the Assize, viz. John Drummond of
Lundie, then Governor of the Castle of Edinburgh, now Treasurer Deputy: Sir
William Paterson, and Mr. Patrick Menzies, Clerks of the Privy Council; and H.
Stevenson their under Clerk. Who deponed, That on the 4th. of November, the
Earl did give in an unsubscribed Explanation of the Test, which he refused to
sign: One of the Witnesses also adding, That he heard him make the same
Explanation, the day before, in Council, and that it was there accepted.

Then His Majesty's Advocate asked, if the Earl would make use of his
Exculpation for eliding the Perjury Libelled, to wit, That he had emitted the
same Explanation, before taking the Test, in presence of his Royal Highness and
the Council. To which the Earl answered, That seeing they had sustained the
Libel, as to the alleged Treason, he would not trouble them about the Perjury;
especially the matter of Fact, referred by the Interloquutour to his probation,
being of it self so clear and notour.

Fut the truth is, the Interloquutour pronounced was so amazing, that both the
Earl and his Advocates, were struck with deep silence, for they plainly
perceived that, after such a Judgment in the case, all further endeavors would
be in vain, it being now manifest, that seeing the Earls innocence had so
little availed, as that his plain and honest words, purely uttered for the
necessary satisfaction of his own conscience, and clearing of his Loyalty, had
been construed, and detorted, to infer Leasing-making, Depraving, and Treason:
the Tongues of men and Angels (as some of his Advocates also said) could not do
any good, and therefore neither did the Earl, nor they object any thing, either
against the Assizers or Witnesses, though liable to obvious, and unanswerable
exceptions: Nor did the Earls Advocates say any thing to the Assize, as the
custom is, and as in this case they might well have done to take off the force
of the Evidence, and to demonstrate that the Depositions, instead of proving
the Indictment, did rather prove the Earls defenses. But, as I have said, they
now plainly saw that all this had been unnecessary work, and, in effect, were
of opinion, that after so black, and dreadful a sense, put upon what the Earl
had spoke and done, in such fair, and favorable circumstances, there could be
nothing said, before such a Court, which might not expose themselves to the
like hazard, and more easily be made liable to the same mis-construction.

But, upon this silence, the Advocate, taking Instruments, protests (whether in
form only, or from a real fear, let others judge) for an Assize of Error, in
case the Assizers should Assoil or acquit: Whereupon the Assize removing was
enclosed, and, after some time, returned their Verdict, which was read in open
Court of this tenor.

The Verdict of the Assize.
THE Assize having Elected, and Chosen the Marquess of Montrose to be their
Chancellor, they all in one voice find the Earl of Argyle guilty, and culpable
of the Crimes of Treason, Leasingmaking, and Leasing-telling. And find, by
plurality of Votes, the said Earl innocent, and not guilty of Perjury.

And then the Court again adjourned: And the Privy Council wrote the following
Letter to His Majesty.

Halyrud-House, December 14. 1681.
The Councils Letter to the King, desiring leave to pronounce Sentence against
the Earl of Argyle.
May it please Your Sacred Majesty,
IN Obedience to Your Majesty's Letter, dated the 15th of November last, we
ordered Your Majesty's Advocate to insist in that Process, raised at your
Instance, against the Earl of Argyle: And having allowed him a long time for
his appearance, and any Advocates he pleased to employ, and Letters of
Exculpation, for his Defense; He, after full Debate, and clear Probation, was
found guilty of Treason, Leasing-making betwixt Your Majesty, Your Parliament,
and Your People, and the reproaching of Your Laws, and Acts of Parliament. But
because of Your Majesty's Letter, ordaining us to send Your Majesty a
particular account of what he should be found guilty of, before the pronouncing
of any Sentence against him, we thought it our duty to send Your Majesty this
account of our, and Your Justices proceedings therein; And to signify to Your
Majesty, with all Submission, That it is usual, and most fit for Your Majesty's
Service, and the Advantage of the Crown, that a Sentence be pronounced, upon
the Verdict of the Assize, without which the Process will be still imperfect.
After which, Your Majesty may, as you in Your Royal Prudenee and Clemency shall
think fit, Ordain all farther execution to be sisted, during Your Majesty's
pleasure: Which shall be dutifully obeyed by,

Your MAJESTY's Most Humble, Most Faithful, and most Obedient Subjects and
Servants, Sic Subscribitur,
Alex. St. And. Athol, Douglas, Montrose, Glencairn, Wintoun, Linlithgow,
Perth, Roxburgh, Dumfries, Strathmore, Airlie, Ancram, Livingstoun, Jo.
Edinburgens, Elphingstoun, Dalziell, Geo. Gordon, Chapter Maitland, Geo. Mckenzie,
G. Mckenzie, Ramsay, J. Drummond.


THE Earl, as well as the Lords of Privy Council, waited some days for the
Answer of this Letter: But the Earl making his escape a day or two before it
came, I shall take occasion to entertain you, in the mean time, with an account
of some thoughts that the Earl had set down in Writing, in order to some
discourse he intended to have made to the Lords of Justiciary, before their
pronouncing Sentence. And then I shall subjoyn the Motives and Arguments, which
(as he has since informed some of his Friends) did induce him to make his
escape: Which, with what I have said before, will give you a full account of
all matters, till His Majesty's return came, and the Sentence past.

And first, he takes notice, That on Monday the Twelfth of December, the day of
his Arraignment, the Court adjourned, before he was aware: And it being then
late, about nine of the Clock, and after a sederunt of twelve hours, He did not
imagine, they would have proceeded further that night; but only heard
afterward that they sat it out till two or three after midnight: And was
surprised the next morning, to understand, that without calling him again, or
asking at him, or hearing, or considering his own sense of his own words, they
had not only found the Libel relevant, but repelled his defenses, and with one
breath rejected all his most material reasons of Exculpation, root and branch.
This seemed hard, though the words had been worse, and no way capable of a
favorable construction (which none, no not the Judges themselves, can be so
void of sense, as to think really they were not) and this was so far beyond all
imagination, that, neither the Earl, nor his Advocates did ever dream it could
fall out, though all was not said might have been said; nor what was said, so
fully enforced as the Earl's Advocates could easily have done, if the case had
not been thought so very clear, and the Earl his innocence so obvious and
apparent, and they unwilling unnecessarily to irritate many concerned.

This great haste, and strange proceeding, did so surprise and astonish him (as
I have said) that it caused him, the next day when the Sentence was read, to
keep deep silence, and suffer the Interloquutor to be pronounced, the Assizers
chosen, and sworn, and the Witnesses received, and examined, without once
offering to say, or object any thing, or so much as inquiring, at either
Assizers, or VVitnesses, whether they had not been tampered with, and practiced
by promises, and threatenings; or whether some of them had not previously, and
publicly declared themselves in the Case, and others of them had not partially
advised, and solicited against him; Which, as they are just, and competent
Exceptions, so he was able to have proven them, against most of them,
instantly, and fully.

And indeed, as to such of the Assizers as were Counselors, (whom, for your
better information, I have marked in the List of Assuzers thus, P. Cr. and had
first ordered his Imprisonment, next, signed the Letter to His Majesty, and
then ordered the Process, and therein manifestly fore-stalled their own
judgment (had they done no more) it was a wonder, beyond parallel, That,
neither their own Honor, nor the common decency of Justice, nor even His
Majesty's Advocate's Interest, did prevent their being impannelled on that
Assize.

But the truth is, the Earl did so far neglect and abandon himself, and give
way to the Court, that he did not so much as open his mouth, to clear himself
of the Perjury laid to his charge, which yet God Almighty was pleased to do, by
the plurality of voices of the same Assize, who it appears plainly did bear him
little kindness: For whereas Assizers do usually return their Verdict, Proven,
or not Proven, rather than Guilty or not Guilty, and ought alwise to do so,
where the relevancy is in dubio, and especially in a case of this nature, in
which the alleged Treason is no overt act, and indeed no act, nor so much as a
real ground of offense; but plainly such a subtle, chimerical, and non-sensical
consequence, that the finding it does quite surpass the comprehension of all
unbyassed men; It might have been expected that persons of their quality would
have chosen the more moderate form of proven or not proven, and not involved
themselves unnecessarily upon Oath in adjudging the relevancy of a guilt, which
so few are able to imagine, and none will ever make out; yet you see in their
Verdict, that all in one voice they did find the Earl Guilty, in the most
positive and strong form; adding, for superabundance, culpable, forsooth, the
better to demonstrate their good will. Nor is it unworthy of remark, that when
such of the Assizers as were present at the Council declared the Earl Innocent
of the Perjury (which His Majesty's Advocate did only pretend to infer from the
Earls alleged silence, or not speaking loud enough, the first day, when he
signed the Test) because they heard him, at the same time, pronounce his
explanation: Yet some other Assizers that were no Counselors, and knew nothing
of the matter of fact, but by hearsay, without all regard to the witnessing of
these Counselors, their fellow Assizers, voted him Guilty: And so took it
formally on their Consciences, that he had said nothing in the Council, at his
taking the Test; albeit all the Council knew the contrary: (by which they are
clearly perjured). Nay, such was the earnestness of some (who thought it scazce
possible to carry the Treason upon words so safe and innocent) to have the Earl
found guilty of Perjury, that it was particularly recommended to His Majesty's
Advocate to get him made guilty of that point, to render him for ever incapable
of public employment. And the Clerk of the Assize was so concerned in it, that
he twice misreckoned the Votes, before he would yield that the Earl was
assoiled, or acquit of the Perjury. And this, among other things, may serve to
clear, how that whole matter was influenced and managed: For, as the Earl
cannot be charged with Perjury the second day, because he swore none at all; so
as little the first day, seeing whether he took the Test with an Explanation
(as certainly he did) or simply without saying any thing, It is equally
apparent, there was no Perjury in the case: But it appears, their Assizers were
of the Opinion, that the Indictment or Libel alone (as it was indeed the only
evidence) was a sufficient proof of the Earl his being guilty of Perjury. And
indeed for any other Rule or Reason that occurs, They might as well have found
him guilty of the Perjury as of the Treason: But the Assizers that were
Counselors being under a particular check, apprehending they might be found
perjured themselves, if they had not acknowledged the hearing of the words,
that all others present could have attested to have been audibly spoken, and
some of themselves have confessed to have heard, before they knew the tenor of
the Libel; And, the great Crime of Treason being sufficient to do the Job, it
is like they judged it advisable to give this insignificant absolution from
Perjury, That their Virdict of Treason might have the greater color, and show
of candor, and sincerity. However it seems to be without measure hard to be
prosecute with such a deadly Dilemma of either Treason or Perjury; for you see,
in their account, if the Earl swear with an Explanation, his Life is knocked
down by Treason; and if without an Explanation, his Honor, which is dearer to
him than his Life, is run through with Perjury. But, to complete a fancy beyond
Bedlam, The Advocate urges, and several Assizers agree, at the same time, to
condemn the Earl as perjured, for not explaining; and for Treason, for
explaining: Quis talia fando?

In the next place, the Earl's Papers contain some thoughts, and endeavors, to
remove certain mistakes, which, he had good ground to believe, did so much
prompt, and precipitate the Judges to pronounce so important a Sentence against
him, upon so weak and sandy foundations, and which were indeed either mere
fancies, or so frivolous, that though they were true, they could never excuse
them before men, far less exoner them before God Almighty. Where, laying down a
true ground, that nunquam concluditur in criminalibus, etc. and withal
representing, how his Advocates were questioned, in so extraordinary a manner,
for signing their Opinion (which you have above Number. 32. Where you may see how
fair, just, and safe it was) that now they dare no more plead for him; He says,
He cannot be denied to plead for himself, as he best may.

The first ground of mistake then that he was to represent, was, that he knew
it had been told them, it was very much His Majesty's Interest, and necessary
for the support of the Government, to divest, and render him incapable of
public Trust: Which words had been often said, and said to himself, to persuade
him that there was no further rigor intended: But as he is very confident our
gracious King will never, upon any such pretense, allow any innocent Person to
be condemned, far less to be destroyed, in a picque or frolic, where his
Majesty can reap no advantage; So he is persuaded, His Majesty has no design
to render him miserable, far less to cut him off, without a cause. And
therefore concludes, it is only his misfortune, in his present circumstances,
never having access to, nor being heard by his Majesty, nor the Case perfectly
understood by him, that has made His Majesty give so much as way to a Process
to be raised or led, far less to a Sentence to be pronounced against him. But
in effect, as this Affair has been managed all alongs, and so many engaged, in
so extraordinary ways, to act, and write against him, first and last, nothing
should appear strange or surprising: However, as their own Consciences, and God
Almighty, knows how they have been brought to meddle, and act, as they have
done; So, one day or other, the World may likewise know it.

A second ground of mistake, which, he says, may impose upon them, is a
confidence of His Majesty's Pardon intended for him, a pretense only given out
to render the Condemnation more easy; yet indeed least wished for by those who
were readiest to spread the report, and whereof the Earl had indeed more
confidence than any that talked of it, if His Majesty were left to himself, and
had the Case fully and truly represented to him: but as His Majesty needs not
this false occasion to make his clemency appear, which is so well known over
all his Dominions, by far more true and genuine discoveries; so it were the
height of injustice in their Lordships of the Justiciary to proceed to
sentence against him, upon such Apprehensions, in case in their hearts they
believe him innocent (as he certainly knows they do) besides, they cannot but
see their acting, upon so unjust a ground, will not only stain their names, and
memories, but instead of alleviating, rather aggravate their guilt, both in
their own Consciences when they reflect on it in cold blood, and in the sight
of God Almighty: And if His Majesty, on importunity and a third Application,
should give way to execution, as he has already given way, first to the
Process, and then to the Sentence; or if (as some may design) Execution shall
be adventured on, without the formality of a new Order (as the Process was at
first commenced, before His Majesty's return, and so is not impossible) would
not their Lordships be as guilty of his blood, as if they had cut his Throat?

And in effect, these are the grounds and Excuses pretended at this day, in
private, by such of his Judges, for their procedour, who are not yet come to
have the confidence, at all Occasions, to own directly what they have done.

A third reason why his Exculpation was not allowed, he says, might be, because
the sustaing of it might have brought other Explanations above-board, and
discover both these who had made, and those who had accepted them, and perhaps
not have left their own Bench untouched. But as this Artifice will not keep up
the Secret; And as this way of shifting is neither just nor equal; so to all
interested it is the meanest of Security; For his Majesty's Advocate has
already told us, that His Majesty's Officers can never wrong him: And although
the Lords and He shauld conceal what others had done, it might make themselves
more guilty, but not prove any Exoneration to those concerned, without a
downright Remission: Whereas it is manifest, That if their Lordships had
admitted the Earl's Exculpation, upon the sure and evident grounds therein
contained, it would not only have answered the Justice of his Case, but
vindicated all concerned.

And lastly, he was to tell them, that possibly they might be inclined to go
on, because they were already so far engaged, as they knew not how to retreat
with their honor: but, as there can be no true honor where there is manifest
wrong, and injustice; so, in the frail and fallible condition of humane things,
there can be no delusion more dangerous and pernicious than this, that unum
scelus est alio scelere tegendum. And here the Earl thought to lay before them,
very plainly and pertinently, some remarkable and excellent Rules, whereby L.
Chief Justice Hales, a renowned Judge of our Neighbour-Nation, tells, he did
govern himself in all Criminal Cases; which (adds the Earl) if they took a due
impression, would certainly give them peace, and joy, when all the vain
Considerations that now amuse, will avail them nothing.

The Rules are these.

I. Not to be rigid in matters purely conscientious, where all the harm is
diversity of Judgment.

II. That Popular, or Court-applause, or distaste, have no influence on any
thing is to be done, in point of distribution of Justice.

III. In a criminal Case, if it be a measuring cast, then to incline to mercy
and acquittal.

IV. In criminal things, that consist only of words, where no harm ensues,
moderation is then no injustice.

V. To abhor all private Solicitations, of what kind soever, and by whomsoever.

VI. In matters depending, not to be solicitous what men will say or think, so
long as the rule of Justice is exactly kept.

VII. And lastly, Never to engage themselves in the beginning of a Cause, but
reserve themselves unprejudged, till the whole business be heard.

Then the Earl goes on, and makes notes, for Additional Defenses, reducible to
these Heads.

I. The absolute innocence af his Explication, in its true and genuine meaning,
from all crime or offense, far more from the horrible Crimes libelled.

II. The impertinency and absurdity of His Majesty's Advocate's Arguings, for
inferring the Crimes libelled, from the Earl's words.

III. The reasonableness of the Exculpation.

IV. The Earl's Answers to the Advocate's groundless Pretenses for aggravating
of his Case.

As to the first, The Earl waving what has been said from common Reason, and
Humanity it self, and from the whole tenor and circumstances of his Life,
comes close to the point by offering that just and genuine Explanation of his
Explication which you have above, Number. 21.

I have delayed hitherto to take the Oath appointed by the Parliament to be
taken, betwixt and the first of January next: But now being required, near two
months sooner, to take it, this day peremptorily, or to refuse: I have
considered the Test, and have seen several Objections moved against it,
especially by many of the Orthodox Clergy, notwithstanding whereof, I have
endeavored to satisfy my self with a just Explication, which I here offer,
that I may both satisfy my Conscience, and obey Your Highness, and your
Lordships Commands in taking the Test, though the Act of Parliament do not
simply command the thing, but only under a certification, which I could easily
submit to, if it were with Your Highness's favor, and might be without
offense: But I love not to be singular; and I am very desirous to give
obedience in this, and every thing, as far as I can; and that which clears me,
is, that I am confident, whatever any man may think or say to the prejudice of
this Oath, the Parliament never intended to impose contradictory Oaths; and
because their sense (they being the Framers and Imposers) is the true sense,
and this Test, enjoined, is of no private interpretation, nor are the King's
Statutes to be interpreted, but as they bear, and to the intent they are made;
therefore I think no man, that is, no private Person, can explain it for
another, to amuse or trouble him with (it may be) mistaken glosses: But every
man, as he is to take it, so is to explain it for himself, and to endeavor to
understand it, notwithstanding all these Exceptions in the Parliament's, which
is its true and genuine sense; I take it therefore, notwithstanding any scruple
made by any, as far as it is consistent with it self, and the Protestant
Religion, which is wholly in the Parliament's sense, and their true meaning;
Which (being present) I am sure, was owned by all to be the securing of the
Protestant Religion, founded on the Word of God, and contained in the
Confession of Faith recorded, J. 6. p. 1. c. 4. And not out of Scruple, as if
any thing in the Test did import the contrair. But to clear my self from
Cavils, as if thereby I were bound up further than the true meaning of the
Oath; I do declare, That by that part of the Test, that there lies lies no
obligation on me, etc. I mean not to bind up my self in my station, and in a
lawful way; still disclaiming all unlawful endeavors, To wish, and endeavor
any alteration, I think, According to my Conscience, to the advantage of
Church, or State, not repugnant to the Protestant Religion, and my Loyalty: And
by my Loyalty I understand no other thing than the words plainly bear, to wit,
the duty and allegiance of all Loyal Subjects; and this Explanation I
understand as a part, not of the Test, or Act of Parliament, but as a
qualifying part of my Oath that I am to swear; and with it I am willing to take
the Test, if your Royal Highness and your Lordships allow me. Or otherwise, in
submission to your Highness and the Councils pleasure, I am content to be held
as a Refuser, at present.

Which Explanation does manifestly appear to be so just, and true, without
violence or straining; so clear and full, without the least impertinency; so
notore and obvious to common sense, without any Commentary; so loyal, and
honest, without ambiguity; and lastly, so far from all, or any of the Crimes
libelled, that it most evidently evinceth, that the words thereby explained are
altogether innocent: And therefore it were lost time to use any Arguments to
enforce it.

Yet seeing this is no trial of wit, but to find out common sense; let us
examine the Advocate's fantastical Paraphrase, upon which he bottoms all the
alleged Crimes, and see whether it agrees, in one jot, with the true and right
meaning of the Earl's words; and (as you may gather from the Indictment) it is
plainly thus.

I have considered the Test; which ought not to be done, and am very desirous
to give obedience, as far as I can, but am not willing to give full obedience:
I am confident the Parliament never intended to impose contradictory Oaths;
that is, I am confident they did intend to impose contradictory Oaths; and
therefore I think no man can explain it but for himself; that is to say, every
man may take it in any sense he pleases to devise, and thereby render this Law,
and also all other Laws, tho not at all concerned in this Affair, useless; and
so make himself a Legislator, and usurp the Supreme Authority: And I take it,
in so far as it is consistent with it self, and the Protestant Religion,
whereby I suppose that it is not at all consistent with either; nor was ever
intended by the Parliament it should be consistent: And I declare, that by
taking this Test, I mean not to bind up my self in my station, and in a lawful
way, to wish, or endeavor any alteration, I think, to the advantage of Church,
or State, not repugnant to the Protestant Religion, and my Loyalty: Whereby I
declare my self, and all others, free from all obligation to the Government,
either of Church, or State, as by Law established, and from the duty and
Loyalty of good Subjects; Resolving of my self to alter all the Fundamentals,
both of Law, and Religion, as I shall think fit: And this I understand as a
part of my Oath: that is as a part of the Act of Parliament, by which I take
upon me, and usurp the Royal Legislative Power.

Which sense and Explanation, as it consists of the Advocate's own words, and
was indeed, every word, necessar to infer these horrible Crimes contained in
the Indictment; so, to speak with all the modesty that truth will allow, I am
sure, it is so violent, false, and absurd, that the greatest difficulty must be
to believe that any such thing was alleged, far more received, and sustained
in judgment, by Men professing only reason, far less Religion.

But thirdly, If neither the Earl's true, genuine, and honest sense, nor this
violent, corrupt, and false sense, will satisfy; let us try what transprosing
the Earl's Explanation will do, and see how the just contrary will look. -- And
it must be thus.

I Have considered the Test, nor am I at all desirous to give obedience, so far
as I can; I am confident the Parliament intended to impose contradictory Oaths;
And therefore I think, every man can explain it for others, as well as for
himself, and take it, without reconciling it, either to it self, or his own
sense of it: And I do take it, tho it be inconsistent with it self, and the
Protestant Religion: And I declare, that I mean thereby to bind up my self
never (either in my station, or in any lawful way whatsoever) to wish, or
endeavor, in the least, any alteration, tho to the advantage of Church, or
State, and tho never so suitable, and no way repugnant to the Protestant
Religion, and my Loyalty: And, tho this be the express quality of my Swearing,
yet I understand it to be no part of my Oath.

Now whether this contradictory Conversion be not Treason, or highly Criminal,
at best, I leave all the World to judge; and to make both sides of a
contradiction, that is, both the Affirmative and Negative of the same
Proposition, Treason, is beyound ordinary Logic. Escobar finds two contrary
ways may both be probable and safe ways to go to Heaven; but neither he, nor
the Devil himself, have hitherto adventured to declare two contradictory
Propositions, both damnable, and either of them a just cause to take away men's
Lives, Honors, and Fortunes.

But where the Disease is in the Will, it is lost labor to apply Remedies to
the Understanding; and must not this be indeed, either the oddest Treason, or
strangest Discovery that ever was heard of? The Bishop of Edinburgh sees it
not, witness his Vindication, saying the same, and more; nor many of the
Orthodox Clergy, witness their Explanations; nor his Royal Highness, in
private; nor at first in Council, nor all the Counselors, when together at the
Council Board; nor the President of the Council, nor the then President of the
Session (now Chancellor) though he rose from his Seat, to be sure to hear; nor
any of the most learned Lawyers, witness their signed Opinion; nor the most
learned of the Judges on the Bench; nor the generality of the knowing Persons,
either in Scotland, or England: wonderful Treason one day seen by none, another
day seen by so many! A Stander-by hearing the Trial, and the Sentence, said, He
believed the Earl's words were by Popish Magic transubstantiate, for he saw
them the same as before; Another answered, that he verily thought it was so;
for he was confident, none could see Treason in the words, that would not, when
ever it was a proper time, readily also profess his belief of
Transubstantiation; but he believed many that professed both, believed neither.

The second Head of the Earl's Additional Defense, contains the impertinencies
and absurdities of the Advocate's Arguings. And here you must not expect any
solid debate; For as there is no disputing with those that deny Principles, so
as little with those who heap up fantastical and inconsequential Inferences,
without all shadow of reason. If a Stone be thrown, though it may do hurt, yet
having some weight, it may be thrown back with equal, or more force: But if a
man trig up a feather, and fling it, it is in vain to throw it back; and the
more strength, the less success: It shall therefore serve, by a cursory
Discourse, to expose his Arguments, which are in effect easier answered than
understood; and, without any serious arguing, which they cannot bear, rather
leave him to be wise in his own eyes, than by too much empty talk hazard to be
like him.

He alleges first, That the Earl, instead of taking the Test in its plain and
genuine meaning, as he ought, does declare against, and defame the Act that
enjoined it, which is certainly a great Crime: But now, Inasmuch, says the
Advocate, as he tells us, That he had considered the Test: Which I have indeed
heard say was his greatest Crime; and that he ought to have taken it with a
profound and devout ignorance, as some of our most inventive Politicians
boasted they had done. But the Earl says that he was desirous to give
obedience, as far as he could; whereby, says the Advocate, he insinuates that
he was not able to give full obedience. This is not the meaning; but what if it
were, and that indeed he could not? Have not thousands given no obedience, yet
even in Law are guiltless? And ought not that to please his Highness, and the
Council, that is accepted of God Almighty, and is all any Mortal can perform?
But the Earl, says the Advocate, goes on, That he was confident the Parliament
never intended to impose contradictory Oaths; whereby, says the Advocate, he
abuses the People with a belief that the Parliament did intend to impose such.
Wonderful reasoning! All men know that Parliaments neither are, nor pretend to
be infallible: And in our present Case, hundreds of Loyal Subjects complain of
Contradictions and Inconsistencies, some way or other, crept into this Oath;
And even the Council have yielded so far to their Exceptions, as to make an
alteration upon it, for satisfying those scruples, far beyond any thing the
Earl said; and such an alteration, as, I believe, few dreamed of; and I am
certain, none durst have attempted, without their express command and
authority: and yet, in the midst of all this, the Earl's charitable and honest
Opinion, in behalf of the Parliaments good Intentions, must be perverted to a
direct slander. But the Earl says, That every man must explain it for himself;
and so, no doubt, he must, if the Test be either in it self, or in his
apprehension, ambiguous; otherwise how can he swear in Judgment? But this the
Advocate will have to be a man's own sense, and thereupon runs out, That hereby
this Law and Oath, and all Laws and Oaths are rendered useless, and to no
purpose: And further, the Legislative Power is taken from the Imposer, and
settled in the Taker of the Oath, which certainly is a most treasonable
presumption. But first, although there be no reason to strain, or mistake the
Expression, yet the Earl did not say, That every man must take the Test in his
own sense.

II. The Council has now explained the Test for the Clergy: Might not then the
Earl, before their Explanation was devised, say, by the Councils allowance,
which he had, That he might explain it for himself? For if an ambiguous
Proposition (the Test for example) may be reconciled to it self two different
ways; must not the Taker reconcile it, as in his own sense he thinks it does
best agree with the genuine meaning of the words themselves, and with the sense
he conceives was intended by the Parliament that formed it, especially before
the Parliament emit their own Explanation? And is it not juster to do it so,
than in any other man's sense, which he thinks agrees less with the words,
albeit they may be thought by others to be reconcilable another way?

III. All this looks like designed Mistakes and Traps; for should any man
swear, unless he understand? And where an Oath is granted to be ambiguous, can
any man understand, unless, in want of the Imposers help, he explain it for
himself.

IV. Was ever a Man's explaining an Oath for himself, before taking it, far
less his bare saying that he must explain it, before he take it, alleged to
be, The overturning of all Laws and Oaths, and the usurping of the Legislative
power, and making of new Laws? Certainly to offer to answer such things, were
to disparage common Reason.

And lastly, this is strange Doctrine from the Advocate, who himself, in
Council, did allow, not only the Earl his Explanation, but that Explanation to
the Clergy, contrary, as appears by their Scruples, to what they that took it
thought either the Parliaments design, or the plain words of the Test could
bear, and certainly different from the sense many had already taken it in, and
wherein others were commanded to take it. And whatever the Advocate may cavil
to ensnare the Earl, sure he will not allow that by his explaining this Oath he
himself has taken on him the Legislative power of the Parliament, far less,
though he should acknowledge it, will any believe that he has, or could thereby
make all Laws or Oaths useless? By this you see what strange stuff he pleads,
which deserves no answer.

But, says the Advocate, the Earl affirms, He takes the Test, only as far as it
consists with it self, and with the Protestant Religion; by which he most
maliciously insinuates, that it is inconsistent with both. But, first, this
only is not the Earl's, but the Advocates addition. Secondly, I would soberly
ask the Advocate, or any Man, Whether the Test, as it includes the Confession
in general, and consequently all contained in it, was not either really, or at
least might not have been apprehended to be inconsistent with it self? Else
what was the use or sense of the Councils explanation, wherein it is declared,
That men do not swear to every proposition of the Confession, but only to the
Protestant Religion therein contained? And if it was either inconsistent, or
apprehended to be so, how could the Earl, or any honest Man swear it in other
terms, with a safe Conscience? But Thirdly, If Parliaments be fallible, and
this Oath, as being ambiguous, needed the Councils explanation to clear it from
inconsistencies, must the Earl's words, when he was to swear, That he took it
in so far as it was consistent, be in this Case understood as spoken
maliciously, and with a criminal intent, when all Sense, Reason, and Religion,
made this caution his duty? And if it be so criminal for one going to swear, to
suppose a possibility of inconsistencies in it, Is it not manifestly more
criminal in others, plainly to confess and grant that there are inconsistencies
in it, after they have swallowed it in gross, without any explanation
whatsoever?

But, says the Advocate, The Earl has invented a new way, whereby no Man is at
all bound to the Test; For how can any Man be bound, if he will obey only as
far as he can? And yet it will be hard, even for the Advocate, tho he sometimes
attempts, indeed, more than he and all the World with him can do. To tell how a
Man can obey farther: And I am sure, that in a matter of this kind, viz. The
free tender of an Oath, all discreet men will judge the Earl's offer both frank
and obliging. Then he asks, To what the Earl is bound; if he be bound no
further than he himself can obey? Manifest confusion! and never either spoke by
the Earl, nor at all pertinent to his case; besides he freely acknowledges,
that all men are bound to more than they can do; or so far as the Test is
consistent with it self, and the Protestant Religion (a strange doubting or!
yet, I dare say, imports as much as His Majesty expects of any, and more than
the Advocate will ever perform) But, says the Advocate, who can determine to
what the Earl is bound? Which says plainly, That either the Test agrees with it
self, and the Protestant Religion in nothing, or that the Protestant Religion
is nothing, both which the Earl thinks far from truth. But the Advocate's
reasoning reflects far more on the Councils Explanation, where it is plainly
said, That the Confession is not sworn to in the Test, but only the Protestant
Religion contained in the Confession; so that the Protestant Religion
indefinitely is that which is said to be sworn to. Now, pray, is it not much
worse for a Man to say, That by taking the Test he swears only to the
Confession as it contains or agrees with the Protestant Religion (which is in
effect to set the Protestant Religion at variance with its own Confession, and
so to reproach and ranverse the standard, and make void the very security that
the Parliament intended) than to say, That he swears the Test as it agrees with
it self and the Protestant Religion, which imports no such insinuation? But
from these pleasant Principles, he jumps into this Fantastic Conclusion, That
therefore it cannot be denied but the Earl's interpretation destroys, not only
this Act, but all Government, and makes every Man's Conscience or Humor the
Rule of his obedience.

But first, as to the whole of his arguing, the Earl neither invents, says; nor
does any thing, except that he offered his Explanation to the Council, which
they likewise accepted. Secondly, What mad inferences are these! You say, you
will explain this Oath for your self, therefore you overturn all Government,
and what not! Whereas it is manifest, on the other hand, That if the Earl
apprehending, as he had reason, the Oath to be ambiguous, and in some things
inconsistent, had taken it without explaining it for himself, or respect to its
inconsistency, it might have been most rationally concluded, that in so doing
he was both impious and perjured. Thirdly, It is false, that the Earl does make
his Conscience any other way the rule of his obedience, than as all honest men
ought to do: That is, as they say, To be Regula regulata, in conformity to the
undoubted Regula regulans, the eternal rules of truth and righteousness, as is
manifest by his plain words. As for what the Advocate insinuates of Humor
instead of Conscience, it is very well known to be the Ordinary reproach,
whereby men that have no Conscience endeavor to defame it in others.

But the Advocate is again at it, and having run himself out of all
consequences, he insists and inculcates, that the Earl had sworn nothing. But
it is plain, that to swear nothing, is none of the crimes libelled. Secondly,
The Earl swears positively to the Test as it is consistent with it self and the
Protestant Religion, which certainly is something; unless the Advocate prove,
as he insinuates, that there is nothing in the Test consistent with either. And
3dly, If the Protestant Religion, and the Earl his reference to it, be nothing,
then is not only the Council sadly reproached, who, in their Explanation,
declare this to be the only thing sworn to, in the first part of the Test, but
our Religion quite subverted, as far as this Test can do it.

But next for the Treason, the Advocate says, That the Earl expressly declares,
he means not by the Test to bind up himself, from wishing, or endeavoring, in
his station, and in a lawful way, any alteration he shall think for the
advantage of Church or State; whereby, says he, the Earl declares himself, and
others, loosed from any obligation to the Government, and from the duty of all
good Subjects, and that they may make what alterations they please. A direct
contrariety, instead of a just consequence; as if to be tied to Law, Religion,
and Loyalty, were to be loosed from all three; Can there be a flatter and more
ridiculous contradiction? Next, the Advocate pretends to found upon the
fundamental Laws of this, and all Nations, Whereby it is Treason for any Man to
make any alterations he thinks fit for the advantage of Church or State. But
first, The Earl is not, nor cannot be accused of so much as wishing, much less
endeavoring or making any alteration, either in Church or State, only he
reserves to himself the same freedom, for wishing, which he had before his
Oath, and that all that have taken it do in effect say they still retain. 2dly,
For a man to endeavor, in his station, and in a lawful way, such alterations
in Church or State, as he conceives to their advantage, not repugnant to
Religion and Loyalty, is so far from being Treason, that it is the duty of
every Subject, and the sworn Duty of all His Majesty's Counselors, and of all
Members of Parliament: But the Advocate by fancying, and misapplying Laws of
Nations, wresting Acts of Parliaments, adding, taking away, chopping and
changing words, thinks to conclude what he pleases. And thus he proceeds, That
the Treason of making Alterations, is not taken off by such qualifications, of
making them in a lawful way, in ones station, to the advantage of Church or
State, and not repugnant to Religion or Loyalty. But how then? Here is a
strange matter! Hundreds of Alterations have been made within these few years,
in our Government, and in very material Points; and the King's best Subjects,
and greatest Favorites have both endeavored, and effectuate them: And yet,
because the things were done according to the Earl's qualifications, instead of
being accounted Treason, they have been highly commended and rewarded. The
Treasury has been sometimes in the hands of a Treasurer, sometimes put into a
Commission, backward and forward: And the Senators of the College of Justice
(the right of whose places was thought to be founded on an Act of Parliament,
giving His Majesty the prerogative only of presenting) are now commissioned by
a Patent under the great Seal, both which are considerable alterations in the
Government, which some have opposed, others have wished and endeavored, and
yet without all fear of Treason on either hand; only because they acted
according to these qualifications, in a lawful way, and not repugnant to
Religion and Loyalty. But that which the Advocate wilfully mistakes (for it is
impossible he could do it ignorantly) is, that he will have the endeavoring of
alterations in general, not to be of it self a thing indifferent, and only
determinable to be good or evil by its qualifications (as all men see it
plainly to be) but to be, forsooth, in this very generality intrinsically evil;
a Notion never to be admitted on Earth, in the frail and fallible condition of
humane Affairs. And then he would establish this wise Position by an example he
adduces, That rising in Arms against the King (for so sure he means, it being
otherwise certain that rising in Arms in general is also a thing indifferent,
and plainly determinable to be either good or evil, as done with or against the
King's Authority) is Treason, and says, If the Earl had reserved to himself a
liberty to rise in Arms against the King, tho he had added in a lawful manner,
yet it would not have availed, because, (and he says well) This being in it
self unlawful, the qualification had been but shams and contrariae facto. But
why then does not his own reason convince him where the difference lies? viz.
That rising in Arms against the King, is in it self unlawful; whereas
endeavoring alterations is only lawful, or unlawful, as it is qualified; and,
if qualified in the Earl's Terms, can never be unlawful. But, says the
Advocate, The Earl declares himself free to make all alterations, and so he
would make Men believe that the Earl is for making All or Any, without any
reserve; whereas the Earl's words are most express, that he is, Neither for
making all or any, but only for wishing and endeavoring for such as are good
and lawful, and in a lawful way; which no Man can disown, without denying
common reason; nor no sworn Councellor disclaim, without manifest Perjury. But
the Advocate's last conceit is, That the Earl's restriction is not as the King
shall think fit, or as is consistent with the Law, but that himself is still to
be judge of this, and his Loyalty to be the standard. But first, The Earl's
restriction is expressly according to Loyalty, which in good sense is the same
with according to Law, and the very thing that the King is ever supposed to
think. Secondly, As neither the Advocate, nor any other hitherto, have had
reason to distinguish the exercise and actings of the Earl^s Loyalty, from
those of His Majesty's best Subjects; so Is it not a mavelous thing, that the
Advocate should profess to think (for in reality he cannot think it) the Earl's
words, His Loyalty, which all men see to be the same with his Duty and
Fidelity, or what else can bind him to his Prince, capable of any quibble, far
more to be a ground of so horrid an accusation? And whereas the Advocate says,
The Earl is still to be judge of this; It is but an insipid calumny, it being
as plain as any thing can be, That the Earl does nowise design His thinking to
be the rule of Right and Wrong; but only mentions it as the necessary
application of these excellent and unerring Rules of Religion, Law and Reason;
to which he plainly refers, and subjects both his thinking and himself, to be
judged accordingly. By which it is evident, that the Earl's restriction is
rather better, and more dutiful than that which the Advocate seems to
desiderate: And, if the Earl's restrictions had not been full enough, it was
the Advocate's part, before administrating the Oath, to have craved what more
he thought necessary, which the Earl, in the Case, would not have refused. But
it is believed, the Advocate can yet hardly propose restrictions more full and
suitable to Duty than the forementioned of Religion, Law and Reason, which the
Earl did of himself profer. As for what His Majesty's Advocate adds, That under
such professions and reserves, the late Rebellions and disorders have all been
c^rried on and fomented, It is but a mere vapor; for no Rebellion ever was, or
can be, without a breach of one or other of the Earl's qualifications; which
does sufficiently vindicate that part of the Earl's Explanation.

The Advocate insists much, that Any is equivalent to All; and that All
comprehends Every particular under it; which he would have to be the deadly
Poison in the Earl's words: And yet the Earl may defy him and all his
detracters, to find out a Case of the least undutifulness, much less of
Rebellion, that a Man can be guilty of, while he keeps within the excellent
Rules and Limitations wherewith his words are cautioned. I could tell you
further, that so imaginary, or rather extravagant, and ridiculous is this
pretended Treason, that there is not a person in Scotland, either of those who
have refused, or who by the Act, are not called to take the Test, that may not
upon the same ground and words be impeach't, viz. That they are not bound (and
so without doubt both may and do say it) by the Test, in their station, etc. to
wish and endeavor any alteration, etc. Nay, I desire the Advocate to produce
the Man, among those that have taken the Test, that will affirm, that by taking
it he has bound up himself never to wish or endeavor any alteration, etc.
according to the Earl's qualifications, and I shall name Hundreds (to whom his
Highness, as you have heard, may be added) that will say they are not bound up.

So that by this conclusion, if it were yielded, all Scotland are equally
guilty of Treason, the Advocate himself, to say nothing of His Royal Highness,
not excepted: Or if he still think he is, I wish he would testify under his
hand to the World, that, by his Oath he is bound up never to wish, nor
endeavor any alteration he thinks to the advantage of Church or State, in a
lawful way, nor in his station, though neither repugnant to the Protestant
Religion, nor his Loyalty. And if this he do, he does as a Man, if not of
Sense, at least of Honor; but if not, I leave a blank for his Epithets.

But that you may see that this whole affair is a deep Mystery, pray, notice
what is objected against the last part of the Explanation: This I understand as
a part of my Oath. Which, says the Advocate, is a Treasonable invasion upon the
Royal Legislative power, as if the Earl could make to himself an Act of
Parliament, since he who can make any part of an Act, may make the whole. And
then say I, farewell all Takers of the Test with an Explanation, whether the
Orthodox Clergy, or Earl Queensberry (tho himself Justice General) who were
allowed by the Council so to do; seeing that whether they hold their
Explanation for a part of their Oath or not, yet others may; and in effect all
men of sense do understand it so: And thus, in the Advocate's Opinion, they
have Treasonably invaded the Legislative Power, and made an Act of Parliament
to themselves: Neither, in that Case, can the Councils allowance excuse them,
seeing not only the Earl had it, as well as they; but even the Council it self
cannot make an Act of Parliament, either for themselves, or others. But, Sir, I
protest, I am both ashamed and wearied of this trifling; and therefore to shut
up this Head, I shall only give a few remarks: First, you may see, by the Acts
of Parliament upon which the Advocate founds his Indictment, That as to
Leasing-making and depraving Laws, all of them run in these plain and sensible
terms; The inventing of Narrations, the making and telling of Lies, the
^ttering of wicked and untrue Calumnies, to the slander of King and Government,
the depraving of his Laws, and misconstruing his Proceedings, to the
engendering of discord, moving and raising of batred and dislike betwixt the
King and his People. And, as to Treason, in these yet more positive terms; That
none impugn the dignity and authority of the Three Estates, or seek, or procure
the innovation, or diminution thereof. Which are things so palpable, and easily
discerned, and withal so infinitely remote both from the Earl's words and
intentions, or any tolerable construction can be put on either, that I
confess, I never read this Indictment, but I was made to wonder that its forger
and maker was not in looking on it, deterred by the just apprehensions he might
have, not only to be sometime accused as a manifest depraver of all Law, but to
be for ever accounted a gross and most disingenuous perverter of common sense.
The Earl's words are sober, respectful, and dutifully spoken, for the
exoneration of his own Conscience, without the least insinuation of either
reflection or slander, much less the impugning of the Authority of Parliament,
as the Earl may appeal, not only to His Majesty's true and Royal sense, but to
the most scrupulous and nice affecters of the exactest discerning; besides that
they were first formally tendered in Council, for their approbation, and by
them directly allowed: How then can any Man think, that they could be charged
with the greatest and vilest of crimes, Leasing-making, Depraving, Perjury, and
Treason? But the Advocate tells us, That there are some things which the Law
commonly forbids in general, and that some inferences are as natural and
strong, and reproach as soon or sooner than the plainest defamations. But what
of all this? Must therefore such generals be left to the fantastic
application of every wild imagination, to the confounding of the use of Speech,
and subverting of humane Society, and not rather be still submitted to the
judgment of common sense, for their true and right understanding, and the
deducing thence these strong and natural inferences talked of? Of which good
sense, if the Advocate do but allow a grain weight, it is evident that the
inferences he here Libels against the Earl, must infallibly be cast, and by all
rational unbiassed men be found strange, unnatural, and monstrous.

For, Sir, Secondly, pray observe these rational and sound Maxims he founds his
Inferences on, and they are manifestly these: First, That he who says he will
only obey as far as be can, invents a new way whereby no man is at all bound to
obey. 2dly, That he who in the midst of Hundreds of exceptions and
contradictions, objected against an Oath enjoined by Act of Parliament, and
still unanswered, says, That he is confident the Parliament never intended to
impose contradictory Oaths, reproaches the Parliament. 3dly, That he that says
he must explain an ambiguous Oath for himself, before he take it, renders all
Laws and Oaths useless, and makes himself the Legislator. 4thly, That he that
says that he takes this Oath, as far as it is consistent with it self, and the
Protestant Religion, swears nothing. 5thly, That he that declares himself not
tied up by the Test from endeavoring, in a lawful way, such alterations as he
thinks to the advantage of Church and State, consistent with Religion and
Loyalty, declares himself, and all others, loosed from the Government, and all
duty to it, and free to make any, and all alterations that be pleases. And
6thly, That he that takes the Test with an explanation, and holds it to be a
part of his Oath, invades the Legislative Power, and makes Acts of Parliament.

Upon which rare and excellent Propositions, I dare say, The Earl is content,
according to the best Judgment that you and all unbiassed Men can make, either
of their Truth, or of my ingenuity in excerping them, to be adjudged Guilty or
not Guilty, without the least fear or apprehension of the issue.

And in the third and last place, I shall only entreat you to try how the
Advocate's reasoning will proceed in other Cases, and what brave work may be
wrought by so useful a Tool. Suppose then a Man refuse the Test simply, or
falls into any other kind of Nonconformity, either Civil or Ecclesiastic, or
pays not the King's Custom, or other dues; or lastly, understands an Act
otherwise than the Advocate thinks he should, Is not his Indictment already
formed, and his Process as good as made? viz. That he regards not the Law; That
he thinks it is unjustly or foolishly Enacted; That he will only obey as far as
he can, and as he pleases, and thereby renders all Laws useless, and so
reproaches the King and Parliament, and impugns their Authority and assumes to
himself the Legislative Power, and therefore is guilty of Leasing-making,
Depraving His Majesty's Laws, and of Treason; of which crimes abovementioned,
or one or other of them, he is Actor, Art, and Part: Which being found by an
Assize, he ought to be punished with the pains of Death, Forfaulture and
Escheat of Lands and Goods, to the terror of others to do or commit the like
hereafter. And, if there be found a convenient Judge, the poor Man is
undoubtedly lost.

But, Sir, having drawn this Parallel, rather to retrieve the Earl's Case, than
to make it a precedent, which, I hope, it shall never be, and choosing rather to
leave the Advocate than follow him in his follies, I forbear to urge it further.

These things considered, must it not appear strange, beyond expression, how
the Earl's Explanation, such as it is, did fall under such enormous and
grievous misconstructions: For, setting aside the Councils allowance and
approbation, (which comes to be considered under the next Head) suppose the
Earl, or any other person called before the Council, and there required to take
the Test, had, in all due humility, said, either that he could not at all take
it, or, at least not without an Explanation; because the Test did contain such
things, as, not noly he, but many other, and those the best of the Loyal and
Orthodox Clergy, did apprehend to be Contradictions, and Inconsistencies: And
thereupon had proponed one or two such as the Papers above set down do plainly
enough hold out, and the Bishop in his Explanation rather evades than answers;
would it not be hard, beyond all the measures of Equity, and Charity, to look
upon this as a designed Reflection, far more a malicious and wicked Slander,
and the blackest Treason? We see the Act of Parliament does not absolutely
injoin the taking of the Test, but only proposes it to such as are entrusted
in the Government, with the ordinary certification, either of losing, or
holding their Trusts, at their option. We know also, that in Cases of this
nature, it is far more suitable both to our Christian Liberty, and the respect
we owe to a Christian Magistrate, to give a reason of our conscientious
noncompliance, with meekness, and fear, than by a mute compearance, to fall
under the censure of a stubborn obstinacy. And Justly, It is certain, and may
safely be affirmed, without the least reproach, that Parliaments are not
infallible; as witness the frequent changes, and abrogations of their own Acts,
and their altering of Oaths imposed by themselves; and even of this Oath, after
it was presented, which the Earl was not for altering, so much as it was done,
as I told you before: How then can it be, that the Earl appearing before a
Christian Council, and there declaring in terms, at the worst a little obscure,
because too tender, and modest, his Scruples at an Oath presented to him,
either to be freely taken, or refused, should fall under any Censure? If the
Earl had, in this occasion, said, he could not take the Test, unless liberty
were given him first to explain himself, as to some Contradictions, and
Inconsistencies, which he conceived to be in it, tho he had said far more than
is contained in his contraverted Explanation, yet he had said nothing but what
Christian Liberty has often freely allowed; and Christian Charity would
readily construe for an honest expression of a commendable tenderness, without
any imputation of reproach against either King or Parliament How much more then
is his part clear and innocent, when, albeit so many thought the Contradictions
to be undeniable, yet such was his well-tempered respect, both to God, and Man,
to his own Conscience, and His Majesty's Authority, that before, and not after,
the taking of this Oath, to clear himself (in the midst of the many Exceptions
and Scruples raised) of all ambiguitles in swearing, he first applies himself,
for a satisfying Explanation, to the Parliament, the prime Imposers, their true
intentions and genuine meaning, and then gathering it very rationally, from the
Oath's consistency with it self, and with the Protestant Religion, the
Parliament's aim and scope, and so asserting the King and Parliament's truth,
and honor, he places the relief and quiet of his own Conscience in his taking
the Test with this Explanation, and in declaring its congruity with his Oath,
and duty of Allegiance.

The third Head of the Earl's additional Defenses, is the further clearing and
improving of his grounds of Exculpation, above adduced, and repelled: Which
were, first, that before the Earl did offer his Explanation to the Council, a
great many Papers were spread abroad by some of the Orthodox Clergy, charging
the Test with Contradictions and Inconsistencies. 2dly, That there was a Paper
penned by a Reverend Bishop, and presented and read in Council, and by them
allowed to be printed, which did contain the same, and far more important
things than any can be found in the Earl's Explanation: And consequently, far
more obnoxious to all His Majesty's Advocate's Accusations. 3dly, That the
Explanation upon which he was indicted was publicly by himself declared in
Council, and by the Council allowed; so that the Oath was administrat to him,
and he received to sit in Council, and vote, by his Highness, and the rest of
the Members, with, and under this express qualification.

But, to all urged for the Earl's Exculpation, the Advocate makes one short
Answer, viz. That if the Earl's Paper did infer the Crimes charged on it, a
thousand the like offenses cannot excuse it: And His Majesty is free to pursue
the Offenders, when, and in what order, he thinks fit: which Answer does indeed
leave the Council, and all concerned, in His Majesty's mercy: But that it does
no way satisfy the Earl's Plea, is manifest: For, the first ground of
Exculpation, viz. That before the Earl did offer his Explanation, a great many
Papers, writ by the Orthodox Clergy, and others, were abroad, charging the Test
with Contradictions, etc. was not alleged by the Earl merely to justify his
Explanation by the multitude of the like Papers, and so to provide for an
escape in the crowd: But, the Earl having most rationally pleaded, that his
Explanation was given in by him, after these many Scruples and Objections
raised by others were abroad, it was a good Plea, from a most pregnant
circumstance, clearing both the design, and sense of his words, from the foul
aspersions of reproaching, and depraving, thrown upon them: Seeing the words
spoken by him under the motive of such a circumstance, by all fair rules of
interpretation, instead of being judged misconstruing and depraving, could only
be understood as a seasonable asserting of the Integrity of the Parliament's
Intentions, and the uprightness of the Earl's Conscience: Which Argument being
in reason unanswerable, it necessarly follows, that the Advocate's return to
the first ground was neither sufficient, nor pertinent, and that therefore the
Exculpation was unjustly repelled. But next, The second ground of Exculpation
is so far from being answered by the Advocate, that it does not appear it was
so much as understood; For, the Earl's Argument being, That words allowed and
approven by the Council, can never fall under the Accusation, either of
Leasing-making, or slandering His Majesty's Proceedings, or depraving Laws, and
Acts of Parliament, as is evident in it self, and granted by the Advocate,
where he says that an Explanation, tho reflecting on the King and Government
(which the Earl's was not) yet, if allowed by the Council, is to be sustained.
But so it is, that the Council has allowed the words contained in this
Explanation contraverted, both in themselves, and also in their equivalent, and
far more important Expressions: As for instance, not only by accepting the
Earl's Explanation (as shall be cleared in the next place) but by giving
warrant for the publication of the Bishop of Edinburgh his Vindication;
wherein, first, for obviating the contradictions objected from the Confession
of Faith, he positively asserts, that by the Test men do not swear to own every
Article of that Confession; and yet the Test binds expressly to believe that
Confession to be founded on, and agreeable to the Word of God, and never to
consent to any alteration contrary thereto, or inconsistent therewith: So that
he gives both the Test and the Parliament the Lie. And then, for removing
another Scruple, he tells us, That by the Test men are not bound up from
regular endeavors to rectify or better the Established Government, both of
Church and State, which is clearly the same thing, (but not so well cautioned)
with that which in the Earl's Case is made a ground of Treason: From which it
unquestionably follows, that the Earl's words, having been allowed, and
approved by the Council, could never, in Law, or Reason, be thereafter made a
ground of accusation, by any, much less by themselves. Now I desire to know
where the Advocate, in all his Plea, does so much as notice, far less answer,
this Defense; or what his telling us, A thousand Offenses of the like nature
does not excuse one, either does, or can signify? seeing this Argument for the
Earl, instead of pleading excuses, does justify the matter, and for ever purge
all shadow of offense, or ground of quarrel, which will be yet more apparent,
when you shall add to this the third ground of the Earl's Exculpation, viz.
That the Explanation, whereupon the Earl was indicted, was publicly by himself
declared in Council, and by the Council allowed and accepted: Insomuch, as,
after he had given his Explanation as the sense wherein he was free to swear
the Test, the Oath was thereupon administrat to him, and he received to sit,
and vote as a Councellor. Whereby it is evident, That, by this allowance, and
acceptance, the Earl's Explanation became the Councils, as much as if, after
the Earl's pronouncing the words, they had verbatim repeated them, and told
him, they were satisfied he should swear the Test in these terms: And whether
this ought not to be a sufficient exoneration to the Earl, let all men judge.
The Advocate makes a noise, That in the case of an Oath required, the Taker
ought to swear it in the sense of the Imposer, (which none doubts) and then
runs out, That the Earl in place of taking it in the Imposers sense, did
unwarrantably intend a sense of his own, to the eluding and frustrating of the
obligation of this, and all other Oaths. But all this is nothing to the
purpose; for waving that in the Earl's Case it is most impertinent to talk of
his obtruding of a sense, to the eluding, and frustrating of the obligation of
his Oath, seeing his Oath was not then given, or at all in being, it is
expressly alleged by the Earl, and notour, that the Explanation tendered by
him, when called to take the Test, was accepted by the Council, and the Oath
thereupon administrated, and so the Earl freely joins issue with the Advocate,
and acknowledging that the Taker of the Oath ought to swear in the sense of the
Imposer, subsumes in terminis, that he himself did swear so, and not otherwise,
inasmuch as he did swear in a sense accepted by the Council, before he gave his
Oath, as is evident. 1. By their commanding him to sit after he had sworn; and
2. In that neither the Advocate, nor any other, had ever the confidence to
quarrel his sitting, as a breach of the Law, which no doubt they had done, if
not convinced that by taking the Oath he had satisfied the Act of Parliament;
which things, in true dealing, and the construction of all honest men, are the
same as if the Oath had been required of him by the Council, in the very sense
and words of this Explanation. Neither is it material whether the Explanation,
offered by the Earl, does deserve (as certainly it does not) these many ill
names, which the Advocate would fix upon it; because, though it had been much
worse than it is, yet being offered to the Council, and submitted to their
judgment, and they having accepted of it, the thing became quasi res judicata,
and cannot be retracted, without subverting the surest Rules, both of Truth,
and Government. The Advocate indeed tells us, 1. That the Council heard not the
Earl's Explanation: But I have already told you, they did hear it, and the Earl
is still ready to prove it: And suppose some say they did not hear it
distinctly. (As what thing spoke in Council is distinctly heard and considered
by all?) Yet it being certain that they did all approve it, it is sufficient to
the Earl: And it is only their concern, whether in approving what they did not
hear, they observed their Oath De fideli, etc. or not. His Highness, who the
Earl was most concerned should hear, did certainly hear, as himself afterward
acknowledged. 2. The Advocate says, That the hearing and allowing the Earl to
sit, is no relevant Plea; yea further, though all the Council had allowed him
that day, yet any of his Majesty's Officers might have quarrelled him the next
day. But first, I would gladly know, upon what head? For if upon obtruding a
sense of his own, it is undeniable that whatever the sense was, the obtruding
of it was purged by the Council's acceptance, and it became theirs, and was no
more his. But if the Advocate does think, that even the matter of the
Explanation, though allowed and accepted, may still be quarrelled: Then; 1. I
hope, he will consider in what terms he does it; for if he charge it after it
becomes the Councils (as in truth he has done already) with the same liberty
wherewith he treats it as the Earl's, he runs fair to make himself the
arrantest Defamer and Slanderer of the King and Council, that ever yet
attempted it. But 2dly, It merits a worse name than I am free to give it, to
say, That an Explanation allowed by the Council, in the administrating of an
Oath proper to be administrat by them, does not secure the Taker as to that
sense, both in Law and Conscience: Seeing in effect this quite takes away the
best grounds of assurance among men, and turns their greatest security to their
greatest snare. And 3dly, If this be sound Doctrine, it is worth the enquiring,
what security the Clergy, to whom the Council, as you have heard, did indulge
an Explanation, have thereby obtained: For as to such Laics as did only at
their own hand take hold of, and snatch at this Indulgence, not provided for
them by the Councils Act, it is clear their doom is dight. It is not here
debated how far that Explication of the Council's may satisfy, and quiet
Conscience, let such concerned see to it. Some please themselves with a general
notion, That if the sense given by the Administrator be sound, then it is also
safe whether it be agreeable to the plain and genuine meaning of the Oath or
not; nay, whether it be agreeable to the sense of the first Imposers, or not:
But others, who consider more tenderly what it is to swear in Truth, and in
Judgment, think it rather a profanation, and a sinful preferring of the Credit
of Men to the glory of the Almighty, to offer to smooth an Oath by a
disagreeable interpretation, when in effect the Oath it self ought to be
changed: But the thing in question is about the security of life and fortune;
for seeing the Council's Explanation is, at least, to say no worse, liable
enough to the Calumnies of an inventive malice, and the Advocate tells us,
Though all the Ceuncil had allowed a man to swear with an Explanation, yet any
of His Majesty's Officers may, the next day, quarrel him; it is evident that
this allowance can afford him no security. It is true, the Advocate may
allege, and possibly find a difference betwixt the Council's emitting, and
their accepting of an Explanation. But as in truth there is none, more than
betwixt a Mandat and a Ratihabition; so I am confident, if ever the thing come
to be questioned, this Pretense will evanish, and come to nothing.

It is likewise to be remembered, That when the Earl, the next day after he took
the Test, was questioned for the Explanation he had made, and required to
exhibit a Copy (which was afterward made the ground of his Indictment) so soon
as he observed that some began to carp, he refused to sign it, demanded it
back, and would have destroyed it, as you have heard, which were all clear Acts
of disowning, and retracting, for eviting offense, and of themselves sufficient
to have prevented any further enquiry; there being nothing more just and human,
than that words, though at the first hearing, offensive; yet if instantly
retracted, when questioned, should be past: But this, as well as other things,
must in the Earl's Case be singular; and whether he plead the Councils
allowing, or his own disowning (as in effect he does both) it is equally to no
purpose, the thing determined must be accomplished. You heard before, how that
a Reverend Bishop, and many of the Orthodox Clergy, did take a far greater
liberty of Explanation than the Earl pretended to: you see also that first the
Council allows his words, whereupon he rests: And when he finds that they begin
to challenge, he is willing to disown: And withal, it is undeniable, and
acknowledged by the Council themselves, that the Test, as it stands in the Act
of Parliament, is ambiguous, and needs to be explained: And the Earl may
confidently aver, that of all the Explanations that have been offered (even the
Councils not excepted) his is the most safe, sound, and least disagreeable to
the Parliament's true sense and meaning. And yet, when all others escape, he
alone must be seized; and for a thing so openly innocent, clearly justifiable,
and undeniably allowed, found guilty of the worst of Crimes, even
Leasing-making, Leasing-telling, Depraving of Laws, and Treason; but all these
things God Almighty sees, and to him the Judgment yet belongs

And thus I leave this Discouse shutting it up with the Case of Archbishop
Cranmer, plainly parallel to the Earl's, to show how much he was more
favorably dealt with by the King, and Government, in those days, than the Earl
now is, though he live under a much more merciful and just Prince, than that
worthy Prelate did; for Cranmer being called and promoted by Henry VIII. of
England to be Archbishop of Canterbury, and finding an Oath was to be offered
to him, which, in his apprehension, would bind him up from what he accounted
his duty, he altogether declined the Dignity and Preferment, unless he were
allowed to take the Oath with such an Explanation as he himself proposed, for
salving of his Conscience; and tho this Oath was no other than the Statute, and
solemn Oath, that all his Predecessors in that See, and all the mitered Clergy
in England, had sworn, yet he was admitted to take it, as you see in Fuller's
Church Hist. of Britain, lib. 5. p. 185, and 186. with this formal Prorestation.

In nomine Domini, Amen. Coram vobis, etc. Non est, aut erit meae voluntatis,
aut intentionis, per hujusmodi juramentum vel juramenta, qualitercunque verba
in ipsis posita sonare videbuntur me obligare ad aliquid, ratione eorundum,
posthac dicendum, faciendum, aut attentandum. quod erit, aut esse videbitur,
contra Legem Dei, vel contra illustrissimum Regem nostrum Angliae, Legesve, aut
Praerogativas Ejusdem: Et quod non intendo, per hujusmodi juramentum, vel
juramenta, quovis modo me obligare, qui minus libere loqui, consulere, aut
consentire valeam, in omnibus, and singulis Reformationem Religionis
Christianae, Gubernationem Ecclesiae Anglicanae, and Praerogativam Coronae
ejusdem Reipublicae, vel commoditatem earundem, quoquo modo concernentibus; and
ea ubique exequi, and reformare, quae mihi in Ecclesia Anglicana reformanda
videbuntur: Et secundum hanc interpretationem, and intellectum hunc, and non
aliter, nequa alia modo, dictum juramentum me praestiturum protestor, and
profiteor.

That is to say. In the name of God, Amen. Before you, etc. It neither is, nor
shall be, my will or meaning, by this kind of Oath, or Oaths, and however the
words of themselves shall seem to sound or signify, to bind up my self, by
virtue hereof, to say, do, or endeavor any thing, which shall really be, or
appear to be, against the Law of God, or against our most Illustrious King of
England, or against his Laws and Prerogatives: And that I mean not, by this my
Oath, or Oaths, any ways to bind up my self from speaking, consulting, and
consenting freely, in all, and every thing in any sort concerning the
Reformation of the Christian Religion, the Government of the Church of England,
and the Prerogative of the Crown of the Commonwealth thereof, or their
advantage; and from executing, and reforming such things as I shall think need
to be reformed in the Church of England: And according to this Explanation, and
sense, and not otherwise, nor in any other manner, do I protest, and profess,
that I am to take, and perform this Oath.

Nor did that excellent Person, says Mr. Fuller, smother this privately in a
corner, but publicly interposed it three several times; once in the
Charter House, before authentic Witnesses; again upon his bended knees, before
the high Altar, in view and hearing of many People, and Bishops beholding him,
when he was consecrated; and the third time, when he received the Pall, in the
same place.

Now would it not be very strange if the like liberty should not be allowed to
the Earl, under His Majesty, in reference to the Test, which Henry the VIIIth,
a Prince that stood as much on his Prerogative as ever any, did vouchsafe to
this Thomas Cranmer, who, as another Historian observes, acted fairly, and
above-board: But there wanted then the high and excellent Designs of the great
Ministers, the rare fidelity of Counselors, sound Religion and tender piety of
Bishops, solid Law and Learning of Advocates, incorruptible Integrity of
Judges, and upright honesty of Assizers, that now we have, to get Archbishop
Cranmer accused, and condemned, for Leasing-making, depraving Laws, Perjury,
and Treason, to which Accusation his Explanation was certainly no less
obnoxious than the Earl's.

But I hasten to the fourth, and last Head of the Earl's Additional Defenses,
viz. The removing certain groundless Pretenses, alleged by the Advocate, for
aggravating the Earl's Offense: As 1. That the Earl, being a Peer, and Member
of Parliament, should have known the sense of the Parliament, and that neither
the Scruples of the Clergy, nor the Council's Proclamation, designed for mere
Ignorants, could any way excuse the Earl for offering such an Explanation. But,
first, the Advocate might have remembered, that in another Passage he taxes the
Earl as having debated in Parliament against the Test, whereby it is easy to
gather, that the Earl having been in the matter of the Test a dissenter, this
quality does rather justify than aggravate the Earl's Scrupling. 2dly, If the
Proclamation was designed for the mere Ignorants of the Clergy, as the Advocate
calls them, who knew nothing of what had past in Parliament, an Explanation was
far more necessary for the Earl, who knows so little of what the Advocate
alleges to have past in Parliament, viz. That the Confession of Faith was not
to be sworn to as a part of the Test, that of necessity (as I think) he must
know the contrary; Inasmuch as, first, this is obvious from the express tenor
of the Test, which binds to own, and profess the true Protestant Religion,
contained in the Confession of Faith, and to believe the same to be agreeable
to the Word of God; as also to adhere thereto, and never to consent to any
change contrary to, or inconsistent with the said Protestant Religion, and
Confession of Faith: Which to common sense appears as plain, and evident, as
can be contrived, or desired. But 2dly, It is very well known, that it was
expressly endeavored, and carried in Parliament, that the Confession of Faith
should be a part of the Test and Oath: For the Confession of Faith being
designed to be sworn to, by an Act, for securing the Protestant Religion (which
you have heard was prepared in the Articles, but afterward thrown out) when
this Act for the Test was brought into the Parliament, some days after, by the
Bishop of Edinburgh, and others, the Confession was designedly left out of it:
But it being again debated that the bare naming of the Protestant Religion,
without condescending on a Standard for it, was not sufficient, the Confession
of Faith was of new added: And, after the affirmative Clause for owning it, and
adhering to it was insert, upon a new motion, the negative, never to consent to
any alteration, contrary to, or inconsistent with the said Protestant Religion,
and Confession of Faith, was also subjoined: But not without a new debate and
opposition made against the words, And Confession of Faith, by the Bishop of
Edinburgh, until at length he also yielded; All which, it is hoped, was done
for some purpose: And if, at that time, any had doubted of the thing, he had
certainly been judged most ridiculous: For it was by that addition concluded by
all, That the Confession was to be sworn. And further, it appears plainly, by
the Bishop of Edinburgh his Vindication, that, when he wrote it, he believed
the Confession was to be sworn to, for he takes pains to justify it (though
calumniously enough) alleging, That it was hastily compiled, in the short
space of four days, by some Barons and Ministers, in the infancy of our
Reformation. Where, by the by, you see that he makes no reckoning of what the
Act of Parliament, to which the Test refers, expressly bears, viz. That that
second Ratification 1567. which we only have recorded, was no less then seven
years after this Confession was first exhibited, and approven Anno 1560. But
moreover, he tells us, That the Doctors of Aberdeen, who refused the Covenant,
were yet willing not only to subscribe, but to swear this Confession of Faith.
Which again, to answer the Bishops Critic of Four days, was more than 70.
years after it was universally received. It Is true, that, when the Bishop finds
himself straightened how to answer Objections, he is forced to make use of the new
Gloss (I shall not call it of Orleans) whereby the Protestant Religion is made
to be sworn to only as far as every Man pleases to interpret, and as far as may
be consistent with any new principles of State. But the Parliament certainly (I
do not speak Ironically) did intend by this Test, to swear and assert the True
Protestant Religion, and the said Confession of Faith, whatever may be now
pretended. The Earl could not also but very well remember what his Highness had
said to himself, about the inserting of the Confession; and no doubt, the
Advocate, if ingenuous, knows all this: For the thing was at that time matter
of common talk, and indeed, till Papers objecting contradictions, and
inconsistencies betwixt the Confession and the rest of the Test, began to be so
numerous (which was about the end of October) that there was no possibility
left to answer them, but by alleging, That in the Test men do not swear to
every article and proposition of the Confession, but only to the Protestant
Religion therein contained, this point was never doubted. And whether this
answer be true, and a solid Vindication, consonant to the words of the Test, or
a circulating evasion enervating all its force, let others judge. But the
Advocate says, When it was moved in Parliament to read the Confession, it was
waved: Most true; and the reason given by the Bishops for it was, That it was
notour, they knew it, and it was already insert in the Acts of Parliament: And,
the truth was, the reading of it would have spent more time than was allowed on
examining the whole Test. It was lik^ wise late, after a long Sederunt, and it
was resolved to have the Act passed that night, and so it went on: But it was
likewise moved to read the Covenant, seeing it was to be disclaimed, and this
was flatly refused. And will the Advocate thence infer, That by the Test the
Covenant is not abjured, albeit it be most certain, that many in the
Parliament, at that time, had never read the one or the other? But to follow
the Advocate's excursions, and answer them more particularly: The motion for
reading the Confession being made on this very occasion, Because it was to be
insert in the Test and sworn to, concludes enough against him: For no body can
be so effronted as to say, it was used in Parliament as an argument not to read
it, because it was not to be sworn to, but (though it cost a debate) it was
plainly agreed to be sworn to, and therefore insert. 2dly, Can any man doubt,
the Confession was to be sworn to, when it is notour that severals who were
members of Parliament, and, by reason of offices they enjoyed, were called to
swear the Test, pretending, with reason, tenderness of an Oath, did, before
swearing, make a fashion at least of reading and studying the Confession, to
satisfy themselves how far they might swear it. And that this was done by an
Hundred, I can attest themselves. Lastly, It is certain that, when, in the end
of October, the Bishop of Edinburgh did quarrel Sir George Lockhart, for
causing the Confession to be insert in the Test, and he answered that without
it a Turk might sign the Test, it was not then pretended by the Bishop that the
Confession was not to be sworn to, and therefore he at that time had no reply.

But this is a debate, I confess, not altogether necessary for my present task,
only thereby you may see ground enough for the Earl to believe the Confession
was sworn to: And all that did swear, before the Councils Explanation, having
sworn in that sense, and, for ought I know, all (except the Clergy) being by
the Councils Act still bound to do so, It was not strange the Earl might be of
this Opinion. And seeing that many of the Contradictions were alleged to arise
hence, and the Earl being a Dissenter, it was yet less strange that the Earl
did scruple; nor is it unreasonable that his modest Explanation should have a
most benign acceptance.

This second pretense of aggravation is, That His Majesty did not only bestow
on the Earl his Lands and Jurisdictions, fallen into His Majesty's hands by the
forfaulture of his Father, but also pardon him the crimes of Leasing-making and
Misconstruing, whereof he was found guilty by the Parliament 1662. And raised
him to the title and dignity of an Earl, and to be a member of all His
Majesty's Judicatories. All which the Earl, as he has ever, does still most
thankfully acknowledge. But seeing the Advocate has no warrant to upbraid him
with His Majesty's favors, and that these things are now remembered with a
manifest design to raise dust, and blind strangers, and to add a very ill
thing, Ingratitude, to the heap of groundless calumnies cast upon him, I must
crave leave to answer a little more particularly, and refute this new Tout (as
the Scots Proverb is) in an old Horn. This old Leasing making is then now
brought in seriously after it has been treated in ridicule for Eighteen years,
by the very Actors who did never pretend to defend it in cold blood: And, were
it not to digress too much, I could name the persons, and make them (if
capable) think shame of their falsehood and prevarications in that point, and of
their abusing His Majesty, and prostrating Justice, but I forbear.

The Advocate, in his Book of Pleadings, makes this a Stretch, and says, His
Majesty rescinded it. And His Majesty himself has several times expressed his
sense of the stretches made by some against the Earl, at that time. It is well
known the Family of Argyle is both Ancient and Honorable, and has been Loyal
and Serviceable to the Crown for several Hundreds of years; but they must now
be destroyed, for having done, and being able, as they say, to do too much,
which others neither can nor will do.

Neither is the Advocate ignorant that the only failing that Family has been
charged with in all that long tract of time, was a compliance of the late
Marquess of Argyle, the Earl's Father, in the time of the late Usurpation, by
sitting in the then Parliament of England, some years after all the standing
Forces of the Kingdom were broken, His Majesty beyond Sea, the whole Country
overrun, the Usurpers universally acknowledged, and neither probability of
resistance, nor possibility of shelter left to any that were most willing to
serve His Majesty, as the Advocate himself has published in his Printed
Pleadings, in which he likewise lays out the special and extraordinary
Circumstances whereby the Marquess was necessitate to do what he did. And the
compliance charged on him was so epidemick, that all others were pardoned for
the same, except he alone, though none had such favorable Arguments to plead,
and though he pleaded the same Indemnity that saved others. And seeing he
submitted, and delivered up himself, and lost his Life, and seeing, at the same
time of the Compliance that he suffered for, the Earl his Son was actually
serving and suffering for His Majesty, as you find in the former part of this
Letter, the Earl's Restitution was no less than He and his Family might well
expect of His Majesty's Goodness and Justice. It is true, The Earl was again
accused and condemned (which may appear indeed strange to such as know not all
particulars) upon the same old? Acts of Leasing-making, and with as little
ground (if possible) as now, and was Pardoned by His Majesty, for which he has
often, and does always acknowledge, that he owes to His Majesty both his Life
and Fortune: But upon this occasion, and being baited as he is, he hopes His
Majesty will not take it ill that he say, That His Majesty's Mercy was in this
case determined by Justice: And for proof that His Majesty did then know him to
be innocent, Did not His Majesty then say. It was impossible to take a Man's
Life upon so small an account? Though nevertheless it had been done, if His
Majesty had not interposed and pardoned him. Did not the Chancellor Clarendon
(who was Patron to the most considerable of the Earl's pursuers) hearing of his
Condemnation, Bless God, he lived not in a Country where there were such Laws?
(He should have said such Judges) And I believe many more will say the same
now. Did it not plainly appear, at that time, that his principal pursuers were
very bitter, malicious, and unjust to him? For the Earl had not only served His
Majesty in that troublesome and hazardous appearance in the Hills, but he had
been particularly useful to Earl Middletoun, then His Majesty's Lieutenant
General, and had stood by him, when these deserted him, whom notwithstanding he
took afterward by the hand, when he was His Majesty's Commissioner in the year
1661. and then designed new Interests and new Alliances, whereof some did hold,
and some never held. And then indeed it was, that he and others thought it
proper for them to destroy the Family of Argyle, to make their own Fortunes;
But it pleased God and His Majesty to dispose otherwise: Then it was that the
Earl was so hotly pursued for his Life; having at that time no Fortune, all
being in His Majesty's hands: Then was the accusation of Treason likewise urged
by the same persons, and must have carried, but it was not found necessary,
Leasing-making being sufficient to take his Life; and, as it falls out, when
any Game is started, and the Hounds in chase, all the little Curs run alongs:
So the Earl wanted not then many pursuers that are now scarce to be heard of.
And further, some of the parties themselves confessed the particulars to the
Earl afterward, who yet now return to act their former parts, and that they
had then laid down a resolution to entrap him, per fas, aut nefas; but
notwithstanding all this ill humor and violence, all the ground they could get
for a quarrel, in two years time, was one single Letter, among many they
intercepted, the occasion and import whereof was as follows: About a
Twelvemonth after the death of the late Marquess of Argyle, The Earl his Son
being, by the loss of his Estate, and burden of his Debts, brought into
straits, a Friend from Edinburgh wrote to him, then at London, to do what he
could for himself at Court, and the sooner the better; for he needed neither
expect Favor nor Justice from some in Scotland; and, if matters were delayed,
his Father's whole Estate would be begged away in parcels. His Friend likewise
complained, that the Earl did not write to inform his Friends in Scotland; and
on this he insisted several post-days, which, at last, drew an answer from the
Earl, that he had been to wait upon His Majesty, and had found him both just
and kind to him, and doubted not the effects of his Royal favor; that he was
sensible of his loss by delay, yet must proceed discreetly, and not press to
give His Majesty trouble, but must take His Majesty's method, and wait his
time; That he judged, much of what his Friend told him was true, but he must
have patience: It was his misfortune that some took pains to make His Majesty
believe, that the Parliament was his Enemy, and the Parliament to believe the
King was his Enemy; and by such informations he was like to be a sufferer, but
he hoped in God all should be well. This blast must blow out, and will blow
over: The King will see their tricks. And upon this Letter, specially those
last words, the Earl was accused of Leasing-making betwixt King and Parliament,
and that he expected changes; and so had a great deal of the same stuff laid to
his charge, as now you have heard: And if the now Register will produce the
Eal's principal Letter, and the Paper the Earl gave in to the Parliament, these
two would clear all, the Case then, and now, as you may see, Mutatis Mutandis,
being much the same, and some of the same Tools used. But to go on, The Earl's
words in that Letter being clear and plain, viz. That he complained of others
that reported Lies to the King and Parliament, but did himself report none to
either; He acknowledged the Letter, which could never have been proven to be
his; and as soon as he heard that it was intercepted, did render himself to His
Majesty before he was called for: But, which very much troubled him, had not
access. Yet His Majesty was so gracious, that instead of sending him Prisoner
to Scotland with a Guard (as was much pressed) he allowed him to go down on a
Verbal Bail: And His Majesty was pleased to say, That he saw nothing in the
Earl's Letter against His Majesty or the Parliament; but believed the Earl did
design to reflect on the Earl of Middleton. The Earl came to Edinburgh, a
fourthnight before the day appointed by His Majesty, and thought to have had
the liberty of the City, till that day should come; but was sent to the Castle
the next day after his arrival: Upon which he advertised His Majesty of his
condition, who would hardly believe they would take his Life, till it was told
plainly it was designed, and if he died it lay at His Majesty's door; upon
which His Majesty was graciously pleased to send immediately an Order to the
Earl of Middleton, not to proceed to Execution against him: Yet the Sentence of
Death was pronounced, and the Day of Execution remitted by the Parliament to
the Earl of Middleton: Which he accepted of, albeit he had no particular
instruction for it from His Majesty, which, before a year went about, Earl
Middleton found could not be justified by him, and some of the Earl's chief
accusers were declared by His Majesty to be themselves Leasing-makers; And then
the Earl, by His Majesty's favor and goodness, was restored to a part of his
Predecessors Estate and Titles, which he took as thankfully, as if a new
Estate, and new and greater Honors had been conferred upon him. And though His
Majesty was pleased, at the granting of these Titles, to say, He could help
them when he pleased; yet His Majesty knows, that the Earl never troubled him
about any such matter, nor solicited him now these Eighteen years, for any
Title, Office, or Employment, (though he confesses he had of all sorts) nor
has he been burthensom to His Majesty's Exchequer (500 l. yearly for four or
five years that the Earl served in the Treasury, being all that ever he touched
of his Majesty's Money) albeit few attended more, and none so much that lived
at his distance. He was also twice at London, to kiss His Majesty's hand, but
still on his own Charges: Which things are not said to lessen His Majesty's
bounty and goodness, whereof the Earl still retains all just, tender, and
dutiful impressions; but to answer the Advocate, and to teach others to hold
their peace, that cannot say so much.

His Life is known to have been True, Honest, and of a piece, and all alongs he
has walked with that straightness, that he can compare his Integrity with all
that now attacque him.

By all which it is apparent, That what the Advocate here pretends for an
aggravation, may w^ll be accounted a Second part of the Earl's Persecutions;
but cannot, in the least, impair either his Innocence, or his Honor.

Seeing therefore the ground of the Earl's present accusation, with all he
either designed, said, o^ did, in this matter, was only that, when called, nay
required to take the Test, and after leave first obtained from his Highness and
Council, he did in their presence, before the giving of his Oath, declare, and
propose to them the sense wherein he was willing to take it; That this his
sense neither contains, nor insinuates, the least slander, reproach, or
reflection, either upon the King, the Parliament, or any Person whatsomeever;
but, on the contrair, is in effect tenfold more agreeable to the words of the
Test, and meaning of the Parliament that framed it, than the Explanation
emitted by the Council; and was also most certainly, the first day, by them
accepted; and, when the next day challenged, by him offered to be retracted,
and refused to be signed: That the whole Indictment, and more especially that
part of it about the Treason, is a mere Rapsody of the most irrational, absurd,
and pernicious consequences, that ever the Sun beheld, not only forcing the
Common rules of Speech, Charity, and Humanity, but ranversing all the Topics
of Law, Reason, and Religion, and threatening no less, in the Earl's person,
than the ruin of every Man's Fortune, Life, and Honor; That the Earl's
Defenses, and grounds of Exculpation, were most pregnant, and unanswerable, and
either in themselves notour, or offered to be instantly verified. And lastly,
That the aggravations pretended against him do either directly make for him, or
most evidently discover the restless malice of some of his implacable enemies:
Shall our Gracious King, who not only clearly understands Right, and hates
Oppression, but also, to all his other excellent qualities, has by his
Gentleness and Clemency, even toward his Enemies, added that great Character
of Goodness, upon vain and false insinuations, and unreasonable and violent
stretches, not only take away the Life of an innocent person, but of one who
himself, and his Family (be it said without disparagement) have, for a longer
time, and more faithfully, and signally served His Majesty and the Crown, than
any person, or Family of his degree and quality, of all his Persecutors can
pretend to? Shall his numerous Family, hopeful Children, his Friends and
Creditors, all be destroyed? Shall both former Services be forgot, Innocence
oppressed, and all Rules of Justice, and Laws of society and humanity for his
sake overturned? Shall not only the Earl be cut off, and his noble and ancient
Family extinguished, but his Blood and Memory tainted with as black and
horrible a stain, as if he had conspired with Jacques Clement, Ravillack, The
Gunpowder Miscreants, The Bloody Irish Rebels, and all the other most wicked
and heinous Traitors of that Gang? And all this for a mere imaginary Crime,
whereof it is most certain, that no Man living has, or can have, the least
real conviction, and upon such frivolous allegations as all men see to be, at
the top, mere Moonshine; and at the bottom, Villainy unmixed.

After clearing these things, the Earl, it seems, intended to have addressed
himself to His Majesty's Advocate in particular, and to have told him, that he
had begun very timeously in Parliament to fall first on his heritable
jurisdictions, and then upon his Estate, and that now he was fallen upon his
Life and Honor, whereby it was easy to divine that more was intended, from
the beginning, than the simple taking away of his Offices: seeing that some of
them, on his refusing the Test, were taken away by the Certification of the Act
of Parliament, and that those that were heritable he offered, in Parliament, to
present and surrender to His Majesty on his knee, if His Majesty, after hearing
him, should think it fit; only he was not willing to have them torn from him,
as has been said; and if that were all were designed, as was at first given
out, the Advocate need not have set him on high, as Naboth, and accuse him as a
Blasphemer of God and the King.

Then turning his Speech to the Lords of Justitiary, he thought to have desired
that they would yet seriously consider his words, in their true sense and
circumstances, his own Explanation of his Explication, and especially the
foregoing matter of Fact to have been laid before them, with his Defenses, and
grounds of Exculpation; as also to have told them, That they could not but
observe how that he was singled out amongst Thousands, (against whom much more
then all he is charged with could be alleged) and that they must of necessity
acknowledge (if they would speak out their own Conscience) that what he had said
was spoke in pure innocence, and duty, and only for the exoneration of himself,
as a Christian, and one honored to be of His Majesty's Privy Council (where he
was bound, by his Oath, to speak truth freely) and not to throw the smallest
reproach on either person or thing. Adding, That he was loath to say any thing
that looks like a reflection upon His Majesty's Privy Council; but if the
Council can wrong one of their own number, he thought he might demand, If he
had not met with hard measure? For first he was pressed, and persuaded to come
to the Council; then they receive his Explanation, and take his Oath, then they
complain of him to His Majesty, where he had no access to be heard; and by
their Letter, under their hands, affirm, That they had been careful not to
suffer any to take the Test with their own Explanations, albeit they had
allowed a thing very like it, first to Earl Queensberry, then to the Clergy:
And the President, now Chancellor, had permitted several Members of the
College of Justice to premise, when they swear the Test, some one sense, and
some another, and some nonsense, as one saying he took it, in sano sensu;
another making a Speech that no Man understood; a third, all the time of the
reading, repeating, Lord have mercy upon me miserable sinner: Nay, even an
Advocate, after being debarred a few days, because albeit no Clerk, yet he
would not take it without the benefit of his Clergy, viz. the Councils
Explanation, was yet thereafter admitted without the Warrant of the Councils
Act: but all this in the Case of so many other was right and good. Further the
Council expressly declare the Earl to be Guilty, before he had ever said one
word in his own defense. Thereafter some of them become his Assizers, and
others of them witness against him; and after all, they do of new concern
themselves, by a Second Letter to His Majesty ( wherein they assert, That after
full debate, and clear probation, he was found guilty of Treason, etc.) to have
a sentence past against him, and that of so high a nature, and so dreadful a
consequence, as suffers no person to be unconcerned, far less their Lordships
his Judges, who upon grounds equally just, and, which is more, already
predetermined by themselves, may soon meet with the same measure, not only as
Concealers of Treason, but upon the least pretended disobedience, or
noncompliance with any Act of Parliament: and, after all, must infallably
render an account to God Almighty. He bids them therefore lay their hands to
their bearts, and whatever they shall judge, he is assured that God knows, and
he hopes all unblassed men in the World will, or may know, he is neither guilty
of Treason, nor any of the Crimes libelled. He says he is glad how many outdo
him in asserting the true Protestant Religion, and their Loyalty to His
Majesty; only, he hadds, If he could justify himself to God, as he can to His
Majesty, he is sure he might account himself the happiest man alive. But yet,
seeing he has a better hope in the mercy of God through Jesus Christ, he
thereupon rests, whether he finds Justice here on Earth, or not. He says, he
will add nothing to move them either to tenderness or pity; he knows that not
to be the place, and pretends to neither from them; He pleads his Innocence,
and craves Justice, leaving it to their Lordships to consider not so much his
particular Case, as what a Preparative it may be made, and what may be its
Consequences: And if all he has said, do neither convince, nor persuade them
to alter their judgment, yet he desires them to consider, whether the Case do
not, at least, deserve to be more fully represented, and left to His Majecty's
wisdom and justice, seeing that if once the matter pass upon record for
Treason, it is undoubted, that hundreds of the best, and who think themselves
most innocent, may, by the same methods, fall under the like Condemnation,
whenever the King's Advocate shall be thereto prompted.

And thus you have a part of what the Earl intended to have said, before
pronouncing Sentence, if he had not made his Escape before the day: Yet some
things I perceive by his Notes are still in his own breast, as only proper to
be said to His Majesty. I find several Quotations out of the Advocate's printed
Books, that, it seems, he was to make some use of; but, seeing it would have
been too great an interruption to have applied them to the places designed, I
have subjoined them together, leaving them to the Advocate's own, and all men's
consideration.

It was by some remarked, That when the Lords of Justitiary, after the ending
of the first days debate, resolved that same night to give judgment upon it,
they sent for the Lord Nairn, one of their number, an old and infirm man, who
being also a Lord of the Session, is so decayed through age, that he has not
for a considerable time, been allowed to take his turn, in the Outer-house (as
they call it) where they judge lesser Causes alone: But notwithstanding both
his age, and infirmity, and that he was gone to bed, he was raised, and brought
to the Court, to consider a Debate, a great deal whereof he had not heard, in
full Court; and withal, as is informed, while the Clerk was reading some of it,
fell of new asleep.

It was also remarked, that the Lords of Justitiary being, in all, five, viz.
the Lord Nairn abovementioned, with the Lords, Collintoun, Newtoun, Hirkhouse,
and Forret, the Libel was found relevant only by the odds of three to two, viz.
the Lord Nairn aforesaid, the Lord Newtoun, since made President of the
Session, and the Lord Forret, both well enough known, against the Lord
Collintoun, a very ingenious Gentleman, and a true old Cavalier, and the Lord
Hirkhouse, a learned and upright Judge: As for the Lord Justice General, who
was also present, and presided, his vote, according to the constitution of the
Court, was not asked.

But to return to my Narrative, the Earl, as I have already told you, did not
think fit, for reasons that you shall hear, to stay till His Majesty's return
came to the Council's last Letter, but, taking his opportunity, made his escape
out of the Castle of Edinburgh, upon Tuesday the Twentieth of December, about
eight at night, and, in a day or two after, came His Majesty's Answer here
subjoined.

The King's Answer to the Council's Letter.
December 18. 1681.
C. R.

MOST dearly, etc. having this day received your Letter of the 14th instant,
giving an account, that our Advocate having been ordered by you to insist in
that Process raised at our instance against the Earl of Argyle, he was, after
full debate, and clear probation, found guilty of Treason, and Leasing-making
betwixt us, our Parliament, and our People; and the reproaching our Laws and
Acts of Parliament: We have now thought fit, notwithstanding of what was
ordered by us in our Letter to you of the 15th of November last, hereby to
authorize you to grant a Warrant to our Justice General, and the remanent
Judges of our Justice Court, for proceeding to pronounce a Sentence, upon the
Verdict of the Jury, against the said Earl; nevertheless it is our express
pleasure, and we do hereby require you, to take care, that all execution of the
Sentence be stopped, until we shall think fit to declare our further pleasure
in this Affair: For doing whereof, etc.

Which Answer being read in Council on the Thursday, and the Court of
Justiciary, according to its last Adjournment, as shall be told you, being to
meet upon the Friday, after a little hesitation in Council whether the Court of
Justiciary could proceed to the Sentence of Forfaulture against the Earl, he
being absent, it was resolved in the affirmative; And what were the grounds
urged, either of hesitation or resolution, I cannot precisely say, there being
nothing on record that I can learn. But that you may have a full, and
satisfying account, I shall briefly tell you what was ordinarily discoursed, a
part whereof I also find in a Petition given in by the Countess of Argyle to
the Lords of Justitiary, before pronouncing sentence, but without any answer or
effect. It was then commonly said, that by the old Law, and Custom, the Court
of Justitiary could no more in the case of Treason, than of any other Crime,
proceed further against a Person not compearing, and absent, than to declare
him Outlaw, and Fugitive: And that, albeit it be singular, in the case of
Treason that the Trial may go on, even to a final Sentence, though the Party be
absent, yet such Trials were only proper to, and always reserved for
Parliaments: And that so it had been constantly observed until after the
Rebellion in the Year 1666: But there being several Persons notourly engaged in
that Rebellion, who had escaped, and thereby withdrawn themselves from Justice,
it was thought, that the want of a Parliament, for the time, ought not to
afford them any immunity; and therefore it was resolved by the Council, with
advice of the Lords of Session, that the Court of Justitiary should summon, and
proceed to trial, and sentence, against these Absents, whether they compeared
or not, and so it was done: Only because the thing was new, and indeed an
innovation of the old Custom, to make all sure, in the first Parliament held
thereafter, in the Year 1669. it was thought fit to confirm these Proceedings
of the Justitiary, in that point, and also to make a perpetual Statute, that,
in case of open Rebellion, and Rising in Arms against the King, and Government,
the Treason, in all time coming, might by an Order from His Majesty's Council
be tried, and the Actors proceeded against by the Lords of Justitiary, even to
final sentence, whether the Traitors compeared, or not. This being then the
present Law, and custom, it is apparent in the first place, that the Earl's
Case, not being that of an open Rebellion, and Rising in Arms, is not at all
comprehended in the Act of Parliament; So that it is without question, that, if
in the beginning he had not entered himself Prisoner, but absented himself, the
Lords of Justiciary could not have gone further, than, upon a citation, to have
declared him Fugitive. But others said, that the Earl having both entered
himself Prisoner, and compeared, and after debate having been found guilty,
before he made his escape, the case was much altered. And whether the Court
could, notwithstanding of the Earl's intervening escape, yet go on to sentence,
was still debatable: for it was alleged for the affirmative, that seeing the
Earl had twice compeared, and that, after debate, the Court had given judgment,
and the Assize returned their Verdict, so that had nothing remained but the
pronouncing of Sentence; it was absurd to think that it should be in the power
of the Party, thus accused, and found guilty, by his escape to frustrate
Justice, and withdraw himself from the punishment he deserved. But on the other
hand it was pleaded for the Earl; That first, It was a fundamental Rule, That
until once the Cause were concluded, no Sentence could be pronounced: Next
that, it was a sure Maxim in Law, that in Criminal Actions there neither is, or
can be any other conclusion of the cause than the Parties presence and silence;
So that, after all that had past, the Earl had still freedom to add what he
thought fit, in his own defense, before pronouncing sentence, and therefore the
Lords of Justiciary could no more proceed to sentence against him, being
escaped, than if he had been absent from the beginning, the Cause being in both
cases equally not concluded, and the principle of Law uniformly the same, viz.
That in Criminals (except in cases excepted) no final sentence can be given in
absence: For, as the Law, in case of absence from the beginning, does hold that
just temper, as neither to suffer the Contumacious to go altogether unpunished,
nor, on the other hand, finally to condemn a party unheard. And therefore does
only declare him Fugitive, and there stops: So in the case of an Escape, before
Sentence, where it cannot be said the Party was fully heard, and the Cause
concluded, the Law does not distinguish, nor can the parity of Reason be
refused. Admitting then that the Cause was so far advanced, against the Earl,
that he was found guilty: Yet 1. This is but a declaring of what the Law does
as plainly presume against the Party absent from the beginning, and
consequently, of it self can operate no further. 2dly, The finding of a Party
guilty is no conclusion of the Cause. And 3dly, As it was never seen, nor
heard, that a Party was condemned in absence, (except in excepted Cases)
whereof the Earl's is none; so he having escaped, and the Cause remaining
thereby unconcluded, the general rule did still hold, and no sentence could be
given against him.

It was also remembered, that the Dyets and days of the Justice Court are
peremptour; and that in that case, even in Civil, far more in Criminal Courts
and Causes, a Citation to hear Sentence is constantly required: which induced
some to think, that at least the Earl should have been lawfully cited to hear
Sentence, before it could be pronounced. But it is like this course, as
confessing a difficulty, and occasioning too long a delay, was therefore not
made use of. However, upon the whole, it was the general Opinion, That seeing
the denouncing the Earl Fugitive would have wrought much more in Law, than all
that was commonly said, at first, to be designed against him: And that his Case
did appear every way so favorable, that impartial men still wondered how it
came to be at all questioned; It had been better to have sisted the Process,
with his Escape, and taken the ordinary course of Law, without making any more
stretches.

But as I have told you, when the Friday came, the Lords of Justiciary, without
any respect, or answer given to the Petition abovementioned, given in by the
Countess of Argyle to the Court for a stop, pronounced Sentence, first in the
Court, and then caused publish the same, with all solemnity, at the
Mercat Cross at Edinburgh.

FOrasmuch as it is found by an Assize, That Archibald, Earl of Argyle, is
guilty and culpable of the Crimes of Treason, Leasing-making, and
Leasing-telling, for which he was detained within the Castle of Edinburgh, out
of which he has now since the said Verdict made his Escape: Therefore the Lords
Commissioners of Justiciary decern and adjudge the said Archibald, Earl of
Argyle, to be execute to the death, demained as a Traitor, and to underly the
pains of Treason, and other punishments appointed by the Laws of this Kingdom,
when he shall be apprehended, at such a time, and place, and in such manner as
his Majesty in his Royal pleasure shall think fit to declare and appoint: And
his Name, Memory, and Honors, to be extinct: And his Arms to be riven forth,
and delete out of the Books of Arms, swa that his Posterity may never have
place, nor be able hereafter to bruick or joyse any Honor, Offices, Titles, or
Dignities, within this Realm in time coming; and to have forfaulted, amitted,
and tint, all and sundry his Lands, Tenements, annual-rents, Offices, Titles,
Dignities, Tacks, Steedings, Rowmes, Possessions, Goods, and Geere whatsumever
pertaining to him, to our Sovereign Lord, to remain perpetually with his
Highness in property. Which was pronounced for Doom -- 23 Dec. 1681.

After the reading (and publshing) whereof, The Earl's Coat of Arms, by order
of the Court, was also torn, and ranversed, both in the Court, and at the
Mercat Cross. Albeit some thought that this was rather a part of the Execution,
which His Majesty's Letter discharges, than a necessary Solemnity, in the
Publication: and the Advocate himself says, p. 61. of his printed Criminals,
That it should only be practiced in the Crime of Perduellion, but not in other
Treasons.

The Reasons and Motives of the Earl's Escape, with the Conclusion of the whole
Narrative.
THE Earl's Escape was at first a great surprise, both to his Friends and
Unfriends: for, as it is known that his Process, in the beginning, did appear,
to the less concerned, more like a piece of pageantry, than any reality; and
even by the more concerned was accounted but a politic Design, to take away
his Offices, and lessen his Power and Interest: So neither did any of his
Friends fear any greater hazard, nor did most of his Unfriends imagine them to
be more apprehensive. Whereby it fell out, that upon report of his Escape,
many, and some of his Well-wishers, thought he had too lightly abandoned a fair
Estate, and the probable expectation he might have had of His Majesty's favor:
As also some, that were judged his greatest Adversaries, did appear very angry,
as if the Earl had taken that course, on purpose to load them with the odium of
a design against his life. And truly, I am apt to think, it was not only hard
and uneasy for others to believe, that a Person of the Earl's quality, and
character, should, upon so slender a pretense, be destroyed, both as to life,
and fortune, but also that he himself was slow enough to receive the
impressions necessary to ripen his Resolution; and that if a few Accidents, as
he says himself, happening a little before his escape, had not as it were
opened his eyes, and brought back, and presented to him several things past, in
a new light, and so made all to operate to his final determination, he had
stayed it out to the last.

Which that you may the better understand, you may here consider the several
Particulars, that, together with what he himself has since told some Friends,
apparently occurred to him in these his second thoughts, in their following
order.

And first you have heard, in the beginning of this Narrative, what was the
first occasion of the Earl his declining in his Highness's favor: You may also
remember, that his Majesty's Advocate takes notice, that he debated against the
Act enjoining the Test, in the Parliament: And, as I have told you, he was
indeed the Person that spoke against excepting the King's Brothers, and Sons,
from the Oath then intended for securing the Protestant Religion, and the
Subjects Loyalty, not thinking it fit to complement with a Privilege where all
possible caution appears rather to be necessary: And this a Reverend Bishop
told the Earl afterward had downright fired the kiln. What thereafter happened
in Parliament, and how the Earl was always ready to have laid all his Offices
at his Majesty's feet: And how he was content, in Council, to be held a Refuser
of the Test, and thereby incur an entire deprivation of all public Trust, is
above fully declared; and only here remembered, to show what Reason the Earl
had, from his first coming to Edinburgh, in the end of October, to think that
something else was intended against him than the simple devesting him of his
Employments and Jurisdictions. And yet such was his assurance of his Innocence,
that when ordered by the Council to enter his Person in Prison under the pain
of Treason, he entered freely, in an Hackney Coach, without either hesitation
or noise, as you have heard.

2dly, The same day of the Earl's Commitment, the Council met, and wrote (as I
have told you) their Letter to his Majesty, above set down, Number. 22. Wherein
they expressly charge him with Reproaching, and depraving; but yet neither with
Perjury nor Treason; and a few days after, the Earl wrote a Letter to his
Highness; wherein he did endeavor to remove his Offense, in terms that, it was
said, at first had given satisfaction: But yet the only return the Earl had,
was a Criminal Summons containing an Indictment, and that before any Answer was
come from His Majesty. And then, so soon as his Majesty's Answer came, there
was a new Summons sent him, with a new Indictment, adding the Crimes of Treason
and Perjury to those of Reproaching and Depraving, which were in the first
Libel, as you have heard above; whereby you may perceive, how early the Design
against the Earl began to grow, and how easily it took increase, from the least
encouragement.

3dly, When the Earl petitioned the Council for Advocates to plead for him:
Albeit he petitioned twice, and upon clear Acts of Parliament, yet he had no
better Answer than what you have above set down. And when the Earl's Petition,
naming Sir George Lockhart as his ordinary Advocate, was read in Council, his
Highness openly threatened, that in case Sir George should undertake for the
Earl, he should never more plead for the King, nor him. But the Earl taking
Instruments upon Sir George his refusal, and giving out, that he would not
answer a word at the Bar, seeing the benefit of Lawyers, according to Law, was
denied him; Sir George, and other Lawyers, were allowed to assist him, but
still with a grudge. Likewise afterward, they were questioned and convened
before the Council, for having, at the Earl's desire, signed their positive
Opinion of the Case. At which time it was also said in Council by his Highness,
That their fault was greater than the Earl's: However, we see that as he was
the occasion of the anger, so he has only found the smart of it.

4thly, The whole Process, with the Judgment of the Lords of Justitiary, and
Verdict of the Assize, whereby the Earl was found guilty, as you have seen
(notwithstanding of what has so plainly appeared, and was so strongly pleaded
in his behalf) of Leasing-making, Depraving, and Treason, Is of it self a clear
demonstration, that either the highest punishment was intended for so high a
guilt; or that, at least, it was no small humiliation that some designed for
him: It being equally against reason, and prudence, setting aside the Interest
of Justice, to strain things of this nature beyond the ends truly purposed, and
which, in effect, are only the more to be suspected, the more they are
concealed.

5thly, The Process being carried on to the Verdict of the Assize, and the
Council being tied up by His Majesty's Letter, before pronouncing Sentence, to
send a particular account to His Majesty of what the Earl should be found
guilty of, for His Majesty's full information: The Council does indeed dispatch
away a new Letter immediately, for His Majesty's leave to proceed; but instead
of that particular account required by His Majesty, for his full information,
all the information was ever heard of to be sent by the Council, was what is
contained in the body of the Letter, wherein they, briefly, but positively,
affirm, That after full debate, and clear probation, he was found guilty of
Treason. Which, all men must say, was far better contrived to prompt his
Majesty to a speedy allowance, than to give him that particular information of
the case which His Majesty's Letter expressly requires, and the Earl expected
should have been performed.

But further, the Council was commanded to sign this Letter, not simply in the
ordinary form, but by a special Command laid on every Member, and the Clerk
appointed to go about and get their Subscriptions, telling them they were
Commanded; and complaining to the Duke when any scrupled to do it. The
strictness of which Orders is apparent enough from the very Subscriptions,
where you may not only read the names of Bishops subscribing in causa
sanguinis, but some of the Earl's Friends and Relations who wanted Courage to
refuse; And, in effect, how many of all the Members did it willingly, is hard
to say, seeing generally they excuse the deed in private.

6thly, About a week or two before the Trial, the Earl had notice, that at a
close Juncto, where were Persons of the greatest eminency, it was remembered by
one present, how that Anno 1663. The Earl had been pardoned by His Majesty,
after he had been found guilty by the Earl of Middleton and that Parliament.
And that then it was looked on as an Error in the Earl of Middletoun, that he
had not proceeded to Execution, albeit His Majesty had given command to the
contrary, because (as it was said) it would have been but the same thing to
him. But now, adds this kind Remembrancer, The case is much more easy: Now his
Royal Highness is on the Throne: It might have cost Earl Middletoun a frown,
but now it can signify nothing, but will rather be commended in his Royal
Highness, as acting freely like himself. The stop of the sentence looks like a
distrust; but this will vindicate all, and secure all. And as the first part of
the Story the Earl remembered well he had heard it from the same Person, An.
1664. and had reported it to the Duke of Lauderdale a little after; so the
second part being of a very well known dialect, could not but give the Earl the
deeper impressions. It was further told the Earl, at the same time when the
Councils Letter to obtain His Majesty's assent to the pronouncing Sentence, and
leaving all to discretion, was sent, that it was thought fit that nothing
should appear but fair weather till the very close. Yet was the Earl so
confident of his own Innocence, and His Majesty's Justice, that he did not
doubt but His Majesty, seeing the Process, would at least put a stop to the
Sentence. But after the Councils Letter was gone, in such terms as you have
seen, to seek Liberty from His Majesty to proceed to Sentence (without either
double, or abbreviate of the Process sent with it) and no doubt smooth
insinuations made with it, that all designed was to humble the Earl, or clip
his wings: And that this Letter was hasted away by a fleeing Packet, to
prevent the Earl's Application, which it could not but do; and so could not but
have weight, and prevail with His Majesty, (to whom the Earl's Petition, as
coming too late, was indeed never presented) Then, and not till then, the Earl
began to have new thoughts.

7thly, The Earl's Trial having been upon Monday and Tuesday, the 12th and 13th
of December; upon the 14th, the Councils Letter was dispatched; and upon the
15th, the Earl entreated, by a friend, for liberty to speak to his Royal
Highness; whose Answer was, That it was not ordinary to speak to criminals,
except with Rogues on some Plot, where discoveries might be expected: Yet his
Highness said, he would advise upon it. But, upon Friday the 16th, he did
refuse it. Yet the Earl did renew his suit, and urged, That he had sent a
Petition to His Majesty, which was the first he had sent upon that occasion,
and that, before the return should come, he was desirous to have his Highness
Answer, that he might owe some part of the favor he expected, to his Highness.

But on Monday morning, the 19th, the Earl was told, he was not like to have
any access; and in the afternoon, he heard that the return of the Councils
Express was looked for, on Thursday the 22d. being the Council day. And
further, That the Justice Court (which according to its custom had sat the same
Monday, and, in course, should have adjourned till Monday the 26th of December,
or, because of Christmas, to the first Monday of January) was, for the Earl's
sake, adjourned till Friday the 23d. to the end, that immediately upon the
King's return, they might pronounce Sentence. He was moreover informed, that
his Royal Highness was heard say, That if the Express returned not timously, he
would take upon himself what was to be done. Which being general, and dark, was
the more to be suspected. All this, the Earl told, made him the same Monday
late, cast in his thoughts whether it were not fit for him to attempt an
escape; but his doubtings were so many he could resolve nothing, that night,
except to put off till Wednesday. Yet on Tuesday morning he began to think, if
he did at all design to escape, he had best do it that same evening. However he
was, even then, not fully resolved, nor had he as yet spoke one word of it to
any mortal. But about Ten of the Clock this Tuesday, his Highness absolute
refusal to suffer the Earl to see him, until His Majesty's Return came, was
confirmed: And about Noon the Earl heard that some Troops, and a Regiment of
Foot were come to Town; and that the next day he was to be brought down from
the Castle to the Common Jail (from which Criminals are ordinarily carried to
Execution) and then he resolved to make his escape that very Night, and yet did
not conclude it thoroughly till five of the Clock in the Evening: At which time
he gave directions about it, not thinking to essay it, till near Ten: But at
Seven, one coming up from the City, and telling him that new Orders were
privately given for further securing of him; That the Castle Guards were
doubled, and none suffered to go out without showing their faces, and that some
Ladies had been already put to do it, and therefore dissuading him to attempt
any escape, because it was impossible: The Earl said, No, then it is full time.
And so he made haste, and within half an hour after, by God's blessing, got
safe out, questioned pretty warmly by the first Centry, but not at all by the
Main-guard; and then, after the great Gate was opened, and the lower Guard
drawn out double, to make a Lane for his Company, one of the Guard who opened
the Gate, took him by the Arm, and viewed him; but it pleased God he was not
discerned. When he was out, he was not fully resolved whither to go. Home he
had judged safest; but he thought it might breed Mistakes and Trouble that he
designed not: So he resolved to go for England, and to take the Road, That by
Post he might be His Majesty's first informer of his escape. But being
disappointed of Horses that he expected, he found that the notice of his escape
was got before him; and soon after, as he came the length of Newcastle, heard
that His Majesty had given way to pronounce Sentence against him, according as
he had apprehended from the circumstances and other grounds I have told you;
which made him judge, it would be an undiscreet presumption, in that state, to
offer himself to his Majesty, while he knew none durst address him, and so he
rather chused to shift in the wide World, till His Majesty might be at some
greater freedom both to understand his Case, and apply suitable Remedies. His
Majesty's clear and excellent understanding, and gracious and benign
disposition, do fully assure him, that His Majesty does not, in His thoughts,
charge him with the least Disloyalty, and that he has no Complacence in his
ruin. But if His Majesty do, at present, lie under the pressure of some
unlucky influences, not so easy to his Royal inclinations, the Earl, it seems,
thinks it reasonable to wait patiently for a better opportunity. It may indeed
appear strange, that Innocence and Honor oppressed in his Person, almost
beyond a parallel, should not, ere now, have constrained him to some public
Vindication; especially when to the horrid Sentence given against him, his
Adversaries have further prevailed to cause His Majesty dispose, not only of
his Heritable Offices and Jurisdictions (the pretended eyesore); but also upon
his whole Estate and Fortune, with as little consideration of the Earl's
personal Interest, as if he had fallen for the blackest Treason, and most
atrocious Perduellion. But, besides that some things are of themselves so
absurdly wicked, that all palliating pretenses do only render them the more
hateful; and the very simple hearing does strike with an horror, not to be
heightened by any representation: Next that the Earl, being so astonishingly
overtaken for words, as fairly and honestly uttered as he could possibly
devise, does, with reason, apprehend that there is nothing he can say in this
matter, though with the serenest mind, and in the greatest truth and fobriety,
that may not be construed to flow from a design to lay blame where hitherto he
has been tender to give any ground of offense. I say (besides these things) he
is withal (I know) most firmly persuaded, That, if ever he shall have the
happiness to be once heard by His Majesty, and in his presence allowed to
explain a few Particulars, in Duty here omitted, His Majesty's Justice and
Goodness will quickly dispel all the Clouds that now hang over him, and restore
him to that favor wherein he has sometime reckoned himself very happy, and
which he will ever be most ready to acknowledge. And therefore all that in the
mean time he judged necessary, or would give way to, was that for preserving
the remembrance of so odd a Transaction, until a more seasonable juncture, some
Memorials should be drawn, and deposited in sure keeping; which being grown
under my hand unto this Narrative, I thought I could not better observe his
Order, than by transmitting it to your faithful custody. I have carefully
therein observed the Truth, in point of fact, avouching nothing but upon the
best and clearest evidence can possibly be expected; nor have I, as to the
manner, licenced or indulged my self in any severity of expression, which, I
thought, could be justly, in such a case, omitted, without betraying the Cause.
Yet if you now, or any other hereafter, shall judge, that I do sometime exceed,
let it not be imputed to him; for as he did indeed charge me to guard against
any more warm or vehement expression, than the merit and exigence of the
subject do indispensibly require; so I am assured that he silently and
patiently waits on the Lord, committing his way to him, and trusting in him,
that he may bring it to pass; and that He shall bring forth his righteousness
as the light, and his judgment as the noonday.

POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
HAving in this Narrative sometimes adduced, as you have seen, the Advocate's
own Authority, ad hominem, I shall here, as I promised, subjoin such passages
out of his Printed Book, as, though they deserved not a place above, may yet
make a pertinent Postscript.

And, omitting what in that Book, called, The Laws and Customs of Scotland in
Matters Criminal, he frequently repeats, from the known grounds of Law, of the
nature of Crimes, and the design of Criminal Laws; viz. That as there can be no
Crime without a fraudulent purpose, either apparent or proven; So it was the
design of Lawgivers, only to punish such Acts as are designedly malicious. I
desire you only to consider the particulars following: And,

1. Page 11. l. 7. of his Book of Criminals, having made the question, Whether
what tends to a Crime, not perfected, does fall under the Statue, or Law, by
which that Crime to which it approaches is punished: He instances in the Crime
of Misconstruing His Majesty's Government, and Proceedings, or depraving his
Laws, which, as he says, is punishable by death, Ja. 6. Par. 10. Act 10. And
then further moves, Whether Papers, as tending to misconstrue His Majesty's
Proceedings, and Government, or bearing insinuations which may raise in the
people jealousy against the Government, be punished by that Law? Which being
one of the great Crimes pretended and libelled against the Earl, I shall here
(omitting his Reasons in the affirmative, which have not the least ground in
the Earl's Case, as you have heard) represent to you, how exactly he himself,
and others, have acted for the Earl's overthrow, all these dangerous and
pernicious things, from which he argues in the Negative. His words then are
these:

And that such insinuations and tendencies are not punished criminally, He
says, 1. It is the interest of mankind to know expressly what they are to obey,
especially where such great Certifications are annexed, as in Crimes. 2. The
Law, having taken under its consideration this guilt, has punished the actual
misconstruing, or depraving; but has not declared such insinuations or
tendencies punishable: Et in statutis casus omissus habetur pro omisso. 3. This
would infallibly tend to render all Judges Arbitrary; for tendencies and
insinuations are in effect the product of conjecture, and Papers may seem
innocent, or criminal, according to the zeal, or humor, as well as malice of
Judges; Men being naturally prone to differ in such consequential inferences,
and too apt to make constructions in such, according to the favor or malice
they bear to the Person or Cause: Are not some men apt to construct that to
tend to their dishonor, which was designed for their honor? and to think
every thing an innovation of Law or Privilege, which checks their inclination
and design? Whereas some Judges are so violent in their Loyalty, as to imagine
the meanest mistakes do tend to an opposition against Authority; and thus Zeal,
Jealousy, Malice, or Interest, would become Judges. 4. Men are so silly, or
may be in such haste, or so confounded, (and the best are subject to such
mistakes) as that no Man could know when he were innocent; simplicity might often
times become a Crime, and the fear of offending might occasion offense, and how
uncomfortably would the people live, if they knew not how to be innocent.

2dly, P. 47. l. 9. Of the same Book, he says, That the eighth point of Treason
is to impugn the Dignity and Authority of the three Estates; or to seek, and
procure the innovation and diminution of their Power and Authority, Act 103.
Ja. 6. p. 6. Now this being another of the Crimes charged upon the Earl, hear
how the Advocate there understands it. But this (he adds immediately) is to be
understood of a (N. B.) direct impugning of their Authority; as if it were
contended, that Parliaments were not necessary, or that one of the three
Estates might be turned out. Which how vastly different from his indirect,
forced, and horrible inferences, in the Earl's Case, is plain and obvious.

3dly, Ibid. p. 58 l. 2. After having said, That, according to former Laws, no
sort of Treason was to be pursued in absence before the Justices; and urging it
to be reasonable, he adds, 'Nor is it imaginable, but if it had been safe, it
had been granted formerly. And l. 31. he says, The Justices are never allowed,
even by the late Act of Parliament, to proceed to sentence against absents, but
such as are pursued for Rising in Arms against the King. The true reason
whereof, he tells us, is that the Law is not so inhumane as to punish equally
presumed and real guilt: And that it has been often found, that men have
absented themselves, rather out of fear of a prevailing Faction, or corrupt
Witnesses, etc. than out of consciousness of guilt: Reasons which albeit
neither true nor just, (seeing that the Law punishes nothing, even in case of
absence, but either manifest contumacy, or Crimes fully proven: And that the
only reason why it allows no other Crime save Perduellion to be proceeded
against in absence, is because it judges no other Crime tanti) yet you see how
this whole passage quadrats with the Earl's Case; who being neither pursued for
Perduellion, nor present at giving Sentence, was yet sentenced in absence, as a
most desperate Traitor.

4thly, Ibid. p. 60. l. 24. Speaking of the Solemnities used in Parliament, at
the pronouncing Sentences for Treason, viz. That the Panel receives his
Sentence kneeling; and that after the doom of Forfaulture pronounced against
him, the Lion, and his Brethren the Heralds in their Formalities, come and
tear his Coat of Arms at the Throne; and thereafter hang up his Escutchion
ranversed upon the Mercat Cross: He adds, But this, I think, should only hold
in the Crime of Perduellion; and then goes on to add, That the Children of the
Delinquent are declared incapable to bruik any Office or Estate, is another
Speciality introduced in the punishment of Perduellion only. And yet both these
terrible Solemnities were practiced against the Earl, even by a Court of
Justitiary, and not in Parliament; albeit he was not accused of Perduellion,
nor be indeed more guilty of any Crime than all the World sees.

5thly, Ibid. page 303. ult. He says, That verbal injuries are these that are
committed by unwarrantable expressions, as to call a Man a Cheat, a Woman
Whore: But because expressions may vary, according to the intention of the
speaker; therefore except the words can allow of no good sense, as Whore or
Thief, or that there be strong presumptions against the speaker, the injuriandi
animus, or design of injuring, as well as the injuring words, must be proven;
and the speaker will be allowed to purge his guilt by declaring his intention;
and his declaration, without an Oath, will be sufficient. 2dly, The pursuer
should libel the design, and prove it, except the words clearly infer it. 3dly,
The pursuer is presently to resent the injury, and if, at first, the words be
taken for no injury, they cannot afterward become such. Which things, being
applied to the Earl's words, do evidently say, That unless his words could
allow of no good sense, or that there were strong presumptions against him, or
that he could not purge his guilt, by declaring his intention, or that his
words did clearly infer the guilt, there could be no Crime of Slandering,
Reproaching or Depraving, charged against him, except the injuriandi animus, as
well as the words, had been both libelled, and proven. But so it is that his
words do manifestly allow of a good sense, that there is not the least
presumption of injury can be alleged against him; That he did most plainly
purge himself of all suspicion of guilt, by declaring his sound and upright
intention; and that his words do not infer, either clearly, or unclearly, the
smallest measure of guilt; and withal neither was the injuriandi animus at all
proven: But on the contrary, the words at first were taken for no injury; so
that they could not afterward become such, as is above fully cleared: Ergo,
Even the Advocate being Judge, the Earl is no Slanderer.

6thly, If it were necessary, I could further tell you several things that he
alleges to be sufficient for purging a Man of any criminal intention: As,
where he says, Ibid. p. 563. l. 2. That, in matters of fact, persons, even
judicious, following the Faith of such as understand, are to be excused. And l.
30. That, if it appear by the meanness of the crime (he should say the
smallness of the deed: And what can be less than the uttering of a few words in
the manner that the Earl spoke them?) that there was no design of
transgression; And that the committer designed not, for so small a matter to
commit a crime (much less such horrid ones as Depraving and Treason). In that
case, the meanness of the transgression (or deed) ought to defend against the
relevancy, etc. But to give you one instance for all, how much the Advocate
may, one day or other, be obliged to plead the innocence of his intentions, to
free himself of words downright in themselves slanderous and depraving an Act
of Parliament, much better nor he understands it, and in fresh and constant
observance. Ibid. p. 139. toward the middle, speaking of the 151 Act, Ja. 6.
P. 12. Whereby it is Statute: That seeing diverse exceptions and objections
rises upon criminal Libels, and parties are frustrate of Justice by the
alleged irrelevancy thereof. That in time coming all Criminal Libels shall
contain, that the persons complained on are Art and Part of the Crimes
Libelled; which shall be relevant to accuse them thereof: swa that no
exception, or objection take away that part of the Libel in time coming. He
says, That he finds no Act of Parliament more unreasonable; for the Statutory
part of that Act, committing the Trial of Art and Part to Assizers, seems most
unjust: Seeing in committing the greatest questions of the Law to the most
ignorant of the Subjects, it puts a sharp Sword into the hands of blind men.
And the reason of this Act specified in the Narrative, is likewise most inept,
and no ways illative, etc. What Reproaches! What Blasphemies! The Earl said not
one word against any Act of Parliament: But on the contrary, That he was
confident the Parliament intended no contradiction; and that he was willing to
take the Test in the Parliaments sense. But here the Advocate both says and
Prints it, That an Act of Parliament is most unreasonable, and most unjust, and
it is reason most inept, and that it puts a sharp Sword in the hands of blind
men. Whereof the smallest branch is infinitely more reproachful than all can be
strained out of the Earl's words. But, Sir, Speculation is but Speculation; and
if the Advocate, when his day comes, be as able to purge himself of Practical
Depravations, as I am inclined to excuse all his Visionary Lapses,
notwithstanding of the famous Title, Quod quisque juris in alterum statuorit ut
ipse eodem jure utatur, he shall never be the worse of my censure.

Murder will out: Or, the King's Letter, justifying the Marquess of Antrim;
and declaring, That what he did in the Irish Rebellion, was by Direction from
his Royal Father and Mother, and for the service of the Crown.
Ireland, Aug. 22. 1663.
Ever honored Sir,
LAST Thursday we came to Trial with my Lord Marquess of Antrim; but according
to my Fears (which you always surmised to be in vain) he was by the King's
Extraordinary and Peremptory Letter of Favor restored to his Estate, as an
Innocent Papist. We proved Eight Qualifications in the Act of Settlement
against him, the least of which made him incapable of being restored as
Innocent.

We proved 1. That he was to have a hand in surprising the Castle of Dublin, in
the Year 1641.

2. That he was of the Rebels Party before the 15th of September, 1643. which
we made appear by his hourly and frequent intercourse with Renny O Moore, and
many others; being himself the most notorious of the said Rebels.

3. That he entered into the Roman Catholic Confederacy before the Peace in
1643.

4. That he constantly adhered to the Nuncio's Party, in opposition to his
Majesty's Authority.

5. That he sat from time to time in the Supreme Council of Kilkenny.

6. That he signed that execrable Oath of Association.

7. That he was Commissionated, and acted as Lieutenant General, from the said
Assembly at Kilkenny.

8. That he declared by several Letters of his own penning, himself in
Conjunction with Owen To Oneale, and a constant Opposer to the several Peaces,
made by the Lord Lieutenant with the Irish.

We were seven hours by the Clock in proving our Evidence against him, but at
last the King's Letter being opened, and read in Court, Rainsford, one of the
Commissioners, said to us, That the King's Letter on his behalf was Evidence
without Exception, and thereupon declared him to be an Innocent Papist.

This Cause (Sir) has (tho many Reflections has passed upon the Commissioners
before) more startled the Judgments of all men, than all the Trials since the
beginning of their sitting; and it is very strange and wonderful to all of the
Long Robe, that the King should give such a Letter, having divested himself of
that Authority, and reposed the Trust in the Commissioners for that purpose:
And likewise it is admired, that the Commissioners having taken solemn Oaths,
To execute nothing but according to, and in pursuance of the Act of Settlement,
should, barely upon his Majesty's Letter, declare the Marquess Innocent.

To be short; There never was so great a Rebel, that had so much favor from so
good a King: And it is very evident to me, though young, and scarce yet brought
upon the stage, that the consequence of these things will be very bad; and if
God of his extraordinary mercy do not prevent it, War, and (if possible greater
Judgments, cannot be far from us; where Vice is Patronized, and Antrim, a Rebel
upon Record, and so lately and clearly proved one, should have no other color
for his Actions but the King's own Letter; which takes all Imputations from
Antrim, and lays them totally upon his own Father.

Sir, I shall by the next, if possible, send you over one of our Briefs against
my Lord, by some Friend: It Is too large for a Packet, it being no less in bulk
than a Book of Martyrs. I have no more at present, but refer you to the King's
Letter, hereto annexed.

CHARES R.

RIght Trusty and well-beloved Cousins and Counselors, etc. We greet you well.
How far we have been from interposing on the behalf of any of our Irish
Subjects, who by their miscarriages in the late Rebellion in that Kingdom of
Ireland, had made themselves unworthy of Our Grace and Protection, is notorious
to all men; and We were so jealous in that particular, that shortly after Our
return into this Our Kingdom, when the Marquess of Antrim came hither to
present his duty to Us, upon the Information We received from those Persons who
then attended Us, by a Deputation from Our Kingdom of Ireland, or from those
who at that time owned our Authority there, that the Marquess of Antrim had so
misbehaved himself toward Us, and Our late Royal Father of blessed memory,
that he was in no degree worthy of the least Countenance from Us, and that they
had manifest and unquestionable Evidence of such his guilt. Whereupon We
refused to admit the said Marquess so much as into Our Presence, but on the
contrary, committed him Prisoner to our Tower of London, where after he had
continued several Months under a strict restraint, upon the continual
Information of the said Persons, We sent him into Ireland, without interposing
the least on his behalf, but left him to undergo such a Trial and Punishment,
as by the Justice of that Our Kingdom should be found due to his Crime,
expecting still that some heinous Matter would be objected and proved against
him, to make him incapable, and to deprive him of that Favor and Protection
from Us, which we knew his former Actions and Services had merited. After many
months attendance there, and (We presume) after such Examinations as were
requisite, he was at last dismissed without any Censure, and without any
transmission of Charge against him to Us, and with a License to transport
himself into this Kingdom; We concluded that it was then time to give him some
instance of Our Favor, and to remember the many Services he had done, and the
Sufferings he had undergone, for his Affections and Fidelity to Our Royal
Father, and Our self, and that it was time to redeem him from those Calamities,
which yet do lie as heavy upon him since, as before Our happy Return; And
thereupon We recommend him to You Our Lieutenant, that you should move Our
Council there, for preparing a Bill to be transmitted to Us, for the
Re-investing him the said Marquess, into the possession of his Estate into that
Our Kingdom, as had been done in some other Cases. To which Letter, you Our
said Lieutenant returned us answer, That you had informed Our Council of that
Our Letter, and that you were upon consideration thereof, unanimously of
Opinion, that such a Bill ought not to be transmitted to Us, the Reason whereof
would forthwith be presented to Us from our Council. After which time We
received the enclosed Petition from the said Marquess, which We referred to the
considerations and examinations of the Lords of Our Privy Council, whose Names
are mentioned in that Our Reference, which is annexed to the said Petition, who
thereupon met together, and after having heard the Marquess of Antrim, did not
think fit to make any Report to Us, till they might see and understand the
Reasons which induced you not to transmit the Bill We had proposed, which
Letter was not then come to Our Hands: After which time We have received your
Letter of the 18th of March, together with several Petitions which had been
presented to you, as well from the Old Soldiers and Adventurers, as from the
Lady Marchioness of Antrim, all which We likewise transmitted to the Lords
Referees; Upon a second Petition presented to Us by the Lord Marquess, which is
here likewise enclosed, commanding Our said Referees to take the same into
their serious consideration, and to hear what the Petitioner had to offer in
his own Vindication, and to report the whole matter to Us, which upon a third
Petition herein likewise enclosed, We required them to expedite with what speed
they could. By which deliberate Proceedings of ours you cannot but observe,
that no importunity, how just soever, could prevail with Us to bring Our Self
to a Judgment in this Affair, without very ample Information. Our said
Referees, after several Meetings, and perusal of what has been offered to them
by the said Marquess, have reported unto Us, That they have seen several
Letters, all of them the handwriting of Our Royal Father to the said Marquess,
and several Instructions concerning his treating and joining with the Irish,
in order to the King's Service, by reducing to their Obedience, and by drawing
some Forces from them for the Service of Scotland. That besides the Letters and
Orders under His Majesty's Hand, they have received sufficient Evidence and
Testimony of several private Messages and Directions sent from Our Royal
Father, and from Our Royal Mother, with the privity, and with the Directions of
the King Our Father, by which they are persuaded, that whatever Intelligence,
Correspondence or Actings, the said Marquess had with the Confederate Irish
Catholics, was directed or allowed by the said Letters, Instructions and
Directions; and that it manifestly appears to them, that the King Our Father
was well pleased with what the Marquess did,
after he had done it, and approved the same.

This being the true state of the Marquess his Case, and there being nothing
proved upon the first Information against him, nor any thing contained against
him in your Letter of March 18. but that you were informed, he had put in his
Claim before the Commissioners appointed for executing the Act of Settlement;
and that if his Innocence be such as is alleged, there is no need of
transmitting such a Bill to us as is desired; and that if he be Nocent, it
consists not with the Duty which you owe to Us, to transmit such a Bill, as if
it should pass into a Law, must needs draw a great prejudice upon so many
Adventurers and Soldiers, which are, as is alleged, to be therein concerned.
We have considered of the Petition of the Adventurers and Soldiers, which was
transmitted to Us by you, the Equity of which consists in nothing, but that
they have been peaceably in possession for the space of seven or eight years,
of those Lands which were formerly the Estate of the Marquess of Antrim, and
others, who were all engaged in the late Irish Rebellion; and that they shall
suffer very much, and be ruined, if those Lands should be taken from them. And
We have likewise considered another Petition from several Citizens of London,
near sixty in number, directed to our Self, wherein they desire, That the
Marquess his Estate may be made liable to the payment of his just Debts, that
so they may not be ruined in the favor of the present Possessors, who (they
say) are but a few Citizens and Soldiers, who have disbursed very small Sums
thereon. Upon the whole matter no man can think We are less engaged by Our
Declaration, and by the Act of Settlement, to protect those who are Innocent,
and who have faithfully endeavored to serve the Crown, how unfortunate soever,
than to expose to Justice those who have been really and maliciously guilty.
And therefore we cannot in Justice, but, upon the Petition of the Marquess of
Antrim, and after the serious and strict Inquisition into his Actions, declare
unto you, That We do find him Innocent from any malice, or rebellious Purpose
against the Crown; and that what he did by way of Correspondence or Compliance
with the Irish Rebels, was in order to the Service of Our Royal Father, and
warranted by his Instructions, and the Trust reposed in him; and that the
benefit thereof accrued to the Service of the Crown, and not to the particular
advantage and benefit of the Marquess. And as we cannot in justice deny him
this Testimony, so We require You to transmit Our Letter to Our Commissioners
that they may know our Judgment in this Case of the Lord of Antrim's, and
proceeded accordingly. And so we bid you heartily farewell.

Given at our Court at White Hall, July 10. in the 15th Year of Our Reign,
1683. By His Majesty's Command, HENRY BENNET.
Entered at the Signet-Office, July 13. 1663.
To Our Right Trusty and Right entirely Wellbeloved Cousin and Counselor,
James Duke of Ormond, Our Lieutenant General, and General Governor of Our
Kingdom of Ireland; and to the Lords of Our Council of that Our Kingdom.
Vox Populi: Or, The Peoples Claim to their Parliament's Sitting, to Redress
Grievances, and to provide for the Common Safety, by the known Laws and
Constitutions of the Nation.
SInce the wonderful Discovery, and undeniable Confirmation of that horrid
Popish Plot, which designed so much ruin and mischief to these Nations, in all
things both Civil and Sacred; and the unanimous Sense and Censure of so many
Parliaments upon it, together with so many public Acts of Justice upon so many
of the Traitors; it was comfortably hoped before thirty Months should have past
over, after the detection thereof, some effectual Remedies might have been
applied to prevent the further Attempts of the Papists upon us, and better to
have secured the Protestants in their Religion, Lives and Properties. But by
sad experience we have found, that notwithstanding the vigorous Endeavors of
three of our Parliaments to provide proper and wholesome Laws to answer both
ends: Yet so prevalent has this Interest been, under so potent a Head the D. of
Y. as to stifle in the birth all those hopeful Parliament-Endeavours; by those
many surprising and astonishing Prorogations and Dissolutions which they have
procured, whereby our Fears and Dangers have manifestly increased, and their
Spirits heightened and encouraged to renew and multiply fresh Plottings and
Designs upon us.

But that our approaching Parliament may be more successful for our Relief
before it be too late, by being permitted to sit to Redress our Grievances, and
to perfect those Good Bills which have been prepared by the former Parliaments
to this purpose; these following Common Law Maxims respecting King and
Parliament, and the Common and Statute-Laws themselves (to prevent such
unnatural Disappointments and Mischiefs) providing for the fitting of
Parliaments till Grievances be redressed, and public Safety secured and
provided for, are tendered to consideration.

Some known Maxims taken out of the Law Books.
1. Respecting the King.
That the Kings of England can do nothing as Kings but what of right they ought
to do. That the King can do no wrong, nor can he dye. That the King's
Prerogative and the Subjects Liberty are determined by Law. That the King has
no Power but what the Law gives him. That the King is so called from Ruling
well, Rex a been Regendo [viz. according to Law] Because be is a King whilst be
Rules well, but a Tyrant when he Oppresses. That Kings of England never appear
more in their glory, splendour, and Majestic Sovereignty, than in Parliaments.
That the Prerogative of the King cannot do wrong, nor be a Warrant to do wrong
to any. Plowd. Comment. fol. 246.
2. Respecting the Parliament.
That Parliaments constitute, and are laid in the Essence of the Government.
That a Parliament is that to the Commonwealth, which the Soul is to the Body,
which is only able (...) and understand the symptoms of all Diseafes which
threaten the Body-politick. That a Parliament is the Bulwark of our Liberty,
the boundary which keeps us from the Inundation of Tyrannical Power, Arbitrary
and unbounded Will-Government. That Parliaments do make new, and abrogate old
Laws; Reform Grievances in the Commonwealth, settle the Succession, grant
Subsidies; And in sum, may be called the great Physician of the Kingdom.
From whence it appears, and is self-evident, if Parliaments are so absolutely
necessary in this our Constitution, That they must then have their certain
stationary times of Session, and continuance, for providing Laws essentially
necessary for the being, as well as the well-being of the People; and
redressing all public Grievances, either by the want of Laws, or of the undue
Execution of them in being, or otherwise: And suitable hereunto are those
Provisions made by the Wisdom of our Ancestors, as recorded by them both in the
Common and Statute Law.

First, Coke, lib. 7. Rep. p. 12, 13.
What we find hereof in the Common Law.

The Common Law (says my Lord Coke) is that which is founded in the immutable
Law and light of Nature, agreeable to the Law of God, requiring Order,
Government, Subjection and Protection, etc. Containing ancient Vsages,
warranted by Holy Scripture; and because it is generally given to all, it is
therefore called Common. Lib. 9. Preface.


And further says, That in the book called The Mirror of Justice, appears
the whole frame of the ancient Common-Laws of this Realm from the time of K.
Arthur, 5 6. till near the Conquest; which treats also of the Officers, as well
as the diversity and dictinction of the Courts of Justice (which are Officinae
Legis) and particularly of the High Court of Parliament by the name of
Council-General, or Parliament; so called from Parler-la-ment, speaking
judicially his mind: And amongst others gives us the following Law of King
Alfred, who reigned about 880.

Le Roy Alfred Ordeigna pur usage perpetuel que a deux foits per lan ou plus
sovene pur mistier in temps de peace so Assembler a Londres, Mirror of Justice.
Chapter 1. Sect. 3.
pur Parliamenter surle guidement del people de dieu corne^t gents soy
garderent de pechers, viverent in quiet, receiverent droit per certain usages
and saints Judgments.

King Alfred ordains for a usage perpetual, That twice a year, or oftener if
need be, in time of peace, they shall assemble themselves at London, to treat
in Parliament of the Government of the People of God, how they should keep
themselves from Offenses, should live in quiet, and should receive right by
certain Laws and holy Judgments.

And thus (says my Lord Coke) you have a Statute of K. Alfred, Lord Coke's
Comment upon it.
as well concerning the holding of this Court of Parliament twice every year at
the City of London, as to manifest the threefold end of this great and
honorable Assembly of Estates; As,

First, That the Subject might be kept from offending; that is, that Offenses
might be prevented both by good and provident Laws, and by the due Execution
thereof.

Secondly, That men might live safely, and in quiet.

Thirdly, That all men might receive Justice by certain Laws, and holy
Judgments; that is, to the end, that Justice might be the better administered,
that Questions and Defects in Laws might be by the High Court of Parliament
planed, reduced to certainty and adjudged. And further tells us, That this
Court being the most Supreme Court of this Realm, is a part of the frame of the
Common-Laws, and in some cases does proceed Legally, according to the ordinary
course of the Common Law, as it appears, 39 E. 3. f. Coke Inst. chapter 29. fol.
5. To be short, of this Court it is truly said, Si vetestatem specter est
antiquissima, si dignitatem est honoratissima, si jurisdictionem est
capacissima. If you regard Antiquity, it is the most Ancient; if Dignity, the
most Honorable; if Jurisdiction, the most Sovereign.

And where question has been made, whether this Court continued during the
Heptarchy, let the Records themselves make answer, of which he gives diverse
Instances in the times of King Ine, Offa, Ethelbert. After the Heptarchy, King
Edward Son of Alfred, King Ethelston, Edgar, Ethelred, Edmond, Canutus. All
which (he says) and many more, are extant, and publicly known; proving by
diverse Arguments, that there were Parliaments unto which the Knights and
Burgesses were summoned, both before, in, and after the Reign of the Conqueror,
till Hen. 3d's time; and for your further satisfaction herein, see 4 E. 3.25.
49 Ed. 3.22, 23. 11 H. 4.2. Littl. lib. 2. cap. 20.

Whereby we may understand,

1. That Parliaments are part of the frame of the Common Law, [which is laid in
the Law and Light of Nature, right Reason and Scripture.]

2. That according to this Moral Law of Equity and Righteousness, Parliaments
ought frequently to meet for the common peace, safety and benefit of the
People, and support of the Government.

3. That Parliaments have been all along esteemed an essential part of the
Government, as being the most ancient, honorable and Sovereign Court in the
Nation, who are frequently and perpetually to sit, for the making and
abolishing Laws, Redressing of Grievances, and see to the due administration of
Justice.

4. That as to the place of Meeting, it was to be at London the Capital City,
the Eye and Heart of the Nation, as being not only the Regal Seat, but the
principal place of Judicature, and residence of the chief Officers, and Courts
of Justice, where also the Records are kept, as well as the principal place of
Commerce and Concourse in the Nation, and to which the People may have the best
recourse, and where they may find the best accommodation.

5. The Antiquity of Parliaments in this Nation, which have been so ancient,
that no Record can give any account of their Beginning; my Lord Coke thus
tracing them from the Britains, through the Saxons, Danes and Normans, to our
days.

So that not to suffer Parliaments to sit to answer the great ends for which
they were Instituted, is expressly contrary to the Common Law, and so
consequently of the Law of God as well as the Law of Nature, and thereby
Violence is offered to the Government it self, and Infringement of the Peoples
fundamental Rights and Liberties.

Secondly, What we find hereof in the Statute Law.
The Statute Laws are Acts of Parliament which are (or ought to be) only
Declaratory of the Common Law, which as you have heard, is founded upon right
Reason and Scripture; for we are told, that if any thing is Enacted contrary
thereto, it is void and null: As Coke Inst. l. 2. c 29. f. 15. Finch. p. 3. 28
H. 8. c. 27. Doct. and Stud.

The first of these Statures which require the frequent Meeting and Sitting of
Parliaments, agreeable to the Common Law, we find to be in the time of Ed. 3.
viz. 4 Ed. 3. and chapter 14. In these words:

'Item, It is accorded that a Pariament shall be holden every year once, or
more often if need be.

The next is in the 36 of the same K. Ed. 3. c. 10. viz.

Item, For the maintenance of the said Articles and Statutes, and Redressing of
diverse Mischiefs and Grievances which daily happen, a Parliament shall be
holden every year, as at another time was ordained by a Statute, viz. the
aforementioned, in his 4th year. And agreeable hereto, are those Statutes upon
the Rolls, viz. 5 Ed. 2. -- 1 R. 2. No. 95.

By which Statutes it appears, That Parliaments ought annually to meet, to
support the Government, and to redress the Grievances which may happen in the
Interval of Parliaments; That being the great End proposed in their said
Meetings. Now, for Parliaments to meet Annually, and not suffered to sit to
Answer the Ends, but to be Prorogued or Dissolved before they have finished
their Work, would be nothing but a deluding the Law, and a striking at the
foundation of the Government it self, and rendering Parliaments altogether
useless; for it would be all one to have No Parliaments at all, as to have them
turned off by the Prince before they have done that that they were called and
entrusted to do. For by the same Rule whereby they may be so turned off one
Session, they may be three Sessions, and so to threescore, to the breaking of
the Government, and introducing Arbitrary Power. To prevent such intolerable
Mischiefs and Inconveniences, are such good Laws as these made in this King's
time, and which were so Sacredly observed in after times, That it was a Custom,
especially in the Reigns of H. 4. H 5. H. 6. to have a Proclamation made in
Westminster Hall before the end of every Session, An honest and a necessary
Proclamation to be made every Parliament.
That all those who had any matter to present to the Parliament, should bring
it in before such a day, for otherwise the Parliament at that day should
Determine. Whereby it appears, the People were not to be eluded, nor
disappointed by surprising Prorogations and Dissolutions, to frustrate and make
void the great ends of Parliaments.

And to this purpose, says a late Learned Author, That if there was no
Statute, or any thing upon record extant, concerning the Parliaments sitting to
redress grievances, yet that I must believe, that it is so by the fundamental
Law of the Government, which must be lame and imperfect without it; [For,
otherwise the Prince and his Ministers may do what they please, and their Wills
may be their Laws].

Therefore it is provided for in the very Essence and Constitution of the
Government it self; and this (says our Author) we may call the Common Law,
which is of as much value (if not more) than any Statute, and of which all our
good Acts of Parliament and Magna-Charta it self is but Delaratory; so that
though the King is entrusted with the formal part of summoning and pronouncing
the Dissolution of Parliaments, which is done by Writ; yet the Laws which
oblige him (as well as us) have determined how, and when he shall do it; which
is enough to show, that the King's share in the Sovereignty, that is in the
Parliament, is cut out to him by Law, and not left at his disposal.

The next Statute we shall mention, to enforce this fundamental Right and
Privilege, 25 Ed. 3. c. 23. Statute of Provisors.
is the 25th Ed. 3. chapter 23. called the Statute of Provisors, which was made to
prevent and cut off the Encroachments of the Bishops of Rome, whose Usurpations
in disposing of Benefices occasioned intolerable Grievances, wherein, in the
Preamble of the said Statute, it is expressed as follows:

Whereupon the Commons have prayed our said Sovereign Lord the King, that since
the Right of the Crown of England, and the Law of the said Realm is such, that
upon the Mischiefs and Damage which happens to his Realm, be ought, and is
bounden of the accord of his said People in his Parliament, thereof to make
Remedy and Law, in avoiding the Mischiefs and Damage which thereof comes; That
it may please him thereupon to provide Remedy. Our Sovereign Lord the King
seeing the Mischiefs and Damage before-named, and having regard to the said
Statute made in the time of his said Grandfather, and to the Causes contained
in the same, which Statute holds always his force, and was never defeated or
annulled in any point, and by so much is bound by his Oath to do the same, to
be kept as the Law of this Realm, tho that by Sufferance and Negligence it has
since been attempted to the contrary: And also having regard to the grievous
Complainte made to him by his People in diverse Parliaments holden heretofore,
Willing to ordain Remedy for the great Damages and Mischiefs which have
happened, and daily do happen by the said Cause, etc. By the assent of all the
great Men and Commonalty of his said Realm, has Ordained and Established, etc.

In which preamble of the Statute we may observe, (1.) The intolerable
grievance and burden which was occasioned by the illegal Encroachments of the Sea of Rome. (2.) The many Complaints the People had made, who in those dark
times under Popery were sensible of, groaning under those Burdens. (3.) The
Endeavors used in vain by former Parliaments to Redress the same, and to bring
their Laws in being, to have their Force and Effect. (4.) The acknowledgment of
the King and Parliament, that the Obligation hereto was upon the King,

(1.) From the Right of the Crown, which obliged every King to pass good Laws.
(2.) The Statute in force. (3.) The King's Oath to keep the Old, and pass New
Laws for his Peoples safeguard, which they should tender to him. (4.) From the
sense of the People, expressed in their Complaints; and, (5.) From the Mischief
and Damage which would otherwise ensue.

And therefore by the desire and accord of his People, He passes this famous
Law. The Preamble whereof is here recited.

Another Statute to the same purpose you find 2 R. 2. No. 28. Also the Commons
in Parliament pray, That forasmuch as Petitions and Bills presented in
Parliament by diverse of the Commons, could not heretofore have their Respective
Answers; That therefore both their Petitions and Bills in this present
Parliament, as also others which shall be presented in any future Parliament,
may have a good and gracious Answer, and Remedy ordained thereupon before the
departing of every Parliament: And that to this purpose, a due Statute be
ensealed [or Enacted] at this present Parliament, to be and remain in Force for
all times to come.

To which the King replied:

The King's Answer.
THE King is pleased that all such Petitions delivered in Parliament, of things
(or matters) which cannot otherwise be determined; A Good and Reasonable Answer
shall be made and given before the departure of Parliament.

In which excellent Law we may observe, (1.) A Complaint of former remisness,
their Bills having aforetime been passed by, their Grievances Unredressed, by
unseasonably Dissolving of Parliaments before their Laws could pass. (2.) That
a Law might pass in that very Parliament to rectify that Abuse for the future.
And, (3.) That it should not pass for a temporary Law, but for perpetuity,
being of such absolute Necessity, that before the Parliaments be dismissed,
Bills of common Right might pass.

And the King agreed hereto.

Suitable hereto, we have my Lord Chief Justice Coke, that great Oracle of the
Law, in his Instit. 4. B. p. 11. asserting, Petitions being truly preferred
(though very many) have been Answered by the Law and Custom of Parliament,
before the end of Parliament.

This appears says he, by the Ancient Treatise, De Modo tenendi Parliamentum,
in these Words faithfully Translated. The Parliament ought not to be ended
while any Petition depends undiscussed, or at the least to which a
determinate Answer is not made. Rot. Par. 17. E. 3. No. 60. 25 E. 3. No. 60. 50
E. 3. No. 212. 2 R. 2.134. 2 R. 2. No. 38. 1 H. 4.132. 2 H. 4325.113.

And that one of the principal ends of calling Parliaments, is for redressing
of Grievances that daily happen, 36 E. 3. c. 10. 18 E. 3. c. 14. 50 E. 3. No.
17. Lions Case, Rot. Par. 1 H. 5. No. 17. 13 H. 4. No. 9.

And that as concerning the departing of Parliaments, It ought to be in such a
manner, faith Modus Tenendi, viz. To be demanded, yea, and publiekly Proclaimed
in the Parliament, and within the Palace of the Parliament, whether there be
any that has delivered a Petition to the Parliament, and has not received
Answer thereto, if there be none such, it is to be supposed, that every one is
Satisfied, or else Answered unto at the least, so far forth as by the Law be
may be. And which custom was observed in after Ages, as you have heard before.

Concerning the Antiquity and Authority of this Ancient Treatise, called, Modus
tenendi Parliamentum (says my Lord Coke) whereof we make often use in our
Institutes: Certain it is, that this Modus was Rehearsed and Declared before
the Conqueror at the time of his Conquest, and by him approved for England; and
accordingly he, according to Modus, held a Parliament for England, as appears
21 E. 3. so 60.

Whereby you clearly perceive, that these wholesome Laws are not only in full
agreement with the Common Law, and declarative thereof, but in full accord with
the Oath and Office of the Prince, who has that great trust by the Law, lodged
with him for the good and benefit, not hurt and mischief of the People, viz.

First, These Laws are very suitable to the Duty and Office of a Ruler, and the
end for which he was instituted by God himself, who commands him to do Judgment
and Justice to all, especially to the Oppressed; and not to deny them any
request for their relief, protection or welfare, 2 Samuel 22.3. 1 Chronicles. 13.1, to
5.2 Chron. 9.8.19.5, etc Est. 1.13. Our Law Books enjoining the same, as
Bracton, Lib. 1. c. 2. Lib. 3. c. 9. fol. 107, etc. Fortiscue, chapter 9. fo. 15.
c. 7. fol 5.11. Coke 7. Book Reports, Calvin's Case, f. 11.

Secondly, They are also in full Harmony with the King's Coronation Oath
solemnly made to all his Subjects, viz. To grant, fulfill, and defend all
rightful Laws which the Commons of the Realm shall choose, and to strengthen
and maintain them after his Power.

Thirdly, These Laws are also in full agreement, and oneness with Magna Charta
it self, that Ancient Fundamental Law, which has been Confirmed by at least
Forty Parliaments, viz. We shall deny, We shall defer to no Man Justice and
Right, much less to the whole Parliament and Kingdom, in denying or deferring
to pass such necessary Bills which the Peoples needs call for.

Object. But to all this which has been said, it may be objected, That several
of our Princes have otherwise practiced, by Dissolving, or [as laterly used,
by] Prorogucing Parliaments at their pleasures, before Grievances were
Redressed, and Public Bills of Common Safety Passed, and that as a Privilege
belonging to the Royal Prerogative.

Answ. To which it is Answered, That granting they have so done: First, It is
most manifest, that death not therefore create a right to them so to do;
according to that known Maxim. a facto ad jus non valet Consequentia,
especially, when such Actions are against so many express and positive Laws,
such Principles of Common Right and Justice, and so many particular Ties and
Obligations upon thems^^es to the contrary.

Secondly, But if it had been so, yet neither can Prerogative be pleaded to
justify such Practices, because the King has no Prerogative, but what the Law
gives him; and it can give none to destroy its self, and those it protects, but
the contrary. Bracton, in his Comments, page 487. tells us, Bracton, p. 487.
That although the Common Law does allow many Prerogatives to the King, yet it
does not allow any, that He shall wrong, or hurt any by His Prerogative.
Therefore it is well said, by a late Worthy Author upon this point, That what
Power or Prerogative the Kings have in Them, ought to be used according to the
true and genuine intent of the Government; that is, for the Preservation and
Interest of the People. And not for the disappointing the Councils of a
Parliament, toward reforming Grievances, and making provision for the future
Execution of the Laws; and whenever it is applied to frustrate those ends, it
is a Violation of Right, and Infringement of the King's Coronation Oath, who is
obliged to Pass or Confirm those Laws His People shall cluse. And tho he had
such a Prerogative by Law, yet it should not be so used, especially in time of
Eminent danger and distress. The late King in His Advice to His Majesty that
now is, in his (...) 239. Tells him, That his Prerogative is best showed, and
exercised, in Remitting, rather than exacting the Rigor of the Laws, there
being nothing worse than Legal Tyranny.

Nor would he have him entertain any Aversion or Dislike of Parliaments, The
Late King's advice to His Majesty.
which in their right Constitution, with freedom and Honor, will never Injure
or Diminish His Greatness, but will rather be as interchangings of Love,
Loyalty and Confidence, between a Prince and His people.

It is true, some Flatterers and Traitors have presumed, in defiance to their
Countries Rights, to assert, that such a boundless Prerogative belongs to
Kings. As did Chief Justice Trisilian, etc. in R. 2^s. time; Advising him, that
he might Dissolve Parliaments at pleasure; and, that no Member should be called
to Parliament, nor any Act past in either House, without His Approbation in the
first place; and, that whoever advised otherwise, were Traitors. But this
Advice, you read, was no less fatal to himself, than pernicious to his Prince.
Bakers Chron. p. 147, 148, and 159.

King James, in His Speech to the Parliament 1609. Gives them assurance, That
he never meant to Govern by any Law, but the Law of the Land; tho it be
disputed among them, as if he had an intention to alter the Law, and Govern by
the absolute power of a King; but to put them out of doubt in that matter,
tells them, That all Kings who are not Tyrants, or Perjured, will bound
themselves within the limits of their Laws. And they that persuade the
contrary, are Vipers and Pests, both against them and the Commonwealth. Wilson.
K. J. p. 46.

The Conclusion.
1. IF this be so, That by so great Authority ( viz. so many Statutes in force,
The sundamental, of the Common Law, the Essentials of the Government it self,
Magna Charta, The King's Coronation Oath, so many Laws of God and Man;) The
Parliament ought to sit to Redress Grievances, and provide for Common Safety,
especially in times of Common Danger. (And that this is eminently so, who can
doubt, that will believe the King; so many Parliaments, The Cloud of Witnesses,
the Public Judicatures, their own sense and experience of the manifold
Mischiefs which have been acted, and the apparent Ruin and Confusion that
impends the Nation, by the restless Attempts of a bloody Interest, if speedy
Remedy is not applied.)

Then let it be Queried, Whether the People having thus the Knife at the
Throat, Cities and Habitations Fired, and therein their Persons fried,
Invasions and Insurrections threatened to Destroy the King and Subjects, Church
and State; and as so lately told us, (upon Mr. Fitz Harris's Commitment) the
present Design on Foot was to Depose and Kill the King; and their only remedy
hoped for, under God, to give them relief Relief thus from time time, cut off,
viz. Their Parliaments, who with so much care, cost and pains, are Elected,
sent up, and Entrusted for their help, turned off re infecta, and rendered so
insiguificant by those frequent Prorogations and Dissolutions.

Are they not therefore justified in their important Cries, in their many
Humble Petitions to their King, Fervent Addresses to their Members, earnest
Claims for this their Birthright here Pleaded, which the Laws of the Kingdom,
consonant to the Laws of God and Nature, has given them?

2. If so, what then shall be said to those who advise to this high Violation
of their Countries Rights, to the infringing so many just Laws, and exposing
the Public to those desperate hazards, if not a total Ruin?

If King Alfred (as Andrew Horn in his Mirror of Justice tells us) hanged
Darling, Segnor, Cadwine, Cole, and Forty Judges more, for Judging contrary to
Law; and yet all those false Judgments were but in particular and private
Cases: What death do those Men deserve, who offer this violence to the Law it
self, and all the Sacred Rights of their Country? If the Lord Chief Justice
Thorp, in Ed. 3d's. time, for receiving the Bribery of One hundred pounds was
adjudged to be Hanged as one that had made the King break his Oath to the
People; How much more guilty are they of making the King break His Coronation
Oath, that persuade him to Act against all the Laws for holding Parliaments,
and passing Laws therein, which he is so solemnly sworn to do? And if the Lord
Chief Justice Tresilian was Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered, for Advising the King
to Act contrary to some Statutes only; What do those deserve that advise the
King to Act not only against some, but against all these Ancient Laws and
Statutes of the Realm?

And if Blake, the King's Council, but for assisting in the matter, and drawing
up Indictments by the King's Command contrary to Law, tho it is likely he might
Plead the King's Order for it, yet if he was Hanged, Drawn and Quartered, for
that, What Justice is due to them that assist in the Total Destruction of all
the Laws of the Nation, and as much in them lies, their King and Country too?
And if Vsk, the Undersheriff (whose Office is to Execute the Laws) for but
endeavoring to aid Tresilian, Blake, and their Accomplices against some of the
Laws, was also with Five more Hanged, Drawn and Quartered; What punishment may
they deserve that Aid and endeavor the Subversion of all the Laws of the
Kingdom? And if Empson and Dudley in Henry the Eighth's time, tho two of the
King's Privy Council, were Hanged for Procuring and Executing an Act of
Parliament contrary to the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and to the great
vexation of the People; so that tho they had an Act of Parliament, of their
side, yet that Act being against the known Laws of the Land, were Hanged as
Traitors for putting that Statute in Execution: Then what shall become of those
who have no such Act to shelter themselves under, and who shall Act not only
contrary to, but to the Destruction of the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom? And
how Harmonious such Justice will be, the Text tells us, Deuteronomy. 27.17. Cursed be
he that removes his Neighbors Land mark: and all the People shall say, Amen.

That this present Session may have a happy Issue, to answer the great ends of
Parliaments, and therein our present Exigencies and Necessities, is the
incessant Cry and longing Expectation of all the Protestants in the Land.

The Security of English-mens Lives; or, the Trust, Power, and Duty of the
Grand Juries of England. Explained according to the Fundamentals of the English
Government, and the Declarations of the same made in Parliament by many
Statutes.
THE Principal Ends of all Civil Government, and of Humane Society, were the
Security of Men's Lives, Liberties and Properties, mutual assistance and help
each unto other, and provision for their common benefit and advantage; and
where the Fundamental Laws and Constitution of any Government have been wisely
adapted unto those Ends, such Countries and Kingdoms have increased in Virtue,
Prowess, Wealth and Happiness, whilst others through the want of such excellent
Constitutions, or negect of preserving them, have been a Prey to the Pride,
Lust and Cruelty of the most Potent; and the People have had no assurance of
Estates, Liberties or Lives, but from their Grace and Pleasure. They have been
many times forced to welter in each other's Blood in their Master's quarrel for
Dominion, and at best they have served like Beasts of burden, and by continual
base subserviency to their Master's Vices, have lost all sense of true
Religion, Virtue and Manhood.

Our Ancestors have been famous in their Generations for Wisdom, Piety and
Courage, in forming and preserving a Body of Laws to secure themselves and
their Posterities from Slavery and Oppression, and to maintain their Native
Freedoms; to be subject only to the Laws made by their own Consent in their
general Assemblies, and to be put in execution chiefly by themselves, their
Officers and Assistants; to be guarded and defended from all Violence and
Force, by their own Arms, kept in their own hands, and used at their own charge
under their Prince's Conduct; entrusting nevertheless an ample Power to their
Kings, and other Magistrates, that they may do all the good, and enjoy all the
happiness that the largest Soul of man can honestly wish; and carefully
providing such means of correcting and punishing their Ministers and
Counselors, if they transgressed the Laws, that they might not dare to abuse
or oppress the People, or design against their freedom or welfare.

This Body of Laws our Ancestors always esteemed the best Inheritance they
could leave to their Posterities, well knowing that these were the sacred Fence
of their Lives, Liberties and Estates, and an unquestionable Title whereby they
might call what they had their own, or say they were their own Men: The
inestimable value of this Inheritance moved our Progenitors with great
resolution bravely from Age to Age to defend it: and it now falls to our lot to
preserve it against the Dark Contrivances of a Popish Faction who would by
Frauds, Sham-Plots, and Infamous Perjuries, deprive us of our Birthrights, and
turn the points of our Swords (our Laws) into our own Bowels; they have
impudently scandalized our Parliaments with Designs to overturn the Monarchy,
because they would have excluded a Popish Successor, and provided ^or the
Security of the Religion and Lives of all Protestants: They have caused Lords
and Commoners to be for a long time kept in Prisons, and suborned Witnesses to
swear matters of Treason against them; endeavoring thereby, not only to cut
off some who had eminently appeared in Parliament for our ancient Laws, but
through them to blast the Repute of Parliaments themselves, and to lessen the
Peoples Confidence in those great Bulwarks of their Religion and Government.

The present purpose is to show, how well our Worthy Forefathers have provided
in our Law for the safety of our Lives, not only against all attemps of open
Violence, by the severe punishment of Robbers, Murderers, and the like; but
the secret poisonous Arrows that fly in the dark, to destroy the Innocent by
false Accusation and Perjuries. Our Lawmakers foresaw both their dangers from
the Malice, and Passion, that might cause some of private condition, to accuse
others falsely in the Courts of Justice, and the great hazards of Worthy and
Eminent Men's Lives, from the Malice, Emulation, and Ill Designs of Corrupt
Ministers of State, or otherwise potent, who might commit the most odious of
Murders in the form and course of Justice; either by corrupting of Judges, as
dependant upon them for their Honor and great Revenue, or by bribing and
hiring men of depraved Principles, and desperate Fortunes, to swear falsely
against them; doubtless they had heard the Scriptures, and observed that the
great men of the Jews sought out many to swear Treason and Blasphemy against
Jesus Christ: They had heard of Ahab's Courtiers and Judges, who, in the Course
and Form of Justice, by false Witnesses, murdered Naboth, because he would not
submit his Property to an A bitrary Power. Neither were they ignorant of the
Ancient Roman Histories, and the pestilent false Accusers that abounded in the
Reign of some of those Emperors, under whom the greatest of Crimes was, to be
virtuous: Therefore, as became good Legislators, they made as prudent Provinon,
as perhaps any Country in the World enjoys, for equal and impartial
Administration of Justice in all the concerns of the Peoples Lives; that every
man, whether Lord or Commoner, might be in safety, whilst they lived in due
obedience to the Laws.

For this purpose it is made a Fundamental in our Government, that (unless it
be by Parliament, See L^ Cook's Instit. 3d part, p. 40. See Mag. Chart. Cooke's
^d part of Ins^^t. p. 50, 51.
no man's Life should be touched for any Crime whatsoever, save by the Judgment
of at least 24 Men; that is, 12 or more, to find the Bill of Indictment,
whether he be Peer of the Realm, or Commoner; and 12 Peers, or above, if a
Lord; if not, 12 Commoners to give the Judgment upon the general Issue of not
guilty joined; of these 24, the first 12 are called the Grand Inquest, or the
Grand Jury, for the extent of their power, and in regard that their number must
be no more than 12, sometimes 23, or 25, never were less than 13. Twelve
whereof at least must agree to every Indictment, or else it is no legal Verdict;
If 11 of 21, or of 13, should agree to find a Bill of Indictment, it were no
Verdict. The other Twelve, in Commoners Cases, are called the Petit-Jury, and
their number is ever Twelve; but the Jury for a Peer of the Realm may be more
in number, though of like Authority. The Office and Power of these Juries is
Judicial, they only are the Judges, from whose Sentence the Indicted are to
expect Life or Death: upon their Integrity and Understanding, the Lives of all
that are brought into Judgment do ultimately depend; from their Verdict there
lies no Appeal, by finding Guilty or not Guilty; they do complicately resolve
both Law and Fact.

As it has been the Law, so it has always been the Custom and Practice of
these Juries, upon all general Issues, pleaded in Cases Civil as well as
Criminal, to judge both of the Law and Fact. See the Reports of the Ld Chief
Justice Vaughan, p. 150, 151.
So it is said in the Report of the Lord Chief Justice Vaughan, in Bushel's
Case, That these Juries determine the Law in all matters where Issue is joined
and tried, in the Principal Case, whether the Issue be about Trespass, or a
Debt, or Disseizin in Assizes, or a Tort, or any such like, unless they should
please to give a special Verdict, with an implicit faith in the Judgment of
the Court, to which none can oblige them against there wills.

These last 12 must be Men of equal condition with the Party indicted, and are
called his Peers; therefore if it be a Peer of the Realm, they must be all
such, when indicted at the Suit of the King; and in the Case of Commoners,
every man of the 12 must agree to the Verdict freely, without compulsion, fear,
or menace, else it is no Verdict. Whether the Case of a Peer be harder, I will
not determine. Our Ancestors were careful, that all men of the like condition,
and quality, presumed to be sensible of each other's infirmity, should mutually
be Judges each of others lives, and alternately taste of Subjection and Rule;
every man being equally liable to be accused, or indicted, or perhaps to be
suddenly judged by the Party, of whom he is at present Judge, if he be found
innocent. Whether it be Lord or Commoner that is indicted, the Law intends (as
near as may be) that his Equals that judge him, should be his Companions, known
to him, and he to them, or at least his Neighbors, or Dwellers near about the
place where the Crime is supposed to have been committed, to whom something of
the Fact must probably be known; and though the Lords are not appointed to be
of the Neighborhood to the indicted Lord, yet the Law supposes them to be
Companions, and personally well known each unto other, being presumed to be a
small number (as they have anciently been) and to have met yearly, or oftener in
Parliament, as by Law they ought, besides their other meetings, as the
hereditary Counselors of the Kings of England. If time has altered the case
of the Lords as to the number, indifferency, and impartiality of the Peers, it
has been, and may be worthy of the Parliament's consideration; and the greater
duty is incumbent upon Grand Juries to examine with the utmost diligence the
Evidence against Peers, before they find a Bill of Indictment against any of
them, if in truth it may put their Lives in greater danger.

It is not designed at this time to undertake a Discourse of Petit-Juries, but
to consider the Nature and Power of Grand Inquests; and to show how much the
Reputation, the Fortunes, and the Lives of Englishmen, depend upon the
Conscientious performance of their Duty.

It was absolutely necessary for the support of the Government, and the safety
of every Man's Life and Interest, that some should be trusted to inquire after
all such, as by Treasons, Felonies, or lesser Crimes, disturbed the peace, that
they might be prosecuted, and brought to condign punishment; and it was no less
needful for every man's quiet and safety, that the trust of such Inquisitions
should be put into the hands of Persons of understanding, and integrity,
indifferent, and impartial, that might suffer no man to be falsely accused, or
defamed; nor the Lives of any to be put in jeopardy, by the malicious
Conspiracies of greator small, or the Perjuries of any profligate Wretches: For
these necessary, honest Ends, was the institution of Grand Juries.

Our Ancestors thought it not best to trust this great concern of their Lives
and Interests in the hands of any Officer of the King's, or in any Judges named
by him, nor in any certain number of men during life, lest they should be awed
or influenced by great men, corrupted by Bribes, Flatteries, or love of Power,
or become negligent, or partial to Friends and Relations, or pursue their own
Quarrels or private Revenges; or connive at the Conspiracies of others, and
indict thereupon. But this trust of enquiring out, and indicting all the
Criminals in a County, is placed in men of the same County, more at least than
Twelve of the most honest, and most sufficient for knowledge, and ability of
Mind and Estate, to be from time to time at the Sessions and Assizes, and all
other Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, named and returned by the chief Sworn
Officer of the County, the Sheriff, (who was also by express Law anciently
chosen annually by the People of every County) and trusted with the Execution
of all Writs and Processes of the Law, and with the Power of the County to
suppress all Violences, unlawful Routs, Riots and Rebellions. Yet our Laws left
not the Election of these Grand Inquests absolutely to the Will of the
Sheriffs, but have described in general their Qualifications, who shall enquire
and indict either Lord or Commoner: They ought, by the old Common Law, to be
Lawful Liedge-people, of ripe Age, not over aged or infirm, and of good Fame
amongst their Neighbors, free from all reasonable suspicion of any design for
himself or others upon the Estates or Lives of any suspected Criminals, or
quarrel or controversy with any of them: They ought to be indifferent and
impartial, even before they are admitted to be sworn, and of sufficient
understanding and Estate for so great a Trust. The ancient Law-book, called
Briton, of great Authority, says, See Brit. p. 9, and 10.
The Sheriffs Bailiffs ought to be sworn to return such as know best how to
enquire, and discover all breaches of the Peace; and lest any should intrude
themselves, or be obtruded by others, they ought to be returned by the Sheriff,
without the denomination of any, except the Sheriff's Officers. And agreeable
hereunto was the Statute of 11 H. 4. in these words. Item, Because of late, See
11 Hen. 4.
Inquests were taken at Westminster of persons named to the Justices, without
due Return of the Sheriff, of which persons some were outlawed, etc. and some
fled to fanctuary for Treason and Felony, etc. by whom, as well many Offenders
were indicted, as other lawful Liege-people of the King not guilty; by
Conspiracy, Abetment, and false imagination of others, etc. against the force
of the Common Law, etc. It is therefore granted, for the Ease and Quietness of
the People, that the same Indictment, with all its Dependences, be void, and
holden for none for ever; and that from henceforth, no Indictment be made by
any such persons, but by Inquest of the King's Liedge-people, in the manner as
was used, etc. returned by the Sheriffs, etc. without any denomination to the
Sheriffs, See Coke's Instit. 3d part, fol. 33.
etc. according to the Law of England; and if any Indictment be made hereafter
in any point to the contrary, the same be also void, and holden for none for
ever. See also the Statute of Westminster. 2d cap. 38. and Articul super Cortas, cap.
9.

So careful have our Parliaments been, that the power of Grand Inquests might
be placed in the hands of good and worthy men; that if one man of a Grand
Inquest, though they be Twenty three or more, should not be Liber and Legalis
Homo, or such as the Law requires, and duly returned without denomination to
the Sheriff; all the Indictments found by such a Grand Jury, and the
proceedings upon them, are void and null. So it was adjudged in Searlet's Case.

I know too well, that the Wisdom and Care of our Ancestors, in this
Institution of Grand Juries, has not been of late considered as it ought; nor
the Laws concerning them duly observed; nor have the Gentlemen, and other men
of Estates, in the several Counties, discerned how insensibly their Legal Power
and Jurisdiction in their Grand and Petit Juries is decayed, and much of the
means to preserve their own Lives and Interests, taken out of their hands. It Is
a wonder that they were not more awakened with the Attempt of the late L. Chapter
K. who would have usurped a Lordly Dictatorian power over the Grand Jury of
Somersetshire, and commanded them to find a Bill of Indictment for Murder, for
which they saw no Evidence; and upon their refusal, he not only threatened the
Jury, but assumed to himself an Arbitrary Power to fine them.

Here was a bold Battery made upon the ancient Fence of our Reputations and
Lives: If that Justice's Will had passed for Law, all the Gentlemen of the
Grand Juries must have been the^ basest Vassals to the Judges, and have been
penally obliged, Jurare in Verba Magistri, to have sworn to the Directions or
Dictates of the Judges: But thanks be to God, the late long Parliament (though
filled with Pensioners) could not bear such a bold Invasion of the English
Liberty; but upon the Complaint of one Sir Hugh Windham, Foreman of the said
Jury, and a Member of that Parliament, the Commons brought the then Chief
Justice to their Bar, to acknowledge his fault, whereupon the Prosecution
ceased.

The Trust and Power of Grand Juries is, and ought to be accounted amongst the
greatest and of most concern, next to the Legislative. The Justice of the whole
Kingdom, in Criminal Cases, almost wholly depending upon their Ability and
Integrity, in the due execution of their Office; Besides, the Concernments of
all Commoners, the Honor, Reputation, Estates and Lives of all the Nobility of
England, are so far submitted to their Censure, that they may bring them into
question for Treason, or Felony, at their Discretion; Their Verdict must be
entered upon Record, against the greatest Lords, and process must legally go out
against them thereupon, to imprison them if they can be taken, or to outlaw
them, as the Statutes direct; and if any Peer of the Realm, though innocent,
should justly fear a Conspiracy against his Life, and think fit to withdraw;
the direction of the Statutes, in proceeding to the Outlawry, being rightly
pursued, he could never reverse the Outlawry, as the Law now stands, save by
Pardon, or Act of Parliament. Hence it appears, that in case a Grand Jury
should be drawn to indict a Noble Peer unjustly, either by means of their own
weakness, or partiality, or a blind submission to the Direction or Opinion of
Judges: One such failure of a Jury may occasion the Ruin of any of the best or
greatest Families in England: I mention this extent of the Grand Juries Power
over all the Nobility, only to show their joint Interest and Concern with the
Commons of England in this ancient Institution.

The Grand Juries are trusted to be the princpal means of preserving the Peace
of the whole Kingdom, by the terror of executing the Penal Laws against
Offenders, by their Wisdom, Diligence, and Faithfulness in making due Inquiries
after all Breaches of the Peace, and bringing every one to answer for his
Crime, at the peril of his Life, Limb and Estate; that every man, who lives
within the Law, may sleep securely in his own House.

It Is committed to their Charge and Trust, to take care of bringing Capital
Offenders to pay their Lives to Justice, and lesser Criminals to other
punishments, according to their several demerits. The Courts, or Judges, or
Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, and of Jail-delivery, are to receive only
from the Grand Inquest, all Capital Matters whatsoever, to be put in issue,
tried and judged before them by the Petit Juries. The whole stream of Justice
in such Cases, either runs freely, or is stopped and disturbed, as the Grand
Inquests do their Duties, either faithfully and prudently, or neglect or ornit
them.

And as one part of their Duty is to indict Offenders, so another part is to
protect the Innocent, in their Reputations, Lives and Interests, from false
Accusers, and malicious Conspirators: They are to search out the Truth of such
Informations as come before them, and to reject the Indictment if it be not
sufficiently proved; and farther, if they have reasonable suspicion of Malice,
or wicked Designs against any Man's Life or Estate by such as offer a Bill of
Indictment; the Laws of God, and of the Kingdom, bind them to use all possible
means to discover the Villainy; and if it appear to them (whereof they are the
Legal Judges) to be a Conspiracy, or malicious Combination against the Accused,
they are bound by the highest Obligations upon Men and Christians, not only to
reject such a Bill of Indictment, but to indict forthwith all the Conspirators,
with their Abettors and Associates.

Doubtless there has been Pride and Covetousness, Malice, and desire of
Revenge in all Ages, from whence have sprung false Accusations and
Conspiracies; but no Age before us ever hatched such Villainies, as our Popish
Faction have contrived against our Religion, Lives and Liberties. No History
affords an Example of such Forgeries, Perjuries, Subornations and Combinations
of infamous Wretches, as have been lately discovered amongst them, to defame
Loyal, Innocent Protestants, and to shed their guiltless Blood in the Form and
Course of Justice, and to make the King's most faithful Subjects appear to be
the vilest Traitors unto him. In this our miserable State, Grand Juries are our
only security, inasmuch as our Lives cannot be drawn into jeopardy, by all the
malicious Crafts of the Devil, unless such a number of our honest Countrymen
shall be satisfied in the truth of the Accusations. For prevention of such
Plotters of wickedness as now abound, was that Statute made in the 42 of E.
3.3. See the Stat. 42 E. 3.3.
in these words: To eschew the mischiefs and damage done to diverse of the
Commons by False Accusers, which oft-times have made the Accusations more for
Revenge and singular Benefit, than for the profit of the King, or of his
People; which accused Persons, some have been taken, and sometimes caused to
come before the King's Council by Writ, and otherwise, upon grievous pain,
against the Law; It is assented and accorded for the good Government of the
Commons, That no man be put to answer without presentment before Justices, or
matter of Record, etc. according to the old Law of the Land, and if any thing
be done to the contrary, it shall be void in Law, etc. And (says the Statute
of the 25 of E. 3.4.) None shall be taken by Petition, or Suggestion made to
the King, or his Council, unless it be by Indictment, or Presentment of good
and lawful People of the same Neighborhood where such deeds be done, etc. That
is to say, by a Grand Jury.

All our Lives are thus by Law trusted to the Care of our Grand Inquests, that
none may be put to answer for their Lives, unless they indict them. If a
causless Indictment of any man should carelessly pass from them, his guiltless
Blood, or what prejudice soever the Accused should thereby suffer, must rest
upon them, who by breach of their Trust were the occasions of it; their fault
cannot be excused by the prosecution of an Attorney, or Solicitor General, or
any other Accuser, if it were in their power to be more truly informed in the
Case. Whosoever prevents not an Evil when he may, consents to it.

Now to oblige these Juries to the more conscientious care, to Indict all that
shall appear to them Criminals, and to save every Innocent, if it may be, from
unjust vexation, and danger, by Malice and Conspiracy, our Ancestors appointed
an Oath to be imposed upon them, whico cannot be altered, except by Act of
Parliament: Therefore every Grand-Jury-Man is sworn, as the Foreman, in the
words following, viz.

You shall diligently enquire, and true Presentment make of all such Articles,
matters and things as shall be given you in charge: And of all other matters
and things as shall come to your own knowledge, touching this present service.
The King's Counsel, your Fellows, and your own, you shall keep secret: You
shall present no person for Hatred or Malice; neither shall you leave any one
unpresented for Favor or Affection, for Love or Gain, or any hopes thereof;
but in all things you shall present the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but
the Truth, to the best of your knowledge; so help you God. The Tenor of the Oath
is plain, saving in these words, All such matters and things as shall be given
you in charge: But whenever a general Commission of Oyer and Terminer is
Issued, all Capital Offenses are always the principal matters given in charge
to the Grand Jury, which is enough for the present discourse of their duty:
Hence then it evidently appears, that every Grand Jury is bound to enquire
diligently after the Truth of every thing, for which they shall Indict or
Present any Man: They are not only bound by the Eternal Law of Loving their
Neighbor, to be as tender of the Life and good Name of every Man, as of their
own, and therefore to take heed to the Truth in Accusing or Indicting any Man;
but their express Oath binds them to be diligent in their Enquiries, that is,
to receive no suggestion of any Crime for Truth, without examining all the
Circumstances about it, that fall within their knowledge; they ought to
consider the first Informers, and enquire as far as they can into their Aims
and Pretenses in their prosecutions; if Revenge or Gain should appear to be
their ends, there ought to be the greater suspicion of the Truth of their
Accusations; the Law intending all Indictments to be for benefit of the King
and of his People, as appears by the Stat. of 42 E. 3.3. Next the Jury are
bound to enquire into the matters themselves, whereof any man is accused, as to
the time, place, and all other circumstances of the Fact alleged. There have
been false Informers that have suggested things impossible; for instance, That
Thirty Thousand Men in Arms were kept in readiness for an Exploit, in a secret
place, as if they could have been hid in a Chamber, or a Cabinet. The Jury
ought also to enquire after the Witnesses, their condition and quality, their
same and reputation, their means of subsistence, and the occasion whereby the
Facts, whereof they bear witness, came to their knowledge. Sometimes persons of
debauched lives, and low condition, have deposed Discourses, and Treasonable
Councils against Persons of Honor and Virtue, so unlikely to come to their
Knowledge, (if such things had been) that their pretense of being privy to
them, was a strong Evidence that their whole story was false and feigned. It is
also agreeable unto our ancient Law and Practice, and of great consequence in
cases of Treason or Felony, that the Jury enquire after the time, when first
the matters deposed came to the Witnesses knowledge, and whether they pursued
the directions of the Law in the immediate Discovery and pursuit of the Traitor
or Felon, by Hue and Cry, or otherwise, or how long they concealed the same;
their Testimony being of little or no value, if they have made themselves
partakers of the Crime by their voluntary Concealment.

Neither may the Jury lawfully omit to enquire concerning the Parties Accused,
of their Quality, Reputation, and the manner of their Conversation, with many
other circumstances; from whence they may be greatly helped to make right
Inferences of the Falsehood or Truth of the Crimes whereof any Man shall be
accused. The Jury ought to be ignorant of nothing whereof they can enquire, or
be informed, that may in their understandings enable them to make a true
Presentment or Indictment of the matters before them.

When a Grand Jury is sworn to enquire diligently after all Treasons, etc. it is
natural and necessary to their business, to think of whom they should enquire;
and it is plainly and easily resolved, that they ought to enquire of every Man
that can or will inform them; and if any kind of Treason be suggested to them,
to have been done by any Man, or number of Men, their Duty is the same in that
particular, as it was in the general; that is, to seek diligently to find the
truth. It Is certainly inconsistent with their Oaths, to shut their Ears against
any lawful Man that can tell them any thing relating unto a crime in question
before them: No man will believe, nor can they themselves think that they
desire to find and present the truth of a fact, if they shall refuse to hear
any Man who shall pretend such knowledge of it, or such material Circumstaeces,
as may be useful to discover it; whether that which shall be said by the
pretenders will answer the Juries expectations, must rest in their Judgments,
when they have heard them. It seems therefore, from the words of the Oath, that
there is no bound or limit set (save their own understanding or Conscience) to
restrain them to any number or sort of persons of whom they are bound to
enquire; they ought first and principally to enquire of one another mutually,
what knowledge each of them has of any matters in question before them; the Law
presumes that some at least of so many sufficient men of a County, must know or
have heard of all notable things done there against the public peace; for that
end the Juries are by the Law to be of the Neighborhood to the place where the
crimes are committed. If the parties, and the facts where of they are accused,
be known to the Jury, or any of them, their own knowledge will supply the room
of many Witnesses. Next, they ought to enquire of all such Witnesses as the
Prosecutors will produce against the Accused; they are bound to examine all
fully and prudently to the best of their skill; every Jury-man ought to ask
such questions (by the Foreman at least) as he thinks necessary to resolve any
doubt that may arise in him, either about the Fact, or the Witnesses, or
otherwise; if the Jury be then doubtful, they ought to receive all such further
Testimony as shall be offered them, and to send for such as any of them do
think able to give Testimony in the case depending.

If it be asked how, or in what manner the Juries shall enquire; the Answer is
ready, According to the best of their understandings. They only, not the
Judges, are sworn to search diligently to find out all Treasons, etc. within
their charge, and they must and ought to use their own discretion in the way
and manner of their Enquiry: No directions can legally be imposed upon them by
any Court or Judges. An honest Jury will thankfully accept good Advice from
Judges, as they are Assistants; but they are bound by their Oaths to present
the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth, to the best of their
own, not the Judges, knowledge: Neither can they, without breach of that Oath,
resign their Consciences, or blindly submit to the dictates of others; and
therefore ought to receive, or reject such Advices, as they judge them good or
bad.

If the Jury suspect a Combination of Witnesses against any Man's Life, (which
perhaps the Judges do not discern) and think it needful to examine them
privately and separately, the discretion of the Juries in such a case, is their
only best and lawful guide, though the example of all Ages and Countries, in
examining suspected Witnesses privately and separately, may be a good direction
to them.

Nothing can be more plain and express, than the words of the Oath are to this
purpose. The Jurors need not search the Law Books, nor tumble over heaps of old
Records for the explanation of them. Our geatest Lawyers may from hence learn
more certainly our ancient Law in this case, than from all the Books in their
Studies. The Language wherein the Oath is penned, is known and understood by
every Man, and the words in it have the same signification, as they have
wheresoever else they are used. The Judges (without assuming to themselves a
Legislative Power) cannot put a new sense upon them, other than according to
their genuine, common meaning. They cannot Magisterially impose their Opinions
upon the Jury, and make them forsake the direct words of their Oath, to pursue
their glosses. The Grand Inquest are bound to observe alike strictly every part
of their Oath; and to use all just and proper ways which may enable them fully
to perform it; otherwise it were to say, that after men had sworn to enquire
diligently after the Truth, according to the best of their knowledge, they were
bound to forsake all the natural and proper means which their Understandings
suggest for the Discovery of it, if it be commanded by the Judges.

And therefore if they are jealous of a Combination of the Witnesses, or that
Corruption and Subornation has been made use of, they cannot be restrained
from asking all such Questions, as may conduce to the sifting out of the Truth,
nor from examining the Witnesses privately and separately; Fort. D. Laud. Leg.
Ang. cap. 26.
lest (as Fortescue says) the saying of one should provoke or instruct others
to say the like.

Nor are the Jury tied up to enquire only of such Crimes as the Judges shall
think fit to give them directly in charge, much less of such Bills only as
shall be offered to them; but their Enquiry ought to extend to All other
Matters and Things which shall come to their Knowledge, touching the present
Service. If they have ground to suspect that any Accusation before them
proceeds from a Conspiracy, they are obliged by their Oaths to turn the Enquiry
that way, and if they find cause, not only to reject the Bills offered upon
such Testimonies, but to Indict such Witnesses, and all the Abettors of their
Villainy.

They are carefully to examine what sort of men the Witnesses are; for it is a
Rule in all Laws, That Turpes a Tribunalibus arcentur, Vile Persons ought to be
rejected by Courts of Justice. Such Witnesses would destroy Justice instead of
promoting it. And the Grand Jury are to take care of admitting such: They may
and ought (if they have no certain knowledge of them) to ask the Witnesses
themselves of their Condition, and way of living, and all other Questions,
which may best inform them what sort of men they are. It Is true, it may be
lawful for the Witnesses, in many cases, to refuse to give answer to some
demands which the Jury may make; as where it would be to accuse themselves of
Crimes: but yet that very refusal, or avoiding to give direct Answers, may be
of great use to the Jury, whose only business is to find out the Truth; and who
will be in a good measure enabled to judge of the Credit of such Witnesses, as
dare not clear themselves of Crimes, which common Fame, or the knowledge of some
of the Grand Inquest has charged them with?

If the Witnesses which come before the Grand Jury upon an Indictment for
Treason, should discover upon their examination, that they concealed it a long
time without just Impediment; The presumption of Law will be strong against
them, that no sense of Honesty or of their duty brought them at last to reveal
it.

It appears by Bracton, that ancient Writer of our Laws, Brac. L. 3. c. 3. Non
morari debet, etc. nec debet ad aliqua negotia, quamvis urgentissima, se
convertere, quia vix permittitur ei quod retro aspiciat, etc. Si post
intervallum accusare velit, non erit de Jure audiendus. S.G. Mackenzy, Crim.
Law, lib. 26.3.
that in Cases of Treason the Juries were in his days advised (as now they
ought) to be so severe in their Enquiry within what time the Witnesses
discovered the Treason after it came to their knowledge: That if it were not
evident that they revealed it with as much expedition as was well possible lor
them, they were not by Law to be heard as Witnesses; It was scarce permitted
them (says he) to look back in their going; such ought to be their speed to
make known the Treason. Or if in any case they be otherwise openly flagitious,
though they be not legally infamous, or if they are men of desperate Fortunes,
so that the temptation of want is manifestly strong upon them, and the
restraint of Conscience can be supposed to be little or none at all; whatever
they say is (at least) to be heard with extraordinary caution, if not totally
rejected. In Scotland such a degree of Poverty, that a Witness cannot swear
himself to be worth Ten pounds, is sufficient to lay him aside wholly in these
high Concernments of Criminal Cases: And in some other Kingdoms to be a loose
liver is an Objection of the same force, against any produced for VVitnesses.

And for the better discovery of the Truth of any fact in question, the Credit
of the VVitnesses, and the Value of the Testimonies, it is the duty of the
Grand Inquest to be well informed concerning the Parties Indicted; of their
usual Residence, their Estates and manner of Living; their Companions and
Friends with whom they are accustomed to Converse; such knowledge being
necessary to make a good judgment upon most accusations; but most of all in
Suspicions, or Indictments of secret Treasons, or Treasonable Words where the
Accusers can be of no credit, if it be altogether incredible that such things
as they testify should come to their knowledge.

Sometimes the quality of the accused person may set him at such a distance
from the Witnesses, that he cannot be supposed to have conversed with them
familiarly, if his Wisdom and Conduct has been always such, that it is not
credible he would trust men so inconsiderable, or mere strangers to him, and
such as are wholly incapable to assist in the Design which they pretend to
discover.

Can the Grand Inquest believe such Testimony to be of any value? Or can they
avoid suspecting Malice, Combination, and Subornation in such a Case? Or can
they show themselves to be just, and conscientious in their Duty, if they do
not suspend their Verdict until further Enquiry, and write Ignoramus upon the
Bill?

It is undoubtedly Law which we find reported in Styles, Styles, Report 11.
That Though there be Witnesses who prove the Bill, yet the Grand Inquest is
not bound to find it, if they see cause to the contrary.

Now to make their Enquiry more instrumental and advantageous to the Execution
of Justice, they are enjoined by their Oath to keep secret the King's Counsel,
their fellows, and their own. Perhaps it is not sufficiently understood or
considered, what Duty is enjoined to every Man of a Grand Inquest by this
clause of their Oath, being seldom (if ever) explained to them in the general
charge of the Judges at Sessions or Assizes: But it is necessary that they
should apprehend what Counsel of the King is trusted with them. Certainly there
is or ought to be much more of it communicated to them, than is commonly
thought, and in things of the greatest consequence. To them ought to be
committed in the several Counties where any Prosecutions are begun, the first
Informations and Suspicions of all Treasons, Murders, Felonies, Conspiracies,
and other Crimes, which may subvert the Government, endanger, or hurt the King,
or destroy the Lives or Estates of the innocent People, or any way disquiet or
disturb the common Peace. Our Law intends the Counsels of the King to be
continually upon the protection and security of the People, and prevention of
all their mischiefs and dangers by wicked, lawless, and injurious men. And in
order thereunto to be advising how to right his wronged Subjects in general, if
the public safety be hazarded by Treasons of any kind; or their Relations
snatched from them by Murderers, or any way destroyed by malicious Conspirators
in form of Law; or their Estates taken away by Robbery and Thieves, or the
Peace broken. And for these ends to bring to exemplary Justice all offenders,
to deter others from the like wickedness. And until these Counsels of the King
come to the Grand Jury, he can bring no such Criminals to judgment, or to
answer to the Accusations and Suggestions against them. Hence it becomes
unavoidably necessary to reveal to the Grand Juries all that has been
discovered to the King or any of his Ministers, Judges, or Justices, concerning
any Treasons, or other Offenses, whereof any Man is accused. And where
suspicion has caused any to be imprisoned, all the grounds of their suspicions
ought to be opened, concerning the Principals and the Accessories, as well
before as after the fact, all the circumstances and presumptions that may
induce a belief of their Guilt, and all notices whatsoever, which may enable
the Jury to make a more exact and effectual Enquiry, and to present the whole
Truth. They themselves will not only be offenders against God by reason of
their Oath, but subject to legal punishments, if they knowingly conceal any
Criminals, and leave them unpresented; and none can be innocent, who shall
conceal from them any thing that may help and assist them in their Duty.

The first notices of Crimes or suspicions of the Criminals by whomsoever
brought in, and the intentions of searching them out, and prosecuting them
legally, are called the King's Counsel, because the principal care of executing
Justice is entrusted to him, and they are to be prosecuted at his Suit, and in
his Name; and such proceedings are called Pleas of the Crown. From hence may be
easily concluded, that the King's Counsel, which by the Oath of the Grand
Inquest is to be kept secret, includes all the persons offered to them to be
Indicted, and all the matters brought in Evidence before them, all
circumstances whatsoever whereof they are informed, which may any way conduce
to the discovery of offenses; all intimations given them of Abettors and
Encouragers of Treasons, Felonies, or Perjuries and Conspiracies, or of the
Receivers, Harbourers, Nourishers, and Concealers of such Criminals.

Likewise the Oath which enjoins the Counsel of their Fellows, and their own,
to be kept, implies that they shall not reveal any of their personal knowledge
concerning Offenses or Offenders; nor their intentions to Indict any Man
thereupon; nor any of the Proposals and Advices amongst them of ways to enquire
into the truth of any matter before them, either about the Crimes themselves,
or the Accusers and Witnesses, or the party accused, nor the debates thereupon
amongst themselves, nor the diversity of opinions in any case before them.

Certainly this Duty of secrecy concerning the King's Counsel was imposed upon
the Grand Inquest with great reason, in order to the public good. It was
intended that they should have all the advantages which the several cases will
afford, to make effectual Enquiries after Criminals, to offer them to Justice.
If packs of Thieves, private Murderers, secret Traitors, or Conspirators and
Suborners, can get intelligence of all that is known of their Villainies, all
the parties concerned may consult together, how to hide their crimes, and
prevent such further enquiries as can be made after them; they may form
Sham-Stories by agreement, that may have appearance of Truth to mislead and
delude the Jury in their Examination, and avoid contradicting each other; they
may remove or conceal all such things as might occasion a fuller discovery of
their Crimes, or become circumstantial Evidences against any of their
Associates, if one or more of them be known or taken, or is to be Indicted.
There has been Confederates in high Crimes, who have secured themselves from
the Justice done upon some of their Companions, by their confident appearance
and denial of the Fact, having been emboldened therein from their knowledge of
all the grounds of suspicion, and all the Witnesses examined about them, and
the matter of their Testimonies. It Is too well known what helps of discovering
the whole Popish Plot were lost, through the want of keeping secret the King's
Counsel therein, before the matter was brought either to the Parliament, or to
any Grand Inquest; and thereby they were disabled for the effectual execution
of their Offices, and could never search into the Bowels of that dangerous
Treason in any County. But our Law having placed this great trust of Enquiry in
the prudence and faithfulness of the Grand Inquest, was careful that they might
not disable themselves for their own trust, by the indiscretion or worser fault
of any of their own number, in revealing the King's Counsel or their own.

And as it was intended hereby to preserve unto them all reasonable helps for
their bringing to light the hidden mischiefs that might disturb the common
Peace; so it was necessary to prevent the Flight of Criminals; if the Evidence
against one that is accused should be publicly known, whether it should be
sufficient for an Indictment of him, and how far it extends to others; his
Confederates and Accomplices might easily have notice of their danger, and take
opportunity to escape from Justice.

Yet the reason will be still more manifest for keeping secret the Accusations
and the Evidence by the Grand Inquest, if it be well considered, how useful and
necessary it is for discovering Truth in the Examinations of Witnesses in many,
if not in most Cases that may come before them; when if by this Privacy
Witnesses may be examined in such manner and Order, as prudence and occasion
direct; and no one of them be suffered to know who has been examined before
him, nor what questions have been asked him, nor what answers he has given, it
may probably be found out whether a Witness has been biassed in his Testimony
by Malice or Revenge, or the Fear or Favor of Men in Power, or the Love or
Hopes of Lucre and Gain in present or future, or Promises of impunity for some
enormous Crime.

The simplicity of Truth in a Witness may appear by the natural plainness,
easiness, and directness of his Answers to whatsoever is propounded to him, by
the equality of his Temper, and suitableness of his Answers to questions of
several kinds, and perhaps to some that may be asked for trial sake only of his
uprightness in other matters. And the Falseness, Malice, or ill Design of
another, may be justly suspected from his studiousness and difficulty in
answering; his Artifice and cunning in what he relates, not agreeable to his
way of breeding and parts; his reserved, indirect, and evasive Replies to easy
Questions; his pretenses of doubtfulness, and want of remembering things of such
short dates, or such Notoriety, that it is not credible he could be ignorant or
forgetful of them. In this manner the Truth may be evidenced to the
satisfaction of the Jurors Consciences, by the very demeanor of the Witnesses
in their private Examinations, inasmuch as the greatest certainty does often
arise from the careful observation and comparing of such minute matters; of
which a distinct account is not possible to be given to a Court: And for that
Reason (among others) the Juries are made the only absolute Judges of their
Evidence.

Yet further, Their private Examination may discover truth out of some
disagreement of the Witnesses, when separately interrogated, and every of the
Grand Inquest ask them Questions for his own satisfaction about the matters
which have come to his particular knowledge, and this freely without Awe or
Control of Judges, or distrust of his own Parts, or fear to be checked for
asking impertinent Questions.

Conspiracies against the Lives of the Innocent in a form of Justice, have been
frequently detected by such secret and separate Examination of Witnesses. The
Story of Susanna is famous; that two of their Elders and Judges of great Credit
and Authority, testified in the open Assembly a malicious Invention against
her, with all the solemnity used in capital Cases, and Sentences of Death
passed upon her, and was ready to be executed, Note, That the Testimony given
in the Assembly without separating the witnesses, and trying the Truth by
Circumstances, was esteemed no Examination, or knowledge of the Truth.
had not wise Daniel cried out in her behalf: Are ye such Fools, O Israelites,
that without examination, or knowledge of the Truth, ye have condemned a
Daughter of Israel? Return (said he) again to judgment, and put these two one
far from another, and I will examine them: And being asked separately (tho in
public, the Testimony having been so given before) concerning the place of the
Fact then in question, they had not agreed upon that Circumstance, as they had
upon their Story; and so their falsehood became manifest, one saying the
Adultery was committed under a Lentick Tree, the other, it was under a Pine
Tree: And upon that conviction of the false Witnesses, the whole Assembly cried
with a loud voice, and praised God. These false Witnesses were put to death as
their Law required.

We have also a late Instance of the usefulness of private and separate
Examinations, in the Case of the Lord Howard, against whom the Attorney General
prosecuted an Accusation of Treason, the last Midsummer Term, before the Grand
Inquest for Middlesex. Mrs. Fitz Herris, and Teresa Peacock her Maid, swore
words of Treason against him positively, and agreed in every point whilst they
were together: But by the prudence of the Inquest, being put asunder, and the
Mistress asked how her Maid came to be admitted to the knowledge of such
Matters; she had an Evasion ready, pretending her Maid to have craftily
hearkened behind a Wainscot Door, and so heard the Treason. But the Maid not
suspecting what her Mistress had said, continued her first Story, that she
heard the Treason from the Lord Howard himself, and was as much trusted by him
as her Mistress: By this Circumstance the Falsehood and Perjury (which Mrs.
Fitz Harris has since acknowledged) was discovered, and the Snare for the Life
of the injured Lord was broken, as is manifest by his liberty now obtained by
Law.

Witnesses may come prepared, and tell plausible Stories in open Court, if they
know from the Prosecutor to what they must answer; and have agreed and
acquainted each other with the Tales they will tell; and have resolved to be
careful, that all their Answers to cross Interrogatories, may be conformable to
their first Stories: And if these relate only to Words spoken at several times
in private to distinct Witnesses, in such a case, Evidence, if given in open
Court, may seem to be very strong against the Person accused, though there be
nothing of truth in it. But if such Witnesses were privately and separately
examined by the Grand Inquest, as the Law requires, and were to answer only
such Questions as they thought fit; and in such order as was best in their
Judgments, and most natural to find out the Truth of the Accusation, so that
the Witnesses could not guess what they should be asked first, or last, nor one
conjecture what the other had said, (which they are certain of when they know
beforehand what the Prosecutor will ask in Court of every of them, and what
they have resolved to answer) if the Inquest should put them out of their Road,
and then compare all their several Answers together, they might possibly
discern marks enough of falsehood, to show that their Testimonies ought not to
be depended upon, where Life is in question.

By what is now said, the reasonableness of this Institution of Secrecy may be
discerned in respect to the discovery of Truth, and the protection of the
Innocent from malicious Combinations and Perjuries. Yet the same Secrecy of the
King's Counsel is no less necessary to reserve the guilty for punishment; when
the Evidence against any party accused is not manifest and full, it may be kept
without prejudice under Secrecy until further enquiry; and if sufficient proof
can afterward be made of the Offense, an Indictment may be found by a Grand
Inquest, and the Party brought to answer it: But when the Examinations are in
open Court, or the King's Council any other way divulged, and the Evidence is
weak, and less than the Law requires, it is not probable that it will be more or
stronger; and should an Indictment be found, and the Party tried by a Petit
Jury, whilst the Evidence is not full, they must and ought to acquit him, and
then the further prosecution for the same Offense is for ever barred, though
his guilt should afterward be manifest, and confessed by himself.

From hence may certainly be concluded, That Secrecy in the Examinations and
Enquiries of Grand Juries is in all respects for the Interest and advantage of
the King. If he be concerned to have secret Treason, Felonies, and all other
Enormities brought to light, and that none of the Offenders should escape
Justice; if the gain of their Forfeitures be thought his Interest (which God
forbid) then the first notices of all dangerous Crimes, and wicked
Confederacies ought to be secretly and prudently pursued and searched into by
the Grand Inquest: the Accusers and Witnesses ought not to publish in a Court
before a multitude what they pretend to know in such Cases, until the
discretion of so many honest Men of the Neighborhood, has first determined
whether their Testimony will amount to so good and full Evidence, that it may
be made public with safety to the King and People in order to Justice. Else
they are obliged by Oath to lock up in their own Breasts all the Circumstances
and Presumptions of Crimes, until they, or such as shall succeed in the same
Trust, shall have discovered (as they believe) Evidence enough to convict the
Accused, and then, and not before, they are to accuse the Party upon Record, by
finding the Bills, (as it is usually called.) But when Bills are offered without
satisfactory Evidence, and they neither know, nor can learn any more, they
ought for the King's sake to indorse Ignoramus upon them, lest his Honor and
Justice be stained by causing or permitting such Prosecution of his People in
his own name, and at his Suit, as shall appear upon their Trial and Acquittal
to have been frivolous, or else malicious designs upon their Lives and Fortunes.

If it should be said, That whatsoever Reasons there are for this Oath of
Secrecy; yet it cannot deprive the King of the benefit of having the Evidence
made public, if he desires it; and that the Grand Jury do not break their
Oaths, when the King, or the Prosecutor for him, will have it so: It Is not hard
to show, that such Notions have no foundation in Law or Reason, and seem to
come from Men who have not well studied the first Principles of the English
Government, or of True Religion.

Whosoever has learnt that the Kings of England were ordained for the good
Government of the Kingdom in the Execution of the Laws, must needs know, that
the King cannot lawfully seek any other benefit in judicial proceedings, than
that common Right and Justice be done to the People according to their Laws and
Customs. Their Safety and Prosperity are to be the Objects of his continual
Care and Study, that being the highest concern. The Greatness and Honor of a
Prince consists in the Virtue, Multitude, Wealth and Prowess of his People; and
his greatest Glory is, by the excellency of his Government so to have
encouraged Virtue and Piety, that few or no Criminals are to be found in his
Dominions. Those who have made this their principal aim, have in some places so
well succeeded, as to introduce such a Discipline and rectitude of Manners, as
rendered every man a Law unto himself. Gar. de la Veg Hist. de los Incas.
As it is reported in the History of Peru, that though the Laws were so severe
as to make very small Crimes capital, yet it often fell out, that not one man
was put to death in a year, within the whole compass of that vast Empire.

The King's only benefit in finding out and punishing Offenders by Courts of
Justice, are the preservation and support of the Government, the protection of
the Innocent, revenging their wrongs, and preventing further mischiefs by the
terrors of exemplary Punishments.

The King is the head of Justice in the esteem of our Laws, and the whole
Kingdom is to expect right to be done them in his several Courts instituted by
Law for that purpose. Therefore Writs issue out in his name in all cases where
relief is sought by the Subject: and the wrongs done to the Lives or Limbs of
the People, are said to be done against the Peace of the King, his Crown and
Dignity; reckoning it a dishonor to him and his Government, that Subjects
should not, whilst they live within the Law, enjoy Peace and Security. It ought
to be taken for a scandal upon the King, when he is represented in a Court of
Justice as if he were partially concerned, or rather inclined to desire, that a
Party accused should be found guilty, than that he should be declared innocent,
if he be so in truth. Doubtless the King ought to wish in all Enquiries made
after Treason, Felonies, etc. that there were none to be found in his Kingdom;
and that whosoever is accused, might be able to answer so well and truly for
himself, as to show the Accusation to be erroneous or false, and to be
acquitted of it. Something of this appears in the common Custom of England,
that the Clerks of the King's Courts of Justice, when any man has pleaded Not
guilty to an Indictment, prays forthwith that God would send him a good
deliverance.

The destruction of every Criminal is a loss to a Prince, and ought to be
grievous to him, in the common regard of humanity, and the more particular
Relation of his Office, and the name of Father. The King's Interest and Honor
is more concerned in the protection of the Innocent, than in the punishment of
the Guilty. This Maxim can never run them into excesses; for it has ever been
looked upon as a mark of great Wisdom and Virtue in some Princes and States,
upon several occasions to destroy all Evidences against Delinquents; and
nothing is more usual than to compose the most dangerous Distempers of Nations
by Acts of general Amnesty, which were utterly unjust, if it were as great a
Crime to suffer the Guilty to escape, as to destroy the Innocent. We do not
only find those Princes represented in History under odious Characters, who
have basely murdered the Innocent, but such as by their Spies and Informers
were too inquisitive after the Guilty; whereas none was ever blamed for
Clemency, or for being too gentle Interpreters of the Laws. Tho Trajan was an
excellent Prince, endowed with all heroical Virtues; yet the most Eloquent
Writers, and his best Friends, found nothing more to be praised in his
Government, Tacit. lib. 1. Hist.
than that in his time, all men might think what they pleased, and every man
speak what he thought; and he had no better way of distinguishing himself from
his wicked Predecessors, than by hanging up the Spies and Informers, whom they
had employed for the discovery of Crimes. But if the punishment of Offenders
were as universally necessary as the protection of the Innocent, he were as
much to be abhorred as Nero; and that Clemency which is so highly praised, were
to be looked upon as the worst of Vices; and those who have hitherto been taken
for the best of Princes, were altogether as detestable as the worst.

Moreover all humane Laws were ordained for the preservation of the Innocent,
and for their sakes only are punishments inflicted; that those of our own
Country do solely regard this, was well understood by Fortescue, who says,
Fort. de Laud. Leg. Ang. chapter 27.
Indeed I could rather wish Twenty Evildoers to ^^ape death through pity, than
one man to be unjustly condemned. Such Blood has cried to Heaven for Vengeance
against Families and Kingdoms, and their utter destruction has ensued. If a
Criminal build be acquitted by too great lenity, caution, or otherwise, he may
be reserved for future Justice from Man or God, if be does not repent; but it is
impossible that satisfaction or reparation should be made for innocent
Bloodshed in the forms of Justice.

Without all question, the King's only just Interest in the Evidence given
against the Party accused, and in the manner of taking it, is to have the truth
made manifest, that Justice may thereupon be done impartially: And if
Accusations may be first examined in secret more strictly and exactly, to
prevent Fraud and Perjury, than is possible to be done in open Court, (as has
before appeared) then it is for the King's benefit to have it so. And nothing
done in, or by a Court, about the Trial of the Accused, is for the King, (in
the sense of our Law) unless it some way conduce to Justice in the case. The
Witnesses which the Prosecutor brings, are no further for the King, than they
tell the truth, and the whole truth impartially: and by whomsoever any others
may be called, upon the Enquiry, or the Trial to be examined, if they sincerely
deliver the truth of the matters in question, they are therein the King's
Witnesses, though the Accused be acquitted by reason of their Testimonies. If
such as are offered by the Attorny-General to prove Treason against any man,
shall be found to swear falsely, maliciously, or for Reward or Promises, though
they depose positively Facts of Treason against the Accused, yet they are truly
and properly Witnesses against the King, by endeavoring to prevent Justice,
and destroy his Subjects: Their Malice and Villainy being confessed or proved,
the King's Attorney ought (ex Officio) to prosecute them in the King's Name,
and at his Suit, for their Offenses against him in such Depositions pretended
to have been for him: and the legal Form of the Indictment ought to be for
their swearing falsely and maliciously against the Peace of the King, his Crown
and Dignity. The Prosecutors themselves, notwithstanding their big words, and
assuming to themselves to be for the King, if their Prosecution shall be proved
to be malicious, or by Conspiracy against the Life or Fortune of the Accused,
they are therein against the King, and ought to be indicted at the King's Suit,
for such Prosecutions done against His Crown and Dignity. And if an
Attorney General should be found knowingly guilty of abetting such a
Conspiracy, his Office could not excuse or legally exempt him from suffering
the villainous Judgment to the destruction of him and his Family. It Is esteemed
in the Law one of the most odious Offenses against the King, to attempt in his
Name to destroy the Innocent, for whose Protection he himself was ordained.
Queen Elizabeth had the true sense of our Law, when the Lord Burleigh, Co.
Inst. 3d part, p. 79.
upon Sir Edward Coke her then Attorney's coming into her presence, told her,
This is he who prosecutes pro Domina Regina, for our Lady the Queen; and She
said she would have the form of the Records altered; for it should be
Attornatus Generalis qui pro Domina veritate sequitur. The Attorney General who
prosecutes for our Lady the Truth. Whoever is trusted in that employment,
dishonours his Master and Office, if he gives occasion to the Subjects to
believe that his Master seeks other profits or Advantages by Accusations, than
the common Peace and Welfare: He ought not to excite a jealousy in any of
their minds, that confiscations of Estates are designed or desired by any of
the King's Ministers; whosoever makes such advantages to the Crown, their
principal aim in accusing, are either Robbers and Murderers, (in the
Scripture-sense) in seeking innocent Blood for gain; or in the mildest
Construction, (supposing the Accusation to be on good grounds) they show
themselves to be of corrupt minds, and a scandal to their Master, and the
Government. Profit or loss of that kind ought to have no place in judicial
proceedings against suspected Criminals, but truth is only to be regarded; and
for this reason the Judgments given in Court of humane Institution, are in
Scripture called, the Judgments of God, who is the God of truth.

Yet further, If any benefit to the King could be imagined by making the
Evidence to the Grand Jury public, it could not come in competition with the
Law expressed in their Oath; which by constant uninterrupted usage, for so many
Ages, has obtained the force of Law. Bracton and Britton in their several
Generations bear witness, that it was then practiced; and greater proof of it
needs not be sought, than the Disputes that appear by the Law Books to have
been amongst the ancient Lawyers, whether it was Treason or Felony for a
Grand Jury to discover, either who was indicted, or what Evidence was given
them. The Trust of the Grand Juries was thought so sacred in those Ages, and
their secrecy of so great concern to the Kingdom, that whosoever should break
their Oath therein, was by all thought worthy to die; Co. Instit. 3d part, p.
107. Rulls Indic. 771.
only some would have had them suffer as Traitors, others as Felons. And at
this day it is held to be a high Misprision, punishable by Fine and
Impoverishment. The Law then having appointed the Evidence to be given to Grand
Juries in secret, the King cannot desire to have it made public. He can do no
wrong, says the old Maxim, that is, He can do nothing against the Law; nor is
any thing to be judged for his benefit that is not warranted by Law: His Will,
Commands, and Desires, are therein no otherwise to be known. He cannot change
the legal Method or manner of enquiring by Juries, nor vary in any particular
case from the customary and general forms of judicial proceedings; he can
neither abridge nor enlarge the power of Juries, no more than he can lessen the
legal Power of the Sheriffs or Judges, or by special Direction order the one
how they shall execute Writs, and the other how they shall give Judgments,
though these made by himself.

It Is criminal, no doubt, for any to say, that the King desires a Court of
Justice, or a Jury, to vary from the direction of the Law, and they ought not
to be believed therein: If Letters, Writs, or other Commands should come to the
Judges for that purpose, they are bound by their Oaths not to regard them, but
to hold them for null; the Statutes of 2 E. 3.8. and 20 E. 3.1. are express,
That if any Writs or Commandments come to the Justices in disturbance of the
Law, or the Execution of the same, or of right to the Parties, they shall
proceed as if no such Letters, Writs, or Commands were come to them: And the
substance of these and other Statutes is inserted into the Oath taken by every
Judge; and if they be under the most solemn and sacred Tie in the Execution of
Justice, to hold for nothing, or none, the Commands of the King under the Great
Seal, surely the Word, or Desire of an Attorney General, in the like case,
ought to be less than nothing.

Besides, they are strangely mistaken, who think the King can have an Interest
different from, or contrary unto that of the Kingdom, in the prosecution of
Accused Persons: His Concernments are involved in those of his People; and he
can have none distinct from them. He is the Head of the Body Politic; and the
legal Course of doing Justice, is like the orderly circulation of the Blood in
the Natural Bodies, by which both Head and Body are equally preserved, and both
perish by the interruption of it.

The King is obliged to the utmost of his Power, to maintain the Law, and
Justice in its due course, by his Coronation Oath, and the Trust thereby
reposed in him. In former Ages he was conjured not to take the Crown, unless he
resolved punctually to observe it. Brom. p. 1159. Mat. Paris, p. 153.
Bromton and others, speaking of the Coronation of Richard the first, delivered
it thus, That having first taken the Oath; Deinde indutus Mantello, ductus est
ad Altar, and conjuratus ab Archiepiscopo, and prohibitus ex part Dei, ne
hunc Honorem sibi assumat, nisi in mente habeat tenere Sacramenta and Vota quae
superius fecit. Et Ipse respondit, se per Dei auxilium omnia supradicta
observaturum bona fide. Deinde cepit Cor^nam de Altari, and tradidit eam
Archiepiscopo, qui posuit eam super caput Regis, and sic Coronatus Rex, ductus
est ad sedem suam. Afterward clothed with the Royal Robe, he is led to the
Altar, and conjured by the Archbishop, and forbid in the Name of God, not to
assume that Honor, unless he intended to keep the Oaths and Vows he had before
made; and he answered, By God's help he would faithfully observe all the
Premises: and then he took the Crown from off the Altar, and delivered it to
the Archbishop, who put it upon the King's Head, and the King thus Crowned, is
led unto His Seat. The violation of which Trust cannot but be as well a wound
unto their Consciences, as bring great Prejudice upon their Persons and Affairs.

The Common Law that exacts this, does so far provide for Princes, That having
their minds free from cares of preserving themselves, they may rest assured,
that no Acts, Words, or Designs, that may bring them into danger, can be
concealed from the many Hundreds of Men, who by the Law are appointed in all
parts of the Kingdom, watchfully to take care of the King; and are so far
concerned in His safety, that they can hope no longer to enjoy their own Lives
and Fortunes in Peace, than they can preserve him, and the good Order which
according to the Laws he is to uphold.

It is the joint Interest of King and People, that the ancient Rules of doing
Justice be held sacred and inviolable; and they are equally concerned in
causing strict enquiries to be made into all Evidences given against suspected,
or accused Persons, that the Truth may be discovered; and such as dare to
disturb the Public Peace by breaking the Laws, may be brought to punishment.
And the whole course of Judicial Proceedings in Criminal Causes, shows that the
People is therein equally concerned with the King, whose name is used. This is
the ground of that distinction which Sir Ed. Coke makes between the Proceedings
in Pleas of the Crown, and Actions for wrongs done to the King himself. In
Pleas of the Crown, or other common offenses, nusances, etc. Co. 3d. Inst. page
136.
principally concerning others, or the Public, there the King by Law must be
apprised by Indictment, Presentment; or other matter of Record; but the King
may have an Action for such wrong as is done is himself, and whereof none other
can have an Action but the King, without being apprised by Indictment,
Presentment, or other matter of Record, as a Quare impedit, Quare incumbravit,
a Writ of Attaint, of Debt Detinue of Ward, Escheat, Scire fac. pur repealer
patent, etc. Unto which every Man must answer: But no Man can be brought to
answer for Public Crimes at the King's Suit, otherwise than by Indictment of a
Grand Jury.

The whole Course of doing Justice upon Criminals, from the beginning of the
Process, unto the Execution of the Sentence, is, and ever was esteemed to be
the Kingdoms concernment, as is evidenced by the frequent Complaints made in
Parliament, that Capital Offenders were pardoned to the Peoples damage and
wrong. In the 13 Rich. 2. it is said, that the King hearing the grievous
complaints of his Commons in Parliament, of the outrageous mischiefs which
happened unto the Realm, for that Treasons, Murders, and Rapes of Women, be
commonly done, and committed, and the more because Charters of Pardon had been
easily granted in such Cases; And thereupon it was enacted, That no Pardon for
such Crimes should be granted, unless the same were particularly specified
therein; and if a Pardon were otherwise granted for the Death of a Man, the
Judges should notwithstanding enquire by a Grand Jury, of the Neighborhood,
concerning the Death of every such Person, and if he were found to have been
wilfully Murdered, such Charter of Pardon to be disallowed; and provisions
were made by imposing grievous Fines upon every person, according to his Degree
and Quality, or Imprisonment, who should presume to sue to the King for any
Pardons of the aforesaid Crimes, and that such persons might be known to the
whole Kingdom, their Names were to be upon several Records. The like had been
done in many Statutes made by several Parliaments, as in the 6 Ed. 1.9. the 2
Ed. 3.2. the 10 Ed. 3.2. and the 14 Ed. 3.15. where it was acknowledged by the
King in Parliament, That the Oath of the Crown had not been kept, by reason of
the Grant of Pardons contrary to the aforesaid Statutes; and Enacted that any
such Charter of Pardon, from thenceforth granted against the Oath of his Crown,
and the said Statutes, the same should be holden for none. In the 27 Edw. 3.2.
It is further provided, for preventing the Peoples damage by such Pardons, That
from thenceforth in every Charter of Pardon of Felony, which shall be granted
at any man's suggestion, the said suggestion, and the name of him that makes
the suggestion, shall be comprised in the same Charter; and if after the same
suggestion be found untrue, the Charter shall be disallowed and holden for
none: And the Justices before whom such Charter shall be alleged, shall
enquire of the same suggestion, and that as well of Charters granted before
this time, as of Charters which shall be granted in time to come; and if they
find them untrue, then they shall disallow the Charter so alleged, and shall
moreover do as the Law demands.

Thus have Parliaments from time to time declared, that the Offenses against
the Crown are against the public welfare, and that Kings are obliged by their
Oath and Office to cause Justice to be done upon Traitors and Felons for the
Kingdom's sake; according to the ancient Common Law, 9 Hen 3.29.
declared by Magna Charta in these words: Nulli negabimus, nulli vendemus,
nulli differemeus Justitiam. We will sell to no Man, we will not deny or defer
to any Man either Justice or Right.

And as the public is concerned, that the due and legal Methods be observed in
the Prosecution of Offenders, so likewise does the security of every single Man
in the Nation depend upon it: No Man can assure himself he shall not be accused
of the highest crimes. Let a Man's Innocence and Prudence be what it will, yet
his most inoffensive Words and Actions are liable to be misconstrued, and he
may, by Subornation and Conspiracy, have things laid to his charge, of which he
is no ways guilty. Who can speak or carry himself with that circumspection, as
not to have his harmless Words or Actions wrested to another sense than he
intended? Who can be secure from having a Paper put into his Pockets, or laid
in his House, of which he shall know nothing till his Accusation? History
affords many Examples of the detestable Practices in this kind of wicked
Court-Para^tes, among which one may suffice for Instance, Polib. lib. 5.
out of Polibius, an approved Author: Hermes, a powerful Favorite, under
Antiochus the younger, but a Man noted to be a favourer of L^ars, was made use
of against the innocent and brave Epigenes: He had long watched to kill him,
for that he found him a Man of great Eloquence and Valor, having also Favor
and Authority with the King: He had unjustly, but unsuccessfully, accused him
of Treason by false glosses put upon his faithful Advice given to the King in
open Council; this not prevailing, he by artifice got him put out of his
Command, and to retire from Court; which done, he laid a Plot against him, with
the help and Council of (one of his Accomplices) Alexis, and writing Letters as
if they had been sent from Molon, (who was then in open Rebellion against his
Prince for fear, amongst other Reasons, of the Cruelty and Treachery of H^^mes)
and corrupted one of Alexis's Servants with great Promises, who went to
Epigenes, to thrust the Letters secretly among his other Writings, which when
he had done, Alexis came suddenly to Epigenes, demanding of him, if he had
received any Letter from Molon: and when he said he had none, the other said,
he was confident he should and some; wherefore entering the House to search, he
found the Letters, and taking this occasion, slew him, (lest if the Fact had
been duly examined, the Conspiracy had been discovered.) These things happening
thus, the King thought that he was justly slain; in this manner the worthy
Epigenes ended his days: But this great Man's designs did not rest here; for
within a while, heightened with success, he so arrogantly abused His Master's
Authority, as he grew dangerous to the King himself, as well as to those about
him; insomuch as Antiochus was forced, for that he hated and feared Hermes, to
take away his Life by Stratagem, thereby to secure himself. By these, and a
Thousand other ways, the most unblemished Innocence may be brought into the
greatest danger. Since then every Man is thus easily subject to question, and
what is one Man's Case this day, may be another Man's to morrow, it is
undoubtedly every Man's concern to see (as far as in him lies) in every case,
that the accused Person may have the benefit of all such provisions, as the Law
has made for the defense of Innocence and Reputation.

Now to this end there is nothing so necessary as the secret and separate
examination of Witnesses, for though perhaps (as has been already observed) it
may be no very difficult thing for several persons, who are permitted to
discourse with each other freely, and to hear, or be told what each of their
fellows had been asked and answered, to agree in one story, especially if the
Jury may not ask what questions they shall think fit for the satisfaction of
their own Consciences; but that they shall be so far under the correction and
censure of the Judges, as to have the questions which they put, called by them
trifles, impertinent, and unfit for the Witnesses to speak to; yet if they be
examined apart, with that due care of sifting out all the Circumstances which
the Law requires, where every Man of the Jury is at full liberty to enquire
into any thing for his clearer Information, and that with what deliberation
they think fit, and all this be done with that Secrecy which the Law commands;
it will be almost impossible for a Man to suffer under a false Accusation.

Nor has the Law been less careful for the Reputation of the Subjects of
England, than for their Lives and Estates, and this seems to be one reason why
in criminal Cases, a Man shall not be brought to an open legal Trial by a Petit
Jury, till the Grand Jury have first found the Bill: The Law having entrusted
the Grand Inquest in a special manner with their good names; they are therefore
not only to enquire whether the fact that is laid, was done by the party
accused, but into the circumstances thereof too, whether it were done
Traitorously, Feloniously, or Maliciously, etc. according to the manner
charged; which Circumstances are not barely matter of form, but do constitute
the very essence of the Crime; and lastly into the Credit of the Witnesses, and
that of the party accused, and unless they find both the Fact proved upon him,
and strong presumptions of such aggravating circumstances attending it, as the
Law requires in the specification of such Crime, and likewise are satisfied in
the credibility of the Witnesses; they ought not to expose the Subject to an
open Trial in the face of the County, to a certain loss of his Reputation, and
hazard of his Life and Estate. Moreover should this practice of public
Examination prevail, and the Jurors Oath of Secrecy continue, how partial and
unequal a thing would it be to declare that to all the World, which will blast
a Man's good name, and religiously conceal what they may know tending to his
Justification: To examine Witnesses (perhaps suborned) certainly prepared, and
have Evidence dressed up with all the advantages that Lawyers wits can give it,
of the foulest Crimes a Man can be guilty of, and this given before some
thousands against him, and yet for the same Court to swear those, whom the Law
makes Judges in the Case, not to reveal one word of those reasons, which have
satisfied their Consciences of his Innocence. What is this, but an Artifice of
slandring men (it may be) of the most unspotted Conversation, and of abusing
Authority, not so much to find Men guilty, as to make them infamous? After this
Ignominy is fixed, what Judgment can the Auditors (and from them the World)
make, but of high probability of guilt in the party accused, and Perjury in the
Jury.

This course, if it should be continued, must needs be of most dangerous
consequence to all sorts of Men; it will both subject every one without relief
to be defamed, and fright the best and most conscientious Men, from serving on
Grand Juries, which is a most necessary part of their duty. Now since there is
in our Government (as in every one that is well constituted there ought to be)
great liberty of Accusation, that no Man may be encouraged to do ill through
hopes of impunity, if by this means a Method be opened, for the blasting the
most innocent Man's honor, and deterring the most honest from being his
Judges, what remains, but that every Man's Reputation, which is most dear unto
such as are good, is held precariously, and it will be in the power of great
Men to pervert the Laws, and take away whose Life and Estate they please, or at
least to fasten imputations of the most detested Crimes upon any, whom, for
secret reasons they have a mind to defame. The consequences of which scandal,
as they are very mischievous to every Man, so in a Trading Country in a more
especial manner, to all who live by any vocation of that kind.

The greatest part of Trade is driven upon credit, most Men of any considerable
Employment, dealing for much more than they are truly worth, and every Man's
credit depends as well upon his behavior to the Government he lives under, as
upon his private honesty in his transactions between Man and Man: so that the
suspicion only of his being obnoxious to the Government is enough to set all
his Creditors upon his back, and put a stop to all his Affairs, perhaps to his
utter ruin. What expedition and violence will they all use to recover their
debts, when he shall be publicly charged with such Crimes as forfeit Life and
Estate? Though there should not be one word of the Accusation true, yet they
knowing the Charge and the seeming proofs in the Court, and the Consequences of
it, and not being acquainted with the truth, as it appears to the Jury, self
interest will make his Creditors to draw in their effects, which is no more
than a new contrivance, under color of Law, of undoing honest Men.

If to prevent any of these mischiefs the Jury should discover their fellows
and their own Counsel, as the Court by public Examination does, it would not
only be a wilful breach of their Oath, but a betraying of the trust which the
Law has reposed in them, for the security of the Subject: For to subject the
reasons of their Verdicts upon Bills to the censure of the Judges, were to
divest themselves of the Power which the Law has given them, for most important
Considerations, without account or control, and to interest those in it, whom
the Law has not in this case trusted, and so by degrees, the course of Justice
in one of the most material parts may be changed, and a fundamental security of
our Liberty and Property insensibly lost. On the other hand, if for fear of
being unworthily reproached as Ignoramus Jurymen, obstinate fellows, that
obstruct Justice, and disserve the King, the Grand Jury shall suffer the
Judges, or the King's Counsel to prev^il with them to indorse Billa vera, when
their Consciences are not satisfied in the truth of the Accusation, they act
directly against their Oaths, oppress the innocent whom they ought to protect;
as far as in them lies, subject their Country, themselves, and posterity to
Arbitrary Powers, pervert the Administration of Justice, and overthrow the
Government, which is instituted for the obtaining of it, and subsists by it.

This seems to be the greatest Treason, that can be committed against the whole
Kingdom, and threatens ruin unto every Man in private in it. None can be safe
against authorized Malice, and notwithstanding the care of our Ancestors,
Rapine, Murder, and the worst of Crimes may be advanced by the formality of
Verdicts, if Grand Juries be overawed, or not suffered to enquire into the
Truth, to the satisfaction of their Consciences. Every Man whilst he lives
innocently, does, under God, place his hopes of security in the Law, which can
give no protection, if its due course be so interrupted, that frauds cannot be
discovered, Witnesses may as well favor Offenders, as give false testimony
against the guiltless, and if they, by hearing what each other says, are put
into a way of concealing their villainous designs, there can be no legal
Revenge of the crimes already committed. Others by their impunity will be
encouraged to do the like: And every quiet minded Person will be equally
exposed unto private injuries, and such as may be done unto him, under the
color of Law. No man can promise unto himself any security for his Life or
Goods, and they who do not suffer the utmost violences in their own persons,
may do it in their Children, Friends, and nearest Relations, if he be deprived
of the remedies that the Law ordains, and forced to depend upon the Will of a
Judge, who may be (and perhaps we may say) are too often corrupted, or swayed
by their own Passions, Interests, or the impulse of such as are greater than
they. This mischief is aggravated by a commonly received Opinion, that
whosoever speaks against an accused person is the King's Witness, and the worst
of men, in their worst designs, do usually shelter themselves under that name,
whereas he only is the King's Witness, who speaks the truth, whether it be for
or against him that is accused. As the Power of the King's the Power of the
Law, he can have no other intention than that of the Law, which is to have
Justice impartially administered, and as he is the Father of his People, he
cannot but incline ever to the gentlest side, unless i^ be possible for a
Father to delight in the destruction, or desire to enrich himself by the
confiscation of his Childrens Estates. If the most wicked Princes have had
different thoughts, that have been obliged to dissemble them. We know of none
worse than Nero, but he was so far from acknowledging, that he desired any
Man's condemnation, that he looked upon the necessity of signing Warrants for
the Execution of Sne. Vit. Ner. Vtinam nescirem letteras.
Malefactors, as a burden, and rather wished he had not learnt to write, than
to be obliged to do it. They who by spreading such barbarous errors, would
create unto the King, an interest different from that of his People which he is
to preserve, whilst they pretend to serve him in destroying of them, they
deprive him of his honor and dignity; Justice is done in all places, in the
name of the chief Magistrate, it being presumed, that he does embrace every one
of his Subjects with equal tenderness, until the guilty are by legal proofs
discriminated from the Innocent, and amongst us the King's name may be used in
civil cases, as well as criminal: But it is as impossible for him rightly to
desire I should be condemned for killing a Man whom I have not killed, or a
Treason that I have not committed, as that my Land should be unjustly taken
from me by a judgment in his Bench, or I should be condemned to pay a debt that
I do not owe.

In both Cases we sue unto him for Justice, and demand it as our right. We are
all concerned in it, publicly, and privately, and the King, as well as all the
Officers of Justice, are by their several Oaths, obliged in their respective
capacities to perform it. They are bound to give their assistance to find out
Offenders, and the King's Attorney is by his Oath to prosecute them, if he be
required; and he is not only the King's servant in such cases, but the Nations;
or rather, cannot otherwise serve the King, than by seeing Justice done in the
Nation. Whenever any Man receives an injury in his Person, Wife, Children,
Friends, or Goods, the King is injured, in as much as he is by his Office to
prevent such mischief, and ought to be concerned in the Welfare of every one of
his Subjects; but the parties to whom the injuries are done, are the immediate
sufferers, and the prosecution is principally made, that they may be repared or
revenged, and other innocent persons secured by the punishment of Offenders, in
which the King can be no otherwise concerned, than as he is to see his Office
faithfully performed, and his People protected. The King's suit therefore is in
the behalf of his People, yet the Law leaves unto every man a Liberty, in case
of Treasons, Murders, Rapes, Robberies, etc. to sue in the King's name, and
crave his aid, or by way of appeal in his own. The same Law looks upon Felons,
or Traitors as public Enemies, and by authorizing every one to pursue or
apprehend them, teaches us, that every man, in his place, ought to do it. The
same Act whereby one or a few are injured, threatens all, and every Man's
private interest so concurs with that of the public, that all depends upon the
exact preservation of the Method prescribed by the Law, for the impartial
inquisition after suspected Offenders, and most tender care of preserving such
as are innocent. As this cannot possibly be effected without secret and
separate examinations, the forbidding them is no less, than to change the
Course, which is enjoined by Law, confirmed by custom, and grounded upon Reason
and Justice.

If on the other side any man believe, that such as in the King's name
prosecute suspected Delinquents, ought only to try how they may bring them to
be condemned, he may be pleased to consider, that all such persons ought,
according unto Law, to produce no Witness whom they do not think to be true: No
Evidence which they do not believe good, nor can conceal any thing that may
justify the accused. No trick or Artifice can be lawfully used to deceive a
Grand Jury, or induce them to find or reject a Bill, otherwise than as they are
led by their own Consciences. All Lawyers were anciently sworn to put no deceit
upon the Courts for their Clients sake, and there are Statutes still in force
to punish them, if they do it, but there is an eternal obligation upon such as
are of Counsel against persons accused of Crimes, not to use such Arts as may
bring the Innocent to be condemned, and thereby parvert that which is not
called the Judgment of Man, but of God, because Man renders it in the stead,
and by the Commandment of God; such practices exalt the Jurisdiction of
Tribunals, but infect and polute them with that Innocent Blood, which will be
their overthrow: And least of all, can it be called a Service to the King,
since none could ever stand against the cry of it. This is necessarily employed
in the Attorney General's Oath, to serve the King in his Kingly Office, wherein
the Law presumes he can do no wrong: But the greatest of all wrongs, and that
which has been most destructive unto Thrones, is by Fraud to circumvent and
destroy the Innocent: This is to turn a Legal King into a Nimrod, a Hunter of
Men: This is not to act the part of a Father or a Shepherd, who is ready to lay
down his Life for his Sheep, but such as the Psalmist complains of, who eat up
the People as if they eat Bread: Jezebel did perhaps applaud her own Wit, and
think she had done a great Service to the King, by finding out Men of Belial,
Judges, and Witnesses to bring Naboth to be stoned; but that unregarded Blood
was a Canker, or the Plague of Leprosy in his Throne and Family, which could
not be cured but by its overthrow and extinction. But if the Attorney General
cannot serve the King by abusing Juries, and subverting the Innocent, he can as
little gain an advantage to himself by falsifying his Oath, by the true meaning
whereof he is to prosecute Justice Impartially, and the Eternal Divine Law
would annul any Oath or Promise that he should have taken to the contrary, even
though his Office had obliged him unto it.

The like Obligation lies upon Jurors not to suffer themselves to be deluded,
or persuaded, that the Judges, King's Council, or any others can dispense with
that Oath, or any part of it, which they have taken before God unto the whole
Nation; nor to think that they can swerve from the Rules set by the Law without
a damnable breach of it. The pwoer of relating, or dissolving Conscientious
Obligations, acknowled in the Pope, makes a great part of the Roman
Superstition; and that grand Impostor could never corrupt Kingdoms and Nations
to their destruction, and the Establishment of his Tyranny, until he had
brought them to believe he could dispense with Oaths, taken by Kings unto their
Subjects, and by Subjects to their Kings; nor impose so extravagant an Error
upon either, until he had persuaded them he was in the place of God. It is hard
to say how the Judges or King's Council can have the same Power, unless it be
upon the same Title; but we may be sure they may as well dispense with the
whole Oath as any part of it, and can have no pretense unto either, unless they
have the Keys of Heaven and Hell in their keeping: It is in vain to say, the
King as any other man may remit the Oath taken unto and for himself; He is not
a party for himself, but in the behalf of his People, and cannot dispose of
their Concernments without their Consent, which is given only in Parliament.

The King's Council ought to remember, they are in criminal Cases of Council
unto every man in the Kingdom; It is no ways referred unto the Direction of the
Judges, or unto them, whether that secrecy enjoined by Law, be profitable unto
the King or Kingdom; They must take the Law as it is, and render Obedience unto
it, until it be altered by the Power that made it. To this end the Judges by
Acts of Parliament, viz. 18 Ed. 3. cap. 8. and 20 Ed. 3. cap. 1. are sworn to
serve the People, Ye shall serve our Lord the King and his People in the Office
of Justice, etc. Ye shall deny to no man common Right by the King's Letters,
nor no other man's, nor for no other cause; and in default thereof in any point,
they are to forfeit their Bodies, Lands, and Goods. This proves them to be the
Peoples Servants as well as the Kings.

Further by the express words of the Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, they are
required to assist every man that suffers injury, and make diligent inquisition
after all manner of falsehoods, deceits, offenses, and wrongs done to any man,
and thereupon to do Justice according to the Law: so that in the whole
proceedings in order unto Trial, and in the Trials themselves, the Thing
principally intended, which several persons are severally in their capacities
obliged to pursue, is, the discovery of Truth: The Withesses are to depose the
Truth, the whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth: Thereupon the Council for
the King are to prosecute: The Grand Jury to present: and the Petit Jury to
try: These are several Offices, but all to the same End; It Is not the Prisoner,
but the Crime that is to be pursued; This primarily, the Offender but by
consequence; and therefore such Courses must be taken, as may discover that,
and not such as may ensnare him: When the Offense is found, the impartial
Letter of the Law gives the Doom; and the Judges have no share in it, but the
pronouncing of it: Till then the Judges are only to preside, and take Care,
that every man else, who is employed in this necessary Affair, do his duty
according to Law. So that upon result of the whole transaction impartial
Justice may be done, either to the Acquittal or condemnation of the Prisoner.

Hereby it is manifest why the Judges are obliged by Oath, To Serve the People
as well as the King: And by Commission, To Serve every One that Suffers
Injuries. As they are to See that Right be done to the King, and His injured
Subjects in discovering of the Delinquent; So they are to be of Council with
the Prisoner, whom the Law supposes may be ignorant as well as innocent; and
therefore has provided, that the Court shall be of Council for him, and as well
inform him of what Legal advantages the Law allows him, as to resolve any point
of Law when he shall propose it to them; And it seems to be upon the
presumption of this steady impartiality in the Judges, (thus obliged by all
that is held Sacred before God and man to be unbyassed) that the Prisoner has
no Council; for if the Court faithfully perform their duty, the Accused can
have no wrong, or hardship, and therefore needs no Adviser.

Now suppose a man perfectly innocent, and in some measure knowing in the Law,
should be accused of Treason or Felony; If the Judges shall deny unto the Grand
Jury the liberty of examining any Witnesses, except in open Court, where
nothing shall be offered that may help to clear the Prisoner, but every Thing
aggravated, that gives color for the Accusation; such Persons only produced,
as the King's Council, or the Prosecutors shall think fit to call, of whose
Credit also the Jury must not inquire, but shall be controlled and brow-beaten
in asking Questions, of such unknown Witnesses, for their own Satisfaction, if
they have any Tendency to discover the Infamy of these Witnesses, or the
Falsehood of their Testimony; How can Innocence secure any Man from being
arraigned?

And if the Oath of the Judges should be as much forgotten in the further
Proceedings upon the Trial, where in Cases of Treason the Prisoner shall have
all the King's Council (commonly not the most unlearned) prepared with studied
Speeches, and Arguments, to make him black and odious, and to Strain all his
words, and to allege them for Instances of his guilt: If then all his private
Papers, and Notes to help his Memory in his Plea, and Defense, shall be taken
from him by the Jailer, or the Court, and given to his Prosecutors; And all
Advice and Assistance from Councils, or Friends, and his nearest Relations
shall be denied him, and none suffered by word or writing to inform him of the
indifferency, or honesty, or the partiality or malice of the Pannels returned
(whom the Law allows him to challenge or refuse, either peremptorily, or for
good Reasons offered;) should he be thus deprived of all the good provisions of
the Law for his safety, To what Frauds, Perjuries, and Subornations is not he,
and every man Exposed, who may be accused? What Deceits may there not be put
upon Juries? and what Probability is there of finding Security in Innocence?
What an admirable Execution would this be of their Commission, To make diligent
Inquisition after all manner of Falsehoods, Deceipts, Wrongs and Frauds, and
thereupon to do Justice according to Law? When at the same Time, if so Managed,
a Method would be introduced of ruining and destroying any Man in the form of
Justice. Such practices would be the highest dishonor to the King imaginable,
whose name is used, and so far Misrepresent the Kingly Office, as to make that
appear, to have been Erected to vex and destroy the People, which was intended,
and ordained to help and preserve them.

The Law so far abhors such proceedings, that it intends, that every Man should
be strictly bound, to be exactly just in their several Employments, relating to
the Execution of Justice. The Sergeant, of the King's Council (Sir George
Jefferys, among the rest) who prosecute in the King's name, and are consulted
in the forming Bills of Indictment, and advise about the Witnesses and their
Testimonies against the Accused; These (if they would remember it) when they
are made Sergeants, take an Oath ( Cokes 2d. Institutes, Page 214.) as well and
truly to serve the People (whereof the party accused is one) as the King
himself, and to minister the King's matters duly and truly after the course of
the Law to their Cunning; Not to use their Cunning and Craft to hide the Truth,
and destroy the accused if they can.

They are also obliged by the Statute of Westminster. 1. Cap. 29. To put no manner of
Deceit or Collusion upon the King's Court, nor secretly to consent to any such
Tricks as may abuse or beguile the Court, or the party, be it in Causes Civil
or Criminal: And it is ordained, that if any of them be convicted of such
practices, he shall be imprisoned for a year, and never be heard to plead again
in any Court; and if the Mischievous consequence of their Treacheries be great,
they are Subject to further and greater punishments. Our Ancient Law Book
called the Miror of Justice, Cap. 2. Sect. 4. says, That every Sergeant Pleader
is chargeable by his Oath, not to maintain or defend any Wrong or Falsehood to
his Knowledge, but shall leave his Client when he shall perceive the wrong
intended by him: Also that he shall not move or proffer any false Testimony,
nor consent to any Lies, Deceits, or Corruptions whatsoever in his pleadings.

As a further Security unto the People against all Attempts upon their Laws,
Exemplary Justice has been done, in several Ages, upon such Judges, and
Justiciaries, as through Corruption, Submission unto unjust Commands, or any
other Sinister consideration, have dared to swerve from them: The punishments
of these wicked Men remain upon Record, as Monuments of their Infamy to be a
Terror unto all that shall succeed them. In the Reign of the Saxons the most
notable Example was given by King Alfred, who caused above forty Judges to be
hanged in a Short Space, for several wrongs done to the People, as is related
in the Mirror of Justice: Some of them suffered for imposing on Juries, and
forcing them to give Verdicts according to their will; And one, as it seems,
had taken the Confidence to examine a Jury, that he might find which of them
would Submit to his Will, and setting aside him who would not, condemned a Man
upon the Verdict of Eleven.

Since the Coming of the Normans, our Parliaments have not been less severe
against such Judges, as have suffered the course of Justice to be perverted, or
the Rights and Liberties of the People to be invaded: In the time of Edward the
1st Anno 1289. The Parliament finding, That all the Judges (except Two) had
swerved from their duty, condemned them to several punishments according unto
their Crimes, Ex Chron. Anno. 10. Ed. 1. ad finem.
As Banishment, Perpetual Imprisonment, or the loss of all their Estates, etc.
Their Particular Offenses are specified in a Speech made by the Archbishop of
Canterbury in Parliament. They had broken Magna Charta; Incited the King
against his People; Violated the Laws under pretense of expounding them; and
impudently presumed to prefer their own Councils to the King, before the
Advices of Parliament, as appears by the speech, etc. Hereunto annexed.

The like was done in Ed. the 2d. Time, when Hugh De Spencer was charged for
having prevailed with the King to break his Oath to the People, in doing Things
against the Law by his own Authority.

In Edward the 3d. Time Judge Thorpe was hanged for having in the like manner
brought the King to break his Oath: Dan. History. p. 260, 261.
And the happy Reign of that great King affords many Instances of the like
nature, amongst which, the punishment of Sir Henry Green and Sir William
Skipwith, deserve to be observed and put into an Equal Rank with those of his
brave and victorious Grandfather.

In Richard the Second's Time, Eleven of the Judges, See all the English
Histories of Walsingham, Fabian, Speed, etc. in the 11 and 12 years of Richard
II.
forgetting the dreadful Punishments of their Predecessors, subscribed
malicious Indictments against Law, and gave false Interpretations of our
Ancient Laws to the King, thereby to bring many of his most Eminent, and
worthiest Subjects, to suffer as Traitors at his Will: Subjected the Authority,
and very Being of Parliaments to his absolute pleasure, And made him believe,
that all the Laws lay in his own breast: Hereupon sentence of death passed upon
them; and tho upon their repentance, and confessing, they had been swayed by
fear, and threatenings from the King, Two only were Executed, all the others
were for ever banished, as unworthy to enjoy the benefit of that Law, which
they had so perfidiously, and basely betrayed.

It were an Endless work to recite all the Examples of this kind that are found
in our Histories and Records; but that of Empson and Dudley must not be
omitted: They had craftily contrived to abolish Grand Juries and to draw the
Lives and Estates of the People into question, without Indictments by them; and
by surprise, and other wicked practices, they gained an Act of Parliament for
their countenance: Hereupon false Accusations followed without number;
Oppression and Injustice broke forth like a Flood, And to gain the King's
Favor, they filled his Coffers: The Indictments against them mentioned in
Anderson's Reports, Pa. 156, 157, are worth reading; whereby they are charged
with Treason, for Subverting the Laws, and Customs of the Land, in their
proceedings without Grand Juries, and procuring the murmuring and hatred of the
People against the King, to the great danger of him, and the Kingdom. Nothing
could satisfy the Kingdom, tho 'the King was dead, whom they had flattered, and
served, but such Justice done upon them, and many of their Instruments, and
Officers, as may for ever make the Ears of Judges to tingle.

And it is not to be forgotten, that the Judges in Queen Eliz. time, in the
Case of R. Cavendish in Anderson's Reports, P. 152, and 155. were (as they told
the Queen, and her Counselors) by the punishment of former Judges, especially
of Empson and Dudley, deterred from obeying her illegal Commands: The Queen had
sent several Letters under her Signet; Great Men pressed them to obey her
Patent under the Great Seal, and the Reasons of their disobedience being
required; they answered, That the Queen her self, and the Judges also had taken
an Oath to keep the Laws; And if they should obey her Commands, the Laws would
not warrant them, and they should therein break their Oath, to the Offense of
God, and their Country, and the Commonwealth wherein they were born; And; say
they, if we had no fear of God, yet the Examples, and Punishments of others
before us, who did offend the Laws, do remember, and recall us from the like
Offenses.

Whosoever being in the like places may design, or be put upon the like
practices, will do well to consider these Examples, and not to think, that he,
who obliquely Endeavors to render Grand Juries useless, is less Criminal, than
he, that would absolutely abolish them: That which does not act according to
its Institution, is, as if it were not in being: And whoever does without
prejudice consider this matter, will see that it is not less pernicious to deny
Juries the use of those Methods of discovering Truth which the Law has
appointed, and so by degrees turn them into a mere matter of form, than openly,
and avowedly to destroy them. Surely such a gradual Method of destroying our
Native Right is the most dangerous in its consequence. The safety, which our
Forefathers for many hundred of years, enjoyed under this part of the Law
especially, and have transmitted to us, is so apparent to the meanest Capacity,
that whoever shall go about to take it away, or give it up, is like to meet
with the fate of Ishmael, to have every man's hand against him, because he is
against every Man. Artifices of this Kind, will ruin us more silently, and so
with less opposition, and yet as certainly, as the other more moved oppression:
This only is the difference, that one way we should be slaves immediately, and
the other insensibly; But with this further disadvantage too, that our slavery
should be the more unavoydable, and the faster rivited upon us, because it
would be under color of Law, which Practice in Time would obtain.

Few men at first see the danger of little changes in Fundamentals, and those,
who design them, usually act with so much craft, as besides the giving specious
Reasons, they take great Care, that the true Reason shall not appear: Every
design therefore of changing the Constitution ought to be most warily observed,
and timely opposed; Nor is it only the Interest of the People, that such
Fundamentals should be duly guarded, for whose benefit they were at first so
carefully laid, and whom the Judges are sworn to serve; but of the King too,
for whose sake those pretend to act, who would subvert them.

Our Kings as well as Judges are sworn to maintain the Laws; They have
themselves in several Statutes required the Judges, at their peril, to
administer Equal Justice to every Man, notwithstanding any Letters, or
Commauds, etc. even from themselves to the contrary; And when any failure has
been, the greatest, and most powerful of them have ever been the readiest to
give Redress. It appears by the Preface to the Statutes of 20th Ed. 3. that the
Judicial proceedings had been perverted, That Letters, Writs and Commands had
been sent from the King, and great Men to the Justices, and that Persons
belonging to the Court of the King, the Queen, the Prince of Wales had
maintained, and abetted Quarrels, etc. whereby the Laws had been violated, and
many wrongs done: But the King was so far from justifying his own Letters, or
those illegal practices; That the preamble of those Statutes says, they were
made for the relief of the People in their sufferings by them. That brave King
in the height of his glory, and vigor of his Age, chose rather to confess his
Error, than to continue in it, as is evident by his own words. Edward, by the
Grace of God, etc. Because by diverse Complaints made unto us, we have perceived
that the Law of the Land, which we by our Oath are bound to maintain, is the
less well kept, and Execution of the same disturbed many times by maintenances
and procurements, as well in the Court as the Country, We greatly moved of
Conscience in this matter, and for this Cause, desiring as much for the
pleasure of God, and ease and quietness of our Subjects, as to save our
Conscience, and for to save and keep our said Oath, by the Assent, etc. Enact.
That Judges shall do Justice, notwithstanding Writs, Letters or Commands from
himself, etc. and that none of the King's House, or belonging to the King,
Queen, or Prince of Wales do maintain Quarrels, etc.

King James in his Speech to the Judges in the Starchamber, Anno. 1616. told
them; That he had after many years resolved to renew his Oath, made at his
Coronation, concerning Justice, and the promise therein contained for
maintaining the Law of the Land. And in the next page save one says, I was
sworn to maintain the Law of the Land, and therefore had been perjured, if I
had broken it; God is my Judge I never intended it. And His Majesty, that now
is, has made frequent Declarations, and Protestations of his being far from
all thoughts of designing an Arbitrary Government, and that the Nation might be
confident, he would rule by Law.

Now if after all this, any Officer of the Kings should pretend Instructions
from his Master, to demand so material an alteration of proceedings, in the
highest Cases against Law, as are above mentioned, And the Court (who are
required to slight and reject the most solemn Commands under the Great Seal, if
contrary to Law) should upon a verbal Intimation allow of such a Demand, and so
break in upon this Bulwark of our Liberties, which the Law has erected; Might
it not give too just an occasion to suspect, that all the legal securities of
our Lives, and Properties are unable to protect us? And may not such fears rob
the King of his greatest Treasure and Strength, the Peoples hearts, when they
dare not rely upon him in his Kingly Office, and trust, for safety and
protection by the Laws? Our English History affords many instances of those
that have pretended to serve our King in this manner, by undermining the
Peoples Right and Liberties, whose practices have sometimes proved of fatal
consequence to the Kings themselves, but more frequently ended in their own
destruction.

But after all imagining it could be made out, that this Method of private
Examinations by a Grand Jury (which from what has been said before, has
appeared to be so extremely necessary for the public good, and to every
private man's security) were inconvenient or mischievous, and therefore fit to
be changed; yet being so Essential a part of the Common Law, it is no otherwise
alterable than by Parliament. We find by Presidents, that the bare forms of
Indictments could not be reformed by the Judges: The words Depopulatores
agrorum, Insidiator es viarum, Vi and Armis, Baculis, Cultellis, Arcubus and
sagittis, could not be left out, but by advice of the Kingdom in Parliament. A
Writ issued in the time of K. Ed. 3. giving power to hear and determine
Offenses, and all the Justices resolved ( Cok. 4. Inst. Page 164.) That they
could not lawfully act, having their Authority by Writ, where they ought to
have had it by Commission; Though it was in the form and words, that the Legal
Commission ought to be. John Knivett Chief Justice, by Advice of all the
Judges, resolved that the said Writ was Contra Legem: And where diverse
Indictments were before them found against T.S. the same, and all that was done
by color of that Writ, was Damned.

If in such seeming little Things as these, and many others, that may be
instanced, the Wisdom of the Nation has not thought fit to entrust the Judges,
but reserved the Consideration of them to the Legislative Power; It cannot be
imagined, that they should subject to the discretion and pleasure of the
Judges, those important Points, in the Established course of the administering
Justice, whereupon depends the safety of all the Subjects Lives, and Fortunes.
If Judges will take upon themselves to alter the constant practice, they must
either alter the Oath of the Grand Jury, or continue it; If they should alter
it, so as to make it sail with any such new Method, and thus in appearance
charitably provide, that the Grand Jury should not take a mock Oath, or
forswear themselves; they then make an incroachment upon the Authority of
Parliaments, who only can make new, or change old Legal Oaths, and all the
proceedings thereupon would be void.

If they should continue constantly to impose the same Oath, as well when they
have notice from the King, that the Jury shall not be bound to keep his
Secrets, and their own, as when they have none; they must assume to make the
same form of Law to be of force, and no force; and the same words to bind the
Conscience, as they will have them; whereby they would profane the Natural
Religion of an Oath, and bring a foul scandal upon Christianity, by trifling
worse than Heathens in that sacred matter; and whilst the Judges find
themselves under the necessity of administering the Oath unto Grand Juries, and
not suffer them to observe it according unto their Consciences, they would
confess, the illegality of their own Proceedings, and can never be able to
repair the Breaches, by pretending a tacit Implication, if the King will, but
must unavoidably fall under that approved Maxim of our Law, Maledicta est
Interpretatio quae corrumpit Textum; It is a Cursed Interpretation that
dissolves the Text.

There are Two Vulgar Errors concerning the duty of Grand Juries, which if not
removed, will in time destroy all the benefit we can expect from that
Constitution, by turning them into a mere matter of form, which were designed
for so great Ends. Many have of late, thought, and affirmed it for Law, that
the Grand Jury is neither to make so strict inquiry into matters before them,
nor to look for so clear Evidence of the Crime, as the Petit Jury; but that of
their Presentiments, being to pass a second Examination, they ought to Indict
upon a superficial Inquiry, and bare probabilities: Whereas should either of
these Opinions be admitted, the prejudice to the Subject would be equal to the
total laying aside Grand Juries; there being in truth no difference between
arraigning without any Presentment from them at all, and their Presenting upon
slight grounds.

For the first, that Grand Juries ought not to make so strict Inquiry, it were
to be wished, that we might know how it comes to pass, that an Oath should be
obligatory unto a Petit Jury, and not unto the Grand: Or in what Points they
may lawfully and with good Conscience omit that Exactness, whether in relation
to the Witnesses, and their credibility: Or the fact and all its circumstances:
Or the Testimony and its weight: Or lastly, in reference to the Prisoner, and
Probability of his guilt: And withal upon what grounds of Law, or Reason their
Opinion is founded. On the contrary, he that will consider either the Oath they
take, or the Commission, where their duty is described, will find in all
Points, that there lies an equal Obligation upon them, and the Petit Juries.

They swear diligently to inquire, and true Presentment make, etc. and to
Present the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth, etc. And in the
Commission of Oyer and Terminer their duty (with that of the Commissioners) is
thus described: Ad Inquirendum per Sacramentum Proborum and legalium hominum,
etc. per quos rei veritas melius sciri poterit, de quibuscunque proditionibus,
etc. confoederationibus, Falsis allegantiis, nec non Accessoriis Eorundem, etc.
per quoscunque and qualitercunque habit. fact. perpetrat. sive Commiss. Et per
quos, Et per quem, cui, vel quibus quando, qualiter, vel quomodo, and de aliis
articulis and Circumstantiis praemis. and eorum aliquod. vel aliqua
qualitercunque concernen. To inquire by the Oath of honest and lawful Men, etc.
By whom the Truth of the matter may be best known, of all manner of Treasons,
etc. Confederacies, false Testimonies, etc. As also the Accessories, etc. by
whomsoever, or howsoever, done, perpetrated, or committed, by whom, or to whom,
how, in what way, or in what manner. And of other Articles and Circumstances
premised, and of any other Thing or Things howsoever concerning the same: Now
for any Man, after this to maintain, that Grand Juries are not to inquire, or
not carefully, is as much as in plain terms to say they are bound to act
contrary to the Commission, and their Oath; And to affirm that they can
discharge their duty according to the Obligations of Law and Conscience which
they lie under, without a strict Inquiry into particulars, is to affirm, that
the End can be obtained without the means necessary unto it.

The truth is, that Grand Juries have both a larger field for their Inquiry,
and are in many respects better capacitated to make a strict one, than the
Petit Juries: These last are confined as to the Person and the Crime, specified
in the Indictment; But they are at large obliged to search into the whole
matter, that any ways concerns every Case before them, and all the Offenses
contained in it, all the Criminal Circumstances whatsoever, and into every
thing, howsoever concerning the same. They are bound to enquire whether their
Information of Suspected Treasons or Felonies, brought by Accusers, be made by
Conspiracy, or Subornation; who are the Conspirators, or false Witnesses: By
whom abbetted, or maintained; Against whom, and how many the Conspiracy is
laid; when, and how, and in what course it was to have been prosecuted.

But none of these most intricate matters (which need the most strict and
diligent Inquiries) can come under the Cognizance of the Petit Jury; They can
only examine so much as relates to the Credit of those Witnesses brought to
prove the Charge against the Parties ^ndicted; wherein also they have neither
Power, nor convenient time to send for Persons, or Papers, if they think them
needful, nor to resolve any doubts of the Lawfulness and Credibility of the
Testimonies.

Yet further, if the Crimes objected are manifest, it is then the Grand Juries
duty to inquire after all the Persons any ways concerned in them, and the
several kinds of Offenses, whereof every one ought jointly, or separately to be
indicted as they shall discover them to have been Principals, or Accessories,
Parties or privy thereunto, or to have comforted, or knowingly relieved either
the Traitors or Felons, or concealed the offenses of others: But the
Inquisition into all these matters, which require all possible strictness in
searching, as being of the highest importance unto the public Justice and
safety, is wholly out of the Power and Trust of the Petit Juries. The guilt, or
innocence of the Parties put upon their Trials, and the Evidence thereof given,
is the only Objects of their Inquiries. It is not their work, nor within their
trust to search into all the guilt or crimes of the Parties whom they try; They
are bound to move within the Circle of the Indictment made by the Grand Jury,
who are to appoint and specify the offenses for which the Accused shall be
tried by the Petit Jury.

When a Prosecutor suggests that any Man is criminal, and ought to be indicted,
it belongs to the Grand Jury to hear all the proof he can offer, and to use all
other means they can, whereby they may come to understand the truth of the
suggestion, and every thing or circumstance that may concern it; Then they are
carefully to examine the nature of the Facts, according unto unto the Rules of
the Com. Law, or the express words of the Statutes, whereby offenses are
distinguished, and punishments allotted unto each of them: It Is true, that upon
hearing the Party, or his Witnesses, the Petit Jury may acquit or judge the
Facts in the Indictment to be less heinous, or malicious than they were
presented by the Grand Jury, but cannot aggravate them; which being considered,
it will easily appear by the intent and Nature of the Powers given unto Grand
Juries, that they are by their Oaths obliged, and their instruction to keep all
injustice from entering the first gates of Courts of Judicature, and to secure
the innocent not only from punishment, but from all disgrace, vexation,
expense, or danger.

To understand our Law clearly herein, the Jurors must first know the lawful
grounds whereupon they may and ought to indict, and then what truly and justly
ought to be taken for the ground of an Indictment. The principal and most
certain is the Jurors personal knowledge, by their own eyes or ears of the
Crimes whereof they indict: Or so many pregnant concurring Circumstances, as
fully convince them of the guilt of the Accused: When these are wanting, the
Depositions of Witnesses and their Authority are their best Guides in finding
Indictments. When such Testimonies make the charge manifest and clear to the
Jury, they are called Evidence, because they make the guilt of Criminals
evident, and are like the light that discovers what was not seen before: All
Witnesses for that reason are usually called the Evidence, taking their name
from what they ought to be: Yet Witnesses may swear directly and positively to
an Accusation, and be no evidence of its truth to the Jury; sometimes such
remarks may be made upon the Witnesses, as well in relation to their Reputation
and Lives, as to the Matter, Manner, and Circumstance of their Depositions,
that from thence the falsehood may appear, or be strongly suspected: It is
therefore necessary to know what they mean by a probable Cause or Evidence, who
say that our Law requires no more for an Indictment.

Probable, is a Logical Term, relating to such propositions, as have an
appearance, but no certainty of Truth, showing rather what is not, than what is
the matter of Syllogisms: These may be allowed in Rhetoric, which works upon
passions, and makes use of such Colors as are fit to move them, whether true
or false; but not in Logic, whose Object is Truth; as it principally intends
to obviate the Errors that may arise from the credit given unto appearances,
by distinguishing the uncertain from the certain, very simile a vero, it cannot
admit of such Propositions, as may be false as well as true, it being as
impossible to draw a certain conclusion from uncertain premises, as to raise a
solid Building upon a tottering or sinking foundation. This ought principally
to be considered in Courts of Justice, which are not erected to bring men into
Condemnation, but to find who deserves to be condemned, and those Rules are to
be followed by them, which are least liable to desception. For this Reason the
Council of the Areopagites, and some others of the best Judicatures that have
been in the World, utterly rejected the use of Rhetoric, looking upon the Art
of persuading by uncertain probabilities, as little differing from that of
deceiving, and directly contrary to their ends, who by the knowledge of truth
desired to be led into the doing of Justice: But if the Art that made use of
these probabilities was banished from uncorrupted Tribunals, as a hindrance
unto the discovery of Truth, they that would ground Verdicts totally upon them,
declare an open neglect of it; and as it is said, that uno absurdo dato mill
sequuntur, if Juries were to be guided by probabilities, the next question
would be concerning the more or less probable, or what degree of probability is
required to persuade them to find a Bill: This being impossible to fix, the
whole Proceedings would be brought to depend upon the Fancies of Men, and as
nothing is so slight but it may move them, there is no security that innocent
Persons may not be brought every day into danger and trouble. By this means
certain mischiefs will be done, whilst it is by their own confession uncertain
whether they are any ways deserved by such as suffer them to the utter
overthrow of all Justice.

If the word Probable be taken in a common, rather than a nice Logical sense,
it signifies no more than likely, or rather likely than unlikely: When a matter
is found to be so, the Wager is not even, there is odds upon one side, and this
may be a very good ground for betting in a Tennis Court, or at a Horse-race,
but he that would make the Administration of Justice to depend upon such
Points, seems to put a very small value upon the fortunes, liberties and
reputations of men, and to forget that those who sit in Courts of Justice, have
no other business there than to preserve them.

This continues in force, though in a Diologue between a Barrister and a Grand
Jury Man, published under the Title of the Grand Jury Man's Oath and Office, it
be said p. 8. and 9. That their work is no more than to present Offenses fit
for a Trial, and for that Reason, give in only a Verisimilar or probable
Charge; and others have affirmed, that a far less Evidence will warrant a Grand
Juries Indictment, than a Petit Juries Verdict. For nothing can be more
opposite to the justice of our Laws, than such Opinions: All Laws in doubtful
Cases direct a suspension of Judgment, or a sentence in favor of the Accused
person: But if this were hearkened unto, Grand Juries should upon their Oaths
affirm, they judge him Criminal, when the Evidence is upon such uncertain
grounds that they cannot but doubt, whether he is so or not.

It cannot be hereupon said, that no Evidence is so clear and full, but it may
be false, and give the Jury occasion of doubts, so as all Criminals must
escape, if no Indictment ought to be found unless the proofs are absolutely
certain, for it is confessed, that such Cases are not capable of an infallible,
Mathematical demonstration: but a Jury that Examines all the Witnesses, that
are likely to give any light concerning the business in question, and all
Circumstances relating to the fact before them, with the Lives and Credit of
those tha^ testify i^, and of the Person accused, may and do often find that
which in their Consciences, does fully persuade them, that the accused Person
is guilty; This is as much as the Law, or their Oath does require, and such as
find Bills, after having made such a Scrutiny, are blameless before God, and
Man, if through the fragility inseparable from humane nature, they should be
led into Error? For they (...) not swear, that the Bill is true, but that they
in their Consciences believe that it is so; and if they write Ignoramus upon
the Bill, it is not thereby declared to be false, nor the P rson accused
acquitted, but the matter is suspended, until it can be more clearly proved, as
in doubtful Cases, it always ought to be.

Our Ancestors took great Care that suspicious, and probable Causes should not
bring any Man's Life and Estate into danger; For that reason, it was ordained
by the Stat 37 Ed 3. Cap 18. That such as made suggestions to the King, should
find surety to pursue and incur the same pain, that the other should have had
if he were attainted, in case their suggestion be not found evil, and that then
process of the Law should be made against the Accused.

This manner of Proceeding, has its root on eternal, and universal Reason: The
Law given by God unto his People, Deuteronomy. 19. allotted the same Punishment unto a
false witness, as a person convicted. The best disciplined Nations of the
world, learnt this from the Hebrews, and made it their Rule, in the
administration of Justice. The Grecians generally observed it, and the Romans,
according to their Lex Talionis, did not only punish death with death, but the
intention of committing Murder by false Accusations, with the same severity,
as if it had been effected by any other means. This Law was inviolably observed
as long as any thing of regularity or equity remained amongst them; and when
through the wickedness of some of the Emperors, or their favorites, it came
to be overthrown, all Justice perished with it. A Crew of false Informers brake
out to the destruction of the best men, and never ceased until they had ruined
all the most eminent and ancient Families: Circumvented the Persons, that by
their Reputation, Wealth, Birth or Virtue deserved to be distinguished from the
common sort of People, and brought desolation, upon that victorious City.
Tacitus complains of this, Tac. Ann. 3.
as the cause of all the mischiefs suffered in his Time, and Country.

By their means the most Savage Cruelties, were committed under the name of
Law, which thereby became a greater Plague, than formerly Crimes had been: No
remedy could be found, when those Delatores, whom he calls, genus hominum
Publico exitio repertum, Tac. Ann. 4.
and poenis quidem nunquam satis coercitum, were invited by impunity, or
reward, and the Miserable People groaned under this calamity, until those
instruments of iniquity, were by better Princes, put to the most cruel, tho
well deserved deaths.

The like has been seen in many places, and the domestic quiet, which is now
enjoyed in the Principal parts of Europe, proceeds chiefly from this, that
every man knows the same Punishment is appointed for a false Accusation, and
proved Crime.

It is hardly seven years since Monsieur Courboyer, a man of quality in
Brittany, suborned two of the King of France his Guards, to swear Treasonable
Designs against La Motte, a Norman Gentleman; the matter being brought to
Monsieur Colbert, he caused the Accused Person and the Witnesses to be secured,
until the fraud was discovered by one of them, whereupon he was pardoned; La
Motte released: Courboyer beheaded, and the other false Witness hanged by the
Sentence of the Parliament of Paris. Though this Law seems to be grounded upon
such foundation, as forbids us to question the equity of it, our Ancestors (for
Reasons best known unto themselves) thought fit to moderate its Severity, by
the Statute of 38 Ed. 3. Cap. 9. yet then it was enacted, and the Law continues
in force unto this day; That whosoever made complaints to the King, and could
not prove them against the Defendant, by the process of Law limited in former
Statures, which is first by a Grand Jury, he should be imprisoned until he had
made gree to the Party of his damages, and of the slander he suffered by such
occasion, and after shall make fine and ransom to the King, which is for the
common damage, that the King and his People suffer by such a false accusation
and defamation of any Subject: And in the 42 Ed. 3. Cap. 3. To eschew the
Mischiefs and damage done by false Accusers. It Is enacted, That no man be put
to answer such suggestions without presentment before the Justices, i. e. by
the Grand Jury: It cannot surely be imagined, that the suggestions made to the
King and his Council, had no probability in them, Or that there was no color,
cause, or Reason for the King to put the party to answer the Accusation, but
the grievance and complaint was, that the People suffered certain damage, and
vexation upon untrue, and at best, uncertain accusations, and that therein the
Law was perverted by the King and his Councils taking upon them, to judge of
the certainty, or Truth of them, which of right belonged to the Grand Jury
only, upon whose Judgment and Integrity our Law does wholly rely, for the
indemnity of the Innocent, and the punishment of all such as do unjustly molest
them.

Our Laws have not thought fit so absolutely to depend upon the Oaths of
Witnesses, as to allow, that upon Two, or Ten men's swearing positively Treason
or Felony against any Man, before the Justices of Peace, or all the Judges, or
before the King and his Council, that the party accused, be he either Peer of
the Realm, or Commoner, should without further Inquiry be thereupon arraigned,
and put upon his Trial for his Life: Yet none can doubt but there is something
of probability in such depositions nevertheless the Law Refers those matters
unto Grand Juries, and no man can be brought to Trial, until upon such strict
inquiries, (as is before said) the Indictment be found. The Law is so strict in
these Inquiries, that tho the Crime be never so notorious, nay if Treason
should be confessed in Writing under Hand and Seal, before Justices of Peace,
Secretaries of State, or the King and Council, yet before the party can be
arraigned for it, the Grand Jury must inquire, and be satisfied, whether such a
Confession be clear and certain: Whether there was no collusion therein: Or the
party induced to such confession by promise of pardon: Or that some pretended
partakers in the Crime may be defamed, or destroyed thereby; they must inquire,
whether the Confession was not extorted by fear, threatenings, or force, and
whether the party was truly Compos mentis, of sound Mind, and Reason at that
Time.

The Stat. 5 Eliz. Cap. 1. declares the ancient Common Law concerning the Trust
and Duty of Juries, and Enacts that none should be indicted for assisting,
aiding, comforting, or abetting Criminals in the Treasons therein made and
declared, unless he, or they be thereof lawfully accused by such good and
sufficient Testimony or Proof, as by the Jury, by whom he shall be indicted,
shall be thought good, lawful, and sufficient to prove him, or them guilty of
the said Offenses. Herein is declared, the only True Reason of Indictments, i.
e. the Grand Juries Judgment that they have such Testimonies as they esteem
sufficient to prove the party indicted guilty of the Crimes whereof he is
accused, and whatsoever the Indictment does contain, they are to present no
more, or other Crimes, than are proved to their satisfaction, as upon Oath they
declare it is, when they present it. This exactness is not only required in the
Substance of Crimes, but in the Circumstances, and any doubtfulness, or
uncertainty in them makes the Indictment, and all proceedings upon it by the
Petit Jury, to be insufficient, and void, and holden for none, as appears by
the following Cases.

In Young's Case in the Lord Cook's Reports, Lib. 4. Fol. 40. An Indictment for
Murder was declared void for its incertainty, because the Jury had not laid
certainty, in what part of the body the mortal wound was given, saying only,
that 'twas about his breast, the words were Vnam Plagam mortalem circitur
pectus. In like manner in Vaux Case Cooks Rep. Lib. 4. Fol. 44. he being
indicted for poisoning Ridley, the Jury had not plainly and expressly averred
that Ridley drank the Poison, though other words implied it, and thereupon the
Indictment was judged insufficient, for (says the Book) the matter of an
Indictment ought to be full, express, and certain, and shall not be maintained
by argument or implication, for that the Indictment is found by the Oath of the
Neighborhood. In the 2d part of Rolls Reports p. 263. Smith and Malls Case the
Indictment was quashed for incertainty, because the Jury had averred that Smith
was either a Servant or Deputy, Smith existens servus sive deputatus, are the
words: It was doubtless probably enough proved to the Jury, that he was either
a Deputy, or Servant, but because the Indictment did not absolutely and
certainly aver his condition either of Servant, or Deputy, it was declared
void: If there be any defect of certainty in the Grand Juries Verdict, no Proof
or Evidence to the Petit Jury can supply it, so it was judged in Wrote and Wigs
Case Coke 4. Rep. Fol. 45, 46, 47. It was laid, that Wrote was killed at
Shipperton, but did not aver that Shipperton was within the Verge, tho in truth
it was, and no Averment or Oath to the Petit Jury, could supply that small
faileur of certainty to support the Indictment; and the reason is rendered in
these words, viz. The Indictment being Veredictum id est dictum Veritatis a
Verdict. That is, a saying of Truth and matter of Record, ought to contain the
whole Truth which is requisite by the Law, for when it does not appear, it is
the same, as if it were not, and every material part of the Indictment ought to
be found upon the Oath of the Indicters, and cannot be supplied by the Averment
of the Party. The Grand Juries Verdict is the foundation of all judicial
proceeding against Capital Offenders (at the King's suit) if that fail in any
point of certainty, both convictions and acquittals thereupon are utterly void,
and the proceedings against both may begin again, as if they had never been
tried, as it appears in the Case last cited, Fol. 47.

Now as the Law requires from the Grand Jury particular, certain, and precise
affirmations of Truth, so it expects that they should look for the like, and
accept of no other from such as bring accusations to them. For no Man can
certainly affirm that which is uncertainly delivered unto him, or which he does
not firmly believe. The Witnesses that they receive for good, are to depose
only absolute certainties about the Facts committed, That is, what they have
seen, or heard from the accused parties themselves, not what others have told
them; They are not to be suffered to make probable arguments, and infer from
thence the guilt of the accused; Their depositions ought to be positive, plain,
direct, and full: The Crime is to be sworn without any doubtfulness or
obscurity; Not in words qualified, and limited to belief, conceptions, or
apprehensions. This absolute certainty required in the deposition of the
Witnesses, is one principal ground of the Juries most rational assurance of the
Truth of their Verdict: The credit also of the Witnesses ought to be free from
all blemish, that good and Conscientious Men may rationally rely upon them, in
matters of so great moment, as the blood of a Man. It must also be certainly
evident, that all the matters which they depose, are consistent with each
other, and accompanied with such Circumstances, as in their Judgment render it
credible: All just Indictments must be built upon these moral assurances, which
the wisdom of all Nations has devised as the best, and only way of deciding
Controversies; Neither can a Grand Jury Man, who swears to present nothing but
the Truth, be satisfied with less.

It Is scarce credible that any learned in our Laws, should tell a Grand Jury
that a far less Evidence will warrant their Indictment (being but an
Accusation) than the Petit Jury ought to have for their Verdict. Both of them
do in like manner plainly and positively affirm upon their Oaths, the Truth of
the Accusation; Their Verdicts are indeed one and the same in substance, and
sense, though not in words. There is no real difference between affirming in
writing, that an Indictment of Treason is true, as is the practice of Grand
Juries, and saying that the party tried thereupon is guilty of the Treason
whereof he is indicted, as is the course of Petit Juries: They are both upon
their Oaths; they are equally obligatory unto both, the one therefore must
expect the same proof for their satisfaction as the other, and as clear
Evidence must be required for an Indictment, as for a Verdict: It is
unreasonable to think that a slighter proof should satisfy the Consciences of
the greater Jury, than is requisite to convince the less, and uncharitable to
imagine, that those should not be as sensible as the others of the Sacred
security they have given by Oath, to do nothing in their Offices but according
to truth.

If there ought to be any difference in the Proceedings of the Grand and Petit
Juries, the greater exactness and diligence seems to be required in the Grand:
For as the same work of finding out the truth in order to the doing of Justice
is allotted unto both, the greatest part of the burden ought to lie upon them
that have the best opportunities of performing it. The invalidity, weakness, or
defects of the Proofs may be equally evident to either of them: But if there be
deceit in stifling true Testimonies, or malice in suborning wicked Persons, to
bring in such as are false, the Grand Jury may most easily, nay probably, can
only discover it. They are not straightened in time; they may freely examine in
private, without interruption from the Council, or Court, such Witnesses as are
presented unto them, or they shall think fit to call; they may jointly or
severally enquire of their Friends or Acquaintance after the Lives and
Reputations of the Witnesses, or the accused Persons, and all circumstances
relating unto the matter in question, and consult together under the Seal of
Secrecy: On the other side the Petty Jury being charged with the Prisoner, acts
in open Court under the awe of the Judges, is subject to be disturbed, or
interrupted by Council; deprived of all opportunity of consulting one another
until the Evidence be summed up, and not suffered to eat or drink until they
bring in a Verdict; so it is almost impossible for them thus limited to
discover such evil practices as may be used for, or against the Prisoner, by
Subornation or Perjury to pervert Justice; if therefore the Grand Jury be not
permitted to perform this part of their duty, it is hard to imagine how it
should be done at all: And it is much more inconceivable how they can satisfy
their Consciences, if they so neglect, as to find a Bill upon an imperfect
Evidence, in the absence of the Prisoner, in expectation that it will be
supplied at the Bar: It concerns them therefore to remember, that if they
proceed upon such uncertainties, they will certainly give incurable wounds into
their Neighbors Reputations, in order unto the destruction of their Persons.

Whatever ground this Doctrine of Indicting upon slight proofs may have got in
our days, it is (as we have seen) both against Law and Reason, and contrary to
the practice of former times. My Lord Coke in his Comment on Westminster. 2d. tells
us, That in those days (and as yet it ought to be) Indictments taken in the
Absence of the Party were formed upon plain and direct Proofs, and not upon
Probabilities and Inferences. Herein we see, that the practice of our
Forefathers, and the opinion of this great and judicious Lawyer, were directly
against this new Doctrine, and some that have carefully looked backward,
observed, that there are very few Examples of men acquitted by Petit Juries,
because Grand Juries of old were so wary in canvasing every thing narrowly, and
so sensible of their Duty, in proceeding according unto truth upon satisfactory
Evidence, that few or none were brought unto Trial till their guilt seemed
evident.

It is therefore a great mistake to think that the second Juries were
instituted for the hearing of fuller proofs, that was not their work, but to
give an opportunity to the accused persons to answer for themselves, and make
their defense, which cannot be thought to strengthen the Evidence, unless they
be supposed to play booty against their own Lives. By way of answer the
Prisoner may avoid the Charge: He is permitted to take exceptions; he may demur
or plead to the Indictments in points of Law: Herein the Judges ought to assist
him, and appoint Council if he desire it: He may show that the Indictors, i. e.
the Grand Jury, or some of them, are not lawful men, or not lawfully returned
by the Sheriffs; embracery or practice may be proved in the packing of the
Jury: A Conspiracy or Subornation may be discovered; falsehood may be found out
in the Witnesses, by questions about some circumstances that none could have
asked, or imagined, except the party accused: And besides doing right to the
Indicted, in these and many other things, it is the Peoples due to have all the
Evidence first taken in private, to be afterward made public at the Trial,
that the Kingdom may be satisfied in the equal administration of Justice, and
that the Judgments against Criminals may be of greater terror, and more useful
to preserve the common peace.

If any object that this Doctrine would introduce double Trials for every
offense, and all the delays that accompany them, it may be answered, That Nulla
unquam de morte hominis cunctatio Longa est. Ju. Sat. No delay is to be
esteemed long, when the life of a man is in question. The punishment of an
Offender that is a little deferred, may be compensated by its severity, but
blood rashly spilt cannot be gathered up, and a Land polluted by it, is hardly
cleansed. Wise and good men in matters of this nature have ever proceeded with
extreme caution, whilst the swift of foot are in the Scripture represented
under an ill Character, and have been often found in their haste to draw more
guilt upon themselves, than what they pretended to chastize in others. To avoid
this mischief, in many well polished Kingdoms, several Courts of Justice are
instituted, who take cognizance of the same facts, but so subordinate unto one
another, that in matters of life, limb, liberty, or other important cases,
there is a right of appeal from the inferior, before which it is first
brought, to the Superior; where this is wanting, means have been found to give
opportunity unto the Judges to reflect upon their own sentences, that if any
thing had been done rashly, or through mistake, it might be corrected, man,
even in his best estate, seeming to have need of some such helps. Tiberius
Caesar was never accused of too much lenity, but when he heard that Lutorius
Priscus had been accused of Treason before the Senate, condemned, and
immediately put to death, Tam praecipites deprecatus est poenas, He desired
that such sudden punishment might for the future be forborne, and a Law was
thereupon made, That no Decree of the Senate should in less than ten days be
transmitted to the Treasury, before which time it could not be executed, Tac.
An. 3. Matters of this nature concerning every man in England, it is not to be
doubted but our Ancestors considered them, and our Constitutions, neither
admitting of subordinate Judicatures, from whence appeals may be made, nor
giving opportunities unto Juries to re-examine their Verdicts, after they were
given, they could not find a way more suitable unto the rules of Wisdom,
Justice, and Mercy, than to appoint two Juries with equal care, according unto
different methods, the one in private, and at leisure, the other publicly in
the presence of the party, and more speedy to pass upon every man, so as none
can be condemned, unless he be thought guilty by them both, and it cannot be
imagined that so little time, as is usually spent in Trials at the Bar, before
a Petit Jury, should be allowed unto one that pleads for his life, or unto them
who are to be satisfied in their Consciences, unless it were presumed that the
Grand Jury had so well examined, prepared, and digested the matter, that the
other may proceed more succinctly, without danger of error.

Therefore let the Grand Juries faithfully perform their high Trust, and
neither be cheated nor frighted from their Duty: Let them pursue the good old
way, since no Innovation can be brought in, that will not turn to the prejudice
of the accused Persons, and themselves: Let them not be deluded with frivolous
Arguments, so as to invalidate a considerable part of our Law, and render
themselves insignificant ciphers, in expectation that Petit Juries will repair
the faults they commit, since that would be no less than to slight one of the
best fences that the Law provides for our Lives and Liberties, and very much to
weaken the other.

When a Grand Jury finds a Bill against any person, they do all that in them
lies to take away his Life, if the crime be capital, and it is ridiculous for
them to pretend they rely upon the virtue of the Petit Jury, if they show none
themselves. They cannot reasonably hope the other should be more tender of the
Prisoners concernments, more exact in doing Justice, or more careful in
examining the Credit of the Witnesses, when they have not only neglected their
duty of searching into it, but added strength unto their Testimony by finding a
Bill upon it.

They cannot possibly be exempted from the blame of consenting (at the least)
unto the mischiefs that may ensue, unless they use all the honest care that the
Law allows to prevent them; nor consequently avoid the stain of the blood that
may be shed by their omission, since it could not have been, if they had well
performed their part before they found the Indictment, whereby the party is
exposed to so many disadvantages, that it is hard for the clearest Innocence to
defend it self against them.

But when the one and the other Jury act as they ought, with courage,
diligence, and indifference, we shall have just reason, with the wise Lord
Chancellor Fortescue, to celebrate that Law that instituted them. To
congratulate with our Country men the happiness we enjoy, Fort. de laud. Leg.
Ang. cap. 26.
whilst our Lives lie not at the mercy of unknown Witnesses, hired, poor,
uncertain, whose Conversation or Malice we are strangers to, but Neighbors of
Substance, of honest report, brought into Court by an honorable sworn Officer;
men who know the Witnesses, and their Credit, and are to hear them, and judge
of them: That want no means for disclosing of Truth, and from whom nothing can
be hid, which can fall within the compass of Humane Knowledge.

POstquam Rex per spatium trium Annorum and amplius in partibus transmarinis
remansisset, Ex chronico ab Anno 1272. 1 Ed. 1. ad An. 1317. 10 Ed. 2. Miss.
and de partibus Vasconiae and Franciae in Angliam rediisset, valde anxiatus
and conturbatus fuit per quotidianum clamorem tam Clericorum quam Laicorum
petentium ab eo congruum remedium apponi versus Justiciarios, An. Dom. 2289.
Anoque Regni Regis Ed. 1.18.
and alios Ministros suos, de multimodis oppressionibus and gravaminibus contra
bonas leges and consuetudines regni illis factis; Certe scimus quam plurimos
eorum qui judiciis sub Ed. 1. praefuere viros quidem marimos and aevo in illo
Jurisconsultos celeberrimos repetundarum and quod lites suas fecerant aliosque
praeter Ministros forenses aliquot merito damnatos multos exitia and carcere
punitos. Ex Seldein ad Fletam dissertatio p. 548.
super quo Dominus Edvardus Rex, per regale scriptum Vicecomitibus Angliae
praecipit quod in omnibus Comitatibus, Civitatibus, and Villis mercatoriis,
public proclamari facerent quod omnes qui sese sentient gravari venirent apud
Westminster. ad proximum Parliamentum, and ibi querimonias suas monstrarent, ubi tam
majores quam minores opportunum remedium and celerem justitiam recuperent,
sicut Rex vinculo juramenti die Coronationis suae astrictus fuit: Ac jam adest
magnus dies and judiciarius Justiciorum and aliorum Ministrorum Concilii Regis,
quem nulla tergiversatione, nullo munere, nulla art vel ingenio placitandi
valent eludi. Coadunat is itaque Clero and Populo and in magno Palatio
Westmonasterii consessis, Archiepiscopus Cantuariensi^ (vir magnae pietatis and
columna quasi sanctae Ecclesiae and Regni) surrexit in medio, and ab alto
ducens suspiria, Noverit universitas vestra (ait) quod convocati sumus de
magnis and arduis negotiis regni (heu nimis perturbat^ and his diebus enormiter
mutilati) unanimiter, fideliter, and efficiater simul cum Domino Rege ad
tractandum and ordinandum, audivistis etiam universi querimonias gravissimas
super intolerabilious injuriis and oppressionibus and quotidianis
desolationibus, tam sanctae Eccles. quam Reg. factis per hoc iniquum Concilium
Domini Regis contra magnas Chartas tot, toties and multoties emptas and
redemptas, concessas and confirmatas per tot and talia Juramenta Domini Regis
nunc, and Dominorum Henrici and Johannis, ac per terribiles fulminationes
Excommunicationis sententiae in transgressores communium libertatum Angliae,
quae in chartis praedictis continentur, corroboratas, and cum spes praeconcepta
de libertatibus illis observandis fideliter ab omnibus putaretur stabilis and
indubitata, Rex conciliis malorum Ministrorum praeventus and seductus easdem
infringendo contravenire non formidavit, credens deceptive pro numere absolvi a
transgressione quod esset manifestum regni exterminium.

Aliud etiam nos omnes angit intrinsecus quod Justiciarii subtiliter ex malitia
sua ac per diversa argumenta avaritiae, and intolerabilis superbiae Regem
contra fideles suos multipliciter provocaverunt and incitaverunt, sanoque and
salubri consilio Ligeorum Angliae contrarium reddiderunt, consilia sua vana
impudenter praeponere and affirmare non erubuerunt seu formidaverunt, ac si
plus habiles essent ad consulendam and conservandam Rempublicam quam tota
Universitas Regni in unum collecta. Ita de illis possit vere dici, viri qui
turbaverunt terram and concusserunt Regnum sub fuco gravitatis totum populum
graviter oppresserunt, praetextuque solummodo exponendi veteres Leges, novas
(non dicam Leges) sed malas consuetudines introduxerunt and vomuerunt, ita quod
per ignorantiam nonnullorum ac per partialitatem aliorum qui vel per munera vel
timorem aliquorum potentum innodati fuerunt, nulla fuit stabilitas Legum nec
alicui de populo Justitiam dignabantur exhibere, opera eorum sunt opera
nequitiae, and opus iniquitatis in manibus, pedes eorum ad malum currunt and
festinant, ac viam recti nescierunt. Quid dicam? non est judicium in gressibus
suis.

Quam plurimi liberi homines terrae nostrae fideles Domini Regis quasi viles
ultimae servi conditionis diversis Carceribus sine culpa commiserunt, ibidem
carcerandi quorum nonnulli in carcere fame, maerore and vinculorum pondere
defecerunt, extorquerunt pro Arbritrio insuper infinitam pecuniam ab e^^dem pro
redemptione sua, crumenas aliorum ut suas impregnarent tam a divitibus quam
pauperibus exhauserunt, ratione quorum incurriverunt odium inexorabile and
formidabile imprecationes omnium quasi tale incommunicabile privilegium per
Chartam detest abilem de non obstante obtinuerunt and perquiviserunt ut a lege
divina humanaque quasi ad libitum immunes essent.

Gravamen insuper solitum adhuc sive aliquo modo saevit, omnia sunt venalia si
non quasi furtiva, proh dolor.

-- Quid non mortalia pectora cogit
Auri sacra fames? --
Ex ore meo contra vos O Impii tremebunda coeli decreta jam auditis. Agnitio
vultuum vestrorum accusat vos, and peccatum vestrum quasi Sodoma praedicavistis
nec abscondistis, vae animae vestrae, vae qui condunt leges and scribentes
injustitiam scripserunt, ut opprimerent in judicio pauperes, and vim facerent
causae humilium populi, ut essent viduae praeda eorum, and pupillos diriperent,
vae qui aedificant domum suam injusticia and coenacula sua non in Judicio, vae
qui concupiverunt agros and violenter tulerunt and rapuerunt domos and
oppresserunt virum and domum ejus imo virum and Haereditatem suam, vae Judices
qui sicut Lupi vespere non relinquebant ossa in mane; Justus Judex adducit
Consiliarios in stultum finem and Judices in stuporem, mox alta voce justum
Judicium terrae recipietis.

His auditis omnium aures tinniebant totaque Communitas ingemuerunt, Vide Mat.
West. Anno 1289. p. 376 li. 13.
dicentes heu nobis, heu, ubi est Angliae toties empta, toties concessa, toties
scripta, toties jurata Libertas?

Alii de Criminalibus sese a visibus populi subtrahentes in locis secretis cum
amicis tacit latitaverunt, Anno vero 1290. (18. Ed. 1.) deprehensis omnibus
Angliae Justiciariis de repetundis (praeter Jo. Metingham, and Eliam de
Bleckingham quos honoris ergo nominatos volui) judicio Parliamenti vindicatum
est in alios, atque alios carcere, exilio, fortunarumque omnium dispendio, in
singulos mulcta gravissima and amissione officii. Spelmans Glossary, p. 1. co.
1. 416.
alios protulerunt in medium unde merito fere omnes ab officiis depositi and
amoti, unus a terra exulatus alii perpetuis prisonis incarcerati, alii que
gravibus pecuniarum solutionibus just adjudicati fuerunt.

AFter that the King for the space of three Years and more, had remained beyond
Sea, and returned out of Gascoign and France into England, he was much vexed
and disturbed by the continual clamor both of the Clergy and Laity, desiring
to be relieved against the Justices, and other His Majesty's Ministers, of
several oppressions and injuries done unto them, contrary to the good Laws and
Customs of the Realm; whereupon King Edward, by his Royal Letters to the
several Sheriffs of England, commanded, that in all Counties, Cities, and
Market Towns, a Proclamation should be made, that all who found themselves
agrieved should repair to Westminster at the next Parliament, and there show
their Grievances, where as well the great as the less should receive fit
Remedies and speedy Justice, according as the King was obliged by the Bond of
his Coronation Oath: And now that great day was come, that day of judging, even
the Justices and the other Ministers of the King's Council, which by no
Collusion or Reward, no Argument or Art of Pleading they could elude or avoid:
The Clergy therefore and the People being gathered together, and seated in the
great Palace of Westminster, the Archbishop of Canterbury (a man of eminent
Piety, and as it were a Pillar of the holy Church and the Kingdom) rising from
his Seat, and fetching a profound sigh, spoke in this manner: Let this Assembly
know that we are called together concerning the great and weighty Affairs of
the Kingdom (too much alas of late disturbed, and still out of Order)
unanimously, faithfully, and effectually with our Lord the King to treat and
ordain: Vide Fleta Cap. 17. p. 18, 19. Authoritas and Officium ordinarii
Concilii Regis.
Ye have all heard the grievous complaints of the most intolerable injuries
and oppressions of the daily desolations committed both on Church and State, by
this corrupt Council of our Lord the King, contrary to our great Charters, so
many and so often, purchased and redeemed, granted and confirmed to us by the
several Oaths of our Lord the King that now is, and of our Lords King Henry and
John, and corroborated by the dreadful thundrings of the sentence of
Excommunication against the Invaders of our common Liberties of England in our
said Charters contained; and when we had conceived firm and undoubted hopes,
that these our Liberties would have been faithfully preserved by all men, the
King circumvented and seduced by the Counsels of evil Ministers, has not been
afraid to violate it by infringing them, falsely believing that he could for
Rewards be absolved from that offense, which would be the manifest destruction
of the Kingdom.

There is another thing also that grieves our Spirits, that the Justices
subtly and maliciously, by diverse Arguments of covetousness and intolerable
pride, have the King against his faithful Subjects sundry ways incited and
provoked, counselling him contrary to the good and wholesome Advice of all the
Liegemen of England, and have not blushed nor been afraid, impudently to assert
and prefer their own foolish Councils, as if they were more fit to consult and
preserve the Commonweal, than all the Estates of the Kingdom together
assembled, so that it may be truly said of them, they are the men that troubled
the Land, and disturbed the Nation under a false color of gravity, have the
whole People grievously oppressed, and under pretense of expounding the ancient
Laws, have introduced new (I will not say Laws, but) evil Customs, so that
through the Ignorance of some, and partiality of others, who for reward or fear
of great Men have been engaged, there was no certainty of Law, and they scorned
to administer Justice to the people, their deeds are deeds of wickedness, and
the work of Iniquity is in their hand, their feet make haste to evil, and the
way of truth have they not known; what shall I say? there is no Judgment in
their paths.

How many Freemen of this Land, faithful Subjects of our Lord the King, have
like the meanest Slaves of lowest condition, without any fault been cast into
Prison, where some of them by hunger, grief, or the burden of their chains
have expired, they have also extorted at their pleasure infinite sums of money
for their ransoms; the Coffers of some, that they might fill their own, as well
from the rich as the poor, they have exhausted, by reason whereof they have
contracted the irreconcilable hatred and dreadful imprecations of all men, as
if they had purchased and obtained such an incommunicable privilege, by their
detestable Charter of non Obstante, that they might at their own lust be free
from all Laws both humane and divine.

Moreover there is another more, the ordinary grievance, which hitherto has,
and in some measure does still rage among us: All things are exposed to sale,
if not as it were to plunder and theft. Alas! how great power has the love of
money in the breasts of Men? Hear therefore O ye wicked, from my mouth the
dreadful decree of Heaven; the dejection af your countenances accuses you, and
like the men of Sodom, ye have not hidden but proclaimed the sin; woe be to
your souls, woe be to them that make Laws, and Writing, write injustice, that
they may oppress the poor in Judgment, and injure the cause of the humble, that
Widows may become their Prey, and that they might destroy the Orphan. Woe be to
those that build their Houses in injustice, and their Tabernacles in
Unrighteousness: Woe be to them that covet large possessions, that break open
Houses and destroy the Man and his Inheritance; woe be to such Judges who are
like Wolves in the Evening, and leave not a bone till the morning. The
Righteous Judge will bring such Counselors to a foolish end, and such Judges
to confusion: ye shall all presently with a loud cry, receive the just sentence
of the Land.

At the hearing of these things all Ears tingled, and the whole Community
lifted up their Voice, and mourned, saying, Alas, alas for us! what is become
of that English Liberty which we have so often purchased, which by so many
Concessions, so many Statutes, so many Oaths have been confirmed to us.

Hereupon several of the Criminals withdrew into secret places, being concealed
by their friends; some of them were brought forth into the midst of the People,
and deservedly turned out of their Offices; one was banished the Land, and
others were grievously Fined, or Condemned to perpetual Imprisonment.

This is confirmed by Spelman, An. 1290. All the Justices of England, says he,
were An. 18. Ed. 1. apprehended for Corruption, except John Mettingham, and
Elias Bleckingham, whom I name for their honor, and by Judgment of Parliament
condemned, some to Imprisonment, others Banishment, or Confiscation of their
Estates, and none escaped without grievous Fines, and the loss of their Offices.

The Speech and Carriage of STEPHEN COLLEGE, Before the Castle at Oxford,
Wednesday, Aug. 31. 1681. Taken exactly from his Mouth at the place of
Execution.
Mr. High Sheriff. MR. College, It is desired, for satisfaction of the World,
because you have professed your self a Protestant, that you would tell what
Judgment you are of.


College. Dear People, dear Protestants, and dear Countrymen,

I Have been Accused and Convicted for Treason, the Laws Adjudge me to this
Death, and I come hither willingly to submit to it. I pray God forgive all
those persons that had any hand in it. I do declare to you, whatever has been
said of me, that I was never a Papist, or ever that way inclined; they have
done me wrong: I was ever a Protestant, I was born a Protestant, I have lived
so, and so by the Grace of God I will die, of the Church of England, according
to the best Reformation of the Church from all Idolatry, from all Superstition,
or any thing that is contrary to the Gospel of our blessed Lord and Savior. I
do declare, I was never in any Popish Service, Prayers, or Devotions, in my
life, save one time about seventeen or eighteen years ago, as near as I
remember, I was out of a curiosity one afternoon at St. James's Chapel, the
Queens Chapel at St. James's; except that one time, I never did hear any
Popish Service, any thing of the Church of Rome, Mass or Prayers, or any thing
else, private or public.

I know you expect that I should say something as to what I die for. It has
been charged upon me: when I was apprehended and brought before the Council,
some of the Council, the Secretary, and my Lord Killingworth, and Mr. Seymour,
they told me there was Treason sworn against me; truly they surprised me when
they said so: for of all things in the World, I thought my self as free from
that as any man. I asked them if any man living had the confidence to swear
Treason against me? They said several, three or four as I remember. Then they
told me, it was sworn against me, that I had a design to pull the King out of
White Hall, and to serve him as his Father was served, or to that purpose, the
Loggerhead his Father, or that kind of Language. I did deny it then, and do now
deny it upon my Death. I never was in any manner of Plot in my days, neither
one way nor another, never knew any su^^ persons, nor ever had such
Communication with any man hitherto. I know of no Plot in the World but the
Popish Plot, and that every man may know as much as I. If I had had such a
design as these men have sworn against me, to have seized his Majesty either at
London, or this place at Oxford; I take God to witness, as I Am a dying man, and
upon the terms of my Salvation, I know not any one man upon the face of the
Earth that would have stood by me; and how likely it was that I should do such
a thing my self, let the whole World judge.

Dugdale swears, That I spoke Treason to him, treasonable words in the
Coffee-house, and in the Barbers shop by the Angel, even he could not pretend
to see me any where else; but it is false, and a very unlikely thing, that I
should speak Treason to him. I must confess I was in his company at the
Coffee-house and that Barbers shop, before I went out of Town, but there could
be no Communication between us; for he was writing at one end of the Room and
eating a piece of bread, and I lighted a Pipe of Tobacco at the other end, and
took it, till Sir Tho. Player and Sir Rob. Clayton came to me, and we went to
my Lord Lovelace's out of Town that night: so when they came we took horse and
went out of Town with the rest.

For my part, I cannot sum up my Witnesses. I was under most strange
Circumstances as ever any man was; I was kept Prisoner so close in the Tower,
that I could have no Conversation with any, though I was certain the Popish
Lords had it every day there, but I could have none: I could not tell the
Witnesses that were to swear against me; I could not tell what it was they
swore against me, for I could have no Copy of the Indictment, nor no way
possible to make any preparation to make my Defense, as I ought to have done,
and might have done by Law, I had no liberty to do any thing, as I am a dying
man.

And as to what Dugdale, Smith, Turbervile, and Heyns swore against me, they
did swear such Treason, that nothing but a mad man would ever have trusted any
body with, and least of all to Papists; every one of them that had been
concerned with Plots and Treasons among their own party, and under the greatest
Ties and Obligations of Damnation, and to be Sainted if they kept it secret,
and to be damned if they revealed it. If these men will not keep things secret
for their own Party, how could I trust them? I take God to witness, and do
freely acknowledge, I have sought my God with Tears several times, to inform me
if so be I had with any word transgressed at any time. I knew not of any part
of what they swore against me, till such time as I heard it swore against me at
the Bar. This is very hard, Gentlemen, but this is the Truth.

And there be a great many other strange Reports that I have heard since I have
been a Prisoner, That I should be a means to convert the Countess of Rochester,
by bringing one Thompson a Priest to her. Truly all that I was concerned in
was, some fifteen or sixteen years ago I lodged at Col. Vernon's that married
my Lady Brooks: The Family were Papists, the Brooks were Papists, and there
was this Thompson; and I did suppose him a Priest in the House, though I never
saw him at Popish Service or Worship, though I was there half a year; but
coming afterward to my Lord Rochester's about some business I had to do for
him and several other persons of Quality, he sent for me one afternoon from the
Parsonage in Adderbury to his House, and his Lady and he stood together: He
sent to me and asked me if my Horse were at home: said he, I would have you
carry this Letter to Mr. Thompson, if you are at leisure this afternoon: My
Lord, I am at leisure to serve you. So I took a Letter from his hand, and his
Lady's too, as I remember (he made an offer that way) sealed with his own Seal,
and carried it to Thompson, and delivered it to him; and he told me that he
would wait upon my Lord, for it was for some Lands my Lord did offer to raise
Money for some occasions. This is the Truth of that Scandal.

It is said, that I had a Priest several years in my House, viz. Sergeant that
came over from Holland to discover: About some ten years ago, that very same
man came to me, but was a stranger to me, and he came to me by the name of Dr.
Smith a Physician: and there was an Apothecary in the Old Bailey, and a
Linnen-draper within Ludgate, that came with him: they brought him thither and
took a Chamber, and lay about half a year or three quarters, at times, by the
name of Dr. Smith, and as a Physician. This is the Truth of that, and no
otherwise. This is the Entertainment of Sergeant.

So the occasion of my coming to Oxford, I do say, was voluntary. The
Parliament Men last Parliament at Westminster, and several Lords, dined
together the day before they sat: the last Sessions of Parliament at
Wistminster they sent for me to the Sun-Tavern behind the Exchange; and when I
came, the Duke of Monmouth and several Lords were together, and I believe above
a hundred Parliament Men of the Commons. The Duke of Monmouth called me to him,
and told me, he had heard a good Report of me, and that I was an honest man,
and one that may be trusted; and they did not know but their Enemies the
Papists might have some design to serve them as they did in King James's time,
by Gunpowder, or any other ways: And the Duke with several Lords and Commons,
did desire me to use my utmost skill in searching all places suspected by them;
which I did perform, and from thence I had, as I think, the popular name of the
Protestant Joyner, because they had entrusted me before any man in England to
do that Office.

The same Haynes, one of them that swore against me, had discovered to me and
several others, as to Macknamar and his Brother, and this Ivy, who are now all
of another stamp, That the Parliament was to be destroyed at Oxford; and that
there was a design to murder my Lord Shaftsbury by Fitzgerald and his Party;
and that they did endeavor to bring Macknamar over to him, and said, Then it
would be well with him; and they would not be long before they had Shaftsbury's
life. And he made Depositions of this to Sir Geo. Treby, as I heard afterward;
for I was not with him when it was sworn. I wish the Commons of England as well
as I wish my own heart; and I did not understand, but when I served the
Parliament, I served his Majesty too; and let them be miserable that make the
Difference between them; for my part I never did.

I came to Oxford with my Lord Howard, whom I look upon to be a very honest
worthy Gentleman, my Lord Clare, my Lord Paget, and my Lord Huntingdon; and
this Capt. Brown and Don Lewis were in my company, and came along with us as
they were my Lord Howard's Friends. Brown I have known I believe two or three
months, but Lewis I never saw before that day; they said they came with my Lord
Howard. I take God to witness, I never had but one sixpence or any thing else,
to carry on any design; and if it were to save my life now, I cannot charge any
man in the world with any design against the Government, as God is my witness,
or against his Majesty, or any other person.

As for what Arms I had, and what Arms others had, they were for our own
defense, in case the Papists should make any attempt upon us by way of
Massacre, or any Invasion or Rebellion, that we should be ready to defend our
selves. God is my witness this is all I know: If this be a Plot, this I was in;
but in no other. But never knew of any numbers or times appointed for meeting;
but we said one to another, that the Papists had a Design against the
Protestants, when we did meet, as I was a man of general Conversation; and in
case they should rise, we were ready: but then they should begin the Attempt
upon us. This was my business, and is the business of every good Subject that
loves the Laws of his Country and his King: For England can never hope to be
happy under those Blood-thirsty men, whose Religion is Blood and Murder; which
I do with all my Soul, and did ever since I knew what Religion was, abhor and
detest, viz. the Church of Rome, as pernicious and destructive to humane
Societies, and all Government.

I beseech God, that every Man of you may unite together as Protestants against
this common Foe. Gentlemen, it is my sense, and I do in that believe I am as
certainly murdered by the hands of the Papists as Sir Edmundbury Godfrey
himself was, though the thing is not seen. These Witnesses certainly are
mercenary men, and I beseech God Almighty to have mercy upon their Souls, and
forgive them; and either by his Judgments or mercies reclaim them, that they
shed no more innocent blood: There is not a man of them that I know of, that
ever heard me say or do any bit of Treason in my life. This is (the first I
may not say it is) but almost the twentieth Sham-Plot that they have endeavored
to put upon the Nation, to delude the People, and put off their own damnable
Plot. This is not the first, but I think the sixteenth or seventeenth; I pray
God that my blood may be the last. I pray God defend every man's blood, and all
Protestants in England, from the hand of these bloody Papists, by whose means I
die this Death; and if they shall go on in this nature, I hope the good God
will open every man's eyes to see it before he feels it: And I beseech you, if
you have any love for your King, your Country, and the Protestants, unite
together, if you are Protestants. I pray God, those that deserve the name, let
them be called how they will, either Dissenters, or Church of England men, that
they may unite together like men, like Christians, against the common Foe, who
will spare neither the one side nor the other, but beat you one against another
like two Pitchers, the last that stands they will certainly destroy if they
can. This is my sense, and God is my witness, I speak my Conscience. I do not
know, Mr. Sheriff, whether there be any thing else I have to say, or no. We
have a good God, and I beseech every man that hears me this day (for we live in
a sinful Age, good People, and it behooves every one of you, it cannot be long
before all that look upon me in this condition, must lie down in the Dust, and
God knows, must come into an eternal estate either for Mercy or Judgment) I
beseech you in the name of God, he is a God of Mercy, and a God of Patience,
and long suffering, that you would break off your Sins by Repentance, and serve
a good God, who must be your Friend at last, or else you are lost to Eternity.

O Lord, how ungrateful wretches are we, that have a God of such infinite Mercy
and goodness, that affords us our Life, our Health, and a thousand Mercies
every day; and we like ungrateful People, not deserving the name of Men or
Christians, live riotous lives, in Debauchery and Swearing, in Malice, and the
Lord knows how many Evils. I beseech God that I may be this day a means in the
hand of God to bring some of their Souls over to him. I beseech you remember
what I say. Indeed I do not know, I have been so strangely used since I have
been a Prisoner, what to say, being brought from one Affliction to another,
that my Body is worn out, and my Memory and Intellects have failed me much, to
what they were; I cannot remember what I have to say more, but that the Lord
Jesus Christ would bless my Country, and preserve it from Popery; and in mercy
bless his Majesty: good God be merciful to him, make him an instrument in thy
hands to defend his Protestant Subjects; Lord, in mercy defend him from his
Enemies; good God bless this People; good Lord continue the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, thy Gospel, in its purity, to us and our Posterity, as long as the Sun
and Moon endures. O Lord, save all that call upon thee, be merciful to all thy
Servants, all thy People that put their trust in thee, good Lord deliver them
from the hands of their Enemies: good Lord, let their Lives, and Bodies, and
Souls, be all precious in thy sight. O merciful God, put a stop to these most
wicked Conspiracies of thy Enemies, and the Nations Enemies, the Papists; let
no more Protestant blood be shed but this of mine, I beseech thee, O my God. O
Lord look upon me; O Lord bless me, O good God, receive me into thy blessed
presence by Jesus Christ my alone Savior and Redeemer, in whom alone I put my
trust for Salvation: It is thee, O God, that I trust in, thou righteous Judge
of Heaven and Earth. All Popery, all Pardons, all Popes and Priests, all
Dispensations I disown, and will not go out of the World with a lie in my
mouth. From the sincerity of my heart, I declare again, that what I Have said to
you, is the very Sentiments of my Soul, as God shall have mercy upon me, and to
the best of my knowledge.

I desire the Prayers of you, good People, while I am here: and once more I
beseech you to think upon Eternity, every one of you that hear me this day; the
Lord turn your Hearts and Souls, if you have been wicked livers, if you do live
wicked lives, the Lord in mercy convert you: and show you your danger: for I as
little thought to come to this, as any man that hears me this day, and I bless
God, I have no more deserved it from the hands of men, than the Child that
sucks at his Mothers breast, I bless my God for it. I do say, I have been a
sinner against my God, and he has learned me Grace ever since I have been a
Prisoner. I bless my God for a Prison; I bless my God for Afflictions: I bless
my God that ever I was restrained: for I never knew my self till he had taken
me out of the World. Therefore you that have your liberties, time, and precious
opportunities, be up, and be doing for God and for your Souls, every one of you.

To his Son. Where is my dear Child?

Mr. Sheriff. I made one request to you, you gave me an imperfect Answer; you
said you were of the best Reformed Church in the world, the Church of England,
according to the best Reformation in the world. I desire you for the
satisfaction of the world, to declare what Church that is, whether
Presbyterian, or Independent, or the Church of England, or what.

College. Good Mr. Sheriff, for your satisfaction, for 20 years and above I
was under the Presbyterian Ministry, till his Majesty's Restoration; then I
was conformable to the Church of England, when that was restored, and so
continued till such time as I saw Persecution upon the Dissenting People, and
undue things done in their Meeting-places; then I went among them to know what
kind of people those were, and I take God to witness, since that time I have
used their Meetings, viz. the presbyterians, others very seldom, and the Church
of England. I did hear Dr. Tillotson not above three weeks before I was taken.
I heard the Church of England as frequently as I heard the Dissenters, and
never had any prejudice, God is my witness, against either, but always heartily
desired that they might unite, and be Lovers and Friends, and I had no
prejudice against any man; and truly I am afraid that it is not for the Nations
good, that there should be such Heart-burnings between them: That some of the
Church of England will preach, that the Presbyterians are worse than the
Papists. God does know that what I say, I speak freely from my heart, I have
found many among them truly serving God, and so I have of all the rest that
have come into my company; Men without any manner of Design but to serve God,
serve his Majesty, and keep their Liberties and Properties; men that I am
certain are not of vicious lives: I found no Dammers or those kind of People
amongst them, or at least few of them.

To his Son, Kissing him several times with great passion. Dear Child Farewell,
the Lord have mercy upon thee. Good people, let me have your Prayers to God
Almighty to receive my Soul.

And then he Prayed, and as soon as he had done, spoke as follows.

The Lord have mercy upon my Enemies, and I beseech you, good People, whoever
you are, and the whole World that I have offended to forgive me; whomever I
have offended in word or deed, I ask every man's pardon, and I forgive the
World with all my soul, all the Injuries I have received; and I beseech God
Almighty forgive those poor Wretches who have cast away their souls, or at
least endangered them, to ruin this body of mine: I beseech God that they may
have a sight of their Sins, and that they may find mercy at his hands: Let my
blood speak the justice of my Cause.

I have done: And God have mercy upon you all.

To Mr. Crosthwait. Pray, Sir, my Service to Dr. Hall, and Dr. Reynall, and
thank them for all their kindnesses to me; I thank you, Sir, for your kindness:
The Lord bless you all. Mr. Sheriff, God be with you: God be with you all, good
People.

The Executioner Ketch desired his pardon; and he said, I do forgive you. The
Lord have mercy on my Soul.


The SPEECH of the Late Lord RUSSEL, to the SHERIFFS.
Together with the PAPER delivered by him to them, at the place of Execution,
on July 21. 1683.
Mr. SHERIFF,
I Expected the Noise would be such, that I could not be very well heard: I was
never fond of much speaking, much less now; Therefore I have set down in this
Paper, all that I think fit to leave behind me. God knows how far I was always
from Designs against the King's Person, or of altering the Government; and I
still pray for the Preservation of both, and of the Protestant Religion.

I am told, that Captain Walcot has said some things concerning my knowledge of
the Plot: I know not whether the Report is true or not, I hope it is not: For
to my knowledge, I never saw him, or spoke with him in my whole Life; and in the
Words of a dying Man, I profess I know of no Plot, either against the King's
Life, or the Government. But I have now done with this World, and am going to a
better. I forgive all the World, and I thank God I die in Charity with all Men;
and I wish all sincere Protestants may love one another, and not make way for
Popery by their Animosities.

The PAPER delivered to the SHERIFFS.
I Thank God, I find my self so composed and prepared for death, and my
Thoughts so fixed on another World, that I hope in God I am now quite weaned
from setting my heart on this. Yet I cannot forbear now, in setting down in
Writing a fuller Account of my Condition, to be left behind me, than I Will
venture to say at the place of Execution, in the noise and clutter that is like
to be there. I bless God heartily for those many Blessings, which he in his
infinite Mercy has bestowed upon me, through the whole course of my Life: That
I was born of worthy good Parents, and had the Advantages of a Religious
Education, which I have often thanked God very heartily for, and looked upon as
an invaluable Blessing: For even when I minded it least, it still hung about
me, and gave me checks, and has now for many years so influenced and possessed
me, that I feel the happy Effects of it in this my extremity, in which I have
been so wonderfully (I thank God) supported, that neither my imprisonment, nor
the fear of Death, have been able to discompose me to any degree; but on the
contrary, I have found the Assurances of the Love and Mercy of God, in and
through my blessed Redeemer, in whom only I trust; and I do not question, but
that I am going to partake of that fullness of Joy which is in his presence, the
hopes thereof does so wonderfully delight me, that I reckon this as the
happiest time of my Life, though others may look upon it as the saddest.

I have lived, and now die of the Reformed Religion, a true and sincere
Protestant, and in the Communion of the Church of England, though I could never
yet comply with, or rise up to all the heights of many People. I wish with all
my Soul, all our unhappy Differences were removed, and that all sincere
Protestants would so far consider the Danger of Popery, as to lay aside their
Heats, and agree against the Common Enemy, and that the Churchmen would be
less severe, and the Dissenters less scrupulous: For I think Bitterness and
Persecution are at all times bad, but much more now.

For Popery, I look on it as an Idolatrous and Bloody Religion, and therefore
thought my self bound in my station, to do all I could against it. And by that
I foresaw I should proture such great Enemies to my self, and so powerful ones,
that I have been now for some time expecting the worst. And blessed be God, I
fall by the Axe, and not by the Fiery Trial. Yet, whatever apprehensions I had
of Popery, and of my own severe and heavy share I was like to have under it,
when it should prevail, I never had a thought of doing any thing against it
basely, or inhumanely, but what could well consist with the Christian Religion,
and the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom. And I thank God, I have examined
all my actings in that matter, with so great care, that I can appeal to God
Almighty, who knows my heart, that I went on sincerely, without being moved,
either by Passion, By-ends, or ill-design. I have always loved my Country much
more than my life; and never had any Design of changing the Government, which I
value and look upon as one of the best Governments in the World, and would
always have been ready to venture my life for the preserving it, and would have
suffered any Extremity, rather than have consented to any Design to take away
the King's Life: Neither ever had Man the impudence to propose so base and
barbarous a thing to me. And I look on it as a very unhappy and uneasy part of
my present Condition, That in my Indictment there should be so much as mention
of so vile a Fact; though nothing in the least was said to prove any such Matter;
but the contrary, by the Lord Howard: Neither does any body, I am confident,
believe the least of it. So that I need not, I think, say more.

For the King, I do sincerely pray for him, and wish well to him, and to the
Nation, That they may be happy in one another; that he may be indeed the
Defender of the Faith, That the Protestant Religion, and the Peace and Safety
of the Kingdom may be preserved, and flourish under his Government; and that He
in his Person may be happy both here, and hereafter.

As for the share I had in the Prosecution of the Popish Plot, I take God to
witness, That I proceeded in it in the Sincerity of my heart, being then really
convinced (as I am still) that there was a Conspiracy against the King, the
Nation, and the Protestant Religion: And I likewise profess, That I never knew
any thing, either directly, or indirectly, of any Practice with the Witnesses;
which I look upon as so horrid a thing, that I could never have endured it.
For, I thank God, Falsehood and Cruelty were never in my Nature, but always the
farthest from it imaginable. I did believe, and do still, That Popery is
breaking in upon the Nation: and that those who advance it, will stop at
nothing, to carry on their Design, I am heartily sorry that so many Protestants
give their helping hand to it. But I hope God will preserve the Protestant
Religion, and this Nation: Though I am afraid it will fall under very great
Trials, and very sharp Sufferings. And indeed the Impiety and Profaneness that
abounds, and appears so scandalously barefaced every where, gives too just
reason to fear the worst things which can befall a People. I pray God prevent
it, and give those who have showed Concern for the Public Good, and who have
appeared hearty for the true Interest of the Nation, and the Protestant
Religion, Grace to live so, that they may not cast a reproach on that which
they endeavor to advance; which (God knows) has often given me many sad
thoughts. And I hope such of my Friends as may think they are touched by this,
will not take what I say in ill part, but endeavor to amend their ways, and
live suitable to the Rules of the true Reformed Religion, which is the only
thing can administer true Comfort at the latter end, and revive a man when he
comes to Dye.

As for my present Condition, I bless God, I have no repining in my heart at
it. I know for my Sins I have deserved much worse at the hands of God; so that
I cheerfully submit to so small a Punishment, as the being taken off a few
years sooner, and the being made a Spectacle to the World. I do freely forgive
all the World, particularly those concerned in taking away my life: and I
desire and conjure my Friends to think of no Revenge, but to submit to the holy
Will of God, into whose Hands I resign my self entirely.

But to look back a little, I cannot but give some touch about the Bill of
Exclusion, and show the Reasons of my appearing in that Business, which in
short is this: That I thought the Nation was in such danger of Popery, and that
the expectation of a Popish Successor (as I have said in Parliament) put the
King's life likewise in such danger, that I saw no way so effectual to secure
both, as such a Bill. As to the Limitations which were proposed, if they were
sincerely offered, and had passed into a Law, the Duke then would have been
excluded from the power of a King, and the Government quite altered, and little
more than the name of a King left. So I could not see either Sin or Fault in
the one, when all People were willing to admit of the other: but thought it
better to have a King with his Prerogative, and the Nation easy and safe under
him, than a King without it, which must have bred perpetual Jealousies, and a
continual struggle. All this I say only to justify my self, and not to inflame
others: Though I cannot but think my Earnestness in that matter has had no
small influence in my present Sufferings. But I have now done with this World,
and am going to a Kingdom which cannot be moved.

And as to the Conspiring to seize the Guards, which is the Crime for which I
am Condemned, and which was made a constructive Treason for taking away the
King's Life, to bring it within the Statue of Ed. the 3d. I shall give this
true and clear account. I never was at Mr. Shepheard's with that Company but
once, and there was no undertaking then of securing or seizing the Guards, nor
none appointed to view, or examine them: Some Discourse there was of the
feasibleness of it, and several times by accident in general Discourse
elsewhere, I have heard it mentioned, as a thing might easily be done, but
never consented to as fit to be done. And I remember particularly at my Lord
Shaftsbury's there being some general Discourse of this kind, I immediately
flew out, and exclaimed against it, and asked, if the thing succeeded, what
must be done next, but massacring the Guards, and killing them in cold blood?
Which I looked upon as so detestable a thing, and so like a Popish Practice,
that I could not but abhor it. And at the same time the Duke of Monmouth took
me by the hand, and told me very kindly, My Lord, I see you and I are of a
Temper, did you ever hear so horrid a thing? And I must needs do him that
Justice to declare, that I never observed in him but an Abhorrence to all base
things.

As to my going to Mr. Shepheard's, I went with an intention to taste Sherry,
for he had promised me to reserve for me the next very good piece he met with,
when I went out of Town; and if he recollects he may remember I asked him about
it, and he went and fetched a Bottle; but when I tasted it, I said 'twas hot in
the mouth, and desired that whenever he met with a choice Piece, he would keep
it for me, which he promised. I enlarge the more upon this, because Sir George
Jefferies insinuated to the Jury, as if I had made a story about going thither;
but I never said, that was the only Reason: And I will now truly and plainly
add the rest.

I was the day before this Meeting, come to Town for two or three days, as I
had done once or twice before; having a very near and dear Relation lying in a
very languishing and desperate Condition: And the Duke of Monmouth came to me,
and told me, he was extremely glad I was come to Town; for my Lord Shaftsbury,
and some hot Men would undo us all: How so, my Lord, I said? Why (answered he)
they will certainly do some disorderly thing or other, if great Care be not
taken, and therefore for God's sake use your Endeavors with your Friends to
prevent any thing of this kind. He told me, there would be Company at Mr.
Shepheard's that Night, and desired me to be at home in the Evening, and he
would call me; which he did: And when I came into the Room, I saw Mr. Rumsey by
the Chimney; though he swears he came in after; and there were things said by
some with much more Heat than Judgment, which I did sufficiently disapprove,
and yet for these things I stand condemned. But I thank God, my part was
sincere, and well meant. It is, I know, inferred from hence, and was pressed to
me, that I was acquainted with these Heats and ill Designs, and did not
discover them. But this is but Misprision of Treason at most. So I dye innocent
of the Crime I stand condemned for, and I hope no body will imagaine that so
mean a Thought could enter into me, as to go about to save my self, by accusing
others. The part that some have acted lately of that kind, has not been such as
to invite me to love Life at such a rate.

As for the Sentence of Death passed upon me, I cannot but think it a very hard
one. For nothing was sworn against me (whether true or false, I will not now
examine) but some Discourses about making some Stirs. And this is not levying
War against the King, which is Treason by the Statute of Edward the Third, and
not the consulting and discoursing about it, which was all that was witnessed
against me. But, by a strange Fetch, the Design of seizing the Guards was
construed a Design of killing the King; and so I was in that cast.

And now I have truly and sincerely told what my part was in that, which cannot
be more than a bare Misprision; and yet I am condemned as guilty of a Design of
killing the King. I pray God lay not this to the charge, neither of the King's
Council, nor Judges, nor Sheriffs, nor Jury: And for the Witnesses, I pity
them, and wish them well. I shall not reckon up the particulars wherein they
did me wrong; I had rather their own Consciences should do that, to which, and
the Mercies of God, I leave them. Only I still aver, that what I said of my not
hearing Col. Rumsey deliver any Message from my Lord Shaftsbury, was true; for
I always detested Lying, though never so much to my advantage. And I hope none
will be so unjust and uncharitable, as to think I would venture on it in these
my last Words, for which I am so soon to give an account to the Great God, the
Searcher of Hearts, and Judge of all Things.

From the time of choosing Sheriffs, I concluded the Heat in that Matter would
produce something of this kind; and I am not much surprised to find it fall
upon me. And I wish what is done to me, may put a stop, and satiate some
Peoples Revenge, and that no more innocent Blood be shed; for I must and do
still look upon mine as such, since I know I was guilty of no Treason; and
therefore I would not betray my Innocence by Flight, of which I do not (I thank
God) yet repent (though much pressed to it) how fatal soever it may have seemed
to have proved to me; for I look upon my Death in this manner (I thank God)
with other eyes than the World does. I know I said but little at the Trial, and
I suppose it looks more like Innocence than Guilt. I was also advised not to
confess Matter of Fact plainly, since that must certainly have brought me
within the Guilt of Misprision. And being thus restrained from dealing frankly
and openly, I chose rather to say little, than to depart from that Ingenuity,
that, by the Grace of God, I had carried along with me in the former parts of
my Life, and so could easier be silent, and leave the whole Matter to the
Conscience of the Jury, than to make the last and solemnest part of my Life so
different from the Course of it, as the using little Tricks and Evasions must
have been. Nor did I ever pretend to a great readiness in speaking: I wish
those Gentlemen of the Law, who have it, would make more Conscience in the use
of it, and not run Men down, and by Strains and Fetches impose on easy and
willing Juries, to the Ruin of innocent Men: For to kill by Forms and
Subtilties of Law, is the worst sort of Murder. But I wish the Rage of hot
Men, and the Partialities of Juries, may be stopped with my Blood, which I
would offer up with so much the more Joy, if I thought I should be the last
were to suffer in such a way.

Since my Sentence, I have had but few Thoughts, but Preparatory ones for
Death: Yet the importunity of my Friends, and particularly of the Best and
Dearest Wife in the World, prevailed with me to sign Petitions, and make an
Address for my Life: To which I was very averse. For (I thank God) though in all
respects I have lived one of the happiest and contented'st Men of the World
(for now very near fourteen years) yet I am so willing to leave all, that it
was not without Difficulty, that I did any thing for the saving of my Life,
that was Begging. But I was willing to let my Friends see what Power they had
over me, and that I was not Obstinate, nor Sullen, but would do any thing that
an honest Man could do, for their Satisfaction. Which was the only Motive that
swayed, or had any weight with me.

And now to sum up all: As I never had any Design against the King's Life, or
the Life of any Man whatsoever; so I never was in any Contrivance of altering
the Government. What the Heats, Wickedness, Passions, and Vanities of other men
have occasioned, I ought not to be answerable for; nor could I repress them,
though I now suffer for them. But the Will of the Lord be done; into whose
Hands I commend my Spirit; and trust that Thou, O most Merciful Father, have
forgiven me all my Transgressions; the Sins of my Youth, and all the Errors of
my past Life; and that Thou will not lay my secret Sins and Ignorances to my
Charge; but wilt graciously support me during that small part of my Time now
before me, and assist me in my last Moments, and not leave me then to be
disordered by Fear, or any other Temptations; but make the Light of thy
Countenance to shine upon me, for thou art my Sun and my Shield: And as Thou
supportest me by thy Grace, so I hope thou will hereafter Crown me with Glory,
and receive me into the Fellowship of Angels and Saints, in that blessed
Inheritance purchased for me by my most merciful Redeemer; who is, I trust, at
thy Right Hand, preparing a place for me, and is ready to receive me: into
whose Hand I commend my Spirit.

To the KING's Most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Petition of Algernon Sidney,
Esquire.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioner, after a long and close Imprisonment, was on the 7th day
of this Month, with a Guard of Soldiers, brought into the Palace-yard, upon an
Habeas Corpus directed to the Lieutenant of the Tower, before any Indictment
had been exhibited against him: But while he was there detained, (...) was
exhibited, and found; whereupon he was immediately carried to the King's Bench,
and there Arraigned. In this surprise he desired a Copy of the Indictment, and
leave to make his Exceptions, or to put in a Special Plea, and Council to frame
it; but all was denied him. He then offered a Special Plea ready Engrossed,
which also was rejected without reading: And being threatened, that if he did
not immediately plead Guilty or Not Guilty, Judgment of High Treason should be
entered, he was forced contrary to Law (as he supposes) to come to a general
Issue in Pleading Not Guilty.

November. 21. He was brought to his Trial, and the Indictment being perplexed
and confused, so as neither he nor any of his Friends that heard it, could
fully comprehend the scope of it, he was wholly unprovided of all the helps
that the Law allows to every man for his Defense. Whereupon he did again desire
a Copy, and produced an Authentic Copy of the Statute of 46 Ed. 3. whereby
it is Enacted, That every man shall have a Copy of any Record that touches him
in any manner, as well that which is for or against the King, as any other
person; but could neither obtain a Copy of his Indictment, nor that the Statute
should be read.

The Jury by which he was tried, was not (as he is informed) summoned by the
Bailiffs of the several Hundreds, in the usual and legal manner, but names were
agreed upon by Mr. Graham, and the Undersheriff, and directions given to the
Bailiffs to Summon them: And being all so chosen, a Copy of the Panel was of
no use to him. When they came to be called, he excepted against some for being
your Majesty's Servants, which he hoped should not have been returned, when he
was prosecuted at your Majesty's Suit; many others for not being Freeholders,
which Exceptions he thinks were good in Law; and others were lewd and infamous
persons, not fit to be of any Jury: But all was overruled by the Lord Chief
Justice, and your Petitioner forced to challenge them Peremptorily, whom he
found to be picked out as most suitable to the Intentions of those who sought
his Ruin; whereby he lost the Benefit allowed him by Law of making his
Exceptions, and was forced to admit of Mechanic Persons utterly unable to
judge of such a matter as was to be brought before them. This Jury being sworn,
no Witness was produced, who fixed any thing beyond Hearsay upon your
Petitioner, except the Lord Howard, and them that swore to some Papers said to
be found in his House, and offered as a second Witness, and written in an Hand
like to that of your Petitioner.

Your Petitioner produced ten Witnesses, most of them of Eminent Quality, the
others of unblemished Fame, to show the Lord Howard's Testimony was
inconsistent with what he had declared before (at the Trial of the Lord Russel)
under the same Religious obligation of an Oath, as if it had been legally
administered.

Your Petitioner did further endeavor to show, That besides the Absurdity and
Incongruity of his Testimony, he being guilty of many Crimes which he did not
pretend your Petitioner had any knowledge of, and having no other hope of
Pardon, than by the drudgery of Swearing against him, he deserved not to be
believed. And similitude of Hands could be no Evidence, as was declared by the
Lord Chief Justice Keiling, and the whole Court in the Lady Carr's Case; so as
that no Evidence at all remained against him.

That whosoever wrote those Papers, they were but a small part of a Polemical
Discourse in answer to a Book written about thirty years ago, upon general
Propositions, applied to no Time, nor any particular Case; That it was
impossible to judge of any part of it, unless the whole did appear, which did
not; That the sense of such parts of it as were produced, could not be
comprehended, unless the whole had been read, which was denied; That the Ink
and Paper showed them to be writ many Years ago; That the Lord Howard not
knowing of them, they could have no concurrence with what your Petitioner is
said to have designed with him and others; That the Confusion and Errors in the
writing showed they had never been so much as reviewed, and being written in an
Hand that no man could well read, they were not fit for the Press, nor could be
in some Years, though the Writer of them had intended it, which did not appear.
But they being only the present crude and private thoughts of a man, for the
exercise of his own understanding in his Studies, and never showed to any, or
applied to any particular Case, could not fall under the Statute of 25 Ed. 3.
which takes cognizance of no such matter, and could not by Construction be
brought under it; such matters being thereby reserved to the Parliament, as is
declared in the Proviso, which he desired might be read, but was refused.

Several important points of Law did hereupon emerge, upon which your
Petitioner, knowing his own weakness, did desire that Council might be heard,
or they might be referred to be found Specially. But all was over ruled by the
violence of the Lord Chapter Justice, and your Petitioner so frequently
interrupted, that the whole method of his Defense was broken, and he not
suffered to say the tenth part of what he could have alleged in his defense.
So the Jury was hurried into a Verdict they did not understand.

Now forasmuch as no man that is oppressed in England, can have Relief, unless
it be from your Majesty, your Petitioner humbly prays, that the Premises
considered, your Majesty would be pleased to admit him into your presence; and
if he does not show, that it is for your Majesty's Interest and Honor to
preserve him from the said Oppression, he will not complain though he be left
to be destroyed.

The very Copy of a Paper delivered to the Sheriffs, upon the Scaffold on
Tower Hill, on Friday December 7. 1683. By Algernon Sidney, Esquire before his
Execution there.
Men, Brethren, and Fathers; Friends, Countrymen, and Strangers;
IT may be expected that I should now say some Great Matters unto you, but the
Rigor of the Season, and the Infirmities of my Age, increased by a close
Imprisonment of above Five Months, does not permit me.

Moreover, we live in an Age that makes Truth pass for Treason: I dare not say
any thing contrary unto it, and the Ears of those that are about me will
probably be found too tender to hear it. My Trial and Condemnation does
sufficiently evidence this.

West, Rumsey, and Keyling, who were brought to prove the Plot, said no more of
me, than that they knew me not; and some others equally known unto me, had used
my Name, and that of some others, to give a little Reputation unto their
Designs. The Lord Howard is too infamous by his Life, and the many Perjuries
not to be denied, or rather sworn by himself, to deserve mention; and being a
single Witness would be of no value, though he had been of unblemished Credit,
or had not seen and confessed that the Crimes committed by him would be
pardoned only for committing more; and even the Pardon promised could not be
obtained till the Drudgery of Swearing was over.

This being laid aside, the whole matter is reduced to the Papers said to be
found in my Closet by the King's Officers, without any other proof of their
being written by me, than what is taken from the suppositions upon the
similitude of an Hand that is easily Counterfeited, and which has been lately
declared in the Lady Car's Case to be no lawful Evidence in Criminal Causes.

But if I had been seen to write them, the matter would not be much altered.
They plainly appear to relate unto a large Treatise written long since in
answer to Filmer's Book, which by all Intelligent Men is thought to be grounded
upon wicked Principles, equally pernicious unto Magistrates and People.

If he might publish unto the World his Opinion, That all Men are born under a
necessity derived from the Laws of God and Nature, to submit unto an Absolute
Kingly Government, which could be restrained by no Law, or Oath; and that he
that has the power, whether he came unto it by Creation, Election,
Inheritance, Usurpation, or any other, way had the Right; and none must oppose
his Will, but the Persons and Estates of his Subjects must be indispensably
subject unto it. I know not why I might not have published my Opinion to the
contrary, without the breach of any Law I have yet known.

I might as freely as he, publicly have declared my Thoughts, and the Reasons
upon which they were grounded, and I persuaded to believe, That God had left
Nations unto the Liberty of setting up such Governments as best pleased
themselves.

That Magistrates were set up for the good of Nations, not Nations for the
honor or glory of Magistrates.

That the Right and Power of Magistrates in every Country, was that which the
Laws of that Country made it to be.

That those Laws were to be observed, and the Oaths taken by them, having the
force of a Contract between Magistrate and People, could not be Violated
without danger of dissolving the whole Fabric.

That Usurpation could give no Right, and the most dangerous of all Enemies
unto Kings were they, who raising their Power to an Exorbitant Height, allowed
unto Usurpers all the Rights belonging unto it.

That such Usurpations being seldom Compassed without the Slaughter of the
Reigning Person, or Family, the worst of all Villainies was thereby rewarded
with the most Glorious Privileges.

That if such Doctrines were received, they would stir up Men to the
Destruction of Princes with more Violence than all the Passions that have
hitherto raged in the Hearts of the most Unruly.

That none could be safe, if such a Reward were proposed unto any that could
destroy them.

That few would be so gentle as to spare even the Best, if, by their
destruction, of a Wild Usurper, could become God's Anointed; and by the most
execrable Wickedness invest himself with that Divine Character.

This is the Scope of the whole Treatise; the Writer gives such Reasons as at
present did occur unto him to prove it. This seems to agree with the Doctrines
of the most Reverenced Authors of all Times, Nations and Religions. The best
and wisest Kings have ever acknowledged it. The present King of France has
declared that Kings have that happy want of Power, that they can do nothing
contrary unto the Laws of their Country, and grounds his Quarrel with the King
of Spain, Anno 1667, upon that Principle. King James in his Speech to the
Parliament, Anno 1603, does in the highest degree assert it: The Scripture
seems to declare it. If nevertheless the Writer was mistaken, he might have
been refuted by Law, Reason, and Scripture; and no man for such matters was
ever otherwise punished, than by being made to see his Error, and it has not
(as I think) been ever known that they had been referred to the Judgment of a
Jury, composed of Men utterly unable to comprehend them.

But there was little of this in my Case; the extravagance of my Prosecutors
goes higher: The abovementioned Treatise was never finished, nor could be in
many years, and most probably would never have been. So much as is of it was
written long since, never reviewed nor shown unto any man; and the fiftieth
part of it was produced, and not the tenth of that afford to be read. That
which was never known unto those who are said to have Conspired with me, was
said to be intended to stir up the People in Prosecution of the Designs of
those Conspirators.

When nothing of particular Application unto Time, Place, or Person could be
found in it, (as has ever been done by those who endeavored to raise
Insurrections) all was supplied by Innuendo's.

Whatsoever is said of the Expulsion of Tarquin, the Insurrection against Nero;
the Slaughter of Caligula, or Domitian; The Translation of the Crown of France
from Merovius his Race unto Pepin; and from his Descendants unto Hugh Capet,
and the like, applied by Innuendo unto the King.

They have not considered, that if such Acts of State be not good, there is not
a King in the World that has any Title to the Crown he bears; nor can have any,
unless he could deduce his Pedigree from the Eldest Son of Noah, and show that
the Succession had still continued in the Eldest of the Eldest Line, and been
so deduced to him.

Every one may see what advantage this would be to all the Kings of the World;
and whether that failing, it were not better for them to acknowledge they had
received their Crowns by the Consent of Willing Nations; or to have no better
Title unto them than Usurpation and Violence, which by the same ways may be
taken from them.

But I was long since told that I must Die, or the Plot must Die.

Lest the means of destroying the best Protestants in England should fail, the
Bench must be filled with such as had been Blemishes to the Bar.

None but such as these would have Advised with the King's Council, of the
means of bringing a Man to Death; Suffered a Jury to be packed by the King's
Sollicitors, and the Undersheriff; Admit of Jurymen who are not Freeholders;
Receive such Evidence as is abovementioned; Refuse a Copy of an Indictment, or
to Suffer the Statute of 46 Ed. 3. to be read, that does expressly Enact, it
should in no Case be denied unto any Man upon any occasion whatsoever; over
rule the most important Points of Law without hearing. And whereas the Stat.
25. Ed. 3. upon which they said I should be Tried, does Reserve unto the
Parliament all Constructions to be made in Points of Treason. They could assume
unto themselves not only a Power to make Constructions, but such Constructions
as neither agree with Law, Reason, or Common Sense.

By these means I am brought to this place. The Lord forgive these Practices,
and avert the Evils that threaten the Nation from them. The Lord sanctify these
my Sufferings unto me; and though I fall as a Sacrifice unto Idols, suffer not
Idolatry to be Established in this Land. Bless thy People, and save them.
Defend thy own Cause, and defend those that defend it. Stir up such as are
Faint; Direct those that are willing; confirm those that Waver; Give Wisdom and
Integrity unto all. Order all things so as may most redound unto thine own
Glory. Grant that I may Die glorifying thee for all thy Mercies; and that at
the last thou have permitted me to be Singled out as a Witness of thy Truth;
and even by the Confession of my Opposers, for that OLD CAUSE in which I was
from my Youth engaged, and for which thou have Often and Wonderfully declared
thy Self.

CHAP. I. Of MAGISTRACY.
I. RELATION is nothing else but that State of Mutual Respect and Reference,
which one Thing or Person has to another.

II. Such are the Relations of Father and Son, Husband and Wife, Master and
Servant, Magistrate and Subject.

III. The Relations of a Father, Husband and Master, are really distinct and
different; that is, one of them is not the other; For he may be any one of
these, who is none of the rest.

IV. This distinction proceeds from the different Reasons, upon which these
Relations are Founded.

V. The Reason or Foundation, from whence arises the Relation of a Father, is
from having Begotten his Son, who may as properly call every Old Man he meets
his Father, as any other Person whatsoever, excepting him only who Begat him.

VI. The Relation of an Husband and Wife is founded in Wedlock, whereby they
mutually consent to become one Flesh.

VII. The Relation of a Master is founded in that Right and Title which he has
to the Possession, or Service, of his Slave or Servant.

VIII. In these Relations, the Name of Father, Husband, and Master, imply
Sovereignty and Superiority, which varies notwithstanding, and is more or less
Absolute, according to the Foundation of these several Relations.

IX. The Superiority of a Father is founded in that Power, Priority and Dignity
of Nature, which a Cause has over its Effect.

X. The distance is not so great in Wedlock, but the Superiorty of the Husband
over the Wife, is like that of the Right hand over the left in the same Body.

XI. The Superiority of a Master, is an absolute Dominion over his Slave, a
Limited and Conditionate Command over his Servant.

XII. The Titles of Pater Patriae, and Sponsus Regni, Father of the Country,
and Husband of the Realm, are Metaphors and improper Speeches: For no Prince
ever Begat a whole Country of Subjects; nor can a Kingdom more properly be said
to be Married, than the City of Venice is to the Adriatique Gulf.

XIII. And to show further, that Magistracy is not Paternal Authority, nor
Monarchy founded in Fatherhood; it is undeniably plain, that a Son may be the
Natural Sovereign Lord of his own Father, as Henry the second had been of
Jeffery Plantagenet, if he had been an Englishman; which, they say, Henry the
Seventh did not love to think of, when his Sons grew up to Years. And this Case
alone is an Eternal Confutation of the Patriarchate.

XIV. Neither is Magistracy a Martial Power, for the Husband may be the
Obedient Subject of his own Wife, as Philip was of Queen Mary.

XV. Nor is it that Dominion which a Master has over his Slave, for then a
Prince might Lawfully Sell all his Subjects, like so many head of Cattle, and
make Money of his whole stock whenever he pleases, as a Patron of Algiers does.

XVI. Neither is the Relation of Prince and Subject the same with that of a
Master and hired Servant, for he does not hire them, but, as St. Paul says,
They pay him Tribute, in consideration of his continual Attendance and
Employment for the Public Good.

XVII. That public Office and Employment is the Foundation of the Relation of
King and Subject, as many other Relations are likewise Founded upon other
Functions and Administrations, such as Guardian and Ward, etc.

XVIII. The Office of a King is set down at large in the XVII. Chap. of the
Laws of King Edward the Confessor, to which the succeeding Kings have been
sworn at their Coronation: And it is affirmed in the Preambles of the Statutes
of Prout Regalis Officii exposcit utilitas
Marlbridge, and of the Statute of Quowarranto, made at ficome le profit de
Office Demand. The Kingly or Regal Office of this Realm. jo Mar. Sess. 3.
Cap. 1.
Gloucester, That the Calling of Parliaments to make Laws for the better Estate
of the Realm, and the more full Administration of Justice, Belongs to the
Office of a King. But the fullest account of it in few words, is in Chancellor
Fortescue, Chap. XIII. which Passage is quoted in Calvin's Case, Coke VII. Rep.
Fol 5. Ad Tutelam namque Legis Subditorum, ac eorum Corporum, and bonorum Rex
hujusmodi erectus est, and ad hanc potestatem a populo effluxam ipse habet, quo
ei non licet potestate alia suo populo Dominari. For such a King (That is of
every Political Kingdom, as this is) is made and ordained for the Defense or
Guardianship of the Law of his Subjects, and of their Bodies and Goods,
whereunto he receives power of his People, so that he cannot Govern his People
by any other power.

Corollary 1. A Bargain's a Bargain.

2. A Popish Guardian of Protestant Laws is such an Incongruity, and he is as
Unfit for that Office, as Antichrist is to be Christ's Vicar.

CHAP. II. Of Prerogatives by Divine Right.
I. GOvernment is not matter of Revelation; if it were, then those Nations that
wanted Scripture, must have been without Government; whereas Scripture it self
says, That Government is The Ordinance of Man, and of Humane Extraction. And
King Charles the First says, of this Government in particular, That it was
Molded by the Wisdom and Experience of the People. Answ. to XIX. Prop.

II. All just Governments are highly Beneficial to Mankind, and are of God, the
Author of all Good; they are his Ordinances and Institutions, Romans 13.1, 2.

III. Plowing and Sowing, and the whole business of preparing Bread-Corn, is
absolutely necessary to the subsistence of Mankind; This also comes forth from
the Lord of Hosts, who is wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in Working, Isa.
28. from 23. to 29th Verse.

IV. Wisdom says, Counsel is mine, and sound Wisdom; I am Understanding, I
have strength: By me Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice: By me Princes
Rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth, Prove. 8.14.

V. The Prophet, speaking of the Plowman, says, His God does instruct him to
discretion, and does teach him, Isa. 28.26.

VI. Scripture neither gives nor takes away Men's Civil Rights, but leaves them
as it found them, and (as our Savior said of himself) is no Divider of
Inheritances.

VII. Civil Authority is a Civil Right.

VIII. The Law of England gives the King his Title to the Crown. For, where is
it said in Scripture, That such a Person or Family by Name shall enjoy it? And
the same Law of England which has made him King, has made him King according to
the English Laws, and not otherwise.

IX. The King of England has no more Right to set up a French Government, than
the French King has to be King of England, which is none at all.

X. Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's; neither makes a Caesar,
nor tells who Caesar is, nor what belongs to him; but only requires Men to be
just, in giving him those supposed Rights, which the Laws have determined to be
his.

XI. The Scripture supposes Property, when it forbids Stealing; it supposes
Men's Lands to be already Butted and Bounded, when it forbids removing the
ancient Landmarks: And as it is impossible for any Man to prove what Estate he
has by Scripture, or to find a Terrier of his Lands there; so it is a vain
thing to look for Statutes of Prerogative in Scripture.

XII. If Mishpat Hamelech, the manner of the King, 1 Samuel 8.11. be a Statute of
Prerogative, and prove all those particulars to be the Right of the King, then
Mishpat Haccohanim the Priest's custom of Sacrilegeous Rapine, Chap. 2.13.
proves that to be the Right of the Priests, the same wood being used in both
places.

XIII. It is the Resolution of all the Judges of England, that even the known
and undoubted Prerogatives of the Jewish Kings, do not belong to our Kings, and
that it is an absurd and impudent thing to affirm they do. Coke 11. Rep. p. 63.
Mich. 5. Jac. Give us a King to Judge us. 1 Samuel 8.5, 6, 20.
Note upon Sunday the Tenth of November, in this same Term, the King upon
Complaint made to him by Bancroft, Archbishop of Canterbury, concerning
Prohibitions, was informed, that when Question was made of what matters the
Ecclesiastical Judges have Cognizance, either upon the Exposition of the
Statutes, concerning Tithes, or any other Thing Ecclesiastical, or upon the
Statute 1 Eliz. concerning the High Commission, or in any other Case, in which
there is not express Authority by Law, the King himself may decide it in his
Royal person; and that the Judges are but the Delegates of the King, and that
the King may take what Causes he shall please to determine from the
Determination of the Judges, and may determine them himself. And the Archbishop
said, That this was clear in Divinity, That such Authority belongs to the King,
by the Word of God in Scripture. To which it was answered by me, in the
presence, and with the clear consent of all the Justices of England, and Barons
of the Exchequer, That the King in his own person cannot adjudge any Case,
either Criminal, as Treason, Felony, etc. but this ought to be determined and
adjusted in some Court of Justice, according to the Law and Custom of England.
And always Judgments are given, Ideo consideratum est per Curiam, so that the
Court gives the Judgment: -- And it was greatly marvelled, That the Archbishop
durst inform the King, that such absolute power and authority, as is aforesaid,
belonged to the King, by the Word of God.

CHAP. III. Of OBEDIENCE.
I. NO Man has any more Civil Authority than what the Law of the Land has
vested in him; Nor is he one of St. Paul's Higher Powers any farther, or to any
other purposes than the Law has empowered him.

II. An Usurped, Illegal and Arbitrary power, is so far from being the
Ordinance of God, that it is not the Ordinance of Man.

III. Whoever opposes an Usurped, Illegal, and Arbitrary Power, does not oppose
the Ordinance of God, but the Violation of that Ordinance.

IV. The 13. of the Romans commands Subjection to our Temporal Governors,
Verse 4.
because their Office and Employment is for the public welfare, For he is the
Minister of God to Thee for Good.

V. The 13. of the Hebrews commands Obedience to spiritual Rulers, Verse 17.
Because they watch for your Souls.

VI. But the 13. of the Hebrews did not oblige the Martyrs and Confessors in
Queen Mary's Time, to obey such blessed Bishops as Bonner and the Beast of
Rome, who were the perfect Reverse of St. Paul's Spiritual Rulers, and whose
practice was murdering of Souls and Bodies, according to the true Character of
Popery which was given it by the Bishops who compiled the Thanksgiving for the
Fifth of November, but Archbishop Laud was wiser than they, and in his time
blotted it out.

The Prayer formerly run thus: To that end strengthen the Hands of our Gracious
King, the Nobles and Magistrates of the Land, to cut off these workers of
Iniquity (whose Religion is Rebellion, whose Faith is Faction, whose practice
is murdering of Souls and Bodies) and to root them out of the Confines of this
Kingdom.

VII. All the Judges of England are bound by their Oath, 18 Edw. III. 20 Edw.
III. Cap. 1.2.
and by the duty of their place, to disobey all Writs, Letters, or Commands
which are brought to them, either under the little Seal, or under the great
Seal, to hinder or delay common Right. Are the Judges all bound in an Oath, and
by their places, to break the 13 of the Romans?

VIII. The Engagement of the Lords attending upon the King at York, June 13.
1642. which was subscribed by the Lord Keeper, and Thirty Nine Peers, besides
the Lord Chief Justice Banks, and several others of the Privy Council, was in
these words:

We do engage our selves not to Obey any Orders or Commands whatsoever, not
warranted by the known Laws of the Land. Was this likewise an Association
against the 13 of the Romans?

IX. A Constable represents the King's person, and in the Execution of his
Office is within the purview of the 13 of the Romans, as all Men grant; but in
case he so far pervert his Office, as to break the Peace, and commit Murder,
Burglary, or Robbery on the Highway, he may, and ought to be Resisted.

X. The Law of the Land is the best Expositor of the 13 of the Romans, Here,
and in Poland, the Law of the Land There.

XI. The 13 of the Romans is received for Scripture in Poland, and yet this is
expressed in the Coronation Oath in that Country; Quod si Sacramentum meum
violavero, Incola Regni nullam nobis Obedientiam praestare tenebuntur. And if I
shall violate my Oath, the Inhabitants of the Realm shall not be bound to yield
me any Obedience.

XII. The Law of the Land, according to Bracton, is the highest of all the
Higher Powers mentioned in this Text; for it is superior to the King, and made
him King, ( Lib. 3. Cap. 26. Rex habet superiorum Deum, item Legem, per quam
factus est Rex, item Curiam suam, viz. Comites and Barons) and therefore by
this Text we ought to be subject to it in the first place. And according to
Melancthon, It is the Ordinance of God, to which the Higher Powers themselves
ought to be subject. Vol. 3. In his Commentary on the Fifth Verse, (Wherefore
ye must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake.) He
has these words, Neque vero haec tantum pertinent ad Subditos, sed etiam ad
Magistratum, qui cum fiunt Tyranni, non minus dissipant Ordinationem Dei, quam
Seditiosi. Ideo and ipsorum Conscientia fit rea, quia non obediunt Ordinationi
Dei, id est, Legibus, quibus debent parere. Ideo Comminationes hic positae
etiam ad ipsos pertinent. Itaque hujus mandati severitas moveat omnes, ne
violationem Politici status putent esse leve peccatum. Neither does this place
concern Subjects only, but also the Magistrates themselves, who when they turn
Tyrants, do no less overthrow the Ordinance of God than the Seditious; and
therefore their Consciences too are guilty, for not obeying the Ordinance of
God, that is, the Laws which they ought to obey: So that the Threatenings in
this place do also belong to them; wherefore let the severity of this Command
deter all men from thinking the Violation of the Political Constitution to be a
light Sin.

Corollary. To destroy the Law and Legal Constitution, which is the Ordinance
of God, by false and arbitrary Expositions of this Text, is a greater Sin than
to destroy it by any other means; For it is Seething the Kid in his Mothers
Milk.

CHAP. IV. Of LAWS.
I. THere is no Natural Obligation, wereby one Man is bound to yield Obedience
to another, but what is founded in paternal or patriarchal Authority.

II. All the Subjects of a patriarchal Monarch are Princes of the Blood.

III. All the people of England are not Princes of the Blood.

IV. No Man who is Naturally Free can be Bound, but by his own Act and Deed.

V. Public Laws are made by public consent, and they therefore bind every
man, because every man's consent is involved in them.

VI. Nothing but the same Authority and Consent which made the Laws, can
Repeal, Alter, or Explain them.

VII. To judge and determine Causes against Law, without Law, or where the Law
is obscure and uncertain, is to assume Legislative power.

VIII. Power assumed, without a Man's consent, cannot bind him as his own Act
and Deed.

IX. The Law of the Land is all of a piece, and the same Authority which made
one Law, made all the rest, and intended to have them all Impartially Executed.

X. Law on One Side, is the Back-Sword of Justice.

XI. The Best Things, when Corrupted, are the Worst; and the wild Justice of a
State of Nature, is much more desirable than Law perverted, and overruled,
into Hemlock and Oppression.

Copies of Two Papers Written by the Late King CHARLES II.
Published by His MAJESTY'S Command. Printed in the Year 1686.
The First Paper.
THE Discourse we had the other Day, I hope satisfied you in the main, that
Christ can have but one Church here upon Earth, and I believe that it is as
visible as that the Scripture is in Print; That none can be that Church, but
that, which is called the Roman Catholic Church. I think you need not trouble
your self with entering into that Ocean of particular Disputes, when the main,
and, in truth, the only Question is; Where that Church is, which we profess to
believe in the two Creeds? We declare there to believe one Catholic and
Apostolic Church, and it is not left to every fantastical man's head to
believe as he pleases, but to the Church to whom Christ left the power upon
Earth to govern us in matters of Faith, who made these Creeds for our
Directions. It were a very Irrational thing to make Laws for a Country, and
leave it to the Inhabitants, to be the Interpreters and Judges of those Laws,
For then every man will be his own Judge, and by consequence no such thing as
either right or wrong. Can we therefore suppose that God Almighty would leave
us at those uncertainties, as to give us a Rule to go by, and to leave every
man to be his own Judge? I do ask any ingenuous man, whether it be not the same
thing to follow our own Fancy or to interpret the Scripture by it? I would have
any man show me, where the power of deciding matters of Faith is given to every
particular man. Christ left his power to his Church even to forgive Sins in
Heaven, and left his Spirit with them, which they exercised after his
Resurrection: First by his Apostles in these Creeds, and many years after by
the Council at Nice, where that Creed was made that is called by that name, and
by the power which they had received from Christ, they were the Judges even of
the Scripture it self many years after the Apostles, which Books were Canonical
and which were not. And if they had this power then, I desire to know how they
came to lose it, and by what Authority men separate themselves from that
Church? The only pretense I ever heard of, was, because the Church has failed
in wresting and interpreting the Scripture contrary to the true sense and
meaning of it, and that they have imposed Articles of Faith upon us, which are
not to be warranted by God's word? I do desire to know who is to be Judge of
that, whether the whole Church, the Succession whereof has continued to this
day without interruption, or particular men who have raised Schims for their
own advantage?

This is a true Copy of a Paper I found in the late King my Brothers Strong
Box, written in his own Hand.

JAMES R.

The Second Paper.
IT is a sad thing to consider what a world of Heresies are crept into this
Nation; Every man thinks himself as competent a Judge of the Scriptures as the
very Apostles themselves; and it is no wonder that it should be so, since that
part of the Nation which looks most like a Church, dares not bring the true
Arguments against the other Sects, for fear they should be turned against
themselves, and confuted by their own Arguments. The Church of England (as it is
called) would fain have it thought, that they are the Judges in matters
Spiritual, and yet dare not say positively that there is no Appeal from them;
for either they must say, that they are Infallible (which they cannot pretend
to) or confess that what they decide in matters of Conscience, is no further to
be followed, then it agrees with every man's private Judgment. If Christ did
leave a Church here upon Earth, and we were all once of that Church, how? and
by what Authority, did we separate from that Church? If the power of
Interpreting of Scripture be in every man's brain, what need have we of a Church
or Churchmen; To what purpose then did our Savior, after he had given his
Apostles power to Bind and Loose in Heaven and Earth, add to it, that he would
be with them even to the end of the World? These words were not spoken
Parabolically, or by way of Figure. Christ was then ascending into his Glory,
and left his Power with his Church even to the End of the World. We have had
these hundred years past, the sad effects of denying to the Church that Power
in matters Spiritual, without an Appeal. What Country can subsist in peace or
quiet, where there is not a Supreme Judge from whence there can be no Appeal?
Can there be any Justice done where the Offenders are their own Judges, and
equal Interpreters of the Law, with those that are appointed to administer
Justice? This is our Case here in England in matters Spiritual; for the
Protestants are not of the Church of England, as it is the true Church from
whence there can be no Appeal; but because the Discipline of that Church is
conformable at that present to their fancies, which as soon as it shall
contradict or vary from, they are ready to embrace or join with the next
Congregation of People, whose Discipline and Worship agrees with their Opinion
at that time, so that according to this Doctrine, there is no other Church, nor
Interpreter of Scripture but that which lies in every man's giddy brain. I
desire to know therefore of every serious Considerer of these things, whether
the great work of our Salvation ought to depend upon such a Sandy Foundation as
this? Did Christ ever say to the Civil Magistrate (much less to the People)
that he would be with them to the end of the World? Or, did he give them the
Power to forgive Sins? St. Paul tells the Corinthians, Ye are Gods Husbandry,
ye are Gods Building; we are Laborers with God. This shows who are the
Laborers, and who are the Husbandry and Building: And in this whole Chapter,
and in the preceding one, St. Paul takes great pains to set forth that they,
the Clergy, have the Spirit of God, without which no man searches the deep
things of God; and he concludes the Chapter with this Verse, For who has
known the mind of the Lord that he may instruct him? But we have the mind of
Christ. Now if we do but consider in humane probability and reason, the powers
Christ leaves to his Church in the Gospel, and St. Paul explains so distinctly
afterward, we cannot think that our Savior said all these things to no
purpose; And pray consider on the other side, that those who resist the truth,
and will not submit to his Church, draw their Arguments from Implications, and
far fetched Interpretations, at the same time that they deny plain and positive
words; which is so great a Disingenuity, that it is not almost to be thought
that they can believe themselves. Is there any other foundation of the
Protestant Church, but that if the Civil Magistrate please, he may call such of
the Clergy as he thinks fit for his turn at that time; and turn the Church
either to Presbytery, Independency, or indeed what he pleases? This was the way
of our pretended Reformation here in England; and by the same Rule and
Authority it may be altered into as many more Shapes and Forms as there are
Fancies in men's Heads.

This is a true Copy of a Paper written by the late King my Brother in his own
Hand, which I found in his Closet.

JAMES R.

A LETTER, Containing some Remarks on the Two Papers, writ by His late Majesty
King CHARLES the Second, Concerning Religion.
SIR,
I Thank you for the two Royal Papers that you have sent me: I had heard of
them before, but now we have them so well attested, that there is no hazard of
being deceived by a false Copy: you expect that in return, I should let you
know what impression they have made upon me. I pay all the reverence that is
due to a Crowned Head, even in Ashes; to which I will never be wanting: far
less am I capable of suspecting the Royal Attestation that accompanies them; of
the truth of which I take it for granted no man doubts; but I must crave leave
to tell you, that I am confident, the late King only copied them, and that they
are not of his Composing. for as they have nothing of that free Air, with which
he expressed himself; so there is a Contexture in them, that does not look like
a Prince; and the beginning of the first shows it was the effect of a
Conversation, and was to be communicated to another: so that I am apt to think
they were Composed by another, and were so well relished by the late King, that
he thought fit to keep them, in order to his examining them more particularly;
and that he was prevailed with to Copy them lest a Paper of that nature might
have been made a Crime if it had been found about him written by another hand:
and I could name one or two Persons, who as they were able enough to Compose
such Papers, so had power enough over his Spirit to engage him to Copy them,
and to put themselves out of danger by restoring the Original.

You ought to address your self to the Learned Divines of our Church, for
answer to such things in them as puzzle you, and not to one that has not the
honor to be of that Body, and that has now carried a Sword for some time, and
imploys the leisure that at any time he enjoys, rather in Philosophical and
Mathematical Enquiries than in matters of Controversy. There is indeed one
Consideration that determined me more easily to comply with your desires, which
is, my having had the honor to discourse copiously of those matters with the
late King himself: and he having proposed to me some of the particulars that I
find in those Papers, and I having said several things to him, in answer to
those Heads, which he offered to me only as Objections, with which he seemed
fully satisfied, I am the more willing to communicate to you, that which I took
the liberty to lay before His late Majesty on several occasions: the
particulars on which he insisted in discourse with me, were the uselessness of
a Law without a Judge, and the necessity of an infallible Tribunal to determine
Controversies, to which he added, the many Sects that were in England, which
seemed to be a necessary consequence of the Liberty that every one took to
interpret the Scriptures: and he often repeated that of the Church of Englands
arguing, from the obligation to obey the Church, against the Sectaries, which
he thought was of no force, unless they allowed more Authority to the Church
then they seemed willing to admit, in their Disputes with this Church of Rome.
But upon the whole Matter I will offer you some Reflections, that will, I hope,
be of as great weight with you, as they are with my self.

I. All Arguments that prove upon such general Considerations, that there ought
to be an Infallible Judge named by Christ, and clothed with his Authority,
signify nothing, unless it can be showed us, in what Texts of Scripture that
nomination is to be found; and till that is showed, they are only Arguments
brought to prove that Christ ought to have done somewhat that he has not done.
So these are in effect so many Arguments against Christ, unless it appears that
he has Authorized such a Judge: therefore the right way to end this Dispute,
is, to show where such a Constitution is Authorized: So that the most that can
be made of this is, that it amounts to a favorable presumption.

II. It is a very unreasonable thing for us to form Presumptions, of what is,
or ought to be, from Inconveniences that do arise, in case that such things are
not: for we may carry this so far, that it will not be easy to stop it. It
seems more suitable to the infinite Goodness of God, to communicate the
knowledge of himself to all Mankind, and to furnish every Man with such
assistances as will certainly prevail over him. It seems also reasonable to
think, that so perfect a Savior as Jesus Christ was, should have showed us a
certain way, and yet consistent with the free Use of our Faculties, of avoiding
all sin: nor is it very easy to imagine, that it should be a reproach on his
Gospel, if there is not an Infallible Preservative against Error, when it is
acknowledged; that there is no infallible Preservative against sin: for it is
certain, that the one Damns us more Infallibly, than the other.

III. Since presumptions are so much insisted on, to prove what things must be
appointed by Christ; it is to be considered, that it is also a reasonable
Presumption, that if such a Court was appointed by him, it must be done in such
plain terms that there can be no room to question the meaning of them: and
since this is the hinge upon which all other matters turn, it ought to be
expressed so particularly, in whom it is vested, that there should be no
occasion given to dispute, whether it is in one Man or in a Body; and if in a
Body, whether in the Majority, or in the two thirds, or in the whole Body
unanimously agreeing; in short, the Chief thing in all Governments being the
Nature and Power of the Judges, those are always distinctly specified; and
therefore if these things are not specified in the Scriptures, it is at least a
strong Presumption, that Christ did not intend to authorize such Judges.

IV. There were several Controversies raised among the Churches to which the
Apostles writ, as appears by the Epistles to the Romans, Corinthians,
Galatians, and Colossians, yet the Apostles never make use of those passages
that are pretended for this Authority to put an end to those Controversies;
which is a shrewd Presumption, that they did not understand them in that sense
in which the Church of Rome does now take them. Nor does St. Paul in the
Directions that he gives to the Churchmen in his Epistles to Timothy and
Titus, reckon this of submitting to the directions of the Church for one, which
he could not have omitted, if this be the true meaning of those disputed
passages: and yet he has not one word sounding that way, which is very
different from the directions which one possessed with the present view that
the Church of Rome has of this matter must needs have given.

V. There are some things very expressly taught in the New Testament, such as
the Rules of a good Life, the Use of the Sacraments, the addressing our selves
to God, for Mercy and Grace, through the Sacrifice that Christ offered for us on
the Cross, and the worshipping him as God, the Death, Resurrection and
Ascension of Jesus Christ, the Resurrection of our Bodies and Life Everlasting:
by which it is apparent, that we are set beyond doubt in those matters; if then
there are other passages more obscure concerning other matters, we must
conclude, that these are not of that Consequence, otherwise they would have
been as plainly revealed as others are; but above all, if the Authority of the
Church is delivered to us in disputable terms, that is a just prejudice against
it, since it is a thing of such Consequence, that it ought to have been
revealed in a way so very clear and past all dispute.

VI. If it is a Presumption for particular Persons to judge concerning
Religion, which must be still referred to the Priests and other Guides in
Sacred Matters, this is a good Argument to oblige all Nations to continue in
the Established Religion, whatever it may happen to be; and above all others,
it was a convincing Argument in the Mouths of the Jews against our Savior. He
pretended to be the Messiah, and proved it both by the Prophesies that were
accomplished in him, and by the Miracles that he wrought: as for the
Prophesies, the Reasons urged by the Church of Rome will conclude much
stronger, that such dark passages as those of the Prophets were, ought not to
be interpreted by particular Persons, but that the Exposition of these must be
referred to the Priests and Sanhedrin, it being expressly proved in their Law
(Deuteronomy. 17.8.) That when Controversies arose, concerning any Cause that was too
intricate, they were to go to the place which God should choose, and to the
Priests of the Tribe of Levi, and to the Judge in those days, and that they
were to declare what was right, and to their decision all were obliged to
submit, under pain of Death: So that by this it appears, that the Priests in
the Jewish Religion were authorized in so extraordinary a manner, that I dare
say, the Church of Rome would not wish for a more formal Testimony on her
behalf: As for our Savior's Miracles, these were not sufficient neither,
unless his Doctrine was first found to be good: since Moses had expressly warned
the people (Deuteronomy. 13.1.) That if a Prophet came and taught them to follow after
other Gods, they were not to obey him, though he wrought Miracles to prove his
Mission, but were to put him to Death: So a Jew saying, that Christ, by making
himself one with his Father, brought in the worship of another God, might well
pretend that he was not obliged to yield to the Authority of our Savior's
Miracles, without taking cognizance of his Doctrine, and of the Prophesies
concerning the Messiah, and in a word, of the whole matter. So that if these
Reasonings are now good against the Reformation, they were as strong in the
Mouths of the Jews against our Savior: and from hence we see, that the
Authority that seems to be given by Moses to the Priests, must be understood
with some Restrictions; since we not only find the Prophets, and Jeremy in
particular, opposing themselves to the whole body of them, but we see likewise,
that for some considerable time before our Savior's days, not only many
illgrounded Traditions had got in among them, by which the vigor of the Moral
Law was much enervated, but likewise they were universally possessed with a
false notion of their Messiah; so that even the Apostles themselves had not
quite shaken off those prejudices at the time of our Savior's Ascension. So
that here a Church, that was still the Church of God, that had the appointed
means of the Expiations of their sins, by their Sacrifices and Washings, as
well as by their Circumcision, was yet under great and fatal Errors, from which
particular persons had no way to extricate themselves, but by examining the
Doctrine and Texts of Scripture, and by judging of them according to the
Evidence of Truth, and the force and freedom of their Faculties.

VII. It seems Evident, that the passage (Tell the Church) belongs only to the
reconconciling of Differences: that of binding and loosing, according to the
use of those terms among the Jews signifies only an Authority that was given to
the Apostles of giving Precepts, by which men were to be obliged to such
Duties, or set at liberty from them: and (the gates of Hell not prevailing
against the Church) signifies only, that the Christian Religion was never to
come to an end, or to perish; and that of ( Christ's being with the Apostles to
the end of the world) imports only a special conduct and protection which the
Church may always expect, but as the promise, I will not leave thee nor forsake
thee; that belongs to every Christian, does not import an Infallibility: no
more does the other. And for those passages concerning ( the Spirit of God that
searches all things) it is plain, that in them St. Paul is treating of the
Divine Inspiration, by which the Christian Religion was then opened to the
World, which he sets in opposition to the Wisdom or Philosophy of the Greeks;
so that as all those passages come short of proving that for which they are
alleged, it must at last be acknowledged, that they have not an Evidence great
enough to prove so important a truth, as some would evince by them; since it is
a matter of such vast consequence, that the proofs for it must have an
undeniable Evidence.

VIII. In the matters of Religion two things are to be considered; first, the
Account that we must give to God, and the Rewards that we expect from him: and
in this every man must answer for the sincerity of his Heart, in examining
Divine Matters, and the following what (upon the best Enquiries that one could
make) appeared to be true: and with relation to this, there is no need of a
Judge: for in that Great Day every one must answer to God according to the
Talents that he had, and all will be saved according to their sincerity; and
with relation to that Judgment, there is no need of any other Judge but God. A
second view of Religion, is as it is a Body united together, and by consequence
brought under some Regulation: and as in all States, there are subaltern
Judges, in whose decisions all must at least acquiesce, though they are not
infallible, there being still a sort of an Appeal to be made to the Sovereign
or the Supreme Legislative Body; so the Church has a subaltern Jurisdiction,
but as the Authority o^ Inferior Judges is still regulated, and none but the
Legislators themselves have an Authority equal to the Law; so it is not
necessary for the preservation of Peace and Order, that the Decisions of the
Church should be infallible, or of equal Authority with the Scriptures. If
Judges do so manifestly abuse their Authority, that they fall into Rebellion
and Treason, the Subjects are no more bound to consider them; but are obliged
to resist them, and to maintain their Obedience to their Sovereign; though in
other matters their Judgment must take place, till they are reversed by the
Sovereign. The case of Religion being then this, That Jesus Christ is the
Sovereign of the Church; the Assembly of the Pastors is only a subaltern Judge:
if they manifestly oppose themselves to the Scriptures, which is the Law of
Christians, particular persons may be supposed as competent Judges of that, as
in civil Matters they may be of the Rebellion of the Judges, and in that case
they are bound still to maintain their Obedience to Jesus Christ. In matters
indifferent, Christians are bound, for the preservation of Peace and Unity, to
acquiesce in the Decisions of the Church, and in Matters justly doubtful, or of
small Consequence, though they are convinced that the Pastors have erred, yet
they are obliged to be silent, and to bear tolerable things rather than make a
Breach; but if it is visible, that the Pastors do Rebel against the Sovereign
of the Church, I mean Christ, the people may put in their Appeal to that great
Judge, and there it must lie. If the Church did use this Authority with due
Discretion, and the people followed the Rules that I have named with Humility
and Modesty, there would be no great danger of many Divisions; but this is the
great Secret of the providence of God, that men are still men, and both Pastors
and People mix their Passions and Interests so with matters of Religion, that
as there is a great deal of Sin and Vice still in the World, so that appears in
the Matters of Religion as well as in other things: but the ill Consequences of
this; though they are bad enough, yet are not equal Effects that ignorant
Superstition, and Obedient Zeal have produced in the World, Witness the
Rebellions and Wars for establishing the Worship of Images; the Croissades
against the Saracens, in which many Millions were lost; those against
Heretics, and Princes deposed by Popes, which lasted for some Ages; and the
Massacre of Paris, with the Butcheries of the Duke of Alva in the last Age, and
that of Ireland in this: which are, I suppose far greater Mischiefs than any
that can be imagined to arise out of a small Diversion of Opinions: and the
present State of this Church, notwithstanding all those unhappy Rents that are
in it, is a much more desirable thing, than the gross Ignorance and blind
Superstition that reigns in Italy and Spain at this day.

IX. All these reasonings concerning the Infallibility of the Church signify
nothing, unless we can certainly know, whither we must go for this Decision:
for while one Party shows us, that it must be in the Pope, or is no where, and
another Party says it cannot be in the Pope, because as many Popes have erred,
so this is a Doctrine that was not known in the Church for a thousand Years,
and that has been disputed ever since it was first asserted, we are in the
right to believe both sides; first, that if it is not in the Pope, it is no
where; and than, that certainly it is not in the Pope; and it is very
Incongruous to say, that there is an Infallible Authority in the Church, and
that yet it is not certain where one must seek for it; for the one ought to be
as clear as the other, and it is also plain, that what Primacy soever St. Peter
may be supposed to have had, the Scripture says not one word of his Successors
at Rome; so at least this is not so clear, as a matter of this Consequence must
have been, if Christ had intended to have lodged such an Authority in that See.

X. It is no less Incongruous to say, that this Infallibility is in a General
Council: for it must be somewhere else, otherwise it will return only to the
Church by some starts, and other long intervals: and as it was not in the
Church, for the first Three Hundred and Twenty years, so it has not been in the
Church these last 120 years. It is plain also, that there is no Regulation
given in the Scriptures: concerning this great Assembly, who have a right to
come and Vote, and what forfeits this right, and what numbers must concur in a
Decision, to assure us of the Infallibility of the Judgment. It is certain,
there was never a General Council of all the Pastors of the Church: for those
of which we have the Acts, were only the Council of the Roman Empire, but for
those Churches, that were in the South of Africa, or the Eastern parts of Asia,
beyond the bounds of the Roman Empire, as they could not be summoned by the
Emperors Authority, so it is certain none of them were present: unless one or
two of Persia at Nice, which perhaps was a Corner of Persia belonging to the
Empire; and unless it can be proved, that the Pope has an Absolute Authority to
cut off whole Churches from their right of coming to Councils, there has been
no General Council these last 700 years in the World, ever since the Bishops of
Rome have Excommunicated all the Greek Churches upon such trifling Reasons,
that their own Writers are now ashamed of them; and I will ask no more of a Man
of a Competent Understanding, to satisfy him, that the Council of Trent was no
General Council, acting in that Freedom that became Bishops, than that he will
be at the pains to read Card. Pallavicin's History of that Council.

XI. If it is said, that this Infallibility is to be fought for in the
Tradition of the Doctrine in all Ages, and that every particular Person must
examine this: here is a Sea before him, and instead of examining the small Book
of the New Testament, he is involved in a study that must cost a Man an Age to
go through it; and many of the Ages, through which he carries this Enquiry, are so
dark, and have produced so few Writers, at least so few are preserved to our
days, that it is not possible to find out their Belief. We find also Traditions
have varied so much, that it is hard to say that there is much weight to be
laid on this way of Conveyance. A Tradition concerning Matters of Fact that all
People see, is less apt to fail than a Tradition of Points of Speculation: and
yet we see very near the Age of the Apostles, contrary Traditions touching the
Observation of Easter, from which we must conclude, that either the Matter of
Fact of one side, or the other, as it was handed down, was not true, or at
least that it was not rightly understood. A Tradition concerning the Use of the
Sacraments, being a visible thing, is the more likely to be exact, than a
Speculation concerning their Nature; and yet we find a Tradition of giving
Infants the Communion, grounded on the indispensible necessity of the
Sacrament, continued 1000 years in the Church. A Tradition on which the
Christians founded their Joy and Hope, is less like to be changed, than a more
remote Speculation, and yet the first Writers of the Christian Religion had a
Tradition handed down to them by those who saw the Apostles, of the Reign of
Christ for a Thousand Years upon Earth; and if those who had Matters at second
hand from the Apostles, could be thus mistaken, it is more reasonable to
apprehend greater Errors at such a distance. A Tradition concerning the Book of
the Scriptures is more like to be exact, than the Expositions of some passages
in it; and yet we find the Church did unanimously believe the Translation of
the 70 Interpreters to have been the effect of a miraculous Inspiration, till
St. Jerome examined this matter better, and made a New Translation from the
Hebrew Copies. But which is more than all the rest, it seems plain, that the
Fathers before the Council of Nice believed the Divinity of the Son of God to
be in some sort inferior to that of the Father, and for some Ages after the
Council of Nice, they believed them indeed both equal, but they considered
these as two different Beings, and only one in Essence, as, three men have the
same Humane Nature in common among them; and that as one Candle lights another,
so the one flowed from another; and after the Fifth Century the Doctrine of one
Individual Essence was received. If you will be farther informed concerning
this, Father Petau will satisfy you as to the first Period before the Council
of Nice, and the leared Dr. Cudworth as to the second. In all which particulars
it appears, how variable a thing Tradition is. And upon the whole matter, the
examining Tradition thus, is still a searching among Books, and here is no
living Judge.

XII. If then the Authority that must decide Controversies, lies in the Body of
the Pastors scattered over the World, which is the last retrenchment, here as
many and as great Scruples will arise, as we found in any of the former Heads.
Two difficulties appear at first view, the one is, How can we be assured that
the present Pastors of the Church are derived in a just Succession from the
Apostles: there are no Registers extant that prove this: So that we have
nothing for it but some Histories, that are so carelessly writ, that we find
many mistakes in them in other Matters; and they are so different in the very
first links of that Chain, that immediately succeeded the Apostles, that the
utmost can be made of this, is, that here is an Historical Relation somewhat
doubtful; but here is nothing to found our Faith on: so that if a Succession
from the Apostles times, is necessary to the Constitution of that Church, to
which we must submit our selves, we know not where to find it: besides that,
the Doctrine of the necessity of the Intention of the Minister to the Validity
of a Sacrament, throws us into inextricable difficulties. I know they generally
say, that by the Intention they do not mean the inward Acts of the Minister of
the Sacrament, but only that it must appear by his outward deportment, that he
is in earnest going about a Sacrament, and not doing a thing in jest; and this
appeared so reasonable to me, that I was sorry to find our Divines urge it too
much: till turning over the Rubricks that are at the beginning of the Missal, I
found upon the head of the Intention of the Minister, that if a Priest has a
number of Hosties before him to be consecrated, and intends to Consecrate them
all, except one, in that case that Vagrant Exception falls upon them all: it
not being affixed to any one, and it is defined that he Consecrates none at
all. Here it is plain, that the secret Acts of a Priest can defeat the
Sacrament: so this overthrows all certainty concerning a Succession: But
besides all this, we are sure, that the Greek Churches have a much more
uncontested Succession than the Latins: So that a Succession cannot direct us.
And if it is necessary to seek out the Doctrines that are universally received,
this is not possible for a private man to know. So that in ignorant Countries,
where there is little Study, the people have no other certainty concerning
their Religion, but what they take from their Curate and Confessor: since they
cannot examine what is generally received. So that it must be confessed, that
all the Arguments that are brought for the necessity of a constant infallible
Judge, turn against all those of the Church of Rome, that do not acknowledge
the Infallibility of the Pope: for if he is not infallible, they have no other
Judge, that can pretend to it. It were also easy to show, that some Doctrines
have been as Universally received in some Ages, as they have been rejected in
others; which shows, that the Doctrine of the present Church is not always a
sure measure. For five Ages together, the Doctrine of the Pope's Power to
depose Heretical Princes was received without the least Opposition: and this
cannot be doubted by any that knows what has been the State of the Church,
since the end of the Eleventh Century: and yet I believe few Princes would
allow this, notwithstanding all the concurring Authority of so many Ages to
fortisie it. I could carry this into a great many other Instances, but I single
out this, because it is a point in which Princes are naturally extreme sensible.

Upon the whole matter, it can never enter into my mind, that God, who has made
Man a Creature, that naturally enquires and reasons, and that feels as sensible
a pleasure when he can give himself a good account of his Actions, as one that
sees, does perceive in comparison to a blind man that is led about; and that
this God that has also made Religion on design to perfect this Humane Nature,
and to raise it to the utmost height to which it can arrive, has contrived it
to be dark, and to be so much beyond the penetration of our Faculties, that we
cannot find out his mind in those things that are necessary for our Salvation:
and that the Scriptures, that were writ by plain men, in a very familiar Style,
and addressed without any Discrimination to the Vulgar, should become such an
unintelligible Book in these Ages, that we must have an infallible Judge to
expound it: and when I see not only Popes, but even some Bodies that pass for
General Councils, have so expounded many passages of it, and have wrested them
so visibly, that none of the Modern Writers of that Church pretend to excuse
it, I say, I must freely own to you, that when I find that I need a Commentary
on dark passages, these will be the last persons to whom I will address my self
for it. Thus you see how fully I have opened my mind to you in this matter; I
have gone over a great deal of ground in as few words as is possible, because
hints I know are enough for you; I thank God, these Considerations do fully
satisfy me, and I will be infinitely joyed, if they have the same effect on
you.

I am yours.

THis Letter came to London with the return of the first Post after his late
Majesty's Papers were sent into the Country; some that saw it, liked it well,
and wished to have it public, and the rather, because the Writer did not so
entirely confine himself to the Reasons that were in those Papers, but took the
whole Controversy to task in a little compass, and yet with a great variety of
Reflections. And this way of examining the whole matter, without following
those Papers word for word, or the finding more fault than the common concern
of this Cause required, seemed more agreeing to the respect that is due to the
Dead, and more particularly to the Memory of so great a Prince; but other
considerations made it not so easy nor so advisable to procure a License for
the Printing this Letter, it has been kept in private hands till now: those who
have boasted much of the Shortness of the late King's Papers, and of the length
of the Answers that have been made to them, will not find so great a
disproportion between them and this Answer to them.

A Brief Account of particulars occurring at the happy Death of our late
Sovereign Lord King Charles II. in regard to Religion; faithfully related by
his then Assistant, Mr. Jo. Hudleston.
UPON Thursday the Fifth of February, 1685. Between Seven and Eight a Clock in
the Evening, I was sent for in haste to the Queens Back-stairs at Whitehall,
and desired to bring with me all things necessary for a dying Person.
Accordingly I came, and was ordered not to stir from thence till further
notice; being thus obliged to wait, and not having had time to bring along with
^^e the Most Holy Sacrament of the Altar, I was in some Anxiety how to procure
it: In this conjuncture (the Divine Providence so disposing) Father Bento de
Lewis a Portugez came thither, and understanding the circumstance I was in,
readily profer'd himself to go to St. James's and bring the Most Holy Sacrament
along with him.

Soon after his departure I was called into the King's Bedchamber, where
approaching to the Bed side, and kneeling down, I in brief presented his
Majesty with what Service I could perform for God's Honor, and the happiness
of his Soul at this last Moment on which Eternity depends. The King then
declared himself: That he desired to die in the Faith and Communion of the Holy
Roman Catholic Church, That he was most heartily sorry for all the Sins of his
life past, and particularly for that he had deferred his Reconciliation so
long; That through the Merits of Christ's Passion he hoped for Salvation, That
he was in Charity with all the World; That with all his Heart he Pardoned his
Enemies and desired Pardon of all those whom he had any wise offended, and that
if it pleased God to spare him longer life, he would amend it, detesting all
Sin.

I then advertised his Majesty of the benefit and necessity of the Sacrament of
Penance, which Advertisement the King most willingly embracing, made an exact
Confession of his whole Life, with exceeding Compunction and Tenderness of
Heart; which ended, I desired him, in farther sign of Repentance and true
sorrow for his Sins, to say with me this little short Act of Contrition.

O my Lord God, with my whole Heart and Soul I detest all the Sins of my Life
past for the Love of Thee, whom I love above all things, and I firmly purpose
by thy Holy Grace never to offend thee more, Amen, Sweet Jesus, Amen, Into thy
Hands, Sweet Jesus, I commend my Soul, Mercy, Sweet Jesus, Mercy. This he
pronounced with a clear and audible voice; which done, and his Sacramental
Penance admitted, I gave him Absolution.

After some time thus spent I asked his Majesty, if he did not also desire to
have the other Sacraments of the Holy Church administered unto him? He replied,
By all means, I desire to be partaker of all the helps and Succors necessary
and expedient for a Catholic Christian in my condition. I added, and does not
your Majesty also desire to receive the Precious Body and Blood of our dear
Savior Jesus Christ in the Most Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist? His Answer
was this: If I am worthy, pray fail not to let me have it. I then told him, it
would be brought to him very speedily, and desired his Majesty, that in the
interim he would give me leave to proceed to the Sacrament of Extreme Unction,
he replied with all my Heart; I then Anoyled him, which as soon as performed I
was called to the door, whither the Blessed Sacrament was now brought and
delivered to me.

Then returning to the King, I entreated His Majesty that he would prepare and
dispose himself to receive. At which the King raising up himself, said, let me
meet my Heavenly Lord in a better posture than in my Bed. But I humbly begged
His Majesty to repose himself: God Almighty, who saw his Heart, would accept of
his good intention. The King then having again recited the forementioned Act
of Contrition with me, he received the most Holy Sacrament for his Viaticum,
with all the Symptoms of Devotion imaginable. The Communion being ended, I Read
the usual Prayers, termed the Recommendation of the Soul, appointed by the
Church for Catholics in his Condition. After which the King desired the Act of
Contrition: O my Lord God, etc. to be repeated, this done, for his last
Spiritual encouragement I said,

Your Majesty has now received the Comfort and Benefit of all the Sacraments,
that a good Christian (ready to depart out of this World) can have or desire.
Now it rests only, That you think upon the Death and Passion of our Dear
Savior Jesus Christ, of which I present unto you this Figure (showing him a
Crucifix) lift up therefore the Eyes of your Soul, and represent to your self
your sweet Savior here Crucified: Bowing down his Head to kiss you: His Arms
stretched out to Embrace you: His Body and Members all Bloody and Pale with
Death to Redeem you: And as you see him Dead and fixed upon the Cross for your
Redemption; So have his Remembrance fixed and fresh in your Heart: beseech him
with all humility, That his most precious Blood may not be shed in vain for
you: And that it will please him by the Merits of his bitter Death and Passion
to pardon and forgive you all your Offenses, and finally to receive your Soul
into his Blessed hands, and when it shall please him to take it out of this
Transitory World, to grant you a joyful Resurrection, and an Eternal Crown of
Glory in the next. In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost: Amen.

So Recommending His Majesty on my Knees, with all the Transport of Devotion I
was able, to the Divine Mercy and Protection, I withdrew out of the Chamber.

In Testimony of all which I nave hereunto subscribed my Name.

JO. HVDLESTON.

Some REFLECTIONS on His Majesty's Proclamation of the Twelfth of February,
1686/7. for a Toleration in Scotland, together with the said Proclamation.
I. THE Preamble of a Proclamation is often writ in have, and is the flourish of
some wanton Pen: but one of such an extraordinary nature as this is, was
probably more severely Examined; there is a new designation of his Majesty's
Authority here set forth of his Absolute Power, which is so often repeated,
that it deserves to be a little searched into. Prerogative Royal and Sovereign
Authority, are Terms, already received and known; but for this Absolute Power,
as it is a new Term, so those who have coined it, may make it signify what
they will. The Roman Law speaks of Princeps Legibus solutus, and Absolute in
its natural signification, importing the being without all Ties and Restraints;
then the true meaning of this seems to be, that there is an Inherent Power in
the King, which can neither be restrained by Laws, Promises, nor Oaths; for
nothing less than the being free from all these, renders a Power Absolute.

II. If the former Term seemed to stretch our Allegiance, that which comes
after it, is yet a step of another nature, though one can hardly imagine what can
go beyond Absolute Power: and it is in these Words, Which all our Subjects are
to obey without reserve. And this is the carrying Obedience many sizes beyond
what the Grand Seignior ever yet claimed: For all Princes, even the most
violent Pretenders to Absolute Power, 'till Lewis the Great's time, have
thought it enough to oblige their Subjects to submit to their Power, and to
bear whatsoever they thought good to impose upon them; but till the Days of the
late Conversions by the Dragoons, it was never so much as pretended, that
Subjects were bound to Obey their Prince without Reserve; and to be of his
Religion, because he would have it so. Which was the only Argument that those
late Apostles made use of; so it is probable this qualification of the Duty of
Subjects was put in here, to prepare us for a terrible le Roy le veut; and in
that case we are told here, that we must Obey without Reserve; and when those
Severe Orders come, the Privy Council, and all such as execute this
Proclamation, will be bound by this Declaration to show themselves more forward
than any others, to obey without Reserve: and those poor pretensions of
Conscience, Religion, Honor, and Reason, will be then reckoned as Reserves
upon their Obedience, which are all now shut out.

III. These being the grounds upon which this Proclamation is founded, we ought
not only to consider what Consequences are now drawn from them, but what may be
drawn from them at any time hereafter; for if they are of force, to justify
that which is inferred from them, it will be full as just to draw from the same
premises an Abolition of the Protestant Religion, of the Rights of the
Subjects, not only to Church Lands, but to all Property whatsoever. In a word,
it Asserts a Power to be in the King, to command what he will, and an
Obligation in the Subjects, to Obey whatsoever he shall Command.

IV. There is also mention made in the Preamble of the Christian Love and
Charity, which his Majesty would have established among Neighbors; but another
dash of a Pen, founded on this Absolute Power, may declare us all Heretics;
and then in wonderful Charity to us, we must be told, that we are either to
Obey without Reserve, or be burnt without Reserve. We know the Charity of that
Church pretty well: It is indeed fervent and burning; and if we have forgot
what has been done in former Ages, France, Savoy, and Hungary have set before
our Eyes very fresh Instances of the Charity of that Religion. While those
Examples are so green, it is a little too imposing on us, to talk to us of
Christian Love and Charity. No doubt His Majesty means sincerely, and his
Exactness to all his Promises, chiefly to those made since he came to the
Crown, will not suffer us to think an unbecoming Thought of his Royal
Intentions; but yet after all, though it seems by this Proclamation, that we are
bound to Obey without Reserve, it is hardship upon hardship to be bound to
Believe without Reserve.

V. There are a sort of People here Tolerated, that will be hardly found out:
and these are the Moderate Presbyterians: Now, as some say, that there are very
few of those People in Scotland that deserves this Character, so it is hard to
tell what it amounts to; and the calling any of them Immoderate, cuts off all
their share in this Grace. Moderation is a quality that lies in the mind, and
how this will be found out, I cannot so readily guess. If a Standard had been
given of Opinions or Practices, then one could have known how this might have
been distinguished; but as it lies, it will not be easy to make the
Discrimination; and the declaring them all immoderate, shuts them out quite.

VI. Another Foundation laid down for repealing all Laws made against the
Papists, is, That they were Enacted in King James the Sixth's Minority: with
some harsh expressions, that are not to be insisted on, since they show more
the heat of the Penner, than the Dignity of the Prince, in whose name they are
given out: But all these Laws were ratifyed over and over again by King James,
when he came to be of full Age: and they have received many Confirmations by
King Charles the First, and King Charles the Second, as well as by his present
Majesty, both when he represented his Brother in the Year 1681, and since he
himself came to the Crown: so that whatsoever may be said concerning the first
Formation of those Laws, they have received now for the course of a whole
hundred Years, that are lapsed since King James was full of Age, so many
Confirmations, that if there is any thing certain in Humane Government, we
might depend upon them; but this new coined Absolute Power must carry all
before it.

VII. It is also well known, that the whole Settlement of the Church Lands and
Tithes, with many other things, and more particularly the Establishment of the
Protestant Religion, was likewise enacted in King James's minority, as well as
those Penal Laws: so that the Reason now made use of, to annul the penal Laws,
will serve full as well for another Act of this Absolute Power, that shall
abolish all those; and if Maxims that unhinge all the Securities of Human
Society, and all that is sacred in Government, ought to be looked on with the
justest and deepest prejudices possible, one is tempted to lose the respect
that is due to every thing that carries a Royal Stamp upon it, when he sees
such grounds made use of, as must shake all Settlements whatsoever; for if a
prescription of 120 Years, and Confirmations reiterated over and over again
these 100 Years past, do not purge some Defects in the first Formation of those
Laws, what can make us secure. But this looks so like a fetch of the French
Prerogative Law, both in their Processes with Relation to the Edict of Nantes,
and those concerning Dependences at Mets, that this seems to be a Copy from
that famous Original.

VIII. It were too much ill nature to look into the History of the last Age, to
examine on what grounds those Characters of Pious and Blessed given to the
Memory of Q Mary are built, but since K. James's Memory has the Character of
Glorious given to it, if the Civility of the fair Sex makes one unwilling to
look into one, yet the other may be a little dwelt on. The peculiar Glory that
belongs to K. James's Memory, is, that he was a Prince of great Learning, and
that he employed it chiefly in writing for his Religion: of the Volume in Folio
in which we have his Works, two thirds are against the Church of Rome, one part
of them is a Commentary on the Revelation, proving that the Pope is Antichrist;
another part of them belonged more naturally to his Post Dignity; which is the
warning that he gave to all the Princes and States of Europe, against the
Treasonable and Bloody Doctrines of the Papacy. The first Act he did when he
came of Age, was to swear in Person with all his Family, and afterward with
all his People of Scotland, a Covenant, containing an Enumeration of all the
points of Popery, and a most solemn Renunciation of them, somewhat like our
Parliament Test: his first Speech to the Parliament of England was Copious on
this Subject; and he left a Legacy of a Wish on such of his Posterity as should
go over to that Religion, which in good manners is suppressed. It is known, K.
James was no Conqueror, and that he made more use of his Pen than his Sword:
so the Glory that is peculiar to his Memory, must fall chiefly on his Learned
and Immortal Writings: and since there is such a Veneration expressed for him,
it agrees not ill with this, to wish, that his Works were more studied by those
who offer such Incense to his Glorious Memory.

IX. His Majesty assures his People of Scotland, upon a certain Knowledge and
long Experience, that the Catholics, as they are good Christians, so they are
likewise dutiful Subjects: but if we must believe both these equally, then we
must conclude severely against their being Good Christians; for we are sure
they can never be good Subjects, not only to a Heretical Prince if he does not
extirpate Heretics; for their beloved Council of the Lateran, that decreed
Transubstantiation, has likewise decreed, that if a Prince does not extirpate
Heretics out of his Dominions, the Pope must depose him, and declare his
Subjects absolved from their Allegiance, and give his Dominions to another: so
that even his Majesty, how much soever he may be a Zealous Catholic, yet he
cannot be assured of their fidelity to him, unless he has given them secret
assurances, that he is resolved to extirpate Heretics out of his Dominions;
and that all the Promises which he now makes to these poor wretches, are no
other way to be kept, than the Assurances which the Great Lewis gave to his
Protestant Subjects, of his observing still the Edict of Nantes, even after he
had resolved to break it, and also his last promise made in the Edict, that
repealed the Edict of Nantes, by which he gave Assurances that no violence
should be used to any for their Religion, in the very time that he was ordering
all possible Violences to be put in execution against them.

X. His Majesty assures us, that on all Occasions the Papists have showed
themselves good and faithful Subjects to him and his Royal Predecessors; but
how Absolute soever the King's Power may be, it seems his Knowledge of History
is not so Absolute, but it may be capable of some Improvement. It will be hard
to find out what Loyalty they showed on the Gunpowder Plot, or during the whole
progress of the Rebellion of Ireland; if the King will either take the words of
King James of Glorious Memory, or K. Charles the first, that was indeed of
pious and blessed Memory, rather than the penners of this Proclamation, it will
not be hard to find Occasions where they were a little wanting in this their so
much boasted Loyalty: and we are sure, that by the Principles of that Religion,
the King can never be assured of the Fidelity of those he calls his Catholic
Subjects, but by engaging to them to make his Heretical Subjects Sacrifices to
their Rage.

XI. The King declares them capable of all the Offices and Benefices which he
shall think fit to bestow on them, and only restrains them from invading the
Protestant Churches by force: so that here a door is plainly opened for
admitting them to the Exercise of their Religion in Protestant Churches, so
they do not break into them by force; and whatsoever may be the Sense of the
term Benefice in its ancient and first signification, now it stands only for
Church Preferments; so that when any Churches, that are at the King's Gift,
fall vacant, here is a plain intimation, that they are to be provided to them;
and then it is very probable, that all the Laws made against such as go not to
their parish Churches, will be severely turned upon those that will not come to
Mass.

XII. His Majesty does in the next place, in the virtue of his Absolute Power,
Annul a great many Laws, as well those that Established the Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy, as the late Test, enacted by himself in person, while he
represented his Brother: upon which he gave as strange an Essay to the World of
his absolute Justice in the Attainder of the late Earl of Argile, as he does
now of his Absolute Power in condemning the Test it self; he also repeals his
own Confirmation of the Test, since he came to the Crown, which he offered as
the clearest Evidence that he could give of his Resolution to maintain the
Protestant Religion, and by which he gained so much upon that Parliament, that
he obtained every thing from them that he desired of them; till he came to try
them in the Matters of Religion. This is no Extraordinary Evidence to assure
his People, that his Promises will be like the Laws of the Medes and Persians,
which alter not; nor will the disgrace of the Commissioner that Enacted that
Law, lay this matter wholly on him; for the Letter, that he brought, the Speech
that he made, and the Instructions which he got, are all too well known to be
so soon forgotten; and if Princes will give their Subjects reason to think,
that they forget their Promises, as soon as the turn is served for which they
were made, this will be too prevailing a Temptation on the Subjects to mind the
Princes promise as little as it seems he himself does, and will force them to
conclude, that the Truth of the Prince, is not so absolute as it seems he
fancies his Power to be.

XIII. Here is not only a repealing of a great many Laws, and established Oaths
and Tests, but by the Exercise of the Absolute Power, a new Oath is imposed,
which was never pretended to by the Crown in any former time, and as the Oath
is Created by this Absolute Power, so it seems the Absolute Power must be
supported by this Oath: since one branch of it, is an Obligation to maintain
his Majesty and his Lawful Successors in the Exercise of this their Absolute
Power and Authority against all deadly, which I suppose is Scotch for Mortals:
now to impose so hard a yoke as this Absolute Power on the Subject, seems no
small stretch; but it is a wonderful exercise of it to oblige the Subjects to
defend this: it had been more modest, if they had been only bound to bear it,
and submit to it: but it is a terrible thing so far to extinguish all the
remnants of natural Liberty, or of a Legal Government, as to oblige the
Subjects by Oath to maintain the Exercise of this, which plainly must destroy
themselves: for the short execution by the Bow-strings of Turkey, or by sending
Orders to Men to return in their Heads, being an Exercise of this Absolute
Power, it is a little too hard to make men swear to maintain the King in it,
and if that Kingdom has suffered so much by the many Oaths that have been in
use among them, as is marked in his Proclamation, I am afraid this new Oath
will not much mend the matter.

XIV. Yet after all, there is some Comfort; his Majesty assures them, he will
use no Violence nor Force, nor any Invincible Necessity to any man on the
account of his persuasion: It were too great a want of respect to fancy, that a
time may come in which even this may be remembered, full as well, as the
promises that were made to the Parliament after his Majesty came to the Crown;
I do not I confess, apprehend that; for I see here so great a Caution used in
the choice of these words, that it is plain, very great Severities may very
well consist with them: It is clear, that the general words of Violence and
Force are to be determined by the last Invincible Necessity, so that the King
does only promise to lay no Invincible Necessity on his Subjects; but for all
Necessities that are not Invincible, it seems they must bear a large share of
them; Disgraces, want of employments, Fines and Imprisonments, and even Death
it self are all vincible things to a man of a firmness of mind: so that the
Violences of Torture, the Furies of Dragoons, and some of the Methods now
practiced in France, perhaps may be included within this Promise; since these
seem almost Invincible to Humane Nature, if it is not fortified with an
Extraordinary measure of Grace: but as to all other things, his Majesty binds
himself up from no part of the Exercise of his Absolute Power by this Promise.

XV. His Majesty Orders this to go Immediately to the Great Seal, without
passing through the other Seals: now since this is Counter-signed by the
Secretary in whose hands the Signet is, there was no other step to be made but
through the Privy Seal; so I must own I have a great Curiosity of knowing his
Character in whose hands the Privy Seal is at present; for it seems his
Conscience is not so very supple, as the Chancellors and the Secretaries are;
but it is very likely, if he does not quickly change his Mind, the Privy Seal
at least will quickly change his Keeper; and I am sorry to hear, that the Lord
Chancellor and Secretary have not another Brother to fill this post, that so
the guilt of the ruin of that Nation, may lie on one single Family, and that
there may be no others involved in it.

XVI. Upon the whole matter many smaller things being waved, it being extreme
unpleasant to find fault, where one has all possible dispositions to pay all
respect; we here in England see what we must look for. A Parliament in Scotland
was tried, but it proved a little stubborn; and now Absolute Power comes to set
all right; so when the Closetting has gone round, so that Noses are counted, we
may perhaps see a Parliament here; but if it chances to be untoward, and not to
Obey without Reserve, then our Reverend Judges will copy from Scotland, and
will not only tell us of the King's Imperial Power, but will discover to us
this new Mystery of Absolute Power, to which we are all bound to Obey without
Reserve.

These Reflections refer in so many places to some words in the Proclamation,
that it was thought necessary to set them near one another, that the Reader may
be able to Judge, whether he is deceived by any false Quotations or not.

By the King. A PROCLAMATION.
JAMES R.

JAMES the Seventh by the Grace of God, King of Scotland, England, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all and sundry our good Subjects, whom these presents do or may concern,
Greeting.
We have taken into our Royal Consideration the many and great inconveniences
which have happened to that our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland of late years,
through the different persuasions in the Christian Religion, through the great
Heats and Animosities amongst the several Professors thereof, to the ruin and
decay of Trade, wasting of Lands, extinguishing of Charity, contempt of the
Royal Power: and converting of true Religion, and the Fear of God, into
Animosities, Names, Fractions, and sometimes into Sacrilege and Treason. And
being resolved as much as in us lies, to Unite the Hearts and Affections of Our
Subjects, to GOD in Religion, to Us in Loyalty, and to their Neighbors in
Christian Love and Charity. Have therefore though fit to Grant, and by our
Sovereign Authority, Prerogative Royal, and Absolute Power, which all our
Subjects are to Obey without Reserve; Do hereby give and grant Our Royal
Toleration, to the several Professors of the Christian Religion after named,
with, and under the several Conditions, Restrictions, and Limitations
after-mentioned. In the first place, We Allow and Tolerate the Moderate
Presbyterians to Meet in their Private Houses, and there to hear all such
Ministers, as either have, or are willing to accept of Our Indulgence
allanerly, and none other, and that there be not any thing said or done
contrary to the Well and Peace of Our Reign, Seditious or Treasonable, under
the highest Pains these Crimes will import; nor are they to presume to Build
Meeting Houses, or to use Outhouses or Barns, but only to Exercise in their
Private Houses, as said is: In the mean time, it is our Royal Will and
Pleasure, that Field-Conventicles, and such as Preach, or Exercise at them, or
who shall any ways assist or connive at them, shall be prosecuted according to
the utmost Severity of our Laws made against them, seeing from these
Rendezvouzes of Rebellion, so much Disorder has proceeded, and so much
Disturbance to the Government, and for which after this Our Royal Indulgence
for tender Consciences there is no Excuse left. In like manner, we do hereby
tolerate Quakers to meet and Exercise in their Form, in any place or places
appointed for their Worship. And considering the Severe and Cruel Laws made
against Roman Catholics (therein called Papists) in the Minority of Our Royal
Grandfather of * Glorious Memory, without His Consent, and contrary to the
Duty of good Subjects, by His Regents, and other Enemies to their Lawful
Sovereigns Our Royal Great Grandmother Queen Mary of Blessed and Pious Memory,
wherein, under the pretense of Religion, they clothed the worst of Treasons,
Factions, and Usurpations, and made these Laws, not as against the Enemies of
GOD, but their own; which Laws have still been continued of course without
design of executing them, or any of them, ad terrorem only, on Supposition,
that the Papists relying on an External Power, were incapable of Duty, and true
Allegiance to their Natural Sovereign, and Rightful Monarchs; We of Our certain
Knowledge, and long Experience, knowing that the Catholics, as it is their
Principle to be good Christians, so it is to be dutiful Subjects; and that they
have likewise on all Occasions shown themselves Good and Faithful Subjects to
Us, and our Royal Predecessors, by hazarding, and many of them actually losing
their Lives and Fortunes, in their Defense (though of another Religion) and the
Maintenance of their Authority against the Violences and Treasons of the most
violent Abettors of these Laws: Do therefore with Advice and Consent of Our
Privy Council, by Our Sovereign Authority, Prerogative Royal, and Absolute
Power, aforesaid, Suspend, Stop, and disable all Laws or Acts of Parliament,
Customs or Constitutions, made or executed against any of our Roman Catholic
Subjects, in any time past, to all intents and purposes, making void all
Prohibitions therein mentioned, pains or penalties therein ordained to be
Inflicted, so that they shall in all things be as free in all Respects
whatsoever, not only to Exercise their Religion, but to enjoy all Offices,
Benefices, and others, which We shall think fit to bestow upon them in all time
coming: Nevertheless, it is our Will and Pleasure, and we do hereby command all
Catholics at their highest Pains, only to Exercise their Religious Worship in
Houses or Chapels; and that they presume not to Preach in the open Fields, or
to invade the Protestant Churches by force, under the pains aforesaid, to be
inflicted upon the Offenders respectively; nor shall they presume to make
Public Processions in the High-Streets of any of Our Royal Burghs, under the
Pains above mentioned. And whereas the Obedience and Service of our good
Subjects is due to Us by their Allegiance, and Our Sovereignty, and that no
Law, Custom, or Constitution, Difference in Religion, or other Impediment
whatsoever, can exempt or discharge the Subjects from their Native Obligations
and Duty to the Crown, or hinder us from Protecting and Employing them,
according to their several Capacities, and Our Royal Pleasure; nor Restrain Us
from Conferring Heretable Rights and Privileges upon them, or vacate or annul
these Rights Heretable, when they are made or conferred; And likewise
considering, that some Oaths are capable of being wrested by men of sinistrous
Intentions, a practice in that Kingdom fatal to Religion as it was to Loyalty;
Do therefore, with Advice and Consent aforesaid, Cass, Annul and Discharge all
Oaths whatsoever, by which any of Our Subjects are incapacitated, or disabled
from holding Places, or Offices in our said Kingdom, or enjoy their Hereditary
Right and Privileges, discharging the same to be taken or given in any time
coming, without Our special Warrant and Consent, under the pains due to the
Contempt of Our Royal Commands and Authority. And to this effect, We do by Our
Royal Authority aforesaid, Stop, Disable, and Dispense with all Laws enjoining
the said Oaths, Tests, or any of them, particularly the first Act of the first
Session of the first Parliament of King Charles the Second; the Eleventh Act of
the foresaid Session of the foresaid Parliament, the sixth Act of the third
Parliament of the said King Charles; the twenty first and twenty fifth Acts of
that Parliament, and the thirteenth Act of the first Session of * Our late
Parliament, in so far allanerly as concerns the taking the Oaths or Tests
therein prescribed, and all others, as well not mentioned as mentioned, and
that in place of them, all our good Subjects, or such of them as We or our
Privy Council shall require so to do, shall take and swear the following Oath
allanerly.

I A. B. do acknowledge, testify and declare, that JAMES the Seventh, by the
Grace of God, King of Scotland, England, France and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith, etc. is rightful King and Supreme Governor of these Realms, and over
all persons therein; and that it is unlawful for Subjects, on any pretense, or
for any cause whatsoever, to rise in Arms against Him, or any Commissionated by
Him; and that I shall never so rise in Arms, nor assist any who shall so do;
and that I shall never resist His Power or Authority, nor ever oppose His
Authority to His Person, as I shall answer to God; but shall to the utmost of
my power Assist, Defend, and Maintain Him, His Heirs and Lawful Successors, in
the Exercise of their Absolute Power and Authority against all Deadly. So help
me God.

And seeing many of Our good Subjects have before Our pleasure in these Matters
was made public, incurred the Guilt appointed by the Acts of Parliament
abovementioned, or others; We, by Our Authority, and Absolute Power and
Prerogative Royal abovementioned, of Our certain Knowledge, and innate Mercy,
give Our ample and full Indemnity to all those of the Roman Catholic or Popish
Religion, for all things by them done contrary to Our Laws, or Acts of
Parliament, made in any time past, relating to their Religion, the Worship and
Exercise thereof, or for being Papists, Jesuits, or Traffickers, for hearing,
or saying of Mass, concealing of Priests or Jesuits, breeding their Children
Catholics at home or abroad, or any other thing, Rite or Doctrine, said,
performed, or maintained by them, or any of them: And likewise, for holding or
taking of Places, Employments, or Offices, contrary to any Law or Constitution,
Advices given to Us, or our Council, Actions done, or generally any thing
performed or said against the known Laws of that Our Ancient Kingdom: Excepting
always from this Our Royal Indemnity, all Murders, Assassinations, Thefts, and
such like other Crimes, which never used to be comprehended in Our General Acts
of Indemnity. And We command and require all Our Judges, or others concerned,
to explain this in the most ample Sense and Meaning Acts of Indemnity at any
time have contained: Declaring this shall be as good to every one concerned, as
if they had Our Royal Pardon and Remission under Our Great Seal of that
Kingdom. And likewise indemnifying Our Protestant Subjects from all pains and
penalties due for hearing or preaching in Houses; providing there be no
Treasonable Speeches uttered in the said Conventicles by them, in which case
the Law is only to take place against the Guilty, and none other present;
providing also, that they Reveal to any of Our Council the Guilt so committed;
As also, excepting all Fines, or Effects of Sentences already given. And
likewise Indemnifying fully and freely all Quakers, for their Meetings and
Worship, in all time past, preceding the publication of these presents. And we
doubt not but Our Protestant Subjects will give their Assistance and Concourse
hereunto, on all Occasions, in their Respective Capacities. In consideration
whereof, and the ease those of Our Religion, and others may have hereby, and
for the Encouragement of Our Protestant Bishops, and the Regular Clergy, and
such as have hitherto lived orderly, We think fit to declare, that it never was
Our Principle, nor will We ever suffer Violence to be offered to any Man's
Conscience, nor will We use Force, or Invincible Necessity against any Man on
the account of his Persuasion, nor the Protestant Religion, but will protect
Our Bishops and other Minsters in their Functions, Rights and Properties, and
all Our Protestant Subjects in the free Exercise of their Protestant Religion
in the Churches. And that We will, and hereby promise, on Our Royal Word, to
maintain the possessors of Church Lands formerly belonging to Abbeys, or other
Churches of the Catholic Religion, in their full and free possession and
right, according to Our Laws and Acts of Parliament in that behalf in all time
coming. And We will employ indifferently all our Subjects of all Persuasions,
so as none shall meet with any Discouragement on the account of his Religion,
but be advanced, and esteemed by Us, according to their several Capacities and
Qualifications, so long as We find Charity and Unity maintained. And if any
Animosities shall arise, as We hope in God there will not, We will show the
severest Effects of Our Royal Displeasure against the Beginners or Fomenters
thereof, seeing thereby Our Subjects may de deprived of this general Ease and
Satisfaction, We intend to all of them, whose Happiness, Prosperity, Wealth and
Safety, is so much Our Royal Care, that We will leave nothing undone which may
procure these Blessings for them. And lastly, to the End all our good Subjects
may have Notice of this Our Royal Will and Pleasure, We do hereby command, Our
Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers, Pursevants and Messengers
at Arms, to make timous Proclamation thereof at the Marcat-Cross of Edinburgh;
And besides the printing and Publishing of this Our Royal Proclamation, it is
Our express Will and Pleasure, that the same be past under the great Seal of
that Our Kingdom per saltum, * without passing any other Seal or Register. In
Order whereunto, this shall be to the Directors of Our Chancelary, and their
Deputies for writing the same, and to Our Chancellor for causing our Great Seal
aforesaid, to be appended thereunto, a sufficient Warrant.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the twelfth day of Febr. 1686. and of Our
Reign the Third Year. By His Majesty's Command MELFORT.

God save the King.
His Majesty's Gracious DECLARATION to all His Loving Subjects for Liberty of
Conscience.
JAMES R.

IT having pleased Almighty God not only to bring Us to the Imperial Crown of
these Kingdoms through the greatest difficulties, but to preserve Us by a more
than ordinary Providence upon the Throne of Our Royal Ancestors, there is
nothing now that we so earnestly desire, as to Establish our Government on such
a Foundation, as may make Our Subjects happy, and unite them to Us by
Inclination as well as by Duty; Which We think can be done by no Means so
effectually, as by granting to them the free Exercise of their Religion for the
time to come, and add that to the perfect Enjoyment of their Property, which
has never been in any case Invaded by Us since Our coming to the Crown: Which
being the two things Men value most, shall ever be preserved in these Kingdoms,
during Our Reign over them, as the truest Methods of their Peace and Our Glory.
We cannot but heartily wish, as it will easily be believed, That all the People
of Our Dominions were Members of the Catholic Church, yet We humbly thank
Almighty God, it is, and has of long time been Our constant Sense and Opinion
(which upon diverse Occasions We have Declared) That Conscience ought not to be
constrained, nor People forced in Matters of mere Religion: It has ever been
directly contrary to Our Inclination, as We think it is to the Interest of
Government, which it destroys by Spoiling Trade, Depopulating Countries, and
Discouraging Strangers; and finally, that it never obtained the End for which
it was employed: And in this We are the more confirmed by the Reflections We
have made upon the Conduct of the Four last Reigns. For after all the frequent
and pressing Endeavors that were used in each of them, to reduce this Kingdom
to an exact Conformity in Religion, it is visible the Success has not answered
the Design, and that the Difficulty is invincible. We therefore out of Our
Princely Care and Affection unto all Our Loving Subjects, that they may live at
Ease and Quiet, and for the increase of Trade, and encouragement of Strangers,
have thought fit by virtue of Our Royal Prerogative, to Issue forth this Our
Royal Declaration of Indulgence; making no doubt of the Concurrence of Our Two
Houses of Parliament, when We shall think it convenient for them to Meet.

In the first place We do Declare, That We will Protect and Maintain Our
Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy, and all other our Subjects of the Church of
England, in the free Exercise of their Religion, as by Law Established, and in
the quiet and full Enjoyment of all their Possessions, without any Molestation
or Disturbance whatsoever.

We do likewise Declare, That it is Our Royal Will and Pleasure, That from
henceforth the Execution of all and all manner of Penal Laws in Matters
Ecclesiastical, for not coming to Church, or not Receiving the Sacrament, or
for any other Nonconformity to the Religion Established, or for or by reason
of the Exercise of Religion in any manner whatsoever, be immediately Suspended;
And the further Execution of the said Penal Laws and every of them is hereby
Suspended.

And to the end that by the Liberty hereby Granted, the Peace and Security of
Our Government in the Practice thereof may not be endangered, We have thought
fit, and do hereby straightly Charge and Command all Our Loving Subjects, That as
We do freely give them Leave to Meet and Serve God after their own Way and
Manner, be it in private Houses, or Places purposely Hired or Built for that
use: So that they take especial care, that nothing be Preached or Taught
amongst them which may any ways tend to Alienate the Hearts of Our people from
Us or Our Government; and that their Meetings and Assemblies be peaceably,
openly, and publicly held, and all Persons freely admitted to them; And that
they do signify and make known to some one or more of the next Justices of the
Peace, what place or places they set apart for those uses.

And that all Our Subjects may enjoy such their Religious Assemblies with
greater Assurance and Protection, We have thought it Requisite, and do hereby
Command, That no Disturbance of any kind be made or given unto them, under pain
of our Displeasure, and to be further proceeded against with the uttermost
Severity.

And forasmuch as We are desirous to have the Benefit of the Service of all Our
Loving Subjects, which by the Law of Nature is inseparably annexed to, and
inherent in Our Royal Person; And that none of Our Subjects may for the future
be under any Discouragement or Disability (who are otherwise well inclined and
fit to serve Us) by reason of some Oaths or Tests, that have been usually
Administered on such Occasions: We do hereby further Declare, That it is Our
Royal Will and Pleasure, That the Oaths commonly called, The Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance, and also the several Tests and Declarations mentioned in the
Acts of Parliament made in the 25th and 30th Years of the Reign of Our late
Royal Brother King Charles the Second, shall not at any time hereafter be
required to be Taken, Declared, or Subscribed by any person or persons
whatsoever, who is or shall be Employed in any Office or Place of Trust, either
Civil or Military, under Us or in Our Government. And We do further Declare it
to be Our Pleasure and Intention from time to time hereafter, to Grant Our
Royal Dispensations under Our Great Seal to all our Loving Subjects so to be
Employed, who shall not take the said Oaths, or Subscribe or declare the said
Tests or Declarations in the abovementioned Acts and every of them.

And to the end that all Our Loving Subjects may receive and enjoy the full
Benefit and Advantage of Our Gracious Indulgence hereby intended, and may be
Acquitted and Discharged from all Pains, Penalties, Forfeitures, and
Disabilities by them or any of them incurred or forfeited, or which they shall
or may at any time hereafter be liable to, for or by reason of their
Nonconformity, or the Exercise of their Religion, and from all Suits,
Troubles, or Disturbances for the same: We do hereby give Our Free and Ample
Pardon unto all Non-conformists, Recusants, and other Our Loving Subjects, for
all Crimes and Things by them committed or done contrary to the Penal Laws
formerly made relating to Religion, and the Profession or Exercise thereof,
Hereby Declaring, That this Our Royal pardon and Indemnity shall be as Good
and Effectual to all intents and purposes, as if every individual person had
been therein particularly named, or had particular Pardons under Our Great
Seal, which We do likewise Declare shall from time to time be Granted unto any
person or persons desiring the same: Willing and Requiring Our Judges,
Justices, and other Officers, to take Notice of and Obey Our Royal Will and
Pleasure herein before Declared.

And although the Freedom and Assurance We have hereby given in relation to
Religion and Property, might be sufficient to remove from the Minds of Our
Loving Subjects all Fears and Jealousies in relation to either; yet We have
thought fit further to Declare, That We will Maintain them in all their
Properties and Possessions, as well of Church and Abby-Lands, as in any other
their Lands and Properties whatsoever.

Given at our Court at Whitehall, the Fourth Day of April, 1687. In the Third
Year of Our Reign.
By His Majesty's Special Command.
A LETTER, containing some Reflections on His Majesty's Declaration for Liberty
of Conscience, Dated the Fourth of April, 1687.
SIR,
I. I Thank you for the Favor of sending me the late Declaration that His
Majesty has granted for Liberty of Conscience. I confess, I longed for it with
great Impatience, and was surprised to find it so different from the Scotch
Pattern; for I imagined, that it was to be set to the second part of the same
tune: nor can I see why the Penners of this have sunk so much in their style;
for I suppose the same Men penned both. I expected to have seen the Imperial
Language of Absolute Power, to which all the Subjects are to Obey without
reserve; and of the Cassing, Annulling, the stopping and disabling of Laws set
forth in the Preamble and body of this Declaration: whereas those dreadful
words are not to be found here: for instead of Repealing the Laws, his Majesty
pretends by this only to Suspend them; and though in effect this amounts to a
Repeal, yet it must be confessed that the words are softer. Now since the
Absolute Power, to which his Majesty pretends in Scotland, is not founded on
such poor things as Law; for that would look as if it were the gift of the
People; but on the Divine Authority, which is supposed to be delegated to his
Majesty, this may be as well claimed in England as it was in Scotland: and the
pretentions to Absolute Power is so great a thing, that since his Majesty
thought fit once to claim it, he is little beholding to those that make him
fall so much in his Language, especially since both these Declarations have
appeared in our Gazettes; so that as we see what is done in Scotland, we know
from hence what is in some peoples hearts, and what we may expect in England.

II. His Majesty tells his people, that the perfect Enjoyment of their Property
has never been in any Case invaded by him since his coming to the Crown. This
is indeed matter of great Encouragement to all good Subjects; for it lets them
see that such Invasions as have been made on Property, have been done without
his Majesty's knowledge: so that no doubt the continuing to levy the Customs
and the Additional Excise (which had been granted only during the late King's
Life,) before the Parliament could meet to renew the Grant, was done without
his Majesty's knowledge; the many Violences committed not only by Soldiers, but
Officers, in all the parts of England, which are severe Invasions on Property,
have been all without his Majesty's knowledge; and since the first Branch of
Property is the Right that a man has to his Life, the strange Essay of
Mohammedan Government, that was showed at Taunton; and the no less strange
proceedings of the present Lord Chancellor, in his Circuit after the Rebellion
(which are very justly called his Campaign, for it was an open Act of Hostility
to all Law) and for which and other Services of the like nature, it is believed
he has had the reward of the great Seal, and the Executions of those who have
left their Colors, which being founded on no Law, are no other than so many
murders; all these, I say, are as we are sure, Invasions on Property; but since
the King tells us, that no such Invasions have been made since he came to the
Crown, we must conclude that all these things have fallen out without his
privity. And if a standing Army, in time of Peace, has been ever looked on by
this Nation as an Attempt upon the whole Property of the Nation in gross, one
must conclude, that even this is done without his Majesty's knowledge.

III. His Majesty expresses his Charity for us in a kind wish, that we were all
Members of the Catholic Church; in return to which we offer up daily our most
earnest Prayers for him, that he may become a Member of the truly Catholic
Church: for Wishes and Prayers do no hurt on no side: but his Majesty adds,
that it has ever been his Opinion, that Conscience ought not to be constrained,
nor people forced in matters of mere Religion. We are very happy if this
continues to be always his sense: but we are sure in this he is no Obedient
Member of that which he means by the Catholic Church: for it has over and over
again decreed the Extirpation of Heretics. It encourages Princes to it, by the
Offer of the pardon of their Sins; it threatens them to it, by denouncing to
them not only the Judgments of God, but that which is more sensible, the loss
of their Dominions: and it seems they intend to make us know that part of their
Doctrine even before we come to feel it, since though some of that Communion
would take away the horror which the Fourth Council of the Lateran gives us, in
which these things were decreed, by denying it to be a General Council, and
rejecting the Authority of those Canons, yet the most learned of all the
Apostates that has fallen to them from our Church, has so lately given up this
Plea, and has so formally acknowledged the Authority of that Council, and of
its Canons, that it seems they think they are bound to this piece of fair
dealing, of warning us before hand of our Danger. It is true Bellarmin says,
The Church does not always execute the Power of Deposing Heretical Princes,
though she always retains it: one Reason that he assigns, is, Because she is not
at all times able to put it in Execution: so the same reason may perhaps make
it appear unadviseable to Extirpate Heretics, because that at present it
cannot be done; but the Right remains entire, and is put in execution in such
an unrelenting manner in all places where that Religion prevails, that it has a
very ill Grace, to see any Member of that Church speak in this strain; and when
neither the Policy of France, nor the Greatness of their Monarch, nor yet the
Interests of the Emperor, joined to the Gentleness of his own temper, could
withstand these Bloody Councils, that are indeed parts of that Religion, we can
see no reason to induce us to believe that a Toleration of Religion is proposed
with any other design but either to divide us, or to lay us asleep till it is
time to give the Alarm for destroying us.

IV. If all the Endeavors, that have been used in the last four Reigns, for
bringing the Subjects of this Kingdom to an Unity in Religion have been
ineffectual, as His Majesty says; we know to whom we owe both the first
beginnings, and the progress of the Divisions among our selves; the gentleness
of Queen Elizabeth's Government, and the numbers of those that adhered to the
Church of Rome, made it scarce possible to put an end to that Party during her
Reign, which has been ever since restless, and has had Credit enough at Court
during the three last Reigns, not only to support it self, but to distract us,
and to divert us from apprehending the danger of being swallowed up by them, by
fomenting our own Differences, and by setting on either a Toleration or a
Persecution, as it has happened to serve their Interests. It is not so very
long since, that nothing was to be heard at Court but the supporting the Church
of England, and the Extirpating all the Nonconformists: and it were easy to
name the persons, if it were decent, that had this in their mouths; but now all
is turned round again, the Church of England is in Disgrace; and now the
Encouragement of Trade, the Quiet of the Nation, and the Freedom of Conscience
are again in Vogue, that were such odious things but a few Years ago, that the
very mentioning them was enough to load any Man with Suspicions as backward in
the King's Service; while such Methods are used, and the Government as if in an
Ague, divided between hot and cold fits, no wonder if Laws so unsteadily
executed have failed of their effect.

V. There is a good reserve here left for Severity, when the proper Opportunity
to set it on presents it self: for his Majesty declares himself only against
the forcing of men in matters of mere Religion: so that whenever Religion and
Policy come to be so interwoven, that mere Religion is not the Case, and that
public Safety may be pretended, then this Declaration is to be no more
claimed: so that the fastening any thing upon the Protestant Religion, that is
inconsistent with the public Peace, will be pretended to show that they are
not persecuted for mere Religion. In France, when it was resolved to extirpate
the Protestants, all the Discourses that were written on that Subject were full
of the Wars occasioned by those of the Religion in the last Age, though as these
was the happy occasions of bringing the House of Bourbon to the Crown, they had
been ended above 80 Years ago, and there had not been so much as the least
Tumult raised by them these 50 Years past: so that the French who have smarted
under this Severity, could not be charged with the least Infraction of the Law;
yet Stories of a hundred years old were raised up to inspire into the King
those Apprehensions of them, which have produced the terrible effects that are
visible to all the World. There is another Expression in this Declaration,
which lets us likewise see with what Caution the Offers of favor are now
worded, that so there may be an Occasion given when the time and Conjuncture
shall be favorable to break through them all: it is in these words, So that
they take especial Care that nothing be preached or taught amongst them, which
may any ways tend to alienate the hearts of our People from Us or Our
Government. This in it self is very reasonable; and could admit of no
Exception, if we had not to do with a set of men, who to our great Misfortune
have so much Credit with His Majesty, and who will be no sooner lodged in the
Power to which they pretend, then they will make every thing that is preached
against Popery pass for that which may in some manner alienate the Subjects
from the King.

VI. His Majesty makes no doubt of the Concurrence of his Two Houses of
Parliament, when he shall think it convenient for them to meet. The hearts of
Kings are unsearchable, so that it is a little too presumptuous to look into
his Majesty's secret thoughts: but according to the Judgments that we would
make of other men's thoughts by their Actions, one would be tempted to think,
that his Majesty made some doubt of it, since his Affairs both at home and
abroad could not go the worse, if it appeared that there was a perfect
understanding between him and His Parliament, and that his people were
supporting him with fresh Supplies; and this House of Commons is so much at his
Devotion, that all the World saw how ready they were to grant every thing that
he could desire of them, till he began to lay off the Mask with relation to the
Test, and since that time the frequent Prorogations, the Closetting, and the
pains that has been taken to gain Members, by Promises made to some, and the
Disgraces of others, would make one a little inclined to think, that some doubt
was made of their Concurrence. But we must confess, that the depth of his
Majesty's Judgment is such, that we cannot fathom it, and therefore we cannot
guess what his Doubts or his Assurances are. It is true, the words that come
after unriddle the Mystery a little, which are, when his Majesty shall think it
convenient for them to meet: for the meaning of this seems plain, that His
Majesty is resolved that they shall never meet, till he receives such
Assurances, in a new round of Closetting, that he shall be put out of doubt
concerning it.

VII. I will not enter into the Dispute concerning Liberty of Conscience, and
the Reasons that may be offered for it to a Session of Parliament; for there is
scarce any one point, that either with relation to Religion, or Politics,
affords a greater variety of matter for Reflection: and I make no doubt to say,
that there is abundance of Reason to oblige Parliaments to review all the Penal
Laws, either with relation to Papists, or to Dissenters: but I will take the
boldness to add one thing, that the King's Suspending of Laws strikes at the
root of this whole Government, and subverts it quite: for if there is any thing
certain with relation to English Government, it is this that the Executive
Power of the Law is entirely in the King; and the Law to fortify him in the
Management of it has clothed him with a vast Prerogative, and made it unlawful
on any pretense whatsoever to resist him: whereas on the other hand, the
Legislative Power is not so entirely in the King, but that the Lords and
Commons have such a share in it, that no Law can either be made, repealed, or
which is all one suspended, but by their consent; so that the placing this
Legislative Power singly in the King, is a subversion of this whole Government,
since the Essence of all Governments consists in the Subjects of the
Legislative Authority, Acts of Violence or Injustice, committed in the
Executive part, are such things that all Princes being subject to them, the
peace of mankind were very ill secured if it were not unlawful to resist upon
any pretense taken from any ill Administrations, in which as the Law may be
doubtful, so the Facts may be uncertain, and at worst the public Peace must
always be more valued than any private Oppressions or Injuries whatsoever. But
the total Subversion of a Government, being so contrary to the Trust that is
given to the Prince who ought to execute it, will put men upon uneasy and
dangerous Inquiries: which will turn little to the Advantage of those who are
driving matters to such a doubtful and desperate Issue.

VIII. If there is any thing in which the Exercise of the Legislative Power
seems indispensable, it is in those Oaths of Allegiance and Tests, that are
thought necessary to Qualify men either to be admitted to enjoy the protection
of the Law, or to bear a share in the Government; for in these the Security of
the Government is chiefly concerned; and therefore the total Extinction of
these, as it is not only a Suspension of of them, but a plain repealing of
them, so it is a Subverting of the whole Foundation of our Government: For the
Regulation that King and Parliament had set both for the Subjects having the
protection of the State by the Oath of Allegiance, and for a share in the
places of Trust by the Tests, is now plucked up by the roots; when it is
declared, That these shall not at any time hereafter be required to be taken or
subscribed by any persons whatsoever: for it is plain, that this is no
Suspension of the Law, but a formal repeal of it, in as plain words as can be
conceived.

IX. His Majesty says, that the Benefit of the Service of all his Subjects is
by the Law of Nature inseparably annexed to and inherent in his Sacred Person.
It is somewhat strange, that when so many Laws, that we all know are suspended,
the Law of Nature, which is so hard to be found out, should be cited; but the
Penners of this Declaration had best let that Law lie forgotten among the rest;
and there is a scurvy Paragraph in it concerning self-Preservation, that is
capable of very unacceptable Glosses. It is hard to tell what Section of the
Law of Nature has marked either such a Form of Government, or such a Family for
it. And if his Majesty renounces his Pretensions to our Allegiance as founded
on the Laws of England; and betakes himself to this Law of Nature, he will
perhaps find the Counsel was a little too rash; but to make the most that can
be, the Law of Nations or Nature does indeed allow the Governors of all
Societies a Power to serve themselves of every Member of it in the cases of
Extreme Danger; but no Law of Nature that has been yet heard of will conclude,
that if by special Laws, a sort of men have been disabled from all Employments,
that a Prince who at his Coronation Swore to maintain those Laws, may at his
pleasure extinguish all these Disabilities.

X. At the end of the Declaration, as in a Poscript, His Majesty assures his
Subjects, that he will maintain them in their Properties, as well in Church and
Abbey Lands, as other Lands: but the chief of all their Properties being the
share that they have by their Representatives in the Legislative Power; this
Declaration, which breaks through that, is no great Evidence that the rest will
be maintained: and to speak plainly, when a Coronation Oath is so little
remembered, other Promises must have a proportioned degree of Credit given to
them: as for the Abbey Lands, the keeping them from the Church is according to
the Principles of that Religion Sacrilege, and that is a mortal Sin, and there
can no Absolution be given to any who continue in it: and so this Promise being
an Obligation to maintain men in a mortal Sin, is null and void of it self:
Church Lands are also according to the Doctrine of their Canonists, so
immediately God's Right, that the the Pope himself is the only Administrator
and Dispencer, but is not the master of them; he can indeed make a truck for
God, or let them so low, that God shall be an easy Landlord: but he cannot
alter God's Property, nor translate the Right that is in him to Sacrilegious
Laymen and Heretics.

XI. One of the Effects of this Declaration, will be the setting on foot a new
run of Addresses over the Nation: for there is nothing how impudent and base
soever, of which the abject flattery of a slavish Spirit is not capable. It
must be confessed, to the Reproach of the Age, that all those strains of flattery
among the Romans, that Tacitus sets forth with so much just scorn, are modest
things, compared to what this Nation has produced within these seven Years:
only if our Flattery has come short of the Refinedness of the Romans, it has
exceeded theirs as much in its loathed Fulsomeness: The late King set out a
Declaration, in which he gave the most solemn Assurances possible of his
adhering to the Church of England, and to the Religion established by Law, and
of his Resolution to have frequent Parliaments; upon which the whole Nation
fell as it were into Raptures of Joy and Flattery: but though he lived four
Years after that, he called no Parliament, notwithstanding the Law for
Triennial Parliaments: and the manner of his Death, and the Papers printed
after his Death in his Name, having sufficiently showed that he was equally
sincere in both those Assurances that he gave, as well in that relating to
Religion, as in that other relating to frequent Parliaments; yet upon his Death
a new set of Addresses appeared, in which all that Flattery couldinvent was
brought forth, in the Commendations of a Prince, to whose Memory the greatest
kindness can be done, is to forget him, and because his present Majesty upon
his coming to the Throne gave some very general Promise of maintaining the
Church of England, this was magnified in so extravagant a strain, as if it had
been a Security greater than any that the Law could give: though by the regard
that the King has both to it and to the Laws, it appears that he is resolved to
maintain both equally: since then the Nation has already made it self
sufficiently ridiculous both to the present and to all succeeding Ages; it is
time that at last men should grow weary, and become ashamed of their Folly.

XII. The Nonconformists are now invited to set an Example to the rest: and
they who have valued themselves hitherto upon their Opposition to Popery, and
that have quarrelled with the Church of England, for some small Approaches to
it, in a few Ceremonies, are now solicited to rejoice, because the Laws that
secure us against it, are all plucked up: since they enjoy at present and
during pleasure leave to meet together. It is natural for all men to love to be
set at ease, especially in the matter of their Consciences; but it is visible,
that those who allow them this favor, do it with no other design, but that
under a pretense of a General Toleration, they may Introduce a Religion which
must persecute all equally: It is likewise apparent how much they are hated,
and how much they have been persecuted by the Instigation of those who now
Court them, and who have now no game that is more promising, than the engaging
them and the Church of England into new Quarrels: and as for the Promises now
made to them, it cannot be supposed that they will be more lasting than those
that were made some time ago to the Church of England, who had both a better
Title in Law, and greater Merit upon the Crown to assure them that they should
be well used than these can pretend to. The Nation has scarce forgiven some of
the Church of England the Persecution into which they have suffered themselves
to be cosened; though now that they see Popery barefaced, the Stand that they
have made, and the vigorous Opposition that they have given to it, is that
which makes all men willing to forget what is past, and raises again the Glory
of a Church that was not a little stained by the Indiscretion and Weakness of
those, that were too apt to believe and hope, and so suffered themselves to be
made a Property to those who would make them a Sacrifice. The Sufferings of the
Nonconformists, and the Fury that the Popish party expressed against them, had
recommended them so much to the Compassions of the Nation, and had given them
so just a pretension to favor in a better time, that it will look like a Curse
of God upon them, if a few men, whom the Court has gained to betray them, can
have such an ill Influence upon them as to make them throw away all that Merit,
and those Compassions which their Sufferings have procured them; and to go and
court those who are only seemingly kind to them, that they may destroy both
them and us. They must remember that as the Church of England is the only
Establishment that our Religion has by Law; so it is the main body of the
Nation, and all the Sects are but small and straggling parties: and if the Legal
Settlement of the Church is dissolved, and that body is once broken, these
lesser bodies will be all at Mercy: and it is an easy thing to define what the
Mercies of those of the Church of Rome are.

XIII. But though it must be confessed, that the Nonconformists are still under
some Temptations, to receive every thing that gives them present ease, with a
little too much kindness; since they lie exposed to many severe Laws, for which
they have of late felt the weight very heavily, and as they are men, and some
of them as ill Natured men as other people, so it is no wonder if upon the
first surprises of the Declaration, they are a little delighted to see the
Church of England, after all its Services and Submissions to the Court, so much
mortified by it; so that taking all together it will not be strange if they
commit some Follies upon this occasion. Yet on the other hand it passes all
imagination, to see some of the Church of England, especially those whose
Natures we know are so particularly sharpened in the point of Persecution,
chiefly when it is levelled against the Dissenters, rejoice at this
Declaration, and make Addresses upon it. It it hard to think that they have
attained to so high a pitch of Christian Charity, as to thank those who do now
Despitefully use them, and that as an earnest that within a little while they
will Persecute them. This will be an Original, and a Masterpiece in Flattery,
which must needs draw the last degrees of Contempt on such as are capable of so
abject and sordid a Compliance, and that not only from all the true Members of
the Church of England, but likewise from those of the Church Rome it self; for
every man is apt to esteem an Enemy that is brave even in his Misfortunes, as
much as he despises those whose minds sink with their Condition, for what is it
that these men would Address the King? Is it because he breaks those Laws that
are made in their Favor, and for their Protection: and is now striking at the
Root of all Legal Settlement that they have for their Religion? Or is it
because that at the same time that the King professes a Religion that condemns
his Supremacy, yet he is not contented with the Exercise of it as it is
warranted by Law, but carries it so far as to erect a Court contrary to the
express words of a Law so lately made: That Court takes care to maintain a due
proportion between their Constitution and all their Procedings, that so all may
be of a piece, and all equally contrary to Law. They have suspended one Bishop,
only because he would not do that which was not in his power to do: for since
there is no Extrajudiciary Authority in England, a Bishop can no more proceed
to the Sentence of Suspension against a Clergyman without a Trial, and the
hearing of Parties, than a Judge can give a Sentence in his Chamber without an
Indictment, a Trial, or a Jury, and because one of the greatest bodies of
England would not break their Oaths, and obey a Mandate that plainly
contradicted them, we see to what a pitch this is like to be carried. I will not
anticipate upon this illegal Court, to tell what Judgments are coming; but
without carrying our Jealousies too far, one may safely conclude, that they
will never depart so far from their first Institution, as to have any regard,
either to our Religion, or our Laws, or Liberties, in any thing they do. If all
this were acted by avowed Papists, as we are sure it is projected by such,
there were nothing extraordinary in it: but that which carries our Indignation
a little too far to be easily governed, is to see some pretended Protestants,
and a few Bishops, among those that are the fatal Instruments of pulling down
the Church of England, and that those Mercenaries Sacrifice their Religion and
their Church to their Ambition and Interests; this has such peculiar Characters
of Misfortune upon it, that it seems it is not enough if we perish without
pity, since we fall by that hand that we have so much supported and fortified,
but we must become the Scorn of all the World, since we have produced such an
unnatural Brood, that even while they are pretending to be the Sons of the
Church of England, are cutting their Mothers Throat: and not content with
Judas's Crime, of saying, Hail Master, and kissing him, while they are
betraying him into the hands of others; these carry their Wickedness farther,
and say, Hail Mother, and then they themselves murder her. If after all this
we are called to bear this as Christians, and to suffer it as Subjects, if we
were required in Patience to possess our own Souls, and to be in Charity with
our Enemies; and which is more, to forgive our False Brethren who add Treachery
to their Hatred; the Exhortation were seasonable, and indeed a little
necessary: for Humane Nature cannot easily take down things of such a hard
digestion: but to tell us that we must make Addresses, and offer Thanks for all
this, is to insult a little too much upon us in our Sufferings: and he that can
believe that a dry and cautiously worded Promise of maintaining the Church of
England, will be religiously observed after all that we have seen, and is upon
that carried so far out of his Wits as to Address and give Thanks, and will
believe still, such a man has nothing to excuse him from believing
Transubstantiation it self; for it is plain that he can bring himself to
believe even when the thing is contrary to the clearest Evidence that his
Senses can give him.

Si populus hic vult decipi decipiatur. POSTSCRIPT. THese Reflections were writ
soon after the Declaration came to my hands, but the Matter of them was so
tender, and the Conveyance of them to the Press was so uneasy, that they
appear now too late to have one effect that was Designed by them, which was the
diverting men from making Addresses upon it; yet if what is here proposed makes
men become so far wise as to be ashamed of what they have done, and carrying is
a means to keep them from their Courtship further than good words, this Paper
will not come too late.

A LETTER TO A DISSENTER, Upon occasion of His MAJESTY'S Late Gracious
DECLARATION of INDVLGENCE.
SIR,
SInce Addresses are in fashion, give me leave to make one to you. This is
neither the Effect of Fear, Interest, or Resentment; therefore you may be sure
it is sincere: and for that reason it may expect to be kindly received. Whether
it will have power enough to Convince, depends upon the Reasons, of which you
are to judge; and upon your preparation of Mind, to be persuaded by Truth,
whenever it appears to you. It ought not to be the less welcome, for coming
from a friendly hand, one whose kindness to you is not lessened by difference
of Opinion, and who will not let his thoughts for the Public be so tied or
confined to this or that Subdivision of Protestants, as to stifle the Charity,
which besides all other Arguments, is at this time become necessary to preserve
us.

I am neither surprised nor provoked, to see that in the Condition you were put
into by the Laws, and the ill Circumstances you lay under, by having the
Exclusion and Rebellion laid to your Charge, you were desirous to make your
serves less uneasy and obnoxious to Authority. Men who are fore, run to the
nearest Remedy with too much haste, to consider all the Consequences: Grains of
allowance are to be given, where Nature gives such strong Influences. When to
Men under Sufferings it offers Ease, the present Pain will hardly allow time
to examine the Remedies; and the strongest Reasons can hardly gain a fair
Audience from our Mind, whilst so possessed, till the smart is a little allayed.

I do not know whether the Warmth that naturally belongs to new Friendships,
may not make it a harder Task for me to persuade you. It is like telling Lovers
in the beginning of their Joys, that they will in a little time have an end.
Such an unwelcome Style does not easily find Credit: but I will suppose you are
not so far gone in your new Passion, but that you will hear still; and
therefore I am under the less Discouragement, when I offer to your
Consideration two things. The first is, the Cause you have to suspect your new
Friends. The second, the Duty incumbent upon you, in Christianity and Prudence,
not to hazard the Public Safety, neither by desire of Ease nor of Revenge.

To the First, Consider that notwithstanding the smooth Language which is now
put on to engage you, these new Friends did not make you their Choice, but
their Refuge: They have ever made their first Courtships to the Church of
England, and when they were rejected there, they made their Application to you
in the second Place. The Instances of this, might be given in all times. I do
not repeat them, because whatsoever is unnecessary, must be tedious, the Truth
of this Assertion being so plain, as not to admit a Dispute. You cannot
therefore reasonably flatter your selves, that there is any Inclination to you.
They never pretended to allow you any Quarter, but to usher in Liberty for
themselves under that Shelter. I refer you to Mr. Coleman's Letters, and to the
Journals of Parliament, where you may be convinced, if you can be so mistaken,
as to doubt; nay, at this very Hour, they can hardly forbear, in the height of
their Courtship, to let fall hard Words of you. So little is Nature to be
restrained; it will start out sometimes, disdaining to submit to the Usurpation
of Art and Interest.

This Alliance, between Liberty and Infallibility, is bringing together the Two
most contrary Things that are in the World. The Church of Rome does not only
dislike the allowing Liberty, but by its Principles it cannot do it. Wine is
not more expressly forbidden to the Mahometans, than giving Heretics Liberty is
to Papists: They are no more able to make good their Vows to you, then Men
married before, and their Wife alive, can confirm their Contract with another.
The continuance of their Kindness would be a Habit of Sin, of which they are to
repent, and their Absolution is to be had upon no other Terms, than their
Promises to destroy you. You are therefore to be hugged now, only that you may
be the better squeezed at another time. There must be something extraordinary,
when the Church of Rome sets up Bills, and offers Plasters for tender
Consciences: By all that has hitherto appeared, her Skill in Chyrurgery lies
chiefly in a quick Hand, to cut of Limbs; but she is the worst at Healing, of
any that ever pretended to it.

To come so quick from another Extreme, is such an unnatural Motion, that you
ought to be upon your Guard; the other Day you were Sons of Belial, Now, you
are Angels of Light. This is a violent Change, and it will be fit for you to
pause upon it, before you believe it: If your Features are not altered, neither
is their Opinion of you, whatever may be pretended. Do you believe less than
you did, that there is Idolatry in the Church of Rome? sure you do not. See
then, how they treat both in Words and Writing, those who entertain that
Opinion. Conclude from hence, how inconsistent their Favor is with this single
Article, except they give you a Dispensation for this too, and by a Non
Obstante, secure you that they will not think the worse of you.

Think a little how dangerous it is to build upon a Foundation of Paradoxes.
Popery now is the only Friend to Liberty, and the known Enemy to Persecution:
The Men of Taunton and Tiverton, are above all other eminent for Loyalty. The
Quakers, from being declared by the Papists not to be Christians, are now made
Favorites, and taken into their particular Protection; they are on a sudden
grown the most accomplished Men of the Kingdom, in good Breeding, and giving
Thanks with the best Grace, in double refined Language. So that I should not
wonder, though a Man of that Persuasion, in spite of his Hat, should be Master
of the Ceremonies. Not to say harsher Words, these are such very new things,
that it is impossible not to suspend our Belier, till by a little more
Experience we may be informed whether they are Reallities or Apparitions: We
have been under shameful Mistakes, if these Opinions are true; but for the
present, we are apt to be incredulous; except we could be convinced, that the
Priests Words in this Case too, are able to make such a sudden, and effectual
Change; and that their Power is not limited to the Sacrament, but that it
extends to alter the Nature of all other things, as often as they are so
disposed.

Let me now speak of the Instruments of your Friendship, and then leave you to
judge, whether they do not afford Matter of Suspicion. No Sharpness is to be
mingled where Healing only is intended; so nothing will be said to expose
particular Men, how strong soever the Temptation may be, or how clear the
Proofs to make it out. A word or two in general, for your better Caution, shall
suffice: Suppose then, for Arguments sake, that the Mediators of this new
Alliance, should be such as have been formerly employed in Treaties of the same
kind, and there detected to have Acted by Order, and to have been empowered to
give Encouragements and Rewards. Would not this be an Argument to suspect them?

If they should plainly be under Engagements on the one side, their Arguments
to the other, ought to be received accordingly; their fair Pretenses are to be
looked upon as part of their Commission, which may not improbably give them a
Dispensation in the Case of Truth, when it may bring a Prejudice upon the
Service of those by whom they are employed.

If there should be Men, who having formerly had Means and Authority to
persuade by secular Arguments, have, in pursuance of that Power, sprinkled
Money amongst the Dissenting Ministers; and if those very Men should now have
the same Authority, practice the same Methods, and Disburse, where they cannot
otherwise persuade: It seems to me to be rather an Evidence, than a
Presumption of the Deceit.

If there should be Ministers among you, who, by having fallen under
Temptations of this kind, are in some sort engaged to continue their Frailty,
by the Awe they are in, lest it should be exposed: The Persuasions of these
unfortunate Men must sure have the less Force, and their Arguments, though
never so specious, are to be suspected, when they come from Men who have
mortgaged themselves to severe Creditors, that expect a rigorous Observation of
the Contract, let it be never so unwarrantable.

If these, or any others, should at this time preach up Anger and Vengeance
against the Church of England; may it not without Injustice be suspected, that
a thing so plainly out of season, springs rather from Corruption than
Mistake; and that those who act this choleric Part, do not believe themselves,
but only pursue higher Directions, endeavor to make good that part of their
Contract which obliges them, upon a Forfeiture, to make use of their inflaming
Eloquence? They might apprehend their Wages would be retrenched if they should
be moderate: And therefore whilst Violence is their Interest, those who have
not the same Arguments, have no reason to follow such a partial Example.

If there should be Men, who by the Load of their Crimes against the
Government, have been bowed down to comply with it against their Conscience;
who by incurring the want of a Pardon, have drawn upon themselves the Necessity
of an entire Resignation: Such Men are to be lamented, but not to be believed.
Nay, they themselves, when they have dischared their Unwelcome Task, will be
inwardly glad that their forced Endeavors do not succeed, and are pleased when
Men resist their Insinuations; which are far from being voluntary or sincere,
but are squeezed out of them by the weight of their being so obnoxious.

If in the height of this great Dearness by comparing things, it should happen,
that at this Instant, there is much a surer Friendship with those who are so
far from allowing Liberty, that they allow no Living to a Protestant under
them. Let the Scene lie in what part of the World it will, the Argument will
come home, and sure it will afford sufficient Ground to suspect. Apparent
Contradictions must strike us; neither Nature nor Reason can digest them:
Self-flattery, and the Desire to deceive our selves, to gratify a present
Appetite, with all their Power, which is Great, cannot get the better of such
broad Conviction, as some things carry along with them. Will you call these
vain and empty Suspicions? have you been at all times so void of Fears and
Jealousies, as to justify your being so unreasonably Valiant in having none
upon this Occasion? Such an extraordinary Courage at this unseasonable time, to
say no more, is too dangerous a Virtue to be commended.

If then for these and a thousand other Reasons, there is cause to suspect,
sure your new Friends are not to dictate to you, or advise you; for instance,
the Addresses that fly abroad every Week; and Murder us with another to the
same; the first Draughts are made by those who are not very proper to be
Secretaries to the Protestant Religion; and it is your Part only to write them
out fairer again. Strange! that you who have been formerly so much against Set
Forms, should now be content the Priests should Indite for you. The Nature of
Thanks is an unavoidable Consequence of being Pleased or Obliged; they grow in
the Heart, and from thence show themselves either in Looks, Speeches, Writing,
or Action: No Man was ever Thankful, because he was bid to be so, but because
he had, or thought he had some Reason for it. If then there is cause in this
Case to pay such extravagant Acknowledgments, they will flow naturally, without
taking such pains to procure them, and it is unkindly done to tire all the
Posthorses with Carrying Circular Letters to solicit that which would be done
without any Trouble or Constraint: If it is really in it self such a Favor,
what needs so much pressing Men to be Thankful, and with such eager
Circumstances, that where Persuasions cannot delude, Threatenings are employed
to fright them into a Compliance? Thanks must be voluntary, not only
unconstrained, but unsolicited, else they are either Trifles or Snares, they
either signify nothing, or a great deal more than is intended by those that
give them. If an inference should be made, that whosoever thanketh the King for
his Declaration, is by that engaged to justify it in point of Law; it is a
greater stride than, I presume, all those care to make who are persuaded to
Address: If it shall be supposod, that all the Thankers will be Repealers of
the TEST, when ever a Parliament shall Meet. Such an Expectation is better
prevented before, than disappointed afterward; and the surest way to avoid the
lying under such a scandal, is not to do any thing that may give a color to
the Mistake: These Bespoken Thanks are little less improper than Love Letters
that were solicited by the Lady to whom they are to be Directed: So, that
besides the little ground there is to give them, the manner of getting them,
does extremely lessen their Value. It might be wished that you would have
suppressed your impatience, and have been content for the sake of Religion, to
enjoy it within your selves, without the Liberty of a public Exercise, till a
Parliament had allowed it: but since that could not be, and that the Artificers
of some amongst you have made use of the Well-meant Zeal of the Generality to
draw them into this Mistake; I am so far from blaming you with that sharpness
which, perhaps, the Matter in strictness would bear, that I am ready to err on
the side of the more gentle construction.

There is a great difference between enjoying quietly the advantages of an Act
irregularly done by others, and the going about to support it against the Laws
in being: The Law is so Sacred, that no Trespass against it is to be Defended;
yet Frailties may in some measure be Excused, when they cannot be justified.
The desire of enjoying a Liberty from which men have been so long restrained,
may be a Temptation that their Reason is not at all times able to resist. If in
such a case, some Objections are leapt over, indifferent men will be more
inclined to lament the Occasion, than to fall too hard upon the Fault, whilst
it is covered with the Apology of a good intention; but where to rescue your
selves from the severity of one Law, you give a blow to all the Laws, by which
your Religion and Liberty are to be protected; and instead of silently
receiving the benefit of this Indulgence, you set up for Advocates to support
it, you become voluntary Aggressors, and look like Counsel retained by the
Prerogative against your old Friend Magna Charta, who has done nothing to
deserve her falling thus under your Displeasure.

If the case then should be, that the Price expected from you for this Liberty,
is giving up your Right in the Laws, sure you will think twice, before you go
any further in such a losing Bargain. After giving Thanks for the breach of one
Law, you lose the Right of Complaining of the breach of all the rest; you will
not very well know how to defend your selves, when you are pressed; and having
given up the Question, when it was for your advantage, you cannot recall it,
when it shall be to your Prejudice. If you will set up at one time a Power to
help you, which at another time by Parity of Reason shall be made use of to
destroy you, you will neither be pitied, nor relieved against a Mischief you
draw upon your selves, by being so unreasonably thankful. It is like calling in
Auxiliaries to help, who are strong enough to subdue you: In such a case your
Complaints will come too late to be heard, and your sufferings will raise Mirth
instead of Compassion.

If you think, for your excuse, to expound your thanks so as to restrain them
to this particular case, others, for their ends, will extend them further; and
in these differing Interpretations, that which is backed by Authority will be
the most likely to prevail; especially when by the advantage you have given
them, they have in truth the better of the Argument, and that the Inferences
from your own Concessions are very strong, and express against you. This is so
far from being a groundless Supposition, that there was a late instance of it,
the last Session of Parliament, in the House of Lords, where the first Thanks,
though things of course, were laterpreted to be the Approbation of the King's
whole Speech, and a Restraint from the further Examination of any part of it,
though never so much disliked; and it was with difficulty obtained, not to be
excluded from the Liberty of objecting to this mighty Prerogative of
Dispensing, merely by this innocent and usual piece of good Manners, by which
no such thing could possibly be intended.

This shows, that some bounds are to be put to your good Breeding, and that
the Constitution of England is too valuable a thing to be ventured upon a
Complement. Now that you have for some time enjoyed the benefit of the End, it
is time for you to look into the Danger of the Means: The same Reason that made
you desirous to get Liberty, must make you solicit us to preserve it: so that
the next thought will naturally be, not to engage your self beyond Retreat, and
to agree so far with the Principles of all Religions, as not to rely upon a
Death bed Repentance.

There are certain Periods of time, which being once past, make all cautions
ineffectual, and all Remedies desperate. Our Understandings are apt to be
hurried on by the first heats; which if not restrained in time, do not give us
leave to look back, till it is too late. Consider this in the Case of your
A^ger against the Church of England, and take warning by their Mistake in the
same kind, when after the late King's Restoration, they preserved so long the
bitter taste of your rough usage to them in other times, that it made them
forget their Interest, and sacrifice it to their Revenge.

Either you will blame this Proceeding in them, and for that reason not follow
it, or if you allow it, you have no reason to be offended with them; so that
you must either dismiss your Anger, or lose your Excuse; except you should
argue more partially than will be supposed of Men of your Morality and
Understanding.

If you had now to do with those Rigid Prelates, who made it a Matter of
Conscience to give you the least Indulgence; but kept you at an uncharitable
distance, and even to your more reasonable Scruples continued stiff and
exorable, the Argument might be fairer on your side, but since the common
Danger has so laid open that Mistake, that all the former Haughtiness toward
you is for ever extinguished, and that it has turned the Spirit of
Persecution, into a Spirit of Peace, Charity and Condescension; shall this
happy Change only affect the Church of England? And are you so in Love with
separation, as not to be moved by this Example? It ought to be followed, were
there no other reason than that it is a Virtue; but when besides that, it is
become necessary to your preservation, it is impossible to fail the having its
Effect upon you.

If it should be said, that the Church of England is never Humble, but when she
is out of Power, and therefore loses the Right of being believed when she
pretends to it; the Answer is, First, it would be an uncharitable Objection,
and very much miss-timed? an unseasonable Triumph, not only ungenerous, but
unsafe: So that in these respects it cannot be urged without scandal, even
though it could be said with Truth. Secondly, This is not so in Fact, and the
Argument must fall, being built upon a False Foundation; for whatever may be
told you, at this very hour, and in the heat and glare of your present
sunshine, the Church of England can in a moment bring Clouds again; and turn
the Royal Thunder upon your Heads, blow you off the Stage with a Breath, if she
would give but a smile or a kind Word; the least Glimpse of her Compliance,
would throw you back into the state of Suffering, and draw upon you all the
Atrears of severity, which have accrued during the time of this kindness to
you, and yet the Church of England, with all her Faults, will not allow her
self to be rescued by such unjustifiable means, but chooses to bear the weight
of Power, rather than lie under the burden of being Criminal.

It cannot be said, that she is unprovoked; Books and Letters come out every
day, to call for Answers, yet she will not be stirred. From the supposed
Authors and the Style one would swear they were Undertakers, and had made a
Contract to fall out with the Church of England. There are Lashes in every
Address, Challenges to draw the Pen in every Pamphlet; in short, the fairest
occasions in the World given to quarrel; but she wisely distinguishes between
the Body of Dissenters, whom she will suppose to Act, as they do, with no ill
intent; and these small Skirmishers picked and sent out to Pickqueer, and to
begin a Fray amongst the Protestants, for the entertainment, as well as the
advantage of the Church of Rome.

This Conduct is so good, that it will be scandalous not to Applaud it. It is
not equal dealing, to blame our Adversaries for doing ill, and not commend them
when they do well.

To hate them because they Persecuted, and not to be reconciled to them when
they are ready to suffer, rather than receive all the Advantages that can be
gained by a Criminal Compliance, is a Principle no sort of Christians can own,
since it would give an Objection to them never to be Answered.

Think a little, who they were that promoted your former Persecutions, and then
consider how it will look to be angry with the Instruments, and at the same
time to make a League with the Authors of your sufferings.

Have you enough considered what will be expected from you? Are you ready to
stand in every Borough by a Virtue of a Conge d'estire, and instead of
Election, be satisfied if you are returned?

Will you in Parliament, justify the Dispensing Power, with all its
consequences, and repeal the Test, by which you will make way for the repeal of
all the Laws, that were made to preserve your Religion, and to Enact others
that shall destroy it?

Are you disposed to change the Liberty of Debate, into the Merit of Obedience,
and to be made Instruments to Repeal or Enact Laws, when the Roman Consistory
are Lords of the Articles?

Are you so linked with your new Friends, as to reject any Indulgence a
Parliament shall offer you, if it shall not be so Comprehensive as to include
the Papists in it?

Consider that the employed Conditions of your new Treaty are no less, than that
you are to do every thing you are desired, without examining, and that for this
pretended Liberty of Conscience, your real Freedom is to be Sacrificed: Your
former Faults hang like Chains still about you, you are let loose only upon
Bayl; the first Act of Non-complyance, sends you to jaybagain.

You may see that the Papists themselves, do not rely upon the Legality of this
power, which you are to Justify, since they being so very earnest to get it
Established by a Law, and the doing such very hard things in order, as they
think to obtain it, is a clear Evidence, that they do not think, that the
single Power of the Crown is in this Case a good Foundation; especially when
this is done under a Prince, so very tender of all the Rights of Sovereignty,
that he would think it a diminution to his Prerogative, where he conceives it
strong enough to go alone, to call in the Legislative help to strengthen and
support it.

You have formerly blamed the Church of England, and not without reason, for
going so far as they did in their Compliance; and yet as soon as they stopped,
you see they are not only Deserted, but Prosecuted: Conclude then from this
Example, that you must either break off your Friendship, or resolve to have no
Bounds in it. If they do not succeed in their Design, they will leave you
first; if they do, you must either leave them, when it will be too late for
your Safety, or else after the squeaziness of starting at a Surplice, you must
be forced to swallow Transubstantiation.

Remember that the other day those of the Church of England were Trimmers for
enduring you, and now by a sudden Turn, you are become the Favorites; do not
deceive your selves, it is not the Nature of lasting Plants thus to shoot up in
a Night; you may look gay and green for a little time, but you want a Root to
give you a continuance. It is not so long since, as to be forgotten, that the
Maxim was, It is impossible for a Dissenter, not to be a REBEL. Consider at
this time in France, even the new Converts are so far from being Employed, that
they are Disarmed: Their sudden Change makes them still to be distrusted,
notwithstanding that they are Reconciled: What are you to expect then from your
dear Friends, to whom, whenever they shall think fit to throw you off again,
you have in other times given such Arguments for their excuse?

Besides all this, you Act very unskilfully against your visible Interest, if
you throw away the Advantages, of which you can hardly fail in the next
probable Revolution. Things tend naturally to what you would have, if you would
let them alone, and not by an unseasonable Activity lose the Influences of your
good Star, which promises you every thing that is prosperous.

The Church of England convinced of its Error in being severe to you; the
Parliament, whenever it meets, sure to be Gentle to you; the next Heir bred
in the Country which you have so often Quoted for a Pattern of Indulgence; a
general Agreement of all thinking Men, that we must no more cut our selves off
from the Protestants abroad, but rather enlarge the Foundations upon which we
are to build our Defenses against the Common Enemy; so that in Truth, all
things seem to conspire to give you ease and satisfaction, if by too much haste
to anticipate your good Fortune, you do not destroy it.

The Protestants have but one Article of Human Strength, to oppose the Power
which is now against them, and that is, not to lose the advantage of their
Numbers, by being so unwary as to let themselves be divided.

We all agree in our Duty to our Prince, our Objections to his Belief, do not
hinder us from seeing his Virtues; and our not complying with his Religion,
has no effect upon our Allegiance; we are not to be Laughed out of our Passive
Obedience, and the Doctrine of Non-Resistance, though even those who perhaps
owe the best part of their Security to that Principle, are apt to make a Jest
of it.

So that if we give no advantage by the fatal Mistake of misapplying our Anger,
by the natural course of things, this Danger will pass away like a shower of
Hail; fair weather will succeed, as lowering as the Sky now looks, and all by
this plain and easy Receipt. Let us be still, quiet and undivided, firm at the
same time to our Religion, our Loyalty, and our Laws, and so long as we
continue this method, it is next to impossible, that the odds of two hundred to
one should lose the Bett; except the Church of Rome, which has been so long
barren of Miracles, should now in her declining Age, be brought a Bed of one
that would outdo the best she can brag of in her Legend.

To conclude, the short Question will be, whether you will Join with those who
must in the end run the same Fate with you. If Protestants of all sorts, in
their Behavior to one another, have been to blame, they are upon the more
equal terms, and for that very Reason it is fitter for them now to be
reconciled. Our Disunion is not only a Reproach, but a Danger to us; those who
believe in modern Miracles, have more Right, or at least more Excuse, to
neglect all Secular Cautions: but for us, it is as justifiable to have no
Religion, as wilfully to throw away the Human Means of preserving it. I am,

Dear SIR, Your most Affectionate Humble Servant. T. W.

The ANATOMY of an EQUIVALENT.
I. THE World has of late years never been without some extraordinary Word to
furnish the Coffee-houses and fill the Pamphlets. Sometimes it is a new one
invented, and sometimes an Old one revived. They are usually fitted to some
present purpose, with Intentions as differing as the various Designs several
Parties may have, either to delude the people, or to expose their Adversaries:
They are not of long continuance, but after they have passed a little while,
and that they are grown Nauseous by being so often repeated, they give place to
something that is newer. Thus, after Whig, Tory, and Trimmer, have had their
Time, now they are dead and forgotten, being supplanted by the word Equivalent,
which reigns in their stead.

The Birth of it is in short this: After many repeated Essays to dispose Men to
the Repeal of Oaths and Tests, made for the security of the Protestant
Religion, the general aversion to comply in it was found to be so great, that
it was thought advisable to try another manner of attempting it, and to see
whether by putting the same thing into another Mould, and softning an harsh
Proposition by a plausible Term, they might not have better success.

To this end, instead of an absolute quitting of these Laws, without any
Condition, which was the first Proposal; Now it is put into gentler Language,
and runs thus; If you will take away the Oaths and Tests, you shall have as
good a thing for them. This put into the fashionable Word, is now called an
Equivalent.

II. So much to the Word it self. I will now endeavor in short to Examine and
Explain, in order to the having it fully understood,

First, What is the nature of a true Equivalent; and

In the next place, What things are not to be admired under that denomination.

I shall treat these as general Propositions; and tho I cannot undertake how
far they may be convincing, I may safely do it, that they are Impartial; of
which there can be no greater evidence than that I make neither Inference, nor
Application, but leave that part entirely to the Reader, according as his own
Thoughts shall direct and dispose him.

III. I will first take notice, that this Word, by the Application which has
been made of it in some modern instances, lies under some Disadvantage, not to
say some Scandal. It is transmitted hither from France; and if as in most other
things that we take from them, we carry them beyond the Pattern, it should
prove so in this, we should get into a more partial Sti^e than the Principles
of English Justice will I hope ever allow us to be guilty of.

The French King's Equivalents in Flanders, are very extraordinary Bargains;
his manner of proposing and obtaining them, is very differing from the usual
methods of equal dealing. In a later Instance, Denmark, by the encouragement as
well as by the example of France, has proposed things to the Duke of Holstein,
which are called Equivalents, but that they are so, the World is not yet
sufficiently convinced, and probably the Parties concerned do not think them to
be so, and consequently do not appear to be at all disposed to accept them.
Princes enjoin and prescribe such things when they have Strength and Power to
supply the want of Arguments; and according to practice in these Cases, the
weaker are never thought to have an ill Bargain, if they have any thing left
them. So that the first Qualification of an Equivalent, must be, that the
Appraisers be indifferent, else it is only a Sound, there can be nothing real
in it: For, where the same party that proposes a Bargain, claims a Right to
set the Value; or which is worse: has power too to make it good; the other may
be forced to submit to the Conditions, but he can by no means ever be persuaded
to treat upon them.

IV. The next thing to be considered is, that to make an Equivalent in reality
an equal thing, in the Proposer, it must be a better thing than that which is
required by him; just as good is subject to the Hazard of not being quite so
good: It is not easy to have such an even Hand, as to make the Value exactly
equal; besides, according to the Maxim in Law, Melior conditio possidentis, the
Offer is not fair, except the thing offered is better in Value than the Thing
demanded. There must be Allowance for removing what is fixed, and there must be
something that may be a Justification for Changing. The Value of things very
often depende^h more upon other Circumstances, than upon what is merely
intrinsic to them; therefore the Calculation must be made upon that Foot,
perhaps in most Cases; and particularly the Want which one of the Parties may
have of the Thing he requires, makes it more valuable to him than it is in it
self. If the Party proposing does not want the Thing he would have in Exchange,
his requiring it is importinent: If he does, his want of it m^st go into the
Appraisement, and by consequence every Proposer of an Equivalent must offer a
better Thing, or else he must not take it unkindly to be refused, except the
other Party has an equal Want of the same Thing, which is very improbible,
since naturally he that wants most, will speak first.

V. Another thing necessary to the making a fair Bargain is, that let the
Parties who treat, be they never so unequal in themselves, yet as to the
particular thing proposed, there must be an exact Equality, as far as it
relates to the full Liberty of Taking or Refusing, Concurring or Objecting,
without any consequence of Revenge, or so much as Dissatisfaction; for it is
impossible to treat where it is an Affront to differ; in that Case there is no
mean between the two Extremes, either an open Quarrel, or an entire Submission;
the Way of Bargaining must be equal, else the Bargain it self cannot be so: For
Example, the Proposer is not only to use equal Terms as to the Matter, but fair
ones in the Manner too. There must be no Intimations of Anger in case of
Refusal, much less any open Threatening. Such a Style is so ill suited to the
usual way of Treating, that it looks more like a Breach of the Peace, than
the making a Bargain. It would be yet more improper, and less agreeing with the
Nature of an Equivalent, if, whilst two Men are a chaffering about the Price,
one of them should actually take the thing in question at his own Rate, and
afterward desire to have his Possession confirmed by a formal Agreement; such
a Proceeding would not only destroy that Particular Contract, but make it
impossible to have any other, with the Party that could be guilty of such a
Practice.

VI. Violence preceding, destroys all Contracts, and even though the Party
that offers it should have a right to the thing he so takes, yet it is to be
obtained by legal Means, else it may be forfeited by his Irregularity in the
Pursuit of it: The Law is such an Enemy to Violence, and so little to be
reconciled to it, that in the Case of a Rape, the Punishment is not taken off,
tho the Party injured afterward consents. The Justice of the Law has its Eye
upon the first Act, and the Maxim of Volenti non fit injuria, does not in this
Case help the Offender, it being a Plea subsequent to the Crime, which makes
it to be rejected as a thing wrong dated, and out of time.

In taking away Goods or Money it is the same thing. The Party Robbed, by
giving them afterward to the Taker, does not exempt him from the Punishment of
the Violence: Quite contrary, the Man from whom they were taken is punishable,
if he does not Prosecute. If the Case should be, that a Man thus taking away a
thing without Price, claims a Right to take it, then whether it is well or
ill founded is not the Question; but sure, the Party from whom it is so taken,
whilst he is treating to Sell or Exchange it, can never make a Bargain with so
arbitrary a Chapman, there being no Room left after that to talk of the Value.

VII. To make an equal Bargain there must be a Liberty of differing, not only
in every thing that is really Essential, but in every thing that is thought so
by either Party, and most especially by him who is in Possession of the thing
demanded: His Opinion must be a Rule to him, and even his Mistake in the Value,
though it may not convince the Man he has to deal with, yet he will be
justified for not accepting what is offered, till that Mistake is fairly
rectified and overruled.

When a Security is desired to be changed, that Side which desires it must not
pretend to impose upon the other, so as to dictate to them, and tell them
without debate, that they are safe in what is proposed, since of that the
Counsel on the other Side must certainly be the most competent Judges. The Hand
it comes from is a great Circumstance, either to invite or discourage in all
Matters of Contract; the Qualifications of the Party offering, must suit with
the Proposition it self, else let it be never so fair, there is Ground for
Suspicion.

VIII. What Men are of a Temper, that they think they have Wrong^ done them, if
they have not always the better side of a Bargain: If they happen to be such,
as by Experience have been found to have an ill Memory for their Word. If the
Character they bear, does not recommend their Justice, wherever their
Interest is concerned. In these Cases, thinking Men will avoid Dealing, not
only to prevent Surprise, but to cut off the Occasions of Difficulty or Dispute.

It is yet more discouraging, when there are, either a precedent Practice, or
standing Maxims of gross Partiality, in assuming a Privilege of Exemption from
the usual Methods of equal Dealing.

To illustrate this by an Instance. Suppose that in any Case, the Church of
Rome should have an Interest to promote a Bargain; let her way of Dealing be a
little examined, which will direct those with whom she treats, how far they
are to rely upon what she proposes to them. We may begin with the Quality in
the World, the least consisting with equal Dealing, viz. An incurable
Partiality to herself; which, that it may arrive to its full Perfection, is
crowned with Infallibility. At the first serting out, she makes her self
incapable of dealing upon Terms of Equality, by the Power she claims of
Binding and Loosing, which has been so often applied to Treaties, as well as
to Sins.

If the Definition of Justice is to deal equally, she cannot be guilty of it
without betraying her Prerogative, and according to her Principles, she gives
up the Superiority derived to her by Apostolical Succession, if she degradeth
her self so as to be judged by the Rules of Common Right, especially if the
Bargain should be with Heretics, who in her Opinion have forf^^ted the Claim
they might otherwise have had to it.

IX. Besides, her Taste has been so spoiled by unreasonable Bargains, that she
can never bring down her Palate to any thing that is Fair or Equal. She has
not only judged it an Equivalent, but a great Bargain for the other side, to
give them Absolutions and Indulgences for the real Payment of great Sums, for
which she has drawn Bills to have them repayed with Interest in Purgatory.

This Spiritual Bank has carried on such a Trade upon these advantageous
Terms, that it can never submit to the small Profits an ordinary Bargain would
produce.

The several Popes have in Exchange for the Peter Pence, and all their other
Rents and Fines out of England, sent sanctified Roses, Relics, and other such
Wonder-working Trifles. And by Virtue of their Character of Holy Fathers, have
used Princes like Children, by sending them such Rattles to play with, which
they made them buy at extravagant Rates; besides which, they were to be
thankful too, into the Bargain.

A Chip of the Cross, a Piece of St. Laurence's Grid-iron, a Hair of St. Peter,
have been thought Equivalents for much more substantial things. The Popes being
Masters of the Jewel-House, have set the Rates upon them, and they have passed;
though the whole Shop would not take up the Value of a Bodkin in Lombardstreet
upon the Credit of them.

They are unconscionable Purchasers, for they get all the Money from the
Living, by praying for them when they are dead. And it is observable, that the
Northern Part of Christendom, which best understands Trade, were the first
that refused to make any more Bargains with them; so that it looks as if the
chief Quarrel to the Heretics was not as they were ill Christians, but as they
were unkind Merchants; in so discourteously rejecting the Commodities of the
Growth of Rome.

To conclude this Head, There is no bartering with Infallibility, it being so
much above Equality, that it cannot bear the Indignity of a true Equivalent.

X. In all Bargains, there is a Necessity of looking back, and reflecting how
far a present Proposal is reconcilable with a former Practice: For Example, if
at any time a thing is offered, quite differing from the Arguments used by the
Proposer, and inconsistent with the Maxims held out by him at other times. Or
in a public Case, if the same Men who promote and press a thing with the
utmost Violence, do in a little time after with as much Violence press the
contrary, and prosess a Detestation of the very thing, for which they had
before employed all their Interest and Authority. Or if in the Case of a Law
already made, there should be a Privilege claimed to exempt those from the
Obligation of observing it, who yet should afterward desire and press to have
a new Law made in exchange for the old one, by which they would not be bound;
and that they should propose a Security by a thing of the very same Nature as
that which they did not allow to be any before. These Incoherences must
naturally have the Effect of raising Suspicion, or rather they are a certain
Proof, that in such Circumstances it is irrational for Men to expect an
effectual Equivalent.

XI. If whatsoever is more than ordinary is suspicious, every thing that is
unnatural is more so: It is not only unnecessary but unatural too to persuade
with Violence what it is Folly to refuse; to push Men with Eagerness into a
good Bargain for themselves, is a Style very much unsuitable to the Nature of
the thing. But it goes further, and is yet more absurd, to grow angry with Men
for not receiving a Proposal that is for their Advantage; Men ought to be
content with the Generosity of offering good Bargains, and should give their
Compassion to those who do not understand them: but by carrying their good
Nature so far as to be Choleric in such a Case, they would follow the Example
of the Church of Rome, where the Definition of Charity is very extraordinary.
In her Language, the Writ de Haeretico Comburendo is a Love-Letter, and burning
Men for differing with them in Opinion, howsoever miscalled Cruelty, is as they
understand it, the Perfection of flaming Charity.

When Anger in these Cases lasts long, it is most probable that it is for our
own Sakes; Good Nature for others is one of those Diseases that is cured by
Time, and especially where it is offered and rejected; but for our selves it
never fails, and cannot be extinguished but with our Life. It is fair if Men
can believe that their Friends love them next to themselves, to love them
better is too much; the Expression is so unnatural, that it is cloying, and Men
must have no Sense, who in this case have no Suspicion.

XII. Another Circumstance necessary to a fair Bargain is, That there must be
Openness and Freedom allowed, as the Effect of that Equality which is the
Foundation of Contracting. There must be full Liberty of Objecting, and making
Doubts and Scruples: If they are such as can be answered, the Party convinced
is so much the more confirmed and encouraged to deal, instead of being hindered
by them; but it instead of an Answer to satisfy, there is nothing but Anger
for a Reply, it is impossible not to conclude that there is never a good one to
give; so that the Objection remaining, without being fully confuted, there is
an absolute Bar put to any further Treaty.

There can be no Dealing where one side assumeth a Privilege to impose, so as
to make an Offer and not bear the Examination of it; this is giving Judgment,
not making a Bargain. Where it is called unmannerly to object, or criminal to
refuse, the surest way is for Men to stay where they are, rather than treat
upon such Disadvantages.

If it should happen to be in any Country where the governing Power should
allow Men Liberty of Conscience in the Choice of their Religion, it would be
strange to deny them Liberty of Speech in making a Bargain. Such a
Contradiction would be so discouraging, that they must be unreasonably
sanguine, who in that case can entertain the Hopes of a fair Equivalent.

XIII. An equal Bargain must not be a Mystery nor a Secret, The Purchaser or
Proposer is to tell directly and plainly, what it is he intends to give in
Exchange for that which he requires. It must be viewed and considered by the
other Party, that he may judge of the Value; for without knowing what it is, he
cannot determine whether he shall take or leave it. An Assertion in general,
that it shall be as good, or a better thing, is not in this a sufficient Excuse
for the Mistake of Dealing upon such uncertain Terms. In all things that are
dark, and not enough explained, Suspicion naturally follows: A Secret
generally implies a Defect or a Deceit; and if a false Light is an Objection,
no Light at all is yet a greater. To pretend to give a better thing, and to
refuse to show it, is very near saying, it is not so good a one; at least so it
will be taken in common construction. A Mystery is yet a more discouraging
thing to a Protestant; especially if the Proposition should come from a Papist;
it being one of his great Objections to that Church, that there are so many of
them Invisible and Impossible, which are so violently thrust upon their
Understandings; that they are overlaid with them. They think that rational
Creatures are to be convinced only by Reason, and that Reason must be visible
and freely exposed; else they will think themselves used with Contempt, instead
of Equality, and will never allow such a suspected Secrecy to be a fit Preface
to a real Equivalent.

XIV. In Matters of Contract, not only the present Value, but the Contingenoies
and Consequences, as far as they can be fairly supposed, are to be considered.
For Example, if there should be a Possibility, that one of the Parties may be
ruined by Accepting, and the other only disappointed by his Refusing; the
Consequences are so extremely unequal, that it is not imaginable a Man should
take that for an Equivalent, which has such a fatal Impossibility at the Heels
of it.

If it should happen in a public Case, that such a Proposal should come from
the minor Part of an Assembly or Nation, to the greater; it is very just, that
the Hazard of such a Possibility should more or less likely fall upon the
lesser Part, rather than upon the greater; for whose Sake and Advantage, things
are and must be calculated in all public Constitutions. Suppose in any mixed
Government, the chief Magistrate should propose upon a Condition, in the
Senate, Diet, or other Supreme Assembly, either to Enact or Abrocate one or
more Laws, by which a Possibility might be let in of destroying their Religion
and Property, which in other Language signifies no less than Soul and Body;
where could be the Equivalent in the Case, not only for the real Loss, but even
for the Fear of losing them? Men can fall no lower than to lose all, and if
losing all destroys them, the venturing all must fright them.

In an Instance when Men are secure, that how far soever they may be over run
by Violence, yet they can never be undone by Law, except they give their
Assistance to make it possible; tho it should neither be likely, nor intended,
still the Consequence which may happen is too big for any present thing to make
amends for it. Whilst the Word Possible remains, it must forbid the Bargain.
Wherever it falls out therefore, that in an Example of a public Nature,
the Changing, Enacting, or Repealing a Law, may naturally tend to the
Misplacing the Legislative Power in the Hands of those who have a separate
Interest from the Body of a People, there can be no Treating, till it is
demonstrably made out, that such a Consequence shall be absolutely impossible:
for if that shall be denied by those who make the Proposal, if it is because
they cannot do it, the Motion at first was very unfair. If they can and will
not, it would be yet less reasonable to expect that such partial Dealers would
ever give an Equivalent fit to be accepted.

XV. It is necessary in all Dealing to be assured, in the first place, that the
Party proposing is in a Condition to make good his Offer; that he is neither
under any former Obligations or pretended Claims, which may render him
incapable of performing it; else he is so far in the Condition of a Minor, that
whatever he disposes by Sale or Exchange, may be afterward resumed, and the
Contract become void, being originally defective, for want of sufficient legal
Power in him that made it.

In the Case of a strict Settlement, where the Party is only Tenant for Life,
there is no possibility of treating with one under such Fetters; no Purchase or
Exchange of Lands, or any thing else can be good, where there is such an
Incapacity of making out a Title; the Interest vested in him being so limited,
that he can do little more than pronounce the Words of a Contract, he can by no
means perform the Effect of it.

In more public Instances, the Impossibility is yet more express; as suppose
in any Kingdom, where the People have so much Liberty left them, as that they
may make Contracts with the Crown, there should be some peculiar Rights claimed
to be so fixed to the Royal Function, that no King for the time being could
have Power to part with them, being so fundamentally tied to the Office, that
they can never be separated. Such Rights can upon no occasion be received in
Exchange for any thing the Crown may desire from the People: That can never be
taken in Payment, which cannot lawfully be given, so that if they should part
with that which is required upon those Terms, it must be a Gift, it cannot be a
Bargain.

There is not in the whole Dictionary a more untractable Word than Inherent,
and less to be reconciled to the Word Equivalent.

The Party that will contract in spite of such a Claim, is content to take
what is impossible to grant, and if he complains of his Disappointment, he
neither can have Remedy, nor deserves it.

If a Right so claimed happens to be of so comprehensive a Nature, as that by
a clear Inference it may extend to every thing else, as well as to the
particular Matter in question, as often as the Supreme Magistrate shall be so
disposed, there can in that case be no Treating with a Prerogative that
swalloweth all the Right the People can pretend to; and if they have no Right
to any thing of which they are possessed, it is a Jest and not a Bargain, to
observe any Formality in parting with it.

A Claim may be so stated, that by the Power and Advantage of Interpreting, it
shall have such a murdering Eye, that if it looks upon a Law, like a
Basilisk, it shall strike it dead: Where is the Possibility of Treating, where
such a Right is assumed? Nay, let it be supposed, that such a Claim is not well
founded in Law, and that upon a free Disquisition it could not be made out; yet
even in this Case, none that are well advised, will conclude a Bargain till it
is fully stated and cleared, or indeed, so much as engage in a Treaty, till by
way of preliminary all possibility shall be removed of any Trouble or Dispute.

XVI. There is a collateral Circumstance in making a Contract, which yet
deserves to be considered, as much as any thing that belongs to it; and that
is the Character and Figure of the Parties contracting; if they treat only by
themselves, and if by others, the Qualifications of the Instruments they employ.

The Proposer especially, must not be so low, as to want Credit, or so raised,
as to carry him above the Reach of ordinary Dealing. In the first, There is
Scandal, in the other, Danger. There is no Rule without some Exception, but
generally speaking, the Means should be suited to the End; and since all Men
who treat, pretend an equal Bargain, it is desirable that there may be Equality
in the Persons, as well as in the Thing.

The Manner of doing things has such an Influence upon the Matter, that Men
may guess at the End by the Instruments that are used to obtain it, who are a
very good Direction how far to rely upon, or suspect the Sincerity of that
which is proposed. An Absurdity in the way of carrying on a Treaty in any one
Circumstance, if it is very gross, is enough to persuade a thinking Man to
break off, and take warning from such an ill Appearance. Some things are so
glaring, that it is impossible to see, and consequently not to suspect them; as
suppose in a private Case there should be a Treaty of Marriage between two
Honorable Families, and the proposing side should think fit to send a Woman
that had been Carted to persuade the young Lady to an Approbation and Consent;
the unfitness of the Messenger must naturally dispose the other Party to
distrust the Message, and to resist the Temptation of the best Match that could
be offered, when conveyed by that Hand, and ushered in by such a doscouraging
Preluminary.

In a public Instance, the Suspicion arising from unfit Mediators, still
grows more reasonable in Proportion as the Consequence is much greater of
being deceived. If a Jew should be employed to solicit all sorts of Christians
to unite and agree; the Contrariety of his Profession, would not allow Men to
stay till they heard his Arguments, they would conclude from his Religion, that
either the Man himself was mad, or that he thought those to be so, whom he had
the Impudence to endeavor to persuade.

Or suppose an Adamite should be very sollicitous and active, in all places,
and with all sorts of Persons, to settle the Church of England in particular,
and a fair Liberty of Conscience for all Dissenters; though nothing in the
World has more to be said for it than naked Truth, yet if such a Man should run
up and down without Clothes, let his Arguments be never so good, or his
Commission never so Authentic, his Figure would be such a Contradiction to his
Business, that how serious soever that might be in it self, his Interposition
would make a Jest of it.

Though it should not go so far as this, yet if Men have Contrarieties in their
Way of Living, not to be reconciled; as if they should pretend infinite Zeal
for Liberty, and at that time be in great Favor, and employed by those who
will not endure it.

If they are effectually singular, and conform to the Generality of the World
in no one thing, but in playing the Knave.

If Demonstration is a familiar Word with them, most especially where the thing
is impossible.

If they quote Authority to supply their Want of Sense, and justify the Value
of their Arguments, not by Reason, but by their being paid for them (in which,
by the way, those who pay them have probably a very melancholy Equivalent.) If
they brandish a Prince's Word like a Sword in a Crowd, to make way for their
own Impertinence; and in dispute, as Criminals formerly fled to the Statue of
the Prince for Sanctuary; if they should now, when baffled, creep under the
Protection of a Kings Name, where out of respect they are no farther to be
pursued.

In these Cases, Though the Propositions should be really good, they will be
corrupted by passing through such Conduits, and it would be a sufficient
Mistake to enter into a Treaty; but it would be little less than Madness from
such Hands to expect an Equivalent.

XVII. Having touched upon these Particulars as necessary in order to the
stating the Nature of an equal Bargain, and the Circumstances belonging to it,
let it now be examined in two or three Instances, what things are not to be
admitted by way of Contract, to pass under the Name of an Equivalent.

First, Though it will be allowed, that in the general Corruption of Mankind,
which will not admit Justice alone to be a sufficient Tie to make good a
Contract, that a Punishment added for the Breach of it, is a fitting, or rather
a necessary Circumstance; yet it does not follow, that in all Cases, a great
Penalty upon the Party offending, is an absolute and entire Security. It must
be considered in every particular Case, how far the Circumstances may
rationally lead a Man to rely more or less upon it.

In a private Instance, the Penalty inflicted upon the Breach of Contract must
be, First, such a one as the Party injured can enforce, and Secondly, such a
one as he will enforce, when it is in his Power.

If the Offending Party is in a capacity of hindering the other from bringing
the Vengeance of the Law upon him. If he has Strength or Privilege sufficient
to overruled the Letter of the Contract; in that Case a Penalty is but a Word,
there is no Consequence belonging to it. Secondly, The Forfeiture or Punishment
must be such as the Man aggrieved will take: For Example, if upon a Bargain,
one of the Parties shall stipulate to subject himself, in case of his Failure
to have his Ears cut, or his Nose slit by the other, with Security given, that
he shall not be prosecuted for executing this part of the Agreement, the
Penalty is heavy enough to discourage a Man from breaking his Contract; but on
the other side it is of such a kind, that the other, how much soever he may be
provoked, will not in cold Blood care to inflict it. Such an extravagant Clause
would seem to be made only for Show and Sound, and no Man would think himself
safer by a thing which one way or other is sure to prove ineffectual.

In a public Case, Suppose a Government so constituted, that a Law may be made
in the Nature of a Bargain, it is in it self no more than a dead Letter, the
Life is given to it by the Execution of what it contains; so that let it in
its self be never so perfect, it depends upon those who are entrusted with
seeing it observed.

If it is in any Country where the Chief Magistrate chooses the Judges, and the
Judges interpret the Laws; a Penalty in any one particular Law can have no
effect but what is precarious. It may have a loud Voice to threaten, but it has
not an Hand to give a Blow; for as long as the Governing Power is in possession
of this Prerogative, let who will choose the Meat, if they choose the Cooks, it
is they that will give the Taste to it. So that it is clear that the Rigor of a
Penalty will not in all cases fix a Bargain, neither is it universally a true
Position, that the Increase of Punishment for the Breach of a new Law, is an
Equivalent for the Consent to part with an old one.

XVIII. In most Bargains there is a Reference to the time to come, which is
therefore to be considered, as well as that which comes within the Compass of
the present Valuation.

Where the Party contracting has not a full Power to dispose what belongs on
him or them in Reversion, who shall succeed after him in his Right; he cannot
make any part of what is so limited to be the Condition of the Contract.
Further he cannot enjoin the Heir or Successor to forbear the Exercise of any
Right that is inherent to him, as he is a Man: neither can he restrain him
without his own Consent, from doing any Act, which in it self is lawful, and
liable to no Objection. For Example, a Father cannot stipulate with any other
Man, that in Consideration of such a thing done, or to be done, his Son shall
never Marry; because Marriage is an Institution established by the Laws of God
and Man, and therefore no Body can be so restrained by any Power from doing
such an Act, when he thinks fit, being warranted by a Authority that is not
to be controuled.

XIX. Now as there are Rights inherent in Men's Persons in their single
Capasities, there are Rights as much fixed to the Body Politic, which is a
Creature that never dies. For instance, There can be no Government without a
Supreme Power, that Power is not always in the same Hands, it is in different
Shapes and Dresses, but still where ever it is Lodged, it must be unlimited: It
has ^^^risdiction over every thing else; but it cannot have it above it self.
Supreme Power can be no more limited than Infinity can be measured; because it
cease^h to be the thing, its very being is dissolved, when any bounds can be
put to it.

Where this Supreme Power is mixed, or divided, the shape only differs, the
Argument is still the same.

The present State of Venice cannot restrain those who succeed them in the same
power, from having an entire and unlimited Sovereignty; they may indeed make
present Laws which shall retrench their present Power, if they are so disposed,
and those Laws if not repealed by the same Authority that enacted them, are to
be observed by the succeeding Senate till they think fit to abrogate them, and
no longer; for if the Supreme Power shall still reside in the Senate, perhaps
composed of other Men, or of other minds (which will be sufficient) the
necessary consequence is, that one Senate must have as much right to alter such
a Law, as another could have to make it.

XX. Suppose the Supreme Power in any State should make a Law, to enjoin all
subsequent Lawmakers to take an Oath never to alter it, it would produce these
following Absurdities.

First, All Supreme Power being instituted to promote the safety and benefit,
and to prevent the prejudice and danger which may fall upon those who live
under the protection of it; the consequence of such an Oath would be, that all
Men who are so trusted, shall take God to witness, that such a Law once made,
being judged at the time to be advantageous for the public, though afterward
by the vicissitude of times, or the variety of accidents or interests, it
should plainly appear to them to be destructive, they will suffer it to have
its course, and will never repeal it.

Secondly, If there could in any Nation be found a set of Men, who having a
part in the Supreme Legislative Power, should as much as in them lies, betray
their Country by such a criminal engagement, so directly opposite to the nature
of their Power, and to the Trust reposed in them. If these Men have their power
only for life, when they are dead such an Oath can operate no farther; and
though that would be too long a Lease for the Life of such a Monster as an Oath
so composed, yet it must then certainly give up the Ghost. It could Bind none
but the first makers of it, another generation would never be tied up by it.

Thirdly, In those Countries where the Supreme Assemblies are not constant
standing Courts, but called together upon occasions, and composed of such as
the People choose for that time only, with a Trust and Character that remains
no longer with them than that Assembly is regularly dissolved; such an Oath
taken by the Members of a Senate, Diet, or other Assembly so chosen, can have
very little effect, because at the next meeting there may be quite another set
of Men who will be under no Obligation of that kind. The Eternity intended to
that Law by those that made it, will be cut off by new Men who shall succeed
them in their power, if they have a differing Taste, or another Interest.

XXI. To put it yet further, Suppose a Clause in such a Law, that it shall be
criminal in the last degree for any Man chosen in a subsequent Assembly, to
propose the repealing it; and since nothing can be Enacted which is not yet
first proposed, by this means it seems as if a Law might be created which
should never die But let this be Examined.

First, Such a Clause would be so destructive to the being of such a
Constitution, as that it would be as reasonable to say, that a King had right
to give or sell his Kingdom to a Foreign Prince, as that any number of Men who
are entrusted with the Supreme Power, or any part of it, should have a right to
impose such shackles upon the Liberty of those who are to succeed them in the
same Trust. The ground of that Trust is, that every Man who is chosen into such
an Assembly, is to do all that in him lies for the good of those who chose
him. The English of such a Clause would be, that he is not to do his best for
those that chose him, because though he should be convinced that it might be
very fatal to continue that Law, and therefore very necessary to repeal it, yet
he must not repeal it, because it is made a Crime, and attended with a Penalty.

But secondly, to show the emptiness as well as injustice of such a Clause, it
is clear, that although such an Invasion of Right should be imposed, it will
never be obeyed: There will only be Deformity in the Monster, it will neither
sting nor bite. Such Lawgivers would only have the honor of attempting a
contradiction which can never have any success; for as such a Law in it self
would be a madness, so the Penalty would be a Jest; which may be thus made out.

XXII. A Law that carries in it self Reason enough to support it, is so far
from wanting the protection of such a Clause, or from needing to take such an
extraordinary receipt for long Life, that the admitting it must certainly be
the likeliest and the shortest way to destroy it; such a Clause in a Law must
imply an opinion that the greatest part of mankind is against it, since it is
impossible such an exorbitance should be done for its own sake; the end of it
must be to force Men by a Penalty, to that which they could not be persuaded
to, whilst their Reason is left at Liberty. This Position being granted, which
I think can hardly be denied, put the case that a Law should be made with this
imaginary Clause of Immortality, after which another Assembly is chosen, and if
the majority of the Electors shall be against this Law, the greater part of the
Elected must be so too, if the choice is fair and regular; which must be
presumed, since the supposition of the contrary is not to come within this
Argument. When these Men shall meet, the Majority will be visible beforehand
of those who are against such a Law, so that there will be no hazard to any
single Man in proposing the Repeal of it, when he cannot be punished but by the
Majority, and he has such a kind of assurance as comes near a Demonstration,
that the greater Number will be of his mind, and consequently, that for their
own s^kes they will secure him from any danger.

For these Reasons, wherever in order to the making a Bargain, a Proposition
is advanced to make a New Law, which is to tie up those who neither can nor
will be bound by it, it may be a good J^st, but it will never be a good
Equivalent.

XXIII. In the last place, let it be examined how far a Promise ought to be
taken for a Sectirity in a Bargain.

There is a great variety of Methods for the Security of those that deal,
according to their Dispssitions and Interests; some are binding, others
inducing circumstances, and are to be so distinguished.

First, Ready Payment is without exception, so of that there can be no dispute;
in default of that, the good Opinion M^n may have of one another, is a great
ingredient to supply the want of immediate Performances. Where the Trust is
grounded upon Inclination only, the Generosity is not always returned; but
where i^ sprinketh from a long Experience it is a better foundation, and yet
that is not always secure. In ordinary dealing, one Promise may be an
Equivalent to another, but it is not so for a thing actually granted or
conveyed; especially if the thing required in exchange for it, is of great
value, either in it self or in its consequences. A bare Promise as a sangle
Security in such a case is not an equal proposal; if it is offered by way of
Addition, it generally gives cause to doubt the Title is crazy, where so
slender a thing is brought in to be a supplement.

XXIV. The Earnest of making good a Promise, must be such a behavior proceeding
as may ^^^urage the party to whom it is made to depend upon it: Where instead
of that, there says been want of kindness, and which is worse, an Invasion of
Right, a Promise has no persuading force; and till the Objection to such a
proceeding is forgotten (which can only be the work of time) and the skin is a
little grown over the tender part, the wound must not be touched. There must be
some Intermission at least to abate the smart of unkind usage, or else a
Promise in the Eye of the party injured is so far from strentghning a Security,
that it raises more doubts, and gives more justifiable cause to suspect it.

A Word is not like a Bone, that being broken and well set again, is said to be
sometimes stronget in that very part: It is far from being so in a Word given
and not made good. Every single Act either weakeneth or improveth our Credit
with other Men; and as an Habit of being just to our Word will confirm, so an
Habit of too freely dispensing with it must necessarily destroy it. A Promise
has its effect to persuade a man to lay some weight upon it, where the
Promises has not only the power, but may reasonably be supposed to have the
will of performing it; and further, that there be no visible Interest of the
party promising to excuse himself from it, or to evade it.

All Obligations are comparative, and where they seem to be opposite, or
between the greater and the Lesser, which of them ought to have precedence in
all respects every man is apt to be his own Judge.

XXV. If it should fall out that the Promiser with full intent at the time to
perform, might by the interposition of new Arguments, or differing Advice think
himself obliged to turn the matter of Conscience on the other side, and should
look upon it to be much a greater fault to keep his word than to break it; such
a Belief will untye the strictest Promise that can be made, and though the
Party thus absolving himself should do it without the mixture or temptation of
prita^e Interest, being moved to it merely by his Conscience, as then informed;
yet how far soever that might diminish the Fault in him, it would in no degree
lessen the inconveniences to the party who is disappointed, by the breach of an
engagement upon which he relied.

XXVI. A Promise is to be understood in the plain and natural sense of the
words, and to be fare not in his who made it, if it was given as part of a
Bargain. That would be like giving a Man power to raise the value of his Money
in the payment of his Debt, by which though he paid but half or less, he might
pretend according to the letter to have made good the contract.

The power of interpreting a Promise entirely takes away the virtue of it. A
Merchant who should once assume that privilege, would save himself the trouble
of making any more Bargains.

It is still worse if this Jurisdiction over a Man's Promise, should be lodged
in hands that have Power to support such an extraordinary Claim; and if in
other Cases, for bearing to deal upon these terms is advisable, in this it
becomes absolutely necessary.

XXVII. There must in all respects be a full liberty to claim a Promise, to
make it reasonable to take it in any part of payment; else it would be like
agreeing for a Rent, and at the same time making it Criminal to demand it.

A superiority of Dignity or Power in the Party promising, makes it a more
tender thing for the other party to treat upon that security. The first makes
it a nice thing to claim, the latter makes it a difficult thing to obtain.

In some cases, a Promise is in the nature of a Covenant, and then between
equal parties the breach of it will bear a Suit; but where the greatness of the
Promiser is very much raised above the Level of equality, there is no
Forfeiture to be taken. It is so far from the party grieved his being able to
sue or recover Damages, that he will not be allowed to explain or expostulate,
and instead of his being relieved against the breach of Promise, he will run
the hazard of being punished for breach of Good Manners. Such a difficulty is
putting all or part of the Payment in the Fire, where Men must burn their
Fingers before they can come at it.

That cannot properly be called good payment, which the party to whom it is
due, may not receive with ease and safety. It was a King's Brother of England
who refused to lend the Pope money, for this reason, That he would never take
the Bond of one, upon whom he could not distrain.

The Argument is still stronger against the validity of a Promise, when the
Contract is made between a Prince and a Subject. The very offering a King's
Word in Mortgage, is rather a threatening in case of Refusal, than an inducing
Argument to accept it; it is unfair at first, and by that gives greater cause
to be cautious, especially if a thing of that value and dignity as a King's
Word ought to be, should be put into the hands of State-brokers to strike up a
Bargain with it.

XXVIII. When God Almighty makes Coveant with Mankind, His promise is a
sufficient Security, notwithstanding his Superiority and his power; because
first, he can neither err nor do injustice. It is the only Exception to his
Omnipotence, that by the Perfection of his being he is incapacitated to do
wrong. Secondly, at the instant of His promise, by the extent of his Foresight
which cannot fail, there is no room left for the possibility of any thing to
intervene, which might change his mind. Lastly, he is above the receiving
either Benefit or Inconvenience, and therefore can have no Interest or
Temptation to vary from his Word, when once he has granted it.

Now though Princes are God's Vicegerents, yet their Commission not being so
large as that these Qualifications are devolved to them, it is quite another
case, and since the offering a Security implies it to be examined by the party
to whom it is proposed, it must not be taken ill that Objections are made to
it, even though the Prince himself should be the immediate Proposer.

Let a familiar Case be put; Suppose a Prince, tempted by a Passion to strong
for him to resist, should descend, so as to promise Marriage to one of his
Subjects, and as Men are naturally in great haste upon such occasions, should
press to take possession before the necessary Forms could be complied with,
would the poor Ladies Scruple be called Criminal for not taking the Security of
the Royal Word? Or would her Allegiance be tainted by her resisting the sacred
Person of her Sovereign, because he was impatient of delay? Courtesy in this
case might persuade her to accept it, if she was so disposed, but sure the just
exercise of Power can never claim it.

XXIX. There is one Case where it is more particularly a Duty to use very great
occasion in accepting the security of a Promise, and that is, when Men are
Authorized and trusted by others to act for them. This puts them under much
greater restraints, than those who are at liberty to treat for themselves It is
lawful, though it is not prudent for any man make an ill Bargain for himself,
but it is neither the one nor the other, where the party contracting treats
on behalf of another, by whom he is entrusted. Men who will unwarily accept an
ill security, if it is for themselves, forfeit their own discretion, and
undergo the Penalty, but they are not responsible to any body else. They lie
under the Mortification and the loss of committing the error, by which though
they may expose their Judgment to some censure, yet their Morality suffers no
reproach by it.

But those who are deputed by others to treat for them, upon terms of best
advantage, though the Considence placed in them should prevent the putting any
limits to their power in their Commission, yet the Condition implied, if not
expressed, is, that the Persons so trusted shall neither make an ill Bargain,
nor accept a slight Security.

The Obligation is yet more binding when the Trust is of a Public Nature. The
aggravation of disappointing a Body of Men that rely upon them, carries the
Fault as high as it can go; and perhaps no Crime of any kind can out do such a
deliberate breach of Trust, or would more justly make Men forfeit the
protection of humane Society.

XXX. I will add one thing more upon this Head, which is, that it is not always
a true Preposition, that it is safe to rely upon a promise, if at the time of
making it, it is the Interest of the Promiser to make it good. This, though
many times it is a good Inducement, yet i^ has these Exceptions to it. First,
if the proposer has at other times gone plainly against his Visible Interest,
the Argument will turn the other way, and his former Mistakes are so many
Warnings to others, not to come within the danger any more: let the Inducements
to those Mistakes be never so great and generous, that does not alter the
Nature, they are Mistakes still.

Interest is an uncertain thing, It goes and comes, and varieth according to
times and circumstances; as good build upon a Quick-sand, as upon a presumption
that Interest shall not alter. Where are the Men so distinguished from the rest
of Mankind, that it is impossible for them to mistake their Interest? Who are
they that have such an Exemption from human frailty, as that it can never
happen to them not to see their Interest for want of Understanding, or not to
leap over it by excess of Zeal.

Above all, Princes are most liable to mistake; not out of any defect in their
Nature, which might put them under such an unfortunate distinction; quite
contrary, the blood they derive from great and wise Ancestors, does rather
distingush them on the better side; besides that their great Character and
Office of Governing, gives a noble Exercise to their Reason, which can very
hardly fail to raise and improve it. But there is one Circumstance annexed to
their Glorious Calling, which in this Respect is sufficient to outweigh all
those Advantages; it is that Mankind, divided in most things else, agree in
this, to conspire in their Endeavors to deceive and mislead them, which makes
it above the Power of human Understanding, to be so exactly guarded, as never
to admit a Surprise, and the highest Applause that could ever yet be given to
the greatest Men that ever wore a Crown, is that they were no oftener deceived.

Thus I have ventured to lay down my Thoughts of the Nature of a Bargain, and
the due Circumstances belonging to an Equivalent, and will now conclude with
this short Word. Where Distrusting may be the Cause of provoking Anger, and
Trusting may be the Cause of bringing Ruin, the Choice is too easy to need
the being explained.

A LETTER From a Gentleman in the City, To his Friend in the Country.
Containing his Reasons for not Reading the Declaration.
SIR,
I Do not wonder at your Concern for finding an Order of Council published in
the Gazette for Reading the King's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience in all
Churches and Chapels in this Kingdom. You desire to know my Thoughts about it,
and I shall freely tell them; for this is not a time to be reserved. Our
Enemies who have given our Gracious King this Counsel against us, have taken
the most effectual way, not only to ruin us, but to make us appear the
Instruments of our own Ruin, that what Course soever we take, we shall be
undone; and one side or other will conclude that we have undone our selves, and
fall like Fools.

To lose our Livings and Preferments, nay, our Liberties and our Lives in a
plain and direct Opposition to Popery, as suppose for refusing to read Mass in
our Churches, or to swear to the Trent Creed, is an honorable way of falling,
and has the Divine Comforts of Suffering for Christ and his Religion; and I
hope there is none of us but can cheerfully submit to the Will of God in it.
But this is not our present Case; to read the Declaration, is not to read the
Mass, nor to profess the Romish Faith; and therefore, some will judge that
there is no hurt in Reading it, and that to suffer for such a Refusul, is not
to fall like Confessors, but to suffer as Criminals for disobeying the Lawful
Commands of our Prince; but yet we judge, and we have the concurring Opinions
of all the Nobility and Gertry with us, who have already suffered in this
Cause, that to take away the Test and Penal Laws at this time, is but one step
from the introducing of Popery; and therefore to read such a Declaration in our
Churches, though it do not immediately bring Popery in, yet it sets open our
Church Doors for it, and then it will take its own time to enter: So that
should we comply with this Order, all good Protestants would despise and hate
us, and men we may be easily crushed, and shall soon fall with great Dishonor,
and without any Pity. This is the Difficulty of our Case; we shall be censured
on both sides, but with this Difference: We shall fall a little sooner by not
Reading the Declaration, if our Gracious Prince resent this as an Act of an
obstinate and peevish, or factious Disobedience, as our Enemies will be sure to
represent it to him; We shall as certainly fall, and not long after, if we do
read it, and then we shall fall unpitied and despised, and it may be with the
Curses of the Nation, whom we have ruined by our Compliance; and this is the
way never to rise more: And may I suffer all that can be suffered in this
World, rather than contribute to the sinal Ruin of the best Church in the
World.

Let us then examine this Matter impartially, as those who have no mind either
to ruin themselves, or to ruin the Church: I suppose no Minister of the
Church of England can give his Consent to the Declaration. Let us then
consider, whether Reading the Declaration in our Churches be not an
Interpretative Consent, and will not with great Reason be interpreted to be so:
For,

First, By our Law all Ministerial Officers are accountable for their Actions:
The Authority of Superiors, though of the King himself, cannot justify
inferior Officers, much less the Ministers of State, if they should execute any
illegal Commands; which shows that our Law does not look upon the Ministers of
Church or State to be mere Machines and Tools, to be managed wholly by the Will
of Superiors, without exercising any Act of Judgment or Reason themselves; for
then inferior Ministers were no more punishable, than the Horses are, which
draw an innocent Man to Tyburn: and if inferior Ministers are punishable, then
our Laws suppose that what we do in obedience to Superiors, we make our own Act
by doing it, and I suppose that signifies our Consent, in the Eye of the Law,
to what we do. It is a Maxim in our Law, That the King can do no Wrong; and
therefore if any Wrong be done, the Crime and Guilt is the Ministers who does
it: for the Laws are the King's public Will, and therefore he is never
supposed to command any thing contrary to Law; nor is any Minister, who does an
illegal Action, allowed to pretend the King's Command and Authority for it: and
yet this is the only Reason I know, why we must not obey a Prince against the
Laws of the Land, or the Laws of God, because what we do, let the Authority be
what it will that commands it, becomes our own Act, and we are responsible for
it; and then as I observed before, it must imply our own Consent.

Secondly, The Ministers of Religion have a greater Tie and Obligation than
this, because they have the Care and Conduct of Men's Souls, and therefore are
bound to take Care that what they publish in their Churches, be neither
contrary to the Laws of the Land, nor to the Good of the Church: For the
Ministers of Religion are not looked upon as Common Cryers, but what they Read,
they are supposed to recommend too, though they do no more than Read it; and
therefore to read any thing in the Church, which I do not consent to and
approve, nay, which I think prejudicial to Religion, and the Church of God, as
well as contrary to the Laws of the Land, is to misguide my People, and to
dissemble with God and Men; because it is presumed, that I neither do, nor
ought to read any thing in the Church, which I do not in some degree approve.
Indeed, let Men's private Opinions be what they will, in the Nature of the
thing, he that reads such a Declaration to his People, teaches them by it: For
is not Reading Teaching? Suppose then I do not consent to what I read, yet I
consent to Teach my People what I Read: and herein is the Evil of it; for it
may be it were no Fault to Consent to the Declaration; but if I consent to
Teach my People what I do not consent to my self, I am sure that is a great
one: And he who can distinguish between consenting to Read the Declaration, and
consenting to Teach the People by the Declaration, when Reading the Declaration
is teaching it, has a very subtle Distinguishing Conscience. Now if consenting
to Read the Declaration be a Consent to Teach it my People, then the natural
Interpretation of Reading the Declaration is, That he who Reads it in such a
solemn Teaching-manner, Approves it. If this be not so, I desire to know, why I
may not read an Homily for Transubstantiation, or Invocation of Saints, or the
Worship of Images, if the King sends me such good Catholic Homilies, and
commands me to read them? And thus we may instruct our People in all the Points
of Popery, and recommend it to them with all the Sophistry and Artificial
Infintrations, in Obedience to the King, with a very good Conscience, because
without our Consent: If it be said, this would be a Contradiction to the
Doctrine of our Church by Law established; so I take the Declaration to be: And
if we may read the Declaration contrary to Law, because it does not imply our
Consent to it; so we may Popish Homilies, for the bare Reading them will not
imply our Consent, no more than the Reading the Declaration does: But whether I
consent to the Doctrine or no, it is certain I consent to teach my People this
Doctrine; and it is to be considered, whether an honest Man cand do this.

Thirdly, I suppose no Man will doubt, but the King intends that our Reading
the Declaration should signify to the Nation, our Consent and Approbation of
it; for the Declaration does not want Publishing, for it is sufficiently known
already: but our Reading it in our Churches must serve instead of Addresses of
Thanks, which the Clergy generally refused, though it was only to Thank the
King for his Gracious Promises renewed to the Church of England, in His
Declaration, which was much more innocent, than to publish the Declaration it
self in our Churches. This would persuade one, that the King thinks our Reading
the Declaration, to signify our Consent, and that the People will think it to
be so. And he that can satisfy his (...), to do an Action without Consent,
which the Nature of the Thing, the Design, and intention of the Command, and
the Sense of the People expound to be a Consent, may, I think, as well satisfy
himself with Equivocations and mental Reservations.

There are two things to be answered to this, which must be considered.

1. That the People understand our Minds, and see that this is Matter of Force
upon us, and mere Obedience to the King. To which I answer,

1. Possibly the People do understand that the Matter of the Declaration is
against our Principles: But is this any Excuse, that we read that, and by
Reading, recommend that to them, which is against our own Consciences and
Judgments? Reading the Declaration would be no Fault at all, but our Duty, wh^^
the King commands it, did we approve of the Matter of it; but to consent to
teach our People such Doctrines as we think contrary to the Laws of God, or the
Laws of the Land, does not lessen, but aggravate the Fault, and the People must
be very good natured to think this an Excuse.

2. It is not likely that all the People will be of a Mind in this Matter, some
may excuse it, others, and those it may be the most, the best, and the wifest
Men, will condemn us for it, and then how shall we justify our selves against
their Censures? when the World will be divided in their Opinions, the plain way
is certainly the best, to do what we can justify our selves, and then let Men
judge as they please. No Men in England will be pleased with our Reading the
Declaration, but those who hope to make great Advantage of it against us, and
against our Church and Religion: others will severely condemn us for it, and
censure us as false to our Religion, and as Betrayers both of Church and State:
and besides that, it does not become a Minister of Religion, to do any thing,
which in the Opinion of the most charitable Men can only be excused; for what
needs an Excuse, is either a Fault, or looks very like one; besides this, I
say, I will not trust Men's Charity; those who have suffered themselves in this
Cause, will not excuse us for fear of suffering; those who are inclined to
excuse us now, will not do so when they consider the thing better, and come to
feel the ill Consequences of it: when our Enemies open their Eyes, and tell
them what our Reading the Declaration signified, which they will then tell us
we ought to have seen before, though they were not bound to see it; for we are
to guide and instruct them, not they us.

II. Others therefore think, that when we read the Declaration, we should
publicly profess, that it is not our own Judgment, but that we only Read it in
Obedience to the King, and then our Reading it cannot imply our Consent to it:
Now this is only Protestatio contra sactum, which all People will laugh at, and
scorn us for: for such a solemn Reading it in time of Divine Service, when all
Men ought to be most grave and serious, and far from dissembling with God or
Men, does in the Nature of the thing imply our Approbation; and should we
declare the contrary, when we read it, what shall we say to those who ask u^,
why then do you read it? But let those who have a mind to try this way, which,
for my part, I take to be a greater and more unjustifiable Provocation of the
King, than not to read it; and, I suppose those who do not read it, will be
thought plainer and honester Men, and will (...) as well as those who read it
and protest against it: and yet nothing less than an express Protestation
against it will salve this Matter; for only to say, they read it merely in
Obedience to the King, does not express their Dissent: It signifies indeed,
that they would not have read it, if the King had not commanded it; but these
Words do not signify, that they disapprove of the Declaration, when their
Reading it, though only in Obedience to the King, signifies their Approbation
of it as much as Actions can signify a Consent: let us call to mind how it
fared with those in King Charles the First's Reign, who read the Book of
Sports, as it was called, and then preached against it.

To return then to our Arguments; if Reading the Declaration in our Churches be
in the Nature of the Action, in the Intention of the Command, in the Opinion of
the People, an interpretative Consent to it, I think my self bound in
Conscience not to read it, because I am bound in Conscience not to approve it:

It is against the Constitution of the Church of England, which is established
by Law, and to which I have subscribed, and therefore am bound in Conscience to
Teach nothing contrary to it, while this Obligation lasts.

It is to teach an unlimit^d and universal Toleration, which the Parliament in
72. Declared illegal, and which has been condemned by the Christian Church in
all Ages:

It is to teach my People, that they need never come to Church more, but have
my free Leave, as they have the King's, to go to a Conventicle or Mass.

It is to teach the Dispencing Power, which alters, what has been formerly
thought the whole Constitution of this Church and Kingdom, which we dare not
do, till we have the Authority of Parliament for it.

It is to recommend to our People, the Choice of such Persons to sit in
Parliament, as shall take away the Test and Penal Laws, which most of the
Nobility and Gentry of the Nation have declared their Judgment against.

It is to condemn all those great and worthy Patriots of their Country, who
forfeited the dearest thing in the World to them, next a good Conscience, viz.
The Favor of their Prince, and a great many honorable and profitable
Employments with it, rather than consent to that Proposal of taking away the
Test and Penal Paws, which they apprehend destructive to the Church of England
and the Protestant Religion; and he who can in Conscience do all this, I think
need scruple nothing.

For let us consider further, what the Effects and Consequences of our Reading
the Declaration are likely to be, and I think they are Matter of Conscience
too, when they are evident and apparent.

This will certainly render our Persons and Ministry infinitely contemptible,
which is against that Apostolical Canon, Let no Man despise thee, Titus 2.15.
That is, so to behave himself in his Ministereal Office, as not to fall under
Contempt; and therefore this obliges the Conscience, not to make our selves
ridiculous, nor to render our Ministry, our Counsels, Exhortations, Preaching,
Writing, of no Effect, which is a thousand times worse than being silenced: Our
Sufferings will preach more effectually to the People, when we cannot speak to
them: but he who for Fear or Cowardice, or the Love of this World, betrays his
Church and Religion by undue Compliances, and will certainly be thought to do
so, may continue to Preach, but to no purpose; and when we have rendered our
selves ridiculous and contemptible, we shall then quickly fall, and fall
unpitied.

There is nothing will so effectually tend to the final Ruin of the Church of
England, because our Reading the Declaration will discourage, or provoke, or
misguide all the Friends the Church of England has: can we blame any Man for
not preserving the Laws and the Religion of our Church and Nation, when we our
selves will venture nothing for it? Can we blame any Man for consenting to
Repeal the Test and Penal Laws, when we recommend it to them by Reading the
Declaration? Have we not reason to expect, that the Nobility and Gentry, who
have already suffered in this Cause, when they hear themselves condemned for it
in all the Churches of England, will think it time to mend such a Fault, and
reconcile themselves to their Prince? and if our Church fall this way, is there
any reason to expect that it should ever rise again? These Consequences are
almost as evident as Demonstrations, and let it be what it will in it self,
which I foresee will destroy the Church of England and the Protestant Religion
and Interest, I think I ought to make as much Conscience of doing it, as of
doing the most immortal Action in Nature

To say that these mischievous Consequences are not absolutely necessary, and
therefore do not affect the Conscience, because we are not certain they will
follow, is a very mean Objection; Moral Actions indeed have not such necessary
Consequences, as natural Causes have necessary Effects, because no moral Causes
act necessarily: Reading the Declaration, will not as necessarily destroy the
Church of England, as Fire burns Wood, but if the Consequence be plain and
evident, the most likely thing that can happen, if it be unreasonable to expect
any other, if it be what is plainly intended and designed, either I must never
have any regard to Moral Consequences of my Actions, or if ever they are to be
considered, they are in this case.

Why are the Nobility and Gentry so extremely averse to the Repeal of the Test
and Penal Laws? Why do they forfeit the King's Favor, and their Honorable
Stations, rather than comply with it? If you say that this tends to destroy the
Church of England and the Protestant Religion, I ask whether this be the
necessary consequence of it? whether the King cannot keep his promise to the
Church of England if the Test and Penal Laws be Repealed? We cannot say, but
this may be: And yet the Nation does not think fit to try it; and we commend
those great men who deny it; and if the same questions were put to us, we think
we ought in Conscience to deny them our selves: And are there not as high
probabilities, that our Reading the Declaration will promote the Repeal of the
Test and Penal Laws, as that such a Repeal will ruin our Constitution, and
bring in Popery upon us? Is it not as probable, that such a compliance in us,
will disoblige all the Nobility and Gentry, who have hitherto been firm to us,
as that when the power of the Nation is put into Popish Hands, by the Repeal of
such Tests and Laws, the Priests and Jesuirs may find some salvo for the King's
Conscience, and persuade him to forget his Promise to the Church of England?
and if the probable ill consequences of Repealing the Test and Penal Laws, be a
good reason not to comply with it, I cannot see but that the as probable ill
consequences of Reading the Declaration, is as good a reason not to read it.

The most material Objection is, that the Dissenters, whom we ought not to
provoke, will expound our not Reading it, to be the effect of a persecuting
Spirit: Now I wonder Men should lay any weight on this, who will not allow the
most probable consequences of our Actions, to have any influence upon
Conscience: For if we must compare consequences, to disoblige all the Nobility
and Gentry by reading it, is likely to be much more fatal, than to anger the
Diffenters, and it is more likely, and there is much more reason for it, that
one should be offended than the other: For the Dissenters who are wise and
considering, are sensible of the snare themselves, and though they desire Ease
and Liberty, they are not willing to have it with such apparent hazard of
Church and State: I am sure that though we were never so desirous that they might
have their Liberty, (and when there is opportunity of showing our inclinations
without danger, they may find that we are nations without danger, they may find
that we are not such Persecutors as we are represented) yet we cannot consent
that they should have it this way, which they will find the dearest Liberty
that ever was granted.

This Sir, is our Case in short, the Difficulties are great on both sides, and
therefore now if ever we ought to besiege Heaven with our Prayers for Wisdom,
and Counsel, and Courage; that God would protect his Church and Reformed
Christianity, against all the devices of their Enemies: Which is the daily and
hearty Prayer of,

SIR, Your Friend and Brother.
May 22. 1^88. POSTSCRIPT.
I Have just now seen H. Care's Paper called, The Public Occurrences, which
came out to day, and cannot but set you right as to his News about the Reading
of the Declaration on Sunday: He tells you, That several Divines of the Church
of England, in and about this City, eminent for their Piety and Moderation, did
yesterday Read his Majesty's late Declaration in their Churches, according to
the Order in that behalf; but some (to the great surprise of their Parishoners)
were pleased to decline it. You in the Country are from this Account to
believe, that it was Read here by the generality of the Clergy, and by the
eminent Men among them: But I can, and do assure you, that this is one of the
most impudent Lies that ever was Printed: For as to this City which has above
a Hundred Parishes in it, it was Read only in Four or Five Churches, all the
rest, and best of the Clergy refusing it every where. I will spare their Names
who read it; but should I mention them, it would make you, who knows this City,
a little heartily to deride H. C's Account of them. And for the Surprise he
talks of, the contrary of it is so true, that in Woodstreet, where it was read
by one Dr. M. the People generally went out of the Church. This I tell you,
that you may be provided for the future against such an Impudent Liar, who, for
Bread, (...) and put about the Nation, the falfest of things.

I am Yours.



AN ANSWER To the City Minister's LETTER, from his Country Friend.
SIR,
IT is not for me now to acknowledge my private Debt to you for the favor of
your Letter, since the public is as much concerned in it as I: and if I may
judge of all by the compass of my Neighborhood and Acquaintance, I may assure
you, they are not insensible of your Obligation, though they are ignorant of
the Author.

The Country as far as my Intelligence reaches, has followed the Example of the
City, and refused to read the Declaration of Indulgence according to a certain
Order said to be the Kings, which we in the Country can scarce believe to be
His. For it has neither been signified to the Ordinaries according to the usual
manner, nor could those that dispersed it give any Account whence it came to
them. I have heard indeed that an Act of Council concerning it has been
published in the Gazette, which I never saw, and if I had I should scarce have
thought Authentic: For I always took that Paper as for its Authority, to have
been all of a piece, and that we were no more bound to take notice of any Order
published there under any penalty, than we are to believe all the News from
Poland or Constantinople. Nay though this Order had come to us in due form, yet
had we had great reason to suspect something of surreption and surprise upon
his Majesty in this matter, and that it could not proceed from his Majesty's
free and full consent; for we cannot yet forget his repeated professions of
kindness to us, and of satisfaction in our Principles and Duty, and having done
nothing since which might forfeit his goed Opinion, we are unwilling to believe
that it is His Majesty's own mind and pleasure to loud us with such an Order,
as we cannot execute with any congruity, safety or good Conscience

I. As to his Majesty's Declaration, We of all his Majesty's Subjects are the
least concerned in it; and with all duty be it spoken, we cannot see, that our
legal Establishment receives any Addition by this Declaration. For there are
yet, thanks be to God, no Penal Laws to which our Congregations are obnoxious,
and therefore we do not stand in need of any Toleration: Yet it is upon us only
that the Reading of it is imposed. An Act which cannot well be construed
otherwise than as a soliciting and tempting our own people to forsake our
Communion. If this Declaration must needs be read in any Religious Assemblies'
in reason surely it should be in those, who wholly owe their substance to it.
It would better have become the Roman than the Protestan Chapels. But in the
Koman Church Indulgence has another signification; and belongs to those only
that frequent their Churches, but not to such as leave them: for with them this
is the only sin that is not capable of Indulgence. But the Priests desire to be
excused, lest while they proclaim Toleration to others they bring an Interdict
upon themselves. Or why I pray, was not Father Pen Ordered to publish it in his
Meetings? Or the worthy Mr. Lob, the reputed Father of this Project; why had
not he the benefit of his own Invention, and a Patent for being the sole
Publisher of it within his own Pound? Or why was not my Lord Mayor's private
and elect Congregation thought worthy of so great a grace? Surely it is not to
draw upon us the envy of the Distenters, that the honor of publishing this
Declaration is imposed upon us alone, when it belongs to all other Communions
in the Kingdom, except our own: And it we refuse it, I hope it will be imputed
to our Modesty, for we are not ambitious of being impertinent or busy bodies
in other men's matters.

A certain person much greaten than he deserves, but perhaps not so high, is
said to have used the Words of Rabshaketh upon this occasion, That the Church
of England Clergy should eat their own Dung. Isa. 36.12. This sentence might
better have become a Messenger of the King of Affyria, than a pretended
Counselor of our own Prince, though some make a question to which King he
belongs: But God be thanked, we are not yet so straightly besieged as to be
reduced to that extremity, and though by the permission of God, We should be
reduced to so miserable a Condition, We should I hope, by the Grace of God, be
content to endure that and worse extremities if possible, rather than Betray or
Surrender the City of God. But before that comes, it is possible that the
Throat that belched out this Nasty Insolence, may be stopped with something
which it cannot swallow.

II. Besides there are some passages in the Declaration, which in Conscience we
cannot read to our People, though it be in the King's Name; for among others we
are to Read these Words: We cannot but heartily wish as will easily be
believed, that all the People of our Dominions were Members of the Catholic
Church. Our People know too well the English of this, and could not but be
strangely surpised to hear us tell them, that it would be an acceptable thing
to the King, that they should leave the Truth and our Communion, and turn
Papists. The Wish of a King when solemnly Declared, is no light insignificant
thing, but has real influence and effect upon the minds of Men. It was but a
Wish of Henry the Second that cut off F. Becket then Archbishop of Canterbury.
Councils and Courts of Justice too often bend to a King's Wishes, though
against their own Inclinations, as well as against their Rule: And can we
imagine that they can have no force at all upon the common people? Therefore we
cannot in Conscience pronounce these words in the Ears of the people whose
Souls are committed to our Charge. For we should hereby lay a snare before
them, and become their Tempters instead of being their Instructers; and in very
fair and reasonable Construction we shall be understood to solicit them to
Apostasy, to leave the Truth of the Gospel, for Fables, and the mistakes of
men; a reasonable and decent Worship, for Superstition and Idolatry; a true
Christian Liberty, for the most intolerable Bondage both of Soul and Body. If
any will forsake our Doctrine and Fellowship, which yet is not ours but
Christ's, at their own peril be it: But as for us, We are resolved by the Grace
of God, to lay no stumbling block in their way, nor to be accessory to their
ruin, that we may be able to declare our integrity with S. Paul, That we are
pure from the blood of all Men.

III. In the next place. We are to declare in the King's Name, That from
henceforth the Execution of all, and all manner of Penal Laws, in matters
Ecclesiastical, for not coming to Church, or not receiving the Sacrament, or
for any other Nonconformity to the Religion Established, or for, or by Reason
of the Exercise of Religion, in any manner whatsoever, be immediately
Suspended, and the farther Execution of the said Penal Laws, and every of them
is hereby Suspended. What! All, and all manner of Laws in matters
Ecclesiastical? What the Laws against Fornication, Adultery, Incest? For these
are in Ecclefiastical matters. What! All Laws against Blasphemy, profaneness,
open Derision of Christian Religion? Yet these crimes are punishable by no
other Laws here, than such as have been made in favor of the Established
Religion: How shall the Lord's day be observed? What shall hinder covetous men
to plow and Cart, and follow their several Trades upon that day? since all the
Laws, that secure this observance, and outward countenance of respect to the
Christian Religion, are by this general expression laid aside: Besides these
words, for not coming to Church, or not receiving the Sacrament, or for any
other Nonconformity to the Religion Established, cannot in Conscience be read
by us in our Churches because they may be a Temptation to young unguided people
to neglect all manner of Religious Worship, and give them occasion of depriving
themselves of such opportunities of grace and salvation, as these Penal Laws
did often oblige them to use. For being discharged attendance on our Service,
they are left at Liberty to be of any Religion or none at all: Nay Christian
Religion is by these general terms left at discretion, as well as the Church of
England. For men may forsake us to become Jews or Mahometans, or Pagan
Idolaters, as well as to be Papists or Dissenters for any care taken in this
Declaration to prevent it. And even of such as pretend to be Christians, there
either are or may be such Blasphemous Sects, so dishonorable to our Common
Lord and Master, as are incapable of all public encouragement and allowance;
for that would involve the Government in the Imputation of those Blasphemies,
and the whole Nation in that Curse and Vengeance of God, which such
provocations may extorts Wherefore it is not out of any unreasonable opinion of
our selves, nor disaffection to Protestant Dissenters, that we refuse to
publish this Indulgence, but out of a tender care of the Souls committed to us,
especially those of the weaker sort, to whom we dare not propose an Invitation
to Popery, and much less any thing that may give countenance or encouragement
to Irreligion. It is said indeed, that we are not required to approve but to
read it: To this Sir, you have very well answered, that Reading was Teaching
it, or if it be not so absolutely in the nature of the thing; yet in common
Construction, I am afraid it would have been understood. But we do not stand in
need of this Excuse, for if there be any passages in it, that are plain
temptations to Popery or Licentiousness; it cannot consist with our duty either
to God or the Church to read them before our people.

As for the dispensing power, and the Oaths and Tests required to qualify men
for Offices Military and Civil, I must leave them to the Consideration of those
who nearer concerned, and therefore reasonably presumed to understand them
better. Nor do I envy his Majesty the use of his Popish Subjects, though I do
not know what service they may be capable of doing more than other Men. This
Nation has for some time made hard shift to subsist without much of their Aid,
and against the wills of several of them: But now they are become the only
necessary men, and seem to want nothing but Number to fill all places Military
and Civil in the Kingdom; in the mean time the Odiousness of their persons, and
the Insolence of their Behavior with their way of menacing strange things,
makes some abatement of the merit of their service.

Lastly, The respect which we have for his Majesty's Service, will not permit
us to Read the Appendix to the Declaration: Where the flower of the Nobility
and Gentry of this Kingdom are something hardly reflected on, as persons that
will not contribute to the peace and honor of the Nation; because they would
consent to the taking away the Laws against Papists, that they be put into a
Condition to give us Laws. The persons here reflected on, We know to be the
chief for Ability and Interest, and Inclination to serve the King, and
therefore cannot do his His Majesty that disservice as to be publishers of
their disgrace, and make our selves the Instruments of alienating from his
Majesty the Affections of his best Subjects. Nay we find in our selves a
strange difficulty to believe that this could come from His Majesty, who has
experienced their faithfulness upon so many and pressing Occasions. This could
not well proceed from any but a Stranger to those Honorable persons, and the
Nation, and a greater Stranger to shame and good manners; and what have we to
do to publish the Venom and Vitulency of a Jesuit.

A Letter from a Gentleman in Ireland, to his Friend in London, upon occasion
of a Pamphlet, Entitled, A Vindication of the present Government of Ireland,
under his Excellency, Richard Earl of Tyrconnel.
SIR,
AS soon as the Letter, Entitled, A Vindication of the present Government of
Ireland, etc. came to my hands, I set upon Answering it with the same
expedition, and plainness of Style, as uses to accompany naked Truth, which
needs not the clothing of sophistical Arguments, or florid Expressions, to
recommend it to the unprejudiced part of Mankind: And indeed upon the very
first reading of every Paragraph of it, the slightness of the Arguing, or the
notorious Falsehood of the Matter of Fact, did so evidently appear, that a man
of ordinary capacity needs not put his Natural Talent on the Rack to refute
them.

The very first position of the paper, viz. [That Ireland is in a better way of
Thriving under the Government of a Native, than an Englishman;] (by which, I
suppose, you mean one not barely so by Birth, but by Inclination, Interest,
Education, Religion, etc.) is so false, that it contradicts the Experience and
Reason of Mankind, and disgusts one so much in the front of the Letter, that I
was tempted to fling it away unread, judging it not worth the loss of so much
time, if the rest should prove of the same kind (as indeed I found it upon
perusal;) but having ventured through it, I looked upon my self obliged to say
something by way of Answer, since in the opinion of some sort of Men, the not
Answering (though even the most trifling Pamphlet) is given out to be the
Inability of the party to reply to the weight of such Arguments as are
contained in it.

I will not insist much upon the constant practice of all the predecessors of
our English Kings, and their Counselors, ever since the Conquest of Ireland,
who made it an established Maxim, in relation to that Kingdom, That none but an
Englishman should be Chief Governor; insomuch that (till within these two
Years) that practice gave occasion to the common erroneous opinion, That a man
born in Ireland, however otherwise qualified, was thereby incapacitated from
being Lord Deputy: It is certain, that long before the Reformation, when
Matters of Religion made no distinction between the Natives of each Country,
this was the settled and unaltered Rule: Have we any reason then to alter it,
(now that Religion is put into the Scale, and become the additional weight,
which never fails giving the advantage to the side it espouses and adheres to)
or rashly to condemn the wise proceedings of the Ancestors of our Kings, and
(contrary to the opinion of the World) judge our Author's Irish Understanding,
better than all the English ones that have been heretofore?

Our Author will certainly allow Ireland to be a conquered Country, and
consequently, that the Conquerors have Right to establish Laws with such
Restrictions and Limitations, as shall seem fitting and convenient toward the
keeping it in their Hands, and the Welfare of the Inhabitants, which are of two
Sorts, the British Planters, and the Natives. I shall prove, that it has been,
and still is, the Advantage of both these, that Ireland should be governed by
an English Man.

By the way, I would have it understood, that I do not pretend to put these two
Interests into any Balance: I know the British Interest does so far outweigh
the other, that it were a Wrong done it, to bring them into any Competition;
more than two parts of three of the Lands of Ireland, being (by the several
Rebellions of the Irish) in British Hands; and for the Quality, Temper,
Industry, etc. there is no Comparison: besides, that if one of two Parties is
to be pleased (though by the Detriment of the other) it is but just, that the
Conquerors (who have Right to give Law) should be indulged; how much more when
it is consistent with the Welfare of the Irish themselves, if they understood
their own Good?

I am convinced, that whatever has been done in favor of the Natives, is pure
Grace, and cannot be claimed as a just Debt, any otherwise, than since it has
been confirmed by our Laws, and Acts of Parliament: He that reflects on 1641.
will readily assent to this, which makes me admire at the pertness of our
Author, in Capitulating, as if we stood upon even Ground with them; but it is
plain, he considers the Interest but of one Party in that Kingdom, and though
he names Ireland often, he means the Native Irish Papist only. But I proceed;

To prove that it is the Interest of the British, that Ireland should be
governed by an Englishman: Ineed say no more than that they all ardently desire
it; and People are the best Judge of their own Necessities: The common Maxim,
That Interest will not lie, holds good here to some purpose. The ill Effects
the contrary Method has had on their Persons and Estates, is but too visible.
Whoever had seen Ireland four Years ago, and would compare its Condition with
what it is now, from the most thriving and flourishing Country of Europe, from
a place of the briskest Trade, and best paid Rents in Christendom, it is fallen
in one Year and a half's time, to Ruin and Desolation: in the most frequent
Cities, empty Houses, and melancholy Countenances; in the best people'd
Counties, unmanur'd neglected Fields, and Solitariness: Such a one, I say,
might justly exclaim, Heu! Quantum mutatus ab illo. But it would be impertinent
to insist any longer on this. I must now prove, That it is the Advantage of the
very Natives themselves (who have long been uneasy under the English
Government, and often endeavored to shake it off) to be ruled and guided by
that Nation they hate so much. They are beholding to us for reducing them from
a State of Barbarity, which left but little difference between them and Brutes:
We taught them to Live, to Eat, Drink, and Lodge like humane Creatures; (if
they esteem this any Advantage, and do not really prefer their Native Wildness
to all the Benefits of civil Society, Trade, Agriculture, Merchandising,
Learning, etc.) and if the Gentleness of the English Government could have had
any Influence on them, they had no reason to be discontented at it: They had
the equal Protection of the Laws, in relation to their Estates and Persons;
they bore but their just Proportion in all Taxes and Cesses: Their Lands
improved in Value, by the Means of their British Neighbors, and their Rents
were much better paid than formerly, whilst themselves were Masters of the
whole Island: They had a large Connivance for the Exercise of their Religion,
and were even allowed to hold a National Synod of their own Clergy in Dublin,
Anno 1666. The poor Natives were not oppressed, when their severe Landlords,
the Irish Gentry, by their cruel Extortions, Casherings, Duties, and Days
Labor ruined them; who as soon as the English Manners prevailed among them (as
they were introduced with Difficulty enough, there was need of the Authority of
Acts of Parliament to constrain them for their own Good) lived plentifully, and
in convenient Houses, had their Share of the current Coin, and proportion of
all other Necessaries, to the Life and Well-being of Man, which now they want;
insomuch that several of them have been heard to curse my Lord Tyrconnel; for
to his Government they attribute their Misery, and acknowledge, they never
lived so well as under the Direction of the English Rulers, nor expected to do
so again, till they were restored to the Helm. See the Force of Truth, which
compels the Confession of it, even from the Mouths of its Adversaries!

One may easily perceive by our Authers manner of arguing, where the Shoo
pinches; he is really concerned that Ireland is not altogether an independent
Kingdom, and in the Hands of its own Natives: he longs till the Day, when the
English Yoke of Boudage shall be thrown off: Of this he gives us broad Hints,
when he tells us That [ England is the only Nation in the World that impedes
their Trade:] That [a Man of English Interest will never Club with them (as he
phrases it) or project any thing which may tend to their Advantage, that will
be the least Bar or Prejudice to the Trade of England.] Now, why a Man of
English Interest (unless he will allow none of that Nation to be an able and
just Minister to his Prince) should be partial, to ruin one Kingdom [to avoid
the least Inconveniency of the other] contrary to the positive Commands of his
King, I cannot imagine: For since [it is the Governor's Duty to Rule by Law,
and such Orders as he shall receive from His Majesty.] I know no Grounds for
our Authors Arraigning the whole English Nation, in saying, That no one Man
among them, of what Persuasion soever, will be true, either to the Laws, or his
Majesty's positive Orders, which shall seem repugnant to the smallest
Conveniences of England. This is a glory reserved only (as it seems) for his
Hero, my Lord Tyrconnel.

The Imbargo upon the West India Trade, and the Prohibition of Irish Cattle,
are the two Instances given.

It were to be wished indeed, for the Good of that Kingdom, that both were
taken off; and I question not but to see a Day wherein it shall seem proper to
the King, and an English Parliament, to Repeal those Laws; a Day wherein they
will consider us as their own Flesh and Blood, a Colony of their Kindred and
Relations, and take care of our Advantages with as little Grudging and Repining
(I am sure they have the same, and no stronger Reason) as Cornwall does at
Yorkshire: There are Instances in sevral Islands in the East Indies, as far
distant as Ireland is from England, that make up but one Kingdom, and governed
by the same Laws; but the Wisdom of England will not judge it time fitting to
do this, till we of Ireland be one Man's Children, either in Reality or
Affection; we wish the latter, and have made many Steps and Advances toward
it, if the Natives will not meet us half way, we cannot help it, let the Event
lie at their own Doors.

But after all, I see not how those Instances have any manner of relation to
the English Chief Governors in Ireland; they were neither the Causes,
Contrivers, nor Promoters of those Acts. The King and an English Parliament did
it without consulting them; if they had, it is forty to one, my Lord of Ormond
and the Council, whose Stake is so great in Ireland, would have hindered it as
much as possible. Our Author's Argument proves indeed, That it is detrimental to
Ireland, to be a subordinate Kingdom to England (and it is plain, it is that he
drives at, let him disguise it as much as he will) but the conclusion he would
prove, cannot at all be deduced from it: Shortly, I expect he will speak
plainer, and in down right Terms propose, That the two Kingdoms may be governed
by different Kings; Matters seem to grow ripe for such a dilloyal Proposition.

If these Acts (and not the Subjection to an English King) were the Grievances,
they would be so to the British there, as well as to the Natives: but though we
wish them Repealed, we do not repine; in the mean time, if the British, who are
the most considerable Trading part of that Nation, and consequently feel the
ill Effects of those Acts more sensibly, can be contented, why the Natives
should not acquiesce in it (unless it be for the forementioned Reasons) I
cannot see.

Our Author allows that there are different ways of obeying the King: it is a
Point gained for us, and proves there may be such a Partiality exercised in
executing his Majesty's Commands, as may destroy the very Intent of them; and
yet (taking the Matter strictly [the King is obeyed] but a good Minister will
consider his Masters Intentions, and not make use of a Word that may have a
double Sense to the Ruin of a Kingdom, nor of a Latitude of Power, wherewith
he is entrusted, to the Destruction of the most considerable Party in it: Far
be it from us to think it was his Majesty's Intentions to depopulate a
flourishing Country, to undo Multitudes of laborious thriving Families in it,
to diminish and destroy his own Revenue, to put the Sword into Mad-mens Hands,
who are sworn Enemies to the British: No! His Majesty, who is willing that
Liberty of Trade as well as Conscience, should equally flourish in all parts of
his Dominions, that recommends himself to his Subjects by his Impartiality in
distributing Offices of Trust; and from that Practice raises his greatest
Argument to move his People to Repeal the Penal Laws; never intended that some
general Commands of his should be perverted to the Destruction of that People,
his Intention is to protect. His Majesty (Great as he is) cannot have two
Consciences, one calculated for the Latitude of England, another for Ireland.
We ought therefore to conclude (in respect to the King) that his Commands have
been ill understood, and worse executed; and this may be done (as our Author
confesses) and the King [undoubtedly obeyed;] but such an Obedience is no
better than a Sacrifice of the best Subjects the King has in this Kingdom.

Our Author has given very good Reasons why the Natives may be well content
with their present Governor, but I cannot forbear laughing at those he has
found out to satisfy the poor British with My Lord Tyrconnel's most Excellent,
Charitable, English Lady: His high sounding Name TALBOT, in great Letters, a
Name that no less frightens the Poor English in Ireland, then it once did the
French; a Name which because he is in possession of, I will not dispute his
Title to, but I have been credibly informed, that he has no relation to that
most Noble Family of Shrewsbury (though my Lord Tyrconnel presumes to bear the
same Coat of Arms:) a Name in short, which I hope in time Vox and praetereae
nihil.

A Second Reason is drawn from his [Education] We have heard (and it has never
yet been contradicted) that my Lord Tyrconnel from his Youth upwards, has
constantly born Arms against the British: If our Author will assure us of the
contrary. I am apt to believe ^i. Excellency will give him no thanks, who lays
the foundation of his Merit upon the Basis of his constant adherence to the
I^ish Party: What use of Consolation can be drawn from this head by the
British, is beyond my skill to con^pre^^nd.

A third Reason is drawn from his Stake in England; the Author would do well to
show us, in what Country this lies, that we may know where to find Reprisals
hereafter; for since he offers this for our Security, it is fit to enquire into
the Title and Value of the Land, before we give so valuable a Consideration.

Thus this great heap of substantial Reasons, together with a large Panegyric
upon his Excellency's fair Face and good Shapes, telling us by the by, how he
[was not killed at Drogheda, because he run away,] is enough, and more than
enough to demonstrate, that [the British have not the least cause to be
dejected, because they are sufficiently secure:] But I will agree with the
Author in this, that he seems to have been reserved by Heaven against the most
critical occasion, that should happen in this Age, reserved as one of the Vials
of God's Wrath to plague the People.

It Is well known [Self-preservation is allowed by God and Man;] and since he
tells us, we are [People of a contrary Interest,] he gives us right to provide
for our selves, and our Families, as well as we may; it is like a generous
Aggressor: First he declares who are his Enemies, then gives them warning to
put themselves into a posture of Defense. We are beholding to him for this
hint, and, I hope, shall make the right use of it. It Is below me to take notice
of the meaness of the Expression of [an honest Man's losing his Head in a
Crowd,] and the nonsense of the other, [The most men bite at the stone, etc.]
Dogs indeed use to do so with us; but this is only to let the World know what
Country man our Author is, and it may be it is the custom here for these Men to
imitate those more rational Creatures.

Our Author seems sensible, that many hard hings have been done, which
occasioned Clamours against the present Government; though I think our
Grievances (how intolerable soever) have been born more silently, than any
people since the Creation: Since I do not remember any one Pamphlet has
hitherto come out, to represent them; ours being of that nature, as stupifies
us, and takes away the use of the Tongue and Pen: Curae leves loquuntur,
ingentes stupent: I say he is not willing this load of Calumny should rest on
my Lord Tyrconnel, but casts it on His Majesty, imagining that the respect we
bear, (and justly) to our King, ought to render us Tongue-ty'd in relation to
the Maladministration of his Minister. But I have already shown, how the
King's Orders may be stretched, and perverted. The very best and most
cautiously penned Laws have a double edge, and (if the Executive Power be
lodged in ill Hands) have the worst Effect, even to the Punishment of Well
doers, and the Encouragement of them that do Ill; and I question not, in the
least, but this is our Case, and as little doubt that our Grievances would be
redrets'd, did not one of His Majesty's most Eminent Virtues interpose between
us and His Grace, I mean his Constancy to his old Servants; and our Condition
is so much the more deplorable, that His Majesty cannot be a Father of His
Country without seeming to desert His Minister; but it is to be hoped that at
long running, the Groans of a distressed Nation will prevail over all private
Consideration.

Whether the Employment His Majesty has given my Lord Tyrconnel, has not proved
the occasion of the Augmentation of his Fortune, (as our Author insinuates it
has not) shall neither prove the Subject of this Discourse, nor Object of our
Envy. I shall only say, if the report be true, that my Lord owes all his Estate
to the King's bounty, it is ungratefully done to rob His Majesty of the Honor
and Thanks due to him, by denying it; much less is it our business to find
fault with the advancement of five Relations. In this point Authors differ, for
some speak 55 at least: If there had not been the greatest Partiality in the
World showed, we should never have opened our mouths, if in an Army of about
9000 English Officers and Soldiers, there be not 200 left, (in a Country where
the English have so much cause to fear) and those turned out for the most part,
without any cause assigned, after the most ignominious disgraceful manner
imaginable, stripped naked in the Field, their Horses, Boots, Buff^coats, etc.
taken from them, giving them Bills to receive so much Money in Dublin, as
amounted to half the value of their Equipage, and that not paid without Charge
and Attendance; have they not reason to fear? It in a Country, whose Government
was perfectly in the English hands, so ^udden an alteration was made, that both
the Courts of Judicature, and Charters of their Corporations were taken from
them without any fault of theirs, have they not reason to complain, and be
afraid? If those very Arms which are taken from them, be put into the hands of
their sworn Ememies, and their just Debts paid after a new Method, by beating
or killing the Creditors, when they (...) their own? Have they not reason to
fear, and defer^ the Kingdom? If these and an hundred other things do not
justify the retreat of several of the British into England, I know not what
shall be adjudged a sufficient reason. This our Author would insinuate, is
caused by a sullen Combination; as if the Gentry of a Nation could agree
together, to do a thing so contrary to their visible Interest, as desert their
Houses and Estates, to the loss of one half of them, merely out of spite to the
Government.

But because our Author is so good at his Narratives, and would induce the
World to believe that there was but two Regiments disbanded [by his talking
only of two] and in another place speaking of [some Officers] that were
Cashiered. We shall hereafter give a faithful Account of the Proceedings in
the business of Disbanding; and in the mean time affirm, that his whole Account
of the Affair at Molingar is most unsincere. The English Soldiers were given
to understand, that they were all to be turned out, and the only Grace his
Excellency did them, was to declare before a long and tedious March, that such
as had a mind, or had Settlements in that Country might better quit then, than
hereafter. This is plainly shown by the turning out (afterward) all those
English who then actually continued in the Service; they were glad that any
would quit voluntarily, but those that did not, and after a public Trial, were
willing to serve his Majesty, they soon after turned out. Thus the false gloss
that our Author puts upon my Lord Tyrconnel's Speech is discovered: And I
assure the Reader, the Memoires I have by me are from such unquestionable
hands, and there are so many hundred living VVitnesses to the Truth of them,
that our Author will not have the Impudence to deny what may be proved before
his Majesty, if he require it. I shall only take notice of the ill Application
of our Authors Sea-Metaphor. Though in stress of weather, the Owner is willing
to make use of all hands that may be helpful toward the saving the Vessel, yet
he takes care to call for none whose practice it has been to cut the
Tacklings, and to steer contrary to the Pilot's Directions; he thinks such
safer by far shut up under Hatches, then set at Liberty or employed to do
mischief: As for his supposition of 30000 men to be sent out of Ireland, into
Handers, I cannot tell what to make on it. Let them crack the Shell that hope to
find the Kernel in it. For my part I despair, though the readiness of the
English Soldiers of Ireland, who at twenty four hours warning came into
England to serve His Majesty in the time of Monmouth's Rebellion, ought to have
been remembered to their advantage, and might serve (to any unprejudiced
person) as a Pattern of the Loyalty, and good Inclinations of all the
Protestants in that Kingdom, if his Majesty had had occasion for them. Whether
the Parliament will Repeal the Test for those several weighty Reasons our
Author says [are fitter for contemplation than Discourse] tho methinks it would
be pleasant to see a House of Common sit like the Brethren at a silent Meeting,
is not my Province to determine: As likewise, Whether they will so much
consider that Grand Reason [the King will have it so] (for his Conscience and
theirs may differ) or what the diffenters will do, I cannot tell. One thing I
am sure of, there will be no such Stumbling Block in the way of the King's
desires, when they meet, as the present condition of Ireland; they will be apt
(when His Majesty tells them, they shall have their equal shares in
Employments, when they have Repealed the Laws) to say, Look at Ireland, see
what is done there, where the Spirit of Religion appears bare faced! and
accordingly compute what may become of us, when we have removed our own legal
Fences, since they now leap over those Hedges, what may we expect when they are
quite taken away!

Poyning's Law is a great grievance to our Author, and here in one word, he
discovers that it is the dependence this Kingdom has on England, he quarrels at:
It Is fit the Reader should understand, that Law (enacted when Poynings was Lord
Deputy) makes all the English Acts of Parliament of force in Ireland; we are
therefore so fond of that Law, and cover so much to preserve our dependence on
England, that all the Arguments our Author can bring, shall not induce us to
part with it.

I will not reflect in the least on the Courage of the Irish, I know there are
several brave men among them, but they have had the misfortune to fall under
the Consideration of (as our Author softens it, but the plain sense is, been
beaten by) a warlike Nation: And, I question not, unless they behave themselves
modestly in their Prosperity, they will again fall under the Consideration of
the same Nation: it is better we should live in peace and quietness, but the
Choice is in their hands, and if they had rather come under our consideration
again, than avoid it, let them look to the Consequence.

Another advantage which may accrue to Ireland, by a Native, as a Governor,
our Author reckons to be, His personal knowledge of the Tories, and their
Harbourers, and his being thereby better capacitated to suppress them.
Malicious People would be apt to infer from this Suggestion, that his
Excellency had occasion formerly to be familiarly acquainted with such sort of
Cattle. I have heard indeed, that one of our bravest English Princes, Henry the
-- during the Extravagancies of his youth, kept Company with public Robbers,
and often shared both in the Danger and Booty: But as soon as the Death of his
Father, made way for his Succession to the Crown, he made use of his former
acquaintance of their Persons and Haunts, to the extirpating and dissolving the
greatest knot of Highway-men, that ever troubled England. My Lord therefore (in
imitation of this great Prince, no doubt) will make use of his Experience that
way, to the same end: And I readily assent to the Author, that no English
Governor can be so fit to clear that Kingdom of Tories, and that for the same
reason he gives us

There are two other Advantages remaining; one is, his Excellency's having
already made different Parties in that Kingdom, the Objects of his Love and
Hatred, let the Offenses of the one, or the Merits of the other, be never so
conspicuous: Whether the British can draw any comfort from his Excellency's
knowledge of them this way, is fit to be debated. The other is, the probality
of his getting the Statute for benefit of Clergy, in favor of Cow-Stealers,
and House Robbers Repealed; and where, by the way, there is a severe Rebuke
given to our English Priests, for their ill-placed Mercy to Irish Offenders: A
fault I hope they will be no more guilty of.

Whether these Advantages be so considerable as to move his Majesty to continue
a Man (for other more weighty Reasons) absolutely destructive to this Kingdom,
or whether some of them might not be performed by an English Governor, His
Majesty is the only Judge: Only this I am sure of, The King (if he were under
any Obligations to His Minister) has fully discharged them all, and has showed
himself to be the best of Masters, in giving so great and honorable an
Employment to his Creature, and continuing him in it so long, notwithstanding
the decrease of his own Revenue, and the other visible bad effects of his
Management; the Impoverishment of that Kingdom, amounting to at least two
Millions of Money: And His Majesty may be now at liberty (without the least
imputation of Breach of promise to his Servant) to restore us to our former
flourishing condition, by sending some English Nobleman among us, whose
contrary Methods will, no doubt, produce different effects.

To conclude, methinks the comparison between His Majesty and Philip of
Macedon, when he was drunk, is a little too familiar, not to say unmannerly,
and that between Antipater, and my Lord Tyrconnel, is as great a Complement to
the latter.

But provided my Lord be commended, which was our Author's chief design, he
cares not though the comparison does not hold good in all points; it is enough
that we know we are Governed by such a Prince that neither practices such
Debauches himself, nor allows of them in his Servants. But we are not beholding
to the Author for the knowledge of this; should a Foreigner read his Pamphler,
or get it interpreted to him, he would be apt (and with reason) to conclude,
that His Majesty as much resembled Philip in a Debauch, as my Lord Tyrconnel
does sober Antipater.

I have now done with all that seems of any weight in our Author's Pamphlet;
and can see nething in his Postscript that deserves an Answer. All that I will
say is. That his Recipes bear no proportion to our desperate Disease, and he
will prove not to be a Physician, but a pretending Quack, who by ill applied
Medicines will leave us in a worse Condition than he found us.

I shall conclude with telling you, That your Letter, which enclosed the
Pamphlet, whereof I have here given you my thoughts, was more than a Fortnight
on the way, or else you had received this sooner, I am,

Dub^^, 1688. SIR, Your most Humble Servant.

A PLAIN ACCOUNT OF THE PERSECUTION Laid to the CHARGE of the Church of England.
THE Desire of Liberty to serve God in that Way and Manner which Men judge to
be most acceptable to him, is so Natural and Reasonable, that they cannot but
be extremely provoked against those who would force them to serve him in any
other. But the Conceit withal, which most Men have, that their Way of Serving
God is the only acceptable Way; naturally inclines them, when they have Power,
to use all Means to constrain all other to serve him in that way only. So that
Liberty is not more desired by all, at one time, than it is denied by the very
same Persons at another. Put them into different Conditions, and they are not
of the same Mind: but have different Inclinations, in one State, from what they
have in another. As will be apparent by a short View of what has passed in
these Churches and Kingdoms, within our Memory.

II. Before the late Civil Wars, there were very grievous Complaints made of
the Bishops; that they pressed the Ceremonies so strictly, as to inflict heavy
Censures upon those called Puritans, who could not in Conscience conform to
them. Now no sooner had those very Persons who thus complaned, got their
Liberty to do as they pleased, but they took it quite away from the other: and
suquestred all those who would not enter into their Holy League and Covenant;
for the reforming all things according to the Model which they propounded. Nay,
they were not willing to bear with Five Dissenting Brethren among themselves;
who could not conform to the Presbyterial Government. And when these Dissenting
Brethren, commonly known by the Name of Independants, had got a Party strong
enough, which carried all before them; they would not allow the use of the
Common Prayer in any Parish; no not to the King himself in his own Chapel: not
grant to one of the old Clergy, so much Liberty as to teach a School, etc.
Which things I do not mention (God knows) to reproach those who were guilty of
them; but only to put them in mind of their own Failings: that they may be
humbled for them, and not insult over the Church of England, nor severely
upbraid them with that, which when time was, they acted with a higher Hand
themselves. If I should report all that the Presbyterians did here, and in
Scotland, and all that the Independants did here and in New England; it would
not be thought that I exceed the Truth, when I say they have been more Guilty
of this Fault, than those whom they now charge with it. Which does not excuse
the Church of England, it must be confessed, but does in some Measure mitigate
her Fault. For the Conformable Clergy having met with such very hard Usage in
that disinal Time, wherein many of them were oppressed above Measure; no wonder
if the Smart of it, then fresh in their Minds, something imbittered their
Spirits; when God was preased, by a wonderful Revolution, to put them into
Power again.

III. Then a stricter Act of Vnifamity was made, and several Laws pursuant to
it, for the enforeing that Uniformity, by severe Penalties. But let it be
remembered that none were by those Laws constrained to come to Church, but had
Liberty left them to serve God at Home (and some Company with them in their own
Way. And let it be farther remembered, that the Re^ion why they were denied
their Liberty of meeting in greater Assemblies was, because such Assemblies
were represented, as greatly endangering the public Peace and Safety: as the
Words are in the very first Act of this Nature against ^uakers, in the Year
1662. Let any one read the Oxford Act, (as it is commonly called) made in the
Year 1665. and that at Westminster, in the Year 16^^. and he will find them
intended against Sed^^ous Conventicles; That is, they w^^^ made them, were
persw^d^d by the J^su^ I^terest at first to look upon such Meetings as
Nurseries of Sedition, where bad Principles were infused into Men's Minds,
destructive to the Civil Government. If it had not been for this, it does not
appear that the Contrivers of these Laws were inclined to such Severities as
were thereby enacted; but the N^nconformists might have enjoyed a larger
Liberty in Religion. It was not Religion alone which was considered, and
prerended, but the public Peace and Settlement, with respect to which they
were tied up so straightly in the Exercise of their Religion. Which, to deal
clearly, I do not believe would have raught Rebellion; but this was constantly
insinuated by the Court Agents; and it is no wonder if the Parliament, who
remembered how the Ministers of that Persuasion (though indeed from the then
Appearance of Popery) had been the Principal Incouragers of that Defensive War
against the King, were easily made to believe that they still retained the same
Principles, and would propagate them, if they were suffered among the People.
Certainly it is also, that the Court made it their Care to have those Acts
passed, though at the same time they hindered their Execution: that they might
keep up both Parties in the height of their Animosities; and especially that
they might make the Church of England, be both, hated and despised by the
Dissenters.

IV. Thus things continued for some time, till wise Men began to see into the
Secret; and think of a Reconciliation. But it was always hindered by the Court,
who never thought of giving Liberty by a Law, but only by the Prerogative,
which could as cas^ly take it away. There was a time, for instance, when a
Comprehension, etc. was projected by several great Men, both in Church and
State; for the taking as many as possible into Union with us; and providing
Ease for the rest. Which so netled the late King, that meeting with the then
Archbishop of Canterbury, he said to him (as I perfectly remember) What, my
Lord, you are for a Comprehension? To which he making such a Reply as
signified, he heard some were about it: No, said the King, I will keep the
Church of England pure and unmixed: that is, never suffer a Reconciliation with
the Dissenters. And when the Lords and Commons also had not many years ago
passed a Bill for the Repealing of the most heavy of all the Penal Laws against
Dissenters, viz. the Statute of 35 Eliz. 1. (which by the Parliament is made
against the Wicked and dangerous Practices of Sediti^^^ Sectaries, and disloyal
Persons) his late Majesty so dealt with the Clerk of the Parliament, that it
was shuffled away and could not be found; when it was to have been presented to
him, among other Bills for his Royal Consent unto it. A notable Token of the
Abhorrence the Court then had of all Penal Laws, and of their great Kindness to
Dissenters.

V. Who may remember, if they please, that as once there was a time, when the
Court turned out, or chid those Justices, who were forward in the Execution of
the Laws against Non^nformists, because they were then in so low a Condition,
that the Court was afraid the Church of England might indeed be established in
its Uniformity. So when the Nonconformists were by some Liberty, grown
stronger, and set themselves against the Court Interest, in the Election of
Sheriffs, and such like things; then all those Justices were turned out who
hung back, and would not execute the Laws against them; and Justices picked out
for the purpose, who would do it severely. Nay, the Clergy were called upon,
and had Orders sent them, to return the Names of all N^nconformisis in their
several Parishes; that they might be proceeded against in the Courts
Ecclesiastical. And here I cannot forget the Order made by the Middlesex
Justices, at the Sessions at Hicks's Hall, Jan. 13. 1681. Where they urge the
Execution of the Act of 22 C. 2. against Conventicles, because in all
probability they will destroy both Church and State. This was the reason which
moved them to call upon Consiables, and all other Officers to do their Doty in
this Matter: Nay, to call upon the B. of London himself, that he would use his
utmost endeavers, within his Jurisdiction, that all such Persons may be
Excommumcate. This was a bold stroke, proceeding from an unusual degree of
Zeal; which plainly enough signifies, that the Bishops were not so forward as
the Jaestices in the prosecuting of Dissenters. Who may do well to remember
that the House of Commons, a little before this, had been so kind to them, that
those Justices would not have dared to have been so severe as they were at
Hicks's Hall, if they had not been set on by Directions from White Hall. For in
their Order they press the Execution of the Statute 1 Eliz. and 3 Jac. 1. for
levying Twelve Pence a Sunday upon all those that do not come to Church:
Whereas the House of Commons, Nov. 6. 1680. had, Resolved, Nemine
Contradicente, That it is the Opinion of this House That the Acts of Parliament
made in the Reign of Queen E^z^beth, and King James, against Popish Recusants,
ought not to be extended against Protestant D^ssenters.

VI. Who should not forget how backward the Clergy of London especially, were
to comply with this Design, of reviving the Execution of the Laws against them;
What Courses they took to save them from this Danger! and what Hatred they
incurred for being so kind to them! Which in truth w^^ Kindness to themselves;
for now they saw plainly that Nothing was intended but the Destruction of us
both, by setting us in our turns, one against the other. Many indeed were
possessed with the old Opinion, that the Dissenters aimed at the Overthrow of
the Government b^th in Church and State: which made them the more readily join
with those who were employed to suppress them, by turning the Loge of the Laws
upon them. But both these were most industriously promoted by the Court: who
labored might and main to have this believed, that they who were called Wings,
intended the Ruin of the Church, and of the Monarchy too; and therefore none
had the Court favor, but they alone who were for the ruining of them: all
others were frowned upon, and branded with the Name of Trimmers; who they
adventured at last, to say were worse than Whigs. Merely because they seeing
through the Design, desired those ugly Names of Whig and Tory might be laid
aside; and persuaded all to Moderation, Love, Unity, and Peace. If any Man had
these dangerous Words in his Mouth, he had a Mark set upon him, and was looked
upon as an Enemy, as soon as he discovered any Desires of Reconciliation. No
Peace with Dissenters was then as much in some Men's Mouths, as no Peace with
Rome had been in others. They were all voted to Destruction; and it was an
unpardonable Crime so much as to mention an Accommodation.

Such things as these ought not to be forgotten.

VII. But if they list not to call them to mind, (though they be of fresh
Memory) yet let them at least consider what they have had at their Tongues end,
ever since they knew any thing: That the Church or Rome is a persecuting
Church, and the Mother of Persecution, Will they then be deluded by the present
Sham of Liberty of Conscience; which they of that Church pretend to give? It is
not in their Power, no more than in their Spirit: They neither will nor can
give Liberty of Conscience; but with a Design to take all Liberty from us. That
Church must be obeyed; and there it no middle Choice among them, between Turn
or Burn, Conform or be undone. What Liberty do they give in any Country where
their Power is established? What Liberty can they give who have determined that
Heretics ought to be rooted out? Look into France (with which we have had the
strictest Alliance and Friendship along time) and behold, how at this Moment
they compel those to go to Mass, who they know abhor it as an abominable
Idolatry. Such a violent Spirit now acts them, that they stick not to profane
their own most holy Mysteries, that they may have the Face of an Universal
Conformity without the least Liberty. For the New Converts, as they are called,
poor Wretches, are known to be mere outward Compliers in their Hearts,
abominating that which they are forced eternally to worship. They declare as
much by escaping form this Tyranny over their Consciences, and bewailing their
sinful Compliance; whenever they have an Opportunity. And they that cannot
escape, frequently protest they have been constrained to adore that, which they
believe ought not to be adored. And when they come to die, refuse to receive
the Romish Sacrament, and thereupon are dragged, when dead, along the Streets,
and thrown like dead Dogs upon the Dunghils. Unto what a height of Rage are the
Spirits of the Romish Clergy inflamed; that it perfectly blinds their Eyes, and
will not let them see how they expose the most sacred thing in all their
Religion (the Holy Sacrament, which they believe to be Jesus Christ himself) to
be received by those who they know have no Reverence at all for it, but utterly
abhor it? For they force them, by all manner of Violence, to adore the Host
against their Will, and then to eat what they have adored; though they have the
greatest reason to believe, that those poor Creatures do not adore it. That is,
the Church of Rome will have her Mysteries adored by all, though it be by
Hypocrites. None shall be excused, but whether they believe or not believe,
they shall be compelled to do as that Church does. Nothing shall hinder it; for
the Hatred and Fury wherewith they are now transported, is so exceeding great,
that it makes them (as I have said) offer Violence even to their own Religion,
rather than suffer any Body not to conform to it.

VIII. And assure your selves, they are very desirous to extend this Violence
beyond the bounds of France. They would fain see England also in the same
Condition, the Bishop of Valence and Die, has told as much, in the Speech
which he made to the French King, in the Name of the Clergy of France, to
congratulate his glorious Achievements, in rooting out the Heresy of Calvin.
In which he has a most memorable Passage, for which we are beholden to him,
because it informs us that they are not satisfied with what their King has
done there; but would have him think there is a further Glory reserved for him,
of lending his Help to make us such good Catholics, as he has made in France.
This is the blessed Work they would be at, and if any among us be still so
blind as not to see it, we must look upon it as the just Judgment of God upon
them for some other Sins which they have committed. They are delivered up to a
reprobate Mind, which cannot discern the most evident things. They declare to
all the World, that they have been above fifty Years crying out against, they
know not what. For they know not what Popery is (of which they have seemed to
be horribly afraid) if they believe that they of that Religion, either can or
will give any Liberty, when they have Power to establish their Tyranny. It is
no better, St. John himself has described that Church under the Name of
Babylon, that cruel City, and of a BEAST, which like a Bear, tramples all under
its Feet; and of another Beast, which causes as many as will not worship the
Image of the Beast, to be killed; and that no man may buy or sell, save such as
have had his Mark; i.e. are of hsi Religion, Rev. 13.1, 15, 16. This Character
they will make good to the very end of their Reign, as they have f^^^thed it
from the beginning* They cannot alter their Nature no more than the Ethiopian
change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots. It ever was since the rising of the
Beast, and it ever will be till its Fall, a bloody Church, which can bear no
Contradiction to her Doctrine and Orders, but will endeavor to root out all
those that oppose her from the Face of the Earth. Witness the Barbarous
Crusado's against the poor Albigenses in France: in one of which alone
Bellarmine himself says, and not without Triumph, there were killed no less
than an hundred thousand. Witness the horrible Butcheries committed in France,
in England, and in the Low Countries in the Age before us; and in Poland, the
Valleys of P^edmont, and in Ireland in this Age; upon those who had no other
Fault but this, that the made the Holy Scriptures, and the Roman Church, the
Rule of their Faith.

IX. But if you be ignorant of what has been done and doing abroad, yet I hope
you observe what they do here at home. What do you think of the Declaration
which was very lately imposed to be read in all our Churches? Which when
several Bishops and their Clergy most humbly represented, they could not in
Conscience publish to the People in time of Divine Service; this would not
excuse them, their Petition was received with Indignation, and looked upon as a
Libel; the Bishops were prosecuted for it, and Inquiry is now ordered to be
made after those who did not read it (as well as those that did) that the may
be punished by the High Commissioners. Call you this Liberty of Conscience? Or
do you imagine you shall never have any thing imposed upon you to be read in
your Congregations, which you c^nnot comply withal? Consider, I beseech you,
what will become of you when that time shall come? What Is the meaning of this,
that ever they are looked upon as Offenders, for following their Conscience,
whose Services have been acknowledged to be so great, that they should never be
forgotten? It ought to teach Dissenters what they are to expect hereafter, when
they have served them so far (by taking off the Tests and Penal Laws) as to
enable them with safety to remember all their former pretended Transgressions.
Let them assure themselves, the Services of the Church of England are not now
more certainly forgotten than the Sins of Dissenters will hereafter, when they
have got Power to punish them, be most certainly remembered. Be not drawn in
then by deccitful Words, to help forward your own Destruction. If you will not
be assistant to it, they cannot do it alone; and it will be very strange if you
be persuaded to lend them your Help, when the Deceit is so apparent. For what
are all the present Pleas for Liberty, but so many infamous Libels upon the
Roman Church, which denies all Men this Liberty? While they declaim so loudly
against Persecution, they most notoriously reproach Popery, which subsists by
nothing but Deceit and Cruelty. And who can think that they would suffer their
Church to be so exposed and reviled, as it is by such Discourses, but with a
Design to cheat heedless People into its Obedience? For this end they can hear
it proved, nay, prove it themselves to be an Antichristian Church, when they
prove it is against Christianity, nay, against the Law of Nature and Common
Reason, to trouble any Body for his Opinion in Religion.

X. Once more then, I beseech you, be not deceived by good Words, if you love
your Liberty and your Life. Call to mind how our poor Brethren in France were
lately deluded by the repeated Protestations which their King made, he would
observe the Edict of Nantes (which was the Foundation of their Liberty) even
then, when he was about to overthrow it; and by many Assurances which were
given them by those who came to torment them, that the King intended to eform
the Church of France, as soon as he had united his Subjects. What he had done
already against the Court of Rome, told them, they was an Instance of it; and
they should shortly see other Matters. Such ensnaring Words they heard there
daily from the Mouths of their armed Prosecutors, who were ready to fall upon
them, or had begun to oppress them: And therefore they would be arrant Fools
here, if they did not give good words when they have no Power to hurt us. But
we shall be far greater Fools, if we believe they will keep their Word when
they have got that Power; the greatest of all Fools if we give them that Power.
They have no other way but this, to wheedle us out of our Laws and Liberties.
Do but surrender the one, I mean our Laws, and they will soon take away the
other, our beloved Liberties. Be not tempted to make such a dangerous
Experiment: but let the Laws stand as they are, because they are against them
(as appears by their earnest Endeavors to repeal them) and be not used as
Tools to take them away, because they have been grievous to you. They never can
be so again. For can they, who now Court you, have the Face to turn them again
upon you, after they have made all this Noise for Liberty? And the Church of
England, you may be assured, will not any more trouble you: but when a
Protestand Prince shall come, will join in the Healing of all our Breaches; by
removing all things out of the way, which have long hindered that blessed Work.
They cannot meet together in a Body to give you this Assurance (how should
they, without the Kings Authority so to do?) but every particular Person that I
have discoursed withal, which are not a few (and you your selves would do well
to ask them, when you meet them) profess that they see an absolute Necessity of
making an end of these Differences that have almost undone us: and will no
longer contend to bring all Men to one Uniformity; but promote an Uniform
Liberty. Do not imagine I intend to give mere Words: I me^n honestly; such a
regular Liberty, as will be the Beauty and Honor, not the Blot and Discredit
of our Religion. To such a Temper the Archbishop of Canterbury, with several
other Bishops of his Province, and their Clergy, have openly declared they are
willing to come. And the Bishops and Clergy of the Church of England have never
been know to act deceitfully Our Religion will not at any time allow them to
equivecate, nor to give good Words without a Meaning, much less at such a time
as this, when our Religion is in great danger, and we have nothing to trust
unto but Gods Protection of sincere Persons. Let Integrity and Vprightness
preserve us, is their constant Prayer. They can hope for no Help from Heaven,
if they should prevaricate with Men. God they know would desert them, if they
should go about to delude their Brethren. And they are not so void of common
Sense, as to adventure to incur his most high Displeasure, when they have
nothing to rely upon but his Favor.

In short, Trust to those who own you for their Brethren, as you do them; for
though they have been angry Brethren, yet there is hope of Reconciliation
between such near Relations. But put no Confidence in those, who not only
utterly disown any such Relation to you, but have ever treated you with an
implacable Hatred, as their most mortal Enemies; unto whom it is impossible
they should be reconciled.

Prove. 12.19, 20. The Lips of Truth shall be established for ever: but a lying
tongue is but for a m^ment.

Lying Lips are an Abomination to the Lord; but they that deal truly are his
Delight.

Abbey and other Church Lands, not yet assured to such Possessors as are Roman
Catholics; Dedicated to the Nobility and Gentry of that Religion.
SInce it is universally agreed on, that so great a Matter as the total
Alienation of all the Abby-Lands, etc. in England, can never be made legal and
valid; and such as will satisfy the reasonable Doubts and Scruples of a
religious and conscientions Person, except it be confirmed by the Supreme
Authority in this Church, it is evident that the Protestants, who assert the
Church of England to be Autokephalos, and such as allows of no Foreign
Jurisdiction or Appeals, having had these Lands confirmed to them by the King,
as Head of the Chuech, the Convocation, as the Church Representative, and by
the King and Parliament, as the Supreme Legislative Power in this Realm, have
these Alienations made as valid to them as any Power on Earth can make them;
but the Members of the Church of Rome, who maintain a Foreign and Supreme
Jurisdiction, either in a General Council, or in the Bishop of Rome, or both
together, cannot have these Alienations confirmed to them, without the Consent
of one or both of these Superior Jurisdictions. If therefore I shall make it
appear, that these Alienations in England were never confirmed by either, I do
not see how any Roman Catholic in England can, without Sacrilege, retain them
and his Religion together.

As to the first of these, since there has been no Council from the first
Alienation of Abby-Lands in England to this Day, that pretends to be general,
but that of Trent; we need only look into that for the Satisfaction of such
Roman Catholic as esteem a General Council above the Bishop of Rome: And I am
sure that that Council is so far from confirming these Abby-Lands to the
present Possessors, that it expressly denounces them accursed that detain them.
Sess. 22. Decret. de Ref. Cap. 11. Si quem, etc. If Covetousness, the Root of
all Evil, shall so far possess any Person whatsoever, whether of the Clergy or
Laity, though he be an Emperor or a King, as that by Force, Fear or Fraud, or
any Art or Color whatsoever, he presume to convert to his own Use, and usurp
the Jurisdiction, Goods, Estates, Fruits, Profits or Emoluments whatever, of
any Church, or any Benefice, Secular or Regular, Hospital or Religious House,
or shall hinder that the Profits of the said Houses be not received by those to
whom they do of right belong, let him lie under an Anathema till the said
Jurisdiction, Goods, Estates, Rents and Prosits, which he has possessed and
invaded, or which have come to him any manner of way, be restored to the
Church; and after that have Absolution from the Bishop of Rome. So great a
Terror did this strike into the English Papists that were Possessors of
Church Lands, against whom this Anathema seems particularly directed, that many
of the zealous Papists began to think of Restitution, and Sir William Peter's,
notwithstanding his private Bull of Absolution from Pope Ju^^us the Fourth, was
so much startled at it, as that the very next Year he endowed eight new
Fellowships in Exeter-Colledge in Oxford. Again, the same Council, Sess. 25.
Decret. de R^f. c. 2 ^. Cupiens Sancta Synodus, etc. Decrees and commands,
that all the Holy Ca(...), and General Councils, and Apostolic Sanctions in
Favor of Ecclesiastical Persons, and the Liberties of the Church, and against
those that violate them, be exactly observed by every (...); and does farther
admonish the Emperor, Kings, Princes, and all Persons of what Estate soever,
that they would observe the Rights of the Church, as the Commands of God, and
defend them by their particular Patronage, nor suffer them to be invaded by any
Lords or G^ntlemen wha^soever; but severely punish all those who hinder the
Li^^w^^ies, Imm^^ities and Jurildictions of the Church; and that they would
imitate those excellent Princes, who by their Authority and Bounty increased
the Revenues of the Church; so far were they from suffering them to be invad^^,
and in this let every one sedulously perform his part, etc. And now after so
full and express Declaration of the Council of Trent, I do not ^^e how any of
those R^man Catholics, who esteem a general Council to be the Supreme
Authority in the Church, and receive the Trent Council as such, can any way
excuse themselves in point of Conscience from these heavy Curses that are there
denounced against all those that detain Church Lands, especially since the
Papists themselves ^eh^mently accuse King Henry the eighth for sacrilegiously
robbing of Religious Houses, and seizing of their Lands; a great p^^t of which
Lands are to this very day possessed by Papists. Now though there may be some
Plea for the Popes Authority, in the interim of a general Council, and in such
things wherein they have made no determination; yet in this matter there is no
color for any pretenses, since the Council of Trent was actually assembled
within sew years after these Alienations, and expressly condemned the possessors
of Abbey Lands, and after all this was all consirm'd and ratified by the Pope
himself in his Bulla Super conf. genesis Council. Trid. A. D. 1564. And though we
have here the Judgment of the infallible See, as to this matter in the
Consirmation of the Trent Council, yet because there be some that magnify the
Popes extravagant and unlimited power over the Church, and pretend that he
confirmed the Abby-Lands in England to the Laypossessors of them, I shall show.
Secondly, That the Pope neither has, nor pretends to any such Power, nor did
ever make use of it in this matter under debate; only I shall premise, that
whereas some part of the Canon Law seems to allow of such particular
alienations as are made by the Clerks and Members of the Church, with the
consent of the Bishop, yet such free consent was never obtained in England, and
as to what was done by force, fraud, and violence, is of so little moment as to
giving a legal Title, that even the alienations that were made by Charles
Martell, who is among the Papists themselves as infamous for Sacrilege as King
Henry the Eighth, yet even his Acts are said to be done by a Council of Bishops
as is acknowledged by Dr. Johnston in his assurance of Abbey Lands, p. 27. I
shall proceed to show, First, That the Pope has no such power as to confirm
these Alienations, and this is expressly determined by the infallible Pope
Damasus in the Canon Law. Cause. 12.9.2. c. 20. The Pope cannot alienate Lands
belonging to the Church in any manner, or for any necessity whatsoever, both
the buyer and the seller lie under an Anathema till they be restored, so that
any Churchman may oppese any such Alienations, and again require the Lands and
Profits so Alienated. So that here we have a full and express Determination of
the infallible See. And tho in Answer to this it is urged by Dr. Johnston, that
this Canon is with small difference published by Binius in the Councils, and so
as to confine it to the suburbicacy Diocese of Rome; yet that this Answer is
wholly trivial, will appear.

First, Because if the Bishop of Rome has no Authority to confirm such
alienations in his own peculiar Diocese where he has most power, much less can
he do it in the Provinces where his power is less.

Secondly, That in all Ecclesiastical Courts of the Church of Rome, it is not
Binius's Edition of the Councils, but Gratian's Collection of Canons, that is
of Authority, in which Book these words are as here quoted.

Thirdly, Since this Book of the Popes Decree has been frequently reprinted by
the Authority and Command of several Popes, and constantly used in their
Courts; this is not to be looked upon as a Decree of Pope Damasus only, but of
all the succeeding Popes, and in the opinion of F. Ellis, ( Sermon before the
King, December. 5. 1686. p. 21.) what is inserted in the Canon Law is become the
whole Judgment of the whole-Church.

Fourthly, It Is absolutely forbid by Pope Gregory the Thirteenth, in his Bull
presixed before the Canon Law ( A. D. 1580.) for any one to add, or invert any
thing in that Book.

So that according to this express Determination in the Popes own Law, the
Bishops of Rome have no power to confirm any such Alienations as have been made
in England, and agreeable to all this Pope Julius the Fourth, (the very person
that is pretended to have confirmed these Alienations) declared to our English
Ambassadors that were sent upon that Errand; That if he had Power to grant it,
he would do it most readily, but his Authority was not so large. F. Paul's H.
of Council of Trent, Land. A. D. 1629. And therefore all Confirmations from the
Bishop of Rome, are already prejudged to be invallid, and of no force at all.

Secondly, No Bishop of Rome did ever confirm them. The Breve of Pope Julius
the Third which gave Cardinal Pool the largest powers toward the effecting
this, had this express limitation, Salvo tamen in his, quibus propttr renem
magnitudinem and gravitatem haec Sancta seeds merito tibi videtur consulenda,
nostro and prefatae sedis beneplacito and confirmatione, i. e. Saving to us in
these matters (in which by reason of their weight and greatness this Holy See
may justly seem to you, that of right it ought to be consulted) the good
pleasure and confirmation of us and of the holy See, which is the true English
to that Latin, and that this whole Kingdom did then so understand these words,
is evident from the Ambassadors that were sent to Rome the next Spring, Viz.
Viscount Moitecute, Bishop of Ely, and Sir Edward Carn; (These being one to
represent every state of the Kingdom,) to obtain of him a Confirmation of all
those Graces which Cardinal Pool had granted. Burnet's H. Ref p. 2. f. 300. So
that in the esteem of the whole Nation, what the Cardinal had done was not
valid without the Confirmation of the Pope himself. Now this Pope Julius, and
the next Marcellus both died before there is any pretense of any Confirmation
from Rome; but this was at length done by Pope Paul the Fourth, is pretended,
and for proof of it three things are alleged, First, The Journals of the House
of Commons where are these words, After which was read a Bill from the Popes
Holiness, confirming the doing of my Lord Cardinal, touching the assurance of
Abbey Lands, etc. Secondly, a Bull of the same Pope to Sir Will Peter's. Thirdly,
The Decrees of Cardinal Peol, and his Life by Dudithius: To all which I answer,

First, That its confessed on all hands, that there is no such Bull or
Confirmation by Pope Paul the Fourth, to be any where found in the whole World,
not any Copy or Transcript of it, not in all the Bullaria, nor our own Rolls
and Records, though it be a matter of so great moment to the Roman Catholics of
England, and what cannot be produced may easily be denied. Nor can it be
imagined that a Journal of Lay-persons that were parties concerned, or a
private Bull to Sir Will, Peter's, or some hints in the Decrees and Life of the
Cardinal will be of any moment in a Court at Rome, whenever a matter of that
vast consequence, as all the Abbey Lands in England shall come to be disputed,
especially if it be observed, that this very Journal of the House of Common^ is
no public Record, but has past through private hands, has been corrupted and
defaced, and that in Passages of the greatest moment, as are the words of W.
Hakewell Esquire in his Observation upon them 70 Years since, printed A D. 1641.
And whereas the Journals of the House of Lords are true Records, and kept by
their proper Officer; there is not one word to befound of any such confirmation,

Secondly, If there ever was any such Buil, it had this limitation in it, that
the Possessors of such Lands should bestow them all on Colleges, Hospitals,
parochial Ministers, or other such like spiritual Uses? and this I prove,

First, Because the famous Instances that are usually given of the Popes
Alienations of Church Lands, were only a changing them from one religious Use
to another. Thus when Pope Clement the Fifth, A. D. 1307. suppressed the
Knights-Templars in this Nation, and seized all their Lands and Goods, he gave
them all to the Hospitaller of St. John of Jerusalem, and that was ratified in
Parliament, 17. Edw. Second, which Act sets forth, That tho those Lands were
escheated to the Lords of the Fee by the said Dissolution, yet it was not
lawful to detain them. When Pope Clement the Seventh, A. D. 1528. gave Cardinal
Woolsey a Power to surpress several Monasteries; he was to transferr all their
Goods and possessions to his Collegiate Church at Windsor, and to Kings
College in Cambridge; and when the same Pope gave the same Cardinal many other
Religious Houses, it was for the endowing Christ-Church in Oxford, and his
College in Ipswich: And to Name no more, when Pope Alexander the seventh, A.
D. 1655. suppressed the Order of the Fratres Cruciferi, he disposed of all
their House^, Farms and Rights to such uses and pious works as he thought fit.
Vide Bullar. Ludg. Vol. Vlt. Fol. 220.

Secondly, When this very Pope was attended with the English Ambassadors that
came to his Confirmation, the Pope found fault with them, That the Churchyards
were not restored, saying that it was by no means to be tolerated, and that it
was necessary to render all even to a Farthing, because the things that belong
to God, can never be applied to humane uses, and he that withholdeth the least
part of them, is in a continual state of Damnation; that if he had power to
grant them he would do it most readily, -- but his Authority was not so large
as that he might profane the things that are dedicated to God; and let England
be assured that this would be an Anathema, etc. F. Paul's H. of the Council of
Trent; p. 392. Sleidam Com. p. 779. And all this was said by the Pope within
four Months of the pretended Consirmation.

Thirdly, The private Bull to Sir W. Peter's bears date within two Months after
the pretended Confirmation, vide. Sir W. Dugdales Eccl. Col. Fol. 207. The
Title of which Bull is this The Bull of Paul the Fourth Bishop of Rome, in
which he confirms to Sir W. Peter's all and singular the Sales of several
Manors, etc. sometimes belonging to Monasteries, which the said Sir W. Peter's
is ready to assign and demile to spiritual uses. Then follows the Bull it self,
which says, That this Confirmation was humbly desired from us, and that there
were reaso^^bre Causes to persuade it, viz. a Petition exhibited by the said
Sir W. Peter's, that the Manors, etc. belonging to certain Monasteries, and
fold to him by King Henry the Eighth, which he is ready to assign and demise to
spiritual uses, may be approved and confirmed to (...); wherefore the said Pope
does acquit and absolve him, being inclined by the said supplications, etc. By
which Bull Sir W. Peter's had no power given him to keep those Lands or (...)
them to his Heirs, but only to distribute them to such Religions uses as he
thought (...). Now it is a (...) thing, that Sir VV. (...) should (...) for a
limited Dispensation, if the whole Nation, as is pretended, had been absolutely
dispensed with but two Months before, without any limitation at all: So that
either there was no such General Confirmation, or else it was limited, with the
samo restrictions as that to Sir VV. Peter's, Viz. To bestow them upon spiritual
Uses. And this is the only probable Reason why in England this Bull is wholly
suppressed and lost. In Confirmation of this, it may be observed, that Cardinal
Pool, notwithstanding his Dispensation, carnestly exhorted all persons by the
Bowels of Christ Jesus, that not being unmindful of their Salvation, they would
at least out of their Ecclesiastical Goods take care to increase the Endowments
of Parsonages and Vicarages, that the Incumbents may be commodiously and
honestly maintained according to their Quality and Estate, whereby they may
laudibly exercise the cure of Souls, and support the incumbent Burdens, and
farther urged the Judgments that fell upon Baithazar, for converting the holy
Vessels to profane uses.

Fourthly, Queen Mary, who best understood what had been done, after the time
of this pretended Confirmation from the pope, restored all the Church Lands
that were then in the Crown, saying, That they were taken away contrary to the
Law of God, and of the Church, and therefore her conscience did not suffer her
to detain them, etc. When she gave them to the pope and his Legate to dispose
of to the Honor of God, etc. she said, She did it because she set more by the
Salvation of her Soul than ten such Kingdoms. Heylins H. Ref. p. 235. And to
this Act of Restitution, she was vehemently pressed by the Pope and his Legate.
F. Paul's H. of the C. of Trent, p. 393. Dudithius in vita poli. p 32. And
these things thus restored by the Queen, were disposed of by the Legate to
several Churches, Dudithius, ib. From all which it is evident, that neither the
Pope, nor his Legate, nor Queen Mary knew of any such confirmations of these
Alienations as would quiet the conscience without restoring them to spiritual
uses.

Fifthly, Queen Mary, not only did so her self, but pressed it vehemently upon
her Nobles and Parliament, that they would make full Restitution, Heylyn p.
237. Sleidan. p. 791. and several of them, as Sir Thomas, Sir VVylliam Peter's,
etc. who had swallowed the largest morsels of those Lands did make some sort of
Restitution, though not to the Abbeys themselves, yet to Colleges and Religious
Uses.

Sixthly, This very pope Paul the Fourth, published a Bull, in which he
threatened Excommunication to all manner of persons as kept any Church Lands to
themselves, and to all Princes, Noblemen, and Magistrates, that did not
forthwith put the same in Execution. Heylin's Hist. Ref. p. 238. So that by a
new Decree he retrieved all those Goods and Ecclesiastical Revenues which had
been alienated from the Church, since the time of Julius the Second, Ryemt's
Contin. p. 112. So improbable a story is it, that this Pope confirmed these
Alienations in England. And whereas Dr. Johnston, p. 173. has these words, Mr.
Fox says, The Pope published a Bull in print against the restoring of
Abby-Lands, which Dr. Burnet affirms also, Ap. Fol. 403. It is notoriously
false, they both asserting the contrary; Dr. Burnet's Words in that very place
are these: The Pope in plain terms refused to ratify what the Cardinal had
done, and soon after set out a severe Bull, cursing and condemning all that
held any Church Lands.

Seventhly and lastly, The succeeding Popes have been clearly of this opinion.
Pope Pius the Fourth, who immediately succeeded this Paul, confirmed the
Counoil of Trent, and therein damned all the detainers of Church Lands; and tho
he was much importuned to confirm some Alienations made by the King of France
to pay the debts of the Crown, yet he absolutely refused it, F. Paul's H. C.
Trent. 713. Pope Innocent the Tenth, first protested against the Alienations of
Church Lands in Germany, that were made at the great Treaty of Munster and
Osnaburg. A. D. 1648. and when that would not do, by his Bull, Nov. 26. in the
very same Year, damns all those that should dare to retain the Church Lands,
and declares the Treaty void. Infirmnentum pacis, etc. and Innocentii 10 me
declaratio nullitatis. Artic. etc. and all their late Popes in the Bulla caenae
do very solemnly, Damn and Excommunicate all who usurp any Jurisdiction,
Fruits, Revenues, and Emoluments belonging to any Ecclesiastical person upon
account of any Churches, Monasteries, or other Ecclesiastical Benefices, or
who, upon any occasion or cause, Sequester the said Revenues without the
Express leave of the Bishop of Rome, or others, having lawful power to do it,
etc. And tho upon Geod-Friday there is published a general Absolution, yet out
of that are expressly excluded all those who possess any Church Lands or Goods,
who are still left under the sentence of Excommunication. Toleti Instr. Sacerd.
and his Explicatio casuum in Bulla caenae Dni reserva.

From which consideration it is evident, that it never was the design of the
Pope to confirm the English Church Lands to the Lay-possessors, but that he
always urged the necessity of restoring of them to religious uses; in order to
which, the papists prevailed to have the statute of Mortmain repealed for 20
Years. In Queen Elizabeth's Reign the factious party that was managed wholly by
Romish ^missaries, demanded to have Abbtes and such Religious Houses restored
for their Use, and A. D. 1585. in their petition to the Fa^hament, they set it
down as a (...) Doctrine, that things once dedicated to Sacred Uses ought so to
remain by the Word of God for ever, and ought not to be converted to any
private Use, Bishop Bancrofts Sermon at p. c. A. D. 1588. p. 25. And that the
Church of Rome is still gaping after these Lands, is evident from many of their
late Books, as the Religion of M. Luther, lately printed at Oxford, p. 15. The
Monks wrote Anathema upon the Registers and Donations belonging to Monasteries;
the weight and essect of which curses are both felt and dreaded to this day. To
this End, the Monasti^^^ Anglicanum is so diligently preserved in the Vatican,
and other Libraries in the popish Countries; and especially this appears from
the obstinate refusal of this present Pope to confirm these Alienations, tho it
be a matter so much controverted, and which would be of that vast Use toward
promoting their Religion in this Kingdom.

If therefore the Bishops of Rome did never confirm these Alienations of
Church Lands, but earnestly and strictly required their Restitution; if they
have declared in their Authentic Canons, that they have no power to do it, and
both they and the last general Council pronounce an heavy Curse and Anathema
against all such as detain them: Then let every one that possesses these
Lands, and yet own either of these Foreign Jurisdictions, consider, that here
is nothing left to excuse him from Sacrilege, and therefore with his Estate he
must derive a curse to his posterity. There is scarcely any Papist but that is
forward to accuse King Henry the 8th. of Sacrilege, and yet never reflects
upon himself who quietly possesses the Fruits of it, without Restitution,
either let them not accuse him, or else restore themselves. Now whatever
opinions the papists may have of these things in the time of health, yet I must
desire to remember what the Jesuits proposed to Cardinal Pool in Doctor Pary's
Days, Viz. That if he would encourage them in England, they did not doubt but
that by dealing with the Consciences of those who were dying, they should soon
recover the greatest part of the Goods of the Church. Dr. Burnet's Hist. Vol.
2. p. 328. Not to mention that whenever the Regulars shall grow numerous in
England, and by consequence burdensome to the few Nobility and Gentry of that
persuasion, they will find it necessary for them to consent to a Restitution of
their Lands, that they may share the burden among others. For so vast are the
Burdens and Payments that that Religion brings with it, that it will be found
at length an advantageous Bargain to part with all the Church Lands to
indemnifie the rest. And I am confident that the Gentry of England that are
Papists, have found greater Burdens and Payments since their Religion has
been allowed, than ever they did for the many years it was forbid; and this
charge must daily increase so long as their Clergy daily grows more numerous,
and their few Converts are most of them of the meanest Rank, and such as want
to be provided for: And that is no easy matter to force Converts, may appear
from that Excellent Observation of the great Emperor Charles the Fifth, who
told Queen Mary, That by endeavoring to compel others to his own Relegion, he
had tired and spent himself in vain, and purchased nothing by it, but his own
dishonor. Card. Pool in Heylin's Hist. Ref. p. 217. And to conclude this
Discourse, had the Act of Pope Julius the Third by his Legate Cardinal Pool, in
confirming of the Alienation of Church Lands in England, been as valid as is by
some pretended? yet what shall secure us from an Act of Resumption? That very
Pope after that pretended Grant to Cardinal Pool, published a Bull, in which he
Excommunicated all that kept Abby-Lands or Church Lands, Burnet's Hist. Vol. 2.
p. 3^9. by which all former Grants, had there been any, were cancelled. His
Successor, Pope Paul the Fourth, retrieved all the Goods and Ecclesiastical
Revenues that had been alienated from the Church, since the time of Julius the
Second; and the chief Reasons that are given why the Popes may not still
proceed to an Act of Resumption of these Lands in England, amount only to this,
That they may stay for a fair opportunity, when it may be done without
disturbing the peace of the Kingdom. From all which it is evident, that the
detaining of Abby-Lands, and other Church Lands, from the Monks and Friars, is
altogether inconsistent with the Doctrine and Principles of the Romish Religion,

The King's Power in Ecclesiastical Matters truly stated.
HIS present Majesty having erected an High Commission Court to enquire of, and
make redress in, Ecclesiastical Matters, etc.

Q. Whether such a Commission, as the Law now stands, be good or not?

And I hold that the Commission is not good. And to maintain my Opinion herein,
I shall, in the first place, briefly consider, what Power the Crown of England
had in Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Matters (for I take them to be synonymous
Terms) before 17 Car. 1. ca. 11. And, Secondly, I shall particularly consider
the Act of 17 Car. 1. ca. 11. And Thirdly, I shall consider 13 Car. 2. ca. 12.
And by that time I have fully considered these three Acts of Parliament, it
will plainly appear, that the Crown of England has now no Power to erect such
a Court.

I must confess, and do agree, That by the Common Law all Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction was lodged in the Crown; and the Bishops, and all Spiritual
Persons derived their Jurisdiction from thence: And I cannot find that there
were any Attempts by the Clergy to divest the Crown of it, till William the
First's Time, and his Successors down to King John, the Pope obtained four
Points of Jurisdiction. First, Sending of Legates into England. Secondly,
Drawing of Appeals to the Court of Rome. Thirdly, Donation of Bishoprics, and
other Ecclesiastical Benefices. And Fourthly, Exemption of Clerks from the
Secular Power. Which four Points were gained within the space of an hundred and
odd Years; but with all the Opposition imaginable of the Kings and their
People; and the Kingdom never came to be absolutely inslaved to the Church of
Rome till King John's Time, and then both King and People were, and so
continued to be in a great measure in Henry the Third's Time; and so would in
all likelihood have continued, had not wise Edward the First opposed the Pope's
Usurpation, and made the Statute of Mortmain: But that which chiefly brake the
Neck of this, was, That after the Pope and Clergy had endeavored in Edward the
Second's Time, and in the beginning of Edward the Third, to usurp again; Edward
the Third did resist the Usurpation, and made the Statutes of Provisors, 25 Ed.
3. and 27 Ed. 3. And Richard the Second backed those Acts with 16 Rich. 2. ca.
5. and kept the Power in the Crown by them Laws, which being interrupted by
Queen Mary (a bloody Bigot of the Church of Rome) during her Reign, there was
an Act made in 1 Elizca. 1. which is Entitled, Keeble's Stat.
An Act to restore to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction over the Estate
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and abolishing all foreign Powers repugnant to
the same, From which Title I collect three things. First, That the Crown had
anciently a Jurisdiction over the Estate Ecclesiastical and Spiritual.
Secondly, That that Jurisdiction had for some time been at least suspended, and
the Crown had not exercised it. Thirdly, That this Law did not introduce a new
Jurisdiction, but restored the old; but with restoring the old Jurisdiction to
the Crown, gave a Power of delegating the Exercise of it. And as a Consequence
from the whole, that all Jurisdiction that is lodged in the Crown, is subject
nevertheless to the Legislative Power in the Kingdom.

I shall now consider what Power this Act of 1 Eliz. 1. declares to have been
anciently in the Crown, and that appears from Sect. 16, 17, 18. of the same Act.

Section 16. Abolisheth all Foreign Authority in Cases Spiritual and Temporal,
in these Words: And to the intent that all the Usurped and Foreign Power and
Authority, Spiritual and Temporal, may for ever be clearly extinguished, and
never to be used or obeyed within this Realm, or any other Your Majesty's
Dominions or Countries. (2:) May it please Your Highness, that it may be
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no Foreign Prince, Person,
Prelate, State or Potentate Spiritual or Temporal, shall at any time after the
last Day of this Session of F^^liament, use, enjoy, or exercise any manner of
Power, Jurisdiction, Superiority, Authority, Pre-eminence or Privilege
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical within this Realm, or within any other Your
Majesty's Dominions or Countries that now be, or hereafter shall be, but from
thenceforth the same shall be clearly Abolished out of this Realm, and all
other Your Highness's Dominions for ever; any Statute, Ordinance, Custom,
Constitutions, or any other Matter or Cause whatsoever to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding. And after the said Act has abolished all Foreign
Authority, in the very next Section, Sect. 17. It annexeth all Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction to the Crown in these Words: And that also it may likewise please
your Heghness, That it may be Established and Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That such Jurisdictions, Privileges, Superiorities, and
Preheminencies, Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as by any Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Power or Authority has heretofore been, or may lawfully be
exercised, or used for the Visitation of the Ecclesiastical State and Persons,
and for Reformation, Order and Correction of the same, and of all manner of
Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts and Enormities shall for
ever, by Authority of this present Parliament, be United and Annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm. From these Words, That such Jurisdiction, etc.
as by any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power or Authority had then-to-fore been
exercised or used, were annexed to the Crown; I observe, That the Four things
aforesaid, wherein the Pope had incroached, were all restored to the Crown; and
likewise all other Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction that had been exercised or used
in this Kingdom, and did thereby become absolutely vested in the Crown.

Then Section 18. Gives a Power to the Crown to assign Commissioners to
excrcise this Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in these Words: And that Your
Highness, Your Heirs and Successors, Kings or Queens of this Realm, shall have
full Power and Authority, by Virtue of this Act, by Letters Patents under the
Great Seal of England, to Assign, Name, and Authorize, when, and as often as
Your Highness, Your Heirs or Successors shall think meet and convenient, and
for such, and so long time as shall pleass Your Highness, your Heirs or
Successors, such Person or Persons, being natural born Subjects to Your
Highness, Your Heirs or Successors, as Your Majesty, Your Heirs or Successors
shall think meet to Exercise, Use, Occupy and Execute under Your Highness, Your
Heirs and Succ^ssors, all manner of Jurisdictions, Privileges and
Preheminencies in any wise touching or concerning any Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within these Your Realms of England and Ireland, or
any other Your Highness's Dominions and Countries; (2.) and to visit, Reform,
Redress, Order, Correct and Amend all such Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses,
Offenses, Contempts and Enormities whatsoever, which by any manner of Spiritual
or Ecclesiastical Power, Authority or Jurisdiction can, or may lawfully be
Reformed, Ordered, Redressed, Corrected, Restrained and Amended, to the
pleasure of Almighty God, the Increase of Virtue, and the Conservation of the
Peace and Unity of this Realm; (3.) And that such Person or Persons so to be
Named, Assigned, Authorized and Appointed by Your Highness, Your Heirs or
Successors, after the said Letters Patents to him or them made and delivered,
as is aforesaid, shall have full Power and Authority, by Virtue of this Act,
and of the said Letters Patents under Your Highness. Your Heirs and Successors,
to exercise, use and execute all the premises, according to the Tenor and
Effect of the said Letters Patents, any matter or cause to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.

So that, I take it, that all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was in the
Crown by the Common Law of England, and declared to be so by the said Act of 1
Eliz. 1. and by that Act, a Power given to the Crown to assign Commissioners to
exercise this Jurisdiction; which was accordingly done by Queen Elizabeth, and
a High Commission Court was by her erected; which sat and held Plea of all
Causes, Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, during the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, King
James the First, and King Charles the First, till the 17th. Year of his Reign.

Which leads me to consider the Statute of 17 Car. 1. ca. 11. which Act recites
the Title of 1 Eliz. ca. 1. and Sect. 18. of the same Act, and recites further,
Section 2. That whereas by color of some Words in the aforesaid Branch of the
said Act, whereby Commissioners are authorized to execute their Commission
according to the Tenor and Effect of the Kings Letters Patents, and by Letters
Patents grounded thereupon, the said Commissioners have to the great and
insufferable Wrong and Oppression of the Kings Subjects, used to Fine and
Imprison them, and to exercise other Authority, not belonging to Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction restored by that Act, and diverse other great Mischiefs and
Inconveniences have also ensued to the Kings Subjects, by occasion of the said
Branch, and Commissions issued thereupon, and the Executions thereof: Therefore
for the repressing and preventing of the aforesaid Abuses, Mischiefs and
Inconveniences in time to come, (by Sect. 3. the said Clause in the said Act 1
Eliz. 1. is Repealed with a Non obstante to the said Act, in these Words:) Be
it Enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Commons in
this present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the
aforesaid Branch, Clause, Article or Sentence contained in the said Act, and
every Word, Matter and thing contained in that Branch, Clause, Article or
Sentence, shall from henceforth be Repealed, Annulled, Revoked, Annihilated and
utterly made Void for ever; any thing in the said Act to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.

And in Sect. 5. of the same Act, it is Enacted, That from and after the first
of August (in the said Act mentioned) all such Commissions shall be void, in
these Words, And be it further Enacted, That from and after the said first Day
of August, no new Court shall be erected, ordained or appointed within this
Realm of England, or Dominion of Wales, which shall or may have the like Power,
Jurisdiction or Authority as the said High Commission Court now has, or
pretends to have; but that all and every such Letters Patents, Commissions
and Grants, made or to be made by his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors; and
all Powers and Authorities, granted or pretended, or mentioned to be granted
thereby; And all Acts, Sentences, and Decrees, to be made, by virtue or Color
thereof, shall be utterly void, and of none effect.

By which Act then, the Power of Exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by
Commissioners, under the Broad-Seal, is so taken away, that it provides no such
Power shall ever for the future be Delegated by the Crown, to any Person or
Persons whatsoever.

Let us then in the last place consider, Whether the Act of 13 Car. 2. ca. 12
has restored this Power or not?

And for this, I take it, that it is not restored by the said Act, or any
Clause in it; and to make this evident, I shall first set down the whole Act,
and then consider it in the several Branches of it, that relate to this Matter:
The Act is Entitled,

An Act for Explanation of a Clause contained in an Act of Parliament made in
the 17th. Year of the Late King Charles, Entitled, An Act for Repeal of a
Branch of Statute, in Primo Elizabethae; c^ncerning Commissioners for Causes
Ecclesiastical.

The Act it self runs thus, Whereas in an Act of Parliament, made in the
Seventeenth Year of the Late King Charles, Entitled, An Act for Repeal of a
Branch of a Stature primo Elizabethae, concerning Commissioners for Causes
Ecclesiastical, It is (amongst other things) Enacted, that no Archbishop,
Bis^^p or Vicar General, nor any Chancellor, nor Commissary of any Archbishop,
Bishop or Vicar General, nor any Ordinary whatsoever, nor any other Spiritual
or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer, or Minister of Justice, nor any other Person
or Persons whatsoever, exercising Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power, Authority,
or Jurisdiction, by any Grant, Lisence, or Commission of the Kings Majesty, His
Heirs, or Successors, or by any Power or Authority derived from the King, his
Heirs or Successors, or otherwise, shall (from and after the First Day of
August which then should be in the Year of our Lord God, 1641.) Award, Impose
or Inflict any Pain, Penalty, Fine, Amercement, Imprisonment, or other Corporal
Punishment upon any of the Kings Subjects, for any Contempt, Misdemeanor,
Crime, Offense, Matter or Thing whatsoever, belonging to Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Cognizance or Jurisdiction: (2.) Whereupon some Doubt has been
made that all ordinary Power of Coertion, and proceeding in Causes
Ecclesiastital were taken away, whereby the ordinary Course of Justice in
Causes Ecclesiastical has been obstructed. (3.) Be it therefore Declared and
Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by
the Authority thereof, That neither the said Act, nor any thing therein
contained, does or shall take away any ordinary Power or Authority from any of
the said Archbishops, Bishops, or any other Person or Persons, named as
aforesaid, but that they and every of them, exercising Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, may proceed, determine, Sentence, execute and exercise all manner
of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and all Censures and Coertions appertaining and
belonging to the same, before any making of the Act before recited, in all
Causes and Matters belonging to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, according to the
Kings Majesty's Ecclesiastical Laws, used and practiced in this Realm, in as
ample Manner and Form as they did and might lawfully have done before making of
the said Act.

Sect. 2. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the before
recited Act of Decimo Septimo Car. and all the Matters and Clauses therein
contained (excepting what concerns the High Commission Court, or the new
Erection of some such like Court by Commission) shall be and is thereby
repealed to dlintents and purposes whatsoever, any thing, clause or sentence in
the said Act contained to the contrary ^^ithstanding.

Sect. 3. Provided always, and it is hereby Enacted, That neither this Act, nor
any thing herein con^^ined, shall extend, or be construed to ravive, or give
Force to the said Branch of the said Statute wade in the said First Year of the
Reign of the said Late Queen Elizabeth, mentioned in the said Act if Parliament
made in the Seventeenth Year of the Reign of the said King Charles; but that
the said Branch of the said Statute, made in the said First Year of the Reign
of the said Late Queen Elizabeth, scall stand and be Repealed in such sort as
if this Act had never been made.

Sect. 4. Provided always, and it is hereby Enacted, That it shall not be
lawful for any Archbishop, Bishop, Vicar General, Chancellor, Commissary, or
any other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer, or Minister, or any other
person having or exercising Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to Tender
or Administer unto any Person whatsoever, the Oath usually called Ex Officio,
or any other Oath whereby such person, to whom the same is tendered or
administered, may be charged or compelled to confess or accuse, or to purge him
or herself of any Criminal matter or thing, whereby he or she may be liable to
Censure or Punishment; any thing in this Statute, or any other Law, Custom or
Usage heretofore to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Sect. 5. Provided always, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall
not extend, or be construed to extend, to give unto any Arch Bishop, Bishop, or
any other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer, or other person or
persons aforesaid, any Power or Authority to Exercise, Execute, Inflict or
Determine any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Censure or Coertion, which they
might not by Law have done before the Year of our Lord 1639. (2.) Nor to
abridge or diminish the Kings Majesty's Supremacy in Ecclefiastical Matters and
Affairs, nor to confirm the Canons made in the Year 1640. nor any of them, nor
any other Ecclesiastical Laws or Canons not formerly confirmed, allowed or
enacted by Parliament, or by the established Laws of the Land, as they stood in
the Year of our Lord, 1639.

From the Title of the Act, and the Act it self considered, I gather.

First, That it is an Explanatory Act of the 17th. of Car. 1. as to one
particular Branch of it, and not introductive of any new Law.

Secondly, That the Occasion of making it was not from any Doubt that did
arise, Whether the High Commission Court were taken away? or whether the Crown
had Power to erect any such like Court for the future, but from a Doubt that
was made, that all ordinary Power of Coertion, and Proceedings in Causes
Ecclefiastical was taken away, whereby Justice in Ecclesiastical Matters was
obstructed; and this Doubt did arise from a Clause in 17 Car. 1. ca. 11. Sect.
4. herein mentioned to be recited in the said Act of 13 Car. 2. ca. 12.

Thirdly, That this Statute of 13 Car. 2. ca. 12. as appears upon the Face of
it, was made to the intent the ordinary Jurisdiction which the Bishops and
other Ecclesiastical Persens had always exercised under the Crown, might not be
infringed; but not to restore to the Crown the power of Delegating the Exercise
of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by Letters Patents to Lay persons or any others,
and as to this, nothing can be plainer, than the Words of the Act it self,
Sect. 2.

Whereby 17 Car. 1. is repealed, but takes particular care to except what
concerned the High Commission Court, or the new Erection of some such Court by
Commission.

Neither did the Lawmakers think this Exception in that Statute of 13 Car. 2.
ca. 12. Sect. 2. to be sufficient, but to put the Matter out of all doubt, in
the Third Section of the same Statute, It is provided and Enacted, That neither
that Act, nor any thing therein contained, should extend or be construed to
revive, or give force to the Branch of 1 Eliz. 1. Sect. 18. but that the same
Branch sh^^^ stand absolutely Repealed. And if so, then the power of the Crown
to delegate the Exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is wholly taken away;
for it was vested in the Crown by 1 Eliz. 1. and taken away by 17 Car. 1. ca.
11. and is in no manner restored by 13 Car. 2.12. or any other.

But there may arise an Objection from the Words in the Statute of 13 Car. 2.
ca. 12. that says, That that Act shall not extend to abridge or diminish the
Kings Majesty's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Matters and Affairs. Whence some
Men would gather, that the same power still remains in the Crown that was in it
before, 17 Car. 1. ca. 11.

To which Objection I give this Answer, That every Law is to be so constructed,
that it may not be Felo de se, and that for the Honor of the Legislators,
King, Lords and Comment. Now I would appeal to the Gentlemen themselves, that
assert this Doctrine, Whether they can so construe the Act of 13 Car. 2. ca.
12. as they pretend to do, without offering Vi^lence to their own Reason? For
when the 1 Car. 1. ca. 11. had absolutely repealed the Branch of 1 Eliz. 1.
that vested the power in the Crown of Delegating the Exercise of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and Enacts, That no such Commission shall be for the future; and
the Act of 13 Car. 2. ca. 12. Repeals the 17 Car. 1. ca. 12. except what
relates to that particular Branch, there can no more of the Kings Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical Matters and Affairs, be saved by the saving in the 13 Car. 2.
ca. 12. but what was left in the Crown by 17 Car. 1. ca. 11.

And now I hope I have sufficiently evinced, That all the Proceedings before
the Ecclesiastical Commissioners are CORAM NON JVDICE; and therefore have
sufficient Reason to believe, That the same would never have been set on foot
by his present Majesty (who had always the Character of JAMES the Just, and
has promised upon his Royal Word, That he will invade no Man's Property) had
he not been advised thereunto by them who are better versed in the Canons of
the Church of ROME, than in the Laws that relate to the CROWN and CHURCH of
ENGLAND.

A LETTER, Writ by Mijn Here Fagel, Pensioner of Holland, to Mr. James Stewart,
Advocate; Giving an Account of the Prince and Princes of Orange's Thoughts
concerning the Repeal of the Test, and the Penal Laws.
SIR,
I Am extreme sorry, that my ill health has so long hindered me from Answering
those Letters, in which you so earnestly desired to know of me, what their
Highnesses thoughts are concerning the repeal of the Penal Laws, and more
particularlarly of that concerning the Test: I beg you to assure your self,
that I will deal very plainly with you in this matter, and without reserve,
since you say that your Letters were writ by the King's knowledge and
allowance. I must then first of all assure you very positively, that their
Highnesses have often declared, as they did it more particularly to the
Marquess of Albeville, His Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary to the States, that it
is Their Opinion, That no Christian ought to be persecuted for his conscience,
or be ill used because he differs from the public and Established Religion;
And therefore, They can consent, that the Papists in England, Scotland and
Ireland be suffered to continue in their Religion, with as much Liberty as is
allowed them by the States in these Provinces; in which it cannot be denied,
that they enjoy a full Liberty of conscience. And as for the Dissenters, Their
Highnesses do not only consent, but do heartily approve of their having an
entire Liberty, for the full exercise of their Religion, without any trouble or
hindrance; so that none may be able to give them the least disturbance upon
that account.

And their Highnesses are very ready, in case his Majesty shall think fit to
desire it, to declare their willingness to concur in the settling and confirming
this Liberty, and as far as it lies in them, they will protect and defend it,
and according to the Language of Treaties, They will confirm it with their
Guaranty, of which you made mention in yours.

And if his Majesty shall think fit further to desire their concurrence in the
repealing of the Penal Laws, they are ready to give it; provided always that
those Laws remain still in their full vigor, by which the Roman Catholics are
shut out of both Houses of Parliament, and out of all public Employments,
Ecclesiastical, Civil and Military. As likewise all those other Laws, which
confirm the Protestant Religion and which secures it against all the attempts
of the Roman Catholics.

But their Highnesses cannot agree to the repeal of the Test, or of those other
Penal Laws last mentioned, that tend to the security of the Protestant
Religion; since the Roman Catholics receive no other prejudice from these,
then the being excluded from Parliaments, or from public Employments. And that
by them the Protestant Religion is covered from all the Designs of the Roman
Catholics against it, or against the public safety; and neither the Test nor
these other Laws can be said to carry in them any severity against the Roman
Catholics upon account of their Consciences: They are only provisions
qualifying men to be Members of Parliament, or to be capable of bearing Office;
by which they must declare before God and Men, that they are for the Protestant
Religion. So that indeed, all this amounts to no more than a securing the
Protestant Religion from any prejudices that it may receive from the Roman
Catholics.

Their Highnesses have thought and do still think, that more than this ought
not to be asked, or expected from them: since by this means, the Roman
Catholics and their posterity will be for ever secured from all trouble in
their Persons or Estates, or in the Exercise of their Religion; and that the
Roman Catholics ought to be satisfied with this, and not to disquiet the
Kingdom because they cannot be admitted to sit in Parliament, or to be in
Employments; or because those Laws in which the Security of the Protestant
Religion does chiefly consist, are not repealed, by which they may be put in a
condition to overturn it.

Their Highnesses do also believe, that the Dissenters will be fully satisfied
when they shall be for ever covered from all danger of being disturbed, or
punished for the free Exercise of their Religion, upon any sort of pretense
whatsoever.

Their Highnesses having declared themselves so positively in these matters, it
seems very plain to me, that They are far from being any hindrance to the
Freeing Dissenters from the Severity of Penal Laws; since they are ready to use
their utmost endeavors for the Establishing of it: Nor do They at all press
the denying to the Roman Catholics the Exercise of their Religion, provided it
be managed modestly, and without Pomp or Ostentation. As for my own part, I
ever was and still am very much against all those, who would persecute any
Christian because he differs from the public and established Religion: And I
hope by the Grace of God to continue still in the same mind; for since that
Light with which Religion illuminates our minds, is according to my sense of
things, purely an effect of the Mercy of God to us, we ought then, as I think,
to render to God all possible Thanks for his Goodness to us: and to have pity
for those who are still shut up in Error, even as God has pitied us, and to put
up most earnest prayers to God, for bringing those into the way of Truth, who
stray from it, and to use all gentle and friendly methods for reducing them to
it.

But I confess, I could never comprehend how any that profess themselves
Christians, and that may enjoy their Religion freely and without any
disturbance, can judge it lawful for them to go about to disturb the Quiet of
any Kingdom or State, or to overturn Constitutions, that so they themselves may
be admitted to Employments, and that those Laws in which the Security and Quiet
of the established Religion consists, should be shaken.

It is plain, that the Reformed Religion is by the Grace of God, and by the
Laws of the Land, enacted both by King and Parliament; the public and
established Religion, both in England, Scotland and Ireland; and that it is
provided by those Laws, that none can be admitted either to a place in
Parliament, or to any public Employment except those that do openly declare,
that they are of the Protestant Religion, and not Roman Catholics; and it is
also provided by those Laws, that the Protestant Religion shall be in all time
coming secured from the Designs of the Roman Catholics against it: In all
which I do not see, that these Laws contain any Severity, either against the
Persons or Estates of those who cannot take those Tests, that are contrary to
the Roman Catholic Religion, all the inconveniences that can redound to them
from thence, is that their Persons, their Estates, and even the Exercise of
their Religion being assured to them, only they can have no share in the
Government, nor in Offices of Trust, as long as their Consciences, do not allow
them to take these Tests: and they are not suffered to do any thing that is to
the prejudice of the Reformed Religion.

Since, as I have already told you. Their Highnesses are ready to concur with
his Majesty for the Repeal of those Penal Laws, by which Men are made liable to
fines or other Punishments.

So I see there remains no difficulty concerning the Repealing the Penal Laws,
but only this, that some would have the Roman Catholics rendered capable of
all public Trusts and Employments, and that by consequence, all those should
be repealed that have secured the Protestant Religion against the designs of
the Roman Catholics, where others at the same time are not less earnest to
have those Laws maintained in their full and due vigor; and think, that the
chief Security of the established Religion consists in the preserving of them
Sacred and unshaken.

It is certain, that there is no Kingdom, Commonwealth, or any constituted
Body or Assembly whatsoever, in which there are not Laws made for the Safety
thereof; and that provide against all Attempts whatsoever, that disturb their
peace, and that prescribe the Conditions and Qualities that they judge
necessary for all that shall bear Employments in that Kingdom, State or
Corporation: And no man can pretend, that there is any Injury done him, that he
is not admitted to Employments when he does not satisfy the Conditions and
Qualities required.

Nor can it be denied, that there is a great difference to be observed in the
conduct of those of the Reformed Religion, and of the Roman Catholics toward
one another: The Roman Catholics not being satisfied to exclude the Reformed
from all places of Profit or of Trust, they do absolutely suppress the whole
Exercise of that Religion, and persecute all that profess it; and this they do
in all those places where it is safe and without danger, to carry on that
rigor. And I am sorry that we have at this present so many deplorable
Instances of this severity before our Eyes, that is at the same time put in
practice in so many different places.

I would therefore gladly see one single good reason to move a Protestant that
fears God, and that is concerned for his Religion, to consent to the Repealing
of those Laws that have been enacted by the Authority of King and Parliament,
which have no other tendency but to the security of the Reformed Religion, and
to the restraining of the Roman Catholics from a capacity of overturning it;
these Laws inflict neither Fines nor Punishments, and do only exclude the Roman
Catholics from a share in the Government, who by being in Employments must
needs study to increase their party, and to gain to it more Credit and Power,
which by what we see every day, we must conclude, will be extremely dangerous
to the Reformed Religion, and must turn to its great prejudice: Since in all
places, those that are in public Employments, do naturally Favor that
Religion of which they are, either more or less. And who would go about to
persuade me or any man else to endeavor to move Their Highnesses, whom God
has honored so far as to make them the Protectors of his Church, to approve
of, or to consent to things so hurtful, both to the Reformed Religion, and to
the public Safety. Nor can I, Sir, with your good leave, in any way, grant
what you apprehend, That no prejudice will thereby redound to the Reformed
Religion.

I know it is commonly said, that the number of the Roman Catholics in England
and Scotland is very inconsiderable; and that they are possessed only of a very
small number of the places of Trust: Tho even as to this, the case is quite
different in Ireland: Yet this you must of necessity grant me, that if their
numbers are small, then it is not reasonable that the public Peace should be
disturbed on the account of so few persons, especially when so great a favor
may be offered to them; such as the free Exercise of their Religion would be:
And if their numbers are greater, then there is so much the more reason to be
afraid of them; I do indeed believe that Roman Catholics, as things at present
stand, will not be very desirous to be in public Offices and Employments, nor
that they will make any attempts upon the Reformed Religion both because this
is contrary to Law, and because of the great inconveniences that this may
bring at some other time both on their Persons and their Estates: yet if the
Restraints of the Law were once taken off, you would see them brought into the
Government, and the chief Offices and Places of Trust would be put in their
hands, nor will it be easy to his Majesty to resist them in this, how steadfast
soever he may be; for they will certainly press his hard in it, and they will
represent this to the King, as a matter in which his Conscience will be
concerned; and when they are possessed of the public Offices, what will be
left for the Protestants to do, who will find no more the support of the Law,
and can expect little Encouragement from such Magistrates? And on the other
hand, the advantages that the Roman Catholics would find in being thus set
loose from all restraints, are so plain, that it were a loss of time to go
about the proving it. I neither can nor will doubt of the sincerity of his
Majesty's intentions, and that he has no other design before him in this
matter, but that all his Subjects may enjoy in all things the same Rights and
Freedom.

But plain Reason, as well as the Experience of all Ages, the present as well
as the past, shows, that it will be impossible for Roman Catholics and
Protestants, when they are mixed together in places of Trust and public
Employments, to live together peaceably, or to maintain a good Correspondence
together. They will be certainly always jealous of one another; For the
Principles and the Maxims of both Religions are so opposite to one another,
that in my opinion I do not see how it will be in the power of any Prince or
King whatsoever, to keep down those Suspicions and Animosities, which will be
apt to arise upon all occasions.

As for that which you apprehend, that the Dissenters shall not be delivered
from the Penal Laws, that are made against them, unless at the same time the
Test be likewise repealed: This will be indeed a great unhappiness to them; but
the Roman Catholics are only to blame for it, who will rather be content that
they and their Posterity should lie still under the weight of the Penal Laws,
and exposed to the hatred of the whole Nation; than he still restrained from a
capacity of attempting any thing against the Peace and the Security of the
Protestant Religion. And be deprived of that small advantage (if it is at all
to be reckoned one) of having a share in the Government and public Enjoyments;
since in all places of the World this has been always the privilege of the
Religion that is established by Laws; and indeed these Attempts of the Roman
Catholics ought to be so much the more suspected and guarded against by
Protestants in that they see that Roman Catholics, even when liable to that
Severity of Penal Laws, do yet endeavor to persuade his Majesty, to make the
Protestants, whether they will or not, dissolve the Security which they have
for their Religion: And to clear a way for bringing in the Roman Ca^^^licks to
the Government, and to public Employments: In which case there would remain no
relief for them but what were to be expected from a Roman Catholic Government.

Such then will be very unjust to Their Highnesses, who shall blame them for
any inconveniency that may arise from thence; since they have declared
themselves so freely on this Subject, and that so much to the advantage even of
the Roman Catholics. And since the Settlements of matters sticks at this
single point, that Their Highnesses cannot be brought to consent to things that
are so contrary to Laws already in being, and that are so dangerous and so
hurtful to the Protestant Religion, as the admitting of Roman Catholics to a
share in the Government, and to places of Trust, and the repealing of those
Laws, that can have no other effect but the Securing of the Protestant Religion
from all the Attempts of the Roman Catholics against it, would be.

You Write, That the Roman Catholics in these Provinces are not shut out from
Employments and places of Trust; But in this you are much mistaken. For our
Laws are express, excluding them by name from all share in the Government, and
from all Employments either of the Policy or Justice of our Country. It is
true, I do not know of any express Law, that shuts them out of Military
Employments; that had indeed been hard, since in the first Formation of our
State they joined with us in defending our public Liberty, and did us eminent
service during the Wars; therefore they were not shut out from those Military
Employments, for the public sifety was no way endangered by this, both because
their numbers that served in our Troops were not great, and because the States
could easily prevent any Inconvenience that might arise out of that; which
could not have been done so easily, if the Roman Catholics had been admitted
to a share in the Government, and in the Policy or Justice of our State.

I am very certain of this, of which I could give very good proofs that there
is nothing which Their Highnesses desire so much, as that his Majesty may reign
happily, and in an entire Confidence with his Subjects and that his Subjects
being persuaded of his Majesty's fatherly affection to them, may be ready to
make him all the returns of duty that are in their Power: But their Highnesses
are convinced in their Consciences, that both the Protestant Religion and the
safety of the Nation, would be exposed to most certain Dangers, if either the
Tests, or those other Penal Laws, of which I have made frequent mention, should
be repealed; Therefore they cannot consent to this, nor concur with his
Majesty's Will; for they believe they should have much to Answer for to God, if
the consideration of any present advantage should carry them to consent and
concur in things which they believe would be not only dangerous but mischievous
to the Protestant Religion.

Their Highnesses have ever paid a most profound duty to his Majesty, which
they will always continue to do; for they consider themselves bound to it, both
by the Laws of God and of Nature: But since the matter that is now in hand,
relates not to the making of new Laws, but to the total Repealing of those
already made both by King and Parliament; they do not see how it can be
expected of them, that they should consent to such a Repeal, to which they have
so just an aversion, as being a thing that is contrary to the Laws and Customs
of all Christian States, whether Protestants, or Papists, who receive none to a
share in the Governments, or to public Employments, but those who profess the
public and established Religion, and that take care to secure it against all
attempts whatsoever.

I do not think it necessary to demonstrate to you how much their Highnesses
are devoted to his Majesty, of which they have given such real Evidences as are
beyond all verbal ones; and they are resolved still to continue in the same
Duty, and Affection; or rather to increase it, if that is possible. I am, SIR,

Yours, etc.
Nov. 4. 1687.
Reflections on Monsieur Fagel's Letter.
SIR,
I Shall endeavor to Answer yours as fully and briefly as possible.

1. You desire to know whether the Letter I sent you be truly Monsieur Fagel's
or not.

2. Whether their Highnesses gave him Commission to Write it.

3. How far the Dissenters may rely on their Highnesses word.

4. What effects it has on all sorts of People.

Sir, Roman Catholics may be pardoned if they endeavor to make that Letter
pass for an Imposture, it is their Interest so to do, and they are seldom
wanting to promote that, let the methods be never so indirect which they are
forced to make use of: It does indeed spoil many hopeful Projects of theirs.
But how any Protestant among us can really doubt the truth of it, is strange to
me. Some things carry their own evidence along with them, I take this Letter to
be one of that kind. I do not desire you to believe me upon my bare affirmation
that I know it to be genuine, (tho this be most true) but shall offer, my
Reasons to convince you that it cannot be otherwise.

First, The Letter is like its Author, the matter is weighty, the Reasoning
solid, the Style grave, full and clear, like that of a Lawyer: It has an Air
all over, which as well shows the Religion and Temper of its Writer, as the
Matter and Method of it do his Capacity and Judgment. Now all these Qualities
make up the Character of Monsieur Fagel.

Secondly, There are the same grounds to believe this Letter to be M. Fagel's
as there are to believe any thing you have not seen, Viz. The constant
Asseverations of Persons of undoubted Credit that come from Holland, who all
agree in it, and assure us of it. M. Fagel owned it to several English
Gentlemen, and many both here and in Holland knew two Months ago that such a
Letter was written; a Forgery would before this time have been detected,
especially such a one as ruins the Designs of the Triumphing Party.

Thirdly, It was written by M. Fagel in answer to Letters from Mr. Stewart,
sent by his Majesty's special Orders, and Mr. Stewart had both an English and
Latin Copy sent him: Therefore the English Copy is not called a Translation,
but it is a sort of Original: For you are not to doubt but the matter was
ordered so, that her Royal Highness might peruse it as well as his Majesty.

In the next place, you would know whether their Highnesses gave Order to
Monsieur Fagel to write it.

I wish Sir; you would take the pains to read the Letter over again, and
consider who this Monsieur Fagel is; He is Pensionary of Holland, and first
Minister of State, raised to that Dignity by the Prince's Favor, he Answers
Letters written to him, which are ordered by his Majesty to be Communicated to
their Highnesses, In his Answer, he gives an Account of their Highnesses
Opinions about the Repeal of the Penal Laws and Test; matters of a National
Concern, and of the greatest Importance. Now you must have a strange Opinion of
Monsieur Fagel, if you think him capable of so great an indiscretion (or rather
Imposture) as to write such a Letter of his own Head. The Letter it self
Demonstrates, that whoever writ it is no Fool, and the Circumstances I have
marked show that he is no Knave. And indeed the Substance of it is not new, it
only repeats to his Majesty the same Answer which the Prince and Princess had
formerly given to his Majesty's Envoy there.

In short, you may leave the whole Matter to this plain Issue: If this Letter
be a false one, it will be disowned; if a true one, it will be owned. Their
Highnesses love not to do things that will not bear the Light. It is evident,
they did not intend the Matter of it should be a Secret, having told it to
Monsieur D' Albeville, as often as he (in his discreet Way) necessitated them
to do it. But how it came to be printed, I cannot inform you justly; however
you shall have my Conjecture.

I remember, as soon as it was noised about Town, that Mr. Stewart had received
a Letter of such a Nature from Monsieur Fagle, care was taken, that the Writer
of the common News Letters, which are dispersed over the Kingdom, should insert
in them, that their Highnesses had declared themselves for the Repeal of the
Test. This Pia Fraus might, I suppose, give occasion to the printing of the
Letter, as the Wisdom and Policy of our Statesmen (in putting Mr. Stewart on
writting such Letters) had procured (...): I say Letters, for Monsieur Fagel
had five or six on that Subject, before he answered, so unwilling were they in
Holland to return an Answer, since they could not give one that was pleasing,
or do any thing that looked like meddling.

The third thing you desired to be satisfied in, is, Whether the Dissenters may
re^y on their Highnesses Word. I am as apt to mistrust Princes Promises, as you
are. But shall now give you my Reasons, why I think the Dissenters may safely
do it. And at the same time, because of the Affinity of the Matter, I will tell
you why I think we may all rely on their Highness for our Civil Liberties, as
well as the Dissenters may do for Liberty of Conscience. Much of what I have to
say is equally applicable to them both, yet because I know you have had an
Account of Her Royal Highness, better than I can give you, I shall for the most
part, speak only of the Prince.

My first Reason is the certainest of all Reasons, That it will be His
Highnesses Interest to settle Matters at Home, which only can be done by a
Legal Tolleration or Comprehension in Matters of Religion; and by restoring the
Civil Liberties of the Nation, so much invaded of late. That this will be his
Interest is evident, if his Designs lie abroad, as it is certain they do.
Designs at home and abroad at the same time, are so inconsistent, that we see
his Majesty, tho raised above his Fears at home by his late Victory; and
invited abroad by all that can excite his Appetite for Glory, cannot reconcile
them: The Truth is, one that would undertake it, is in the same Condition with
Officers that beat their Men to make them fight, they have Enemies before and
behind.

But you may happily object, that Princes do not always follow their true
Interests, of which it is not difficult in this Age to give several fatal
Instances. I answer, That it is to be presumed that Princes, as well as other
Men, will follow their Interests till the contrary appear; and if they be of an
Age to have taken their Fold, and have till such an Age kept firm to their
Interests, the Presumption grows strong; but if their Inclinations, the Maxims
of their Families, the Impressions of their Education, and all their other
Circumstances to side with their Interest, and lead them the same way, it is
hardly credible they should ever quit it. Now this being the present Case, we
have all the certainty that can be had in such Matters.

The Prince of Orange has above these 15 years given so great proof of his
Firmness and Resolution, as well as of his Capacity and Conduct in opposing the
Grand Ravisher (I may add the Betrayers too) of Liberty and Religion, that he
is deservedly (by all impartial Men) owned to be the Head of the Protestant
Interest: A Headship, which no Princes but the Kings of England should have,
and none but they would be without it.

Now one may rationally conclude, That when the Prince shall join to his
present Possession of this Headship, a more natural Title, by being in a
greater Capacity to act, he will not degrade himself, nor lay aside Designs and
Interests, which ought to be the Glory of England, as they are indeed the Glory
of his Family, acquired and derived to him by the Blood of his Ancestors, and
carried on and maintained by himself with so much Honor and Reputation.

I might add here, That the Prince is a Man of a sedate, even Temper, full of
Thoughts and Reflections: one that precipitates neither in Thinking, Speaking,
nor Acting; is cautious in resolving and promising, but firm to his
Resolutions, and exact in observing his Word: Inform your self, and you will find
this a part of his Character, and conclude from hence what may be presumed from
his Inclinations.

Now as to the Maxims of his Family, let us compare them a little where it may
be decently done.

The French King broke his Faith to his Protestant Subjects, upon this single
Point of Vain glory, that he might show the World he was greater than most of
his Predecessors; who tho they had the same Inclinations, were not potent
enough to pursue them effectually, as he has done to the everlasting Infamy of
his Name and Reign. The Maxims of the French Kings have been, how to outvie
each other in Robbing their Neighbors, and Oppressing their Subjects by
Perfidiousness and Cruelty. But those of the Family of Orange, on the contrary,
have been, to Rescue Europe from its Oppressors, and maintain the Protestant
Interest, by Virtue, Truth, Honor and Resolution; knowing that such Methods
are as necessary to make Protestant Princes and States flourish, as Vice and
Oppression are to maintain Popish Government.

No Popish Prince in Europe can pretend to have kept his Word to his Protestant
Subjects, as the Princes of Orange have always done to their Popish Subjects at
Orange, and elsewhere; and the Papists have often broke their Word to that
Family, and have been and are its declared Enemies; and tho the Princes two
Great Grandfathers, Admiral Coligny, and Prince William, were assassinated by
the Authority, and with the Approbation of that whole Party, yet it cannot be
made appear, that ever the Princes of that Family failed in keeping their Word,
even to such Enemies, or used their own Popish Subjects the worse for it, in
making distinction between them and their other Subjects, or influenced the
States to use theirs so: I say the States, who a low their R. C. Subjects all
the Privileges of their other Subjects, only they are kept by a Test from
having any share in the Government, which is truly a Kindness done them,
considering that ill-natured humor of destroying all those that differ from
them, which is apt to break out when that Religion is in Power.

Now the (...) of England may justly expect all sort of Protection and
Countenance from the Succe^^^^ (...) it is their Turn to give it, they have a
legal Right to it, and impartial Dissenters (...) ^^^ledge, that of late they
have deserved it.

But as (...) Protestant Dissenters, I think no honest Man amongst them will
apprehend, that their (...), who keep their Word to their Popish Enemies, will
break it to Protestant Subject^ (...) from the public Establishment.

The next thing I am to make good, is, That his Highnesses Education must have
infused such Principles as side with his Interest: There must be a fatal
Infection in the English Crown, if Matters miscarry in his Highnesses Hands,
his Veins are full of the best Protestant Blood in the World. The Reformation
in France grew up under the Conduct and Influence of Coligni. Prince William
founded the Governmtnt of the United Netherlands on the Basis of Property and
Liberty of Conscience, his Highness was bred, and lives in that State which
subsists and flourishes by adhering steadily to the Maxims of its Founder.

He himself, both in his public and private Concerns, as well in the
Government of his Family, and of such Principalities as belong to him, as in
that of the Army, and in the Dispensing of that great Power which the States
have given him, has as great regard to Justice, Virtue and true Religion, as
may complete the Character of a Prince, qualified to make those he governs
happy.

It does not indeed appear, that their Highnesses have any share of that
devouring Zeal which has so long set the World on Fire, and tempted thinking
Men to have a Notion of Religion it self, like that we have of the ancient
Paradise, as if it had never been more than an interced Blessing, but all who
have the Honor to know their Highnesses and their Inclinations in Matters of
Religion, are fully satisfied they have a truly Christian Zeal, and as much as
is consistent with Knowledge and Charity.

As to his Highnesses Circumstances, they will be such when his Stars make way
for him, as may convince our Scepticks, that certain persons, times and things,
are prepared for one another. I know not why we may not hope, that as his
Predecessors broke the York of the House of Austria from off the Neck of
Europe; The Honor of breaking that of the House of Bourbon is reserved for
him. I am confident the Nation will heartily join with him in his just
Resentments. Resentments which they have with so much Impatience longed to
find, and have miss^d with the greatest Indignation in the Hearts of their
Monarchs.

His Highness has at present, a greater Influence on the Councils of the most
part of the Princes of Christendom, than possibly any King of England ever had.
And this acquired (...) weight of his own personal Merit, which will no doubt
grow up to a glorious Authority, when it is clothed with Sovereign Power. May
I here mention (to lay the Jealousies of the most unreasonable of your Friends)
that his Highness will have only a borrowed Title, which we may suppose will
make him more cautious in having Designs at Home, and his wanting Children (to
our great Misfortune) will make him less solicitous to have such Designs.

But after all, it must be acknowledged, that in Matters of this Nature, the
Premises may seem very strong, and yet the Conclusion not follow. Humane
Infirmities are great, Temptations to Arbitrariness are strong, and often both
the Spirit and Flesh weak. Such fatal Mistakes have been made of late, that the
Successors themselves may justly pardon Men's jealousies. A VVidow that has had
a bad Husband, will cry on her VVedding-day, though she would be married with
all her Heart. But I am confident you will grant to me, that in the Case of the
present Successors, the Possibilities are as remote, and the Jealousies as ill
grounded, and that there is as much to balance them, as ever there was to be
found in the prospect of any Successors to the Crown of England. Now may I add,
To conclude the Reasons that I have given you, why we may depend on their
Highnesses, that I know considerable Men, who after great Enquiry and
Observation, do hope that their Highnesses (being every way so well qualified
for such an end) are predestined (if I may speak so) to make us happy in
putting an end to our Differences, and in fixing the Prerogative, and in
recovering the Glory of the Nation, which is so much sunk, and which now (when
we were big with Expectations) we find sacrificed to unhappy partialities in
matters of Religion.

The last thing you desire to know, is, What Effect this Letter has had? But it
is not yet old enough for me to judge of that, I can better tell you what
Effects it ought to have. I find the moderate wise Men of all Persuasions are
much pleased with it.

I know Roman Catholics that wish to God Matters were settled on the Model given
in it; they see the great Difficulty of getting the Test Repealed: And withal,
they doubt whether it is their Interest that it should be repealed or not: They
fear needy violent Men might get into Employments who would put his Majesty on
doing things that might ruin them and their posterity. They are certainly in
the right of it. It is good to provide for the worst. A Revolution will come
with a VVitness; and its like it may come before the Prince of Wales be of Age
to manage an unruly Spirit, that I fear will accompany it. Humane Nature can
hardly digest what it is already necessitated to swallow, such provocations
even alters men's Judgments. I find that Men, who otherways hate severity, begin
to be of Opinion that Queen Elizabeth's Lenity to the R. C's proves now Cruelty
to the Protestants. The whole Body of Protestants in the Nation, was lately
afraid of a Popish Successor, and when they reflected on Queen Mary's Reign,
thought we had already sufficient Experience of the Spirit of that Religion;
and took Self preservation to be a good Argument for preventing a second Trial.
But now a handful of Roman Catholics, perhaps reflecting on Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, are not, it seems, afraid of Protestant Successors. But if some
Protestants at that time, from an Aversion to the Remedy, hoped that the
Disease was not so dangerous as it proves. I am confident at present, all
Protestants are agreed, that henceforward the Nation must be saved, not by
Faith. And therefore I would advise the R. C's. to consider that Protestants
are still Men, that late Experiences at home, and the Cruelties of Popish
Princes abroad, has given us a very terrible Idea of their Religion. That
Opportunity is precious and very slippery, and if they let the present Occasion
pass by, they can hardly ever hope that it will be possible for them to recover
it. That their Fathers and Grandfathers would have thought themselves in
Heaven to have had such an Offer as this is, in any of the four last Reigns,
and therefore, that they had better be contented with Half a Loaf, than no
Bread. I mean, it will be their Wisdom to embrace this Golden Occasion of
putting themselves on a Level with all other English Men, at least as to their
private Capacity; and to disarm once for all, the severity of those Laws; which
if ever they should come to be in good earnest executed by a Protestant
Successor, will make England too hot for them: And therefore I should
particularly advise those among them, who have the Honor to approach his
Majesty, to use their Credit to prevail with him to make this so necessary a
step in Favor of the Nation; since the Successors have advanced two Thirds of
the way for effecting so good and pious a Work. Then, and not till then, the
R. C's may think themselves secured, and his Majesty may hope to be great by
translating Fear and Anger from the Breasts of his Subjects, to the Hearts of
his Own and the Nations Enemies.

But if an evil Genius (which seems to have hovered over us now a long time)
will have it otherwise; if I were a R. C. I could meddle no more, but live
quiet at home, and caress my Protestant Neighbors; and in so doing, I should
think my self better secured against the Resentments of the Nation, than by all
the Forces, Forts, Leagues, Garranties, and even Men Children, that His Majesty
may hope to leave behind him.

As for the Protestant Dissenters, I am confident the Body of them will
continue to behave themselves like Men, who, to their great Honor have ever
preferred the Love of their Country and Religion to all Dangers and Favors
whatsoever, but there are both weak and interested Men among all great Numbers;
I would have them consider how much the state of things is altered, upon the
coming out of this Letter, for if hitherto they have been too forward in giving
Ear to Proposals on this Mistake, that they could never have such a favorable
Juncture, for getting the Laws against them repealed: I hope now they are
undeceived, since the Successors have pawned their Faith and Honor for it,
which I take to be a better security (as Matters go at present) than the so
much talked of Magna Charta for Liberty of Conscience would be, tho got in a
legal way, for our Judges have declared, That Princes can dispense with the
Obligation of Laws, but they have not yet given their Opinion, that they can
dispense with the Honor of their Word; nor have their Highnesses any Confessor
to supply such an Omission.

However it is not to be charged on their Highnesses, if such a Magna Charta be
not at present given them, provided the Test be let alone; but I fear the Roman
Catholics Zeal will have all or nothing; and the Test too must be repealed by
wheedling the Dissenters to join with willing Sheriffs in violating the Rights
of Elections, which are the Root of the Liberties of England; prudent way of
recommending their Religion to all true English Men.

But if any of the Dissenters be so destitute of Sense and Honesty, as to
prefer a Magna Charta, so obtained, Void and Null in it self, to their own
Honor and Conscience, to the Love and Liberties of their Country, to the
present Kindness of all good Men, and their Countenance at another time, and
above all, to the Favor and Word of the Successors, who have now so generously
declared themselves for them: We may pronounce, that they are Men abandoned to
a reprobate Sense, who will justly deserve Infamy and the hatred of the Nation
at present, and its Resentments hereafter. Is it possible, that any Dissenter,
who either deserves or loves the Reputation of an honest Man, can be prevailed
with by any pretenses of Insinuations, how plausible soever, to make so odious
and pernicious a Bargain, as that of buying a precarious pretended Liberty of
Conscience, at the price of the Civil Liberties of their Country, and at the
price of removing that, which under God, is the most effectual Bar to keep us
from the Dominion of a Religion, that would, as soon as it could, force us to
abandon our own, or reduce us to the miserable Condition of those of our
Neighbors, who are glad to forsake all they have in the World, that they may
have their Souls and Lives for a Prey.

As for the Church of England, their Clergy have of late opposed themselves to
Popery, with so much Learning, Vigor, Danger and Success, that I think all
honest Dissenters will lay down their Resentments against them, and look on
that Church, as the present Bulwark and Honor of the Protestant Religion. I
wish those high Men among them, who have so long appropriated to themselves,
the Name and Authority of the Church of England, and have been made Instruments
to bring about Designs, of which their present Behavior convinces me, they
were ignorant, as I suppose many of the Dissenters are, whose turn it is now to
be the Tools.

I say, I wish such Men would consider, to what a pass they have brought
Matters by their Violences, or rather the Violences of these whose Property
they were, and at length be wise; They cannot but be sensible of the Advantages
they receive by this Letter. I suppose they apprehend (I am sure they ought to
do it) that the Ruin of their Church is resolved on^ But if the Dissenters
upon this Letter withdraw themselves, the R. C's. have neither Hearts to keep
firm to such a Resolution, nor Hands to execute it.

Since therefore they themselves have unhappily brought their Church into such
Precepices by provoking the Dissenters, it is in a particular manner their
Duty, as well as their Interest, to endeavor to soften them, by assisting the
Letter, and promoting the Design of it.

But if the old Leaven still remain, and they continue to argue as formerly, if
the Surplice be parted with, the Church of England is lost; if the Penal Laws
be repealed, the Test w^^ follow: and comfort themselves with this most
Christian Reflection, that the R. C^^ will (...) accept of what is offered
them; such Men deserve all the Misery that is preparing for them, and will
perish without Pity, and give thinking Men occasion to remember the Prove^^,
But a Fool (or a Zealot) in a Mortar, yet his Foolishness will not depart from
him. But the Disse^^^^ ought not to be much concerned at this, they have their
own Bigots, and the Church ^^^land theirs, there will be Tools whilst there are
Workmen.

This is a time for Wisdom to be justified of her Children, when honest Men
(...) off minding the lesser Interests of this or that particular Church, and
join in (...) common Interests of the Protestant Religion. And to conclude, I
would (...) of the Dissenters to make use of their best Judgment on this so
critical an Occusion, wh^^ they will do, in my Opinion, in keeping close to the
Contents of this Letter, by ends (...) to obtain in a fair and legal way, such
a Liberty to all Persuasions, as is the (...) Right of Free men, and as our
Protestant Successors declare themselves willing to join in; and it those who
have an equal, nay, a greater Interest than themselves, will not agree to such
a Liberty, because they will be Masters or nothing; the Dissenters will have
the Comfort of having discharged their own Consciences, as prudent Men and good
Christians ought to do, and may safely trust God with the Event.

Sir, I thought I had made an end, but looking your Letter over again, I find I
have forgot to answer a Reason or two you give, why you doubt whether the
Letter be truly Mr. Fagels: You are informed (you say) that such and such Great
Men doubted of it; but some might as well pretend to doubt of the Truth of that
Letter (though they knew it to be true) as believe her Majesty to be with
Child, almost before she knew it her self; and that she was quick, when the
Embryo, as Anatomists say, is not much above an inch long; I don't think that
Popish Successors, like certain Weeds, grow faster than others: The Persons
you name may Trim, and presume on their Merit, least they might be thought
capable of Resentment. A dangerous Reflection. I say their Merit: you have seen
a long Relation of the great Services some (when they were in Power) did their
Highnesses; it is bound up with a Relation of the true Causes of their
Sufferings for their (or rather their Highnesses) Religion. You know even how
one of them the last Summer paid them his Reverence with all the Respect and
Humility of a due distance, and with the same Caution with which the Invincible
Monarch fights out of Canon Shot. But Sir, though the Character of a Trimmer be
ordinarily the Character of a prudent Man, there are Times and Seasons when it
is not the Character of an honest Man.

I acknowledge, that since their Highnesses Marriage, nothing has happened so
much for the Good of the Protestant Interest as this Letter of Mr. Fagels, and
if I had been either the Writer or Adviser of it, I should be very proud of it,
and think the Nation much in my Debt. But Sir, that was not a very good Reason
to make you doubt of it, for a good Cause will have its time, though not so
often as a bad one, which has ordinarily the Majority of its side.

I am confident at present we have all the reason in the World to expect it,
for my own part, though I am neither young nor strong, I hope to live to see a
Day of Jubilee in England for all that deserve it; when honest Men shall have
the same Pleasure in thinking on these Times, that a Woman happily delivered
has in reflecting on the Pain and Danger she was in. But Knaves shall remember
them, as I am told, the damned do their Sins, Cursing both them and themselves:

SIR, I am Yours.
January the 12th. 1688.
Animadversions upon a pretended Answer to Mijn Here Fagel's Letter.
SIR,
I Have been so far hitherto from thinking, that the pretended Answer to the
Excellent Letter of Mijn Here Fagel deserved a Reply, that I judged it would
have been a disgrace offered to the Judgment of persons of the most ordinary
Intellectuals, as well as the Witnessing not only a great measure of
self-denial, but the submitting of my self to a severe mortification and
penance, to bestow one upon it. For as it argues a mean Opinion of mankind, to
believe that they should need any assistance, save what their own Reason
furnishes them with, in order to their preservation from being imposed upon,
by so weak, foolish, incoherent and self-contradictious a Paper; so it is both
the rendering one mean and cheap, and the inflicting upon himself a most uneasy
chastisement, to waste his time and employ his thoughts in animadverting upon,
and exposing so trifling and despicable an Author. But seeing I am told, that
not only he who is commonly supposed to have had the presumption and
indiscretion to write the Answer, has also the vanity to value himself upon it;
but that there are others, whose wit, candor, and ingenuity are much of a size
with his, who do improve our silence in reference unto it, though arising from
the contempt and neglect which all wise men have for it, to countenance
themselves in a belief, and to obtrude an Opinion upon others, of its
containing something nervous and considerable; I shall therefore account my
self for once, so much a debtor both to the vain, and to the unwise, as to
bestow a few such Reflections upon it, as may serve to rectify the Judgments
of the one, and both to correct the folly, and to abate the pride and swelling
confidence of the other. And indeed the Author's concealing his Name, may make
us justly suspect, that we are not to look for truth, strength, nor candor in
that Paper, especially when he writes not only in Justification of the
proceedings of his Majesty of Great Britain, which is enough to shield him
from all severe Attacks, provided that he had conducted himself as became a
wise and an honest man: But in that he enters the lists against a person of
Mijn Here Fagel's quality, and whose Letter not only had his Name affixed to
it, and was beautified with all those impressions of clearness, gravity,
strength, prudence and Religion, which became the greatness of the Subject, and
whereunto the having been able to return an Answer, that had the umbrage and
appearance of Reason, would have given a reputation to the Undertaker; but
which had been also penned by the Command and Authority of their Serene
Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Orange, in order to declare their Opinion
in a matter of the greatest importance that ever English Protestants were
concerned in, and from Principles of Conscience and Justice has given that
assurance and satisfaction, which all peaceable and good men either stood in
need of, or could desire. And as this Authors venturing abroad in the fashion
of an Incognito, was not without reason, seeing he might thereby hope not only
to treat Mijn Here Fagel without regard to truth or ingenuity, but that with
the less hazard both to his person and reputation, he might arraign the Justice
and Fidelity of these States, and charge them with a violation of the
Fundamental Articles, upon which their Government was at first erected; so he
must not take it amiss, if upon encountering him in the dark, I not only fail in
paying him the deference which he may conceive due unto him, but handle him
unsuitably to the Post he is said to possess. Though I am not without
apprehension, that if he bear the Character which is vulgarly ascribed to him;
and if the greatest indication of the wisdom and integrity of Princes, be the
prudence and sincerity of their Ministers, but that we may thence come under a
necessity of entertaining meaner thoughts than we otherwise would, both of the
Moral and Intellectual Capacity of him, to whom this Gentleman is indebred both
for his Titles, and the Function he is exalted unto. Whereas on the other hand,
besides many signal Evidences, which have filled all Europe with admiration of
the admirable Wisdom, inflexible Integrity, eminent Virtues, Religious though
calm and discreet Zeal, and steady and impartial Justice of his Highness the
Prince of Orange; our Ideas of him as a person under whose Government, Conduct
and Shadow all good men may promise themselves happiness, are not a little
heightened by the consideration of the excellent Qualities of Monsieur Fagel,
whose advancement as Pensionary of Holland, to the first Ministry in that
State, is owing to the Princes Grace and Recommendation. Which Eminent Trust,
as he has all along discharged with Honor to his Highness, Reputation to
himself, and to the Satisfaction of those who are interested in the Affairs of
that Republic; so by nothing has he more merited an universal esteem and
praise from all Protestants, and acquitted himself more worthily toward God
and their Serene Highnesses, than by that Letter wherein he was honored to
declare their thoughts, and in which he has with so much wisdom, moderation
and convincing light, expressed both their Highnesses Sentiments, and his own,
as well concerning the English Laws, the Papists may, and the Dissenters ought
to be favored with the Repeal of, as concerning those, which no wise
Nonconformist desires to have rescinded, and which to humor the Papists with
the Abrogation of, were no less than to expose the Nation to ruin, and to lay
the Reformed Religion open to be totally subverted.

Now this Excellent Letter, and which has produced all the good Effects that
honest men longed for, but knew not before how to compass, our Anonymous
Answerer is pleased with an Indignation and angry Resentment, and in hopes to
exasperate his Majesty of Great Britain against their Serene Highnesses, to
style a kind of Manifest in reference to most important Affairs, which even Mr.
Stewart, who in obedience to the injunctions of his Sovereign, had with so much
importunity solicited their Highnesses Opinion about the Repeal of the Penal
and Test Laws, he says, could not have expected. And of whom to testify his
exact and intimate knowledge, and to recompense him for the unfortunate service
he had been employed in, and to encourage his readiness to future drudgery, he
is pleased by a creation of his own, as being the Substitute of the Fountain of
Honor, to confer the Title of Dr. upon. But certainly had this Anonymous
Writer the sense and prudence of an ordinary man, he would not under the
present conjuncture of Affairs, talk of Manifests, nor put people in mind of
them at a season, when most persons of all ranks and qualities are so much
disgusted, and when they at Whitehall are so lavish in their provocations
toward some, who if they were not strangely fortified against all tincture of
Resentment, are known to be capable of doing them irreparable prejudice, and
who by such a Manifest as there is cause enough to emit, might not only disturb
their proceedings, but with the greatest facility blow up at once both all
their hopes and projections. I would fain know of this modest and discreet
Gentleman, whether if their Highnesses had ordered a Letter to be written,
declarative of their Opinion for the Abrogation of the Tests, by what name he
would have judged it worthy to be called, and whether if he had bestowed upon
it the Title of a Manifest, he would have thereby intended to fasten upon it an
imputation of presumption and reproach? All good men have reason mightily to
bewail their Highnesses condition, seeing according to this rate of proceeding
toward them, it is in the power of the Papal Ecclesiastics in England, when
they please, to prevail upon the King to reduce them to the uneasy
circumstances, either of offending against their Consciences, or of displeasing
him. For there is no more requisite toward the bringing them into this unhappy
Dilemma, but that Father Peter's, or any other of the Tribe who have an
Ascendency over his Majesty, do persuade him to desire their Highnesses
Thoughts, in reference to such particulars, wherein it is neither consistent
with their Religious Principles, nor agreeable with their Honor, to comply
with his Majesty's Judgment and Inclinations. For if in prudence they decline
the returning of an Answer, they are sure not only to be censured, as guilty of
neglect, incivility and rudeness, but they do thereby administer an advantage
to their Enemies, of diffusing reports to their prejudice through the Nation, as
if they approved all those Court-methods, which for no other reason, save upon
the mere motives of respect and wisdom, they avoided openly to disallow. And if
on the other hand, they suffer themselves to be overcome by importunities, and
thereupon give an Answer agreeable to the Dictates of their own minds, but
which is found to interfere with the prepossessions wherewith his Majesty is
imbued, then their Lot is, to have it called by the unkind and ignominious
Title of a Manifest. One would think that Letter ought to have been mentioned
by a softer name, if we do but consider its being written not only with the
utmost modesty that becomes the Relation Their Highnesses stand in to the King,
and which is any ways agreeable to their own quality, but that it is enforced
with all the Reasons, that may serve to demonstrate that their Opinion is the
result of conviction and judgment, and not the effect of humor, nor a
sentiment they are merely determined unto by their interest. But we see no Term
is too hard to be bestowed upon a Paper that has so much prejudiced the
Priests in their designs, and laid so great an obstruction in the way of those
methods, which they had proposed to themselves, for the robbing England of the
Protestant Religion.

And whereas our Author tells us, that though Mr. Stewart did not account himself
obliged to answer Monsieur Fagel's Letter yet one who extremely esteems and
honors Mr. Stewart, thinks the Public too much concerned, not to have the
weakness of the reasonings in it detected, and to have it made appear that the
inferences deduced from them are no ways convincing. I can easily believe that
Mr. Stewart did not judge himself obliged to answer the Pensionary's Letter,
and all men do account it a piece of wisdom in him to forbear endeavoring it.
For though he be much better qualified for such an undertaking than our Author,
yet he could not but be sensible that it was not to be attempted with any hope
of success. And if our Author had been endowed with any measure of discretion,
he would have applied himself to any other Employment, rather than have betaken
himself to writing, being a thing which Nature never intended him for, and
especially upon a Subject so far above the reach of his understanding, and
against a discourse of that solid and well-digested strength, that even the
Reverend Fathers, whose Letter-carrier he used to be (if we be not strangely
mistaken in the Gentleman) had so much wit as not to attack it. As knowing that
notwithstanding all their Art in Sophistry, they must have come off baffled;
and that their false colors would have been easily detected, by the beams of
that light, which dart themselves forth in all the parts of that excellent
Paper. And I dare farther say, that as Mr. Stewart will never much value
himself, upon the being esteemed by one either of this Gentleman's Religious
Principles, or of his intellectual Accomplishments; so I can never think that
he can be so much degenerated from what he formerly was, as to obtain the
approbation of his mind, to return any considerable degree of honor to a
person who upon all accounts does so little merit it, unless it be that he may
possibly challenge it by virtue of an undeserved Title, and of a Character that
he is exceeding ill qualified for.

However, seeing Fools will be meddling, though they are sure to come by the
worst, I shall reduce all I have to say in Castigation of this vain and
presumptuous man, to the seven following heads. (1.) His Falsifications in
reference to several parts of Mijn Here Fagel's Letter. (2.) His Injustice to
Their Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Orange, and the hidden spleen he
every where ventureth to express against them. (3.) His slanderous Calumnies
against the States of these Provinces, and how he studies to excite their Roman
Catholic Subjects to disturb the Peace and Tranquillity of this Country. (4)
His Shameless Impudence in endeavoring to impose upon the World, as if the
Protestant Dissenters in England, were concluded by Their Highnesses to stand
hereafter involved in the same rank and condition with the Papists. (4.) His
Publishing the Villainy of the Romish Church, and proclaiming the Injustice and
Dishonor of the most Eminent Papal Monarchs, while he pretends to commend and
justify the proceeding of his Majesty of Great Britain. (6.) His egregious
Ignorance in relation to Government, Laws, Customs, and matters of Fact.
(Lastly) The signal Ingratitude of the Papists toward Their Royal Highnesses
for all that Grace, Favor and Ease, which they were willing to have allowed
unto them.

As to the first, It Is known to be a received Principle among the Casuists of
the Society, that it is at most but a venial sin, to detract from,
misrepresent, and calumniate those whom they either take to be their Enemies,
or do conceive to have done them any ways a prejudice. And though the Opinion
authorizing such a practice, be condemned by a Bull of the present Pope bearing
date Anno 1679 yet our Author is more a Vassal to the Ignatian Order, than upon
the Authority of one whom the Jesuits do so little value, to forbear putting a
Doctrine into exercise, which he has been so well instructed in by these
Reverend Fathers, and especially when he finds it so conduceable to his design
and interest. What can be remoter from Truth as well as Ingenuity, than to
charge Monsieur Fagel with confining the name of Protestants in England, only
to those of the Conformable Communion, and with excluding the Dissenters from
the glorious privilege of that appellation? For though it be true, that through
the hatred and violence of the late King and his present Majesty to the
Fanatics, and by virtue of their Commands to a Company of Mercenary, timorous
and servile Justiciaries and Officers it has some time come to pass that the
Laws which were originally enacted, and only intended against Papists, have
been executed upon Dissenters; yet all men know that to have been a perversion
of Justice, seeing in all the Statutes to the Penalties whereof they were made
obnoxious, they are still considered and acknowledged for Protestants, and made
liable to sufferings by no other Title than that of persons differing from the
Church of England, in matter of Discipline, and about Forms and Rites of
External Worship. Nor is there one word in Mijn Here Fagel's Letter, whereby
they are precluded from that style, or any ways represented as unworthy of it.
While they stand obnoxious to several Laws, in which the Members of the Church
of England have no concernment, nor are in any danger from; it was impossible
to avoid the giving them a name by which they might be distinguished from those
of the Legal and National Communion. And so tender has the Pensionary been of
charactering them by any offensive or harsh denomination, that he has not so
much as once in his whole Letter called them Fanatics, though it be an
appellation that has been vulgarly affixed to them; but he has chosen always
to denominate them by the name of Dissenters, which is not only the softest
Term they can be described by, but that which themselves have elected as the
style by which they are willing to be discriminated from their fellow
Protestants, with whom they differ in some few and little particulars. And many
of them being people, whose Principles are coincident and agreeable with theirs
of the Legal Establishment in Holland, in whose Fellowship Monsieur Fagel is
known to be; it could not have entered into the thoughts of any save one of our
Authors Intellectuals and Integrity, either to charge upon him or so much as to
imagine, that he should be so injurious to himself and to the Dutch Churches,
as to preclude those from the list of Protestants. But whether this calumnious
charge and falsification, be the fruit of an Irish Understanding, or of Papal
Sincerity, or the effect of both, I shall leave others to judge, who may
possibly know this Author, better than I pretend to do. Only this I shall add,
that he proceeds with the same wit and honesty as he has begun. For from Their
Highnesses declaring that they cannot agree to the Repeal of the Tests, and
Monsieur Fagel's thereupon saying, that these Laws inflict not any mulct or
penalty upon the Roman Catholics, but that they are only means of securing the
Reformed Religion, through containing provisions by which men are to be accounted
qualified for Members of Parliament, and to bear public Offices; our Author
does by a strange kind of falsification and calumny, fasten upon him his having
affirmed. That the Non-conformists are to be accounted dangerous Enemies of the
State, and not to be admitted into any Public Employments. He must either be
of a very unusual and perverse frame of mind, or extremely ignorant of the
nature of those Laws, and the Terms wherein they are enacted, otherways it is
impossible he should imagine how the Dissenters are capable of receiving
prejudice by them. Seeing all required by those Laws toward the qualifying
persons to sit in Parliament, and to exercise Offices in Church and State, is
only to declare that they do believe there is not any Transubstantiation in the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, or in the Elements of Bread and Wine, at or
after the Consecration by any persons whatsoever; and that the Invocation of
the Virgin Mary, or any other Saint; and the Sacrifice of the Mass, as they are
now used in the Church of Rome, are Superstitious and Idolatrous. And this
Declaration the Non-conformists are of all people, the most inclinable and
forward to make, and therefore very far by virtue of those Statutes from
standing incapable of any Trust, Office, and Employment, that other Subjects
are admitted unto. Nor has there been a Protestant Dissenter since the first
hour that these Laws were enacted, that ever scrupled to take the Tests, or
that was precluded from Office and Employment for refusing them. But on the
contrary, several of the most famous Dissenters, such as Sir John Hartop,
Alderman Love, and Mr. Eyles, persons who at all times have kept at the
greatest distance from Communion with the Church of England, by reason of her
Forms and Ceremonies, are known to have cheerfully made the Declaration
contained in the Test Laws, and thereupon to have sit as Members in diverse
Parliaments. And as a further demonstration of the impudence and dishonesty of
our Author in this particular, it is not unworthy of remark, that though the King
has taken upon him to dispense with the Tests, and to prohibit the requiring
them; yet the Dissenters, who have since that time, been preferred to public
Trusts, continue still to take them, and go to the respective Courts, where by
Law the Declaration is enjoined to be exacted, and there demand the being
admitted to make it. Though in the mean season they cannot be unsensible, that it
is the thing in the World whereby they most highly offend his Majesty; it being
both a proclaiming the Illegality of that Authority which he challenges of
dispensing with Laws; and a defeating, so far as lies in them, his great
design as well as artifice, for the introducing of Popery, which his Soul is so
much in travel with. And were not this Author both a person of a most depraved
Conscience, and destitute of all common sense, he would never have slandered
Monsieur Fagel, and so egregiously perverted his plain meaning, as to tell us,
that though he be a Hollander and a Nonconformist, yet he thanks God for the
Test Laws, by which his Nonconforming Brethren in England, of what degree and
quality soever they be, stand excluded from Public Employments. For every one
that will be so kind to himself, and so just to the Pensionary, as to read his
Letter, will immediately discern that there is not one word in it, upon which
to superstruct this calumny and accusation; seeing he therein affirms in
repeated and emphatical Terms, that all contained in, and designed by the Test
Laws, is the securing the Reformed Religion, through the having provided, that
none be allowed to sit in Parliament, nor admitted to Public Offices, except
they declare that they are of the Reformed, and not of the Roman Catholic
Religion. So that how Monsieur Fagel's Nonconformity Brethren in England,
should come to be affected by these Laws so as to receive any prejudice by
them, is that which none but a person of our Author's wit, integrity and
candor, could have had the faculty either to conceive or allege.

But that we may come to the second particular; there is the less reason to
wonder at this Gentleman's calumniating Mijn Here Fagel, and affixing dull,
though malicious Forgeries of his own unto him, if we do but consider-with what
petulancy and injustice he treats Their Serene Highnesses, and at the gate of
their own Court assumeth the confidence to misrepresent, lessen and asperse
them. The nearness which those Princes stand in to the ascending the English
Throne, and the joyful prospect which all Protestants have of it, exciteth a
discontent and rage in our Author, which he knows not how either to suppress or
govern. For not to mention what we learn of the kindness of Roman Catholics to
an Heir, professing the Reformed Religion, from the proceedings of Sixtus
Quintus, and the Papists in France toward Henry 4. we are sufficiently
instructed what good will they bear to a Protestant Successor, by the Bull
which Clement 8. published about the End of Queen Elizabeth's Reign. For the
Supreme and Infallible Head does therein ordain, That when it should happen to
that miserable Woman to die, they should admit none to the Crown, quantumque
propinquitate sanguinis niterentur, nisi ejusmodi essent qui fidem Catholicam
non modo tolerarent, sed omni open ac studio promoverent, and more majorum
jurejurando se id praestituros susciperent; whatsoever Right and Title they
should have thereunto, by virtue of their next affinity in blood, unless they
should first swear not only to tolerate, but to advance and establish the
Romish Religion. Nor can I avoid being filled with fear and reverence to the
safety of some certain persons, when I remember how Cardinal Baronius commends
Irene for murdering the Emperor her Son, because he was against the Worship of
Images, and not only calls it Justitiae zelum, a righteous zeal but adds,
Christum docuisse, summum pietatis genus esse in hoc adversus filium esse
fidelem, That Christ has taught the perfiction of Religion in such a case to
consist in fidelity to the Church, though by destroying one that was both her Son
and her Sovereign. It Is a high piece of injustice in our Author toward Their
Highnesses, and calculated for no other end but to alienate his Majesty's
affections from them, when he tells us, that the thing aimed at in the writing
of the Pensionary's Letter, as well as that pursued in the manner of publishing
it, was to obstruct the King's righteous and pious designs, and to render them
unpracticable. For the Letter being written in obedience to the Command of
Their Highnesses, and to declare their Opinion in reference to the several
matters, about which it treats; it plainly follows that though Mijn Here Fagel
be accountable for the manner of clothing and delivering their thoughts, and
for the Order and Method in which things are digested, and possibly for the
ratiocinations by which they are supported and enforced, yet that the Prince
and Princess are the persons who are alone responsible for the End unto which
it was intended. And it appears to have been so far from their intentions,
thereby to obstruct and defeat any pious and just designs of his Majesty; that
nothing can be more visible, than that as it is admirably adapted to the giving
ease and security to all his Protestant Subjects, so it offers means for
relieving the Papists from the severe Laws to which they are liable, and for
the granting them a Warranty in a legal way for the exercise of their Religion.
Nor does it discourage any kind of favor toward them, save that which the
concession whereof, would not only be inconsistent with the peace and safety of
those of the Reformed Religion in England, but which might inflame the Nation
to such Resentments, as would in all likelihood both endanger his Majesty's
Person and Crown, and come at last to issue in the reducement of the Roman
Catholics to worse circumstances, than they have hitherto been acquainted
with. But to proceed with our Author, to whom it is so natural to act
foolishly, and with sauciness and injustice, that neither the Character he is
said to bear, nor the Quality of the Persons of whom he speaks, can either
restrain his intemperance, or correct his rudeness and indiscretion. For
Monsieur Fagel having said, that he believes there are many Roman Catholics,
who under the present state of Affairs, will not be very desirous to be in
Public Offices and Employments, nor use any attempts against those of the
Reformed Religion; and that not only because they know it to be contrary to
Law, but lest it should at some other time, prove prejudicial to their Persons
and States. Our Author is so unjust as well as imprudent, as to call this a
menacing not only of all the Non-conformists and Roman Catholics in England,
but a threatening of his Majesty, and an insulting over him: And from thence he
takes occasion to add, that he hopes God will enable his Majesty to repress and
prevent the effects of these menaces, and furnish him with means of mortifying
those who do thus threaten and insult over him. It certainly argues a strange
weakness and distemper of mind, to call so modest and soft an expression, both
a menacing of the King and of all his Catholic Subjects, when I dare say, it
proclaims the sense of all among the Papists who are endowed with any measure
of Wisdom, and is nothing else save a Declaration of the measure, by which they
do at this day regulate and conduct themselves. But the injustice of our Author
toward Their Highnesses in his Reflections upon the forementioned expression
of the Pensionary's, is his intending them by the persons that do threaten his
Majesty and insult over him. For did he take Mijn Here Fagel for the only
guilty person in reference to this Phrase which he miscalls a Menace, it would
be a strange detracting in him from the Power and Glory of his Majesty of Great
Britain, to wish him sufficient means whereby to shun the effects of a
Gentleman's threatening, whose highest Figure in the World is merely to be a
Minister in a Republic. Nor would he bring down his Master to so low a level,
as to make it the highest Object of his Hopes, concerning so great a Monarch,
that he shall be able to mortify a person, who whatsoever his Merit be, yet
his Fortune is to fill no sublimer a Post. So that it can be no other save the
Prince and Princess, whom our Author in his usual way of injustice, petulancy
and indiscretion does here character, represent and intend. And what he
thereupon means by the Kings having power in his hands, and by his hoping that
God would furnish him with means by which he may mortify them, is not a matter
of difficult penetration, even by persons of the most ordinary capacities. For
the several methods that have been projected, and are still carrying on, for
the debarring them from the Succession to the Imperial Crowns of England,
Scotland and Ireland, to which they have so Just and Hereditary a Right, are
sufficient to detect unto us what our Author intends, and serve as a Key
whereby to open the scope, and meaning of his Expressions. But whatsoever the
Papal and Jesuitick Endeavors may be, for the obstructing and preventing their
Ascending the Thrones of Great Britain, I dare say that all the effects they
will have, will be only the discovering the folly and malice of those that
attempt it, and that they can never be able to compass and accomplish it. For
as their Highnesses have both that interest in the Love and Veneration of all
Protestants, and so indisputable a Title, that it is impossible they should be
precluded either by Force, or in a way to which their Enemies may affix the
Name of Legal; so there is no great cause to apprehend or fear, their being
supplanted by their King's having Male Issue of a vigor to live, considering
both his Majesty's condition and the Queens, which is such that they can never
communicate bona stamina vitae. And for the Papists being able to Banter a
suppositious Brat upon the Nation, (though there are many among them villainous
enough to attempt it) we have not only the watchfulness of Divine Providence to
rely upon for preventing it, but there are many faithful and waking Eyes that
will be ready and industrious to discover the Cheat. And if the People once
perceive, that there has been a contrivance carried on for putting so base an
affront upon a noble and generous Kingdom, and of committing so horrid a wrong
against such Virtuous and Excellent Princes; I do not know but that their
Resentment of it may rise so high, as that all who are discovered to have been
accessory unto it, may undergo the like fate that they of old did, who were
found to have been conscious and contributory unto the thrusting the Eunuch
Smerdis into the Persian Throne. Nor do I in the least doubt but that the same
Righteous, Wise and Merciful God, who prevented the like villainy when designed
in the time of Queen Mary, and which was advanced so far, that some Priests had
the wickedness and impudence, both to give thanks in the public Churches for
her Majesty's safe delivery of a Prince, and also to describe the Beauty and
Features of the Babe, though all she had gone with amounted only to a Tympany of
Wind and Water; I say that I do not question, but that the same God will out of
his Immense Grace and Sapience, find ways and methods, of which there are many
within the compass of his Infinite Understanding, by which so hellish a piece
of villainy, if there be any such projected and promoting, may be brought into
light and disappointed. And truly when I consider the Christian and Royal
Virtues wherewith their Highnesses are imbued, and how they are furnished, with
all the Moral, Intellectual and Religious accomplishments, that are requisite
for adapting them to weild Scepters, and which render them not only so
agreeable to the necessities and desires of all good people, but so admirably
qualified to answer both the present posture of Affairs in Europe, and the
Exigencies of those that are oppressed and afflicted; I grow into a confidence,
that as the Church of God both in Britain and elsewhere, and the circumstances
in which so many Countries are involved, do bespeak and crave their Exaltation
to the Thrones of the British Dominions, so that they are both destined of God
unto them, and will in due time be safely conducted thither. Nor can I avoid
pleasing my self with those joyful and hopeful thoughts, when I reflect upon
the various steps of Divine Providence, by which they are brought into that
nearness of legally inheriting these Crowns. Certainly there is a voice that
speaks loud to this purpose, not only in Gods denying a Legitimate Issue to
the Late King, and in his taking away from time to time all the Lawful Male
Offspring of his present Majesty, but in the uniting their Highnesses in
Marriage, even to the crossing a certain Persons Inclinations, whom I forbear
to Name, as well as to the disgusting of a Neighboring Monarch, and to the
defeating the busy endeavors of the Popish Party. But I must return to our
Author, whose Injustice to their Highnesses, and his malice against their
Honor, Interest and Reputation, knows neither end nor bounds. For upon
Monsieur Fagel's having asked, Who would go about to advise him or any man
else, to endeavor to persuade their Highnesses, whom God has so far honored,
as to make them, Defenders of his Church, to approve and promote things so
dangerous and hurtful both to the Reformed Religion, and to the public safety,
as the Repealing of the Test Laws would be; our Author does hereupon, with his
wonted Friendship, Equity, and Candor to those Excellent Princes, tells us that
he has not met with so bold a Declaration as this of calling them the
Protectors of Gods Church, and that the ascribing it to them, is a detracting
from the Honor of Kings and Monarchs, who will not Abdicate from themselves to
any other so glorious a Title. And in pursuance of his rancour toward their
Highnesses, he runs out in his way of Wit and Learning into a most silly and
impertinent Discourse about the Nature of a Church, and accuses the Prince and
Princess, as if by having this Character conferred upon them, they had a design
to usurp from his Majesty of Great Britain the style of Defenders of the
Faith, and to challenge to themselves the being the Protectors of the Church of
England. Surely this Gentleman does by virtue of his Popish Zeal and Irish
Understanding, believe that no Titles are due to Princes in reference to the
Church of God, but what are derived from the Papal Chair. Whereas I dare say,
that Monsieur Fagel in bestowing this Title upon Their Highnesses, did not
dream of the Roman Pontif, but had been taught it by God Almighty, whom I take
to be the Supreme and true Fountain of Honor, who is pleased to character such
Princes as do cherish and favor his Church, by the Name of Nursing Fathers and
Nursing Mothers, which is the term that the Pensionary uses in reference to
their Highnesses. And as it is their own merit, which according to the Tenor of
the Divine Creation, has entitled them to this glorious style; so they are
neither to be ridiculed nor hectored out of that duty, of countenancing and
supporting the Reformed Religion, nor to be deterred by bold and empty words
from those compassionate, generous, and Princely Offices to sincere Orthodox
Believers, by which they have deserved it. And while others glory in the
enjoyment of the Titles of most Christian and most Catholic Kings, which their
Vassalage to the Sea of Rome, their contributing to the Exaltation of the
Triple Crown, and their being the Popes Executioners in the shedding the Blood
of Saints, has procured unto them, it is enough for their Highnesses to be by
the Suffrage of all true Protestants, and that agreeably to the Doctrine and
Authority of the Sacred Scriptures, had in esteem, and reverenced for Nutritii
and Protectors of Gods Church. Nor do they appropriate this style to
themselves, though they account it the brightest among all their Titles, but they
acknowledge it to belong equally to many others, and are afflicted at nothing
more, than that all Potentates may not justly claim a share in it. And as the
Pensionary's ascribing it unto their Highnesses was out of no design to usurp
upon the King of Englands Title of Defender of the Faith, nor to affix any
Authority unto them over that Church, so it will be no presumption to add, that
all of the Reformed Religion in that Kingdom, how much soever differing in
little and circumstantial things among themselves, are yet so far sensible of
the obligations they are under to Their Highnesses, and of the benefits they
have all the Assurance to expect from them hereafter, that without meaning ill
either to the King or to any one else, they will unanimously join in stiling
them Defenders of the Christian Reformed Faith, and Protectors of Gods Church
professing the Protestant Religion. And they will easily know with whom they
are to be angry, and against whom to direct their Resentments. Mijn Here Fagel
had said, that if the Dissenters cannot during his Majesty's Reign be eased
from the Penal Laws, unless the Tests be also abrogated, that this will be an
unhappiness unto them, but for which the Roman Catholics are only to be
blamed, who choose rather to be contented, that they and their Posterity should
remain still obnoxious to the Penal Laws, and exposed to the hatred of the
whole Nation, than be restrained from a capacity of attempting any thing
against the peace and security of the Reformed Religion. Our Author whose envy
and injustice against Their Highnesses, is not yet fully spent, does in his
imprudent and indiscreet way obtrude from hence upon the World, that the
Nonconformists as well as the Roman Catholics may hereby see where their true
Interest stands, and that they are extremely obliged to those in whose Name
this advice is given, for the Consolation afforded them in the condition under
which they are stated by Law. Which is as much as if he should harangue the
Nonconformists into coffeehouse against the Prince and Princess, by assuring
them that they are to hope for no relief against the Penal Laws by any favor
of theirs. Whereas the Dissenters are not only told that their Highnesses are
willing to consent, but that they do fully approve, that they should have an
entire Liberty for the full exercise of their Religion, without being obnoxious
to receive any prejudice, trouble, or molestation upon that account. So that
the heat which our Author would inflame the Dissenters unto against their
Highnesses, ought to turn and spend it self against the Papists, who rather
than part with the Tests which the Nonconformists are as much concerned to have
maintained as they of the National Communion can be, are resolved to keep all
the Penal Laws in force, and to leave the Dissenters under the dread and
apprehension of them. But this they may be fully persuaded of, that if they can
escape the edge of them during this Kings Reign, they will be in no danger from
them, in case the Nation come once to be so happy as to see their Highnesses
seated on the Throne. For as much as they have not only their word, which was
hitherto never violated, laid to pledge for their relief and ease, but in that
their Interest as well as their Principles will oblige them to be compassionate
and tender to all sorts of Protestants, and if they cannot be so Fortunate as
to unite them, yet to exercise equal kindness and favor toward them.

Having examined what our Author in his impertinent way venteth in unjust
Reflections against their Highnesses; and having in some measure chastned him
for them, though not to the Degree he does deserve; I come now in the third place
to call him to an account for his calumniating the States of these Provinces,
and for his endeavoring to possess the minds of their Popish Subjects with
dissatisfaction and prejudice toward them. And if he be the person whom most
men take him for, though he may have herein acted suitably to himself, yet he
has behaved disagreeably to his character, and unworthy of the Post, which his
Master has placed him in. Nor need we from henceforth to doubt, but that he
does all the ill Offices he can between his Majesty of Great Britain and this
Government, seeing he has by slanders destitute of all Foundation, most
maliciously studied to raise differences betwixt them and their own Subjects.
And if the Intelligence which he transmits to Whitehall, be as equally distant
from truth and sincerity, as the Memoirs are which he has here published, we
may easily conjecture what little credit ought to be given unto it, though at the
same time we cannot but discern the end that it must be shappen and designed
unto. Nor was there the least occasion administered by mijn Here Fagel in his
Letter, by which our Author could be provoked to attack these States, with so
much rudeness, injustice, and falsehood, as he has done in his Answer. For all
that the Pensionary had said, and which it seems threw our Author into a raging
fit, was only that their Highnesses could consent that the Papists in England,
Scotland and Ireland, should be suffered to exercise their Religion with as
much freedom, as is allowed them in these Provinces, in which they enjoy a full
liberty of Conscience. And as the time has been, and may hereafter come,
Wherein the English Roman Catholics would have thought, and may again account
such a Liberty for a happiness; so I do not understand if the condition of the
Roman Catholics in these Countries, be as our Author describes it, with what
consistency either to Reason or with themselves, the Papists in England, should
have so often heretofore in their Pleas for a Toleration, have made the Liberty
vouchsafed their Brethren in these Provinces, not only a motive for their own
being capable of Indulgence, but to have represented it as the largest measure
of the freedom they desired, and which they would have been thankful for.
Seeing this Gentleman according to his accustomed manner of truth and ingenuity
takes upon him to assure us, That as there can be no greater persecution, than
what the Papists undergo in the exercise of their Religion, in Guelderland,
Freesland, Zeland, and the Province of Groningue; so that the Liberty which
they even enjoy in Holland, is so mean and inconsiderable, that it does not
deliver them from being subject to daily fines and molestations. Surely this
man is either very unacquainted with what is done upon the account of Religion
in other parts of the World, or else he must needs think, that the most brutal
severities to some, are Acts of Merit; while gentle restrictions upon others,
are mortal Crimes, otherwise he could never write at this ignorant and
extravagant rate, wherein all persons must discern his folly as well as
insincerity and neglect of truth. For we have too many deplorable evidences
daily before our Eyes, besides those which arrive with us by reports of
unquestionable credit, of a stranger kind of Persecution exercised toward
those of the Reformed Religion in France and Piedmont, than any which the Roman
Catholics in these Provinces can be alleged to be under, except it be by one
of our Author's veracity and discretion. Neither needs there any other
Refutation of the calumny with which he asperseth the Supreme and Subordinate
Magistrates of this Country in reference to the treating their Popish Subjects
with horrid Severities, nor a clearer proof that those of the Romish Communion,
do esteem themselves to be in a condition of peace, freedom and ease under this
Government, than that of their behavior during the late War carried on by the
French King against these States, which he gave out both at Rome and at several
other Courts in Europe, to have been undertaken in favor, and for the
restoring of the Roman Catholic Religion, For had they lain under that
grievous persecution, and those tragical hardships in the practice of it, which
our Author would impose the belief of upon the World; they would not have
failed to welcome that Monarch as their happy Deliverer, and would have united
in a general Insurrection against the States, for their having been Tyrannous
over them. But instead of that, most of them acquitted themselves with the same
Zeal for the support of this Government, and in defense of their Country, that
other Subjects did. Which demonstrates beyond all control, that they do not
judge themselves to be in so wretched and miserable circumstances, as this bold
and calumnious Person represents them to be. And whereas Monsieur Fagel in
justification of the necessity of preserving the Test Laws by which the Papists
are precluded from Employments and Places of Trust, and to rectify a mistake
in Mr. Stewart about his conceiving the Roman Catholics to continue capable of
bearing public Offices in this Commonwealth, had said, that by the Laws of
this Republic they are expressly shut out from all the Employments both of
Policy and Justice. Our Author does hereupon with the highest Injustice, and
with all the acrimony he can, accuse the States, not only of departing from the
express Terms of the Pacification of Gant, but of violating the Articles of the
Union at Utrecht, which was the Foundation upon which this Government was both
originally erected and does still subsist. And with his wonted degree of
knowledge and prudence he further adds, That the Provinces, and most of the
Cities, would not have entered into the foresaid Union, but upon condition that
they of the Roman Catholic Religion should at all times possess the
Government. And particularly that Amsterdam, had it stipulated unto them, under
the Guaranty of the Prince of Orange, that none of the Reformed Religion should
be allowed a Place to assemble in, either within the Walls, or without, so far
as the Jurisdiction of the City did extend. One would have little expected,
that a person living in the Communion of the Romish Church, as our Author
professes himself to do, should upbraid these States with the violation of
Articles, relating unto a Grant made unto any for their Security in the free
Exercise of their Religion, at a season when Popish Sovereigns not only account
it their glory to break all Laws, Oaths and Edicts, by which Protestants had
their Religion, together with many other Rights and Privileges, established
and confirmed unto them, but who with a salvageness and barbarity which scarce
any Age can parallel, seek to extirpate their Religion and destroy them. And
all this attempted and pursued against them, not only without their being
guilty of any crime, by which they might have deserved to lose the favor of
their Princes, and to forfeit protection in the free exercise of their
Religion, and their safety as to their Persons and Estates, which had been
sworn unto them, and secured by Authentic Laws: But when one of the chiefest
motives unto it, was their Loyalty, and the Merit that they had laid upon their
respective Sovereigns, which by a new way of gratitude was thought fit to be
thus recompensed and rewarded. And if we be not, as I have formerly said,
strangely deceived in the Person and Character of our Author, this charge upon
the States of these Provinces, is the effect of a most prodigious folly, as
well as of inveterate malice, in that his Master contrary both to the Laws of
the Realms, his often repeated Promises, and his Coronation Oath, assumes a
power of introducing those into Offices, who by the Statutes of the Land stand
precluded from them, and of thrusting them out, who alone are the Person that
are legally capable of them. Which manner of proceeding in his Majesty, has
besides the injustice that attends it toward all that are laid aside, a signal
piece of ingratitude accompanying it to many of them, as having been the
Persons, whose Zeal for his Person brought him to the Throne, and whose courage
maintained him in it. But I shall not think it enough merely to have exposed
his imprudence and indiscretion in the forementioned accusation against the
whole Governing Body of this Country; but I shall likewise show it to be false,
slanderous, and unjust in every part and branch of it. And that I may act with
more truth and candor than our Author has done, I do acknowledge, that at the
first commencement of the War against the King of Spain, for the defense of the
Laws and Privileges of these and the neighboring Provinces, that not only
they of the Reformed Religion, but likewise the Roman Catholics, took Arms and
hazarded their Lives and Estates in that just quarrel. And I do also grant that
thereupon there was Liberty of Conscience allowed and established by several
Treaties, in the virtue of which, both parties were to be equally tolerated,
and the one not to disturb or disquiet the other. Nor was there ever any thing
done by way of Ordinance or Law, to lessen or restrain the liberty of the
Papists, nor to abridge, much less deprive them, of any Power, Jurisdiction and
Authority that they possessed, so long as they remained faithful in the common
cause, and behaved themselves with Equity, Justice and Peace toward those who
had withdrawn from the Roman Communion. But such was the ascendency of the
Priests over the Roman Catholics, and so powerful was their influence upon
them, that in a little time they not only hindered and molested the Protestants
in the exercise of their Religion, and committed many unjust and cruel
severities against them, but they proceeded to various attempts of betraying
the Rights and Civil Liberties of the whole Country, and of enslaving it both
to the Tyranny of the King of Spain, and to the bloody and cruel Inquisition.
So that from hence it became a matter of necessity rather than at first of
choice, that the Government should be disposed into Protestant hands; and that
the liberty of the Papists, should have those limits and regulations given unto
it, as might render it both consistent with the peace, freedom, and safety of
those of the Reformed Religion, and with the preservation of the Civil Rights
and Privileges of these Provinces. This is the account, which all who have
written with any knowledge and integrity of the Transactions of those Times, do
give us of the many Changes and Revolutions that fell out in reference to
Religion, till all matters both concerning it, and the Political Government of
these Countries came to be established in the Form and Way, wherein they do
still continue and subsist. And this I do undertake to make good by all
public, Authentic, and approved Histories, if our Author shall have the
confidence to insist upon the justification of his criminations, And all that I
shall at present direct men unto for the confirmation of what I have said, is
that admirable Apology of William I. Prince of Orange, whom his present
Highness, does in Wisdom, Steddiness, and true temperate Christian Zeal so
signally imitate, and which that great Prince, who was the first and happy
Founder of this Republic, published in defense of himself, and of those
actings, for which the slavish and mercenary Factors of Rome and Spain had
traduced and aspersed him. But let us advance to a particular Examination of
those matters of Fact, upon which our Author challenges these States for
violating their Faith with their Roman Catholic Subjects. And the things he is
pleased to specify, are their departing from the Terms of the Pacification of
Gant, and their breaking the Articles of the Union agreed unto at Utrecht,
1597. Nor am I unwilling to acknowledge, that soon after the Pacification
concluded at Gant, there were several indecent and undiscreet things done
contrary to the purport and tendency of it, both by those of the Romish, and by
them of the Reformed Religion. Which proceeded from the Superstitious Fury of
the former, and the imprudent Zeal of the latter. Yet it is certain, that the
ground of its coming to be rendered wholly ineffectual, arose from a design of
the King of Spain's, under the cloak and palliation of that Treaty, to subvert
the Civil Rights and Privileges of all the Provinces, to the Defense and
Preservation of which the Roman Catholics as well as Protestants were sworn
and bound by the said Pacification. For after that Philip II. had in compliance
with the necessity of this Affairs, consented unto, and ratified all the Terms,
Provisions and Conditions, which both the Papists and the Reformed had in that
Pacification, League and Confederacy, insisted upon, and agreed to adhere unto;
it was soon after discovered by Letters intercepted to Don John, who was at
that time constituted Governor over the Low Countries, that all which Philip
aimed at, was through the having rendered them secure by the Ratification of that
Treaty, to take advantages whereby to enslave them, and under the Covert of it,
to provide himself of means, by which he might be established in an unbounded
Tyranny over them. So that by reason of what was detected in those Letters, and
from Don John's proceeding to possess himself of Namur, and his endeavoring to
corrupt and debauch the German Troops, which were in the States service, and
paid by them, together with the defection of many of the Roman Catholics from
all the Terms of that Pacification; the War came again to be revived against
the King of Spain, and all that had been agreed unto at Gant, was rendered
ineffectual and overthrown. And I would fain know of our Learned and Wise
Author, how the States of the Seven Provinces are more guilty of the violation
of that Pacification, by making the Protestant Religion, to be that of the
public Establishment, within their Territories and Jurisdiction; than the King
of Spain, and the States of the Spanish Netherlands, are in their denying a
Toleration of the Protestant Religion in those Provinces; seeing I am sure it
was agreed and sworn unto in that Pacification. And as for the Union concluded
at Vtrecht, the Terms whereof our Author upbraids these States with a departure
from: It will be no difficult matter to show how his knowledge and sincerity
are in reference to this particular of one measure and piece. For though diverse
of the Provinces, which entered into that Union, did thereby enjoy a Liberty of
choosing and determining which of the two Religions should have the stamp of the
public establishment within their own Jurisdictions; yet it was then and there
ordained, that the Protestant Religion alone should be publicly professed, and
have the protection of the Laws in the Provinces of Holland and Zealand. And as
the other Provinces were left to do, as they should judge best for the peace
and safety of their respective Territories, and the support and defense of the
Union; so it is a thing wherein all that have written with any integrity, do
agree, that the alterations which were afterward made in these Provinces, or
in reference unto them, concerning Religion, were either resolved and decreed
in the Provincial Assemblies of the States of those several Provinces, or else
in the meetings of the States General, where not only the Deputies of those
several Provinces were present and consenting, but behoved to have the
approbation of their Principals, in order to the rendering those Alterations
legal and binding. Nor is it unworthy to be observed, that the chief occasion
for shutting the Roman Catholics out of the Government, and for depressing the
Romish Religion from being Dominant, arose from the Papists themselves, in that
not only contrary to their stripulations and promises, they were found in the
verture of a malice imbibed from their Religion, to be upon all occasions
committing violences and outrages against the Reformed, but in that the Roman
Catholic Magistrates, and many others of that Communion, were discovered to
retain too great an inclination to Spain, and to be ready to abandon and betray
the Freedom and Civil Rights of their Country, instead of continuing steadfast
and faithful in the defense of them, as they had covenanted and sworn. In a
word, as neither the Articles of the Union at Vtrecht, nor any other Terms
agreed upon, before the Abdication of the King of Spain, which was not until
Anno 1581. can be called the Fundamental Laws of the Government of this
Republic, though they may be styled conditions upon which such and such
Provinces Associated for mutual defense against the Spanish Power and Tyranny;
so it is undeniable, that by reason of the many dangers they found themselves
exposed unto, and the hazards they had run of being betrayed again into the
hands of the Spaniard, through their having suffered the Magistracy to remain
any wherein Papists, and through their having allowed the Roman Catholic
Religion to be publicly preached and exercised, they thereupon reassumed and
gave a new frame unto their Union in the Year 1583. in which it was agreed and
enacted by all the Provinces, that from that time forward, the Reformed
Religion should alone be openly professed and preached, and that none but
Protestants should from that time be admitted to any Office of Policy and
Justice in the Government. And as this is the true Fundamental Law upon which
this State has since so happily subsisted and flourished; so there can be
nothing objected against the Justice of it, but what will lie against all
States of the World, who have always changed and molded their Laws, as they
have been necessitated in order to self-preservation. And so remote from all
truth, is our Author's affirming the Roman Catholics to have been upon these
Alterations brought under Persecution; that Sir William Temple, whom the World
will much sooner believe than this Gentleman, though possibly he may bear the
same character which that worthy person once did, does assure us in his
excellent Observations upon the United Provinces of the Netherlands. That no
Papist can here complain of being pressed in his Conscience, of being
restrained from his own manner of Worship in his House, or obliged to any other
abroad, and that all such, who ask no more than to serve God and save their own
Souls, have as much Freedom, Ease and Security as they can desire. Yea it is
demonstrable that the Roman Catholics enjoy advantages under this Government,
which they have not in Popish States. In that being suffered to exercise their
Relgion so far as is necessary to attain all the ends of it, if it be capable
of affording them any whereon they can hereafter find themselves happy; they
are delivered from the Tyranny of Priests over their Persons and Estates, and
hindered from being in a condition to do that ill to others, which the Doctrines
of their Church would both tempt them unto and justify them in. And as to that
which our Author says of the injustice done to the City of Amsterdam, and of
the violating the Conditions toward the Roman Catholics there, upon which
under the guaranty of the Prince of Orange they came into the Union; he is
mistaken in that whole matter, and betrays only his ignorance, infidelity, or
both. For the Conditions which he mentions, were the result of an Agreement
made Anno 1578. when upon the Nassovian Army's coming before their City to
attack them, they abandoned the Party and Interest of the King of Spain, whom
they had till that time adhered unto, and came into an Alliance with the rest
of the Towns of the Province, to oppose him in defense of the Privileges of
these Countries. And as this was a year before the Union concluded at Vtrecht,
into which Amsterdam entered at the same time that Gelderland, Zutphen, Holland,
Zealand, and Utrecht did; so they joined in the Union upon the same Terms, that
the other Towns of their own Province had agreed unto. Nor could the Prince of
Orange be Guaranty in reference to the conditions specified in the Union;
forasmuch as tho the Act of Union was signed Jan. 23. 1579. yet the Prince did
not sign it till the May following. And that the Roman Catholic Magistrates,
came to be divested of the Government, contrary to the Articles made with them
when they forsook the party of the King of Spain, they have none to blame for
it but themselves, nor was there that injustice in it which our Author does
imagine. For not being satisfied to remain disobedient and refractory to an
Edict and Decree of the Archduke Matthias and the Council of State, who Anno
1578. had appointed, that wheresoever there were a hundred Families of those
professing the Reformed Religion, that they should there be allowed a Church or
Chapel for the exercise of their Worship; they not only broke all their
capitulations made with the Protestants, through oppressing them in various,
severe, unjust, method's, and in denying them a decent and convenient place in
which they might bury their dead, but they were found to be still inclining to
the Spanish Interest, and ready to espouse it upon the first convenient
opportunity. And therefore the Protestants, who were by much the majority,
partly to relieve themselves from the sufferings which were daily inflicted
upon them contrary to stipulations and Articles, and partly to prevent the
mischiefs which would have ensued to the whole Country, should that City have
been betrayed again into the power and hands of the Spaniards, assumed the
Government to themselves, and eased the other party of the Trust, which they
had so unwisely and unrighteously managed. Nor can our Author deny, but that
since they took on them the Ruling Authority, they have exercised it with all
the moderation that can be expressed. And have been so far from returning to
the Roman Catholics, the like measures which themselves had met with, that
they have in no one thing given them cause to complain, unless they should
quarrel that they are kept out of capacity of doing the mischief, their priests
would otherway's be ready to excite them unto, and which their Religion would
countenance them in.

But it is now time that I should proceed to the fourth thing, for which I
promised to call our Anonymous Answerer to an account. And were he not of a
singular Forehead, and of a peculiar complexion from all others; he could not
have had the impudence to endeavor to deceive the world into a belief, that
the Protestant Dissenters in England, stand listed by their Highnesses into the
same rank with the Papists, and that they are hereafter to expect, to be shut
up into the same state and condition. Certainly he must either have an
Antipathy woven into his nature against all truth and sincerity, or else through
having long accustomed himself to the misreporting of persons and to the giving
false representations of things, he must at last have acquired an incurable
Habit, otherwise it were impossible to prevaricate to that degree from truth,
in every thing he medleth with, and which he undertaketh to say. For Mijn Here
Fagel having declared, that the reason why their Highnesses can not agree to
the Repeal of the Test Laws, is because they are of no other tendency, than to
secure the Reformed Religion from the designs of the Roman Catholics, and that
they contain only conditions and provisions, whereby men may be qualified to be
Members of Parliament, and to bear public Offices. Our Author hereupon tells
us. That the Nonconformists as well as the Roman Catholics, do apprehend that
they receive a great deal of damage, by those Laws, and do account them
extremely prejudicial to their Persons and Families. And where as Monsieur
Fagel had said, that he would be glad to hear one good Reason, whereby a
Protestant fearing God, and concerned for his Religion, could be prevailed upon
to consent to the Repealing of these Laws which have been enacted by the
Authority of King and Parliament, and that have no other tendency save the
providing for the safety of the Reformed Religion, and the hindering Roman
Catholics from being in a capacity to subvert it. Our Author in way of
reflection upon this, tells us, that it is not only a Childish demand, but that
it is to be hoped that the pensionary will from hence be brought to acknowledge,
how trifling and weak all those Reasons are, by which he would preclude the
Nonconformists as well as the Roman Catholics from public Employments. So
that by these and many other passages equally false and disingenuous in our
Author's pretended Answer, which for brevity's sake I forbear to mention, it is
apparent that he endeavors to persuade the world into a belief, that the
Dissenters are staed by their Highnesses in the same rank and condition with
the Papists, and are to expect to be treated in the same manner, in case it
please the Almighty God to bring Their Highnesses to the Throne. One would
wonder at this sudden and strange change in the opinion and conduct of the
Papists toward the Nonconformists; that they who were represented by them a
while ago' as unfit to live in His Majesty's Dominions; should now come to be
accounted the Kings best and most Faithful Subjects, and worthy to be advanced
to the chief Trusts and Employ's It Is but a few years since, that all the Laws
enacted against them, were judged to be too few and gentle, and therefore they
had Laws executed upon them, to which the Legislators had never made them
obnoxious; but now the Roman Catholics are become so tender of their ease and
safety, that out of pure kindness unto them, if any will be so foolish as to
believe it, they must have Laws abrogated, which in the worst times, and during
the most illegal and barbarous procedures against them, they were never
affected with nor suffered the least prejudice by. And whereas it was the only
way for persons heretofore to make their Court at St. James's, by declaiming
against the Dissenters as Rebels and Traitors, and by putting them into a
salvage Dress, to be run upon as beasts of prey; it is now grown the only
method of becoming gracious at Whitehall, to proclaim their Loyalty, and to cry
them up for the only people in whom his Majesty, with safety to his Person and
Crown, can repose a confidence. But under all the Shapes which the Papists do
assume, they may be easily discovered to retain the same malice to the Reformed
Religion, and only to act those various and opposite parts, in order the better
to subvert it. And the Dissenters being harassed and oppressed before, and
indulged and caressed now, was upon the same motive of hatred unto it, and in
subserviency to its extirpation. The method's are altered, but the design is
one, and tho they have changed their Tools, yet they remain constant in the
pursuance of the same End. While they of the Church of England were found
compliant with the ways, which the Factors for Rome thought serviceable
thereunto, they were not only the Favorites of the Court and of the whole
Popish party, but were gratified, at least as was pretended, with a rigorous
execution of the Penal Laws upon Dissenters. But there remaining several steps
to be taken for the introduction of Popery, and the extirpation of the Reformed
Religion, which they of the National Communion would not go along with them in,
they are forced to shift Instruments, and to betake themselves to the
Nonconformists; whose assistance the better to engage, they have not only
suspended all the Penal Laws, to which the Dissenters were liable, but have
endeavored to fill' them with jealousy and apprehension of danger from the
Test Acts, tho at the same time they know that Nonconformists never either did,
or could receive prejudice by them. Only they are sensible, that if they could
work up that easy people into such a belief, they should thereby not only
obtain their concurrence and abettment, for the rescinding of those Laws, that
are at present the only great remaining Fence about our Religion, and upon the
abrogation whereof nothing could hinder the Papists from getting into a
condition to extirpate it; but make them a formed and united Body with
themselves against the Prince and Princess of Orange, who have with so much
Wisdom, Courage and Integrity, declared that they are against the having them
repealed. And as the Dissenters cannot have so far renounced all regard both to
honesty and to a good name, as to be fond of being herded with the Papists, or
thank our Author for it; so they must be become void of all sense and
understanding, if they suffer themselves to be either wheedled or frighted into
an opinion of their being subject to receive any damage by the Tests; it being
so expressly contrary both to the Terms of those Laws, and to their own
experience. Nor can they be so far abandoned of God, nor prove so treacherous
to the Nation, Posterity and the whole Protestant Interest through Europe, as to
cooperate to the Repeal of them, by destroying that great Fence about the
Reformed Religion in England, and to put the Papists into capacity both of
subverting it there and every where else. And setting aside a few mercenary
fellows among them, there is no ground to fear, after we have had so many
proofs of their zeal for the Protestant Religion and English Liberties, in the
worst of times and under the greatest Temptations, that they should at this
season, when all others behave themselves with so much Integrity and Courage,
be accessory to so villainous a thing. The ill success which the Court has met
with in the several Towns and City's, since the late Regulation of the
Corporations, sufficiently shows, that the Dissenters who were put into
Magistracy, in hopes by them to have compassed the packing of a Parliament, are
no less careful of preserving the Test Laws, than they of the Church of England
Communion were, who were displaced to make way for them. And to discover the
grossness of the abuse, which our Author, without regard to Truth or Ingenuity,
endeavors to put upon them, as if they were judged by their Highnesses to be
incapable of Trusts and Employments, or any ways concluded to stand under those
restraints by the Test, which the Roman Catholics do; there is not one word in
Mijn Here Fagel's Letter, whereby they are said to be subject unto them, or by
which there is any ground administered of fancying they are put into the same
rank with the Papists, and whereby to fear that they may hereafter come to be
treated accordingly. But in stead of this, they are expressly told, that Their
Highnesses do both allow and desire the abrogation of all the Penal Laws
against Dissenters, and the having them freed from the severity of them; and
that they do not only consent but heartily approve of their having an entire
liberty granted them for the full exercise of their Religion, without any
trouble or hindrance, or being left exposed to the least molestation or
inconvenience upon that account. And to testify how far the Nonconformists are
from being in the least menaced by those Laws, it is again Declared, that the
only reason why their Highnesses refuse to consent to the having them repealed,
is, because that they have no other tendency, save to Secure the Reformed
Religion from the Designs of the Papists, by containing provisions in the
virtue of which, those only may be kept out of Office who can not testify that
they are of the Reformed, and not of the Roman Catholic Religion. Which as it
is the highest evidence imaginable, of their own stedfastness and integrity in
the Reformed Religion, and of the compassion and love which they equally bear
to all who profess it, and how careful they will at all times be to have it
maintained and supported; so it is the putting such a merit upon all
Protestants, that it should engage their prayers for their happy extation to
the Throne, and make them ambitious as well as willing and ready to hazard
their lives and Fortunes, for the securing the Succession unto them, if any
should be so wicked as to go about to preclude them.

But I must pay a further attendance upon our Author, and accompany him to the
fifth particular which I promised to consider; namely that according to his own
foolish and incoherent way of writing, while he pretends to commend and justify
the proceeding of His Majesty of Great Britain, he publishes the villainy of
the Papal Church, and proclaims the dishonor and injustice of diverse Eminent
Monarchs and Princes of the Romish Communion. His Panegyricks upon the King of
England, are so many just Satyr's upon the Church of Rome, the Monarch of
France, and the Duke of Savoy, etc. For if it be becoming a Christian, to be of
a contrary judgment to those who are for persecuting such as differ from the
public and established Religion, and if it be a sentiment worthy of a Royal
mind, that none ought to be oppressed for their Consciences in Divine Matters;
what characters of irreligion, ignominy, wickedness, are due unto them, who
judge it to be meritorious to destroy sincere Christians, for no other
pretended Crime, save that they cannot believe as the Pope and the Church of
Rome do. Surely our Author must either be extremely ignorant of the Doctrine of
his own Church, and of the bloody and barbarous practices pursuant thereunto,
both at this day, and for many ages past; or else he must be the most unsincere
miscreant that ever writ, or at best be guilty of the inconsistency and folly
as to continue in the Communion of a Church, whose Articles of Faith he
condemns as Antichristian, and whose practices according to the Terms made
necessary for Salvation, he abhors both as unworthy of Royal Minds, and
contrary to Christian Piety. But tho nothing can render a false man honest, or
a foolish Man wise, yet seeing something may be done toward the curing a
person's ignorance if he be teachable, or at least to show his obstinacy, and
that the fault is in his will, not in his Understanding, if he will not learn
and be convinced; I shall therefore both acquaint him a little with the
Doctrine of that Church, and briefly put him in remembrance, how these of the
Romish Fellowship have therefore persecuted Christians, and still continue so
to do, only for differing from the public and established Religion. As to the
first, it is sufficiently known that according to the judgment of the Church of
Rome we are Heretics, and that Heresy being Crimen laesae Majestatis Divinae,
we are therefore the worst of Traitors, and liable to the Penalties of the
greatest High Treason. And thereupon we are not only declared to be infamous
and sentenced to be deprived of all Honor and Dignity, and to be incapable of
all Offices, and have our Estates confiscated and seized; but we are condemned
to be burnt, and if that cannot conveniently be effected, it is both made
lawful and meritorious to extirpate us by War or Massacre, as shall be best and
most safe for the Church of Rome. In order whereunto, not only all Laws made
for our Security are declared to be null, and that no promises made unto us,
ought to be kept; but all Princes, that neglect to destory and extirpate us,
are proclaimed to be deposed. And suitable hereunto has their carriage been for
many ages to such as differ from them in Articles of Faith, and will not join
in their Superstitions and Idolatries. In proof where of I neither need to
insist upon the infinite Murders, committed by the Inquisition, the most
Devilish Engine of Cruelty that ever the World was acquainted with, nor to
reflect so far backward as the Parisian and Irish Massacres, or the infinite
Slaughters perpetrated heretofore in France, Germany, and the Low Countries,
etc. seeing we have such fresh and doleful evidences of the mercy and
gentleness of the Papal Church, in the ungrateful, inhumane, perjurious, and
salvage persecutions executed so lately in France and Piedmont. If it be the
effect of Royal and Paternal affection in the King of England to his Subjects,
that all he endeavors, is to treat them as becomes a common Father, without
making any distinction between one and another, as our Author is pleased to
call it in his Testimony concerning him; what cruel Parents must many Princes
of the Roman Communion be, who act with that difference toward their people,
that while they cherish and embrace some, they tear out the Bowels, and suck
the blood of others? And if no Society destitute of such tender and Christian
affections, can merit the name of a Church, we hence learn where to fasten the
character of being the Mother of Harlots. In that we not only know whose
Doctrine it is, that whom She cannot convert, She ought to destroy; but that we
have observed her, to have been in all Ages drunk with the Blood of Saints. All
the commendations our Author bestows upon the King of England; are not only
either so many accusations of His Majesty's insincerity in the Papal Faith, or
infallible indications that both the King (pardon the expression) and his
Minister, are Hypocritical Dissemblers; but they are stabbing and twinging
Satyr's against Mother Church, and the Holy Father, and against his Brittanick
Majesty's dear Brother and Ally the French King. Nor can we be guilty either of
Crime or Indecency, in the worst we can say of the Church of Rome, and the Most
Christian King; seeing we have in equivalent Terms a President for it, both
from so good a Catholic, and so wise a Minister of a great Monarch, as our
honorable Author is.

And tho I begin to grow weary of conversing with so impertinent a man, yet I
am bound to wait upon him a little longer, and while the Reader can reap no
advantage by any thing he says, to see whether it be not possible to lay hold
of an occasion from his Ignorance and Folly, to communicate things that may be
more solid and instructive. The sixth thing therefore whereof I accused him,
and for which I promised to call him to an account, is his egregious ignorance
in relation to Government, Laws, Customs, and matters of Fact, Mijn Here Fagel
tells us, that the Test Laws being enacted by King and Parliament for the
Security of the Reformed Religion, and the Roman Catholics receiving no
prejudice by them, but being merely restrained from getting into a condition to
subvert it, therefore Their Highnesses could not consent to their Repeal. And
he further adds, that there is no Kingdom, Commonwealth, or any constituted
Body and Society, in which there are not Laws made for the safety thereof,
which not only provide against all attempts that may disturb their peace, but
which prescribe such conditions as they judge necessary, for the discerning who
are qualified to bear Employments. To which he again subjoins, that there is a
great difference between the conduct of these of the Reformed Religion toward
Roman Catholics, which is moderate, and only to prevent their getting into a
capacity to do hurt; and that of those of the Roman Catholic Religion toward
the Reformed, who not being satisfied to exclude them from places of Trust, do
both suppress the whole Exercise of their Religion and severely persecute all
that profess it. And he finally adds, that both Reason and the Experience of
the present, as well as past Ages do show, that it is impossible for Roman
Catholics, and those of the Reformed Religion, when joined together in places
of Trust, and public Employment, to maintain a good Correspondence, live in
mutual peace, and to discharge their Offices quietly and to the public Good.
Now from these several passages, which carry their own evidence along with
them, our Author takes occasion both to vent his foolish and ridiculous
Politics, and to proclaim his ignorance in History and of the most obvious
matters of Fact. However we shall have the patience to hearken to what he has
been pleased to say, and shall examine it piece by piece, as we go along. And
the first thing he does is to acquaint us with a mighty Mystery of State, and
which none but so great a Minister could have been able to have revealed;
namely, that tho the King and Parliament upon the first Revolution with respect
to Religion, and the introducing and setting up the Reformed Religion, thought
fit to make those Laws which they judged necessary for its preservation; yet
that it does not follow that his present Majesty and a Parliament would be of
the same mind, but that they might enact Laws of a differing Nature from the
former, and re-establish Religion into the same State, in which it was before
the Reformed Doctrine and Worship was set up. We are much obliged to our Author
for this discovery, though I must add, that this it is to trust a Fool with
secrets, for he will be sure to be blabbing. For tho he subjoin, that he will
not say that matters would be pushed so far; yet he has already told us
enough, to make us understand both what his own hopes are, and what is designed
by the Papal party, if they could compass a Parliament of a Complexion and
Temper to their mind. But there are two fatal things, which lie in their way.
One is, that neither progressing nor closeting, bribing nor threatening, can
prove effectual to give them the slenderest ground of confidence of their
obtaining a Parliament of that mould and constitution. And the second is, that
all the Members must take the Tests, before they can be a Legal Parliament; and
then there is little probability, that they who can make the Declaration
required in these Laws, will be inclinable to Repeal them; especially at a
season, when their own safety as well as that of the Protestant Religion,
renders it so necessary to have them maintained. Whatsoever any Body of men, by
what name soever they be called, or within what walls soever they assemble,
shall attempt to do, without first having taken the Tests; is ipso facto null
and void in Law, and will serve to no Legal purpose, but to make themselves
obnoxious to the severest punishments, which the Justice of a provoked and
betrayed Nation can be able to inflict upon them. So that we do not doubt what
the King would do, for the re-establishing Popery and banishing the Protestant
Religion, could he get a Parliament to his mind; but our hope is that he will
not, and the better to prevent it, we will endeavor to keep our Test Laws. But
to go on with our Author, who with his accustomed ignorance, but personating
here the wisdom of a Solon or a Lycurgus, takes upon him to instruct us, that
as nothing can be called the fundamental Law of a Kingdom or a Republic, but
what was enacted at the commencement of that State or Society, before any
alterations could fall out in it with reference to Religion; so nothing
deserves the name of such a Law save that which is to the advantage and benefit
of all the Subjects. It were not amiss here to enquire, by what Authority our
Author fastens on Mijn Here Fagel this Term of Fundamental Law in reference to
the Tests; seeing he never used it in his Letter much less applied it to such a
purpose. But falsifying is so natural to this Gentleman, that he could not
avoid it, even when he might have been sensible, that he would not escape the
being challenged for it. There is a Country in the world, that is said to bear
no poisonous animal, nor had it need, seeing if any number of the Natives be of
the mould and frame that some are, there are brutal and venomous Creatures
enough in it, tho there be neither Toad nor Serpent there. But may not the Test
Laws answer the end they were designed unto, of being a Fence about Religion,
tho they be none of the Fundamental Laws of the Government. It is not the name
that alone gives value to a Law; but the Sanction of the Legislative Authority,
and the usefulness of it to the public good. A Statute, that was occasioned by
a necessity arising in reference to the public Safety, ought as much to be
stood by and upheld while that necessity continues, as if it were an original
Law and Coaeval with the Constitution. And if it was the indispensable
dependence of the Welfare and Safety of the Community upon such and such
Provisions at first, that gave them the Name of Fundamental Laws; I am sure,
that under our present Circumstances, we may call the Test Laws absolutely
needful, if we assume not the vanity to style them Fundamental. Besides I would
fain know of our Author, that if all Laws lie exposed to an easy Abrogation,
that are not coaeval with the Kingdom; what will then become of the Magna
Charta for Liberty of Conscience, which his Majesty not only promises, but
undertakes to make irrepealable? And withal may not some Laws be as necessary
to the being and preservation of a State under the notion of Protestant; as
others are to its being and subsistence under the consideration of an embodied
and formed Society? Every Society is bound to use all necessary means to
preserve it self, and while it makes no provisions in order thereunto, that
derive inconvenience upon others, unless it be only to keep them from being
able to do hurt; it would be a wickedness as well as a folly to neglect them.
In a word, as the making no Laws necessary for the Safety of a people under any
knowledge of God they may be grown up into, but what were coaeval with their
first formation into a Kingdom or Republic, were the weakening and undermining
the Security of the Christian Religion in all parts of the world where it has
obtained to be embraced and settled; so by the same reason that it is lawful to
make provisions for the preservation of Christianity in a State professing the
Gospel of Jesus Christ; it is also lawful to make the like provisions for the
Security of the Reformed Religion in these Kingdoms and Commonwealths, which
have judged it to be their duty to God, and their Souls, to receive and
establish it. And for our Author's saying, that no Law deserves to be called
Fundamental, save that which is to the benefit and advantage of all the
Subjects; it is wholly impertinent to the case for which it is alleged, and
does no way's attack or weaken what the Pensionary had said. For as the Laws
contended for to be maintained, were never styled Fundamental; so many
thousands may have benefit by a Law; whom nevertheless all persons of sense and
wisdom will account unfit to be advanced to public Trusts. As no man will
judge it unreasonable to require that all who are held capable of public
employments, should have some degree of wit and understanding; so I think it is
very reasonable that they should be qualified with so much honesty, as to be
well affected to the Government as it is by Law established. And to speak
properly it is not the Law that makes the Papists incapable of Offices and
Employments, it only declares they shall not be admitted, because they were
incapable before, and had made themselves unfit to be trusted, partly through
their dependence upon a foreign power, that is at enmity with the State, and
seeks to subvert it, and partly by reason of that principle which they are
possessed with, of its being their duty to destroy us whenever they can. And
as it is a great favor vouchsafed by the Government, to suffer such to live
under it, as stand so ill affected to it, and want only means to overthrow it;
so if the Roman Catholics will not be content with the first without the
latter, it will be a great temptation upon the Kingdom to deprive them of the
Privilege they have, because they would not be content with it, unless they
might obtain that which the Nation could not grant, without being Felo de se,
and without abandoning the means both of our safety here, and Happiness
hereafter And whereas our Author takes the confidence to tell us, That there
are many States and Cities in Germany, where without the giving occasion to any
disturbance, the Government is shared between Papists and Protestants, and
where both those of the Roman Catholic and Reformed Religion, do equally
partake in public Trusts and Employments: He must pardon me if I not only say,
he is mistaken, but that it is a downright Falsehood, and that herein he
betrays his wonted ignorance, or at least gives us a new discovery of the
insincerity that is natural to him. Nor would he have vented this in so general
Terms, but that he did foresee if he should have condescended to particulars,
how easy it would have been for persons of very ordinary acquaintance either
with History or the World, to have both contradicted and refuted him. And if
there were some one or other small City, where by reason of the Fewness of
those of one Religion to exercise the Government, and to take care of the
Welfare of the Society, those of the other Religion are sometimes received into
Employments, in order to prevent the inconveniences which the want of a
competent number of Magistrates would be attended with, and where the Jealousy
and Fear of being swallowed up by some envious and potent Neighbor, may lay
them under a necessity of agreeing better together than otherwise they would or
than the principles of some of them incline them unto; must we thence conclude
that it ought to be so in a great Kingdom, where there is so vast a number of
Protestants admirably qualified with Wisdom, Interest, and Estates, to
discharge all the Offices of the Government, and to manage the universal care
of the Society, without running the hazard of the many mischiefs, that would
accompany the taking the Papists into partnership with them? Nor could Mijn
Here Fagel in representing what is safe or unsafe to so great and noble a
Nation, take notice of what is practiced upon necessity in some mean Town or
Corporation, (supposing that it were there as our Author alleges) without
transgressing against all the Rules both of prudence and decency. But as the
Pensionary had no where in his Letter affirmed, that there were not any States
or Cities, in which the Protestants and Papists bear Office in Government
together; but had only said, that Reason and Experience do show us, how
impossible it will be for them when joined together in places of Trust and
public Employments, to maintain a good Correspondence, and to live peaceably
with one another; so this is found to be so just a truth, and so pertinently
observed, that in all the places where it has been practiced (tho not in
Germany, as our Author ignorantly suggests) they have not only lived in
continual heats and dissentions, but have often come to open Hostility against
each other. Nor has it merely fallen out thus in private, and particular
States within themselves, but the like evils have often followed and ensued
where more States have associated into Union for the common preservation of the
Generality; and where the Government has been in some in the hands of
Protestants, and in others executed by Roman Catholics. Of this we have
diverse Examples in the Cantons of Switzerland, where through the Magistrates
being in some Cantons of the Reformed, and in others of the Roman Catholic
Religion, they have not only been often hindered from joining and acting
vigorously, as they ought to have done, for the interest of all, and the
benefit of the common Confederation and Union; but they have sometimes come to
open ruptures, and have been embarked in War against one another. And
forasmuch as our Author makes bold to say, That there was never any Christian
Kingdom, where the Religion that the Prince professes, and which had in former
ages been. Dominant, was so far laid aside and banished, that his Subjects
professing the same with himself, were shut out and precluded from Trusts and
Employments. I will take the freedom to tell him, that it is so gross and
palpable a Falsehood, that none but a person of his ignorance and impudence,
would have had the face to have asserted it. For there are Christian Kingdoms
that have done more than this amounts unto, and who to prevent the danger of
having Papists preferred to Trusts and Employments, in case a Prince of their
Religion should come to the Throne, have been so wise as to declare Roman
Catholics incapable either of obtaining or keeping the Sovereignty. And it was
in the virtue of such a Law, and by reason of the dread of it, that Christina
Queen of Sweden, upon the having taken up a resolution to turn Papist, chose to
demit her Crown before she declared her self, as knowing that immediately after
such a Declaration she would have been deposed from the Throne, and possibly
not have had so liberal an allowance assigned her afterward, as by that
conduct she did obtain. Nor is it unknown to any, except it be to such as our
Author is for natural and acquired accomplishments, that there were not only
Laws in Scotland for precluding a Popish Prince from coming to the Government,
but that the same thing was employed in the English Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, as being Oaths of such a frame and nature that it had been most
incongruous to impose them upon Subjects to a King of the Roman Catholic
Religion. And tho these two Nations did not improve the advantage which they
had by means of their legal provisions, to hinder the present King from
inheriting the Crowns of the respective Realms; yet those Laws serve to inform
us, how far some Christian Kingdoms thought it lawful to go, and to what
height to Act, not only against Popish Subjects, but against Catholic Princes
themselves. Yea the time was, that the very Papists were so far from condemning
the having men of their Religion debarred from Trusts and Employments in
Protestant Kingdoms under a Popish Prince, that they made the Test Laws by
which they are shut out from Offices and Declared incapable of them, the great
Argument against the necessity of having the Bill passed for excluding the Duke
of York from the Crown, and improved them as the main Engine for allaying the
fears of the Nation, under the apprehensions they had of his being a Roman
Catholic, and coming to the Throne. But by their different Language now from
what it was then, all Englishmen understand how far they are to be believed in
other cases: and whether the many promises which they do make at this time, in
order to a further design, and the putting a new Trick upon the Nation, ought
to be depended on by them whom they have already deceived. And whereas upon
Mijn Here Fagel's having observed that the conduct of Roman Catholics is much
more severe toward Protestants, than that of those of the Reformed Religion
toward Papists, our Author is pleased to reply, that in order to judge as we
should of that different procedure, we are to consider whether it be not less
just, to banish a Religion that had been so long dominant as the Roman
Catholic had been; than to withstand the introduction of a new Religion that
would depress and supplant the old. All I shall say in reference to this, is
that as it does not weaken, but in effect acknowledge what the Pensionary had
said; so by justifying what the Papists did, to prevent the bringing in of the
Protestant Religion, which he styles new; he forewarns us what we are to expect
they will be ready to do, for the reintroducing the Papal Religion, to which he
gives the character of old. Nor is it at all pertinent to the present case,
which of the Religions is the oldest, or which is the newest; but all contended
for is that the method's of the one, have been, and still are, more severe and
sanguinary, than the methods of those of the other. And as we believe our
Religion to be as ancient, as Jesus Christ and his Apostles; so no prescription
of time for Popery's having been in possession, can deprive that which has the
Divine Authority to warrant it, from a right of re-entrance.

There remains only one thing to be spoken unto, of all that I undertook to
discipline and correct our Author for, and that is the signal ingratitude of
the Papists, and particularly of this Gentleman, to their Highnesses, for all
that Liberty, Favor, and ease which Their Highnesses were willing to have had
allowed unto them. And that we may the more fully have an Idea of their
unthankfulness, we are to consider both the extent of that Liberty which Their
Highnesses were contented to have had bestowed upon them, and the obligations
they would have come under for the rendering it hereafter inviolable. And all
this not only at a season, when many of the Papists carry it so undutifully
toward their Highnesses, but at a time when they of the Reformed Religion are
so unhumanely persecuted by several Popish Princes in other parts of the world.
It had not been an unreasonable desire that before the Papists had been so
importunate to have all Penal Laws against them in Protestant Nations rescinded
and taken away; that they should have declared themselves, and improved their
interest, for the Abrogation of all such Laws as are in force against those of
the Reformed Religion in Popish Countries. And if their Highnesses had insisted
upon such a stipulation, before They would have given their consent for the
Repeal of the Penal Laws against Roman Catholics in England, it had been no
more than what was agreeable to the Rules of Wisdom and Justice. But their
Highnesses not thinking it fit to suffer their own mercy to be restrained by
reason of the want of Christian bowels in others, took the first opportunity
put into their hands, of testifying their readiness to consent to the Repeal of
all those Laws against Papists in England, Scotland and Ireland, by which they
are made liable to fines or other punishments. And that those which they can
not agree to the rescinding of, are only such by which the Reformed Religion is
covered from the designs of the Roman Catholics against it, and by which they
are restrained from getting into a condition to overturn it. One would think
that this should have been received as a most special favor, and have obliged
them to very hearty acknowledgments. Especially when the Prince and Princess
were willing to confirm both this and a Liberty for the private Exercise of
their Religion with their Guaranty. But in stead of any symptoms of gratitude,
there is nothing to be heard of from many of them, or to be met with in our
Answerer, but what proclaims their dissatisfaction, anger, and revenge. For
besides all the ill returns, we have already taken notice of in this wrathful
and unthankful man; he tells us, that all which Their Highnesses declare
themselves ready to consent unto amounts only to the abolishing some cruel
Laws, by which Romish Ecclesiastics stood condemned to death, for no other
reason save their being Priests; and in the virtue of which, other persons were
banished and deprived of their Estates, merely for being Roman Catholics; all
which was a higher degree of barbarity than was ever practiced among the most
salvage Nations. Now not to trouble my self about what kind of entertainment,
Romish Priests and Lay Papists have met with among those Nations, which our
Author styles Barbarous, tho it will be found infinitely more severe, than any
thing that was ever inflicted upon them in England, Scotland or Ireland, by
reason of their Religion, or upon the score of any Ecclesiastical Character: I
would only know of this modest and veracious Gentleman, what he thinks of the
barbarous and innumerable Cruelties, that were perpetrated in all ages and
places heretofore, and which are at this day committed upon peaceable and
sincere Christians, for no other crime but that they could not, and to this day
cannot believe as the Church of Rome does, nor continue in Communion with so
idolatrous and villainous a Society. Whatsoever measure of severity has been
any where exercised toward Papists, it was but according to the President
themselves had set, in their dealing with them whom they style Heretics, and
in which the Copy comes vastly below the Original. But then that which wholly
alters the case, is, that whereas the Papists persecute and destroy Christians,
merely upon the account of Religion; there were never any severe, much less
Sanguinary Laws enacted against them, save by reason of their Crimes against
the State, and for being Enemies and Traitors to the Government. Popery was
never persecuted in England as it is a false and erroneous Belief; but as it
binds men to the owning of a foreign, usurped, and unlawful Jurisdiction. It Is
neither for their believing Transubstantiation, nor for their Worshipping
Images, that Papists are adjudged to penalties or death; but because they
adhere to a foreign Enemy, and are treacherous to their Country. Could they
have been but good Subjects; their being bad Christians would never have
prejudiced them. And indeed while they continue to hold that the Pope can
depose Protestant Sovereigns, and absolve Subjects from their Allegiance to
them, and that it is lawful to cut the Throats of all whom they style
Heretics, and that all Laws made for our security are null and void, as being
enacted by an incompetent and unlawful Authority, it would seem according to
the exact measures of wisdom and reason, that all lenity and favor toward
them, were not only a supererogating in Mercy, but an indiscretion in Policy.
But then to let such into the Government, were plainly to betray the State, and
wilfully to abandon both it and our selves to be destroyed and ruined. Nor is
there so much danger in advancing Robbers and Newgate Fellons to Employments,
as there would be in preferring Papists, especially if Jesuiced and Bigoted,
into Civil Offices in a Reformed Kingdom. And therefore seeing they will not
thankfully accept and quietly acquiesce in what is offered, and that rather
from an exurberancy of Generosity and Mercy, than from Maxims of prudence, and
obligations arising from duty; it is best to leave them, to steer their own
course, and to pursue those Methods, which will infallibly issue in their
disadvantage, to say no worse. All ways of Gentleness and Moderation toward
them, do only encourage their making the bolder claims, and the proceeding
further in their usurpations. The giving them an inch, provokes them to take an
ell, and they grow enraged because we will not tamely suffer it. If they act as
they do, while the Chain hangs still about their necks? what are we to expect
if it should be wholly taken off, and they left loose to exert the malignity
which their Religion inspires them with? For not being contented to invade and
usurp all sorts of Employments and places of Trust in defiance of the Test
Laws; they have assumed that confidence, as to make those very Laws which were
intentionally enacted and designed to keep Papists out of Office and Power, the
ground and occasion of incapacitating and shutting out Protestants. And whereas
none are by Law to be admitted into Employments without making the Declarations
contained in the Tests; none are now to be continued, save they who shall both
refuse to take them, and withal promise to give their votes for the Election of
such persons into Parliament, as shall be willing to Abrogate and Repeal them.
Which is not only such a piece of Chicannery in it self, but such an Assault
upon the Legislative Authority, that it is hard to speak of it, without more
than usual emotion of mind, and the having ones indignation strangely excited
and enflamed. However all I shall allow my self at present to say, shall be
only to advise all sort of persons to take care what they do, there being no
Dispensing power lodged in the King, in reference to Penal, and much less in
relation to the Test Laws. Of this we have a clear and uncontrollable proof in
the proceedings of the Parliament 1673. when the House of Commons voted the
Declaration of the late King for Liberty of Conscience, to be both a violation
of the Laws of the Land, and an altering of the Legislative power. Which is the
more remarkable, in that it was not only done by the most obsequious Parliament
that ever any King of England had, and of which many of the Members were his
hired and bribed Pensioners, but that they did thus adjudge, both after the
King had acquainted them by a solemn Speech at the opening of the Session, that
he was Resolved to adhere to his Declaration, and had endeavored to Hector
them into a departure from their Vote, by telling them in an Answer which he
made to one of their Addresses, that they had questioned a power in the Crown,
which had never been disputed in the Reign of any of his Predecessors, and
which belonged unto him as a prerogative inseparable from the Sovereignty. Yet
notwithstanding both all this, and his applying himself in a Speech to the
House of Lords to have engaged them to stand by him against the Commons, he was
necessitated upon the Commons insisting, that there was never any such
Dispensing power vested in the Crown, nor claimed or exercised by any of his
Predecessors; and that the assuming it was a changing of the Constitution, and
an altering of the Legislative Authority; and upon the Lords declining to stand
by him, and their advising him to give liberty by way of Bill to be passed into
a Law; I say he was necessitated to take his Declaration off from the File,
tear the Seal from it, and to assure both Houses in a Speech he made to them,
March 8. that what he had done in taking upon him to Suspend the Penal Laws,
should not for the future be drawn either into consequence or Example. In
brief, if the Papists will not so far consult their own interest, and comply
with our safety, as to be contented with an ease from Penalties, and an
Indulgence to be ratified into a Law for the private exercise of their
Religion; it is the indispensable duty of all Protestants, of what party or
persuasion soever they be, to unite together in withstanding their endeavors
and attempts for obtaining more. We have a laudable example in the carriage of
all that pretended to Christianity, when they were brought into a condition
somewhat parallel with ours in one of the first Centuries. For tho the Orthodox
had been persecuted by the Arrians under Constantius, and some of the Arrians
harshly enough treated at least, as they thought for a while under Constantine;
yet upon Julian's coming to the Throne, both parties were so far from embracing
his offers in order to revenge their wrongs upon one another, that they
resolved at that season if not wholly to silence their Disputes, yet to forbear
all those harsh Terms, that had enflamed their heats and animosities. To which
I shall add but this one thing more, and would beg of the Dissenters, that they
may seriously consider it, namely that as the Donatists were the only party of
Christians that made Addresses to Julian, and received favors from him; so
they thereby became infamous, and were often afterward reproached with it.

Thus Sir, I have studied to do what you required of me, and if it be my
misfortune not to have acquitted my self answerably to your expectations; yet
the doing it as well, as the being bound up to an Author, that administers so
little occasion for valuable thoughts, would allow, gives me the satisfaction
of having approved my self,

SIR, Your Obedient Servant.

Some Reflections on a Discourse, called, Good Advice to the Church of England,
etc.
SIR,
I Have, at last, procured a sight of the Book, styled, Good Advice to the
Church of England, Roman Catholic and Protestant Dissenter; and of the Three
Letters from a Gentleman in the Country to his Friend in London; which, as
they are written by one and the same person, so he endeavors, in all of them,
to make it appear to be the Duty, Principles, and Interest of the parties
mentioned, to Abolish the Penal Laws and Tests. Now though I Am daily in
expectation of seeing such an Answer returned to those Papers, as will both
give the Author cause to wish he had been otherways employed when he wrote
them, and make the Court-Faction ashamed of the Elogies they have heapt upon
him for his service; yet it may not be amiss in the mean time, to show, in a
very few Pages, that it is not any considerable strength in those Discourses,
which has given them a Reputation, but the Interest of some to have every
thing accounted unanswerable that is published in favor of their Designs, and
the folly and weakness of others, which makes them believe that to be nervous,
in whose success they imagine their case to be wrapped up and involved.

I think it is universally acknowledged, and I Am sure it can be demonstratively
proved, that they are written by a Quaker; and this ought to render us jealous
both of the motives influencing unto it, and of the end to which they are
designed to be subservient. For first, the affinity of several of the Religious
Principles of that party, with some of the material Doctrines of the Roman
Church, may, notwithstanding the Charity which we retain toward the Bulk of
them, make us justly apprehensive, that one or more of their Leaders are
entirely in the Interest of the Church of Rome. For as the Popish Emissaries
know how to put themselves into all shapes, for the increasing and heightning
divisions among Protestants, and for the exposing as well as supplanting of our
Religion; so the design promoted in the foresaid Papers, of destroying all the
Legal Fences against Popery, and of letting the Papists into the Legislative
and whole Executive Power of the Government, gives the World too much ground to
suspect out of whose mint and forge writings of this stamp and mettle do
proceed? Secondly, It should not a little contribute to augment our Jealousy,
that they who without being false to their Religious Tenets, cannot join to
assist Protestants, in case the Papists should attempt to cut our Throats, or
endeavor to impose their Religion upon the Nation by Military force; should,
of all men, study to overthrow that Security which we have, by the Test Laws,
whose whole tendency is only to prevent the Papists, from getting into a
condition to extirpate our Religion, and destroy us. Is it not enough that they
have robbed the Kingdom of the Aid of so many as they have leavened with their
Doctrine, in case the King, upon despairing to establish Popery by a
Parliament, should employ his Janissaries to compel us to receive it, and should
set upon the converting Protestants in England, in the way that the French
Monarch has converted the Huguenots; but that over and above this, they should
be doing all they can, to deprive us of all the Legal Security, whereby we may
be preserved from the Power of the Papists? Surely 'twere not Charity and good
Nature, but stupidity and folly, not to suspect the tendency of such a design,
when we find it pursued and carried on by a person that styles himself a Quaker.

But then, when besides this, we find that it is Mr. William Pen, who is the
Author of those Papers, and the great Instrument in advancing this projection,
we have the more cause to suspect some sinistrous thing at the bottom of it.
For first, he is under those Obligations to His Majesty, which, as they may put
a biass upon his Understanding, so they afford ground enough to Protestants to
look upon him no otherways than as one Retained against them. 'Twas through his
present Majesty's Intercession with the late King, that he obtained the
Proprietorship of Pensilvania, and from his Bounty that he had the Propriety of
Three whole Counties bordering upon it superadded thereunto. And as this cannot
be but a strong Obligation upon so grateful a person as Mr. Pen, why he should
effectually serve the King, and make his Will, in a very great degree, the
measure of his actings; so it ought to be an Inducement to others to be the
more jealous of all he says, and not to surrender themselves too easily either
to his Magisterial Dictates upon the one hand, or to his smooth Flatteries upon
the other. He must have either laid a mighty merit upon the two Royal Brothers,
of both whose Religion we are at last convinced, or he must have come under
Obligations, of doing them very considerable service, in reference to that
which they were most fond of compassing; otherways we have little cause to
think, that he would have been singled out from all the rest of the Kingdom, to
be made the object of so special favor, and of so eminent liberality. For
though there might be a debt owing to his Father Sir William Pen, yet they must
be extremely weak, who conceive there was no other motive to the forementioned
Donation, save Honor and Justice in the two Royal Brothers, for having it
discharged. Seeing many of the noblest Families in England, who had spent their
Blood, and wasted their Estates in fighting for the Crown, while Sir William
Pen was all along engaged against it, were not only left without all kind of
Compensation, for what they had eminently acted, and as eminently suffered in
behalf of the Monarchy, but could never get to be reimbursed one farthing of
the vast Sums, which they had lent the late King and his Father upon the
security of the Royal Faith. Secondly, Mr. Pen has too far detected himself in
these very Discourses, not to give us ground to suspect what they are
calculated for, and whereunto they are subservient. For besides his justifying
the King's turning so many Gentlemen of the Church of England out of all Office
and Employ, by saying, they are not fit to be trusted, who are out of the
King's Interest; he further tells us, that the King being mortal, it is not
good sense, that he should leave the power in those hands, that to his face
show their aversion to the Friends of his Communion. (Letter first.) For as
this implies no less, than that they ought to have the whole Legal and Military
Power of the three Kingdoms put into their hands, that they may be in a
condition to preclude the right Heir from Succession to the Crown, or prescribe
such Laws to her as they please, in case they should think fit to admit her; so
a very small measure of Understanding, will serve to instruct us, what the
Papists esteem to be an aversion to them, and in what manner, had they the
power in their hands, they think themselves obliged to treat us upon that
account. And as we have had occasion to know too much of his Majesty's Temper
and Design, as well as to whose Guidance he has implicitly resigned himself,
not to be sensible what he esteems his Interest; so we need no other evidence
what it amounts unto to be in it, than the seeing so many displaced from all
share in the administration, whose Quality gives them a Right, and their
Abilities a fitness for the chiefest and most honorable Trusts; and whom as
the King, by reason of their services to himself as well as the Crown, cannot
lay aside without the highest ingratitude; so their known Loyalty to his
person, and zeal for the grandeur of the Monarchy is such, that nothing could
take them off from concurring in his Councils, and promoting his Designs, but
the conviction they are under, of their tendency to the subversion of Religion,
and the altering of the Legal Government.

And as we have reason to suspect what the foresaid Papers are intended to
promote, both upon the account of the Author's being Quaker, and because not
only of the many Obligations he is under to His Majesty, but his being so
entirely in his Interest, as appears by his influence into Councils, the great
stroke he has in all Affairs, and from his being one of the King's principal
Confidents; so upon looking into those Discourses, we find several things
obtruded on us for truth, and proposed in order to wheedle and ensnare us into
an abrogation of the Laws enacted for our security, which to every ones
knowledge are so palpably false, that we have all the ground that may be, both
to question and suspect his sincerity, and to conclude, that his Masters do not
purpose to confine themselves within the bounds that he is pleased to chalk out
for them; and which he undertakes they shall be contented with for their
allotment. For what can be remoter from Truth? than that the Test Laws were
designed as a preamble to the Bill of Exclusion, (as he phrases it, Letter
first) and that they were contrived to exclude the Duke of York from the Crown,
(as he expresses it, p. 15. of his Good Advice, etc.) when it is most certain,
that as the Test in 73. was made long before there were, or could be any
thoughts of it, and was enacted by a Parliament against whose Loyalty there can
be no exception; so there was a clause in the last Test Act, by which it was
provided, that he should not be obliged to take it. Again, what can be more
repugnant to experience, than that the King only desires ease for those of his
Religion; (Good Adv. p. 44.) and that the Papists desire no more than a
Toleration, and are willing upon those Terms, to make a perpetual peace with
the Church of England, (Good Advice, p. 17.) For do we not daily see
Protestants turned out of all Places of Trust, Authority and Command; and
Papists advanced into all Offices Military and Civil; Could the King have been
contented with a Non-execution of the Laws against those of his Communion, and
could they have been satisfied with such an Indulgence, and have modestly
improved it? It Is not improbable but that such a behavior, would have so far
prevailed upon the ingenuity and good nature of the generality of Protestants,
that without needing to have been importuned, they would have repealed all the
Penal Laws against Roman Catholics. But the methods which have been pursued by
his Majesty and them, shows, both that they aim at no less than the Domination,
and that we must be very willing to be deceived, if we either credit Mr. Pen,
or suffer our selves to be influenced by him, after his obtruding upon us for
truths, matters, which our very senses enable us to refute. It may justly make
us question his sincerity, and beget a suspicion in all thinking people, of the
sinistrous design these Papers are adapted unto, when we find him endeavoring
to cajole the Nation to an abrogation of the Laws, by which our Religion and
Safety are secured, by telling us. That the King's word is enough for us to
rely upon, if they were gone, ( Good Advice, p. 49.) and that he could easily
pack a Parliament for Repealing them, if he did not seek a more lasting and
more agreeable security to his Friends, ( Letter third, p. 12.) and that if
they were abolished, it is below the Glory of our King, to use ways so unlike
the rest of his open and generous principles, as to endeavor to get a
Parliament afterward returned, that is not duly chosen ( Letter second, p.
15.) and that he is a Prince of that Honor, Conscience and generoas nature, as
not by invading the Rights of the Church of England, to become guilty of an
injustice and irreligion, he has so often, so solemnly and earnestly spoken
against ( Letter second, p. 11.) He must needs take us to be strangely
unacquainted with the whole Tenor of the King's Actings in England, as well as
in Scotland and Ireland, and to be persons of very weak understandings, and of
an easy belief, if he think we are to be imposed upon, and decoyed by such
Topics as these, to absolish the Tests: or that after what we have seen and
felt contradictory to those Panegyricks, and inconsistent with those beautiful
and lofty Characters fastened upon his Majesty, we should believe Mr. Pen to
mean nothing but well and honestly toward the Protestant Interest, in what he
so earnestly solliciteth the Church of England and the Dissenters in the
forementioned Papers to concur and consent unto.

I do acknowledge, that what he has said about Liberty, due to men in matters
of mere Religion, and by way of rebuke unto, and reflection upon the Wisdom and
Justice of those, that either are, or have been for persecution, is very strong
and convincing; but I must withal add, that it is all at this time very
needless and impertinent. For the Church of England is so sensible of the
Iniquity, as well as folly of that Method, that there is no ground to suspect
She will ever be guilty of it for the future. They, whom no Arguments could
heretofore convert, the Court (whose Tools they were in that mischievous and
Unchristian work, and by whom they were instigated to all the severities which
they are now blamed for) by objecting it to them as their Reproach and
Disgrace, and by seeking to improve the resentments of those who had suffered
by Penal Laws, to become an united party with the Papists for their subversion,
has brought them at once to be ashamed of what they did, and to Resolutions of
promoting all Christian Liberty for the time to come. And should there be any
peevish and ill-natured Ecclesiastics, who, upon a turn of Affairs, would be
ready to reassume their former principles, and pursue their wonted course; we
may be secure against all fear of their being successful in it, not only by
finding the Majority as well as the more learned, both of the dignified and
inferior Clergy, unchangeably fixed and determined against it, but by having
the whole Nobility and Gentry, and those Noble Princes whose right it will be
next to ascend the Throne, fully possessed with all the generous and Christian
purposes we can desire, of making provision for Liberty of Conscience by a Law.
Nor can I forbear to subjoyn how surprising it ought to be to all Protestants,
that while Mr. Pen expresses so much charity for the Papists, he entertaineth
so little for the Church of England. He would persuade us, that if the Penal
and Test Laws were abrogated, the Papists would be so far afterward from
seeking to shake the Constitution of the Church of England, or from breaking in
upon the Liberty that is now vouchsafed unto Dissenters, or from endeavoring
to make their Religion National; that they would not only be contented with a
bare Toleration, but that upon their enjoyment of ease by Law, they would turn
good Countrymen, and come in to the Interest of the Kingdom, (Letter first.)
Whereas at the same time, he would have us believe, that all the Protestations
of those in the Communion of the Church of England for exercising Moderation in
time to come, are but the Language of their fear, that their promises are not
to be trusted, ( Good Advice, p. 54.) and that the Dissenters deserve to be
begged for Fools, should they be satisfied with any less assurance, than the
abolition of the Penal and Test Laws, ( ibid. p. 55.) It Is enough, not only to
excite our Jealousy, but to stir up severer passions, to be told at a season
when we know what the Catholics are doing in France, and in most other places
where they have any power, that the Papists through having burnt their fingers
with persecution, may be grown so wise as to do so no more; and yet to have it
asserted in the same Page, that they who can be prevailed upon to believe, that
the Church of England is sorry for what She has done, and that she will not be
guilty of such a thing again, have little reason to quarrel at the unaccount
ableness of Transubstantiation. ( Good Advice, p. 8.) Nor is it becoming one
who styles himself a Protestant, no more than it is consistent with Truth, to
extenuate our being scandal'd at the severity upon Protestants in France, by
affirming, that he can parallel some of the severest passages in that Kingdom,
out of the Actions of some Members of the Church of England in cool Blood, (
ibid. p. 7.) And though I have all the kindness imaginable for Mr. Pen's
Person, and am loath to think otherways of him, as to his Religious Principles,
than as his avowed profession discovers him; yet these, and diverse passages
more of that kind, together with the accession he must necessarily have had to
the apprehension and imprisonment of Mr. Gray. etc. for abandoning the
Benedictine Order; are things I can neither reconcile to the title he assumes,
nor to his many Discourses for Repealing the Test Laws. And to speak freely,
considering the Nature of our Laws against Papists, and that it was their
manifold Treasons, and only our care to preserve our selves, that both gave
the first rise unto them, and has necessitated their continuance; I know
neither how to construe that Assertion of Mr. Pen's (Good Advice, p. 13.) that
the Principle which the Church of England acts by, justifies the King of France
and the Inquisition; nor that other, (Letter first) of there having been eight
times more Laws made for ruining men for their Conscience, since the Church of
England came to be the National Establishment, than were all the time that
Popery was in the Chair. Nor can this be designed to any other end, but the
giving the Church of Rome the commendation of Mercy and Moderation above a
Protestant Church. For as it is certain, that the one Law of Burning and
Extirpating Heretics, was a thousand fold worse, and has produced infinitely
more Sanguinary effects, than all the Laws and Rigours that the Church of
England can be charged with; so there is nothing can be falser, than that
either her Principle, or Practice, do parallel or justify the barbarous and
brutal severities of the French King, and the Inquisition.

Moreover, were all Protestants agreed, that Liberty, in mere matters of
Religion, should be immediately granted in a Legal way; yet I do not see how
the Papists should pretend to any benefit by it, or be able to lay a just claim
to a share in it. So that the foundation which Mr. Pen goes upon, of men's
having a Right to be indulged in matters of Religion, is too narrow to support
the structure he raises upon it. For though there may be some things retained
in Popery, which may be called matters of Religion; yet in the bulk and complex
of it, it is a Conjuration against all Religion, and a Conspiracy against the
Peace of Societies, and the Rights of Mankind. It Is one of the Crimes, as well
as the Miseries of this Age, that out of a dread of some, and in complacence to
others, we have avoided representing Popery in its native colors, and calling
it by the Names properly due unto it. But I have always thought, that it is
better fail in our Courtship to Men, than in our duty to God, and fidelity to
the Interest of Jesus Christ, and the safety of Mankind. Nor do I doubt but
that they will be better approved in the Great day of Account, who Character
Persons, Doctrines and Practices as the Scripture does, than they, who that
they may accommodate themselves unto, and be acceptable with the world, speak
of them in a softer style. Now if either Blasphemies against God, or Tyrannies
over Men; if either the defacing the Ideas of a Deity, or corrupting the
Principles of Virtue, and Moral Honesty; if either the subverting the
foundations of natural Religion, or the overthrowing the most essential
Articles of the Christian Faith; if either the most avowed and bold affronts
offered to heaven, or the bloodiest and most brutal outrages executed against
the best of men; if all these be sufficient to preclude a party from the
benefit of Liberty due to people in Religious Matters, I am sure, none have
reason to challenge it in behalf of the Papists, nor cause to complain, if it
be denied them. Can there be any thing more unreasonable, than that they should
claim a Toleration in a Protestant State, whose Principles not only allow, but
oblige them to destroy us, as soon as their power inables them to do it? Is not
the Doctrine of the Pope's Supremacy, and his having a Right to Depose Kings,
and absolve Subjects from their Allegiance, together with that of breaking
Faith to Heretics, and the extirpating all those who cannot believe as the
Church of Rome does, mighty inducements to those whom they have baptized with
that Name, and to whom they long to exercise that courtesy, for the Repealing
of the Penal and Test Laws against Papists? Nor are these Principles falsely
charged upon them, but they are the Oracular Decisions of their General
Councils and Popes, whom they style Infallible. So that Mr. Pen's Book and
Letters, which seem to have been written not so much in favor of Dissenting
Protestants, as of Roman Catholics, can little advantage the latter, even
allowing the Principle which he goes upon, and admitting all he has said for
Men's Right to Liberty in mere matters of Religion, to be unanswerable. And his
telling us ( Good Adv. p. 42.) that Violence and Tyranny are not natural
consequences of Popery, does only discover his kindness to Rome, and the
little Friendship and care he has for the Protestant Interest. For we know
both the Principles of their Religion too well, and have at all times
experienced, and do at this day feel the effects of them too sensibly, to be
deluded by this kind of Sophistry, and imposed upon by so palpable a Falsehood,
to abandon the means of our safety. Wheresoever any Popish Rulers Act with
Gentleness and Moderation toward those whom their Church has declared
Heretics; it is either because there are Political Reasons for it, as might be
easily showed in reference to all those States and Governments which he
mentions, or because there are some Princes of the Roman Communion, in whom the
Dictates of Humane Nature are more prevalent than those of their Religion.

But should the gentle Temper of the English Nation, sway them beyond the
strict obligations of duty, and make them willing to Repeal the Penal Laws
against Papists; yet to do it in their present Circumstances, and at such a
conjuncture as this, were the highest act of folly in the world, and a
betraying both their own safety and that of their Religion. Had the Roman
Catholics forbore to assume a liberty till it had been legally given them;
they had been the more capable objects of such a Grace; but to bestow it upon
them after they have in contempt and defiance of all our Laws taken it, 'twere
to justify their usurpation, and approve their crime. Could they have been
contented with the private practice of their Worship, and the non-exaction of
the penalties to which our Statutes make them liable, without leaping into all
Offices of Trust and Command, and invading our Seats of Judicature, our
Churches, and our Universities; their modesty might have wrought much upon the
generosity and candor of all sort of Protestants; but their audacious wresting
all power into their hands, and their laying aside all those that have either
any zeal for our Civil Rights, or for the Protestant Religion, is enough to
kindle our further indignation, in stead of influencing us to thoughts of
moderation and lenity. And should we once begin to cancel our Laws, according
to the measure and proportion, that they break them and usurp upon them, no man
can tell where that will terminate; and they will be sure to turn it into an
encouragement to further attempts. For having, in compliance with their
Impudence, and to absolve them from the guilt of their Crimes and Treasons,
abrogated the Laws against Popery; they will not fail, in a little while, to
betake themselves to the same Methods, for obtaining the abolition of all the
Laws for Protestancy. It Is but for the King to declare, that he will have all
his Subjects to be of his own Religion; and then by the Logic of the late
Cant, which he used in his Speech to the Council at Windsor, That they who are
not for him, are against him; we must immediately either turn Papists, or be
put into the same List with them, and be thought worthy of the same Royal
Displeasure, which they are become obnoxious unto, who cannot find it to be
their duty and interest to destroy the Tests. And Mr. Pen's Argument of being
afraid of His Majesty's and the Papists power, and yet to provoke it, (Good
Advice, p. 43.) will hold in the one case as well as in the other. Nor do I see
but that the Court may improve another Topic of his against us ( Ibid. p. 44.)
viz. That we were ill Courtiers by setting him up, first to give him
Roast-meat, and then to beat him with the Spit, by refusing to be of his
Religion. To which I may add, that the brutal severities exercised toward
Protestants in France and Piedmont, are but ill inducements to prevail upon a
Reformed Nation to give Liberty to Papists. It Is an Axiom founded in the light
of Nature, as well as an Oracle of Revelation, That with what measure any do
mete unto others, it shall be measured to them again; and that whatsoever any
would that we should do to them, they should do so to us. Would the Papists
once persuade Catholic Rulers to give Indulgence to those of our Religion; it
would be an argument that they acted sincerely in their pleading against Penal
Laws for matters of Religion; and would mightily prevail upon all of the
Reformed Communion to Repeal such Statutes as are Enacted against them. But
while they continue and increase their Persecution against us in all places
where they have power; I do not see how they can reasonably expect, that we
should believe them either to be just or honest, or to deserve any measure of
lenity. Reprizals are the only methods, whereby to bring them to peaceable and
equal Terms. Had Protestant Princes and States, given Papal Sovereigns to
understand, that they would act upon the same square that they do; and
retaliate upon those of the Romish Faith, whatsoever should be inflicted
because of Religion upon those of ours; I have ground to think that the Clergy
in France and Savoy, would have had more discretion, than to have been
Instrumental in stirring up the late Persecutions, and of instigating Rulers to
such unparallelled Barbarities. It Is not many years since a Prince in Germany
begun to treat Protestants with an unjust severity, and to Banish them his
Country, contrary to his word and the Stipulation he had made with them; but
upon the Duke of Brandenburg's both threatening and beginning to do so by the
Roman Catholics in his Duchy of Cleve, the other Prince immediately forbear
his rigor, and the Protestants had fair Quarter allowed them. And therefore if
Mr. Pen and his Catholic Friends, in stead of reproaching the Church of
England of justifying by her principle the King of France and the Inquisition,
would prevail for abolishing the one, and for putting an end to Persecution by
the other, they would thereby do more for inclining the Nations to Tolerate
Papists, than either by all their invidious Satyrs against the conformable
Clergy, or by their Panegyricks upon a Popish Monarch and the Romish Church. In
the mean time, it is most unreasonable for them to demand or expect, and unwise
as well as unseasonable, for British Protestants to consent to the Abrogation
of the Tests, and the Repealing of the Penal Laws against Papists. Moreover,
though it is possible that we might defend our selves against the dangers that
might ensue upon it, had we a Prince of our own Religion on the Throne, yet it
would be to surrender our selves unto their power, and to expose our selves to
their Discretion, should we venture to do it while a Papist of His Majesty's
humor has the weilding of the Scepter. One of the main Arguments, by which
Mr. Pen would persuade us against all apprehension of danger from the Papists,
in case the Test and Penal Laws were abolished, is the inconsiderableness of
their number in comparison of Protestants, (Good Advice, p. 49.) And yet if
there be so many ill Men in the Nation, as he intimates ( Letter 3d. p. 12.)
who being of no Religion, are ready, upon the motives of worldly Interest, to
take upon them the profession of any, were it not for fear of being at one time
or another called to an account: I do not see but that as the Papists through
having the King on their side, are already possessed of what he styles the
Artificial Strength of the Kingdom, why they may not, in a short while, were
those Laws once destroyed, by which the Atheistical and profane sort of Men are
kept in awe, come to obtain too much of the natural strength of it, and raise
their number to a nearer equality to that of Protestants. And though they
should never multiply to any near proportion, yet we may easily imagine, what a
few hands may be able to do, when Authorized by a Popish Sovereign, and
seconded by a well-disciplin'd Army commanded by Roman Catholics, could they
once get to have a share in the Legislation, and to be legally stated in all
places of Trust and Power. What need we had of a legal security for our
Religion, in case of a Papists coming to inherit the Crown, not only the late
King, who thoroughly knew his Brothers temper and bigottry, but those Loyal
Zealots, who, with an unhappy vigor, opposed the Bill of Exclusion, were
sensible of; and therefore besides all the security which we have for our
Religion by the Statutes in force, they offered many other provisions for its
protection, and several of them very threatening to the Monarchy, which we might
have had established into Laws, if through our pursuit of the point of
Exclusion, we had not been so improvident as to despise and reject them. He
that dares attempt so much as he has done, in opposition unto, and defiance of
all our Laws; what will he not have the confidence to undertake, and be in a
condition to accomplish, if these obstructions were out of his way. The Penal
Laws cannot prejudice the Papists in this King's Reign, seeing he can connive
at the nonexecution of them; and the Repeal of them now, cannot benefit the
Papists when he is gone, because if they do not behave themselves modestly, we
can either reestablish them, or enact others which they will be as little fond
of. But their abrogation at this time, would infallibly prejudice us, and would
prove to be the pulling up of the Sluices, and the throwing down the Dikes,
which stem the deluge that is breaking in upon us, and which hinder the
threatening waves from overflowing us. And whereas Mr. Pen would obtrude upon
weak and credulous Men, That if these Laws were Repealed, the King is willing
to give us other for our security, and that he would only exchange the
security, and not destroy it, (Letter 2d, p. 11.) he must pardon us, if we do
not easily believe him, after what we know of his Majesty's natural Genius, and
Religious Bigottry, and after what we have seen and experienced in the whole
course of his Government. And if there be no other way of giving the King an
opportunity of Keeping his word with the Church of England, in preserving her,
and maintaining our Religion, but the Repealing of the Penal and Tests Laws, as
he intimates unto us ( Good Adv. p. 50.) we have not found the Royal Faith so
sacred and inviolable in other instances, as to rob our selves of a Legal
defense and protection, for to depend upon the precarious one of a bare
promise, which his Ghostly Fathers, whenever they find it convenient, will
tell him it was unlawful to make, and which he can have a Dispensation for the
breaking of, at what time he pleases. Nor do we remember, that when he pledged
his Faith unto us, in so many Promises, that the parting with our Laws was
declared to be the condition, upon which he made, and undertook to perform
them. Neither can any have the confidence to allege it, without having
recourse to the Papal Doctrine of Mental Reservation. Which being one of the
Principles of that Order, under whose conduct he is, makes us justly afraid to
rely upon his word without further Security. However, we do hereby see, with
what little sincerity Mr. Pen Writes: and what small regard he has to His
Majesty's honor, when he tells the Church of England, That if She please and
like the terms of giving up the Penal and Test Laws against Papists, that then
the King will perform his word with her (Good Adv. p. 17.) but that otherways,
it is She who breaks with him, and not he with her, (ib p. 44.)

Though something may be said, for the Repealing of all Penal Laws, in
reference to every persuasion that is called Religion, how incongruously soever
it may claim that Name; yet it is inconsistent with the safety of all Civil
Government, and a plain betraying of the Civil Liberties, as well as the
established Religion in Great Britain, not to allow the precluding those from
places of Trust, of whose fidelity we can have no assurance. And therefore as
all that Mr. Pen has alleged for abolishing the Tests is miserably silly; so
he has thereby too manifestly detected the small regard he bears to the safety
of the Kingdoms and the Protestant cause, not to be suspected in every thing
else which he has more plausibly and reasonably asserted. For as all
Governments have an unquestionable Right to use means whereby to preserve
themselves; so it is not only lawful, but expedient, that they should have
Tests, by which it may be known, who are fit to be trusted with the Legislative
and Executive power. Without this no Constitution can subsist, nor Subjects be
in any security under it. Neither can any Reasons be advanced against the Test
Laws, but what are of equal force against exacting Oaths of Allegiance, and
Promises of Fidelity from those, whom the Government thinks meet to Employ. One
might think, that Mr. Pen should allow as much to the Parliament of England, as
he challenges to himself in his Government of Pensilvania. For I find, that
not only such shall be precluded from a share in the Government there, who
shall either be convicted of ill Fame and unsober Coversation, or who shall not
acknowledge Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, and Savior of the World, (Chap.
2d. of their Constitutions and Laws) but that none shall be either chosen into
Office, or so much as admitted to choose, but who solemnly declare and promise
Fidelity to William Pen and his Heirs: ( Chap. 57.) This I take not only to be
equivalent unto, but something more than our Tests do amount unto. For whereas
there may be several whom the Quakers may judge persons of unsober
Conversation; who may be true to the Civil Interest of their Country, and
willing, to the utmost of their power, to preserve the Peace, and promote the
Prosperity of it; we have no ground to believe the like of Papists, in relation
to the welfare and safety of a Protestant State. And that not only because
they acknowledge a Foreign Jurisdiction inconsistent with, and paramount to
ours; but because they are obliged by the Principles of their Religion,
whenever they find themselves able, to destroy and extirpate us. I Am sure
that the Motives which in 73, and 78 enforced to the Enacting of the Test Laws,
do at this season plead more effectually for the continuing them. Nor had we so
much cause then of being afraid of Popery, or to be apprehensive of having our
Religion overturned by Papists, which were the Inducements to the making of
those Laws, as we have ground to dread it at this time, and to be jealous of it
under the present conjuncture. And the more that the Roman Catholics, and
their Advocates press to have these Laws abolished, the more fear they excite
in us of their design if they knew how to effect it, and make us the more
resolved to hazard all we have to maintain them. For as no Papist is prejudiced
by them in his person or property; so they are the most innocent and moderate
security we can have for the preservation of our selves and of our Religion.
Nor could any thing justify the Wisdom of the Nation in being without them so
long, but that we were not till then suspicious of the Religion of the Regnant
Prince, nor apprehensive before of the misfortune of having a Popish Successor.
And whereas Mr. Pen tells us, that it were ridiculous to talk of giving liberty
of Conscience, and at the same time imagine that the Tests ought to be
continued: (Good Adv. p. 59.) We may not only reply, that Liberty of
Conscience has no Relation to Men's being admitted unto Civil Trusts, but that
the same is practiced in several States and Governments both Popish and
Protestant, and in Pensilvania it self, where I suppose Liberty of Conscience
is allowed. For as we find freedom vouchsafed to Men in matters of Religion,
both in Holland, and in diverse Protestant States in Germany, without their
being capable of Claiming a share in the Magistracy; so though the Protestant
Religion be tolerated in Collen, yet it is with a preclusion of all of that
Religion from Authority. Whatsoever else Mr. Pen says upon this head, is so
despicably weak, that as I neither judge it worthy to be taken notice of, nor
have Room to do it; so I am confident, that be his Religion what it will, which
by reason of his late Papers I have more Reason to suspect than ever, he writes
as much against his conscience and Judgment, as against the Pattern and Example
which he has set us in Pensilvania.

I confess, the Dissenters are under more temptations, than other Protestants,
to wish for, and to endeavor the Abrogation of the Penal Laws. And as this
makes them to be the more particularly applied unto by the Court for the
promoting of it; so it renders them the more liable to be influenced by
Discourses of the nature and complexion that Mr. Pen's are of. But I hope they
will consider, that the preservation of the Protestant Religion to themselves,
their posterity, and the Kingdom; is more valuable than a little temporal ease,
and which they only hold by the precarious tenure of the King's word. Surely
they cannot be so infatuated, as to think that the Papists love them, or that
they will trust them any longer, than they have occasion to use them. I would
think, that it should both make them blush to find themselves coupled with
Roman Catholics in Courts and Employments, while their fellow Protestants are
shut out, and make them jealous, that they are only made use of for some
mischievous and sinistrous end. They can never hope to lay such a merit upon
the Court, as the Church of England has done; and her reward may forewarn them
what they are to expect, when they have done the job that is allotted for them.
His Majesty's sincerity in giving liberty to Dissenting Protestants, may be
easily guessed at, by his ordering 26 poor Scots Dissenters to be sent to the
Barbados for slaves; and this both since the Emitting of his First
Proclamation for a Toleration, and without the having any thing objected to
them, but what concerned their Consciences in matters of Religion. The Terms
upon which Phanaticks are to enjoy his Majesty's favor, and how long they are
to expect the continuance of that mighty Grace, we have declared by himself, as
they stand recorded in my Lord Melfort's Letter to the Presbyterian Ministers
in Scotland. Namely, That he intends to continue their Liberty, if he have
suitable encouragement and concurrence from them in their Doctrine and
Practice, and if they concur with him in removing of the Penal Laws. This is
the Task that they are indulged and preferred for, and it is a wonder that they
do not foresee that their destiny will be one and the same, in case they have
once done it, as if they do it not. This is the Fountain of all his Majesty's
friendship to them; and the glorious assertion of its having been always his
Principle, that Conscience ought not to be constrained, and that none ought to
be persecuted for mere matters of Religion, is at last dwindled into this, that
he will give them Liberty so long as they will concur and cooperate with him
in his introducing of Popery, and till they have destroyed the Laws by which
our own Religion is fenced about and defended. Certainly it is high time to
consider, what this is which is exacted of them, and what hazard they not only
expose the Nation and the Gospel unto, but what guilt they derive upon
themselves if they undertake and pursue it. Nor can they promote the Repealing
of the Penal Laws against Papists, and the Test Statutes; without running
themselves under the guilt of Perjury, and the making themselves chargeable
before God, with all the blood that was shed in the War between King Charles I.
and the Parliament. For as one of the Articles of the Solemn League and
Covenant was, to endeavor to extirpate Popery; so the countenance and
encouragement which that Prince gave to Papists, was a main ingredient in the
State of the Quarrel for which they drew their Swords against him, and in the
assertion whereof so many thousands lost their lives. Can they now be willing
to act in direct opposition to that Covenant, which rather than renounce and
disclaim the obligatory force of, many of them have suffered so much? or would
they have the guilt of all the blood lie upon them, which was shed in the
former long and fatal War? I Am persuaded that many, who are most forward, to
pursue the Abrogation of the Tests and Penal Laws against Papists, never gave
themselves leave to think what they are hurried unto. Mr. Pen tells them, he
will beg them for Fools if they do it not, ( Good Advice, p. 54.) and I dare
take upon me to say, that they are most Execrable Knaves and Villains, if they
do it. Is it possible they should be so deprived of all understanding, as not
to perceive themselves merely trick't upon, and made use of for Tools to
promote a Design which others have the wisdom and integrity not to be
instrumental in; when Jeffreys, who a while ago, said on the Bench, Show me a
Fanatic, and I will show you a Knave, and that 'twas impossible to be a
Fanatic, and not to be a Rebel; should now caress them as his Majesty's best
and most Loyal Subjects, and tell them, upon their being advanced to Offices,
That he is glad to find honest men come to be employed, which was the
Complement he lately bestowed upon Sir John Shorter. It Is likely they may be
told, that if they will fall in with the Papists for destroying the Church of
England, that they shall be secured from the Resentments of the next Heir, by
having the Monarchy made dissolvable into a Republic upon his Majesty's death.
And this would seem to be what Mr. Pen intends, when he tells us, that such a
Bargain will be driven with the Kingdom, as will make the Church of England
think, that half a Loaf had been better, than no Bread; (Good Adv. p. 43.) and
that one year will show the Trick, and mightily deceive her, and the
opportunity of her being preserved lost, and another Bargain driven mightily to
her disadvantage, (Ibid. p. 42.) But as it will be impossible for Papists and
Dissenters, should they conspire together, to be able to effect it, considering
the interest which her integrity in the Protestant Religion, and her tenderness
for the Rights and Liberties of the Kingdoms, have justly acquired unto her; so
it were both the most foolish, as well as criminal thing, which any, pretending
themselves Protestants, can be guilty of, to be in any measure accessory unto
it. For as there is nothing in reference to their own Religious Liberties, and
the Privileges of the Nation, which they may not undoubtedly expect, from her
Justice as well as from her Mercy and Moderation; so there is no means left
within our view, either to give a lasting Peace and a firm settlement to Three
distracted Kingdoms, or to bring the Protestant Interest into such a condition,
as may balance the Papal grandeur in Europe, and give check to the rage of
Persecution in all places, but her happy advancement to the Thrones of Great
Britain and Ireland, when it shall please God to remove his Majesty. Until
which time, I hope all who call themselves Protestants, will submit to the
worst of fate, rather than to fall under the Curse of this Age, and Ignominy,
with all that shall come after, for becoming an United Party with the Church of
Rome, in any of her Designs, how plausible soever they may appear.

The Ill Effects of Animosities.
IT IS long since the Court of England, under the Authority of the late King and
his Brother, was embarked in a design of subverting the Protestant Religion,
and of introducing and establishing Popery. For the two Royal Brothers being in
the time of their Exile seduced by the Caresses and Importunities of their
Mother, allured by the Promises and Favors of Popish Princes, and being
wheedled by the Crafts and Arts of Priests and Jesuits, who are cunning to
deceive, and know how to prevail upon persons that were but weakly established
in the Doctrine, and wholly strangers to the practice and power of the Religion
they were tempted from; they not only abjured the Reformed Religion, and became
reconciled to the Church of Rome; but by their Example, and the Influence which
they had over those that depended upon them, both for present Subsistence, and
future Hopes, they drew many that accompanied them in their Banishment, to
renounce the Doctrine, Worship, and Communion of the Church of England, though
in the War between Charles the First and the Parliament, they had pretended to
fight for them in equal conjunction with the Prerogatives of the Crown. So that
upon the Restoration in the year 1660, they were not only molded and prepared
themselves for promoting the desires of the Pope and his Emissaries, but they
were furnished with a stock of Gentlemen, out of whom they might have a supply
of Instruments, both in Parliament and elsewhere, to cooperate with and under
them in the methods that should be judged most proper and subservient to the
Extirpation of Protestancy, and the bringing the Nation again into a Servitude
to the Triple Crown. And besides the Obligations that the Principles of the
Religion to which they had revolted, laid them under for eradicating the
established Doctrine and Worship, they had bound themselves unto it, by all the
Promises and Oaths which persons are capable of having prescribed unto, and
exacted of them.

Nor can any now disbelieve his late Majesty's having lived and died a Papist,
who has either heard what he both said and did, when under the prospect of
approaching Death, and past hope of acting a part any longer on the present
Stage, or who have seen and read the two Papers left in his Closet, which have
been since published to the World, and attested for Authentic by the present
King. And had we been so just to our selves, as to have examined the whole
course of his Reign, both in his Alliances Abroad, and his most Important
Counsels and Actions at Home; or had we hearkened to the Reports of those who
knew him at Collen and in Flanders, we had been long ago convinced of what
Religion he was. Nor were his many repeated Protestations of his Zeal for
Protestancy, but in order to delude the Nation, till insensibly as to us, and
with safety to himself, he had overturned the Religion which he pretended to
own, and had introduced that which he inveighed against. And while with the
highest asseverations he disclaimed the being what he really was, and with most
sacred and tremendous Oaths, professed the being what he was not, his Religion
might in the mean time have been traced through all the signal Occurrences of
his Government, and have been discerned, written in Capital Letters, through
all the material Affairs wherein he was engaged, from the Day he ascended the
Throne, till the Hour he left the World. His entering into two Wars against the
Dutch, without any provocation on their part, or ground on his, save their
being a Protestant State; his being not only conscious unto, but interposing
his Commands, as well as Encouragements for the burning of London. His
concurrence in all the parts of the Popish Plot, except that which the
Jesuits, with a few others, were involved in against himself, his stifling
that Conspiracy, and delivering the Roman Catholics from the Dangers into
which it had cast them. His being the Author of so many forged Plots, which he
caused to be charged on Protestants. His constant Confederacies with France, to
the disobliging his people; the betraying of Europe; the neglect of the
reformed in that Kingdom, and the encouraging the Design carried on against
them for their Extirpation. His entailing the Duke of York upon the Nation,
contrary to the Desires and Endeavors of three several Parliaments, and that
not out of Love to his person, but Affection to Popery, which he knew that
Gentleman would introduce and establish: All these, besides many other things
which might be named, were sufficient Evidences of the late King's Religion,
and of the Design he was engaged in for the Subversion of Ours. So that it
would fill a sober person with amazement, to think, that after all this, there
should be so many sincere Protestants and true English Men, who not only
believed the late King to be of the reformed Religion, but with an
insatiableness thirsted after the Blood of those that durst otherwise represent
him. And had it not been for his receiving Absolution and Extreme Unction from
a Popish Priest at his Death; and for what he left in writing in the two Papers
found in his strong Box, he would have still passed for a Prince who had lived
and died a cordial and zealous Protestant, and whosoever had muttered any thing
to the contrary, would have been branded for a Villain and an execrable person.
But with what a scent and odor must it recommend his Memory to them, to
consider his having not only lived and died in the Communion of the Church of
Rome, in contradiction to all his public Speeches, solemn Declarations, and
highest Asseverations to his People in Parliament; but his participating, from
time to time, of the Sacrament, as Administered in the Church of England, while,
in the interim, he had Abjured our Religion, stood reconciled to the Church of
Rome, and had obliged himself by most sacred Vows, and was endeavoring, by all
the Frauds and Arts imaginable, to subvert the established Doctrine and Worship,
and set up Heresy and Idolatry in their room. And it must needs give them an
abhorrent Idea and Character of Popery, and a loathsome representation of those
trusted with the Conduct and Guidance of the Consciences of Men in the Roman
Communion, that they should not only dispense with, and indulge such Crimes
and Villainies, but proclaim them Sanctified and Meritorious from the end which
they are calculated for, and levelled at.

And for his dear Brother, and renowned Successor, who possessed the Throne
after him, I suppose his most partial Admirers, who took him for a Prince, not
only merciful in his Temper, and imbued with all gracious Inclinations to our
Laws, and the Rights of the Subject, but for one Orthodox in his Religion, and
who would prove a zealous Defender of the Doctrine, Worship and Discipline of
the Church established by Law, are before this time both undeceived, and filled
with Resentments for his having abused their Credulity, deceived their
Expectations, and reproached all their Gloryings and Boastings of him. For as
it would have been the greatest Affront they could have put upon the King, to
question his being of the Roman Communion, or to detract from his Zeal for the
introduction of Popery, notwithstanding his own antecedent Protestations, as
well as the many Statutes in force for the preservation of the Reformed
Religion; so I must take the liberty to tell them, that his Apostasy is not of
so late Date as the World is made commonly to believe. For though it was many
Years concealed, and the contrary pretended and dissembled; yet it is most
certain, that he Abjured the Protestant Religion, soon after the Exilement of
the Royal Family, and was reconciled to the Romish Church at St. Germains in
France. Nor were several of the then suffering Bishops and Clergy ignorant of
this, though they had neither the Integrity nor Courage to give the Nation and
Church warning of it. And within these five Years there was in the custody of a
very worthy and honest Gentleman, a Letter written to the late Bishop of D. by
a Doctor of Divinity then attending upon the Royal Brothers, wherein the
Apostasy of the then Duke of York to the Sea of Rome is particularly related,
and an Account given, how much the Duchess of Tremoville (though without being
her self, observed) had heard the Queen Mother glorying of it, bewailed it as a
dishonor unto the Royal Family, and as that which might prove of pernicious
consequence to the Protestant Interest. But though the old Queen privately
rejoiced and triumphed in it, yet she knew too well what disadvantage it might
be, both to her Son, and to the Papal Cause in Great Britain, to have it at
that Season communicated and divulged. Thereupon it remained a Secret for many
Years, and by virtue of a Dispensation, he sometimes joined in all Ordinances
with those of the Protestant Communion. But for all the Art, Hypocrisy and
Sacrilege, by which it was endeavored to be concealed, it might have been
easily discerned, as manifesting it self in the whole Course of his Actions.
And at last his own Zeal, the Importunity of the Priests, and the Cunning of
the late King, prevailing over Reasons of State, he withdrew from all Acts of
Fellowship with the Church of England. But neither that, nor his refusing the
Test enjoined by Law, for distinguishing Papists from Protestants, though
thereupon he was forced, both to resign his Office of Lord High Admiral, etc.
nor his declining the Oath which the Laws of Scotland, for the securing a
Protestant Governor, enjoin to be taken by the High Commissioner; nor yet so
many Parliaments having endeavored to get him Excluded from Succession to the
Crown, upon the account of having revolted to the Sea of Rome, and thereby
become dangerous to the Established Religion, could make impression upon a
wilfully deluded and obstinate sort of Protestants, but in defiance of all
means of Conviction, they would persuade themselves, that he was still a Zealot
for our Religion, and a grand Patriot of the Church of England. Nor could any
thing undeceive them, till upon his Brother's Death he had openly declared
himself a Roman Catholic, and afterward in the fumes and raptures of his
Victory over the late Duke of Monmouth, had discovered and proclaimed his
Intentions of overthrowing both our Religion and Laws. Yea so closely had some
sealed up their Eyes against all beams of Light, and hardened themselves against
all Evidences from Reason and Fact, that had it pleased the Almighty God to
have prospered the Duke of Monmouth's Arms in the Summer 85. the present King
would have gone off the Stage with the Reputation among them, of a Prince
tender of the Laws of the Kingdom; and who, notwithstanding his own being a
Papist, would have preserved the Reformed Religion, and have maintained the
Church of England in all her Grandeur and Rights. And though his whole Life had
been but one continued Conspiracy against our Civil Liberties and Privileges,
he had left the Throne with the Character, and under the Esteem of a Gentleman;
that in the whole course of his Government would have regulated himself by the
Rules of the Constitution, and the Statutes of the Realm.

Now among all the Methods fallen upon by the Royal Brothers, for the
undermining and subverting our Religion and Laws, there is none that they have
pursued with more Ardor, and wherein they have been more successful to the
compassing of their Designs, than in their dividing Protestants, and alienating
their Affections, and embittering their Minds from and against one another. And
had not this lain under their prospect, and the means of effecting it appeared
easy, they might have been Papists themselves, while in the mean time they had
been dispensed with to protest and swear their being of the Reformed Religion,
and they might have envied our Liberties, and bewailed their Restriction from
Arbitrary and Despotical Power; but they never durst have entertained a Thought
of subverting the Established Religion, or of altering the Civil Government,
nor would they ever have had the boldness to have attempted the introducing and
erecting Popery and Tyranny in their room. And whosoever should have put them
upon reducing the Nation to the Church of Rome, or upon rendering the Monarchy
unlimited and independent on the Law, would have been thought to have laid a
Snare for exposing the Papists to greater Severities than they were obnoxious
unto before, and to have projected the robbing the Crown of the Prerogatives
which belong unto it by the Rules of the Constitution, and to which it was so
lately restored. And the despair of succeeding, would have rendered the Royal
Brothers deaf to all Importunities from Romish Emissaries, and Court Minions.
Neither the Promises and Oaths which they had made and taken beyond Sea to
introduce Popery, nor their Ambition to advance themselves beyond the restraint
of Laws, and the Control of Parliaments, would have prevailed upon them to
have encountered the Hazards and Difficulties, which in case of the Union of
English Protestants, must have attended and ensued upon Attempts and Endeavors
of the one kind and of the other. Or should their beloved Popery, and their own
Bigottedness in the Romish Superstition, have so far transported them beyond
the bounds of Wisdom and Discretion, as to have appeared possessed with an
Intention of subverting the Protestant Religion, and of enslaving the Nation to
the Superstition and Idolatry of Rome, they would have been made soon to
understand, That the Laws which make it Treason to own the Jurisdiction of the
Pope, or to seduce the meanest Subject to the Church of Rome, were not enacted
in vain, and that those, as well as many more, made for the Security of the
Protestant Religion, and to prevent the growth and introduction of Popery, were
not to be dallied and played withal. Or, should they have been so far infatuated
and abandoned of all Understanding, as out of a foolish and haughty Affectation
of being Absolute, to have attempted the Alteration of the Civil Government,
they would have been immediately and unanimously told, That the People have the
same Right to their Liberties, that the King has to the Prerogatives of the
Crown. And if they would not have been contented with what belongs unto the
Prince, by the Common and Statute-Laws of the Realm, but had invaded the
Privileges reserved unto the Subject: they would have been made to know, that
they might not only be withstood, in what they strove to Usurp, contrary to
Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, and other Laws of the Kingdom, but that
thereby they forfeited, and might be disseized of what either appertained unto
the Crown by fundamental Agreements, or has been since settled upon the
Monarch by Statute-Laws. Nor could any thing have emboldened his late Majesty
and the present King to Enterprises of the one kind or the other, but the
prospect of begetting a Misunderstanding, Jealousy, and Rancor among
Protestants, and thereby both of making them instrumental to the ruin of one
another, and contributary to the loss of English Liberty and the Reformed
Religion, which they equally value and esteem, and to the setting up Popery and
Tyranny, which the one detesteth and abhors no less than the other.

Though all English Protestants have ever been at an Accord in all the
Essentials and Vitals of Religion, yet from the very beginning of the
Reformation, there have been Differences among them concerning Ecclesiastical
Government and Discipline, and about Forms, Rites, and Ceremonies of Worship.
And had they consulted either their Duty to God, or the common Interest of
Religion, they might have found ways either for removing the occasions of them,
or they ought to have lived together as Brethren, notwithstanding the
differences which were among them in those things. But how much wiser are the
Children of this World, than those of the Kingdom of God and of Jesus Christ?
For though the differences among the Papists do far exceed ours, both in their
number, and in the Importance of those things wherein they disagree, yet they
do mutually tolerate and bear with one another. The matters wherein they differ
are neither made the Terms of their Church Communion, nor the Grounds of mutual
Excommunications and Persecutions.

But alas, one Party among us has been always endeavoring to cut or stretch
others to their own Size, and have made those things which themselves style
Indifferent, both the Qualifications for admission to the Pastoral Office, and
the Conditions of Fellowship in the Ordinances of the Gospel. Nor is it to be
expressed, what Advantages were hereby administered all along to the Common
Enemy; and what Sufferings peaceable and orthodox Christians were exposed unto
from their peevish and angry Brethren. And though these Things, with the Heats
begotten among all, and the Calamities undergone by one side, were not the
cause of that funestous War betwixt Charles the First and the Parliament, yet
they were an occasion of diverting Thousands from the side which the
Persecuting Churchmen espoused, and engaging them in the behalf of the two
Houses, in the Quarrel which they begun and carried on against that Prince, for
defense of the Civil Liberties, Privileges and Rights of the People but some
of the Mitred Clergy were so far from being made wise by their own and the
Nations Sufferings, as upon their Restoration to hearken to moderate Counsels,
and to decline their former Rigours and Severities, that they became the Tools
and Instruments of the Court, not only for reviving, but for heightning and
enflaming all the Differences which had formerly been among English
Protestants. For the Royal Brothers finding nothing more adapted and
subservient than this, to their Design of altering the Government, and
subverting Religion, they animated those waspish and impolitick Ecclesiastics,
not only to pursue the Restoration of all those things which had given rise
and occasion to former Dissentions and Persecutions, but to lay new Snares for
alienating many persons of unspotted lives and tender Consciences, from the
Church, and of rendering them obnoxious to suffer in their Names, Persons and
Estates. And what a satisfaction was it to the late King and his Brother, to
find the old Episcopal Clergy prepared through Principles of revenge, as well
as from Love of Domination, Ambition and Covetousness, to fall in with the
Design, not only of Increasing Divisions among Protestants, both by making the
Conditions of entering upon the Pastoral Function narrower, and for screwing
Conformity with the Church in her Forms and Ceremonies of Worship, into Tests,
for admission to Magistracy and Civil Trusts, but of obtaining several Laws
against Dissenters, whereby the Penalties to which they foresaw that People
would become liable, were rendered greater than they had been before, and their
Sufferings made more merciless, inhumane and intolerable.

For though his late Majesty had, by a Declaration dated at Breda, promised
Indulgence to all Protestants that would live peaceably under the Civil
Government; yet it was never in his Thoughts to perform it; and the previous
Obligations which he was under to the Church of Rome, had a virtue to supersede
and cancel his Engagements to English Heretics. And all he intended by that
Declaration was only to wheedle and lull those into a tameness of admitting
his Return into his Dominions, whom a jealousy of being afterward persecuted
for their Consciences, might have awakened to withstand and dispute it. And, to
give him his due, he never judged himself longer bound to the observation of
Promises and Oaths made to his People, than, until without hazard to his Person
and Government, he could violate and break them. Accordingly he was no sooner
seated in the Throne of his Ancestors, and those whom he had been apprehensive
of Resistance and Disturbance from, put out of Capacity and Condition of
attempting any thing against him; but he thought himself discharged from every
thing that the Royal Word and Faith of a Prince had been pledged and (...) to
stake for in that Declaration, and from that day forward acted in direct
opposition to all the Parts and Branches of it. For having soon after his
Return obtained a Parliament molded and adapted, both to his Arbitrary and
Popish Ends he immediately set all his Instruments at work for the procuring of
such Laws to be Enacted, as might divide and weaken Protestants, and thereby
make us, not only the more easy Prey to the Papists, but afford them an
advantage through our Scuffles, of undermining our Religion with the less
notice and observation.

How such persons came to be chosen, and to constitute the Majority of the
House of Commons, who by their Actings have made themselves Infamous and
Execrable to all Ages, were a matter too large to penetrate at present into the
Reasons of; but that which my Theme conducts me to observe, is, That as they
sacrificed the Treasure of the Nation to the profuseness and prodigality of the
Prince, and our Rights and Liberties to his Ambition and Arbitrary Will, so
they both introduced and established those Things which have been a means of
dividing us; and by many severe and repeated Laws, they subjected a great
number of industrious Englishmen and true Protestants, to Excommunications,
Imprisonments, rigorous and multiplied Fines, and all this for Matters only
relating to their Consciences, and for their Obedience to God in the Ordinances
of his Worship and House. And notwithstanding the late King's often pretended
compassion to the Dissenters, it will be hard to discern them, unless in
Effects which proceed from very different and opposite Principles. The distance
which he kept them from his Person and Favor; the influencing these Members of
both Houses that depended upon him, to be the Authors and Promoters of
Severities against them; the enjoining so often the Judges and Justices of
Peace to execute the Laws upon them in their utmost rigor; the instigating the
Bishops and Ecclesiastical Courts, if at any time they relented in their
Prosecutions, to pursue them with fresh Citations and Censures; the arraigning
them, not only upon the Statutes made intentionally against Dissenters, but
upon those that were originally and solely enacted against the Papists; these,
and other Procedures of that Nature, are the only Proofs and Evidences which I
can find, of the late King's Bowels, Pity and Tenderness to them. And whereas
the weak Churchmen were imposed upon to believe, that all the Severity against
the Nonconformists, was the Fruit of his Zeal for the Protestant Religion, and
for the security of the Worship and Discipline established by Law; they might
have easily discovered, if Passion, Prejudice, Wealth and Honor had not
blinded them, that all this was calculated for Ends perfectly destructive to
the Church, and inconsistent with the Safety and Happiness of all Protestants.
For as his seeking oftener than once to have wriggled himself into a Power of
superseding and dispensing with those Laws and suspending their Execution,
plainly shows, that he never intended the support and preservation of the
Church by them; so his non-execution of the Laws against Papists; his conniving
at their increase; his persuading those nearest unto him to reconcile
themselves to the Sea of Rome, as he did, among others, the late D. of
Monmouth; his countenancing the Roman Catholics in their open and intolerable
Insolences; and his advancing them to the most gainful and Important Places
and trusts, sufficiently declare, that he never had any love to Protestants, or
care of the Reformed Religion; but that all his designs were of a contrary
tendency, and his fairest Pretenses for the Protection and Grandeur of the
Church of England, adapted to other ends.

Thus the Royal Brothers having obtained such Laws to be enacted, whereby one
Party of Protestants was armed with means of oppressing and persecuting all
others, neither the necessity of their Affairs at any time since, nor the
Application and Interposure of several Parliaments for removing the Grounds of
our Differences and Animosities, by an Indulgence, to be past into a Law, could
prevail, either upon his late Majesty, or the present King, to forgo the
Advantage they had gotten of keeping us in mutual Enmity, and thereby of
ministering to their projection of supplanting our Religion, and re-establishing
the Faith and Worship of the Church of Rome. Hereupon the last King, not only
refused to consent to such Bills as diverse late Parliaments had prepared for
indulging Dissenters, and for bringing them into an union of Counsels, and
Conjunction of Interest with those of the Church of England, for resisting the
Conspiracies of the Papists against our Legal Government and Established
Religion; but he rejected an Address for suspending the Execution of the Penal
Laws against Dissenters, which was offered and presented unto him by that very
Parliament which had framed and enacted those cruel and hard Laws.

And as the Royal Brothers have made it their constant Business to cherish a
Division and Rancour among Protestants, and to provoke one Party to persecute
and ruin another; so nothing could more naturally fall in with the Design of
Arbitrariness or be more subservient to the betraying the Nation^^ Papal
Idolatry and Jurisdiction. For several Penal Laws against a considerable Body
of People, do either expose them against whom they are enacted, to be destroyed
by the Prince, with whom the executive Power of the Law is trusted and
deposited; or they prove a Temptation to such as are obnoxious of resigning
themselves in such a manner to the Will and Pleasure of the Monarch, for the
obtaining his connivancy at their violation of the Laws, as is unsafe and
dangerous for the common Liberty and Good of the Kingdom. For in case the
Supreme Magistrate pursue an Interest distinct from, and destructive to that of
his People, they who the Law has made liable to be oppressed, are brought
under Inducements of becoming so many Parisans for abetting him in his Designs,
in hopes of being thereupon protected from the Penal Statutes, the execution
whereof is committed to him. And as it is not agreeable to the Wisdom and
Prudence which ought to be among Men, nor to the Mercy and Compassion which
should be among Christians, for one party to surrender another into the Hands
and Power of the Sovereign, to be impoverished and ruined by him at his
pleasure, especially when those whom they give up to be thus treated and
entertained, are at agreement with them in all the Essentials of Religion,
equally zealous as themselves for the Liberties of their Country; and who, for
Sobriety in their Lives, Industry in their Callings, and Usefulness in the
Commonwealth, are inferior to none of their Fellow Subjects: So it is obvious
to any, who give themselves leave to think, that the King would long ere this
have been stated in the Absoluteness that is aspired after, and both Church and
State reduced to lie at the discretion of the Monarch, provided the
Nonconformists, for procuring his Favor in non-execution of the Laws, had
suffered themselves to be prevailed upon, and drawn over to stand by and assist
him in his Popish and Despotical Designs.

But that honest people, though hated and maligned by their Brethren, rather
than be found aiding the King in his Usurpations over the Kingdom, have chosen
to undergo the utmost Calamities they could be made subject unto, either
through the Execution of those Laws which had been made against them, or
through our Princes and their Ministers wrecking their Malice upon them in
Arbitrary and Illegal Methods. But what the Royal Brothers could not work the
afflicted and persecuted Side unto, they found the Art to engage the other Side
in, though not only excepted from all Obnoxiousness to those Laws, but
strengthened and supported by them. For as soon as the Court begun to despair
of prevailing upon Dissenters to become their Tools and Instruments of
enslaving the Nation, and of exalting the Monarchy to a Despotical
Absoluteness, they applied to the Bigots of the Church of England, whom by
gratifying with a vigorous Execution of the Laws upon Dissenters, they brought
to abett, applaud and justify them in all those Counsels and Ways which have
reduced us into that miserable condition wherein we not long since were. The
Clergy being advanced to Grandeur and Opulency, things which many of them are
fonder of, and lother to foregoe than Religion and the Rights of the Nation,
the Court made it their business to possess them with a Belief, that unless the
Fanatics were suppressed and ruined, they could not enjoy with Security their
Dignities and Wealth. Whereupon not only the lesser Levites, but the Superior
Clergy having their Lesson and Cue given them from White Hall and St. James's,
fell upon pursuing the Nonconformists with Ecclesiastical Punishments, and upon
exciting and animating the Civil Officers against them. And under pretense of
preserving and defending the Church they gave themselves over to an implicit
serving of the Court, and became not only Advocates but Instruments for the
robbing of Corporations of their Charters, for imposing Sheriffs upon the City
of London who had not been legally elected, and of fining and punishing Men
arbitrarily for no Crime, save the having asserted their own and the Nations
Rights in modest and lawful ways. Posterity will hardly believe that so many of
the Prelatical Clergy, and so great a number of Members of the Church of
England, should from an Enmity unto, and pretended Jealousy of the Dissenters,
have become Tools under the late King for justifying the Dissolution of so many
Parliaments, the Invasion made upon their Privileges, the ridiculing and
stifling of the Popish Plot, the shamming of forged Conspiracies upon
Protestants, the condemning several to Death for High Treason, who could be
rendered guilty by the Transgression of no known Law, and finally for advancing
a Gentleman to the Throne, who had been engaged in a Conjuration against
Religion and the Legal Government, and whom three several Parliaments would
have therefore Excluded from the Right of Succession. And being seduced into an
espousal of the Interests of the Court against Religion, Parliaments and the
Nation, it is doleful to consider what Doctrines both from Pulpit and Press
were thereupon brought forth and divulged. Such as Monarchy's being a
Government by Divine Right; That it is in the Prince's Power to Rule as he
pleases; That it is a Grace and Condescension in the King to give an Account
of what he does; That for Parliaments to direct, or regulate the Succession,
borders upon Treason, and is an Offense against the Law of Nature; And that the
only thing left to Subjects, in case the King will Tyrannize over their
Consciences, Persons and Estates, is tamely to suffer, and as some of them did
absurdly express it, to exercise Passive Obedience. So that by corrupting the
Minds and Consciences of men with those pestilent and slavish Notions, they
betrayed the Nation, both to the Mischiefs which have alrerdy overtaken us, and
to what further we were threatened with. Nor did these Doctrines tend merely to
the fettering and enfeebling the Spirits of Men, but they were a Temptation to
the Royal Brothers to put in Execution what they had been so long contriving,
and traveling with, and were a kind of reprimanding them for being ignorant of
their own Right and Power, and for not exerting it with that Vigor and
Expedition which they might. I do acknowledge that there were many both of the
Sacred Order, and of the Laick Communion of the Church of England, who were far
from being infected with those brutish Sentiments and Opinions, and who were as
zealous as any for having the Monarchy kept within its ancient limits;
Parliaments maintained in their wonted Reverence and Authority; the Subjects
preserved in the enjoyment of their immemorial Privileges; and who were far
from sacrificing our Religion and Laws to Popery and Arbitrariness; and from
lulling us into a Tameness and Lethargy, in case the Court should attempt the
abolishing the established Doctrine and Worship, and the subverting and
changing the Civil Government. But alas! besides their being immediately
branded with the Name of Trimmer and conformable Fanatics, and registered in
the Calendar with those that stood precluded the King's Favor, and merited his
Animadversion; their Modesty was soon drowned and silenced in the loud Noise of
their clamorous Brethren, and their retiredness from Conversation, while the
others frequented all places of Society and public Concourse, deprived the
Nation of the benefit of their Example, and the happiness of their
Instructions. Nor have I mentioned the Extravagancies of any of the
Ecclesiastics and Members of the Church of England, with a design either of
reproaching and upbraiding them, or of provoking and exasperating the
Dissenters to Resentments, but only to show how fatal our Divisions have been
unto us, what excesses they have occasioned our being hurried and transported
into, and what mischievous Improvement our Enemies have made of them, to the
supplanting and almost subverting of all that is valuable unto us, as we are
Englishmen, Christians and Protestants.

And as our Animosities, through our Divisions, gave the Courrt an advantage of
suborning that Party, which they pretended to befriend and uphold, into a
Ministration to all their Counsels, and Projections against our Religion and
Laws; so by reason of the unnatural Heats wherewith Protestants have been
enflamed and enraged against Protestants, many weak, ungrounded, and unstable
Souls, have been tempted to question the Truth of our Religion, and to
Apostatize to the Church of Rome, and thereupon have become united in
Inclination, Power and Endeavors with the Court, and our old Enemies the
Papists, for the Extirpation of Protestancy, and the alteration of the
Government. As it has been matter of Offense and Scandal to all Men, so it
has been ground of stumbling and falling unto many, to see those who are
professedly of the same Religion, to be mutually embittered against one
another, and so far transported with Malice and Rage, as to seek and pursue
each others Destruction. For such a Carriage and Behavior are so contrary to
the Spirit and Principles of Christianity, and to the Genius and Temper of True
Religion, that it is no marvel if persons ignorant of the Holy Scriptures, and
strangers to the converting and comforting Virtue of the Doctrine of the Gospel
asserted in our Confessions, and insisted upon by our Divines, should suspect
the Orthodoxy of that Religion which is accompanied with so bitter Fruits, even
in the Dispensers of the Word as well as in others, and betake themselves to
the Communion of that Church, where how many and important soever their
Differences be one with another, yet they do not break forth into those Flames
of Excommunicating and Persecuting each other, that ours have done. How have
some among us, through having their Spirits fretted and exasperated by the
craft and cunning of our Enemies, not only loaded and stigmatized their
Brethren and fellow Protestants with Crimes and Names, which, were they true,
and deserved, would justly render us a loathing and an Abomination to Mankind,
but having Libelled and Branded those whom God had honored to be Instruments
of the Reformation, with Appellations and Characters fit to beget a Detestation
of their Doctrine as well as their Memory. The worst that the Papists have
forged and vomited out against Luther, Zwinglius, Calvin, etc. has been raked
up and repeated, to the disparagement of the Reformation, and to the
scandalizing the Minds of weak Men against it. And as the Jesuits and Priests
have improved those Slanders and Calumnies to the seduction of diverse from the
Church of England, and to a working them over to a Reconciliation with the
Church of Rome; so the Court has thereby had an increase of their Faction and
Party against our Religion and Liberties, and have been enabled to muster
Troops of Janisaries for their Despotical and Unlimited Claim.

Nor have our Divisions, with the Heats, Animosities, Revilings and
Persecutions that have ensued thereupon, proved only an occasion of the
Seduction of several from our Religion, and of their Apostasy to Popery, but
they have been a main spring and source of the Debauchery, Irreligion and
Atheism, which have over spread the Nation, and have brought so many both to an
indifferency and unconcernedness for the Gospel, and all that is virtuous and
noble, and have disposed them to fall in with those that could countenance and
protect them in their Impiety and Profaneness, and feed their Luxury and Pride
with Honor and Gain. What a woeful Scheme of Religion have we afforded the
World! and how shamefully have we painted forth and represented the Holy
Doctrine of the blessed Jesus, while we have not only lived in a direct
opposition to all the Commands of Meekness, Love and mutual Forbearance which
our Religion lays us under the Authority of, but have neglected to practice
good Manners, to observe the Rules of Civility, to treat one another with
common Humanity, and to do as we would be done unto? while we have been more
offended at what seemed to supplant our Dominations and Grandeurs, than at what
dishonored God and reproached the Gospel; while we weighed not so much whether
they whom we took into our Sacred Communion, as well as into our personal
Friendship, were conformable in their Lives to the Scripture, as whether they
complied with the Canons of the Church, while we reprobated all that were not
of our way, though never so virtuous and devout, and Sainted all that were,
though never so wicked and profane; while we branded such for Fanatics, whom
we could justly charge with nothing, save the not admitting that into Religion,
which came not from the Divine Author of it; and hugged those for good and
Orthodox Believers, that would sooner consult the Statute-Book for their
Practice in the Worship of God, than the Bible; while we haled those to Prison,
and spoiled them of their Estates, to whom nothing could be objected, except
their being too precise and conscientious, in avoiding that, through fear and
apprehension of sinning, which others had a liberty and latitude to do, as
judging it lawful; and in the mean time esteemed those worthy of the chiefest
Trusts in the Church and Commonwealth, whose Folly and Villainies made them
unfit for Civil Societies; while they who lived most agreeably to the Laws of
God, and the Example of Christ, were persecuted as Enemies to Religion, and the
Pests of the Kingdom, and, in the interim, too many of the very Clergy were not
only Countenancers of the most Profligate Persons, as their best Friends, but
joined and assisted in scandalous Debaucheries, under pretense of sustaining
the Honor of their Tribe, and doing Service to the Church. I say, while these
were the unhappy, but too obvious Fruits of our Divisions, and of the bitter
Heats that accompanied them, how was the Reverence for the Sacred Order
lessened and diminished, the Veneration for Religion weakened and lost, the
Shame and Dread of appearing profane and wicked, removed and banished; and
such who took the measures of Christianity from the Practices of those that
were styled Christians, rather than from the immaculate and holy Scriptures,
tempted to think all Religion a Juggle, and Priesthood but an Artifice and
Craft to compass Honor and Wealth. And though nothing but a shortness of
Understanding, and an immoderate Love to their Lusts, could occasion the
drawing such a Conclusion from the foregoing Premises, yet I must needs grant
that there was too just a ground administered unto them of saying, that many did
not believe that themselves, the Faith whereof they recommended to others. But
that which I would more particularly observe is, that it is from among those,
who by the foregoing occasions have been tempted to Debauchery and Irreligion,
that the Romish Emissaries have made the Harvest of Proselytes and Converts to
the Church of Rome. For as they who fear not God, will be easily brought to
imitate Caesar; and such who are of no Religion, will in subserviency to
Secular Ends, assume the Mask and Profession of any: So Popery is extremely
adapted to the Wishes and Desires of wicked and profane Men, in that it
provides for their living as enormously as they please here, and flatters them
with hopes and assurances of Blessedness hereafter. They who can be ascertained
of going to Heaven upon their confessing their Sins to a Priest and their
receiving Absolution, the Eucharist and Extreme Unction, need not look after
Repentance toward God, Conversion to Holiness, nor a Life of Faith, Love,
Mortification and Obedience, which the Protestant Religion, upon the Authority
of the Gospel, obliges them unto, in order to the obtaining of Eternal
Happiness. And as the late Apostates to Popery in England, are chiefly such who
were notorious for Looseness, Profaneness and Immorality, and were the Scandal
of our Religion while they professed it; and while in our Church, were not
properly of it: So it is from among Men of this stamp and character, that their
late Majesty's have found Persons assisting and subservient to their Despotical
and Arbitrary Designs. For whosoever takes a Survey of the Court-Faction, and
considers who have been the Advocates for Encroachments upon our Liberties,
and Abetters of Usurpations over our Rights, they will find them to have been
principally the profligate and debauched among the Nobility and Gentry, the
mercenary, ignorant and scandalous among the Clergy, the Offscouring and such
as are an Ignominy to Human Nature among the Yeomanry and Peasants. And it was
in order to this villainous End, that the Royal Brothers have endeavored so
industriously to debauch the Nation, and have made Sensuality and Profaneness
the Qualifications for Preferment, and the Badges of Loyalty. And if among
those that appear for the Preservation of the Liberties of their Country, there
be any that deserve to be styled Enemies to Religion and Virtue, as I dare
affirm that they owe their Immoralities to Court-Education, Converse and
Example; so I hope that though they have not hitherto been all of them so happy
as to have left their Vices where they learned them, yet that they will not
continue to disparage the good Cause which they have espoused with an unsuitable
Life, nor give their Adversaries reason to say, that while they pretend to seek
the Reformation of the State, they are both the Deriders of Sobriety and
Virtue, without which no Constitution can long subsist, and guilty of such
horrid Oaths, Cursing, Imprecations, Blasphemies and uncleanness, which
naturally, as well as morally and meritoriously, dispose Nations to Subversion
and Extirpation.

Finally, Being through the bitter Effects which have ensued upon our
Divisions, made apprehensive and jealous one of another, it has from thence
come to pass, that while the Care of the Conformists has been to watch against
the growth of the Dissenters; and the solicitude of the Nonconformists has
been, how to prevent the Rage of the bigoted Churchmen, the Papists, in the
mean time, without being heeded or observed, have both incredibly multiplied,
and made considerable Advances in their designs of ruining us. For whenever
the Court was to take a signal step toward Popery and Arbitrary Power, there
was a clamor raised of some menacing Boldness of the Dissenters. And if the
Nation grew at any time alarmed, by reason of the Favor shown to the Roman
Catholics, and of some visible Progress made toward the Kings becoming
Despotical, all was immediately hushed with a shout and cry of the Government
and Church's being in imminent hazard from the Dissenters. Yea, whenever the
Papists and their Royal Patrons stood detected, of having been conspiring
against our Religion and Civil Liberties, all was diverted and stifled, by
putting the Kingdom upon a false Scent, and by hounding out their Beagles upon
the Nonconformists. So that the Eyes and Minds of Protestants being employed in
reference to what was to be apprehended and feared from one another, the
working of our Popish Enemies either escaped our Observation, or were heeded by
most, only with a superficial and unaffective Glance. And while our Churchmen
stood prepossessed by the Court, with a dread and jealousy of the Dissenters,
all that was said and written of a Conspiracy carried on by the Papists against
our Laws and Religion, was entertained and represented by the prejudiced
Clergy, as an Artifice only of the Dissenters for compassing an Indulgence from
the Parliament, which in case such a Plot had obtained the belief, that a
Matter of so great Danger and Consequence required, would have been easily
granted being the only rational Expedient for the preservation of the
established Religion and the Legal Government. Nor did our Enemies question but
that having enflamed our Divisions, and raised our Animosities to so great a
height, rather than the one party would lay aside their Severities, and the
other let fall their Resentments, we would even be contented to lie at their
Mercy, and submit our selves to the Pleasure and Discretion of the Court and
Papists. And there have not wanted some peevish, foolish, and ill Men of both
Parties, who rather than sacrifice their Spleen and Passion, and abandon their
particular Quarrels for the Interest and Safety of the whole, have been
inclined to expose the Protestant Religion and English Liberties, to the
Hazards wherewith they were apparently threatened, and to suffer all
Extremities, merely to have the satisfaction of seeing those whom they
respectively hate, involved with them under the same miseries. But as this was
such a degree of Madness and Infatuation, as could proceed from nothing but
brutish Rage, and argues no less than a Divine Nemesis; so, I hope, they are
but few that now stand infected with these passionate Sentiments and
Inclinations, and remain thus hardened in their mutual Prejudices. And to those
I have nothing to say, nor the least Advice to administer, but shall leave them
to their own Follies, as Persons to whose Conviction no Discourse, though never
so rational, can be adapted, and whom only Stripes can work upon.

It Is to such therefore as are capable of harkening to Reason, and who are
ready to embrace any Counsel that shall be found adjusted to the Common
Interest, that I am to address what remains to be represented and said in the
following Leaves. For all Parties of Protestants having seen how far our
Enemies have improved our Divisions and Rancours, to the compassing their
wicked and ambitious Designs, and the robbing us of all that good and generous
Men account valuable; they are at last convinced of the necessity we have been,
and are reduced unto, of altering the measures of our acting toward one
another, and both of laying aside our Persecutions, and of exchanging our
Wranglings among our selves, into a joint contending for the Faith of the
Gospel, and the Rights of the Nation. For what the Gentleman, so lately in the
Throne, intends and aims at, is not any longer matter of mere Suspicion and
Jealousy, but of demonstrable Evidence and unquestionable Certainty.

His Mask and Vizor of Zeal for the preservation of the Church of England, and
of tender regard for the Laws of the Land, were laid by and put off, and his
Resolutions of governing Arbitrarily, and of introducing Popery, were become
obvious to all Men, whom Reason and Sense have not forsaken and left.

The Papists, whom it was thought much, a while ago, to see connived at in the
exercise of their Worship in private Houses, are allowed now to practice their
Idolatry openly in our chief Towns, and in the Metropolitan City of the Kingdom
to usurp the public Churches and Cathedrals. Those Catholic Gentlemen, whom
heretofore it was matter of surprise to see countenanced with the private
Favor of the Prince, are now advanced to the supreme Commands in the Army, and
the principal Trust in Civil Affairs. The Recusant Lords, whose enlargement out
of the Tower, we could not but look upon as an unpresidented Violation, both of
the Laws of the Land, and of the Rights and Jurisdiction of Parliament, being
committed thither by the Authority of the House of Lords, upon a Charge and
Impeachment of High Treason, by the Commons of England in Parliament assembled,
were now honored to be Members of the Privy Council, and exalted to be chief
Ministers of State. They whom the Statutes of the Realm make subject to the
severest Penalties for Apostasy to Rome, are not only protected from the edg of
the Laws, but maintained in Parochial Incumbencies, and Headships of Colleges.

Our Orthodox Clergy are not only inhibited to preach against Popery, but are
illegally Reprimanded, Silenced, and Suspended, for discharging that Duty which
their Consciences, Offices, Oaths, and the Laws of the Kingdom oblige them
unto. And such whom neither the Ecclesiastical nor Westminster Courts can
arraign and proceed against, we have a new Court of Inquisition erected for the
adjudging and punishing of them. So that it is not the Dissenters who are the
only Persons to be struck at and ruined, but the Conformists are to be treated
after the same manner, and to share in the common Lot whereunto all honest and
sincere Protestants are destined and designed. Even they who were the Darlings
of Whitehall and St. Jameses, and recompensed with Honors and Titles for
betraying the Rights and Privileges of Corporations, persecuting Dissenters,
and heading Addresses, wherein Parliaments were reproached, the Course of
Justice against Popish Offenders was slandered, the illegal and arbitrary
procedures of the Court applauded and justified, and all that were zealous for
our Laws and Liberties stigmatized with the names of Villains and Traitors, are
now themselves, for but discouraging Popish Assemblies, and attempting to put
the Laws in execution against Priests who had publicly celebrated Mass, not
only checked and rebuked, but punished with Seizure and Imprisonment.

Nor are our Religion and Civil Liberties merely supplanted and undermined by
illegal Tricks, glossed over with the Varnish of judicial Forms, but they are
assaulted and battered in the face of the Sun, without so much as a palliation
to give their procedures a plausible figure. And the King being brought to a
despair of managing the Parliament to his barefaced Purpose of Popery and
Arbitrariness, and of prevailing with them to establish Tyranny and Idolatry by
Law, notwithstanding their having been as industriously packed and chosen to
answer such a Design, as Art, Bribery and Authority could reach; and
notwithstanding their having been obsequious in their first Session to an
excess that has proved unsafe to themselves and the Nation, he became resolved
not to allow them to meet any more, but to set up a-la-mode de France, and to
his personal Commands, seconded with the Assent of his
durante-beneplacito-Judges, to be acknowledged and obeyed for Laws. So that
they who were formerly seduced into a good Opinion of him, are not only
undeceived, but provoked to warm Resentments, for having had their credulity
and easiness of belief so grossly abused. And as the converting so vast a number
of well-meaning, but woefully deluded People, who had suffered themselves to be
hoodwinked, and fatally hurried to betray their Religion, Country and
Posterity, to the Ambition and Popish Bigottry of the Court, was a design
becoming the Compassion, Mercy and Wisdom of God; so the Method's and Means
whereby they are come to be enlightened and proselyted, are a signal vindication
of the Sapience and Righteousness of God in all those tremendous steps of his
Providence, by which our Enemies have been emboldned to detect and discover
themselves. For though their continuing so long to have a good opinion of the
present King, and their abetting him so far in the undermining our Religion,
and invading our Liberties, may seem to have proceeded not so much from their
Ignorance as from their Obstinacy and Malice; yet God, who penetrates into the
Hearts of Men, may have discovered some degrees of sincerity in their
Pretentions and Carriages, though accompanied with a great deal of folly and
unmanliness. Nor are the Lords ways like to ours, to give Persons over as
unteachable and irreclaimable, upon their withstanding every measure of Light,
and the resisting even those Means which were sufficient and proper for their
Conviction; but he will try them by new and extraordinary Methods, and see
whether Feeling and doleful Experience may not convert those, upon whom
Arguments and Moral Evidence could make no impressions. And there being among
those formerly misled and deluded Protestants, many who retained a Love for
their Country, a Care for their Posterity, and a Zeal for the Gospel and
Reformed Religion, even when their Actions imported the contrary, and seemed to
betray them; the singling and weeding out such from among the Court-Faction and
Party, is a compensation both for the defeatment of all endeavors, for the
prevention of the Evils that have overtaken us, and for the Distresses and
Calamities under which we do at present lie and groan. And if there be joy in
Heaven upon the conversion of a Sinner, with what thankfulness to God, and joy
in themselves, should they who have so many years wrestled against the
encroachments of Popery and Arbitrariness, and who have deeply suffered in
their Names, Persons and Estates upon that account, welcome and embrace their
once erring and misled, but now enlightened, reclaimed and converted Brethren?
And in stead of remembering or upbraiding them with the opposition and rancour
which they expressed against our Persons, Principles, and Ways, let there be no
Language heard from us, but what may declare the joy we have in our selves for
their conversion, and the entire trust and confidence which we put in them.

The first Duty incumbent therefore upon Dissenters toward those of the Church
of England, is to believe, that notwithstanding there have been many of them so
long Advocates and Partisans for the Court, through ignorance of what was aimed
at and intended, they are nevertheless as really concerned as any others, and
as truly zealous for the preservation of the Protestant Religion, and for
maintaining the legal Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and when occasion
shall offer, will approve themselves accordingly. It Is a ridiculous, as well as
a mischievous Fancy, for one Party to confine all Religion only to themselves,
or to circumscribe all the ancient English Ardor for the common Rights of the
Nation, to such as are of their particular Fellowship and Persuasion, there
being sincere Christians, and true Englishmen among those of all Judgments and
Societies of Protestants, and among none more than those of the Communion of
the Church of England. It were the height of Wickedness, as well as the most
prodigious Folly, to imagine that the Conformists have abandoned all Fidelity
to God, and cast off all care of themselves and their Country, upon a mistaken
Judgment of being Loyal and Obedient to the King. The contrary is plain enough;
they knew as well as any, that the giving to Caesar the Things that are
Caesar's, lay them under no Obligation of surrendering unto him the Things that
are God's; nor of sacrificing unto the Will of the Sovereign the Privileges
reserved unto the People by the Fundamental Rules of the Constitution, and by
the Statutes of the Realm. And they understand, as well as others, that the
Laws of the Land are the only measures of the Prince's Authority, and of the
Subjects Fealty; and where they give him no Right to Command, they lay them
under no tie to Obey. And though here and there a Dissenter has written against
Popery with good Success, yet they have been mostly Conformable Divines, who
have triumphed over it in elaborate Discourses, and who have beaten the Romish
Scriblers off the Stage. Nor can it be thought that they who have so accurately
related and vindicated the History, and asserted and defended the Doctrine of
the Reformation, should either tamely relinquish, or be wanting in all due and
legal Ways to uphold and maintain it. And though some few of the Nonconformists
have, with sufficient strength and applause, used their Pens against
Arbitrariness, in detecting the Designs of the Royal Brothers, yet they who
have generally, and with greatest Honor, appeared for our Laws and Legal
Government, against the Invasions and Usurpations of the Court, have been
Theologues and Gentlemen of the Church of England. Nor in case of further
Attempts for altering the Constitution, and enslaving the Nation, will they
show themselves unworthy the having descended from Ancestors, whose Motto in
the high Places of the Field was, nolumus Leges Angliae mutari, They who have
so often justified the Arms of the United Netherlands against their Rightful
Princes the Kings of Spain, and so unanswerably vindicated their casting off
Obedience to those Monarchs, when they had invaded their Privileges, and
attempted to establish the Inquisition over them, cannot be ignorant what their
own Right and Duty is in behalf of the Protestant Religion and English
Liberties; for the Security whereof, we have not only so many Laws, but the
Coronation Oaths, and Stipulations of our Kings.

And those Gentlemen of the Church of England, who appeared so vigorously in
three Parliaments for excluding the Duke of York, from the Succession to the
Crown, by reason of a Jealousy of what, through being a Papist, he would
attempt against our Religion and Privileges, in case he were suffered to
ascend the Throne; cannot be now to seek what becomes them toward him, having
seen and felt what before they only apprehended and feared. For if the Law that
entaileth the Succession upon the next of Kin, and obliges the Subjects to
admit and receive him, not only may, but ought to be dispensed with, in case
the Heir, through having imbibed Principles which threaten the Safety, and are
inconsistent with the Happiness of the People, has made himself incapable to
inherit, we know, by a short Ratiocination, how far we stand bound to a Prince
on the Throne, who by Transgressing against the Laws of the Constitution, has
abdicated himself from the Government, and stands virtually Deposed. For
whosoever shall offer to Rule Arbitrarily, does immediately cease to be King de
jure, seeing by the Fundamental, Common, and Statute Laws of the Realm, we know
none for Supreme Magistrate and Governor, but a limited Prince, and one who
stands circumscribed and bounded in his Power and Prerogative.

And should the Dissenters entertain a belief that the Conformists are less
concerned and zealous than themselves for the Protestant Religion and Laws of
the Kingdom, they would not only Sin, and offend against the Rules of Charity,
but against the Measures of Justice, and daily Evidences from Matters of Fact.
For neither they, nor we, owe our Conversion to God, and our practical Holiness
to the Opinions about Discipline, Forms of Worship, and Ceremonies, wherein we
differ, but the Doctrines of Faith and Christian Obedience, wherein we agree.
It Is not their being for a Liturgy, a Surpliss, or a Bishop, that has
heretofore influenced them to subserve the Court in Designs tending to
Absoluteness, but they were seduced unto it, upon Motives whereof they are now
ashamed; and the ridiculousness and folly of which they have at last
discever'd. Nor is the multitude of profligate and scandalous persons with
which the Church of England is crowded, any just impeachment of the Purity of
her Doctrine in the Vitals and Essentials of Religion, or of the Virtue and
Piety of many of her Members. For as it is her being the only Society
established by Law that attracts those Vermin to her Bosom, so it is her being
restrained by Law from debarring them, that keeps them there to her reproach,
and to the grief of many of her Ecclesiastics. Neither is it the fault of the
Church of England, that the Agents and Factors for Popery and Arbitrary Power,
have chosen to pass under the name of her Sons; but it proceeds partly from
their Malice, as hoping by that means to disgrace her with all true
Englishmen, as well as with Dissenters; and partly from their Craft, in order
thereby the better to conceal their Design, and to shroud themselves from the
Censure and Punishment, which had it not been for that Mask, they would have
been exposed unto, and have undergone. And I dare affirm, that besides the
Obligations from Religion, which the Conformists are equally under with
Dissenters, for hindering the introduction of Popery, there are several
Inducements from interest which sway them to prevent its establishment, wherein
the Dissenters are but little concerned. For though Popery would be alike
afflictive to the Consciences of Protestants of all Persuasions, yet they are
Gentlemen, and Ministers of the Church of England, whole Livings, Revenues, and
Estates have been threatened in case it had come to be established.

Nor would the most Loyal and obsequious Levites, provided they resolve to
continue Protestants, be willing that their Personages and Incumbencies, to
which they have have no less Right by Law, than the King has to the Excise and
Customs, should be taken from them, and bestowed upon Romish Priests, by an Act
of Despotical Power, and of unlimited Prerogative. And for the Gentlemen, as I
think few of them would hold themselves obliged to part with their purses to
High-way-Padders, though such should have a pattent from the King to rob
whomsoever they met upon the Road; so there will not be many inclined to suffer
their Mannours and Abbey-Lands, to which they have so good a Title, to be
ravished from them, either by Monks or Janissaries, though authorized thereunto
by the Princes Commission. Even they who had formerly suffered themselves to be
seduced, to prove in a manner, Betrayers of the Rights and Religion of their
Country, will now (being undeceived) not only in conjunction with others,
withstand the Court in its prosecution of Popish and Arbitrary Designs; but
through a generous exasperation. for having been deluded and abused, will judge
themselves obliged, in vindication of their Actings before, to appear for the
Protestant Religion, and the Laws of England, with a Zeal equal to that
wherewith they contributed to the undermining and supplanting of them. For they
are not only become more sensible than they were of the Mischiefs of Absolute
Government, so as for the future to prize and assert the Privileges reserved
unto the people by the Rules of the Constitution, and chalked out for them in
the Laws of the Land; but they have such a fresh view of Popery, both in its
Heresies, Blasphemies, Superstitions, and Idolatries; and in the Treachery,
Sanguinariness, Violence and Cruelty which the Papal Principles mould,
influence, and oblige Men unto; that they not only entertain the greatest
abhorrency and detestation imaginable for it, but seem resolved not to cherish
in their Bosom, a Thing so abominable to God, execrable to good Men, and
destructive to Humane as well as to Christian Societies.

Nor are the Dissenters merely to believe that the Conformists are equally
zealous as themselves for the Reformed Religion, and English Rights, but they
are to consider them as the only great and united Body of Protestants in the
Kingdom, with whom all other parties compared bear no considerable proportion.
For though the Nonconformists, considered abstractly, make a vast number of
honest and useful people, yet being laid in the Scale with those of the
Episcopal Communion, they are but few, and lie in a little room. And whosoever
will take the pains to balance the one against the other, even where
Dissenters make the greatest Figure, and may justly boast of their Multitude,
they will soon be convinced that the number of the other does far transcend and
exceed them. And if it be so in Cities and Corporations, where the greatest
Bulk of Dissenters are, it is much more so in Country Parishes, where the
latter bear not the proportion of one to a hundred. Nor does the Church of
England more exceed the other parties in her number, than she does in the
quality of her Members. For whereas they who make up and constitute the
separate Societies; are chiefly persons of the middle Rank and Condition, the
Church of England does in a manner vouch, and claim all the Persons of Honor,
of the Learned professions, and such as have valuable Estates, for her
Communicants. And though the other sort are as necessary in the Commonwealth,
and contribute as much to its Strength, Prosperity, and Happiness, yet they
make not that Figure in the Government, nor stand in that Capacity of having
influence upon Public Affairs. For not only the Gentlemen of both the Gowns,
who by reason of their Calling and Learning are best able to defend our
Religion, and vindicate our Laws and Privileges with their Tongues and Pens,
but they whose Estates, Reputation and Interest, recommendeth them to be
elected Members of the great Senate of the Nation, as well as they, who by
reason of their Honors and Baronages, are Hereditary Legislators, are
generally, if not all, of the Communion of the Church of England. So, that they
who conform to the established Worship and Discipline, are to be looked upon
and acknowledged as the great Bulwark of the Protestant Religion in England,
and the Hedge and Fence of our Civil Liberties and Rights.

And though it be true, that this great Breach made upon our Religion and Laws
is fallen out under their hand, while the poor Dissenters had neither accession
to, nor were in a condition to prevent it; yet seeing their own Consciences do
sufficiently load and charge them for it with Shame and Ignominy, it were
neither candid, nor at this Juncture seasonable to upbraid it to them, or
improve it to their Dishonor and Reproach. For as they have tamely looked on
and connived till our Religion and Liberties are so far undermined and
supplanted; so it is they alone who have been in a condition of stemming the
Inundation of Idolatry and Tyranny, with which we were threatened, and of
repairing our Breaches, and reducing the Prerogative to its old Channel, and
making Popery sneak and retreat into its holes and corners again. And should
the Church of England have been overthrown and devoured, what an easy Prey
would the rest have been to the Romish Cormorants! And could the King, under
the Conduct of the Jesuits, and with the assistance of his Myrmidons, have
dissolved the established Worship and Discipline, they of the Separation would
have been in no capacity to support the Reformed Religion, nor able to escape
the common Ruin and Persecution. It Is therefore the Interest, as well as the
Duty of the Dissenters, to help, maintain and defend those Walls, within the
skreen and shelter whereof their own Huts and Cottages are built and stand. And
the rather seeing the Conformists are at last, though to their own Religion's,
and the Nations Expense, become so far enlightened, as to see a necessity of
growing more amicable toward them, and to enlarge the Terms of their
Communion, grant an Indulgence to all Protestants that differ from them. And as
we ought to admire the Wisdom of God in those Providence, by which Protestants
are taught to lay aside their Animosities, and let fall their Persecutions of
one another; so it would be a Contradiction both to the principles and repeated
Protestations of Dissenters, to aim at more than such a Liberty as is
consistent with a National Ecclesiastic Establishment. Yea it were to proclaim
themselves both Villains and Hypocrites, not to allow their Fellow-Protestants
the Exercise of their Judgments, with what further Profits and Emoluments the
Law will grant them, provided themselves may be discharged from all
obnoxiousness to Penalties and Censures upon the account of their Consciences,
and be admitted a free and public Practice of their own respective Modes of
Discipline, and be suffered to worship God in those ways which they think he
has required and enjoined them. And were England immediately to be rendered so
happy as to have a Protestant Prince or Princess (as we are not now quite out
of hopes) ascend the Throne, and to enjoy a Parliament duly chosen, and acting
with freedom, no one party of the Reformed Religion among us, must ever expect
to be established and supported to the denial of Liberty to others, much less
to be by Law empowered to ruin and destroy them. Should it please Almighty
God, to bring the Princess of Orange to the Crown, though the Church of England
may in that case justly expect the being preserved and upheld as the National
Establishment, yet all other Protestants may very rationally promise themselves
an Indulgence, and that not only from the Mildness and compassionate Sweetness
of her Temper, but from the Influence which the Prince her Husband will have
upon her, who, as he is descended from Ancestors, whose Glory it was to be the
Redeemers of their Country from Papal Persecution and Spanish Tyranny; so his
Education, Generosity, Wisdom, and many Heroic Virtues, dispose him to embrace
all Protestants with an equal Tenderness, and to erect his Interest upon the
being Head and Patron of all that profess the Reformed Religion. Had the late
Duke of Monmouth been victorious against the Forces of the present King, and
enabled to have wrested the Scepter out of his Hand, though all Protestants
might thereupon have expected, and would certainly have enjoyed an equal
freedom, without the liableness of any party to Penal Laws for matters of
Religion, yet he would have been careful; and I have reason to believe that it
was his purpose to have had the Church of Eng. preserved and maintained, and
that she should have suffered no alteration but what would have been to her
Strength and Glory, through an enlargement of the Terms of her Communion, and
what would have been to the Praise of her Moderation and Charity through her
being persuaded to bear with such as differ from her in little things, and
could not prevail with themselves to partake with her in all Ordinances. Upon
the whole, it is both the prudence and safety of Dissenters, as they would
escape Extirpation themselves, and have Religion conveyed down to Posterity, to
unite their Strength and Endeavors to those of the Church of England for the
upholding her against the assaults of Popish Enemies, who pursue her
Subversion. As matters have been circumstanced and stated in England, there
has not been an Affront or Injury offered or done unto her by the Court, which
did not at the same time reach and wound the Dissenters. It Is not her being for
Episcopacy, Ceremonies, and imposed Set-Forms of Worship, the things about
which she and the Nonconformists differ, that she has been, not long since
maligned and struck at by the Man in Power, and his Popish functo; but it is
for being Protestant, Reformed, and Orthodox, Crimes under the Guilt whereof
Dissenters were equally concerned and involved. Being therefore in opposition
to the common Cause of Religion, that the late Court of Inquisition was erected
over her Ecclesiastics, all Protestants jointly resented the Wrongs which she
sustained, and not only to sympathize with those dignified and lower Clergy
which were called to suffer, but to espouse her Quarrel with the same warmth
that we would our own.

And as we are to look upon those of the Episcopal Communion, to be the great
Bulwark of the Protestant Religion and Reformed Interest in England; so it was
farther incumbent on Dissenters toward them, and a Duty which they owe to God,
the Nation, and themselves, not to be accessory to any thing through which the
legal Establishment of the Church of England might have been, by an Act of
pretended Regal Prerogative, weakened and supplanted.

I never counsel the Dissenters to renounce their Principles, nor to
participate with the Prelatical Church in all Ordinances, on the Terms to which
they have straightened and narrowed their Communion. For while they remain
unsatisfied of the lawfulness of those Terms and Conditions, they cannot do it
without offending God, and contracting Guilt upon their Souls; nor will they of
the Church of England in Charity, Justice and Honesty, expect it from them. For
whatsoever any Man believes to be Sin, it is so to him, and will by God be
imputed as such, till he be otherwise enlightened and convinced; nor are the
Dissenters to be false and cruel to themselves, in order to be kind and
friendly to them. But that which I would advise them unto is, that after the
maintaining the highest measure of Love to the conformable Congregations as
Churches of Christ, and the esteeming their Members as Christian Protestant
Brethren, notwithstanding the several things wherein they judge them to err,
and to be mistaken, that they would not by any Act and Transactions of theirs,
betray them into a Despotical Power, not directly, nor indirectly acknowledge
any Authority paramount unto, and superseding the Laws, by which the Church of
England is established in its present Form, Order, and Mode of Jurisdiction,
Discipline and External Worship.

Whatsoever Ease arrived to the Dissenters, through the Kings suspending the
Execution of the Penal Laws, without their Address and Application, they might
receive it with Joy and Humility in themselves, and with thankfulness to God,
nor was there hereby any prejudice offered on their part, to the Authority of
the Law, or Offense or Injury given or done to the conformable Clergy. Nor is
it without grief and regret that the Churchmen have been forced to behold the
harassing, spoiling, and imprisonment of the Nonconformists, while in the mean
time the Papists were suffered to assemble to the Celebration of their
Idolatrous Worship without Censure and Control. And had it been in their power
to remedy it, and give Relief to their Protestant Brethren, they would with
delight and readiness have embraced the occasion and opportunity of doing it.
But alas! instead of having an advantage put into their hand, of contributing
to the Relief of the Dissenters, which I dare say, many of them ardently wish
and desire, they were compelled, contrary to their Inclination, as well as
their Interest, to become instrumental in persecuting and oppressing them. Nor
does the late King covet a better and a more legal advantage against the
Conformists, than that they would refuse to pursue Dissenters, and decline
molesting them with Ecclesiastical Censures and civil Punishments. So that
their condition was to be pityed and bewailed, in that they were hindered from
acting against the Papists, though both enjoyed by Law, and influenced
thereunto by Motives of self-Preservation, as well as by ties of Conscience,
while in the mean time they were forced to prosecute their fellow-Protestants,
or else to be suspended and deposed, and put out of their Offices and
Employments. And tho I believe that they would at last have more Peace in
themselves, and be better accepted with God in the great Duty of their Account,
should they have refused to disturb and prosecute their Protestant Brethren,
and scorn to be any longer Court-Tools for weakening and undermining the
Reformed Cause and Interest, yet I could not but leave them to act in this as
they should be persuaded in themselves, and as they judged most agreeable to
Principles of Wisdom and Conscience. In the interim, the Dissenters have all
the Reason in the World to believe, that the Proceedings of the Clergy and
Members of the Church of England against them, were not the Results of their
Election and Choice, but the Effects of moral Compulsion and Necessity. Nor
will any Dissenter that is prudent and discreet, blame them for a matter which
they cannot help, but bear his Misfortune and Lot with Patience in himself, and
with Compassion and Charity toward them; and have his Indignation raised only
against that Court, which forced them to be instrumental in their Oppression
and Trouble. The Protestant Dissenters could not be so far void of sense, as to
think that the Person lately in the Throne bore them any Good Will, but his
drift was to screw himself into a Supremacy and Absoluteness over the Law, and
to get such an Authority confessed to be vested in him, as when he pleased he
might subvert the Established Religion, and set up Popery. Forby the same Power
that he can dispense with the Penal Statutes against the Nonconformists, he may
also dispense with those against the Roman Catholics. And whosoever owneth
that he has a Right to do the first, does in effect own that he has a Right
to do the last. For if he be allowed a Power for the superseding some Laws made
in reference to Matters of Religion, he may challenge the like Power for the
superseding others of the same kind. And then by the same Authority that he can
suspend the Laws against Popery, he may also suspend those for Protestancy. And
by the same Power that he can, in defiance of Law, indulge the Papists the
Exercise of their Religion in Houses, he may establish them in the public
Celebration of their Idolatry in Churches and Cathedrals. yea, whereas the Laws
that relate to Religion are enacted by no less Authority, than those that are
made for the Preservation of our Civil Rights, should the K. be admitted to
have an Arbitrary Power over the one it is very like that by the Logic of
Whitehall he might have challenged the same Absoluteness over the other. Nor do
I doubt but that the eleven Judges, who gratified him with a Despoticalness
over the former, would, when required, grant him the same over the latter. I
know the Dissenters have been under no small Temptations, both by reason of
being hindered from enjoying the Ordinances of the Gospel, and because of many
grievous Calamities which they suffer for their Nonconformity of making
Applications to the K. for some Relief by his suspending the Execution of the
Laws; but they must give me leave to add, that they ought not, for the
obtaining of a little Ease, to have betrayed the Kingdom, and Sacrifice the
Legal Constitution of the Government to the Lust and Pleasure of a Popish
Prince, whom nothing less would serve than being Absolute and Despotical. And
had he once been in the quiet Possession of an Authority to dispense with the
Penal Laws, the Dissenters would not long have enjoyed the Benefit of it. Nor
could they have denied him a Power of reviving the Execution of the Law, which
is part of the Trust deposited with him as Supreme Magistrate, who have granted
him a Power of Suspending the Laws, which the Rules of the Government precluded
him from. And as he might, whenever he pleased, cause the Laws, to which they
were Obnoxious, to be executed upon them; so by virtue of having an Authority
acknowledged in him of superceding the Laws, he might deprive them of the
Liberty of meeting together to the number of Five, a Grace which the Parliament
thought fit to allow them, under all the other Severities to which they were
subjected. Nor needs there any further Evidence, that the Prince's challenging
such a Power was an Usurpation, and that the Subjects making any Application,
by which it seemed allowed to him, was a betraying of the Ancient Legal
Government of the Kingdom; whereas the most Obsequious and Servile Parliament
to the Court that ever England knew, not only denied this Prerogative to the
late King Charles, but made him renounce it by revoking his Declaration of
Indulgence which he had emitted Anno 1672.

And as it will be to the perpetual Honor of some of the Dissenters, to have
chosen rather to suffer the Severities which the Laws make them liable unto,
than by any Act and Transaction of theirs, to undermine and weaken either the
Church or the State; so it will be a means both of endearing them, we hope, not
only to the Prince of Orange, now by a miraculous Providence brought in amongst
us, but to future Parliaments, and of bringing them and the Conformists into an
Union of Counsels and Endeavors against Popery and Tyranny for ever; which is
at this season a thing so indispensibly necessary for their common
Preservation. Especially when through a new and more threatening Alliance and
Confederacy with France, than that in 72, the King had not only engaged to act
by and observe the same Measures toward Protestants in England, which that
Monarch has vouchsafed the World a Pattern and Copy of in his carriage toward
those of the Reformed Religion in France; but had promised to disturb the Peace
and Repose of his Neighbors, and to commence a War, in conjunction with that
Prince, against Foreign Protestants. For as the King's giving Liberty and
Protection to the Algerines to frequent his Havens, and sell the Prizes which
they take from the Dutch, is both a most infamous Action for a Prince,
pretending to be a Christian, and a direct Violation of his Alliance with the
States General; so nothing can be more evident, than that he thereby sought to
render them the weaker for him to assault, and that he was resolved (if some
unforeseen and extraordinary Providence had not interposed and prevented) to
declare War against them the next Summer; in order whereunto great Remises of
Money were already ordered him from the French Court. So that the Indulgence
which he pretends to be inclinable to afford the Dissenters, was not an effect
of Kindness and Good Will, but an Artifice whereby to oblige their Assistance
in destroying those Abroad of the same Religion with themselves. Which if he
could once compass, it were easy to foresee what Fate both the Dissenters, and
they of the Communion of the Church of England, were to expect. Who as they
would not then have known whither to retreat for shelter; so they would have
been destitute of Comfort in themselves, and deprived of Pity from others; not
only for having, through their Divisions, made themselves a Prey to the Papists
at Home, but for having been accessory to the Ruin of the Reformed State
Abroad; and which was the Asilum and Sanctuary of all those that were elsewhere
oppressed and persecuted for Religion.

Gloria Deo Optimo, Maximo. Honos Principi nostri celcissimo, pientissimo.
A Representation of the Threatening Dangers, Impending over Protestants in
Great Britain. With an Account of the Arbitrary and Popish Ends, unto which the
Declaration for Liberty of Conscience in England, and the Proclamation for a
Toleration in Scotland, are designed.
THey are great Strangers to the Transactions of the World, who know not how
many and various the Attempts of the Papists have been, both to hinder all
Endeavors toward a Reformation, and to overthrow and subvert it where it has
obtained and prevailed. For beside the innumerable Executions and Murders
committed by means of the Inquisition to crush and stifle the Reformed Religion
in its Rise and Birth, and to prevent its Succeeding and Settlement in Spain,
Italy, and many other Territories; there is no Kingdom or State, where it has
so far prevailed as to come to be universally received and legally established,
but it has been through strange and wonderful Conflicts with the Rage and
Malice of the Church of Rome. The Persecutions which the Primitive Christians
underwent by virtue of the Edicts of the Pagan Emperors, were not more
Sanguinary and Cruel, than what through the Laws and Ordinances of Popish
Princes, have been inflicted upon those, who have testified against the
Heresies, Superstitions, and Idolatries, and have withdrawn from the Communion
of the Papal Church. Nor were the Martyrs that suffered for the Testimony of
Jesus against Heathenism, either more numerous or worthier of esteem for
Virtue, Justice and Piety, than they who have been slaughtered, upon no other
Pretense, but for Endeavoring to restore the Christian Religion to the
Simplicity and Purity of its Divine and first Institution, and to recover it
from the Corruptions, wherewith it was become universally Tainted in Doctrine,
Worship and Discipline. How have all the Nations in Europe been soaked with the
Blood of Saints, through the Barbarous Rage of Popish Rulers, whom the Roman
Bishops and Clergy stirred up and instigated, in order to support themselves in
their secular Grandeur, and in their Tyranny over the Consciences of Men, and
to keep the World in Slavery under Ignorance, Errors, Superstition and
Idolatry, which the reducing Christianity again to the Rule of the Gospel,
would have redeemed Mankind from, and been an effectual Means to have
Dissipated and Subverted? They of the Roman Communion, having strangely
corrupted the Christian Religion in its Faith, Worship and Discipline, and
having prodigiously altered it, from what it was in the Doctrines and
Institutions of our Savior and his Apostles; they found no otherway whereby to
sustain their Errors and Corruptions, and to preserve themselves in the
Possession of that Empire, which they had usurped over Conscience, and in the
Enjoyment of the Wealth and secular Greatness, which by working upon the
Ignorance, Superstition, Lusts, and Profaneness of People, they had skrewed
and wound themselves into, but by adjudging all who durst detect or oppose
them, to Fire and Sword, or to Miseries, to which Death in its worst shape were
preferrable. Nor have they for the better obstructing the Growth, and
compassing the Extirpation of the Reformed Religion, omitted either the Arts
and Subtleties of Julian, or the Fury and Violence of Galerius and Dioclesian.
Whosoever has not observed the Craft and Rage that have been employed and
exerted against Protestants for these 170 Years, must have been very little
Conversant in Histories, and strangely overlooked the Conduct of Affairs in the
World, and the Transactions in Churches and States, during their own time. And
tho the Papists do not think it fit, to put their Maxims for preserving the
Catholic Religion, and converting Heretics, in Execution at all times, and in
every place, yet some of their Writers are so Ingenuous, as to tell us the
reason of it, and that they do not forbear it upon Principles of Christianity
or good Nature, but upon Motives of Policy and Fear, lest the cutting one of
our Throats might endanger two of their own However they have been careful not
to suffer a period of twenty Years to clapse since the beginning of the
Reformation, without affording us in some place or another, renewed Evidences
of Papal Charity, and of the Roman Method of hindering the Growth of Heresy,
either by a Massacre, War, or Persecution, begun, and executed, upon no other
Account or Provocation, but merely that of our Religion, and because we cannot
believe and practice in the Matters of God, as they do. And having obtained of
late, great Advantages for the pursuing their Malice against us, more boldly
and avowedly than at another Season, and that not only through a strange
Concurrence and Conjunction of Princes in the Papal Communion, who are more
intoxicated with their Superstitions and Idolatries, or less wise, merciful,
and humane, than some of their Predecessors of that Fellowship were, but
through having obtained a Prince entirely devoted unto them, and under the
implicit guidance of their Priests, to be advanced unto a Throne, where such
sometime used to sit, as were the Terror of Rome, the Safeguard of the Reformed
Religion, and the Sanctuary of oppressed Protestants; they have thereupon both
assumed a Courage of stirring up new and unpresidented Persecutions in diverse
places, against the most useful, best and loyallest of Subjects, upon no other
Charge or Allegation, but for dissenting for the Tridentine Faith, and denying
Subjection to the Tripple Crown, and are raised into a Confidence of wholly
Extirpating Protestancy, and of re-establishing the Papal Tyrannies and
Superstition, in the several Countries whence they had been expelled, or stood
so depressed and discountenanced, as that the Votaries and Partisans of their
Church, had not the Sway and Domination. Nor need we any other Conviction, both
of their Design, and of their Confidence of Succeeding in it, than what they
have already done, and continue to pursue in France, Hungary and Piedmont,
where their prospering to such a degree in their Cruel and Barbarous Attempts,
not only gives them boldness of entertaining thoughts of taking the like
Methods, and Acting by the same Measures, in all Places where they find Rulers
at their beck, and under their Influence, but to unite and provoke all Popish
Monarchs to enter into a holy War against Protestants every where, that by
Conquering and Subduing those States and Kingdoms, where the Reformed Religion
is received and established, they may extirpate it out of the World, under the
Notion of the Northern Heresy. If Principles of Humanity, Maxims of Interest,
Rules of Policy, Obligations of Gratitude, Ties of Royal and Princely Faith, or
the repeated Promises, Oaths, Edicts, and Declarations of Sovereigns, could
have been a Security to Protestants, for the Profession of their Faith, and
Exercise of their Worship, in the forementioned Territories and Dominions, they
had all that could be rationally desired, for their Safety and Protection, in
the free and open Profession and Practice of their Religion; whereas by a
Violation of all that is Sacred among Men, of a binding Virtue unto Princes
(except Chains and Fetters) or that confer a Right, Claim, and Security unto
Subjects, the poor Protestants in those Places, have been, and still are,
Persecuted with a Rage and Barbarity, which no Age can parallel, and for which
it is difficult to find words proper and severe enough, whereby to stamp a
Character of Infamy, upon the treacherous, cruel, and savage Authors,
Promoters, and Instruments of it. Nor does it proceed from a Malignancy of
Nature peculiar to the Emperor, the French King, and the Duke of Savoy, above
what is in other Princes of the same Communion, or that they are more
regardless of Fame, and less concerned how future Generations will brand their
Memories, than other Papal Monarchs seem to be, that they have suffered
themselves to be prevailed upon, to violate the Promises and Oaths they were
bound by to their Protestant Subjects; seeing the Emperor is charactered for a
Person of a meek and gentle Temper, and of the goodness of whose Nature, there
remain some shadows interwoven with the bloody streaks of the Hungarian
Persecution. And the French King, though he stand not much commended for
Sweetness and Benignity of Disposition, is known to be unmeasurably Ambitious,
of having his name transmitted to Posterity in Letters of Greatness and Honor,
which his behavior toward his Subjects of the Reformed Religion, is no ways
adapted unto, but calculated to make him hereafter listed with Nero and Julian.
As to the Duke of Savoy, there seems by the whole course of his other Actions,
to be a certain Greatness of Mind in him, not easily consisting with that
savage and brutal Temper, which the Cruelties he has exercised upon the
Protestants in Piedmont, would intimate and denote. But it arises from the
Mischievousness and Pestilency of their Religion, their Bigottry in it, and
their having put themselves so entirely under the conduct of the Clergy,
particularly of the Jesuits, who are for the most part a Set of Men,
especially the latter, that through acting in the Prospect of no other Ends,
but the Grandeur, Wealth, and Domination of the Church of Rome, do with an
unlimited Rage, and a peculiar kind of Malice, persecute all that have
renounced Fellowship with it, and care not if they Sacrifice the Honor, Glory
and Safety of Monarchs, and bring their Kingdoms into Contempt and Desolation,
by rending them weak, poor, and dispeopled, provided they may wreek their
Spleen, and Revenge upon those, whose Religion is not only dissonant from
theirs, but should it prevail to be the Religion of the Legislators and Rulers
of Nations, those Springs of Wealth would be immediately dried up, by which
their Superior Clergy, and all their Religious Orders are enriched and fed up
in Idleness. And should the People come to be generally imbued with Principles
of Gospel, Light and Liberty, they would immediately shake off a blind and
slavish Dependence upon Pope and Priests, and thereby subvert the Foundation
upon which the Monarchick Grandeur of the Romish Church and their whole
Religion is superstructed, and destroy the Engine by which they are enabled to
Lord it over the Bodies, Estates, and Consciences of Men. And if Protestants
every where, especially under Popish Rulers, were not under a strange
Infatuation, they would look for no fairer Quarter from Papists, than what
their Brethren have met with in France and Piedmont, nor would they rely upon
the Faith of any King, that styles himself a Roman Catholic, seeing Sacred
Promises, tremendous Oaths, and the most Authentic Declarations, are but Papal
Arts, and Tricks sanctified at Rome, whereby to lull Subjects into a Security,
and delude them into a neglect of all means, for preserving themselves, and
their Religion, till their Rulers can be in a condition, of obeying the Decrees
of the fourth Lateran Council, that enjoins Kings to destroy and extirpate
Heretics, under pain of Excommunication, and of having both their Subjects
absolved from Allegiance to them, and their Territories given away to others;
and till without running any Hazard, they may comply with the Ordinance of the
Council of Constance, which not only releaseth them from all Obligation of
keeping Faith to Heretics, but requires them to violate it; and accordingly
made Sigismond break his Faith to John Hus, whom in defiance of the Security
given him by that King, they caused to be condemned and Burned. Nor is the
Practice and late Example of the Great Louis, designed for less than a Pattern,
by which all Popish Princes are to act, and his Proceedings are to be the Copy
and Moddel, which they who would merit the name of Zealous Catholics, and be
esteemed dutiful Sons of the Church, are to transcribe and limn out in Lines of
Force, Violence and Blood, and for the better corresponding with the Original,
to employ Dragoons for Missionaries.

And tho I will not say, but that there may be some Popish Princes, who through
an extraordinary Measure of good Nature, and from Principles of Compassion,
woven into their Constitution, previously to all notices of Revelation, whether
real or pretended, and who through Sentiments imbibed from a generous
Education, and their coming afterward to be under the Influence and Management
of wise and discreet Counselors, may be able to resist the malignant
Impressions of their Religion, and so be preserved from the Inhumanities
toward those of different Persuasions from them in the things of God, which
their Priests would lay them under Obligations unto, by the Doctrines of the
Romish Faith; yet there appears no reason why an understanding Man should be
induced to believe, that the King of England is likely to prove a Prince of
that great and noble Temper, there being more than enough, both to raise a
Jealousy and beget a Persuasion, that there is not a Monarch among all those
who are commonly styled Catholics, from whom Protestants may justly dread
greater Severities than from Him, or look for worse and more Barbarous
Treatments. I am not ignorant, with what Candor we ought, by the Rules of
Charity and good Manners, to speak of all Men, whatsoever their Religion is,
nor am I unacquainted with what Veneration and Deference we are to discourse of
Crowned Heads; but as I dare not give those flattering Titles unto any, of
which there are not a few in some of the late Addresses, presented to the King,
by an inconsiderable and foolish sort of Dissenting Preachers; so I should not
know how to be accountable to God, my own Conscience, or the World, should I
not in my Station, as a Protestant, and as a Lover of the Laws and Liberties of
my Country, offer something, whereby both to undeceive that weak and
short-sighted People, whom their own being accommodated for a Season by the
Declaration of Indulgence, has deluded into an Opinion, that His Majesty
cherishes no thoughts of subverting our Religion, and also further to
enlighten and confirm others, in the just Apprehensions they are possessed
with, of the Design carrying on in Great Britain and Ireland, for the
Extirpation of Protestancy, and that the late Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience, is emitted in Subserviency thereunto, and calculated by the Court,
toward the paving and preparing the way, for the more facile Accomplishment of
it. And while Mercenary Sycophants, by their Flatteries infect and corrupt
Princes, and by their representing them to the World, in Colors disagreeable
from their Tempers and Dispositions, and in milder and fairer Characters, than
any thing observable in them, either deserves, or correspondeth with, do
delude Subjects into such Opinions of them, as beget a neglect of Means for
preserving themselves; it is become a necessary Duty, and an indispensible
Service to Mankind, to deal plainly and above-board, that so by describing
Kings as they are, and setting them in a true and just Light, we may prevent
the Peoples being further imposed upon; or if through suffering themselves to
be still deceived, they come to fall under Miseries and Persecutions, they may
lay all their Distresses and Desolations at the Door of their own Folly, in not
having taken care, how to avoid what they were not only threatened with, but
whereof they were warned and advertised. History of the Times.
For as I am not of Sir Roger l'Estrange's mind, That if we cannot avoid being
distrustful of our Safety, yet it is extremely Vain, foolish, and extravagant
to talk of it; so I am very sensible how many of the French Ministers, by
painting forth their King more like a God than a Man, and by possessing their
People with a belief of Wisdom, Justice, Grace, and Mercy in Him, of which they
knew him destitute, they both emboldned Him, to attempt what he has
perpetrated, and laid them under Snares, which they knew not how to disentangle
themselves from, in order to escape it. Nor would the King of England, have
acted with that neglect of the future Safety of the Papists, nor have exposed
them to the Resentment, and hereafter Revenge of three Nations, by the
Arbitrary and Illegal Steps he has made in their Favor, if he intended any
thing less, than the putting Protestants for ever out of Capacity and
Condition, of calling them to a Reckoning, and exacting an Account of them,
which neither He, nor they about him, can have the weakness to think they have
sufficiently provided against, without compelling us by an Order of a la mode
France Missionaries to turn Catholics, or by adjudging us to Mines and
Galleys, according to the Versailles President, for our Heretical Stubbornness,
or which is the more expeditious way of Converting three Kingdoms, to cause
Murder the Protestant Inhabitants, according to the Pattern, which his Loyal
Irish Catholics, endeavored to have set anno 1641. for the Conversion of that
Nation. Had his Majesty been contented with the bare avowing, and publishing
himself to be of the Communion of the Church of Rome, and of challenging a
Liberty, though against Law, for the Exercise of his Religion, it might have
awakened our Pity and Compassion, to see him embrace a Religion, where there
are so many Impediments of Salvation, and in doing whereof, he was become
obnoxious unto the Imprecation of his Grandfather, who wished the Curse of God,
to fall upon such of his Posterity, as should at any time turn Papists; but it
would have raised no intemperate Heats in the Minds of any against him, much
less have alienated them, from the Subjection and Obedience, which are due unto
their Sovereign, by the Laws of the several Kingdoms, and the Fundamental Rules
of the respective Constitutions. Or could He have been contented with waving
the rigorous Execution of the Laws against Papists, of whatsoever Quality,
Rank, or Order they were, and with the bestowing personal and private Favors
upon those of his Religion; it would have been so far from begetting Rancor or
Discontent in his Protestant Subjects, that they would not only have connived
at, and approved such a Procedure, and those little Benignities and Kindnesses,
but had the Papists quietly acquiesced in them, and modestly improved them, it
might have been a means of reconciling the Nation to more Lenity toward them
for the future, and might have influenced our Legislators, when God shall
vouchsafe us a Protestant on the Throne, to moderate the Severities to which by
the Laws in being they are obnoxious, and to render their Condition as easy
and safe, as that of other Subjects, and only to take care, for precluding them
such Places of Power and Trust, as should prevent their being able to hurt us,
but could bring no damage or inconvenience upon themselves. But the King
instead of terminating here, and allowing only such Graces and Immunities to
the Papists, as would have been enough, for the placing them in the private
Exercise of their Religion, with Security to them, and without any threatening
Danger to us. He has not only suspended all the penal Laws against Roman
Catholics, but He has by an usurped Prerogative, that is paramount to the
Rules of the Constitution, and to all Acts of Parliament, dispensed with, and
disabled the Laws that enjoin the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, and which
appoint and prescribe the Tests, that were the Fences, which the Wisdom of the
Nation had erected, for preserving the Legislative Authority, securing the
Government, and keeping Places of Power, Magistracy and Office, in the hands of
Protestants, and thereby of continuing the Protestant Religion, and English
Liberties, to our selves, and the Generations that shall come after us. And as
if this were not sufficient, to awaken us to a Consideration of the danger we
are in, of having our Religion supplanted and overthrown; He has not only
advanced the most violent Papists, unto all Places of Military Command by Sea
and Land; but has established many of them, in the chief Trusts and Offices of
Magistracy, and Civil Judicature, so that there are scarce any continued in
Power and Employment, save they who have either promised to turn Roman
Catholics, or who have engaged to concur and assist to the Subverting our
Liberties and Religion, under the Mask and Disguise of Protestants. It Is
already evident, that it is beyond the help and relief of all Peaceable and
Civil means, to preserve and uphold the Protestant Religion in Ireland, and
that nothing but Force and an intestine War, can retrieve it unto, and
re-establish it there, in any degree of Safety. Nor is it less apparent, from
the Arbitrary and Tyrannous Oath, ordained to be required of His Majesty's
Protestant Subjects in Scotland, whereby they are to swear Obedience to Him
without Reserve, that our Religion is held only precariously in that Kingdom;
and that whenever He shall please to command the Establishment of Popery, and
to enjoin the People to enter into the Communion of the Church of Rome he
expects to have his Will immediately conformed unto, and not to be disputed or
controlled. But lest what we are to expect from the King, as to the Extirpation
of the Reformed Religion, and the inflicting the utmost Severities upon his
Protestant Subjects, that Papal Rage, armed with Power, can enable him unto,
may not so fully appear, from what has been already intimated, as either to
awaken the Dissenters out of the Lethargy, into which the late Declaration has
cast them, or to quicken those of the Church of England, to that zealous care,
vigilance, and use of all Lawful means, for preserving themselves, and the
Protestant Religion, that the impendent Danger, wherewith they are threatened,
requires at their hands; I shall give that farther Confirmation of it, from
Topics and Motives of Credibility, Moral, Political, and Historical, as may
serve to place it in the brightest Light, and fullest Evidence, that a matter
future and yet to come, which is only the object of our prospect and dread, and
not of our feeling and experience, is capable of.

It ought to be of weight upon the minds of all English Protestants, that the
King of Great Britain, is not only an open and avowed Papist, but as most
Apostates use to be, a fiery Bigot in the Romish Religion, and who, as the
Liege Letter from a Jesuit to a Brother of the Order, tells us, is resolved
either to Convert England to Popery, or to dye a Martyr. Nor were the Jewish
Zealots, of whose rageful Transports, Josephus gives us so ample an Account,
nor the Dervises among the Turks and Indians, of whose mad Attempts, so many
Histories make mention, more brutal in their Fanatical Heats, than a Popish
Bigot uses to be, when favored with Advantages, of exerting his Animosity
against those who differ from him, if he be not carefully watched against, and
restrained. Beside the innumerable Instances of the Tragical Effects of Romish
Bigottry, that are to be met with in Books of all kinds, we need go no farther
for an Evidence of it, than to consult the Life of Dominick, the great
Instigator and Promoter of the Massacre of the Waldenses, and the Founder of
that Order, which has the Management of the Bloody Inquisition; together with
the Life of Henry the Third of France, who contrary to the Advice of Maximilian
the Emperor, and the repeated Entreaties of the wisest of his own Counselors,
the Chancellor de l' Hospital, and the President de Thou, not only revived the
War and Persecution against his Reformed Subjects, after he had seen what
Judgments, the like Proceedings had derived upon his Predecessors, and how
prejudicial they had proved to the Strength, Glory, and Interest of his Crown
and Kingdom, but he entered into a League with those that fought to depress,
abdicate, and depose him, and became the Head of a Faction for the destroying
that part of his Subjects, upon whom alone he could rely for the defense of his
Person, and support of his Dignity. Nor were the Furies of the Duke de Alva
heretofore, or the present Barbarities of Louis the Fourteenth, so much the
Effects of their haughty and furious Tempers, as of their Bigottry in their
inhuman and sanguinary Religion. That the King of England is second to none, in
a blind and rageful Popish Zeal, his Behavior, both while a Subject, and since
he arrived at the Crown, does not only place it beyond the limits of a bare
Suspicion, but affords us such Evidences of it, as that none in consistency
with Principles of Wisdom, and Discretion, can either question or contradict
it. To what else can we ascribe it, but to an excessive Bigottry? That when the
Frigot, wherein he was Sailing to Scotland anno 1682. struck upon the Sands,
and was ready to sink, he should prefer the Lives of one or two pitiful
Priests, to those of Men of the greatest Quality, and receive those Mushroons
into the Boat, in which himself escaped, while at the same time, he refused to
admit, not only his own Brother-in-Law, but diverse Noblemen of the Supremest
Rank and Character, to the benefit of the same means of Deliverance, and
suffered them to perish, though they had undertaken that Voyage out of pure
respect to his Person, and to put an Honor upon him, at a Season, when he
wanted not Enemies. Nor can it proceed from any thing but a violent and furious
Bigottry, that he should not only disoblige and disgust the two Universities,
of whose Zeal to his Service, he has received so many seasonable and effectual
Testimonies, but to the Violation both of the Laws of God and the Kingdom,
offer force to their Consciences, as well as to their Rights and Franchises,
and all this in favor of Father Francis, whom he would illegally thrust into a
Fellowship in Cambridge, and of Mr. Farmer, whom he would arbitrarily obtrude
into the Headship of a College in Oxford, who as they are too despicable to be
owned, and stood for, in Competition against two famous Universities, whose
greatest Crime, has been, an Excess of Zeal for his Person and Interest, when
he was Duke of York, and a measure of Loyalty and Obedience unto him, since he
came to the Crown, beyond what either the Rules of Christianity, or the Laws of
the Kingdom, exact from them; so he has ways enough of expressing Kindness and
Bounty, to those two little contemptible Creatures, and that in Methods as
beneficial to them, as the Places into which he would thrust them, can be
supposed to amount unto, and I am sure with less Scandal to himself, and less
Offense to all Protestants, as well as without offering Injury to the Rights of
the University, or of compelling those learned, grave and venerable Men to
perjure themselves, and act against their Duties and Consciences. The late
Proceedings toward Dr. Burnet, are not only contrary to all the Measures of
Justice, Law and Honor, but argue a strange and furious Bigottry in His Majesty
for Popery, there being nothing else into which a Man can resolve the whole
Tenor of his present Actings against Him, seeing setting aside the Doctor's
being a Protestant, and a Minister of the Church of England, and his having
vindicated the Reformation in England, from the Calumnies and Slanders
wherewith it was aspersed by Sanders, and others of the Roman Communion, and
the approving himself in some other Writings, worthy of the Character of a
Reformed Divine, and of that esteem which the World entertains of him, for
Knowledge in History, and all other parts of good Learning; there has nothing
occurred in the whole Tenor and Trace of his Life, but what, instead of Rebuke
and Censure, has merited Acknowledgments, and the Retributions of Favor and
Preferment from the Court. Whosoever considers his constant Preaching up
Passive Obedience to such a Degree and Height, as he has done, may very well
be surprised at the whole Method of their present Actings toward him, and at
the same time that they find cause to justify the Righteousness of God, in
making them the Instruments of his Persecution, whom in so many ways he had
sought to oblige, they may justly conclude that none, save a Bigoted Papist,
could be the Author of so insuitable, as well as illegal and unrighteous
Returns. For as to all whereof he is accused, in the Criminal Letters against
him, bearing date the 19th. of April 1687. I my self am both able to assert his
Innocence, and dare assure the World, that none of the Persons whom he is
charged to have conspired with against the King, would have been so far void of
Discretion, (knowing his Principles) as to have transacted with him in Matters
of that kind; but whether his Letters since that, to the Earl of Middletoune,
with the Paper enclosed in one of them, have administered any Legal Ground for
their Second Citation, I shall not take upon me to determine, and will only
say, that as I heartily wish, he had not in those Letters afforded them any
probable Pretense for proceeding against him, so there are Excesses of Loyalty
in them, to atone for the utmost Indiscretions, his words are capable of being
wrested unto; nor can any thing but Papal Malice and Romish Chicanerie,
construe and pervert them, so far contrary to his Intentions, as to make
Crimes, and much less to make Treasons of them. Now as nothing can be of more
portentous Omen to British and Irish Protestants, than to have a Popish Bigot
exalted to Rule over them; so through a Concurrence of ill Nature, and a
deficiency in Intellectuals, met in him with this furious Zeal and Bigottry,
they are the more to expect, whatsoever his Power inables him to inflict, that
is Severe and Dreadful. It Is possible that a Ruler may be possessed with a
Fondness and Valuation of Popery, as the only Religion wherein Salvation is to
be obtained, and therefore in his private Judgment and Opinion, sentence all to
eternal Flames, who cannot herd with him in the same Society; and yet he may,
through a great measure of Humanity, and from an extraordinary Proportion of
Compassion and Meekness, woven into his Nature, hate the imbrueing his Hands in
their Blood, or treating those with any Harshness, whose supposed Misbelief is
their only Crime; and that finding them in all other Respects, Virtuous,
Peaceable and Industrious, He may leave them to the decretive Sentence of the
Sovereign and infallible Judge, without disturbing or meddling with them
himself. Nor is it impossible, but that there may be a Prince so far Bigoted
in Popery, as to have Inclination and Propensity to force all under his
Authority, to be of his Religion, or else to destroy and extirpate them, yet
through being of that largeness of Understanding and Political Wisdom, as to be
able to penetrate into the Hazards of attempting it, and to foresee the
Consequences that may ensue upon it, in reference to the Peace and Safety of
his Government, as well as the Wealth and Power of his Dominions, he may come
to check and stifle his furious Inclinations, and choose rather to leave his
Subjects at quiet, than to impoverish, weaken and dis-people his Country,
either by destroying them, or by driving them to abandon his Territories, in
order to find a Shelter and Sanctuary in other places. But where (as in the
King of England) a small Measure of Understanding, accompanied with a large
share of a Morose, Fierce and Ill Nature, and these attended with Insolency and
Pride, as they usually are in weak and froward People, come to have a Bigottry
in such a Religion as Popery, superadded to them, whose Doctrines and
Principles instigate and oblige to Cruelty, toward all of other Persuasions,
there Protestants do find nothing that may encourage to hope for Security and
Protection under a Prince of that Temper and Complexion; but all that does
affect and impress their Minds, bids them prepare for Persecution, and to look
for the utmost Rigors and Severities that Pride, Malice, brutal Zeal, backed
and supported with Force and Power, can execute and inflict. And how much such
a Prince's Religion proves too weak to restrain him from Uncleanness, and
other Immoralities, by so much the more is he to be dreaded, in that he thinks
to compound for, and expiate Crimes of that Nature, by his Cruelty to
Heretics, and his offering them up in Sacrifices of Atonement to the Tripple
Crown. Nor are the Priests either displeased with, or careful to dissuade
Princes from Offenses of that kind, though they know them to be great
Provocations to God, and of mischievous Example to Subjects, seeing they are
Masters of the Art of improving them, to the Service of Holy Church, and the
Advantage of the Catholic Faith. For instead of imposing upon those Royal
Transgressors, the little and Slavish Penances of Pilgrimages, Whippings, and
going Barefoot; they require them to make Satisfactions for those and the like
Crimes, by the pious and meritorious Acts of Murdering Protestants, and of
extirpating the Northern Heresy. And as one of the French Whores of State is
reported to have been a Person that has principally instigated to all the
Cruelties against the Reformed in France; so no doubt but as she did it under
the Influence and Conduct of her Confessors, to compensate for her Adulteries,
so she advised and persuaded Louis to it upon Motives of the same nature. Nor
do they who have the guidance of Consciences at White Hall want matter of the
same kind to improve and work upon; and as there are of the licentious Females,
that will be glad of attoning for their filthy Pollutions, by Acts so agreeable
to the Articles of their Religion; so there are some, who as they have
Influence enough upon the King, to Counsel Him to the like Methods, so they
will find Him sufficiently disposed to compound for his Loathsome and
Promiscuous Scatterings, at a rate so suitable to his Temper, as well as to the
Doctrines of the Papal Faith.

If any be deluded into a good Opinion of His Majesty, and brought to flatter
themselves with Expectations of their being protected in the Profession of the
Protestant Religion, they may be easily undeceived and prevailed upon to change
their Sentiments, if they will but consider his Behavior toward Protestants
in the Post wherein he formerly stood, and what his carriage was to them, while
he was fixed in a meaner and more subordinate Station than now he is. Though
there have been many whose Behavior in their private Condition, would have
rendered them thought worthy to Rule, if their Actions, after their Advancement
to governing Power, had not confuted the Opinion entertained concerning them;
yet here have been very few that have approved themselves Just and Merciful
after their attaining to Sovereignty, whose Carriage in an inferior Station,
had been to the Damage and general Hurt of Mankind, as far as their narrow
Power and Interest would extend. It ought therefore to lay us under a
Conviction, what we are to expect from His Majesty on the Throne, when we find
the whole Thread and Series of his Conduct while a Subject, to have been a
continued Design against our Religion, and an uninterrupted Plot for the
Subversion of our Laws and Liberties. It Is sufficiently known, how active he
always was, to keep up and inflame the Differences among Protestants, and how
he was both a great Promoter of all the severe Laws made against Dissenters,
and a continual Instigator to the rigorous Execution of them: So that his
affirming it to have been ever his Judgment, that none ought to be oppressed
and persecuted for Matters of Religion, nor to be hindered in Worshipping God
according to their several Persuasions; serves only to inform us, either with
what little Honesty, Honor and Conscience He acted, in concurring to the making
of the foresaid Laws, or what small Faith and Credit is now to be given to his
Declaration, and to what he has, since the Emission of it, repeated both in
his Speech to Mr. Penn, and in his Letter to Mr. Alsop. And to omit many other
Instances of his kindness and Benignity to the Fanatics, whom he now so much
hugs and caresseth; it may not be amiss to remember them, and all other
Protestants, of that barbarous and illegal Commission issued forth by the
Council of Scotland, while he, as the late King's High Commissioner, had the
Management of the Affairs of that Kingdom; by which every Military Officer that
had command over twelve Men, was empowered to impannel Juries, Try, Condemn and
cause to be put to Death, not only those who should be found to disclaim the
King's Authority, but such as should refuse to acknowledge the King's new
modelled Supremacy over that Church; in the pursuance and Execution of which
Commission, some were Shot to Death, others were Hanged or Drowned, and this
not only during the Continuance of the Reign of his late Majesty, but for above
a Year and a half after the present King came to the Crown. But what need is
there, of insisting upon such little Particulars, wherein he was at all times
ready to express his Malice to Protestants, seeing we have not only Dr. Oates's
Testimony, and that of diverse others, but most Authentic Proofs from Mr.
Coleman's Letters, of his having been in a Conspiracy several Years for the
Subversion of our Religion, upon the meritorious and sanctified Motive of
extirpating the Northern Heresy. Of which, beside all the Evidence that four
Successive Parliaments arrived at, I know several, who, since the Duke of York
ascended the Throne, have had it confirmed unto them by diverse Foreign Papists,
that were less reserved, or more ingenuous than many of that Communion use to
be. To question the Existence of that Plot, and his present Majesty's having
been Accessory unto, and in the Head of it, argues a strange Effrontery and
Impudence, through casting an Aspersion of Weakness, Folly and Injustice, not
only upon those Three Parliaments that seemed to have retained some Zeal for
English Liberties, but by fastening the same Imputations upon the Long
Parliament, which had showed it self at all times more Obsequious to the Will
of the Court, than was either for their own Honor, or the Safety and Interest
of the Kingdom, and who had expressed a Veneration for the Royal Family, that
approached too much upon a degree of Idolatry. Whosoever considers that Train
of Counsels wherein the King was many Years engaged, and whereof we felt the
woeful Effects in the Burning of London, the frequent Prorogation and
Dissolution of Parliaments, the widening and exasperating Differences among
Protestants, the stirring up and provoking Civil Magistrates, and
Ecclesiastical Courts, to persecute Dissenters, and the maintaining
Correspondencies with the Pope and Catholic Princes abroad, to the dishonor of
the Nation, and danger of our Laws and Religion, cannot avoid being
apprehensive what we are now to look for at his Hands, nor can be escape,
thinking that he esteems his Advancement to the Crown, both a Reward from
Heaven for what he has done and plotted against these three Kingdoms, and an
Opportunity and Advantage administered to him for the Perfecting and
Accomplishment of all those Designs with which he has been so long Bigg and in
Travel for the Destruction of our Religion, the Subversion of our Laws, and the
Re-establishment of Popery in these Dominions.

The Conduct and Guidance under which His Majesty has put himself, and the
fiery Temper of that Order to whose Government he has resigned his Conscience,
may greatly add to our Fears, and give us all the Jealousy and Dread that we
are capable of being impressed with, in reference to Matters to come, that
there is nothing which can be Fatal to our Religion or Persons, that we may not
expect the being called to conflict with and suffer. For tho most of the Popish
Ecclesiastics, especially the Regulars, bear an inveterate Malice to
Protestants, and hold themselves under indispensible Obligations of eradicating
whatsoever their Church styles Heresy, and have accordingly been always
forward to stir up and provoke Rulers, to the use and Application of Force for
the Destruction of Protestants, as a Company of perverse and obstinate
Heretics, adjudged and condemned to the Stake and Gibbet by the infallible
Chair; yet of all Men in the Communion of the Romish Church, and of their
Religious Orders, the Jesuits are they who do most hate us, and whose Counsels
have been most Sanguinary, and always tending to influence those Monarchs,
whose Consciences they have had the guiding and conducting of, to the utmost
Cruelties and Barbarities toward us. What our Brethren have had measured out
to them in France, through Father de la Chaise's Influence upon that King, and
through the bewitching Power and Domination he has over him in the quality of
his Confessor, and as having the Direction of his Conscience, may very well
alarm and inform us what we ought to expect from His Majesty of Great Britain,
who has surrendered his Conscience to the Guidance of Father Peter's, a Person
of the same Order, and of the like mischievous and bloody Disposition that the
former is. It Is well observed by the Author of the Reasons against Repealing
the Acts of Parliament concerning the Test, that Cardinal Howard's being of
such a meek and gentle Temper, that is able to withstand the Malignity of his
Religion, and to preserve him from concurring in those mischievous Counsels
which his Purple might seem to oblige him unto, is the reason of his being shut
out from Acquaintance with, and Interest in the English Affairs transacted at
Rome, and that whatsoever his Majesty has to do in that Court, is managed by
his Ambassador under the sole Direction of the Jesuits. So that it is not
without cause, that the Jesuit of Liege, in his intercepted and lately printed
Letter, tells a Brother of the Order, what a wonderful Veneration the King has
for the Society, and with what profound Submission he receives those Reverend
Fathers, and hearkens to whatsoever they represent. Nor is His Majesty's being
under the Influence of the Jesuits, through having one of them for his
Confessor, and several of them for his Chief Counselors and principal
Confidents, the only thing, in this Matter, that awakens our Fear in what we
are to expect from his armed Power, excited and stirred up by that fiery Tribe,
but there is another Ground why we ought more especially to dread him, and that
is, his being entered and enrolled into the Order, and become a Member of the
Society, whereby he is brought into a greater Subjection and Dependence upon
them, and stands bound by Ties and Engagements of being obedient to the
Commands of the General of the Jesuits, and that not only in Spirituals, but in
whatsoever they shall pretend to be subservient to the Exaltation of the
Church, and for upholding the Glory of the Tripple Crown. This is a Mystery
which few are yet acquainted with, and which both His Majesty, and the Order,
judge it their Interest to have industriously concealed, but whereof the World
may ere long receive that convictive Intelligence, that there will be no room
left for suspecting the Truth of it, and whereof a Jesuit, in the late printed
Letter from Liege, has given us already sufficient Intimation, both in telling
us, That the King of England styles himself a Son of the Society; and how that
he wrote to Father de la Chaise, that he would account every Injury done to the
Jesuits, to be a wrong committed against himself. Neither is it so surprising
as it may seem at first view that the King should list himself a Member of the
Order, seeing there have been four other Crowned Heads, of whose Entrance and
Matriculation into the Society, there is all the Evidence and Assurance
imaginable. And tho one of them is acknowledged to have been in the Classis of
the Directors, while the other three are generally believed to have been in the
Form of the Directed; yet such was the Power of the Society over them all, that
a great part of the Cruelty exercised toward Protestants both in the last Age
and in this, is to be ascribed to that implicit and blind Obedience, which they
were bound to yield to the Injunctions of the Order and to the Commands of the
General. Philip the Second of Spain, who was the first King that entered into
the Order, and who did it upon Motives of Policy in hopes, by their means, to
have compassed the Universal Monarchy which he was aspiring after, and who,
through being in the Classis of Directors, had Advantages of using and
improving, and not of being in that degree of Servitude unto them which the
others have been; yet to what barbarous Cruelties did they overruled and
instigate him, not only to the Destruction of unconceivable Numbers of his
Subjects, whose only Crime was, that they could not believe as the Church of
Rome does, which issued in the depopulating some of his Dominions, and his
being deposed from the Sovereignty in others; but to the Sacrificing his Son
and Heir Prince Charles, whom to gratify the Society, he caused, upon an
Accusation of his favoring the Low Country Heretics, and the being himself
tainted with Lutheranism, to be murdered in his own Court and Palace.
Sigismond of Poland, who was the second Crowned Head admitted into the Order,
through complying with the Counsels, and serving the Wrath, Rage and Passions
of the Jesuits, in endeavoring to suppress Religion in Swedeland, to which he
was Heir, and in striving to subvert their Civil Rights, drew upon himself the
Resentment and Wrath of that Nation to such a degree, that they abdicated him
and his Heirs from the Government, and advanced another to the Throne.
Casimire, who was also King of Poland, is reckoned to be the third Sovereign
Prince that entered into the Society, and he, through coming under the
Domination of the Jesuits, and being bound to follow their Directions, and to
execute whatsoever the General of the Order thought fit to enjoin for the
Promotion and Benefit of the Church, became not only an Instrument of a severe
Persecution against all sort of Dissenters from the Romish Faith, so that many
were put to Death, and more driven to abandon their Country, but through
committing many things in the course of his Government, that were prejudicial
to the Rights, and thereupon disgustful to the Polish Nobility, they conceived
such an Aversion and Hatred for him, that to avoid the Effects of their
Resentment and Indignation, he was forced to lay down his Crown, and to choose
to end his days in France, in no higher a Post, and under no more glorious a
Character, than that of Abbot of St. German. There is a fourth Prince, and who
is yet in being, that is generally believed to be enrolled into the Order, and
the Persecution he has carried on in Hungary, contrary to his natural Temper,
and to all the Rules of Interest and Policy, and to the Violation of his
Promises and Oaths for continuing unto them the Liberty of their Religion, is
both too probable an Evidence of it, and a strong Confirmation of the Cruelties
which the Jesuits instigate Princes unto, over whom they have Influence, and
whom they have wheedled into Engagements of obeying their Commands, and
pursuing their Injunctions. And as the desolating of Hungary, through a long
and bloody War, and the tempting the Turks to invade the Austrian Territories,
are some of the Effects that have ensued upon the Emperor's complying with the
fierce and heady Counsels of the Jesuits; so we have not seen all the Mischiefs
that the Persecution, which they have engaged him in against Protestants, is
like to issue in, tho beside the disgusting several Electoral Princes and
States in Germany, and the furnishing the Ottoman Potentate with Encouragements
of continuing the War, there are wonderful Advantages afforded by it, to
embolden the French King in his Encroachments upon the Empire, which otherways
he would not have dared to attempt, and whereof the result at last may prove
fatal to the Imperial Dignity, and to the whole House of Austria. Now what the
Protestants in Great Britain and Ireland ought to dread from the King, upon his
being entered into a Society that has breathed nothing but Fire and Blood since
its first Institution, I leave to the serious Consideration of all Men who
value their Lives, Liberties and Estates, and that do not think of renouncing
their Religion, and turning Papists. Nor is it to be imagined that the King,
before he can be supposed well settled on the Throne, and while under a
declining State of Body, as well as in an advanced Age, having the weight of
Four and fifty upon his Shoulders, beside something else that he is obliged to
the Earl of Southesk for, which I shall not mention, would have taken so many
bold, wide, and Illegal Steps for the Supplanting our Religion and Laws, and
for the Introduction and Establishment of Popery and Tyranny, and this not only
to the losing and disobliging his former Votaries and Partisans, but to the
strange Allarming and Disgusting most Persons of Honor, Quality and Interest in
the Three Kingdoms, were he not beside the being under the Sway of his own
Bigottry, and the strong Balance of a large Measure of ill Nature, bound by
Ties of implicit Obedience to the Commands of that extravagant and furious
Society, to the promoting of whose Passions and Malice, rather than his own
Safety and Glory, or the lasting Benefit of the Roman Catholics themselves,
the whole Course of his Government hitherto seems to have been shapen and
adapted. The Occasion and Subject of the late Contest between him and the Pope,
which has made so great a Noise not only at Rome, but through all Europe, may
serve to convince us both of the extraordinary Zeal he has for the Society,
and of the transcendent Power they have over him, and that it is no wonder he
should exact an Obedience without reserve from his Subjects in Scotland, seeing
he himself yields an Obedience without reserve to the Jesuits. It Is known, how
that by the Rules of their Institution, no Jesuit is capable of the Mitre, and
that if the Ambition of any of them, should tempt him to seek or accept the
Dignity of a Prelate, he must, for being capacitated thereunto, renounce his
Membership in the Order. Yet so great is His Majesty's Passion for the Honor
and Grandeur of the Society, and such is their Domination and absolute Power
over him, that no less will serve him, neither would they allow him to insist
upon less, than that the Pope should dispense with Father Peter's being made a
Bishop, without his ceasing to be a Jesuit, or the being transplanted into
another Order. And this the old Gentleman at Rome has been forced at last to
comply with, and to grant a Dispensation, whereby Father Peter's shall be
capable of the Prelature, notwithstanding his remaining in the Ignatian Order,
the Jesuits, through their Authority over the King, not suffering him to recede
from his Demand, and His Majesty's Zeal for the Society, not permitting him to
comply either with the Prayers, or the Conscience and Honor of the Supreme
Pontiff.

Not only the King's Unthankfulness unto, but his illegal Proceedings against,
and his Arbitrary invading the Rights of those who stood by him in all his
Dangers and Difficulties, and who were the Instruments of preventing his
Exclusion from the Crown, and the chief means both of his Advancement to the
Throne, and his being kept in it, are so many new Evidences of the ill will he
bears to all Protestants, and what they are to dread from him, as Occasions are
Administered of Injuring and Oppressing them; and may serve to convince all
impartial and thinking People, that his Popish Malice to our Religion, is too
strong for all Principles of Honor and Gratitude, and able to cancel the
Obligations, which Friendship for his Person, and Service to his Interest, may
be supposed to have laid him under to any heretofore. Had it not been for many
of the Church of England, who stood up with a Zeal and Vigor for preserving the
Succession in the right Line, beyond what Religion, Conscience, Reason or
Interest could conduct them unto, he had never been able to have out-wrestled
the Endeavors of Three Parliaments for ex-excluding him from the Imperial Crown
of England: And had it not been for their Abetting and standing by him with
their Swords in their Hands, upon the Duke of Monmouth's Descent into the
Kingdom Anno 1685 he could not have avoided the being driven from the Throne,
and the having the Scepter wrested out of his Hand. Whosoever had the Advantage
of knowing the Temper and Genius of the late King, and how afraid he was of
embarking into any thing that might import a visible Hazard to the Peace of his
Government, and draw after it a general Disgust of his Person; will be soon
satisfied, that if all his Protestant Subjects had united in their Desires, and
concurred in their Endeavors, to have had the Duke of York debarred from the
Crown, that his late Majesty would not have once scrupled the complying with
it, and that his Love to his Dear Brother, would have given way to the
Apprehension and Fear of forfeiting a Love for himself in the Hearts of his
People, especially when what was required of him, was not an Invasion upon the
Fundamentals of the Constitution of the English Monarchy, nor dissonant from
the Practice of the Nation in many repeated Instances. Nor can there be a
greater Evidence of the present King's ill Nature, Romish Bigottry, and
prodigious Ingratitude, as well as of the Design he is carrying on against our
Religion and Laws, than his Carriage and Behavior toward the Church of
England; tho I cannot but acknowledge it a righteous Judgment upon them from
God, and a just Punishment for their being not only so unconcerned for the
Preservation of our Religion and Liberties, in avoiding to close with the only
Methods that were adapted thereunto, but for being so Passionate and
Industrious to hasten the Loss of them, through putting the Government into
ones hands, who (as they might have foreseen) would be sure to make a Sacrifice
of them to his beloved Popery, and to his inordinate Lust after despotical and
Arbitrary Power. And as the only Example bearing any Affinity to it, is that of
Louis XIV. who in recompense to his Protestant Subjects for maintaining him on
the Throne, when the late Prince of Conde, assisted by Papists, would have
wrested the Crown from him, has treated them with a Barbarity, whereof that of
Antiochus toward the Jews, and that of Diocletian and Maximian toward the
Primitive Christians were but scanty and imperfect Draughts; so there wants
nothing for completing the Parallel between England and France, but a little
more time and a fortunate Opportunity, and then the deluded Churchmen will
find, that Father Peter's is no less skillful at Whitehall, for transforming
their Acts of Loyalty and Merit toward the King, into Crimes and Motives of
their Ruin, than Pere de la Chaise has shown himself at Versailles, where by
an Art peculiar to the Jesuits, he has improved the Loyalty and Zeal of the
Reformed in France, for the House of Bourbon, into a reason of alienating that
Monarch from them, and into a ground of his destroying that dutiful and
obedient People. It will not be amiss to call over some of his Majesty's
Proceedings toward the Church of England, that from what has been already
seen and felt, both they and all English Protestants may the better know what
they are to expect and look for hereafter. Tho it be a Method very unbecoming a
Prince, yet it shows a great deal of Spleen, to turn the former Persecution of
Dissenters so maliciously upon the Prelatical and Conforming Clergy, as his
Majesty does in his Letter to Mr. Alsop, in stiling them a Party of
Protestants, who think the only way to advance their Church, is by undoing
those Churches of Christians that differ from them in smaller Matters. Whereas
the Severity that the Fanatics met with, had much of its Original at Court,
where it was formed and designed upon Motives of Popery and Arbitrariness; and
the Resentment and revengeful Humor of some of the old Prelates, and other
Churchmen that had suffered in the late times, was only laid hold of, the
better to justify and improve it. And tho it be too true, that many of the
dignified Rank, as well as of the little Levites, were both extremely fond of
it, and contentiously pleaded for it; yet it is as true, that most of them did
it not upon Principles of Judgment and Conscience, but upon Inducements of
Retaliation for conceived Injuries, and upon a belief of its being the most
compendious Method to the next Preferment and Benefice, and the fairest way of
standing recommended to the Favor of the two Royal Brothers. Nor is it unworthy
of Observation, that some of the most virulent Writers against Liberty of
Conscience, and others of the most fierce Instigators to the persecuting
Dissenters, among whom we may reckon Parker Bishop of Oxford, and Cartwright
Bishop of Chester, are, since Addressing for the Declaration of Indulgence
became the means of being graciously looked upon at Whitehall, turned forward
Promoters of it, tho their Success in their Diocesses with their Clergy, has
not answered their Expectations and Endeavors. For as these two Mytred
Gentlemen will fall in with and justify whatsoever the King has a mind to do,
if they may but keep their Seas, and enjoy their Revenues, which I dare say,
that rather than lose, they will subscribe not only to the Tridentine Faith,
but to the Alcoran; so it is most certain that they two as well as the Bishop
of Durham, have promised to turn Roman Catholics; and that as Crew has been
several times seen assisting at the Celebration of the Mass, and that as
Cartwright paid a particular respect to the Nuncie at his solemn Entrance at
Windsor, which some Temporal Lords had so much Conscience and Honor, as to
scorn to do, so the Author of the Liege Letter tells us, that Parker not only
extremely favors Popery, but that he brands in a manner all such for Atheists,
who continue to plead for the Protestant Religion. It Is an Act of the same
Candor and good Nature in the King with the former, and another Royal Effect of
his Princely Breeding, as well as of his Gratitude, when he Endeavors to cast a
farther Odium upon the Church of England, and to exasperate the Dissenters
against her, by saying in the forementioned Letter to Mr. Alsop, That the
reason why the Dissenters enjoyed not Liberty sooner, is wholly owing to the
Solicitation of the Conforming Clergy; whereas many of the learned and sober
Men of the Church of England, could have been contented that the Nonconforming
Protestants should have had Liberty long ago, provided it had been granted in a
legal way; and the chief Executioners of Severity upon them, were such of all
Ranks, Orders and Stations as the Court both set on and rewarded for it. It Is
not their Brethrens having Liberty that displeases modest and good Men of the
Church of England; but it is the having it in the virtue of an Usurped
Prerogative over the Laws of the Land, and to the shaking all the legal
Foundations of the Protestant Religion it self in the Kingdom. And had the
Declaration of Indulgence imported only an Exemption of Dissenters and Papists
from Rigors and Penalties, I know very few that would have been displeased at
it; but the extending it to the removing all the Fences about the Reformed
Doctrine and Worship, and laying us open both to the tyranny of Papists, and
the being overflowed with a deluge of their Superstitions and Idolatries, as
well as the designing it for a means to overthrow the established Church, is
that which no wise Dissenter no more than a conformable man knows how to
digest. For I am not of Sir R. L'Estrange's mind, who after he has been
writing for many years against Dissenters with all the venom and malice
imaginable, and to disprove the wisdom, justice, and convenience of granting
them liberty, has now the impudence to publish that whatsoever he formerly
wrote, bears an exact conformity to the present Resolutions of State, Pref. to
his Hist. of the Times. p. 8.
in that the liberty now vouchsafed is an Act of Grace issuing from the supreme
Magistrate, and not a claim of Right in the people. And as to recited
expressions of the King, they are only a papal trick whereby to keep up heats
and animosities among Protestants, when both the inward heats of men are much
allayed, and the external provocations to them are wholly removed, and they are
merely Jesuitick methods by which our hatred of one another may be maintained,
tho the Laws enabling one party to persecute the other, which was the chief
spring of all our mutual rancor and bitterness, be suspended. It would be the
sport and glory of the Ignatian Order, to be able to make the disabling of
penal Laws as effectual to the supporting differences among Protestants, as the
enacting and rigorous execution of them, was to the first raising, and the
continuing them afterward for many years. And if the foregoing Topics can
furnish the King arguments whereby to reproach the Chapter of England, when he
thinks it seasonable and for the interest of Rome to be angry with them; I dare
affirm he will never want pretenses of being discontented with and of aspersing
Fanatics, when he finds the doing so, to be for the service of the papal
cause. And if the forementioned instances of his Majesty's behavior to the Chapter
of England to which he stands so superlatively obliged, be neither testimonies
of his Ingenuity, evidences of his Gratitude, nor effects of common, much less
royal Justice; yet what remains to be intimated, does carry more visible marks
of his malice and design both against the legally established Church and our
Religion. For not being satisfied with the suspension of all those Laws, by
which Protestants and they of the national Communion might seem to be injurious
to Papists in their Persons and Estates, such as the Laws which make those, who
shall be found to have taken Orders in the Chapter of Rome, obnoxious to death, or
those other Statutes by which the King has Power and Authority for levying two
thirds of their Estates that shall be convicted of Recusancy; but by an usurped
Prerogative and an absolute Power he is pleased to suspend all the Laws by
which they were only disabled from hurting us, through standing precluded from
places of Power and Trust in the Government. So that the whole security we have
in time to come for our Religion, depends upon the temperate disposition and
good nature of those Roman Catholics that shall be advanced to Offices and
Employments, and does no longer bear upon the protection and support of the
Law; and I think we have not had that experience of grace and favor from
Papists, as may give us just confidence of fair and candid treatment from them
for the future. Now that we may be the better convinced, how little security we
have from his Majesty's promise in his Declaration, of his protecting the
Archbishops, Bishops and Clergy, and all other his Subjects of the Church of
England, in the free exercise of their Religion as by Law established, and in
the quiet and full enjoyment of their poffessions, without any molestation or
disturbance whatsoever, which is all the Tenor that is left us; it is not
unworthy of observation how that beside the suspending the Bishop of London ab
Officio, and the Vice Chancellor of Cambridge both ab Officio and Beneficio,
and this not only for Actions which the Laws of God and the Kingdom make their
duty, but through a sentence inflicted upon them by no legal Court of Judicature,
but by 5 or 6 mercenary persons supported by a tyrannous and arbitrary
Commission, his Majesty in his Proclamation for Toleration in Scotland, bearing
date Febr. 12. does among many other Laws, cass, disable, and dispense with the
Law enjoining the Scots Test, tho it was not only enacted by himself while he
represented his Brother as his high Commissioner, but has been confirmed by
him in Parliament since he came to the Crown. Surely it is as easy to depart
from a promise made in a Declaration, as it is to absolve and discharge himself
from the obligation of a Law which he first concurred to the enacting of, and
gave the creating Fiat unto as the late King's Commissioner, and has since
ratified in Parliament after he was come to the Throne. As there is no more
infidelity, dishonor and injustice, so there is less of absolute power and
illegality, in doing the one than the other. Nor is it possible for a rational
man to place a confidence in his Majesty's Royal word for the protection of our
Religion, and the Chapter of England men's enjoying their possessions, seeing he
has not only departed from his Promise made to the Council immediately after
his Brother's death, but has violated his Faith given to the Parliament of
England at their first Session, which we might have thought would have been the
more sacred and binding, by reason of the Grandeur, State, and Quality of the
Assembly to which it was pledged.

If we consider how much Protestants suffered, what number of them was burnt at
the Stake, as well as Murdered in Goals, beside the vast Multitudes, who to
avoid the Rage and Power of their Enemies, were forced to abandon their
Country, and seek for shelter in foreign Parts, and what Endeavors of all kinds
were used for the Extirpation of our Religion under Q. Mary; we may gather and
learn from thence what is to be dreaded from James II. who is the next Popish
Prince to her that since the Reformation has sat on the Throne of England. For
though there be many things that administer grounds of Hope, that the Papists
will not find it so easy a matter to bring us in shoals to the stake, nor of
that quick and easy dispatch to suppress the Protestant Religion, and set up
Popery, at this time as they found it then; yet every thing that occurs to our
Thoughts, or that can affect our Understandings, serves not only to persuade us
into a belief that they will set upon and endeavor it, but to work us up to an
Assurance that his Majesty would take it for a diminution of his Glory, as well
as reflection upon his Zeal for the Church of Rome, not to attempt what a Woman
had both the Courage to undertake, and the Fortune to go through with. And
there is withal a Concurrence of so many things both abroad and at home at this
Juncture, which if laid in the balance with the Motives to our hope of the
Papists miscarrying, may justly raise our Fears of their prospering to a very
sad and uncomfortable height. Whosoever shall compare these two Princes
together, will find that there was less danger to be apprehended from Mary, and
that not only upon the score of her Sex, but by reason of a certain gentleness
and goodness of Nature which all Historians of Judgment and Credit ascribe unto
her; than is to be expected from the present King, in whom a Sourness of
Temper, Fierceness of Disposition, and Pride joined with a peevishness of humor
not to bear the having his will disputed or controlled, are the principal
Ingredients into his Constitution, and which are all strangely heightened and
enflamed by contracted distempers of Body, and through furious Principles of Mind
which he has imbibed from the Jesuits, who of all Men carry the Obligations
arising from the Doctrines of the Popish Religion to the most outrageous and
inhuman Excesses. Nor can I forbear to add, that whereas the Cruelty which that
Princess was hurried into, even to the making her Cities common Shambles, and
her Streets Theaters of Murder for Innocent Persons, for which she became hated
while she lived, and her Memory is rendered infamous to all Generations that
come after, was wholly and entirely owing to her Religion, which not only
proclaims it lawful, but a necessary duty of Christianity, and an Act meriting
a peculiar Crown of Glory in Heaven, to destroy Heretics; it is to be feared
there will be found in the present King a spice of revenge against us as we are
Englishmen, as well as a measure heapt up and running over of furious Papal
Zeal against us as we are Protestants. Beside the Wrath he bears unto us for
our departure from the Communion of the Romish Church, and our Rebellion
against the Triple Crown; the War wherein many of the Kingdom were engaged
against his Father, and the issue of it in the Execution of that Monarch, is
what he has been heard to say, That he hopes to revenge upon the Nation. And
all that the City of London underwent through that dreadful Conflagration 1666.
of which he was the great Author and Promoter, as well as the Rescuer and
Protector of the Varlets that were apprehended in their spreading and carrying
on the fire, is but earnest in respect of what is designed farther to be paid
them, for the having been the great Supporters of that War, both by continued
Recruits of Men, and repeated Supplies of Treasure. Though it was Qu. Marys
misfortune, and proved the misery of Protestants, that she was under the
Influence of Popish Bishops, and of Religious of several Orders, by whom she
was whetted on and provoked to those Barbarities wherewith her Reign is stained
and reproached; yet she had no Jesuits about her, to whom all the other Orders
are but punies in the arts of wheedling and frighting Princes forward to
Cruelty. The Society being then but in its Infancy, and the distance between
its Institution, which was in 1540. and the time of her coming to the Crown,
which was A. 1553. not affording season enough for their spreading so far
abroad as they have since done, nor for the perfecting themselves to that
degree in the methods of Butchery, and in the Topics whereby to delude
Monarchs, to serve and promote their sanguinary Passions, as they have in
process of time attained unto. Nor have the Protestants now any security for
their Religion, whereby it or themselves may be preserved from the attempts of
his Majesty for the Extirpation of both, but what our Predecessors in the same
Faith had in the like kind, though not to the same measure and degree, when Qu.
Mary arrived at the Throne. For though our Religion was of late fenced about with
more Laws, and we had Royal Promises oftener repeated for the having it
preserved, and our selves protected in the Profession of it; yet it is certain
that it had not only received a legal Establishment under K. Edward VI. but had
the Royal Faith of Q. Mary laid to pledge in a Promise made to the Men of
Suffolk, that nothing should be done toward its Subversion, or whereby they
might be hindered in the free Exercise of it. But as neither Law nor Promise
could prove restraints upon Mary, to hinder her from subverting Religion, and
burning Protestants, so the Obligation of Gratitude that she was under to the
Men of Suffolk, for their coming in so seasonably to her Assistance against the
D. of Northumb. who was in the field with an Army in the name of the Lady Jane
Gray, whom the Council had proclaimed Queen, could not excuse them from sharing
in the Severity that others met with, it being observed that more of that
County were Burnt for Religion, than of any other Shire in England. And it is
greatly to be feared, that this piece of her Example, will not escape being
conformed unto by the King in his Carriage toward those that eminently served
him, as well as all the rest of it in his Behavior toward Protestants in
general. Nor is it possible to conceive that the Papists living at that ease
and quietness which they did under his late Majesty, of whose being of their
Religion they were not ignorant, as appears by the Proofs they have vouchsafed
the World of it since his death, would have been in so many plots for
destroying him, and at last have hastened him to his Fathers, as can be
demonstrated whenever it is seasonable, had they not been assured of more to
be attempted by his Successor for the Extirpation of Protestants, than Charles
could be wrought up unto, or prevailed upon to expose his Person and Crown to
the danger and hazard of. For as it is not merely a Prince's being a Papist,
and mild, gentle, and favorable to Catholics, that will content the fiery
Zealots of the Roman Clergy and the Regular Orders, but he must both gratify
their Ambition in exalting them to a Condition above all others, and serve
their inhuman Lusts and brutal Passions, in not suffering any to live in his
Dominions that will not renounce the Northern Heresy; so it is not more
incredible that they should dispatch a Prince by an infusion in a Cup of Tea or
Chocolate, whom though they knew to be a Papist yet they found too cold and slow
in promoting their Designs; than that they should have murdered another by a
consecrated Dagger in the hand of Ravilliac, the one being both more easy to
be detected, and likelier to derive an universal Hatred and Revenge upon them
than the other. And as the King's being conscious of that parricide committed
upon his Brother, plainly tells us, that there is nothing so abominable and
barbarous, which he has not a Conscience that will swallow and digest; so the
Promotion of the Catholic Cause being the Motive to that horrid Crime, we may
be sure that what is hitherto done in favor of Papists, falls much short of
what is intended there being something more meritorious than all this amounts
unto, needful to atone for so barbarous a Villainy, which can be nothing else
but the extirpating the Protestant Religion out of the three Kingdoms. Nor is
it probable that the present King, who is represented for a Person ambitious of
Glory, would lose the Opportunities wherewith the present posture of Affairs in
the World presents him, of being the Umpire and Arbiter of Christendom, and of
giving check to the Grandeur and Usurpations of a neighboring Monarch, to whom
all Europe is in danger of becoming enslaved; if he were not swallowed up in
the Thoughts of a Conquest over the Consciences, Laws and Liberties of his own
People, and of subjugating his Dominions to the Sea of Rome, and had he not
Hopes and Assurances of Aid and Assistance therein from that Monarch, as he is
emboldned and encouraged thereunto by his Pattern and Example.

What the Papists have all along been endeavoring for the Subversion of our
Religion, during and under the Reigns of Protestant Princes, may yet farther
inform and confirm us, what they will infallibly attempt upon their having
gotten one into the Throne, who is not only in all things of their own Faith,
but of an Humor agreeable unto their Desires, and of a Temper every way suited
and adapted to their Designs. Though the Protestant Religion had obtained some
entrance into several States and Kingdoms, and had made some considerable
spread in Europe, before it came to be generally received, and established upon
Foundations of Law in England; yet they of other Countries, were little able to
defend themselves from the Power and Malice of the Church of Rome, and of
Popish Princes, and many of them were very unsuccessful in Endeavors of that
nature, till England, in Qu. Elizabeth's time by espousing their Cause and
undertaking their Quarrel, not only wrought out their Safety, but made them
flourish. This the Court of Rome and the Priests grew immediately sensible of,
and have therefore molded all their Counsels ever since against England, as
being both the Bulwark of the Protestant Religion, and the Balance of Europe.
All the late attempts for the Extirpation of the Protestant Religion in France
and elsewhere, are much to be ascribed to the Confidence the Papists had in the
late King and his Brother of their giving no Discouragement nor Obstruction to
so holy a Design; and thereupon as the first Edicts for infringing the Liberty,
and weakening and oppressing Protestants in France, and the persecution in
Hungary, commenced and bore date with the Restoration of the Royal Family, and
multiplied, and increased from year to year as they grew into farther assurance
of the Royal Brothers approving as well as conniving at what was done; so that
for the abolition of the Edict of Nants, and the total Suppression of the
Reformed Religion in France, was emitted upon his present Majesty's being
exalted to the Throne, and the encouragement he gave them to a Procedure, which
as he now justifies he will hereafter imitate. It were to suppose English
Protestants exceedingly unacquainted with the History of their own Nation, to
give a long Deduction of what the Papists have attempted for the Extirpation of
our Religion, while we had Princes on the Throne whose Belief and Principles in
Christianity, led them to assert and defend the Reformation, and who had
Courage as well as Integrity to punish those that conspired against it. Their
many Conjurations against Queen Elizabeth's Person, and their repeated Endeavors
of bringing in Foreigners, and of betraying the Nation to the Spaniards, who
were to convert the Kingdom as they had done the West Indies by killing the
Inhabitants, are sufficiently known to all who have allowed themselves leisure
to read, or who have been careful to remember what they have been often told by
those that have inspected the Memoirs of those times. The Gunpowder-plot with
the Motives unto it, and the extent of the mischief it was shapen for, together
with the insurrection they were prepared for in case it had succeeded, and the
foreign aid they had been soliciting and were promised, and all for the
extirpation of English Heretics, are things so modern, and which we have had
so many times related to us by our Fathers, that it is enough barely to
intimate them. The Irish Massacre in which above 200000 were murdered in cold
blood, and to which there was no provocation but that of hatred to our
Religion, and furious zeal to extirpate Heretics, ought at this time to be
more particularly reflected upon, as that which gives us a true scheme of the
manner of the Church of Rome's converting Protestant Kingdoms, and being the
Copy they have a mind to write after, and that in such Characters and lines of
blood as may be sure to answer the Original. At the season when they both
entered upon and executed that hellish conjuration, they were in a quiet and
peaceable enjoyment of the private exercise of their Religion, yea had many
public meeting-places, through the means of the Queen and many great friends
which they had at Court, and were neither disturbed for not coming to Church,
nor suffered any severities upon the account of their Profession; but that
would not satisfy, nor will any thing else, unless they may be allowed to cut
the throats, or make bonefires, of all that will not join with them in a blind
obedience to the Sea of Rome, and of worshipping S. Patrick. The little harsh
usages which the Papists at any time met with there or in England, they derived
them upon themselves by their Crimes against the State, and for their
Conspiracies against our Princes and their Protestant Subjects. For till the
Pope had taken upon him to depose Queen Elizabeth, and absolve her Subjects
from their Allegiance, and till the Papists had so far approved that Act of his
Holiness as to raise Rebellions at home and enter into treasonable
confederacies abroad, there were no Laws that could be styled severe enacted in
England against Papists, and the making of them was the result of necessity in
order to preserve our selves, and not from an inclination to hurt any for
matters of mere Religion. Such has always been the moderation of our Rulers,
and so powerful are the incitements to lenity, which the generality of
Protestants through the influence and impression of their Religion, especially
they of a more generous education, have been under toward those of the Roman
Communion, that nothing but their unwearied restlesness to disturb the
Government and destroy Protestants, has been the cause either of enacting
those Laws against them that are styled rigorous, or of their having been at
any time put into execution. And notwithstanding that some such Laws were
enacted as might appear to savor of severity, yet could they have but
submitted to have dwelt peaceably in the Land, they would have found that their
mere belief and the private practice of their Worship, would not have much
prejudiced or endangered them, and that tho the Laws had been continued
unrepealed, yet it was only as a Hedge about us for our protection, and as
Bonds of obligation upon them to their good behavior. To which may be added,
that more Protestants have suffered in one year, by the Laws made against
Dissenters, and to the utmost height of the penalties which the violation of
them imported, and that by the instigation of Papists and their influence over
the late King and his present Majesty, than there have Papists from the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign to this very day, tho there was a
difference in the punishments they underwent. However we may from their many
and repeated attempts against us, while we had Princes that both would and
could chasten their insolences, and inflict upon them what the Law made them
obnoxious unto for their outrages, gather and conclude what we are now to
expect, upon their having obtained a King imbued with all the persecuting and
bloody principles of Popery, and perfectly baptized into all the Doctrines of
the Councils of Lateran and Constance. And it may strengthen our faith as well
as increase our fear, of what is purposed against and impends over us, in that
they cannot but think that the suffering our Religion to remain in a condition
to be at any time hereafter the Religion of the State, and of the universality
of the People, may not only prove a means of retrieving Protestancy in France,
and of assisting to revenge the barbarities perpetrated there upon a great and
innocent people, but may leave the Roman Catholics in England exposed to the
resentment of the Kingdom, for what they have so foolishly and impudently acted
both against our Civil Rights, and Established Religion, since James II. came
to the Crown; and may also upon the Government's falling into good hands, and
Magistrates coming to understand their true Interest, which is for an English
Prince to make himself the Head of the Protestant cause, and to espouse their
quarrel in all places, give such a Revolution in Europe as will not only check
the present Career of Rome, but cause them repent the methods in which they
have been engaged. These things we may be sure the Papists are aware of, and
that having proceeded so far, they have nothing left for their security from
punishments because of crimes committed, but to put us out of all capacity of
doing our selves Right and them Justice; and he must be dull who does not know
into what that must necessarily hurry them.

It being then as evident as a matter of this nature is capable of, what we are
to expect and dread from the King both as to our Religion and Laws; we may do
more than presume that the late Declaration for liberty of Conscience, and the
Proclamation for a Toleration, are not intended and designed for the benefit
and advantage of the Reformed Religion, and that whatsoever motives have
influenced to the granting and emitting of them, they do not in the least flow
or proceed from any kindness and good will to Protestant Dissenters. And though
many of those weak and easy People may flatter themselves with a belief of an
interest in the Kings favor, and suffer others to delude them into a
persuasion of his bearing a gracious respect toward them; yet it is certain,
that they are People in the world whom he most hates, and who when things are
ripe for it, and that he has abused their credulity into a serving his Ends as
far as they can be prevailed upon, and as long as the present Juggle can be of
any advantage for promoting the Papal Cause, will be sure not only to have an
equal share in his displeasure with their Brethren of the Church of England,
but will be made to drink deepest in the cup of fury and wrath that is mingling
and preparing for all Protestants. No provocation from their present behavior,
tho it is such as might warm a person of very cool temper, much less offenses
of another complexion administered by any of them, shall ever tempt me to say
they deserve it, or cause me to ravel into their former and past carriages, so
as to fasten a blot or imputation upon the party or body of them, whatsoever I
may be forced to do as to particular persons among them. For as to the
generality, I do believe them to be as honest, industrious, useful, and
virtuous a people (tho many of them be none of the wisest nor of the greatest
prospect) as any party of men in the Kingdom, and that wherein soever their
carriage (even abstracting from their differences with their Fellow Protestants
in matters of Religion) has varied from that of other Subjects; they have been
in the Right, and have acted most agreeably to the interest and safety of the
Kingdom. But it can be no reflection upon them, to recall into their memories,
that the whole tenor of the King's actings toward them both when Duke of York
and since he came to the Crown, has been such as might render it beyond
dispute, that they are so far from having any singular room in his favor, that
he bears them neither pity nor compassion, but that they are the objects of his
unchangeable indignation. For not to mention how the Persecutions, that were
observed always to relent both upon his being at any distance from the late
King, and upon the abatement of his influence at any time into Counsels, were
constantly revived upon his return to Court, and were carried on in degrees of
severity proportionable to the figure he made at Whitehall and his Brothers
disposedness and inclination to hearken to him; surely their memories cannot be
so weak and untenacious, but they must remember how their sufferings were never
greater, nor the Laws executed with more severity upon them, than since his
Majesty came to ascend the Throne. As it is not many years since he said
publicly in Scotland, that it were well if all that part of the Kingdom,
(which is above half of the Nation) where the Dissenters were known to be most
numerous, were turned into a hunting field; so none were favored and promoted
either there or in England, but such as were taken to be the most fierce and
violent of all others against Fanatics. Nor were men preferred either in
Church or State for their learning, virtue or merit, but for their passionate
heats and brutal rigours to Dissenters. And whereas the Papists from the very
first day of his arrival at the Government, had beside many other marks of his
Grace, this special Testimony of it, of not having the penal Statutes to which
they stood liable put in execution against them; all the Laws to which the
Dissenters were obnoxious, were by his Majesty's Orders to the Judges, Justices
of the Peace, and all other Officers Civil and Ecclesiastical most unmercifully
executed. Nor was there the least talk of lenity to Dissenters, till the King
found that he could not compass his Ends by the Church of England, and prevail
upon the Parliament for repealing the Tests, and cancelling the other Laws in
force against Papists, which if they could have been wrought over unto, the
Fanatics would not only have been left Pitiless, and continued in the Hands of
the furious Church men to exercise their Spleen upon, but would have been
surrendered as a Sacrifice to new Flames of Wrath, if they of the Prelatical
Communion had retained their wonted Animosity, and thought it for their
Interest to exert it, either in the old or in fresh Methods. But that Project
not succeeding, his Majesty is forced to shift Hands, and to use the Pretense
of extending Compassion to Dissenting Protestants, that he may the more
plausibly, and with the less Hazard, suspend and disable the Laws against
Papists, and make way for their Admission into all Offices Civil and Military,
which is the first Step, and all that he is yet in a Condition to take, for the
Subversion of our Religion. And all the celebrated Kindness to Fanatics, is
only to use them as the Cat's Paw, for pulling the Chesunt out of the Fire to
the Monkey, and to make them stales under whose Shroud and Covert, the Church
of Rome may undermine and subvert all the legal Foundations of our Religion,
which to suffer themselves to be Instrumental in, will not in the Issue turn to
the Commendation of the Dissenters Wisdom or their Honesty. Nor is there more
Truth in the King's declaring it to have been his constant Opinion, that
Conscience ought not to be constrained, nor People forced in Matters of mere
Religion, than there is of Justice in that malicious Insiuuation, (in his
Letter to Mr. Alsop) against the Church of England, That should he see cause to
change his Religion, he should never be of that Party of Protestants, who think
their only way to advance their Church, is by undoing those Churches of
Christians that differ from them in smaller Matters: Forasmuch as he is in the
mean time a Member of the most Persecuting and Bloody Society, that ever was
clothed with the name of a Church, and whose Cruelty toward Protestants he is
careful not to Arraign, by fastening his Offense at Severity upon Differences in
smaller Matters, which he knows that those between Rome and us are not, nor so
accounted of by any of the Papal Fellowship. It were to be wished that the
Dissenters would reflect and consider, how when the late King had emitted a
Declaration of Indulgence, Anno 1672. upon pretended Motives of Tenderness and
Compassion to his Protestant Subjects, but in truth to keep all quiet at home,
when in Conjunction with France, he was engaging in an unjust War against a
Reformed State abroad, and in order to steal a Liberty for the Papists to
Practice their Idolatries, without incurring a Suspicion himself, of being of
the Romish Religion, and in hope to wind up the Prerogative to a Paramount
Power over the Law; and how when the Parliament condemned the Illegality of it,
and would have the Declaration recalled, all his Kindness to Dissenters not
only immediately vanished, but turned into that Rage and Fury, that tho both
that Parliament addressed for some Favor to be showed them, and another voted
it a Betraying of the Protestant Religion to continue the Execution of the
Penal Laws upon them, yet instead of their having any Mercy or Moderation
exercised toward them, they were thrown into a Furnace, made seven times
hotter than that wherein they had been scorched before. And without pretending
to be a Prophet. I dare prognosticate and foretell, that whenever the present
King has compassed the Ends, unto which this Declaration is designed to be
subservient, namely, the placing the Papists both in the open Exercise of their
Religion, and in all public Offices and Trusts, and the getting a Power to be
acknowledged vested in him over the Laws; that then, instead of the still Voice
calmly whispered from Whitehall, they will both hear and feel the Blasts of a
mighty rushing Wind, and that upon pretended Occasions arising from the Abuse
of this Indulgence, or for some alleged Crimes wherein they and all other
Protestants are to be involved, (tho their supineness and excess of Loyalty
continue to be their greatest Offenses) this Liberty will not only be
withdrawn, and the old Church of England Severities revived, but some of the
new a la mode a France Treatments come upon the Stage, and be pursued against
them, and all other perverse and obstinate British Heretics.

The Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, being injurious to the Church of
England, and not proceeding from any inward and real good Will to the
Dissenters; it will be worth our pains to inquire into, and make a more ample
Deduction of the Reasons upon which it was granted, that the Grounds of
emitting it being laid under every Man's view, they who have Addressed may come
to be ashamed of their Simplicity and Folly, they who have not, may be farther
confirmed both of the Unlawfulness and Inconveniency of doing it, and that all
who preserve any regard to the Protestant Religion and the Laws of England, may
be quickened to the use of all legal and due means for preventing the
mischievous Effects which it is shapen for, and which the Papists do promise
themselves from it. The Motives upon which His Majesty published the
Declaration, may be reduced to three, of which, as I have already made some
mention, so I shall now place every one of them in its several and proper
light, and give such Proofs and Evidence of their being the great and sole
Inducements for the Emitting of it, that no rational Man shall be able,
henceforth, to make a doubt of it. The first, is the King's winding himself
into a Supremacy and Absoluteness over the Law, and the getting it
acknowledged, and calmly submitted unto and acquiesced in by the Subjects. The
Monarchies being Legal and not Despotical, bounded and regulated by Laws, and
not to be exercised according to mere Will and Pleasure, was that which he
could not digest the thoughts of when a Subject, and had been heard to say,
That he had rather Reign a day in that Absoluteness that the French King does,
than an Age tied up and restrained by Rules as his Brother did. And therefore
to persuade the Prince of Orange to approve what he had done, in dispensing
with the Laws, and to obtain him and the Princess to join with His Majesty, and
to employ their Interest in the Kingdom for the Repealing the Test Acts, and
the many other Statutes made against Roman Catholics, he used this Argument in
a Message he sent to their Royal Highnesses upon that Errand, that the getting
it done, would be greatly to the Advantage, and for the increase of the
Prerogative; but this these two noble Princes, of whose Ascent to the Throne
all Protestants have so near and comfortable a Prospect, were too Generous, as
well as Wise, to be wheedled with, as knowing that the Authority of the Kings
and Queens of England is great enough, by the Rules of the Constitution,
without grasping at a new Prerogative Power, which as the Laws have not vested
in them, so it would be of no use, but to enable them to do hurt. And indeed it
is more necessary, both for the Honor and Safety of the Monarch, and for the
Freedom and Security of the People, that the Prerogative should be confined
within its ancient and legal Channels, than be left to that illimited and
unbounded Latitude, which the late King and his present Majesty have endeavored
to advance and screw it up unto. That both the Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience in England, and the Proclamation for a Toleration in Scotland, are
calculated for raising the Sovereign Authority to a transcendent Power over the
Laws of the two Kingdoms, may be demonstrated from the Papers themselves, which
lay the Dispensing Power before us in terms that import no less than his
Majesty's standing Free and absolved from all Ties and Restraints, and his
being clothed with a Right of doing whatsoever he will. For if the Style of
Royal Pleasure to suspend the Execution of such and such Laws, and to forbid
such and such Oaths to be required to be taken, and this in the virtue of no
Authority declared by the Laws to be resident in his Majesty, but in the virtue
of a certain vagrant and indeterminate thing called Royal Prerogative, as the
Power exercised in the English Declaration is worded and expressed, be not
enough to enlighten us sufficiently in the matter before us; the Style of
Absolute Power, which all the Subjects are to obey without reserve, whereby the
King is pleased to chalk before us, the Authority exerted in the Scots
Proclamation, for the stopping, disabling, and dispensing with such and such
Laws as are there referred unto, and for the granting the Toleration with the
other Liberties, Immunities and Rights there mentioned, is more than sufficient
to set the Point we are discoursing beyond all possibility of rational
control. As it is one and the same Kind of Authority that is claimed over the
Laws and Subjects of both Kingdoms, tho for some certain reasons it be more
modestly designed and expressed in the Declaration for a Liberty in England,
that it is in the Proclamation for a Toleration in Scotland; so the utmost that
the Czar of Mosco, the great Mogul, or the Turkish Sultan ever challenged over
their respective Dominions, amounts only to an Absolute Power, which the King
both owns the Exertion of, and makes it the Fountain of all the Royal Acts
exercised in the forementioned Papers. And as the improving this challenged
Absolute Power into an Obligation upon the Subjects to obey his Majesty without
reserve, is a Paraphrase upon Despotical Dominion, and an advancing it to a
Pitch, above what any of the Ancient or Modern Tyrants ever dreamed of, and
beyond what the most servile part of Mankind was ever acquainted with, till the
present French King gave an Instance of it, in making his mere Will and
pleasure to be the Ground and Argument upon which his Reformed Subjects were to
renounce their Religion, and to turn Roman Catholics; so it is worth
considering, whether His Majesty, who glories to imitate that Foreign Monarch,
may not, in a little time, make the like Application of this Absolute Power,
which his Subjects are bound to obey without reserve; and whether in that case,
they who have Addressed to thank him for his Declaration, and thereby justified
the Claim of this Absolute Power, being that upon which the Declaration is
superstructed, and from which it emergeth, can avoid paying the Obedience that
is demanded as a Duty in the Subject, inseparably annexed thereunto. That which
more confirms us, that the English Declaration and the Scots Proclamation, are
not only designed for the obtaining from the Subjects an Acknowledgment of an
Absolute Power vested in the King, but that no less than the Usurpation and
Exercise of such a Power, can warrant and support them, are the many Laws and
Rights, which a Jurisdiction is challenged over and exerted in reference unto,
in the Papers styled by the forementioned Names. All confess a Royal
Prerogative settled on the Crown, and appertaining to the Royal Office; nor can
the Supreme Magistrate be executed and discharged to the Advantage and Safety
of the Community, without a Power affixed unto it of superceding the Execution
of some Laws at certain Junctures, nor without having an Authority over the
Rights of particular Men in some incident cases; but then the received Customs
of the respective Nations, and the universal Good, Preservation and Safety of
the People in general, are the Measures by which this Prerogative in the Crown
is to be regulated, and beyond which to apply or exert it, is an Usurpation and
Tyranny in the Ruler. All the Power belonging to the Kings and Queens of
England and Scotland, arises from an Agreement and Concession of the People,
wherein it is stipulated, what Rights, Liberties and Privileges they reserved
unto themselves, and what Authority and Jurisdiction they delegated and made
over unto the Sovereign, in order to his being in a Condition to protect and
defend them, and that they may the better live in Peace, Freedom and Safety,
which are the Ends for which they have chosen Kings to be over them, and for
the compassing whereof, they originally submitted unto, and pitched upon such a
Form of Civil Administration. Nor are the Opinions of particular Men, of what
Rank or Order soever they be, to be admitted as an Exposition of the Extent of
this Prerogative, seeing they, through their Dependencies upon the King, and
their Obnoxiousness to be influenced by selfish and personal Ends, may enlarge
it beyond what is for the Benefit of the Community; but the immemorial course
of Administration, with the Sense of the whole Society signified by their
Representatives in Parliament upon emerging Occasions, are to be taken for the
Sense, Paraphrase and Declaration of the Limits of this Royal and Prerogative
Power; and for any to determine the Bounds of it from the Testimonies of
Mercenary Lawyers, or Sycophant Clergymen, in Cases wherein the Parliament
have, by their Votes and Resolutions, settled its Boundaries, is a Crime that
deserves the severest Animadversion, and, which it is to be hoped, a true
English Parliament will not let pass unpunished. Now a Power arising from Royal
Prerogative, to suspend and disable a great number of Laws at once, and they of
such a Nature and Tendency, as the great Security of the People consists in
their being maintained, and which the whole Community represented in
Parliaments have often disallowed and made void Princes meddling with, so as to
interrupt their Execution and Course, is so far from being a Right inherent in
the Crown, that the very pretending unto it, is a changing of the Government,
and an overthrowing of the Constitution. De Laudib. Leg. Angl. c. 9.
Fortescue says, That Rex Angliae populum Gubernat non mera potestate Regia,
sed politica; quia populus iis legibus gubernatur quas ipse fert; the King of
England does not so properly Govern by a Power that is Regal, as by a Power
that is Political, in that he is bound to Rule by the Laws, which the People
themselves choose and enact. And both Bracton and Fleta tell us, Bract. l. 2. c.
16. Flet. l. 2. c. 17.
That Rex Angliae habet superiores, viz. legem per quam factus est Rex, ac
Comites and Barons qui debent ei fraenum ponere; the King of England has for
Superiors, both the Law by which he is constituted King, and which is the
measure of his Governing Power, and the Parliament which is to restrain him, if
he do amiss. And thereupon we have not only that other Saying of Bracton, Lib.
3. cap. 9.
That Nihil aliud potest Rex, nisi id solum quod jure potest; The King can do
nothing but what he can do by Law: But we have that Famous Passage in our
Parliament Rolls, Rot. Parl. 7. Hen. 4. Number. 59
Non est ulla Regis prerogativa, quae ex justitia and aequitate quicquam
derogat: That there is no Prerogative belongs to the King, by which he can
decline from acting according to Law and Justice. So careful were our Ancestors
both in England and Scotland, to preserve their Laws from being invaded and
superceded by their Kings; that they have not only by diverse Parliamentary
Votes and Resolutions, and by several Statutes, declared all Dispensations by
the King, from Laws and enjoined Oaths, to be null and void, and not admittable
by the Judges or other Executors of Law and Justice; but they have often
Impeached, Arraigned and Condemned those to one Penalty or another, that have
been found to have counseled and advised Kings to an Usurpation of Power over
the Laws, and to a Violation of established and enacted Rules. It would draw
this Discourse to a length beyond what is intended, should I mention the
several Laws against Papists as well as against Dissenters, that are suspended.
stopped, disabled and dispensed with, in the two forementioned Royal Papers,
and it would be an extending it much more, should I make the several
Reflections that the matter is capable of, and which a Person of a very
ordinary Understanding cannot be greatly to seek for; I shall therefore only
take notice of two or three Efforts which occur there, of this Royal
Prerogative and Absolute Power, which as they are very bold and ample Exertions
of them for the first time; so should the next Exercises of them be
proportionable, there will be nothing left us of the Protestant Religion, or of
English Liberties, and we must be contented to be Papists and Slaves, or else
to stand adjudged to Tyburn and Smithfield. One is the Suspending the Laws
which enjoin the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and the prohibiting that
these Oaths be at any time hereafter required to be taken; by which single
Exercise of Royal Prerogative and Absolute Power, the two Kingdoms are not only
again subjected to a Foreign furisdiction, the Miseries whereof they groaned
under for several Ages; but as the King is hereby deprived of the greatest
Security he had from his Subjects, both to himself and the Government, so the
Crown is robbed of one of its chiefest Jewels, namely, an Authority over all the
Subjects, which was thought so essential to Sovereignty and Royal Dignity, that
it was annexed to the Imperial Crown of England, and adjudged inherent in the
Monarch, before the Reformed Religion came to be received and established. And
it concerns their Royal Highnesses of Orange, to whom the Right of succeeding
to the Crown of Great Britain unquestionably belongs, to consider whether his
Majesty may not, by the same Authority whereby he alienates and gives away so
considerable and inherent a Branch of the Royal Jurisdiction, transfer the
Succession it self, and dispose the Inheritance of the Crown to whom he
pleases. Nor will they about him, who thrust the last King out of the Throne,
to make room for his present Majesty, much scruple to put a Protestant
Successor by it, if they can find another Papist as Bigoted as this to advance
unto it. However, were they on the Throne to morrow, here is both a Foreign
Jurisdiction brought in and set up to Rival and control theirs, and they are
deprived of all means of being secured of the Loyalty and Fealty of a great
number of their Subjects. Nor will His Majesty's certain Knowledge and long
Experience (whereof he boasts in the Scots Proclamation) that the Catholics,
as it is their Principle to be good Christians, so it is to be dutiful
Subjects, be enough for their Royal Highnesses to rely upon, their Religion
obliging them to the contrary toward Princes, whom the Church of Rome has
adjudged to be Heretics. A second Instance wherein this pretended Royal
Prerogative is exercised Paramount to all Laws, and which nothing but a claim
of Absolute Power in his Majesty can support, and an Acknowledgment of it by
the Subjects, make them approve the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, and
the Proclamation for Toleration; is the stopping, disabling and suspending the
Statutes whereby the Tests were enacted, and thereby letting the Papists in to
all Benefices, Offices, and Places of Trust, whether Civil, Military, or
Ecclesiastic. I do not speak of Suspending the Execution of those Laws,
whereby the being Priests, or taking Orders in the Church of Rome, or the being
reconciled to that Church, or the Papists meeting to celebrate Mass, were in
one degree or another made Punishable, (tho the King's dispensing with them by
a challenged Claim in the Crown be altogether Illegal) for as diverse of these
Laws were never approved by many Protestants, so nothing would have justified
the making of them, but the many Treasons and Conspiracies that they were from
time to time found guilty of against the State. And as the Papists, of all Men,
have the least cause to complain of the Injustice, Rigor, and Severity of them,
considering the many Laws, more Cruel and Sanguinary, that are in Force in most
Popish Countries against Protestants, and these enacted and executed merely for
their Opinions and Practices in the Matters of God, without their being
chargeable with Crimes and Offenses against the Civil Government under which
they live, so were it necessary from Principles of Religion and Policy, to
relieve the Roman Catholics from the forementioned Laws, yet it ought not to
be done but by the Legislative Authority of the Kingdoms; and for the King to
assume a Power of doing it in the virtue of a pretended Prerogative, is both a
high Usurpation over the Laws, and a Violation of his Coronation Oath. Nor is
it any Commendation either of the Humanity of the Papists, or of the Meekness
and Truth of their Religion, that while they elsewhere treat those who differ
from them in Faith and Worship with that Barbarity, they should so clamorously
inveigh against the Severities which in some Reformed States they are liable
unto, and which their Treasons gave the Rise and Provocation unto at first, and
have been at all times the Motives to the Infliction of. But they alone would
have the Allowance to be Cruel, wherein they act consonantly to their own
Tenets; and I wish that some Provision might be made for the future, for the
Security of our Religion, and our Safety in the Profession of it, without the
doing any thing that may unbecome the Merciful Principles of Christianity, or
be unsuitable to the meek and generous Temper of the English Nation; and that
the Property of being Sanguinary may be left to the Church of Rome, as its
peculiar Privilege and Glory, and as a more distinguishing Character than all
the other Marks which she pretends unto. That which I am speaking of, is the
Suspending the Execution of those Laws, by which the Government was secured of
the Fidelity of its Subjects, and by which they, in whom it could not confide,
were merely shut out from Places of Power and Trust, and were made liable to
very small Damages themselves, and only hindered from getting into a Condition
of doing Mischief to us. All Governments have a Right to use means for their
own Preservation, provided they be not such as are inconsistent with the Ends
of Government, and repugnant to the Will and Pleasure of the Supreme Sovereign
of Mankind; and it is in the Power of every Legislative Assembly, to declare
who of the Community shall be capable or incapable of public Imploys, and of
possessing Offices, upon which the Peace, Welfare and Security of the whole
Politic Body does depend. Without this no Government could subsist, nor the
People be in Safety under it; but the Constitution would be in constant danger
of being Subverted, and the Privileges, Liberties and Religion of the Subjects
laid open to be overthrown. And should such a Power in Legislators, be upon
weak Suspicions and ill grounded Jealousies, carried at any time too far, and
some prove to be debarred from Trusts, whose being employed would import no
Hazard; yet the worst of that, would be only a disrespect shown to individual
Persons, who might deserve more Favor and Esteem, but could be of no Prejudice
to the Society, there being always a sufficient number of others, fit for the
discharge of all Offices, in whom an entire Confidence may be reposed. And it is
remarkable, that the States General of the United Provinces, who afford the
greatest Liberty to all Religions, that any known State in Europe gives; yet
they suffer no Papists to come into Places of Authority and Judicature, nor to
bear any Office in the Republic, that may either put them into a Condition, or
lay them under a Temptation of attempting any thing to the Prejudice of
Religion, or for the betraying the Liberty of the Provinces. And as it is Lawful
for any Government to preclude all such Persons from public Trusts, of whose
Enemity, and ill Will to the Establishment in Church or State, they have either
a moral Certainty, or just Grounds of Suspicion; so it is no less lawful to
provide Tests for their Discovery and Detection, that they may not be able to
mask and vizor themselves in order to getting into Offices, and thereupon of
promoting and accomplishing their mischievous and malicious Intentions. Nor is
it possible in such a case, but that the Tests they are to be tried by, must
relate to some of those Principles by which they are most eminently
distinguished from them of the National Settlement, and in reference whereunto
they think it most piacular to dissemble their Opinion. Nor have the Papists
cause to be offended, that the Renouncing the Belief of Transubstantiation,
should be required as the distinguishing Mark, whereby, upon their refusal,
they may be discerned, when all the Penalty upon their being known, is only to
be excluded from a Share in the Legislation, and not to be admitted to
Employments of Trust and Profit; seeing it has been, and still is their
Custom, to require the Belief of the Corporal Presence in the Sacrament, as
that upon the not Acknowledgment whereof, we are to be accounted Heretics, and
to stand condemned to be Burnt, which is somewhat worse than the not being
allowed to sit in the Two Houses of Parliament, or to be shut out from a Civil
or Military Office. Neither are they required to Declare, much less to Swear,
that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is False, or that there is no such
thing as Transubstantiation, (as is affirmed in a Scurrilous Paper written
against the Loyalty of the Church of England) but all that is enjoined in the
Test Acts, is, that I, A. B. do declare, that I do believe that there is not
any Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, or in the Elements
of Bread and Wine, at or after the Consecration thereof by any Prrson
whatsoever. Tho the Parliament was willing to use all the Care they could, for
the discovering Papists, that the Provision for our Security, unto which those
Acts were designed, might be the more effectual; yet they were not so void of
Understanding, as to prescribe a Method for it, which would have exposed them
to the World for their Folly: It Is much different to say, Swear, or Declare,
that I do believe there is not any Transubstantiation, and the saying or
declaring that there is not a Transubstantiation; the former being only
expressive of what my Sentiment or Opinion is, and not at all affecting the
Doctrine it self, to make, or unmake it, other than what it is, independently
upon my Judgment of it; whereas the latter does primarily Affect the Object and
the Determination of its Existence to such a Mode as I conceive it; and there
are a thousand things which I can say that I do not believe, but I dare not say
that they are not. Now as it is the dispensing with these Laws that argues the
King's assuming an Absolute Power; so the Addressing by way of Thanks, for the
Declaration wherein this Power is exerted, is no less than an owning and
acknowledging of it, and that it rightfully belongs to him. There is a third
thing which Shame or Fear would not suffer them to put into the Declaration for
Liberty of Conscience in England, but which they have had the Impudence to
insert into the Proclamation for a Toleration in Scotland, which as it carries
Absolute Power written in the forehead of it, so it is such an unpresidented
Exercise of Despoticalness, as hardly any of the Oriental Tyrants, or even the
French Leviathan would have ventured upon. For having stopped, disabled and
suspended all Laws enjoining any Oaths, whereby our Religion was secured, and
the Preservation of it to us and our Posterity was provided for; he imposes a
new Oath upon his Scots Subjects, whereby they are to be bound to defend and
maintaim him, his Heirs and lawful Successors, in the Exercise of their
Absolute Power and Authority against all deadly. The imposing an Oath upon
Subjects has been always looked upon as the highest Act of Legislative
Authority, in that it affects their Consciences, and requires the Approbation,
or Disapprobation of their Minds and Judgments, in reference to whatsoever it
is enjoined for; whereas a Law that affects only Men's Estates may be submitted
unto, tho in the mean time they think that which is exacted of them to be
Unreasonable and Unjust. And as it concerns both the Wisdom and Justice of
Lawgivers to be very tender in ordaining Oaths that are to be taken by
Subjects, and that not only from a care that they may not prostitute the Name
of God to Profanation, when the matter about which they are imposed, is either
light and trivial, or dubious and uncertain; but because it is an Exercise of
Jurisdiction over the Souls of Men, which is more than if it were only
exercised over their Goods, Bodies and Privileges; so never any of our Kings
pretended to a Right of enjoining and requiring an Oath that was not first
enacted and specified in some Law; and it would have been heretofore accounted
a good Plea for refusing such or such an Oath, to say there was no Statute that
had required it. It was one of the Articles of High Treason (and the most
material) charged upon the Earl of Strafford, that being Lord Deputy of
Ireland, he required an Oath of the Scots who inhabited there, which no Law had
ordained or prescribed; which may make those Counselors who have advised the
King to impose this new Oath, as well as all others that shall require it to be
taken upon his Majesty's bare Authority, to be a little apprehensive, whether
it may not at some time rise in Judgment against them, and prove a Forfeiture
of their Lives to Justice. And as the imposing an Oath not warranted by Law, is
an high Act of Absolute Power, and in the King an altering of the Constitution;
so if we look into the Oath it self, we shall find this Absolute Power
strangely manifested and displayed in all the Parts and Branches of it, and the
People required to Swear themselves his Majesty's most obedient Slaves and
Vassals. By one Paragraph of it, they are required to Swear that it is unlawful
for Subjects, on any pretense, or for any Cause whatsoever, to rise in Arms
against him, or any Commissioned by him; and that they shall never resist his
Power or Authority; which as it may be intended for a Foundation and means of
keeping Men quiet when he shall break in upon their Estates, and overthrow
their Religion, so it may be designed as an Encouragement to his Catholic
Subjects, to set upon the Cutting Protestants Throats, when by this Oath their
Hands are tied up from hindering them. It is but for the Papists to come
Authorized with his Majesty's Commission, which will not be denied them for so
meritorious a Work, and then there is no Help nor Remedy, but we must stretch
out our Necks, and open our Breasts, to their Consecrated Swords, and
Sanctified Daggers. Nay, if the King should transfer the Succession to the
Crown from the Rightful Heir, to some zealous Romanist, or Alienat, and dispose
of his Kingdoms in way of Donation and Gift to the Pope, or to the Society of
the Jesuits; and for the better securing them in the Possession hereafter,
should invest and place them in the Enjoyment of them while he lives; the Scots
are bound, in the virtue of this Oath, tamely to look on, and calmly to
acquiesce in it. Or should his Physicians advise him to a nightly Variety of
Matrons and Maids, as the best Remedy against his malignant and venomous Heats;
all of that Kingdom are bound to surrender their Wives and Daughters to him,
with a dutiful Silence and a profound Veneration. And if by this Oath he can
secure himself from the Opposition of his Dissenting Subjects, in case through
recovery of their Reason, a Fit of ancient Zeal should surprise them; he is
otherways secured of an Asiatick Tameness in his Prelatical People, by a
Principle which they have lately imbibed, but neither learned from their
Bibles, nor the Statutes of the Land. For the Clergy, upon thinking that the
Wind would always blow out of one quarter, and being resolved to make that a
Duty by their Learning, which their Interest at that season made convenient;
have preached up the Doctrine of Passive Obedience to such a boundless height,
that they have done what in them lies, to give up themselves and all that had
the Weakness to believe them, fettered and bound for Sacrifices to Popish Rage
and Despotical Tyranny. But for my self (and I hope the like of many others.) I
thank God I am not tainted with that slavish and adulatory Doctrine, as having
always thought that the first Duty of every Member of a Body Politic, is to
the Community, for whose Safety, and Good, Governors are instituted, and that
it is only to Rulers, as they are found to answer the main Ends they are
appointed for, and to Act by the legal Rules that are Chalked out unto them.
Whether it be from my Dullness, or that my Understanding is of a perverser make
than other Men's, I cannot tell; but I could never yet be otherways minded, than
that the Rules of the Constitution, and the Laws of the Republic or Kingdom,
are to be the Measures both of the Sovereign's Commands, and of the Subjects
Obedience; and that as we are not to invade what by Concessions and
Stipulations belongs unto the Ruler; so we may not only Lawfully, but we ought
to defend what is reserved to our selves, if it be invaded and broken in upon.
And as without such a Right in the Subjects, all legal Governments, and mixed
Monarchies, were but empty Names, and ridiculous things; so wheresoever the
Constitution of a Nation is such, there the Prince, who strives to subvert the
Laws of the Society, is the Traitor and Rebel; and not the People who endeavor
to preserve and defend them. There is yet another Branch of the foresaid Oath,
that is of a much more unreasonable Strain than the former, which is, That they
shall, to the utmost of their Power, assist, defend and maintain him in the
Exercise of this Absolute Power and Authority; which being tacked to our
Obeying without reserve, make us the greatest Slaves that either are, or ever
were in the Universe. Our Kings were heretofore bound to Govern according to
Law (and so is his present Majesty, if a Coronation Oath and faith to
Heretics, were not weaker than Sampson's cords proved to be) but instead of
that, here is a new Oath imposed upon the Subjects, by which they are bound to
protect and defend the King in his ruling Arbitrarily. It had been more than
enough to have required only a calm submitting to the exercise of Absolute
Power; but to be enjoined to swear to assist and defend his Majesty and
Successors in all things wherein they shall exert it, is a plain destroying of
all natural as well as civil Liberty, and a robbing us of that freedom that
belongs unto us, both as we are men, and as we are born under a free and legal
Government. For by this we become bound to drag our Brethren to the Stake, to
cut their Throats, plunder their Houses, imbrew our hands in the Blood of our
Wives and Children, if his Majesty please to make these the Instances wherein
he will exert his Absolute Power, and require us to assist him in the exercise
of it. As it was necessary to cancel all other Oaths and Tests, as being
directly inconsistent with this; so the requiring the Scots to swear this Oath,
is the highest revenge he could take for their Solemn League and Covenant, and
for all other Oaths, that lust after Arbitrariness and Popish Bigottry, will
pronounce to have been injurious to the Crown. But no words are sufficient to
express the mischiefs wrapped up in that new Oath, or to declare the abhorrency
that all who value the Rights and Liberties of Mankind ought to entertain for
it, nor to proclaim the Villainy of those who shall by Addresses give thanks for
the Proclamation. There may a fourth thing be added, whereby it will appear,
that his Majesty's assuming Absolute Power, stands recorded in Capital Letters
in his Declaration for liberty of Conscience. For not being contented to omit
the requiring the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy and the Test Oaths to be
taken, nor being satisfied to suspend for a season the enjoining any to be
demanded to take them; he tells us that it is his Royal will and pleasure that
the aforesaid Oaths shall not at any time hereafter be required to be taken,
which is a full and direct Repealing of the Laws in which they are Enacted. It
has hitherto passed for an undoubted Maxim, that eorum est tollere, quorum est
condere, they can only abrogate Laws, who have Power and Authority to make
them; and we have heretofore been made believe, that the Legislative power was
not in the King alone, but that the two Houses of Parliament had at least a
share in it; whereas here by the disabling and suspending Laws for ever, the
whole Legislative Power is challenged to be vested in the King, and at one dash
the Government of England is Subverted and changed. Tho it has been much
disputed whether the King had a liberty of refusing to Assent to Bills relating
to the benefit of the Public that had passed the two Houses; and if there be
any sense in those words of the Coronation Oath of his being bound to Govern
according to the Laws quas vulgus Elegerit, he had not; yet none till now, that
his Majesty does it, had the impudence to affirm that he might abrogate Laws
without the concurrence and assent of the Lords and Commons. For to say that
Oaths enjoined by Laws to be required to be taken, shall not at any time
hereafter be required to be taken, is a plain Cancelling and Repealing of these
Laws, or nothing of this World ever was or is; nor can the wisdom of the Nation
in Parliament Assembled, find words more emphatical to declare their
Abrogation, without saying so, which at this time it was necessary to forbear,
for fear of allarming the Kingdon too far, before his Majesty be sufficiently
provided against it. For admitting them to continue still in being and force,
tho the King may promise for the non execution of them, during his own time,
(which is even a pretty bold undertaking) yet he cannot assure us that the
Oaths shall not be required to be taken at any time hereafter, unless he have
provided for an eternal Line of Popish Successors, which God will not be so
unmerciful as to plague us with, or have gotten a Lease of a longer Life than
Methusalah's, which is much more than the full Century of years wished him in a
late Dedication, by one that styles himself an Irishman, a thing he might have
forborne telling us, because the Size of his Understanding fully declares it.
However here is such a stroke and exercise of Absolute power, as Dissolves the
Government, and brings us all into a State of Nature, by discharging us from
the ties, which by virtue of Fundamental Stipulations and Statute Laws we
formerly lay under; forasmuch as we know no King but a King by Law, nor no
Power he has but a legal Power. Which through disclaiming by a challenge that
the whole Legislative Authority does reside in himself, he has thrown the
Gantler to three Kingdoms, and provokes them to a trial, whether he be ablest
to maintain his Absoluteness, or they to justify their being a free People.
And by virtue of the same Royal will and pleasure, that he annuls (which he
calls suspending) the Laws enjoining the Tests and the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, and commands that none of these Oaths and Declarations shall at any
time hereafter be required to be taken; he may in some following Royal Papers
give us White Hall or Hampton Court Edicts, conformable to those at Verfailles,
which at all times hereafter we shall be bound to submit unto, and stand
obliged to be ruled by instead of the Common Law and Statute Book. Nor is the
taking upon him to stamp us new Laws, exclusively of Parliamentary concurrence,
in the virtue of his Royal Prerogative, any thing more uncouth in it self, or
more disagreeable to the Rules of the Constitution and what we have been
constantly accustomed unto, than the cassing, disabling and abrogating so many
old ones, which that obsolete, out of date, as well as ill favored thing upon
Monarchs, called a Parliament, had a share in the enacting of. I will not say
that our Addressers were conscious, that the getting an Absolute Power in his
Majesty. to be owned and acknowledged, was one of the Ends for which the late
Declaration was calculated and emitted, but I think I have sufficiently
demonstrated both that such a power it issues and flows from, and that such a
power is plainly exercised in it. Which whether their coming now to be told and
made acquainted with it, may make them repent what they have done, or at least
prevent their being accessory to the support of this Power in other mischievous
effects that are to be dreaded from it, I must leave to time to make the
discovery, it being impossible to foretell what a People fallen into a phrenzie
may do in their paroxisms of distraction and madness.

Nor was the scruing himself into the possession of an Absolute power, and the
getting it to be owned by at least a part of the people, the only Motive to the
publishing the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience in England, and the
Proclamation for a Toleration in Scotland; but a second inducement, that swayed
unto it, was the undermining and subverting the Protestant Religion, and the
opening a door for the introduction and establishment of Popery. Nor was it
from any compassion to Dissenters, that these two Royal Papers were emitted,
but from his Majesty's tender love to Papists, to whom as there arise many
advantages for the present, so the whole benefit will be found to redound to
them in the issue. We are told (as I have already mentioned) that the King is
resolved to convert England, or to die a Martyr; and we may be sure that if he
did not think the suspending the penal Laws, and the dispensing with requiring
of the Tests, and the granting Liberty and Toleration, to be means admirably
adapted thereunto, he would not have acted so inconsistently with himself, nor
in that opposition to his own designs, as to have disabled these Laws, and
vouchsafed the Freedom that results thereupon. Especially when we are told by
the Liege Jesuit, that the King being sensible of his growing old, finds
himself thereby obliged to make the greater haste, and to take the larger
steps, lest through not living long enough to effect what he intends, he should
not only lose the glory of converting three Kingdoms, but should leave the
Papists in a worse condition than he found them. His Highness the Prince of
Orange very justly concludes this to be the thing aimed at by the present
Indulgence, and therefore being desired to approve the Suspension of the Test
Acts, and to cooperate with his Majesty for the obtaining their being
Repealed; was pleased to answer, That while he was, as well as professes
himself, a Protestant, he would not act so unworthily as to betray the
Protestant Religion, which he necessarily must, if he should do as he was
desired. Her Royal Highness the Princess of Orange, has likewise the same
apprehension of the tendency of the Toleration and Indulgence, and therefore
was pleased to say to some Scots Ministers that did themselves the honor, and
performed the duty that became them, in going to wait upon her, that she
greatly commended their having no accession to the betraying of the Protestant
Religion, by their returning home to take the benefit of the Toleration. What
an indelible Reproach will it be to a company of men, that pretend to be set
for the defense of the Gospel, and who style themselves Ministers of Jesus
Christ, to be found betraying Religion, through justifying the Suspension of so
many Laws whereby it was established and supported, and whereby the Kingdoms
were fenced about, and guarded against Popery; while these two noble Princes to
the neglect of their own Interest in His Majesty's Favor, and to the provoking
him to do them all the prejudice he can in their Right of Succession to the
Imperial Crown of Great Britain, do signify their open dislike of that Act of
the King, and that not only upon the account of its Illegality and
Arbitrariness, but by reason of its tendency to supplant and undermine the
Reformed Religion. And they are strangely blind that do not see how it
powerfully operates, and conduces to the effecting of this, and that in more
ways and methods than are easy to be recounted. For thereby our divisions are
not only kept up at a time, when the united Counsels and strength of all
Protestants is too little against the craft and power of Rome; but they who
have Addressed to thank the King for his Royal Papers, and become a listed and
enrolled Faction, to abet and stand by the King in all that naturally follows
to be done for the maintaining his Declaration, and justifying of the usurped
Authority from which it issues. It Is matter of a melancholy consideration, and
turns little to the credit of Dissenters, that when they of the Church of
England, who had with so great indiscretion promoted things to that pass, which
an easy improvement of would produce what has since ensued, are through being
at last enlightened in the designs of the Court, come so far to recover their
wits, as that they can no longer do the service they were wont, and which was
still expected from them; there should be a new Tribe of men mustered up to
stand in their room, and who by their Vows and Promises made to the King in
their Addresses, have undertaken to perform, what others have the Conscience
and Honesty, as well as the Wisdom to refuse and decline. Nor are the Divisions
among Protestants only hereby upheld and maintained; but our Animosities and
Rancors are both continued and enflamed. For while they of the established way
are provoked and exasperated to see all the legal Foundations both of the
Protestant Religion and their Church subverted; the Addressing Dissenters are
emboldned to revenge themselves upon the National Clergy, in terms of the
utmost Opproory, Virulence, and Reproach, for their accession to the Sufferings
which they had endured. Surely it would have been not only more generous, but
much more Christian, to have made no other Retaliations but those of
forgiveness and pardon for the injuries they had met with, and to have offered
all the assistances they could give, to their conformable Brethren, for the
stemming and withstanding the deluge of Popery and Tyranny that is impetuously
breaking in upon the Kingdoms. And as this would have united all Protestants in
bonds of forbearance and love not to be dissolved through petty differences
about Discipline, Forms of Worship, and a few Rites and Ceremonies; so it would
in the sense and judgment of all men, have given them a more triumphant Victory
over those that had been their imprudent and peevish Enemies, than if they were
to enjoy the spoils of the conformable Clergy, by being put into possession of
their Cures and Benefices. The Relation I have stood in to the Dissenting
Party, and the Kindness I retain for them above all other, make me heartily
bewail their losing the happiest opportunity that ever was put into their
hands, not only of improving the compassion, which their calamities had raised
for them in the hearts of the generality, into friendship and kindness, but of
acquiring such a merit upon the Nation, that the utmost favors which a true
English Protestant Parliament could hereafter have showed them, would have been
accounted but slender as well as just Recompenses. Nor can I forbear to say,
that I had rather have seen the Furnace of Afflictions made hotter for them,
though it should have been my own lot to be thrown into the most scorching
flames, than to have beheld them guilty of those excesses of folly toward
themselves, and of treachery to Religion, and the Laws of their Country, which
their present ease, and a short opportunity afforded them of acquiring gain,
have hurried and transported so many of them into. It plainly appears with what
aspect upon our Religion the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience was emitted,
if we do but observe the advantages the Papists have already reaped by it. How
is the whole Nation thereupon, not only overflowed with swarms of Locusts, and
all places filled with Priests and Jesuits, but the whole executive Power of
the Government, and all preferments of Honor, Interest, and Profit, are put
into Roman Catholic hands? So that we are not only exposed to the unwearied
and restless importunities of Seducers, but through the advancement of Papists to
all Offices Civil and Military, if not Ecclesiastic; the covetous become
bribed, the timorous threatened, and the profane are baited with temptations
suitable to their lusts, and they that stand resolved to continue honest are
laid open not only to the bold affronts of Priests and Friars, the insolences
of petulant Popish Justices, the chicaneries and oppressions of the Arbitrary
Commission Court, but to the rage of his Majesty, and the danger of being
attacked by his armed Squadrons. To which may be added, that by the same
Prerogative and Absolute Power that his Majesty has suspended the Laws made
for the Protection of our Religion; he may disable and dispense with all the
Laws by which it is set up and established. And as it will not be more illegal
and arbitrary to make void the Laws for Protestancy, than to have suspended
those against Popery; so I do not see how the Addressers that have approved the
one, can disallow or condemn the other. For the King having obtained an
acknowledgment of his Absolute Power, and of his Royal Prerogative paramount to
Laws on his exercising it in one instance; it now depends merely upon his own
will (for any thing these thanksgiving Gentlemen have to say against it)
whether he may not exert it in another, wherein they are not likely to find so
much of their ease and gain.

There is a third Inducement to the emitting those Royal Papers, which tho at
the first view it may seem wholly to regard Foreigners, yet it ultimately
terminates in the subversion of our Religion at home, and in the King's putting
himself into a condition of exercising his Absolute Power in whatsoever Acts he
pleases over his own Subjects, whether after the French fashion in commanding
them to turn Catholics because he will have it so, or after the manner of the
Grand Seignior to require them to submit their Necks to the Bow-string; because
he is jealous of them, or wants their Estates to pay his Janissaries. The United
Provinces are they whom he bore a particular spleen and indignation unto, when
he was a Subject, and upon whom he is now in the Throne, he resolves not only
to wreak all his old Malice, but by Conquering and Subduing them (if he can) to
strengthen his Absoluteness over his own People, and to pave his way for
overthrowing the Protestant Religion in Great Britain, without lying open to
the Hazards that may otherways attend and ensue upon the attempting of it. And
instead of expecting nothing from him, but what may become a brave and generous
Enemy, they ought to remember the Encouragement that he gave heretofore to two
Varlets, to burn that part of their Fleet which belonged to Amsterdam, an
Action as Ignominious as Fraudulent, and that might have been Fatal to all the
Provinces, if, through a happy and seasonable Detection, and the Apprehension
of one of the Miscreants, it had not been prevented. He knows that the States
General are not only zealous Assertors of the Protestant Religion, but always
ready to afford a Sanctuary and a place of Refuge to those, who being oppressed
for the Profession of it elsewhere, are forced to forsake their own Countries,
and to seek for Shelter and Relief in other Parts. And as he is not unsensible,
how easy the Withdrawment and Flight is into these Provinces, for such as are
Persecuted in his Dominions; so he is aware, that if Multitudes, and especially
Men of Condition and Estates, should, for the avoiding his Cruelty, betake
themselves thither, that they would not be unthoughtful of all Ways and Means,
whereby they might Redeem their Country from Tyranny, and restore themselves to
the quiet Enjoyment of their Estates and Liberties at home. But that which most
Enrages him, is the Figure which the two Princes do make in that State (of
whose Succession to the Crown the Protestants in Britain have so near a
Prospect) and the Post which the Prince fills in that Government, so that he
dare neither venture to Disinherit Them, nor impose upon them such Terms and
Conditions, as their Consciences will not suffer them to comply with, while
either these States remain Free, or while such English and Scots, as retain a
Zeal for Religion and the Ancient Laws and Rights of their respective
Countries, can retreat thither under hopes of Admission and Protection. And so
closely are the Interests of all Protestants in England and Scotland, woven and
inlaid with the Interest of the United Netherlands, and such is the singular
regard that both the one and the other bear to the Reformed Religion, the
Liberty of Mankind, and their several Civil Rights; that it is impossible for
his Majesty to embark in a Design against the One, without resolving at the
same time upon the Ruin of the Other. Neither will the One be able to subsist,
when once the Other is Subdued and Enslaved. As Philip the Second, of Spain,
saw no way so compendious for the restoring himself to the Sovereignty and
Tyrannous Rule over the Dutch, as the Subjugating of England that helped to
support and assist them, which was the ground of Rigging out his Formidable
Armado, and of his design against England in 1588, so his British Majesty
thinks no Method so Expeditious for the Enslaving his own People, as the
endeavoring first to subdue the Dutch. And as upon the one hand it would be of
a threatening Consequence to Holland, could the King subjugate his own People,
extirpate the Protestant Religion out of his Dominions, and advance himself to
a Despotical Power; so upon the other hand, could he conquer the Dutch, we
might with the greatest certainty Date the woeful Fate of Great Britain, and the
loss of all that is valuable to them as Men and Christians, from the same
Moment and Period of time. They are like the Twins we read of, whose Destiny
was, to live and die together; and which soever of the two is destroyed first,
all the Hope and Comfort that the other can pretend unto, is to be last
devoured. Now after the Advances which his Majesty had made toward the
Enslaving his Subjects, and the Subverting the Reformed Religion in his
Kingdoms, he finds it necessary, before he venture to give the last and fatal
Stroke at home, and to enter upon the plenary Exercise of his Absolute Power,
in laying Parliaments wholly aside, in cancelling all Laws to make way for
Royal Edicts or Declarations of the Complexion of the former, and in commanding
us to turn Roman Catholics, or to be Dragoon'd; I say he thinks it needful,
before he proceeds to these, to try whether he can Subdue and Conquer the
Dutch, and thereby remove all hopes of Shelter, Relief, Comfort and Assistance
from his own People, when he shall afterward fall upon them. And how much
soever the Court endeavors to conceal its Design, and strives to complement the
States General into a Confidence that all Alliances between them and the Crown
of England, shall be maintained and preserved; yet they not only speak their
Intentions by several open and visible Actions, but some of them cannot forbear
to tell it, when their Blood is heated, and their Heads warmed with a liberal
Glass and a lusty Proportion of Wine. Thence it was that a Governing Papist
lately told a Gentleman, after they two had drank hard together, That they had
some Work in England that would employ them a little time, but when that was
over, they would make the Dutch fly to the end of the World to find a resting
place. Delenda est Carthago is engraven upon their Hearts, as being that,
without which Rome cannot arrive at the Universal Monarchy that it aspires
after. It was upon a formed Design of a War against the United Provinces, that
the King has for these two Years stirred up and incited, as well as
countenanced and protected the Algerines in their Piracies, that through their
weakening and spoiling the Dutch beforehand, it may be the more easy a matter
for him to Subdue them, when he shall think fit to begin his Hostilities. It Is
in order to thi^ that he has entered into new and secret Alliances with other
Princes, the purpott of which is boldly talked of in London, but whether
believed at the Hague I cannot tell. For as Monsieur Barrillion and Monsieur
Bonrepos present Transactions at Whitehall relate to something else than merely
to the affair of Hudson's Bay; so Prince George's errand to Denmark, is of more
importance than a bare Visit, or a naked Compelment to his Brother. It Is upon
this design that all that great Marine Preparation has been so long making in
the several Ports of England; but to the hindering the execution whereof some
unexpected and not foreseen accidents have interposed. And it is in
subserviency not to be disquieted at Home, while he is carrying on this holy
War Abroad, that the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience in England, and the
Proclamation for a Toleration in Scotland, are granted and published. It Is well
enough known, how that after the French King, had among many other severities
exercised against Protestants, made them incapable of Employments and Commands;
yet to avoid the consequences that might have ensued thereupon, while he was
engaged in a War against the Emperor, the King of Spain, and the States of
Holland, and to have the aid of his Reformed Subjects; he not only intermitted
and abated in many other rigours toward them, but in Anno 1674, restored them
to a capacity of being employed and preferred. And that this did not flow from
any compassion, tenderness, or good will toward them, his carriage since the
issue of that War, and the miserable condition he has reduced them to, does
sufficiently testify and declare. Nor can we forget, how that the late King,
after a rigorous execution of the penal laws for several years against
Dissenters; yet being to enter into an unjust War against the United Provinces
Anno 1672. not only forbore all proceedings of that kind, but published a
Declaration for suspending the Execution of all those Laws, and for the
allowing them liberty of Assembling to worship God in their separate Meetings,
without being hindered or disturbed. What Principle that proceeded from, and to
what End it was calculated, appeared in his behavior to them afterward, when
neither the danger the Nation was in from the Papists, nor the application of
several Parliaments, could prevail for lonity toward them, much less for a
legal Repeal of those implitick and unreasonable Statutes. Nor does the present
Indulgence flow from any kindness to Fanatics, but it is only an artifice to
stifle their Discontents, and to procure their assistance for the destroying of
a Foreign Protestant State. And it may not be unworthy of observation, that as
the Declaration of Indulgence Anno 1672, bore date much about the same time
with the Declaration of War against the Dutch; so at the very Season that his
present Majesty emitted his Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, there were
Commissions of Reprisal prepared and ready to be granted to the English
East India Company against the Hollanders, but which were suppressed upon the
Court's finding that they whom the suspending the Execution of so many Laws,
and the granting such Liberties, Rights and Immunities to the Papists, had
disgusted and provoked, were far more numerous, and their resentments more to
be apprehended, than they were, whose murmurings and discontents they had
silenced and allayed by the liberty that was granted. Now as it will be at this
juncture, when the Protestant Interest is so low in the World, and the Reformed
Religion in so great danger of being Destroyed, a most wicked as well as an
imprudent Act, to contribute help and aid to the Subjugating a People that are
the chief Protectors of the Protestant Religion that are left; and almost the
only Asserters of the Rights and Liberties of Mankind, so it may fill the
Addressers with confusion and shame, that they should have not only justified
an Act of His Majesty's that is plainly designed to such a mischievous End, but
that they should by the Promises and Vows that they have made Him, have
emboldned His Majesty to continue his purposes and resolutions of a War against
the Dutch. Which as it must be funestous and fatal to the Protestant Cause, in
case he should prosper and succeed; so howsoever it should issue, yet the
Addressers, who have done what in them lies to give encouragement unto it, will
be held betrayers of the Protestant Religion, both abroad and at home, and
judged guilty of all the Blood of those of the same Faith with them, that shall
be shed in this Quarrel.

That Liberty ought to be allowed to men in matters of Religion, is no Plea
whereby the King's giving it in an illegal and Arbitrary manner, can be
maintained and justified. Since ever I was capable of exercising any distinct
and coherent acts of Reason, I have been always of that mind, that none ought
to be persecuted for their Consciences toward God in matters of Faith and
Worship. Nor is it one of those things that lie under the power of the
Sovereign and Legislative Authority, to grant or not to grant; but it is a
Right settled upon Mankind antecedent to all Civil Constitutions and Humane
Laws, having its foundation in the Law of Nature, which no Prince or State can
legitimately violate and Infringe. The Magistrate, as a Civil Officer, can
pretend or claim no Power over a People, but what he either derives from the
Divine Charter; wherein God, the Supreme Institutor of Magistracy has chalked
out the Duty of Rulers in general, or what the People, upon the first and
original Stipulation, are supposed to have given him in order to the
Protection, Peace and Prosperity of the Society. But as it does no where
appear, that God has given any such Power to Governors, seeing all the
Revelations in the Scripture, as well as all the Dictates of Nature, speak a
contrary Language, so neither can the People, upon their choosing such a one to
be their Ruler, be imagined to transfer and vest such a Power in him, forasmuch
as they cannot divest themselves of a Power, no more than of a Right, of
believing things, as they arrive with a Credibility to their several and
respective Understandings. As it is in no Man's Power to believe as he will,
but only as he sees cause; so it is the most irrational Imagination in the
World, to think they should transfer a Right to him whom they have chosen to
govern them, of punishing them for what it is not in their power to help. Nor
can any thing be plainer, than that God has reserved the Empire over Conscience
to himself, and that he has circumscribed the Power of all Humane Governors to
things of a civil and inferior Nature. And had God conveyed a Right unto
Magistrates of commanding Men to be of this or that Religion, and that because
they are so, and will have others to be of their mind; it would follow that the
People may conform to whatsoever they require, tho by all the Lights of Sense,
Reason and Revelation, they are convinced of the Falsehood of it: Seeing
whatsoever the Sovereign rightfully Commands, the Subjects may lawfully obey.
But tho the persecuting People, for Matters of mere Religion, be repugnant to
the Light of Nature, inconsistent with the Fundamental Maxims of Reason,
directly contrary to the Temper and Genious, as well as to the Rules of the
Gospel, and not only against the Safety and Interest of Civil Societies, but of
a Tendency to fill them with Confusion, and to arm Subjects to the cutting of
one another Throats; yet Governors may both deny Liberty to those whose
Principles oblige them to destroy those that are not of their mind, and may in
some measure Regulate the Liberty which they vouchsafe to others, whose
Opinions, tho they do not think dangerous to the Peace of the Community, yet
through judging them Erroneous and False, they conceive them dangerous to the
Souls of Men. As there is a vast difference betwixt Tolerating a Religion, and
approving the Religion that is Tolerated; so what a Government does not
approve, but barely permits and suffers, may be brought under Restrictions as
to time, place and number of those professing it, that shall assemble in one
Meeting; which it were an Undecency to extend to those of the justified and
established way. Now whatsoever Restrictions or Regulations are enacted, and
ordained by the Legislative Authority, in reference to Religions or Religious
Assemblies, they are not to be stopped, disabled or suspended, but by the same
Authority that enacted and ordained them. The King says very truly, That
Conscience ought not to be constrained, nor People forced in matters of mere
Religion: But it does not from thence follow, (unless by the Logic of
Whitehall) that without the concurrence of a Parliament, he should suspend and
dispense with the Laws, and by a pretended Prerogative, relieve any from what
they are Obnoxious unto by the Statutes of the Realm. His saying that the
forcing People in matters of Religion, spoils Trade, depopulates Countries,
discourageth Strangers, and answers not the End of bringing all to an
Uniformity, for which it is employed; would do well in a Speech to the Houses
of Parliament, to persuade them to Repeal some certain Laws; or might do well
to determine his Majesty to assent to such Bills as a Parliament may prepare
and offer, for relieving Persons in matters of Conscience; but does not serve
for what it is alleged, nor can it warrant his suspending the Laws by his
single Authority. And by the way, I know when these very Arguments were not
only despised by his Majesty, and rediculed by those who took their Cue from
Court, and had Wit to do it, as by the present Bishop of Oxford, in a very
ill-natured Book, called Ecclesiastical Polity; but when the daring to have
mentioned them, would have provoked the then Duke of York's Indignation, and
have exposed the Party that did it, to Discountenance and Disgrace. The
Question is not, what is convenient to be done in some measure and degree, and
in reference to those whose Religion does not oblige them to destroy all that
differ from them, when they have opportunity for it; but the Point in debate
is, who has the legal Power of doing it, and of fixing its Bounds and Limits.
It was never pretended that the King ought to be shut out from a Share in
Suspending and Repealing Laws; but that the sole Right of doing it belongs to
him, is what cannot be allowed, without changing the Constitution, and placing
the whole Legislative Authority in His Majesty. And as it is an Usurpation in
the King to challenge it, and a Treachery in English Subjects to acknowledge
it; so the Inconveniences that this or that Party are in the mean time exposed
unto, through the Laws remaining in Force, are rather to be endured, than that
a Power of giving Ease and Relief (farther than by Connivance) should be
confessed to reside in any one, in whom the Laws of the Community have not
placed it. It Is better to undergo Hardships under the Execution of unjust Laws;
than be released from our Troubles, by a Power Usurped over all Laws. For by
the one, the Measures of Government, as well as the Rights and Privileges of a
Nation, are destroyed; whereas by the other, only a part of the People are
Afflicted and unduly dealt with. While we are governed by Laws, tho several of
them may be Injust and Inconvenient, yet we are under a Security as to all
other things which those Laws have not made liable; but when we fall under an
illimited Prerogative and Absolute Power, we have no longer a Title unto, or a
hedge about any thing, but all lies open to the Lust and Pleasure of him, in
whom we have owned that Power to be seated. A Liberty is what Dissenters have a
Right to Claim, and which the Legislative Authority is bound by the Rules of
Justice and Duty, as well as by Principles of Wisdom and Discretion to grant.
And I am sorry, that while they stood so fair to obtain it in a Legal and
Parliamentary way, any of them by acknowledging a Right in another to give it,
and that in a manner so Subversive of the Authority of Parliaments, should have
rendered themselves unworthy to receive it from them, to whom the Power of
Bestowing it does belong. Not but that a Toleration will be always due to their
Principles, but I know not whether the particular Men of those Principles, who
have, by their Addresses, betrayed the Kingdom, may not come to be judged to
have forfeited all Share in it, for their Crime committed against the
Constitution, and the whole Politic Society. Nor is there any thing more Just
and Equal, than that they who surrender and give away the Rights both of
Legislators and Subjects; should lose all Grace and Favor from the former, and
all Portion among the latter.

And how much soever some Protestant Dissenters, may please themselves with the
Liberty, that at present they enjoy in the virtue of the two Royal Papers; yet
this may serve to moderate them in their Transports of Gladness, that they have
no solid Security for the Continuance of it. For should a Parliament null and
make void the Declaration for Liberty, and impeach the Judges for declaring a
Power vested in the King to suspend so many Laws, and for forbearing upon the
King's Mandat to execute them; the Freedom that the Dissenters possess, would
immediately vanish, and have much the same Destiny that the Liberty had, which
was granted unto them by the Declaration of Indulgence, Anno 1672. Or should
the Parliament be willing to grant Ease and Indulgence to all Protestants, by a
Bill prepared for Repealing of all the Laws formerly made against them, and
should only be desirous to preserve in force the Laws relating to the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and the Statutes which enjoin the Tests, of whose
Execution we never more wanted the Benefit, in order to our Preservation from
Popery, and which an English Parliament cannot be supposed willing to part
with, at a time when our Lives, Estates and Religion, are so visibly threatened
to be swallowed up, and destroyed by the Papists: In that case we may
confidently believe, that the King, instead either of Assenting to such a Bill
for separate Favor to Protestants, or persevering in his Compassion and
Kindness of continuing the Suspension of the Laws against Dissenters, he would
from an inveterate Enmity, as well as from a new contracted Resentment, be
stirred up and enraged to the putting the Laws in Execution with greater Rigor
and Severity than has been seen or felt heretofore. And all that the
Addressers would then reap by the Declaration, would be to undergo the furious
Effects of Brutal Rage in their Persecutors, and to be unpitied by the Kingdom,
and unlamented by their fellow Protestants. Or should his Majesty, in favor to
his good Catholics, resolve against the Meeting of a Parliament, or to Adjourn
and Prorogue them whenever he shall find, that instead of confirming what he
has done, they shall make null his Declaration, vote his pretended Prerogative
Illegal and Arbitrary, and fall upon those Mercenary and Perjured Villains, who
have allowed him a Power transcendent to Law; yet even upon that Supposal,
which is the best that can be made, to support Men's hopes in the continuance of
the present Liberty, the Protestant Dissenters would have but slender Security;
all the Tenure they have for the Duration of their Freedom, being only
Precarious, and depending merely upon the King's Word and Promise, which there
is small ground to rely upon. Nor can He be true to them, without being false
to his Religion, which not only gives Him leave to break his Faith with
Heretics, but obliges Him to it, and to destroy them to boot, and that both
under the pain of Damnation, and of forfeiting his Crown and losing his
Dominions. And how far the Promise and Royal Word of a Catholic Monarch is to
be trusted unto, and depended upon, we have a modern Proof and Evidence in the
Behavior of Louis de Grand toward his Reformed Subjects, not only in Repealing
the many Edicts made and confirmed by himself, as well as his Ancestors, for
the free Exercise of their Religion; but in the Methods he has always
observed, namely to promise them protection in the profession of their Faith,
and practice of their Worship, when he was most steadfastly resolved to subvert
their Religion, and was about making some fresh advance, and taking some new
step for its Extirpation. Thus when he had firmly purposed, not to suffer a
Minister to continue a year in the Kingdom, he at the same time published an
Edict, requiring Ministers, to serve but three Years in one Place, and not to
return to the Church where they had first Officiated, till after the expiration
of twenty Years. In the same manner, when he had resolved, to Repeal the Edict
of Nantes, and had given injunction for the Draught, by which it was to be
done, he at the same season, gave the Protestants all assurances of Protection,
and of the said Edicts being kept Inviolable. To which may be added, that
shameful and detestable Chicanery, in passing his Sacred and Royal Word, that
no violence should be offered any for their Religion, tho at that very moment,
the Dragoons were upon their March; with orders of exercising all manner of
Cruelties und Barbarities, upon them. So that his Majesty of Great Britain,
has a Pattern lately sent him, and that by the Illustrious Monarch, whom he so
much admires, and whom he makes it his Ambition, and Glory, to imitate. Nor are
we without proofs already, how insignificant the King's Promises are, (except
to delude) and what little confidence ought to be put in them. The disabling
and suspending the 13th. Statute of his late Parliament in Scotland, wherein
the Test was Confirmed, and his departing from all his Promises Registered in
his Letter, as well as from those contained in the Speech made by the Lord
Commissioner, pursuant to the Instructions which he had undoubtedly received,
together with his having forgotten and receded from all his Promises made to
the Church of England, both when Duke of York, and since he came to the Crown,
are undeniable evidences, that his Royal Word, is no more Sacred, nor Binding,
than that of some other Monarchs; and that whosoever of the Protestants shall
be so foolish, as to rely upon it, will find themselves as certainly
disappointed, and deceived, as they of the Reformed Religion elsewhere, have
been. And while they of the Established way, find so small security by the
Laws, which the King is bound by his Coronation Oath, to observe; the
Dissenters cannot expect very much, from a naked Promise, which as it has not
a solemn Oath to enforce it, so it is both Illegal in the making, and contrary
to the principles of his Religion to keep. Nor is it unworthy of observation,
that he has not only departed from his Promises made to the Church of England,
but that we are told, in a late Popish Pamphlet, Entitled A New Test of the
Church of England's Loyalty, Published (as it self says) by Authority, that
they were all conditional, (to wit, by virtue of some Mental Reservation in his
Majesty's Breast) and that the Conformable Clergy having failed in performing
the Conditions, upon which they were made; the King, is absolved, and
discharged, from all Obligation, of observing them. The Church of England (says
he) must give his Majesty leave not to nourish a Snake in his Bosom, but rather
to withdraw his Royal Protection, which was promised, upon the account of her
constant fidelity. Which as it is a plain threatening of all the Legal Clergy,
and a denunciation of the unjust and hard measure, they are to look for; so it
shakes the Foundation, upon which all credit unto, and reliance upon, his
Majesty's Word, can be any ways placed. For tho Threatenings may have tacit
Reserves, because the right of executing them, resides in the Threatner; yet
Promises are incapable of all latent conditions, because every Promise vests a
Right in the Promisee, and that in the virtue of the words in which it is made.
But it is the less to be wondered at, if his Majesty fly to Equivocations and
Mental Reserves, being both under the conduct of that Order, and a Member of
the Society, that first taught and practiced this treacherous piece of
Chicanery. However it may inform the Dissenters, that if they be not able to
answer the End, for which they are depended upon; or be not willing in the
manner and degree, that is expected; or if it be not for the Interest of the
Catholic Cause, to have them indulged; in all these cases, and many more, the
King may be pronounced, acquitted, and discharged from all the Promises, he
has given them, as having been merely stipulatory, and conditional. And as he
will be sure then, finem facere ferendae alienae personae, to lay aside the
disguise that he has now put on; so if they would reflect either upon his
temper, or upon his Religion, they might now know, haud gratuitam in tanta
superbia comitatem, that a person of his pride would not stoop to such
Flattery, (as his Letter to Mr. Alsop expresses) but in order to some design.
But what need other proof of the fallaciousness of the two Royal Papers, and
that no Protestants can reasonably depend upon the Royal Word, there laid to
pledge for the continuation of their Liberty; but to look into these too Papers
themselves, where we shall meet expressions, that may both detract from our
belief of his Majesty's sincerity, and awaken us to a just jealousy, that the
Liberty, and Toleration, granted by them, are intended to be of no long
standing and duration. For while he is pleased to tell us, that the granting
his Subjects the free use of their Religion for the time to come, is an
addition to the perfect Enjoyment of their Property, which has never been
invaded by His Majesty since his coming to the Crown: He does in effect say,
that His Fidelity, Truth and Integrity, in what he grants, in reference to
Religion, is to be measured, and judged, by the Verity that is in what He rells
us, as to the never having Invaded our Property. And that I may Borrow an
Expression from Mr. Alsop, and to no less Person than to the King himself,
namely, That tho we pretend to no refined Intellectuals, nor presume to
Philosophise upon Mysteries of Government, yet we make some pretense to the
Sense of Feeling, and whatever our Dullness be, can discern, between what is
exacted of us according to Law, and what we are robbed of by an Exerclse of
Arbitrary Power For not to insist upon the violent Seizure of Men's Goods, by
Officers, as well as Soldiers, in all parts of England, which looks like an
Invasion upon the Properties of the Subject; nor to dwell upon his keeping an
Army on foot in time of Peace, against the Authority, as well as without the
Countenance of Law, which our Ancestors would have styled an Invasion upon the
whole Property of the Kingdom; I would fain know, by what Name we are to call
his Levying the Customs, and the Additional Excise, before they were granted
unto him by the Parliament, all the legal Establishment of them upon the
Nation, having been only, during the late King's Life, till the Settlement of
them upon the Crown was again renewed by Statute. It were also worth his
Majesty's telling us, what Titles are due to the Suspending the Vice Chancellor
of Cambridge a Beneficio, and the turning the President of Magdalen's in Oxford
out of his Headship, and the Suspending Dr. Fairfax from his Fellowship, if
there be not an Invasion upon our Property; seeing every part of this is
against all the known Laws of the Kingdom, and has been done by no legal
Court, but by a Set of Mercenary Villains, armed with an Arbitrary Commission,
and who do as Arbitrarily exercise it. And as the End unto which that
Inquisition-Court was instituted, was to rob us of our Rights and Privileges at
the mere Pleasure of the King; so the very Institution of it, is an Invasion
both upon all our Laws, and upon the whole Property of the Nation, and is one
of the highest Exercises of Despotical Power, that it is possible for the most
Absolute and unlimited Monarch to exert. Among all the Rights reserved unto the
Subjects by the Rules of the Constitution, and whereof they are secured by many
repeated Laws and Statutes, there are none that have been hitherto less
disputed, and in reference to which, our Kings have been farther from claiming
any Power and Authority, than those of levying Money without the Grant as well
as the Consent of Parliament, and of Absolving and Discharging Debtors from
paying their Creditors, and of Acquitting them from being Sued and Imprisoned
in case of Non-payment; and yet in Defiance of all Law, and to the Subverting
the Rights of the People, and the most essential Privilege and Jurisdiction of
Parliaments, and to a plain changing the ancient legal Constitution into an
Absolute and Despotical Governing Power, the King (they say) is assuming to
himself an Authority, both of imposing a Tax of 5 l. per Annum upon every
Hackney Coach, and of Releasing and Discharging all Debtors, of whom their
Creditors cannot claim and demand above 10 l. Sterling; which as they will be
signal Invasions upon Property, and leading Cases for the raising Money in what
other Instances he pleases, by a Hampton Court or a Whitehall Edict, without
standing in need of a Parliament, or being obliged to a Dependence upon their
Grant, for all Taxes to be levied upon the Subjects, as his Predecesso^s have
heretofore been; so they may serve fully to instruct us what little Security
either the Dissenters have, as to being long in the Possession of their present
Liberty, or Protestants in general of having a Freedom continued unto them of
professing the Reformed Religion, if we have nothing more to rely upon for
preventing our being abridged and denied the Liberty of our Religion, than we
have had for preserving our Property from being Invaded and broken in upon. We
may subjoyn to the Clause already mentioned, that other Expression, which
occurs in the foresaid Declaration, viz. That as he freely gives them leave to
meet and serve God after their own way and manner, so they are to take special
care, that nothing be preached or taught amongst them, which may any ways tend
to alienate the Hearts of the People from his Majesty, or his Government: Which
words as they import the Price at which the Dissenters are to purchase their
Freedom (whereof we shall discourse anon) so they admirably serve to furnish
the King with a Pretense of retrenching their Liberty whenever he pleases,
nor are they inferted there for any other End, but that upon a Plea, of their
having abused his Gracious Indulgence, to the alienating the Hearts of his
People from him, they may be adjudged to have thereby deservedly forfeited,
both all the Benefits of it, and of his Royal Favor. Nor is it possible for a
Protestant Minister to preach one Sermon, which a Popish Critic, or a Romish
Bigot, may not easily misconstrue and pervert, to be an Alienation of the
Peoples Hearts, from the King's Person and Government. And of which as we have
heard many late Examples in France, so it will be easy to draw them into
President, and to imitate them in England. I might add the Observation of the
ingenious Author of the Reflections on his Majesty's Proclamation for a
Toleration in Scotland: Namely, that whereas the King gives all Assurance to
his Scots Subjects, that he will not use invincible Necessity against any Man,
on the account of his Persuasion, he does thereby leave himself at a liberty of
Dragooning, Torturing, Burning, and doing the utmost Violences, all these being
vincible to a Person of an ardent love to God, and of a lively Faith in Jesus
Christ; and which accordingly many Thousands have been triumphantly Victorious
over. Nor is it likely that this new and uncouth Phrase of not using an
invinsible Necessity, would have found room in a Paper of that nature, if it
had not been first to conceal some malicious and mischievous Design, and then
to justify the Consistency of its Execution, with what is promised in the
Proclamation. Moreover, were there that Security intended by these two Royal
Papers, that Protestant Dissenters might safely rely upon; or did the King act
with that Sincerity which he would delude his People into a Belief of, there
would then be a greater Agreeableness than there is, betwixt the Declaration
for Liberty of Conscience in England, and the Proclamation for a Toleration in
Scotland. The Principle his Majesty pretends to act from, That Conscience ought
not to be constrained, and that none ought to be persecuted for mere matters of
Religion, would oblige him to act uniformly, and with an equal extention of
Favor to all his Subjects, whose Principles are the same, and against whom he
has no Exception, but in matters merely Religious. Whereas the Disparity of
Grace, Kindness and Freedom, that is exercised in the Declaration, from that
which is exerted in the Proclamation, plainly shows, that the whole is but a
Trick of State, and done in Subserviency to an end, which it is not yet
seasonable to discover and avow. For his circumscribing the Toleration in
Scotland, to such Presbyterians as he styles Moderate, is not only a taking it
off from its true Bottom, matters of mere Religion, and a founding it upon an
internal Quality of the mind, that is not dissernable, but it implies the
reserving a Liberty to himself, of withdrawing the Benefits of it from all
Scots Dissenters, through fastening upon them a contrary Character, whenever
it shall be seasonable to revive Persecution. And even as it is now exerted to
these Moderate ones, it is attended with Restrictions, that his Indulgence in
England is no ways clogged with. All that the Declaration requires from those
that are indulged, is, That their Assemblies be peaceably, openly and publicly
held, that all Persons be freely admitted to them, that they signify and make
known to some Justice of the Peace, what places they set apart for these uses;
and that nothing be preached or taught amongst them, which may any ways tend to
alionate the Hearts of the People from the King or his Government: Whereas the
Proclamation not only restrains the Meetings of the Scots Presbyterians to
private Houses, without allowing them either to build Meeting Houses, or to use
Outhouses or Barns; but it prohibits the hearing any Ministers, save such as
shall be willing to swear, That they shall, to the utmost of their power,
assist, defend and maintain the King, in the Exercise of his Absolute Power
against all deadly. Nor is it difficult to assign the reason of the Deformity
that appears in his Majesty's present Actings toward his Dissenting Protestant
Subjects in those two Kingdoms. For should there be no Restriction upon the
Toleration in Scotland, to hinder the greatest part of the Presbyterians from
taking the Advantage of it; the Bishops and Conforming Clergy would be
immediately forsaken by the generality if not all the People, and so an issue
would not only be put to the Division among Protestants in that Kingdom, but
they would become an united, and thereupon a formidable Body against Popery,
which it is not for the Interest of the Roman Catholics to suffer, or give way
unto. Whereas the more unbounded the Liberty is, that is granted to Dissenters
in England, the more are our Divisions not only kept up, but increased and
promoted, (especially through this Freedom's arriving with them in an illegal
way, without both the Authority of the Legislative Power, and the Approbation
of a great part of the People) it being infallibly certain, that there is a
vast number of all Ranks and Conditions, who do prefer the abiding in the
Communion of the Church of England, before the joining in Fellowship with those
of the Separate and Dissenting Societies. Upon the whole, this different Method
of proceeding toward Dissenting Protestants in Matters mere Religious, shows
that all this Indulgence and Toleration, is a Trick to serve a present juncture
of Affairs, and to advance a Popish and Arbitrary Design; and that the
Dissenters have no Security for the continuance of their Liberty, but that when
the Court and Jesuitick end is compassed and obtained, there is another course
to be steered toward them; and instead of their hearing any longer of Liberty
and Toleration, they are to be told, that it is the Interest of the Government,
and the Safety and Honor of his Majesty, to have but one Religion in his
Dominions, and that all must be Members of the Catholic Church, and this
because the King will have it so, which is the Argument that has been made use
of in the making so many Converts in France. They who now suffer themselves to
be deluded into a Confidence in the Royal Word, will not only come to
understand what Mr. Coleman meant, in his telling Pere de la Chaise, that the
Catholics in England had a great work upon their hand, being about the
Extirpation of that Heresy, which has borne sway so long in this Northern
part of the World; but they will also see and feel, how much of the Designs of
Rome was represented in that passage of the Pope's Nuncio's Letter dated at
Brussels Aug. 9. 1674. wherein upon the Confidence which they placed in the
Duke of York, which is not lessened since he came to the Crown, he takes the
confidence to write, That they hoped speedily to see the total and final Ruin
of the Protestant Party.

And as Protestant Dissenters have no Security by the Declaration and
Proclamation for the continuance of their Liberty, so they that have, by way of
Thanksgiving, Addressed to the King for those Royal Papers, have not only acted
very ill, in reference both to the Laws and Rights of the Kingdoms, and of
Religion in general, but they have carried very unwisely in relation to their
own Interest, and the avoiding the Effects of that Resentment, which most Men
are justly possessed with, upon the illegal Emission of these Arbitrary and
Prerogative Papers. I shall not enter upon any long Discourse, concerning this
new Practice of Addressing in general, it having been done elsewhere some years
ago, but I shall only briefly intimate, that it was never in fashion, unless
either under a weak and precarious Government, or under one that took illegal
Courses, and pursued a different Interest from that of the People and
Community. As he who Rules according to the standing Laws of a Country, over
which he is set, needs not seek for an Approbation of his Actions from a part
of his Subjects; the Legality of his Proceedings being the best Justification
of him that Governs, and giving the truest Satisfaction to them that are Ruled;
so he who enjoys the love of all his People, needs not look for Promises of
being assisted, stood by and defended, by any one Party or Faction among them;
there being none from whom he can have the least Apprehension of Opposition and
Danger. It was the want of a legal Title in Oliver Cromwell, and his Son
Richard, to the Government, that first begot this Device of Addressing, and
brought it upon the Stage in these British Nations; and it was the Arbitrary
Procedures of the late King, as it is of his present Majesty, and their acting
upon a distinct Bottom from that of the Three Kingdoms, that has revived, and
does continue it. Nor is there any thing that has rendered those two Princes
more contemptible abroad, and proclaimed them Weaker at home, than their
recurring unto, and soliciting, the Flatteries and Aid of the Mercenary,
Timorous, Servile, and for low and personal Ends biased part of their
Subjects, and thereby telling the World, that neither the Generality nor the
most Honorable of their People, have been united in their Interest, nor
Approvers of the Counsels that have been taken and pursued. And if any thing
did ever cast a Dishonor upon the English Nation, it has been that loathsome
Flattery, and slavish Sycophancy, wherewith the Addressers, both now, and for
some years past, have stuffed their Applications to the two Royal Brothers. The
Throne that is sustained and upheld by the Pillars of Law and Justice, needs
not to hew out unto its self other Supporters, nor lean upon the crooked and
weak Stilts of the insignificant, and for the most part deceitful, as well as
bribed Vows, of a sort of Men, who will be as ready upon the least disgust, to
cry Crucify to morrow, as they were for being gratified, may be in their
Lusts, Humors and Revenges, and at the best in some separate Concern, to cry
Hosanna to day. I shall decline prosecuting what concerns the Honor or Dishonor
of him, to whom the Addresses are made, or how Politic, or Impolitick, the
Countenancing and Encouraging them is, and shall apply my self to this new Set
of Addressers, and endeavor to show how Foolish as well as Criminally they have
acted. Nor is it an Argument either of their Prudence or Honesty, or of their
acting with any Consistency to themselves, that having so severely inveighed
against the Addresses that were in fashion a few years ago, and having fastened
all the Imputations and Reproaches upon those that were Accessory to them,
which that Rank of Addressers could be supposed to have deserved; they now
espouse the Practice which they had condemned, and in reference to as Arbitrary
and unjustifiable an Act of His present Majesty, as the most illegal one the
late King was guilty of, or the worst Exercise or Prerogative, for which any
heretofore either commended, or promised to stand by him. For tho the Matter
and Subject of the Arbitrary Act of him now upon the Throne, be not, as to
every Branch of it, so publicly Scandalous, as some of the Arbitrary
Proceedings of the late King were, (as relating to a Favor which Mankind has a
just Claim unto) yet it is every way as Illegal, being in reference to a
Privilege, which his Majesty has no Authority to grant and bestow. And were it
not that there are many Dissenters, who preserve themselves Innocent at this
Juncture, and upon whom the Temptation that is administered makes no Impression;
the World would have just ground to say, that the Fanatics are not governed by
Principles, but that the Measures they walk by, are what conduces to their
private and personal Benefit, or what lies in a Tendency to their Loss and
Prejudice. And that it was not the late King's Usurping and exerting an
Arbitrary and illegal Power that offended them, but that they were not the
Objects in whose Favor it was exercised. It Is also an Aggravation of their
Folly; as well as their Offense, that they should revive a Practice which the
Nation was grown ashamed of, and whereof they who had been guilty begun to
repent, through having seen that all the former Declarations, Assurances and
Promises of the Royal Brothers, which tempted to Applications of that kind,
were but so many Juggles, peculiar to the late Breed of the Family, for the
deceiving of Mankind; and that never one of them was performed and made good.
But the Transgression, as well as the Imprudence, of the present Addressers, is
yet the greater, and they are the more Criminal and Inexcusable before God and
Men, in that they might have enjoyed all the Benefits of the King's
Declaration, without acknowledging the Justice of the Authority by which it was
granted, or making themselves the Scorn and Contempt of all that are truly
Honest and Wise, by their servile Adulations, and their Gratulatory Scriblers,
unbecoming Englishmen and Protestants. They had no more to do, but to continue
their Meetings, as they had sometimes heretofore used to do, without taking
notice that the present Suspension of the Laws, made their Assembling together
more safe, and freed them from Apprehensions of Fines and Imprisonments. Nor
could the King, how much soever displeased with such a Conduct, have at this
time ventured upon the expressing Displeasure against them; seeing as that
would have been both to have proclaimed his Hypocrisy, in saying, That
Conscience ought not to be constrained, nor People forced in matters of mere
Religion, and a discovering the villainous Design, in Subserviency to which the
Declaration had been emitted; so it were not possible for him, after what he
has published, to single out the Dissenters from amongst other Protestants;
and to fall upon all, before Matters are more ripe for it, might be a means of
the Abortion of all his Popish Projections, and of saving the whole Reformed
Interest in Great Britain. Neither would the Church of England-men have envied
their Tranquillity, or have blamed their Carriage; but would have been glad that
their Brethren had been eased from Oppressions, and themselves delivered from
the grievous and dishonorable Task of prosecuting them, which they had formerly
been forced unto by Court-Injunctions and Commands. And as they would have, by
a Conduct of this Nature, had all the Freedom which they now enjoy, without the
Guilt and Reproach which they have derived upon themselves by Addressing; so
such a Carriage would have wonderfully recommended them to the Favor of a true
English Parliament, which tho it would see cause to condemn the King's Usurping
a Power of Suspending the Laws, and to make void his Declaration; yet in
gratitude to Dissenters for such a Behavior, as well as in Pity and Compassion
to them as English Protestants, such a Parliament would not fail to do all it
could, to give them relief in a legal way. Whereas if any thing Inflame and
Exasperate the Nation, to revive their Sufferings, it will arise from a
Resentment of the unworthy and treacherous Carriage of so many of them, in this
critical and dangerous Juncture. But the Terms, which through their Addressing,
they have owned the receiving their Liberty and Indulgence upon, does in a
peculiar manner enhance their Guilt against God and their Country, and
strangely adds to the Disgust and Anger, which Lovers of Religion, and the Laws
of the Nation have conceived against them. For it is not only upon the
Acknowledgment of a Prerogative in the King over the Laws, that they have
received, and now hold their Liberty; but it is upon the Condition, That
nothing be preached or taught amongst them, that may any ways tend to alienate
the Hearts of the People from his Majesty's Person and Government. He must be
of an Understanding very near allied unto, and approaching to that of an
Irishman, who does not know what the Court-Sense of that Clause is; and that
his Majesty thereby intends, that they are not to preach against Popery, nor to
set forth the Doctrines of the Romish Church in Terms that may prevent the
Peoples being infected by them, much less in Colors that may render them Hated
and Abhorred. To accuse the King's Religion of Idolatry, or to affirm the
Church of Rome to be the Apocalyptick Babylon, and to represent the Articles of
the Tridentine Faith, as Faithful Ministers of Christ ought to do, would be
accounted an alienating the Hearts of their Hearers from the King and his
Government; which as they are in the foresaid Clauses required not to do, so
they have, by their Addressing, confessed the Justice of the Terms, and have
undertaken to hold their Liberty by that Tenor. And to give them their due,
they have been very Faithful hitherto, in conforming to what the King Exacts,
and in observing what themselves have assented to the Equity of. For
notwithstanding all the Danger from Popery, that the Nation is exposed unto,
and all the Hazard that the Souls of Men are in, of being poisoned with Romish
Principles; yet instead of Preaching or Writing against any of the Doctrines of
the Church of Rome, they have agreed among themselves, and with such of their
Congregations as approve their Procedure, not so much as to mention them; but
to leave the Province of defending our Religion, and of detecting the Falsehood
of Papal Tenets, to the Pastors and Gentlemen of the Church of England. And
being asked (as I know some of them that have been) why they do not preach
against Antichrist, and confute the Papal Dectrines; they very gravely reply,
that by preaching Christ, they preach against Antichrist; and that by Teaching
the Gospel, they refute Popery; which is such a piece of fraudulent and guilful
Subterfuge, that I want words to express the knavery and criminalness of it.
What a reserve and change have I lived to see in England, from what I beheld a
few years ago. It was but the other day that the Conformable Clergy were
represented by some of the Dissenters, not only as favorers of Popery, but as
endeavoring to hale it in upon us by all the methods and ways that lay within
their circle; and yet now the whole defense of the Reformed Religion, must be
entirely devolved into their hands; and when all the sluices are pulled up, that
had been made to hinder Popery from overflowing the Nation, they must be left
alone to stem the Inundation, and prevent the Deluge. They among the Fanatics
that boasted to be the most avowed and irreconcilable Enemies of the Church of
Rome, are not only become altogether silent, when they see the Kingdom pestered
with a swarm of busy and seducing Emissaries; but are both turned Advocates
for that Arbitrary Paper, whereby we are surrendered as a Prey unto them, and do
make it their business to detract from the reputation, and discourage the
Labors of the National Ministers, who with a zeal becoming their Office, and a
Learning which deserves to be admired, have set themselves in opposition to
that croaking fry, and have done enough by their excellent and unimitable
Writings, to save People from being deluded, or perverted, if either
unanswerable confutations of Popery, or demonstrative defenses of the Articles
and Doctrines of the Reformed Religion can have any efficacy upon the minds of
Men. Among other fulsom Flatteries adorning a Speech made to his Majesty by an
Addressing Dissenter, I find this hypocritical and shameful Adulation, namely,
that if there sholud remain any seeds of Disloyalty in any of his Subjects, the
transcendent goodness exerted in his Declaration, would mortify and kill them.
To which he might have added with more truth, that the same transcendent
goodness had almost destroyed all the seeds of their honesty, and mortified
their care and concernment for the Interest of Jesus Christ, and for the
Reformed Religion. Their old strain of zealous Preaching against the Idolatry
of Rome, and concerning the coming out of Babylon my People, are grown out of
fashion with them in England, and are only reserved, and laid by, to recommend
them to the kindness and acceptance of Foreign Protestants, when their
occasions and conveniences draw them over to Amsterdam. Whoever comes into
their Assemblies, would think, for any thing that he there hears delivered from
their Pulpits, that She which was the Whore of Babylon a few years ago, were
now become a Chaste Spouse; and that what were heretofore the damnable Doctrines
of Popery, were of late turned Innocent and Harmless Opinions. The King's
Declaration would seem to have brought some of them to a melius inquirendum;
and as they are already arrived to believe a Roman Catholic the best King,
that they may in a little time come to esteem Papists for the best Christians.
The keeping back nothing that is profitable to save such as hear them, and the
declaring the whole Counsel of God; that are the terms upon which they received
their Commission from Jesus Christ, and wherein they have Paul's practice and
example for a pattern, would seem to be things under the Power of the Royal
Prerogative, and that the King may supercede them by the same Authority, by
which he dispenses with the Penal Statutes. Which as it is very agreeable unto,
and imported in his Majesty's Claim of being obeyed without reserve; so the
owning this Absolute power with that annex of challenged obedience, does acquit
them from all obligations to the Laws of Christ, when they are found to
interfer with what is required by the King. But whether God's Power or the
King's, be superior, and which of the two can cassate the others Laws, and
whose wrath is most terrible, the Judgment day will be able and sure to
instruct them, if all means in this World prove insufficient for it. The
Addressers know upon what conditions they hold their Liberty; and they have not
only observed how several of the National Clergy have been treated for
preaching against Popery, but they have heard how diverse of the Reformed
Ministers in France (before the general Suppression) were dealt with for
speaking against their Monarch's Religion, and therefore they must be pardoned,
if they carry so as not to provoke his Majesty, tho in the mean time through
their Silence, they both betray the Cause of their Lord and Master, and are
unfaithful to the Souls of those, of whom they have taken upon them the
Spiritual guidance. As for the Papers themselves, that are styled by the name
of Addresses, I shall not meddle with them, being as to the greatest part of
them, fitter to be exposed and ridiculed, either for their dullness and
pedantry, or for the Adulation and Sycophancy with which they are fulsomly
stuffed, than to deserve any serious consideration, or to merit Reflections that
may prove instrumentive to Mankind. Only as that Address wherein his Majesty is
thanked for his restoring God to his Empire over Conscience, deserves a rebuke
for its Blasphemy; so that other which commends him for promising, to force the
Parliament to ratify his Declaration, (tho by the way all he says is, that he
does not doubt of their concurrence, which yet his ill success upon the
Closetting of so many Members, and his since Dissolving that Parliament, shows
that there was some cause for the doubting of it) I say that other Address
merits a severe Censure for its insolency against the legislative Authority:
And the Authors of it ought to be punished for their crime committed against
the Liberty and Freedom of the two Houses, and for encouraging the King to
invade and subvert their most essential and fundamental Privileges, and without
which, they can neither be a Council, Judicature, nor Lawgivers.

After all, I hope the Nation will be so ingenuous, as not to impute the
miscarriages of some of the Nonconformists to the whole Party, much less to
ascribe them to the Principles of Dissenters. For as the points wherein they
differ from the Church of England, are purely of another nature, and which have
no relation to Politics, so the influence that they are adapted to have upon
men as members of Civil Societies, is to make them in a special manner
regardful of the Rights and Franchises of the Community. But if some neither
understand the tendency of their own Principles, nor are true and faithful unto
them; these things are the personal faults of those men, and are to be
attributed to their ignorance, or to their dishonesty; nor are their Carriages
to be counted the effects of their religious Tenets, much less are others of
the Party to be involved under the reproach and guilt of their imprudent and
ill conduct. Which there is the more cause to acknowledge, because tho the
Church of England has all the reason of the world, to decline Addressing, in
that all her legal Foundation, as well as Security, is shaken by the
Declaration; yet there are some of her Dignitaries and Clergy, as well as
diverse of the Members of her Communion, who upon motives of Ambition,
Covetousness, Fear, or Courtship, have enrolled themselves into the List of
Addressers; and under pretense of giving thanks to the King for his promise of
protecting the Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy, and all other of the Church of
England in the free exercise of their Religion, as by Law established; have cut
the throat of their Mother, at whose breasts they have sucked till they are
grown fat, both by acknowledging the usurped Prerogative upon which the King
assumes the Right and Authority of emitting the Declaration; and by exchanging
the legal standing and security of their Church, into that precarious one of
the Royal Word, which they fly unto as the bottom of her Subsistence, and trust
to as the wall of her defense. And as most of the Members of the Separate
Societies, are free from all accession to Addressing, and the few that
concurred were merely drawn in by the wheedle and importunity of their
Preachers; so they who are of the chiefest Character, and greatest reputation
for Wisdom and Learning among the Ministers, have preserved themselves from all
folly and treachery of that kind. The Apostle tells us, that not many wise, not
many noble are called; which as it is verified in many of the Dissenting
Addressers, so it may serve for some kind of Apology for their low and
sneaking, as well as for their indiscreet and imprudent behavior in this
matter. And it is the more venial in some of them, as being not only a means of
ingratiating themselves (as they fancy) with the King, who heretofore had no
very good opinion of them; but as being both an easy and compendious method of
Attoning for Offenses against the Crown, of which they were strongly suspected;
and a cheap and expenceless way of purchasing the pardon of their Relations,
that had stood actually accused of High Treason. Nor is it to be doubted, but
that as the King will retain very little favor and mercy for Fanatics when
once he has served his Ends upon them; so they will preserve as little kindness
for the Papists, if they can but obtain relief in a legal way. And as there is
not a People in the Kingdom, that will be more loyal to Princes; while they
continue so to govern as that Fealty by the Laws of God or Man remains due to
them; so there are none, of what Principles or Communion soever, upon whom the
Kingdom in its whole interest come to lie at stake, may more assuredly and with
greater confidence depend, than upon the generality of Dissenting Protestants,
and especially upon those that are not of the Pastoral Order. The severities
that the Dissenters lay under before, and their deliverance from Oppression and
Disturbance now, seconded with the Kings expectation and demands of
thanksgiving Addresses, were strong Temptations upon men void of generosity and
greatness of spirit, and who are withal of no great political Wisdom, nor of
prospect into the Consequences of Councils and Tricks of State, to act as
illegally in their thanks, as his Majesty had done in his bounty. So that
whatsoever Animadversion they may deserve, should they be proceeded against
according to their demerit; yet it is to be hoped, that both they, and the
Addressers of the former stamp, may all find room in an Act of Indemnity, and
that the Mercy of the Nation toward them, will triumph over and get the better
of its Justice. As it would argue a strange and judicial infatuation, should
they proceed to farther excesses, and think to escape the Punishment due to one
Crime, by committing and taking sanctuary in another, through improving their
Complements into actions of Treachery; so all their hope of Pardon, as well as
of Lenity and Moderation, from a true Protestant and rightly constituted
Authority, depends upon their conduct and behavior henceforward, and their not
suffering themselves to be hurried and deluded into a cooperation with the
Court, for the obtaining of a Popish Parliament. All their endeavors of that
kind would but more clearly detect, and manifest, their treachery to Religion
and the Kingdom, it not being in their power to out-vote the honest English
part of the People, so as to help the King to such a House of Commons as he
desires; and were it possible, that through their assistance, in conjunction with
violence and tricks, used in Elections and Returns by the Court, such a House
of Commons might be obtained, as would be serviceable to Arbitrary and Papal
Ends; yet neither the King nor they would be the nearer the compassing what is
aimed at; it being demonstrable that the majority of the House of Lords, are
never to be wrought over to justify this illegal Declaration; or to grant the
King a Power of Suspending Laws at his pleasure; nor to give their Assent to a
Bill for Repealing the Test Acts, and the Statutes that enjoin and require the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. And if they should be so far left of God,
and betrayed by those among themselves whom the Court has gained, as to become
guilty of so enormous an act of folly and villainy; and should the Election of
the next Parliament, be the happy juncture they wait for, and the improving
their interest, as well as the giving their own Votes for the Choice of Papists
into the House of Commons, be what they mean by an essential proof of their
Loyalty and of the sincerity of their humble Addresses, See Mr. Alsop's Speech
to the King.
and that whereby they intend to demonstrate, that the greatest thing they have
promised, is the least thing they will perform for his Majesty's service and
satisfaction: as in that case, they will deserve to forfeit all hopes of being
forgiven; so it would be an infidelity to God and Men, and a cruelty to our
selves and our Posterity, not to abandon them as betrayers of Religion; expunge
them out of the Roll of Protestants; strip them of all that wherein free
Subjects have a Legal Right; and not to condemn them to the utmost punishments,
which the Laws of the Kingdom adjudge the worst of Traitors and Malefactors
unto. There are some, who through hating of them, do wish their miscarrying and
offending to so unpardonable a degree, that they may hereafter be furnished
with an advantage, both of ruining them and the whole Dissenting Party for
their sakes. But as the love that I bear unto them, and the persuasion and
belief I have of the truth of their Religious Principles, do make me exceeding
sollicitous to have them kept and prevented from being hurried and transported
into so fatal and criminal a behavior; so I desire to make no other excuse for
my plain dealing toward them, but that of Solomon, who tells us, that faithful
are the wounds of a friend, while the kisses of an Enemy are deceitful; and
that he who rebukes a man, shall find more favor afterward than he who
flattereth with the tongue.

POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the foregoing Sheets went to the Press, and while they were Printing
off, there is come to my hands a new Proclamation dated at Windsor the 28th. of
June 1687, for granting further Liberty in Scotland, and which was published
there by an Order of the Privy Council of that Kingdom bearing date at
Edinburgh the 5. of July. This Superfoetation of one Proclamation after another
in reference to the same thing, is so apportioned and parallel to the late
French method of emitting Edicts in relation to those of the Reformed Religion
in that Kingdom, that they seem to proceed out of one mint, to be calculated
for the same end, and to be designed for the compassing and obtaining the like
effects. For as soon as an Alarm was taken at the publishing of some
unreasonable and rigorous Edict, there used often to follow another of a milder
strain, which was pretended to be either for the moderating the severities of
the former, or to remove and rectify what they were pleased to call
misconstructions unduly put upon it; but the true end whereof was only to
stifle and extinguish the Jealousies and Apprehensions that the other had
begotten and excited, and which had they not been calmed and allayed might have
awakened the Protestants there to provide for their safety by a timely
withdrawing into other Countries, if they had not been provoked to generous
endeavors of preventing the final suppression of their Religion, and for
obviating the ruin which that Court had projected against them and was hastening
to involve them under. Nor does my suspicion of his Majesty's pursuing the same
design against Protestants, which the great Louis glories to have accomplished,
proceed merely from that conjunction of Counsels that all the world observes
between Whitehall and Versailles; nor merely from the Kings abandoning his
Nephew and Son-in-law the Prince of Orange, and not so much as interposing to
obtain satisfaction to be given him, for the many Injuries, Damages, Spoils,
and Robberies, as well as Affronts done him by that haughty Monarch; when one
vigorous Application could not fail to effect it; nor yet merely from that
agreeableness in their proceedures, through the King of England's imitating
that Foreign Potentate, and making the whole course that has been taken in
France, the Pattern of all his actings in Great Britain; but I am much
confirmed in my fears and jealousies, by remembering a passage in one of Mr.
Coleman's Letters, who as he very well knew what the then Duke of York, had
been for many years engaged in, against our Religion and Civil Lberties, and
under what Vows and Promises he was, not to desist from prosecuting what had
been resolved upon and undertaken; so he had the confidence to say, that his
Master's design, and that of the King of France, was one and the same; and that
this was no less, as he farther informs us, than the extirpating the Northern
Heresy. Had the King of England acted with sincerity from that noble
Principle, that Conscience ought not to be constrained, nor People forced in
matters of mere Religion, as he would delude weak and easy People to believe;
and had not all his Arbitrary and illegal proceedings in granting Liberty to
Dissenting Protestants been to subserve and promote other Designs, which it is
not yet seasonable and convenient to discover and avow, he would have then
acted with that conformity to the Principle he professes to be under the
Influence and Government of, and with that consonancy and harmonious
agreeableness, in all the degrees of Indulgence, vouchsafed to those of the
Reformed Religion in England and Scotland, that differ from them of the
Established way, that there would have needed no second Proclamation apporting
new measures of Liberty, and favor to Scots Dissenters, seeing they would have
had it granted them at first in the same latitude and illimitedness, that it
was bestowed upon the English Nonconformists. But when Princes carry on and
pursue mischievous designs, under the palliations of Religion, public good,
and the Right of Mankind; it comes often to pass through adapting their methods
to what they mean and intend, and not to what they pretend and give out, that
their crafty projections by being not sufficiently accommodated to their
purposes, prove ineffectual to the compassing what was aimed at; and this
forces them to a new Game of Falsehood and Subtilety, but still under the old
varnish and gloss, and obliges them to have recourse to means that may be more
proportioned than the former were, for their reaching the End that they
ubtimately drive at. Thence it is that those Rulers, who are engaged in the
Prosecution of wicked and unjustifiable Designs, are necessitated not only to
apply themselves to opposite Methods toward different Parties, and those such
as must be suited and apportioned to their discrepant Interest, without the
accommodating of which they can neither hope to mould them to that tame and
servile Compliance, nor work them up to that active and vigorous abetting of
their malicious and crafty Projections as is necessary for the rendering them
Successful; but they are forced to vary their Proceedings toward one and the
same Party, and that as well when the ways they have acted in toward them are
found inadequate to the end unto which they were calculated, as when the
mischief hid under them comes to be too soon discovered. This weak and
short-sighted People fancy to arise from an uncertainty in Princes Counsels,
and from their being at no Consistency with themselves; but they who can
penetrate into Affairs, and that do consider things more narrowly, can easily
discern, that all this Variation, Diversity, and shifting of Methods in Rulers
Actings, proceed from other Causes, and that it is their Stability and
Perseverance in an illegal and wicked Design, that compels them to those
crooked and contrary Courses, either for the gaining the unwary and ill-applied
Concurrence of their Subject, to the hastening Distress and Desolation upon
themselves, or for the throwing them into that Lethargy, and under that
Supineness, as may hinder them from all Endeavors of obstructing and diverting
the Evils, that their Governors are seeking to bring upon them. Nor is there a
more certain Indication, of a Princes being engaged in a Design, contrary to
the good and happiness of the Society, over which he is set; than his betaking
himself to illegal ways, upon pretense of promoting the ease and benefit of his
People; or according as he finds his Subjects to differ in their particular
Interests, his applying himself to them in Methods, whereof the contrariety of
the one to the other, renders them the more proper and adapted to ensnare the
divided Factions, through accosting each of them with something that they are
severally fond of. Legal means are always sufficient to the pursuing and
compassing legal Ends; and whatsoever is for the general good of the Community,
may either be obtained by Courses, wherein the Generality find their united
Interest and common Felicity, or else by Application to a Parliament freely and
duly chosen, which as it represents the whole Politic Society, so there may be
expected most Compassion and Tenderness, as well as Wisdom and Prudence, for
redressing the Grievances, easing the Troubles, and providing for the Benefit
and Safety of all that are wrapped up in and represented by them. And as every
Prince, who sincerely seeks and pursues the Advantage of his People, will so
adjust and attemper all his Actions toward them, that his whole Carriage shall
be uniform, and all the Exercises of his Governing Power, meet in the benefit
of the Community, as so many lines from a circumference uniting in their
Center; so there needs no other proof that these two or three late Actions of
His Majesty, which a foolish sort of men are apt to interpret for favors, and
to account them effects of Compassion and Kindness; are but to conceal his
Malice, and to subserve as well as cover some fatal and pernicious Design that
he is carrying on against his Protestant Subjects, than that while he is
gratifying a few of them in one thing, he is at the same time robbing all of
them of many; and that while he is indulging the Dissenters with a freedom from
the penal Laws for matters of Religion, he is invading the Properties, and
subverting the Civil Rights of the three Nations, and changing the whole
Constitution of the Government. He that strips us of what belongs unto us as we
are English and Scots men; cannot mean honestly in the favors he pretends to
vouchsafe us as we are Christians; nor can he that is endeavoring to enslave
our Persons, and to subject our Estates to his arbitrary Lust and Pleasure,
intend any thing else by this kindness granted to Fanatics in matters of
Religion, than the dividing them from the rest of the People, in what concerns
the Civil Interest and external happiness of the Community, and to render them
an engaged Faction to assist and abet him in enthralling the Kingdoms.
Whosoever considers the whole Tenor of His Majesty's other Actings, in
proroguing and dissolving Parliaments, when he finds them uncompliant with his
Popish and Despotical Ends; his keeping on foot a formidable Army against all
the Laws of the Land, and upon no other intention, but to maintain him in his
Usurpations over our Rights, and to awe us into a tame and servile submission
to his Prerogative Will; his filling all places of Judicature with weak as well
as treacherous persons, who instead of administering Justice may be the
Instruments of Tyranny; his robbing men of their Estates, by judicial forms,
and under pretense that nullum tempus occurrit Regi, after they have been
quietly enjoyed by the Subjects for several hundred years; his advancing none
to Civil or Military Employs, but whom he has some confidence in, as to the
finding them ready to execute his despotical Injunctions; and his esteeming no
persons loyal and faithful to himself, save those who are willing to betray
their Country, and be Rebels and Traitors against the Legal Constitution: I say
whosoever considers all this, and a great deal more of the same hue and
complexion, cannot imagine (unless he be under a judicial blindness and a
strange infatuation) that any thing arriving from the King, tho it may be a
matter wherein they may find their present ease and advantage should proceed
from compassion and good will to his Protestant Subjects, but that it must be
only in order to promote a distinct interest from that of his People, and for
the better and more easy accomplishing of some wicked and unjustifiable
Design. And tho his Majesty would have us believe, that the reasons moving him
to the emission of this second Proclamation, were the sinistruous
Interpretations which either have, or may be made, of some Restrictions in his
former; yet it is not difficult, even without being of his Privy Council, to
assign a truer motive, and a more real and effectual cause of it. For as that
of the 12 of February came forth attended with so many limitations, not easy
to be digested by men of Wisdom or Honesty, lest if it had been more unconfined
and extensive, and should have opened a door for all Scots Dissenters to have
gone in and taken the benefit of it, the generality of Protestants in that
Kingdom, abstracting from the Bishops, Curates, and a few others, should have
joined in the separate Interest, and thereby have become an united Body against
Popery; but upon finding that hardly any would purchase their freedom from the
penal Laws at so dear a rate, as to do things so unbecoming Men and Christians,
as the conforming to the Terms therein prescribed obliged them unto; and that
as they of the National Communion were alarmed and disgusted, so fesh or none
of the Dissenting Fellowships were pleased; and that both were not only angry
at the many illegal favors, and threatening advantages, bestowed upon the
Papists, but were grown so sensible of the Design carrying on against the
Protestant Religion, and the Liberties and Privileges of the Subject, that tho
they could not renounce their respective Tenets in the matters wherein they
differed, yet they were willing to stifle their Heats and Animosities, and to
give that Encouragement, Aid and Assistance to one another, as was necessary
for their common safety: upon these Cnnsiderations, his Majesty (if he would
have spoken fincerely) ought to have said, that he had published this new
Proclamation, in order to hinder Scots Protestants from uniting, for their
mutual defense against Turkish Tyranny, and Romish Idolatry, in hopes thereby
to continue and exasperate their undue and passionate heats, and to steep them
not only in divided and opposite interests, but to make them contribute to the
suppressing and ruining each other, or at least to look on unconcernedly, till
he have ripened his Designs against them both, and be prepared for extirpating
the Reformed Religion, and for subverting the Fundamental as well as Statute
Laws, and for bringing such to the Stake and Gibbet as shall have the Integrity
to assert the one, or the Courage to plead for the other. And yet in his last
Proclamation, wherein he grants a more illimited Freedom, than in the former,
and promises to protect all in the Exercise of Their Protestant Religion, as
he Disdainfully and Ignominiously calls it; there is a Clause that may
discourage all honest Men from owning their Liberty to the Authority that
bestows it, and from which it is derived and conveyed to them. For not being
satisfied to superstruct his pretended Right, of Suspending, Stopping and
Disabling Laws, upon his Sovereign Authority and Prerogative Royal, but as
knowing that these give no such Pre-eminence and Jurisdiction over the Laws of
the Kingdom, he is pleased to challenge unto himself an Absolute Power, as the
Source and Spring of that Exorbitant and Paramount Claim, which he therein
exercises and exerts. And forasmuch as Absolute Power imports his Majesty's
being loose and free from all Ties and Restraints, either by Fundamental
Stipulations, or superadded Laws; it is very Natural to observe, that he allows
the Government under which we were born, and to which we were Sworn and stood
Bound, to be hereby subverted and changed, and that thereupon we are not only
Absolved and Acquitted, from the Allegiance and Fealty, we were formerly under
to his Majesty, but are indispensably obliged by the Ties and Engagements that
are upon us, of maintaining and defending the Constitution and Government, to
apply our selves to the use of all Means and Endeavors against him, as an Enemy
of the People, and a Subverter of the legal Government, wherein all the
Interest he had, or could lawfully claim, was an Official Trust, and not an
Absolute Power or a Desp^tical Dominion, the first whereof he has deposed and
abdicated himself from, by challenging and usurping the latter. And should any
Scots Dissenter, either in his entrance upon the Liberty granted by this
Proclamation, or in Addressing by way of Thankfulness for it, take the least
notice of this Freedoms flowing from the King, which cannot be done, without
Recognizing this Absolute Power in his Majesty as the Fountain of it, he is to
be looked upon as the worst of Traitors, and deserves to be proceeded against
both for his Accession unto, and justifying the Subversion of the Laws,
Liberties and Government of his Country, and for betraying the Rights of all
Freeborn Men. For those few Reflections in the foregoing Sheets, which this
new Proclamation may not only seem to render useless, and frustrate the end
whereunto they were intended, but may make the publishing any Animadversions
upon that, which the King, by departing from, does himself Censure and Condemn,
be esteemed both a failure in Ingenuity and Candor, and a want of regard to
those Measures of Justice, which ought to be observed toward all Men, and more
especially toward Crowned Heads: I shall only say, that as the Proclamation
arrived with me too late, to hinder and prevent the Communication of them to
the Public; so I have this farther to add, in Justification of their being
published, that it will thereby appear, that what his Majesty styles
Sinistruous Interpretations made of some Restrictions mentioned in his former,
are no other than the just, natural, genuine, and obvious Constructions, which
they lie open unto, and are capable of, and which a Man cannot avoid fastening
upon them, without renouncing all Sense and Reason. And while the King
continues to disparage and asperse all sober and judicious Reflections upon
that Royal Paper, by charging upon them the unjust and reproachful Character of
Sinistruous Interpretations; it is necessary as well as equal, that the whole
matter should be plainly and impartially represented to the World, and that the
Dection be remitted and left to the understanding and unbiased part of Mankind
who are the Calumniators and Slanderers, they who accuse the Proclamation of
importing such Principles, Consequences, and Tendencies, or he and his
Ministers, who think they have avoided and answered the Imputations fastened
upon it, when they have loaded them with hard and uncivil Terms. For tho he be
pleased to assume to himself an Absolute Power, which all are bound to obey
without reserve; and in the virtue of which he Suspends, Stops and Disables
what Laws he pleases, yet I do not know but that his Intellectuals being of
the Size of other Men's, and that seeing neither his Sovereignty, nor
Catholicalness, have vested in him an Inerrability, why we may not enter our
Plea and Demur to the Dictates of his Judgment, tho we know not how to
withstand the Efforts of his Power. Nor shall I subjoyn any more, save that
whereas his Majesty declares so many Laws to be disabled to all Intents and
Purposes, he ought to have remembered, that beside other Intents and Purposes,
that several of them may hereafter serve unto, as the Papists may possibly come
to have Experience; there is one thing, in reference to which he cannot, even
at present, hinder and prevent their Usefulness and Efficacy, and that is, not
only their raising and exciting all just Resentments in the minds of freeborn
and generous Men, for his challenging a Power to Suspend and Cassate them, but
their remaining and continuing Monuments of his Infidelity to the Trust reposed
in him, of his departure from all Promises made at and since his entering upon
the Government, and of his Invading and Subverting all the Rules of the
Constitution.

The Declaration of His Highness William Henry (by the Grace of God) Prince of
Orange, etc. Of the Reasons inducing him to appear in Arms in the Kingdom of
England, for Preserving of the Protestant Religion, and for Restoring the Laws
and Liberties of England, Scotland and Ireland.
IT is both certain and evident to all Men, that the Public Peace and
Happiness of any State or Kingdom cannot be preserved, where the Laws,
Liberties and Customs established, by the Lawful Authority in it, are openly
Transgressed and Annulled: More especially where the Alteration of Religion is
endeavored, and that a Religion which is contrary to Law is endeavored to be
introduced: Upon which those who are most immediately concerned in it, are
Indispensably bound to endeavor to preserve and maintain the established Laws,
Liberties and Customs; and above all, the Religion and Worship of God that is
established among them: And to take such an effectual Care, that the
Inhabitants of the said State or Kingdom, may neither be deprived of their
Religion, nor of their Civil Rights. Which is so much the more Necessary,
because the Greatness and Security both of Kings, Royal Families, and of all
such as are in Authority, as well as the Happiness of their Subjects and
People, depend, in a most especial manner, upon the exact Observation and
Maintenance of these their Laws, Liberties and Customs.

Upon these grounds it is, that we cannot any longer forbear to Declare, That
to our great Regret, we see that those Counselors, who have now the chief
Credit with the King, have overturned the Religion, Laws and Liberties of those
Realms; and subjected them in all things relating to their Consciences,
Liberties and Properties, to Arbitrary Government; and that not only by Secret
and Indirect ways, but in an open and undisguised manner.

Those Evil Counselors for the advancing and coloring this with some
plausible Pretexts, did invent and set on foot, the King's Dispensing Power, by
virtue of which, they pretend, that according to Law, he can Suspend and
Dispense with the Execution of the Laws, that have been enacted by the
Authority of the King and Parliament, for the Security and Happiness of the
Subject, and so have rendered those Laws of no Effect: Tho there is nothing
more certain, than that as no Laws can be made, but by the joint Concurrence of
King and Parliament, so likewise Laws so enacted, which secure the Public
Peace and Safety of the Nation, and the Lives and Liberties of every Subject in
it, cannot be Repealed or Suspended, but by the same Authority.

For tho the King may pardon the Punishment that a Transgressor has incurred,
and to which he is condemned, as in the cases of Treason or Felony; yet it
cannot be with any color of Reason inferred from thence, that the King can
entirely Suspend the Execution of those Laws, relating to Treason or Felony:
Unless it is pretended that he is clothed with a Despotick and Arbitrary
Power, and that the Lives, Liberties, Honors and Estates of the Subjects,
depend wholly on his good Will and Pleasure, and are entirely subject to him;
which must infallibly follow, on the King's having a Power to Suspend the
Execution of Laws, and to Dispense with them.

Those Evil Counselors, in order to the giving some Credit to this strange and
execrable Maxim, have so conducted the Matter, that they have obtained a
Sentence from the Judges, declaring that this Dispensing Power is a Right
belonging to the Crown; as if it were in the Power of the Twelve Judges, to
offer up the Laws, Rights and Liberties of the whole Nation to the King, to be
disposed of by him Arbitrarily, and at his Pleasure, and expressly contrary to
Laws enacted, for the Security of the Subjects. In order to the obtaining this
Judgment, those Evil Counselors did beforehand examine secretly the Opinion
of the Judges, and procured such of them, as could not in Conscience concur in
so pernicious a Sentence, to be turned out, and others to be substituted in
their rooms, till by the Changes which were made in the Courts of Judicature,
they at last obtained that Judgment. And they have raised some to those Trusts,
who make open Profession of the Popish Religion, tho those are by Law rendered
Incapable of all such Employments.

It is also Manifest and Notorious, that as his Majesty was, upon his coming to
the Crown, received and acknowledged by all the Subjects of England, Scotland
and Ireland, as their King, without the least Opposition, tho he made then open
Profession of the Popish Religion, so he did then Promise, and Solemnly Swear,
at his Coronation, that he would maintain his Subjects in the Free Enjoyment of
their Laws, Rights and Liberties, and in particular, that he would maintain the
Church of England as it was established by Law: It is likewise certain, that
there have been at diverse and sundry times, several Laws enacted for the
Preservation of those Rights and Liberties, and of the Protestant Religion: And
among other Securities, it has been enacted, That all Persons whatsoever, that
are advanced to any Ecclesiastical Dignity, or to bear Office in either
University; as likewise all others, that should be put in any Employment, Civil
or Military, should declare that they were not Papists, but were of the
Protestant Religion, and that by their taking of the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, and the Test; yet these Evil Counselors have, in effect, annulled
and abolished all those Laws, both with relation to Ecclesiastical and Civil
Employments.

In order to Ecclesiastical Dignities and Offices, they have not only without
any color of Law, but against most express Laws to the contrary, set up a
Commission of a certain number of Persons, to whom they have committed the
Cognizance and Direction of all Ecclesiastical Matters; in the which Commission
there has been and still is, one of His Majesty's Ministers of State, who makes
now public Profession of the Popish Religion, and who at the time of his first
professing it, declared that for a great while before, he had believed that to
be the only true Religion. By all this the deplorable State to which the
Protestant Religion is reduced is apparent, since the Affairs of the Church of
England are now put into the Hands of Persons, who have accepted of a
Commission that is manifestly Illegal, and who have executed it contrary to all
Law; and that now one of their chief Members has abjured the Protestant
Religion, and declared himself a Papist, by which he is become incapable of
holding any Public Employment: The said Commissioners have hitherto given such
proof of their Submission to the Directions given them, that there is no reason
to doubt, but they will still continue to promote all such Designs as will be
most agreeable to them. And those Evil Counselors take care to raise none to
any Ecclesiastical Dignities, but Persons that have no Zeal for the Protestant
Religion, and that now hide their Unconcernedness for it, under the specious
Pretense of Moderation. The said Commissioners have Suspended the Bishop of
London, only because he refused to obey an Order that was sent him to Suspend a
Worthy Divine, without so much as citing him before him, to make his own
Defense, or observing the common Forms of Process. They have turned out a
President, chosen by the Fellows of Magdalen College, and afterward all the
Fellows of that College, without so much as citing them before any Court that
could take legal Cognizance of that Affair, or obtaining any Sentence against
them by a Competent Judge. And the only reason that was given for turning them
out, was their refusing to choose, for their President, a Person that was
recommended to them, by the Instigation of those Evil Counselors; tho the
Right of a Free Election belonged undoubtedly to them. But they were turned out
of their Freeholds, contrary to Law, and to that express provision in the Magna
Charta, That no Man shall loose Life or Goods, but by the Law of the Land. And
now these Evil Counselors have put the said College wholly into the Hands of
Papists, tho, as is abovesaid, they are incapable of all such Employments, both
by the Law of the Land, and the Statutes of the College. These Commissioners
have also cired before them all the Chancellors and Archdeacons of England,
requiring them to certify to them the Names of all such Clergymen as have
read the King's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, and of such as have not
read it; without considering that the reading of it was not enjoined the Clergy
by the Bishops, who are their Ordinaries. The Illegality and Incompetency of
the said Court of the Ecclesiastical Commissioners was so notoriously known,
and it did so evidently appear, that it tended to the Subversion of the
Protestant Religion, that the Most Reverend Father in God, William Archbishop
of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, seeing that it was
raised for no other end, but to oppress such Persons as were of eminent Virtue,
Learning and Piety, refused to sit or to concur in it.

And tho there are many express Laws against all Churches or Chapels, for the
Exercise of the Popish Religion, and also against all Monasteries and Convents,
and more particularly against the Order of the Jesuits, yet those Evil
Counselors have procured orders for the building of several Churches and
Chapels, for the Exercise of that Religion: They have also procured diverse
Monasteries to be erected, and in contempt of the Law, they have not only set
up several Colleges of Jesuits, in diverse places, for the corrupting of the
Youth, but have raised up one of the Order to be a Privy Counselor and a
Minister of State. By all which they do evidently show, that they are
restrained by no Rules or Law whatsoever; but that they have subjected the
Honors and Estates of the Subjects, and the established Religion to a Despotick
Power, and to Arbitrary Government; in all which they are served and seconded
by those Ecclesi^stical Commissioners.

They have also followed the same Methods with relation to Civil Affairs: For
they have procured orders to examine all Lords-Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants,
Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, and all others that were in any public
Employment, if they would concur with the King in the Repeal of the Test and
Penal Laws; and all such, whose Consciences did not suffer them to comply with
their Designs, were turned out, and others were put in their places, who they
believed would be more compliant to them, in their designs of defeating the
intent and Execution of those Laws, which had been made with so much Care and
Caution for the Security of the Protestant Religion. And in many of these
places they have put professed Papists, tho the Law has disabled them, and
warranted the Subjects not to have any regard to their Order.

They have also invaded the Privileges, and seized on the Charters of most of
those Towns that have a right to be represented by their Burgesses in
Parliament; and have procured Surrenders to be made of them, by which the
Magistrates in them have delivered up all their Rights and Privileges, to be
disposed of at the Pleasure of those Evil Counselors; who have thereupon
placed new Magistrates in those Towns, such as they can most entirely confide
in; and in many of them they have put Popish Magistrates, notwithstanding the
Incapacities under which the Law has put them.

And whereas no Nation whatsoever can subsist without the Administration of
good and impartial Justice, upon which Men Lives, Liberties, Honors and Estates
do depend; those Evil Counselors have subjected these to an Arbitrary and
Despotick Power: In the most important Affairs they have studied to discover
beforehand the Opinions of the Judges; and have turned out such, as they found
would not conform themselves to their Intentions; and have put others in their
places, of whom they were more assured, without having any regard to their
Abilities. And they have not stuck to raise even professed Papists to the
Courts of Judicature, notwithstanding their Incapacity by Law, and that no
regard is due to any Sentences flowing from them. They have carried this so
far, as to deprive such Judges, who in the common Administration of Justice,
show that they were governed by their Consciences, and not by the Directions
which the others gave them: By which it is apparent, that they design to render
themselves the absolute Masters of the Lives, Honors and Estates of the
Subjects, of what Rank or Dignity soever they may be; and that without having
any regard either to the Equity of the Cause, or to the Consciences of the
Judges, whom they will have to submit in all things to their own Will and
Pleasure; hoping by such ways to intimidate those other Judges, who are yet in
Employment, as also such others as they shall think fit to put in the rooms of
those whom they have turned out; and to make them see what they must look for,
if they should at any time act in the least contrary to their good liking; and
that no Failings of that kind are pardoned in any Persons whatsoever. A great
deal of Blood has been shed in many places of the Kingdom, by Judges governed
by those Evil Counselors, against all the Rules and Forms of Law; without so
much as suffering the Persons that were accused to plead in their own Defense.

They have also, by putting the Administration of Justice in the Hands of
Papists, brought all the Matters of Civil Justice into great Uncertainties;
with how much exactness and Justice soever that these Sentences may have been
given. For since the Laws of the Land do not only exclude Papists from all
places of Judicature, but have put them under an Incapacity, none are bound to
acknowledge or to obey their Judgments, and all Sentences given by them, are
null and void of themselves; so that all Persons who have been cast in Trials
before such Popish Judges, may justly look on their pretended Sentences, as
having no more Force than the Sentences of any private and unauthorised Person
whatsoever. So deplorable is the case of the Subjects, who are obliged to
answer to such Judges, that must in all things stick to the Rules which are set
them by those Evil Counselors, who as they raised them up to those
Employments, so can turn them out of them at pleasure, and who can never be
esteemed Lawful Judges; so that all their Sentences are in the Construction of
the Law, of no Force and Efficacy. They have likewise disposed of all Military
Employments in the same manner: For tho the Laws have not only excluded Papists
from all such Employments, but have in particular provided that they should be
disarmed; yet they in contempt of those Laws, have not only armed the Papists,
but have likewise raised them up to the greatest Military Trusts, both by Sea
and Land, and that Strangers as well as Natives, and Irish as well as English,
that so by these means they having rendered themselves Masters both of the
Affairs of the Church, of the Government of the Nation, and of the course of
Justice, and subjected them all to a Despotick and Arbitrary Power, they might
be in a capacity to maintain and execute their wicked Designs by the assistance
of the Army, and thereby to enslave the Nation.

The dismal Effects of this Subversion of the established Religion, Laws and
Liberties in England, appear more evidently to us, by what we see done in
Ireland; where the whole Government is put into the hands of Papists, and where
all the Protestant Inhabitants are under the daily Fears of what may be justly
apprehended from the Arbitrary Power which is set up there; which has made
great Numbers of them leave that Kingdom, and abandon their Estates in it,
remembering well that Cruel and Bloody Massacre which fell out in that Island
in the year 1641.

Those Evil Counselors have also prevailed with the King to declare in
Scotland, that he is clothed with Absolute Power, and that all the Subjects
are bound to obey him without Reserve; upon which he has assumed an Arbitrary
Power, both over the Religion and Laws of that Kingdom; from all which it is
apparent, what is to be looked for in England, as soon as Matters are duly
prepared for it.

Those great and insufferable Oppressions, and the open Contempt of all Law,
together with the Apprehensions of the said Consequences that must certainly
follow upon it, have put the Subjects under great and just Fears; and have made
them look after such lawful Remedies as are allowed of in all Nations; yet all
has been without effect. And those Evil Counselors have endeavored to make all
Men apprehend the loss of their Lives, Liberties, Honors and Estates, if they
should go about to preserve themselves from this Oppression by Petitions,
Representations, or other means authorized by Law. Thus did they proceed with
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other Bishops, who having offered a most
Humble Petition to the King, in Terms full of Respect, and not exceeding the
number limited by Law, in which they set forth in short, the Reasons for which
they could not obey that Order, which by the Instigation of those Evil
Counselors was sent them, requiring them to appoint their Clergy to read in
their Churches the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience; were sent to Prison,
and afterward brought to a Trial, as if they had been guilty of some enormous
Crime. They were not only obliged to defend themselves in that pursuit, but to
appear before professed Papists, who had not taken the Test, and by consequence
were Men whose Interest led them to condemn them; and the Judges that gave
their Opinion in their Favors, were thereupon turned out.

And yet it cannot be pretended that any Kings, how great soever their Power
has been, and how Arbitrary and Despotick soever they have been in the Exercise
of it, have ever reckoned it a Crime for their Subjects to come in all
Submission and Respect, and in a due Number, not exceeding the Limits of the
Law, and represent to them the Reasons that made it impossible for them to obey
their Orders. Those Evil Counselors have also treated a Peer of the Realm as a
Criminal, only because he said, that the Subjects were not bound to obey the
orders of a Popish Justice of Peace; tho it is evident, that they being by Law
rendered incapable of all such Trust, no regard is due to their orders: This
being the Security which the People have by the Law for their Lives, Liberties,
Honors and Estates, that they are not to be subjected to the Arbitrary
Proceedings of Papists, that are, contrary to Law, put into any Employments
Civil or Military.

Both we our selves, and our Dearest and most Entirely Beloved Consort, the
Princess, have endeavored to signify in Terms full of Respect to the King, the
just and deep Regret which all these Proceedings have given us; and in
Compliance with His Majesty's Desires signified to us, we declared both by word
of Mouth, to his Envoy, and in Writing, what our Thoughts were, touching the
Repealing of the Test and Penal Laws; which we did in such a manner, that we
hoped we had proposed an Expedient, by which the Peace of those Kingdoms, and a
happy Agreement among the Subjects, of all Persuasions, might have been
settled; but those Evil Counselors have put such ill Constructions on these
our good Intentions, that they have endeavored to alienate the King more and
more from us; as if we had designed to disturb the Quiet and Happiness of the
Kingdom.

The last and great Remedy for all those Evils, is The calling of a Parliament,
for securing the Nation against the Evil Practices of those wicked Counselors;
but this could not be yet compassed, nor can it be easily brought about. For
those Men apprehending, that a lawful Parliament being once assembled, they
would be brought to an account for all their open Violations of Law, and for
their Plots and Conspiracies against the Protestant Religion, and the Lives and
Liberties of the Subjects, they have endeavored, under the specious Pretense of
Liberty of Conscience, first to sow Divisions among Protestants, between those
of the Church of England, and the Dissenters: The design being laid to engage
Protestants, that are all equally concerned, to preserve themselves from Popish
Oppression, into mutual Quarrellings; that so by these, some Advantages might
be given to them to bring about their Designs; and that both in the Election of
the Members of Parliament, and afterward in the Parliament it self. For they
see well, that if all Protestants could enter into a mutual good Understanding
one with another, and concur together in the Preserving of their Religion, it
would not be possible for them to compass their wicked ends. They have also
required all Persons in the several Counties of England, that either were in
any Employment, or were in any considerable Esteem, to declare beforehand,
that they would concur in the Repeal of the Test and Penal Laws; and that they
would give their Voices in the Elections to Parliament, only for such as would
concur in it. Such as would not thus pre-ingage themselves, were turned out of
all Employments; and others who entered into those Engagements were put in
their places, many of them being Papists. And contrary to the Charters and
Privileges of those Boroughs, that have a Right to send Burgesses to
Parliament, they have ordered such Regulations to be made, as they thought fit
and necessary, for assuring themselves of all the Members that are to be chosen
by those Corporations; and by this means they hope to avoid that Punishment
which they have deserved; tho it is apparent, that all Acts made by Popish
Magistrates, are null and void of themselves; so that no Parliament can be
Lawful, for which the Elections and Returns are made by Popish Sheriffs and
Mayors of Towns; and therefore as long as the Authority and Magistracy is in
such Hands, it is not possible to have any Lawful Parliament. And tho according
to the Constitution of the English Government, and Immemorial Custom, all
Elections of Parliament Men ought to be made with an entire Liberty, without
any sort of Force, or the requiring the Electors to choose such Persons as shall
be named to them, and the Persons thus freely elected, ought to give their
Opinions freely, upon all Matters that are brought before them, having the good
of the Nation ever before their Eyes, and following in all things the Dictates
of their Conscience, yet now the People of England cannot expect a Remedy from
a Free Parliament, legally Called and Chosen. But they may perhaps see one
called, in which all Elections will be carried by Fraud or Force, and which
will be composed of such Persons, of whom those Evil Counselors hold
themselves well assured, in which all things will be carried on according to
their Direction and Interest, without any regard to the Good or Happiness of
the Nation. Which may appear evidently from this, that the same Persons tried
the Members of the last Parliament, to gain them to consent to the Repeal of
the Test and Penal Laws; and procured that Parliament to be dissolved, when
they found that they could not, neither by Promises nor Threatenings, prevail
with the Members to comply with their wicked Designs.

But to Crown all, there are great and violent Presumptions, inducing us to
believe, that those Evil Counselors, in order to the carrying on of their ill
Designs, and to the gaining to themselves the more time for the effecting of
them, for the encouraging of their Accomplices, and for the discouraging of all
Good Subjects, have published, that the Queen has brought forth a Son; tho
there have appeared both during the Queens Pretended Biggness, and in the
manner in which the Birth was managed, so many just and visible Grounds of
Suspicion, that not only we our selves, but all the good Subjects of those
Kingdoms, do vehemently suspect, that the Pretended Prince of Wales was not
born by the Queen. And it is notoriously known to all the World, that many both
doubted of the Queens Biggness, and of the Birth of the Child, and yet there
was not any one thing done to satisfy them, or to put an end to their Doubts.

And since our Dearest and most Entirely Beloved Consort, the Princess, and
likewise we our selves, have so great an Interest in this Matter, and such a
Right, as all the World knows, to the Succession to the Crown; since also the
English did in the Year 1672. when the States General of the United Provinces
were Invaded in a most unjust War, use their utmost Endeavors to put an end to
that War, and that in Opposition to those who were then in the Government; and
by their so doing, they run the Hazard of losing both the Favor of the Court,
and their Employments: And since the English Nation has ever testified a most
particular Affection and Esteem both to our Dearest Consort the Princess, and
to our selves, We cannot excuse our selves from espousing their Interests, in a
matter of such high Consequence, and from Contributing all that lies in us, for
the Maintaining both of the Protestant Religion, and of the Laws and Liberties
of those Kingdoms, and for the Securing to them the continual Enjoyment of all
their just Rights. To the doing of which, we are most earnestly solicited by a
great many Lords, both Spiritual and Temporal, and by many Gentlemen and other
Subjects of all Ranks.

Therefore it is, that we have thought fit to go over to England, and to carry
over with us a Force, sufficient, by the Blessing of God, to defend us from the
Violence of those Evil Counselors. And we being desirous that our Intentions
in this may be rightly understood, have for this end prepared this Declaration,
in which as we have hitherto given a true Account of the Reasons inducing us to
it, So we now think fit to Declare, that this our Expedition, is intended for
no other Design, but to have a free and lawful Parliament assembled as soon as
is possible; and that in order to this, all the late Charters, by which the
Elections of Burgesses are limited contrary to the Ancient Custom, shall be
considered as null and of no force: And likewise all Magistrates who have been
Injustly turned out, shall forthwith resume their former Employments, as well
as all the Boroughs of England shall return again to their Ancient
Prescriptions and Charters: And more particularly that the Ancient Charter of
the Great and Famous City of London shall again be in Force: And that the Writs
for the Members of Parliament shall be addressed to the proper Officers
according to Law and Custom. That also none be suffered to choose or to be
chosen Members of Parliament, but such as are qualified by Law: And that the
Members of Parliament, being thus lawfully chosen, they shall meet and sit in
full Freedom, that so the Two Houses may concur in the preparing of such Laws,
as they upon full and free Debate shall judge necessary and convenient, both
for the confirming and executing the Law concerning the Test, and such other
Laws as are necessary for the Security and Maintenance of the Protestant
Religion; as likewise for making such Laws as may establish a good Agreement
between the Church of England, and all Protestant Dissenters, as also for the
covering and securing of all such, who will live Peaceable under the Government
as becomes good Subjects, from all Persecution, upon the account of their
Religion, even Papists themselves not excepted; and for the doing of all other
things, which the Two Houses of Parliament shall find necessary for the Peace,
Honor and Safety of the Nation; so that there may be no more danger of the
Nations falling at any time hereafter, under Arbitrary Government. To this
Parliament we will also refer the Enquiry into the Birth of the Pretended
Prince of Wales, and of all things relating to it, and to the Right of
Succession.

And we, for our part, will concur in every thing that may procure the Peace
and Happiness of the Nation, which a Free and Lawful Parliament shall
determine; Since we have nothing before our Eyes, in this our Undertaking, but
the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, the covering of all Men from
Persecution for their Consciences, and the Securing to the whole Nation the
free Enjoyment of all their Laws, Rights and Liberties, under a Just and Legal
Government.

This is the design that we have proposed to our selves, in appearing upon this
occasion in Arms: In the Conduct of which, we will keep the Forces under our
Command, under all the Strictness of Martial Discipline; and take a special
Care, that the People of the Countries, through which we must march, shall not
suffer by their means: And as soon as the State of the Nation will admit of it,
we promise that we will send back all those Foreign Forces that we have brought
along with us.

We do therefore hope, that all People will judge rightly of us, and approve of
these our Proceedings: But we chiefly rely on the Blessing of God, for the
Success of this our Undertaking, in which we place our whole and only
Confidence.

We do, in the last place, invite and require all Persons whatsoever, all the
Peers of the Realm, both Spiritual and Temporal, all Lords-Lieutenants,
Deputy Lieutenants, and all Gentlemen, Citizens, and other Commons of all
Ranks, to come and assist us, in order to the Executing of this our Design,
against all such as shall endeavor to oppose us; that so we may prevent all
those Miseries which must needs follow, upon the Nations being kept under
Arbitrary Government and Slavery: And that all the Violences and Disorders,
which have overturned the whole Constitution of the English Government, may be
fully redressed, in a Free and Legal Parliament.

And we do likewise resolve, that as soon as the Nations are brought to a State
of Quiet, we will take care that a Parliament shall be called in Scotland, for
the restoring the Ancient Constitution of that Kingdom, and for bringing the
Matters of Religion to such a Settlement, that the People may live Easy and
Happy, and for putting an end to all the Injust Violences that have been in a
course of so many Years committed there.

We will also study to bring the Kingdom of Ireland to such a State, that the
Settlement there may be Religiously observed; and that the Protestant and
British Interest there may be secured. And we will endeavor, by all possible
means, to procure such an Establishment in all the Three Kingdoms, that they
may all live in a Happy Union and Correspondence together; and that the
Protestant Religion, and the Peace, Honor and Happiness of those Nations, may
be established upon Lasting Foundations.

Given under our Hand and Seal, at our Court at the Hague, the Tenth day of
October, in the Year 1688. William Henry, Prince of Orange.
By His Highness's Special Command, C. HUYGENS.

His Highness's Additional Declaration.
AFter we had prepared and printed this our Declaration, we have understood,
that the Subverters of the Religion and Laws of those Kingdoms, hearing of our
Preparations to assist the People against them, have begun to retract some of
the Arbitrary and Despotick Powers that they had assumed, and to vacate some of
their Injust Judgments and Decrees. The Sense of their Guilt, and the distrust
of their Force, have induced them to offer to the City of London, some seeming
Relief from their Great Oppressions; hoping thereby to quiet the People, and to
divert them from demanding a Secure Re-establishment of their Religion and Laws
under the shelter of our Arms. They do also give out, that we intend to Conquer
and Enslave the Nation: And therefore it is, that we have thought fit to add a
few words to our Declaration.

We are Confident, that no Persons can have such hard thought of us, as to
imagine that we have any other Design in this Undertaking, than to procure a
Settlement of the Religion, and of the Liberties and Properties of the Subjects
upon so sure a Foundation, that there may be no danger of the Nations relapsing
into the like Miseries at any time hereafter. And as the Forces that we have
brought along with us, are utterly disproportioned to that wicked Design of
Conquering the Nation, if we were capable of intending it, so the Great Numbers
of the Principal Nobility and Gentry, that are Men of Eminent Quality and
Estates, and Persons of known Integrity and Zeal both for the Religion and
Government of England; many of them being also distinguished by their constant
Fidelity to the Crown, who do both accompany us in this Expedition, and have
earnestly solicited us to it, will cover us from all such Malicious
Insinuations. For it is not to be imagined, that either those who have invited
us, or those that are already come to assist us, can join in a wicked Attempt
of Conquest, to make void their own lawful Titles to their Honors, Estates and
Interests. We are also confident, that all Men see how little weight there is
to be laid, on all Promises and Engagements that can be now made; since there
has been so little regard had in time past, to the most solemn Promises. And as
that imperfect Redress that is now offered, is a plain Confession of those
Violations of the Government that we have set forth; so the Defectiveness of it
is no less Apparent, for they lay down nothing which they may not take up at
Pleasure; and they reserve entire, and not so much as mentioned, their Claims
and Pretenses to an Arbitrary and Despotick Power; which has been the Root of
all their Oppression, and of the total Subversion of the Government. And it is
plain, that there can be no Redress nor Remedy offered but in Parliament; by a
Declaration of the Rights of the Subjects that have been invaded; and not by
any Pretended Acts of Grace, to which the Extremity of their Affairs has driven
them. Therefore it is that we have thought fit to declare, That we will refer
all to a Free Assembly of the Nation, in a Lawful Parliament.

Given under our Hand and Seal, at our Court in the Hague, the 24th. day of
October, in the Year of our Lord 1688. William Henry, Prince of Orange.
By His Highness's Special Command, G. HUYGENS.

By his Highness William Henry, Prince of Orange, A Declaration. Printed in the
Year, 1688.
WE have in the course of our whole Life, and more particularly by the apparent
Hazards both by Sea and Land, to which we have so lately exposed our Person,
given to the whole World so high and undoubted Proofs of our fervent Zeal for
the Protestant Religion, that we are fully confident no true Englishman and
good Protestant can entertain the least Suspicion of our firm Resolution,
rather to spend our dearest Blood and perish in the Attempt, than not carry on
the Blessed and Glorious Design which by the Favor of Heaven we have so
successfully begun, to Rescue England, Scotland, and Ireland from Slavery and
Popery, and in a Free Parliament to Establish the Religion, the Laws, and the
Liberties of those Kingdoms upon such a sure and lasting Foundation, that it
shall not be in the Power of any Prince for the future to introduce Popery and
Tyranny.

Toward the more easy Compassing this great Design, we have not been hitherto
deceived in the just Expectation we had of the Concurrence of the Nobility,
Gentry, and People of England with Us, for the Security of their Religion, the
Restitution of the Laws, and the Re-establishment of their Liberties and
Properties: Great Numbers of all Ranks and Qualities having joined themselves
to us; and others at great Distances from Us, have taken up Arms and Declared
for Us. And, which we cannot but particularly mention, in that Army which was
Raised to be the Instrument of Slavery and Popery, may (by the special
Providence of God) both Officers and common Soldiers have been touched with
such a feeling sense of Religion and Honor, and of true Affection for their
Native Country, that they have already deserted the Illegal Service they were
engaged in, and have come over to Us, and have given us full Assurance from the
rest of the Army, That they will certainly follow this Example, as soon as with
our Army we shall approach near enough to receive them, without the Hazard of
being prevented and betrayed. To which end, and that we may the sooner execute
this just and necessary Design we are engaged in for the public Safety and
Deliverance of these Nations, We are resolved, with all possible Diligence, to
advance forward, that a Free Parliament may be forthwith called, and such
Preliminaries adjusted with the King, and all things first settled upon such a
foot according to Law, as may give Us and the whole Nation just Reason to
believe the King is disposed to make such necessary Condescensions on his part,
as will give entire Satisfaction and Security to all, and make both King and
People once more happy.

And that we may effect all this, in the way most agreeable to our Desires, if
it be possible, without the Effusion of any Blood, except of those execrable
Criminals who have justly forfeited their Lives for betraying the Religion and
Subverting the Laws of their Native Country, We do think fit to declare, That
as we will offer no Violence to any but in our own necessary Defense; so we
will not suffer any Injury to be done to the Person even of a Papist, provided
he be found in such Place, and in such Condition and Circumstances as the Laws
require. So we are resolved and do declare that all Papists, who shall be found
in open Arms, or with Arms in their Houses, or about their Persons, or in any
Office or Employment Civil or Military upon any Pretense whatsoever contrary to
the known Laws of the Land, shall be treated by Us and our Forces not as
Soldiers and Gentlemen, but as Robbers, Free-Booters and Banditti; they shall
be incapable of Quarter, and entirely delivered up to the Discretion of our
Soldiers. And We do further declare that all Persons who shall be found any
ways aiding and assisting to them, or shall march under their Command, or shall
join with or submit to them in the Discharge or Execution of their Illegal
Commissions or Authority, shall be looked upon as Partakers of their Crimes,
Enemies to the Laws, and to their Country.

And whereas we are certainly informed that great Numbers of armed Papists have
of late resorted to London and Westminster, and parts adjacent, where they
remain, as we have reason to suspect, not so much for their own Security, as
out of a wicked and barbarous Design to make some desperate Attempt upon the
said Cities, and their Inhabitants by Fire, or a sudden Massacre, or both; or
else to be the more ready to join themselves to a Body of French Troops,
designed, if it be possible, to land in England, procured of the French King,
by the Interest and Power of the Jesuits in Pursuance of the Engagements, which
at the Instigation of that pestilent Society, his most Christian Majesty, with
one of his Neighboring Princes of the same Communion, has entered into for the
utter Extirpation of the Protestant Religion out of Europe. Tho we hope we have
taken such effectual care to prevent the one, and secure the other, that by
God's Assistance, we cannot doubt but we shall defeat all their wicked
Enterprises and Designs.

We cannot however forbear out of the great and tender Concern We have to
preserve the People of England, and particularly those great and populous
Cities, from the cruel Rage and bloody Revenge of the Papists, to Require and
expect from all the Lord-Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, and Justices of the
Peace, Lord-Mayors, Mayors, Sheriffs, and all other Magistrates and Officers
Civil and Military, of all Counties, Cities and Towns of England, especially of
the County of Middlesex, and Cities of London and Westminster, and parts
adjacent, that they do immediately disarm and secure, as by Law they may and
ought, within their respective Counties, Cities and Jurisdictions, all Papists
whatsoever, as Persons at all times, but now especially most dangerous to the
Peace and Safety of the Government, that so not only all Power of doing
mischief may be taken from them; but that the Laws, which are the greatest and
best Security, may resume their Force, and be strictly Executed.

And We do hereby likewise Declare that We will Protect and Defend all those
who shall not be afraid to do their Duty in Obedience to these Laws. And that
for those Magistrates and others of what condition soever they be, who shall
refuse to assist Us, and in Obedience to the Laws to Execute vigorously what we
have required of them, and suffer themselves at this Juncture to be cajoled or
terrified out of there Duty, We will esteem them the most Criminal and Infamous
of all Men; Betrayers of their Religion, the Laws, and their Native Country,
and shall not fail to treat them accordingly; resolving to expect and require
at their hands the Life of every single Protestant that shall perish, and every
House that shall be burnt or destroyed by their Treachery and Cowardice.

William Henry, Prince of Orange.
Given under our Hand and Seal at our Headquarters at Sherburn- Castle, the
28th day of November, 1688. By his Highness special Command, C. HUYGENS.

The following Paper was Published by Mr. Samuel Johnson, in the Year, 1686.
for which he was Sentenced by the Court of King's- Bench, (Sir Edward Herbert
being Lord Chief Justice) to stand three times on the Pillory, and to be
whipped from Newgate to Tyburn: Which barbarous Sentence was Executed.
An Humble and Hearty Address to all the English Protestants in this present
Army.
Gentlemen,
NExt to the Duty which we owe to God, which ought to be the principal Care of
Men of your Profession especially, (because you carry your Lives in your Hands,
and often look Death in the Face); The second Thing that deserves your
Consideration, is, The service of your Native Country, wherein you drew your
first Breath, and breathed a free English Air. Now I would desire you to
consider, how well you comply with these two main Points, by engaging in this
present Service.

Is it in the Name of God, and for his Service, that you have joined your
selves with Papists; who will indeed fight for the Mass Book but burn the
Bible, and who seek to Extirpate the Protestant Religion with Your Swords,
because they cannot do it with their Own? And will you be Aiding and Assisting
to set up Mass-houses, to Erect that Popish Kingdom of Darkness and Desolation
amongst us, and to train up all our Children in Popery? How can you do these
Things, and yet call your selves Protestants?

And then what Service can be done your Country, by being under the Command of
French and Irish Papists, and by bringing the Nation under a Foreign Yoke? Will
you help them to make forcible Entry into the Houses of your Countrymen, under
the Name of Quartering, directly contrary to Magna Charta and the Petition of
Right? Will you be Aiding and Assisting to all the Murders and Outrages which
they shall commit by their void Commissions? Which were declared Illegal, and
sufficiently blasted by both Houses of Parliament, (if there had been any need
of it) for it was very well known before, That a Papist cannot have a
Commission, but by the Law is utterly Disabled and Disarmed. Will you exchange
your Birthright of English Laws and Liberties for Martial or Club-law, and
help to destroy all others, only to be eaten last your selves? If I know you
well, as you are English Men, you hate and scorn these Things. And therefore be
not unequally yoaked with Idolatrous and Bloody Papists. Be Valiant for the
Truth, and show your selves Men.

The same Considerations are likewise humbly offered to all the English Seamen,
who have been the Bulwark of this Nation against Popery and Slavery ever since
Eighty Eight.

Several Reasons for the Establishment of a standing Army, and Dissolving the
Militia. By Mr. S. Johnson.
1. BEcause the Lords Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, and the whole Militia,
that is to say, the Lords, Gentlemen, and Freeholders of England, are not fit
to be trusted with their own Laws, Lives, Liberties, and Estates, and therefore
ought to have Guardians and Keepers assigned to them.

2. Because Mercenary Soldiers, who fight for twelve Pence a Day, will fight
better, as having more to lose than either the Nobility or Gentry.

3. Because there are no Irish Papists in the Militia, who are certainly the
best Soldiers in the World, for they have slain Men, Women, and Children, by
Hundreds of Thousands at once.

4. Because the Dragooners have made more Converts than all the Bishops and
Clergy of France.

5. The Parliament ought to establish one standing Army at the least, because
indeed there will be need of Two, that one of them may defend the People from
the other.

6. Because it is a thousand pities that a brave Popish Army should be a Riot.

7. Unless it be Established by Act of Parliament, The Justices of Peace will
be forced to suppress it in their own Defense; for they will be loath to forfeit
an hundred Pounds every day they rise, out of Complement to a Popish Rout. 13
H. 4. c. 7. 2 H. 5. c. 8.

8. Because a Popish Army is a Nullity. For all Papists are utterly disabled
(and punishable besides) from bearing any Office in Camp, Troop, Band, or
Company of Soldiers, and are so far disarmed by Law, that they cannot wear a
Sword, so much as in their Defense, without the allowance of four Justices of
the Peace of the County: And then upon a March they will be perfectly
Enchanted, for they are not able to stir above five Miles from their own
Dwelling House. 3. Jac. 5. Sect. 8.27, 28, 29.35 Eliz. 2.3 Jac. 5. Sect. 7.

9. Because Persons utterly disabled by Law are utterly Unauthorized; and
therefore the void Commissions of Killing and Slaying in the Hands of Papists,
can only enable them to Massacre and Murder.

To the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
The Humble Petition of William Archbishop of Canterbury, and diverse of the
Suffragan Bishops of that Province (now present with him) in behalf of
themselves, and others of their absent Brethren, and of the Clergy of their
respective Diocesses.
Humbly shows,
THAT the great averseness they find in themselves to the distributing and
publishing in all their Churches, your Majesty's late Declaration for Liberty
of Conscience, proceeds neither from any want of Duty and Obedience to your
Majesty, (our Holy Mother the Church of England, being both in her Principles
and in her constant Practice unquestionably Loyal; and having to her great
Honor, been more than once publicly acknowledged to be so by your Gracious
Majesty;) Nor yet from any want of due tenderness to Dissenters, in relation to
whom they are willing to come to such a Temper as shall be thought fit, when
that Matter shall be considered and settled in Parliament and Convocation. But
among many other Considerations, from this especially, because that Declaration
is founded upon such a Dispensing Power, as has been often declared Illegal in
Parliament, and particularly in the years 1662, and 1672. and in the beginning
of your Majesty's Reign; and is a matter of so great Moment and Consequence to
the whole Nation, both in Church and State, that your Petitioners cannot in
Prudence, Honor, or Conscience, so far make themselves Parties to it, as the
distribution of it all over the Nation, and the solemn Publication of it once
and again, even in God's House, and in the Time of his Divine Service, must
amount to in common and reasonable Construction.

Your Petitioners therefore most Humbly and Earnestly beseech your Majesty,
that you will be ciously pleased, not to insist upon their Distributing and
Reading your Majesty's said Declaration.
And Your Petitioners, as in Duty bound, shall ever Pray. Will. Cant. Will.
Asaph. Fr Ely. Jo. Cicestr. Tho. Bathon. and Wellen. Tho. Peterburgen. Jonath.
Bristol.

His Majesty's Answer was to this effect.
I Have heard of this before, but did not believe it! I did not expect this
from the Church of England, especially from some of you. If I change my Mind,
you shall hear from me; if not, I expect my Command shall be obeyed.



The PETITION of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal for the Calling of a Free
Parliament: Together with his Majesty's Gracious Answer to their Lordships.
To the KING's most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Petition of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, whose Names are
subscribed.
May it please your Majesty,
WE your Majesty's most loyal Subjects, in a deep sense of the Miseries of a
War now breaking forth in the Bowels of this your Kingdom and of the Danger to
which your Majesty's Sacred Person is thereby like to be exposed, and also of
the Distractions of your People, by reason of their present Grievances, do
think our selves bound in Conscience of the duty we owe to God, and our holy
Religion, to your Majesty, and our Country, most humbly offer to your Majesty,
That in our Opinion, the only visible Way to preserve your Majesty, and this
your Kingdom, would be the Calling of a Parliament, Regular and Free in all its
Circumstances.

We therefore do most earnestly beseech your Majesty, That you would be
graciously pleased, with all speed, to call such a Parliament, wherein we shall
be most ready to promote such Counsels and Resolutions of Peace and Settlement
in Church and State, as may conduce to your Majesty's Honor and Safety, and to
the quieting the Minds of your People.

We do likewise humbly beseech your Majesty, in the mean time, to use such
means for the preventing the Effusion of Christian Blood, as to your Majesty
shall seem most meet.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc. W. Cant. Grafton. Ormond. Dorset.
Clare. Clarendon. Burlington. Anglesey. Rochester. Newport. Nom. Ebor. W.
Asaph. Fran. Ely. Tho. Roffen. Tho. Petriburg. Tho. Oxon. Paget. Chandois.
Osulston.

Presented by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Archbishop of York Elect, the
Bishop of Ely, and the Bishop of Rochester the 17th of November, 1688. His
Majesty's most Gracious Answer.
My LORDS,
What You ask of Me, I most passionately desire: And I promise You, upon the
Faith of a King, That I will have a Parliament, and such an One as You ask for,
as soon as ever the Prince of Orange has quitted this Realm; For, How is it
possible a Parliament should be Free in all its Circumstances, as You Petition
for, whilst an Enemy is in the Kingdom, and can make a Return of near an
Hundred Voices?

The Lords Petition, with the King's Answer, may be printed, November. 29. 1688.


The P. O.'s Letter to the English Army.
Gentlemen and Friends,
WE have given you so full, and so true an Account of Our Intentions, in this
Expedition in Our Declaration, that as We can add nothing to it, so We are sure
you can desire nothing more of us. We are come to preserve your Religion, and
to restore and establish your Liberties and Properties; and therefore We cannot
suffer Our selves to doubt but that all true English men will come and concur
with Us, in Our desire to secure these Nations from POPERY and SLAVERY. You
must all plainly see, that you are only made use of as Instruments to enslave
the Nation, and ruin the Protestant Religion, and when that is done, you may
judge what ye your selves ought to expect, both from the cashiering of all the
Protestant and English Officers and Soldiers in Ireland, and by the Irish
Soldiers being brought over to be put in your places; and of which you have
seen so fresh an instance, that we need not put you in mind of it. You know how
many of your Fellow-Officers have been used for their standing firm to the
Protestant Religion, and to the Laws of England, and you cannot flatter your
selves so far as to expect to be better used, if those who have broke their
word so often, should by your means be brought out of those Straits to which
they are reduced at present. We hope likewise, that you will not suffer your
selves to be abused by a false Notion of Honor, but that you will in the first
place consider, what you owe to Almighty God and your Religion, to your
Country, to your Selves, and to your Posterity, which you, as Men of Honor,
ought to prefer to all private Considerations and Engagements whatsoever. We do
therefore expect, that you will consider the Honor that is now set before you,
of being the Instruments of serving your Country, and securing your Religion,
and We will ever remember the Service you shall do Us upon this Occasion; and
will promise unto you, that We shall place such particular Marks of our Favor
on every one of you, as your Behavior at this time shall deserve of Us, and
the Nation; in which we will make a great Distinction of those that shall come
seasonably to join their Arms with ours, and you shall find us to be

Your Well-wishing, and Assured Friend, W. H. P. O.

Prince George 's Letter to the King.
SIR,
WITH a Heart full of Grief am I forced to Write, what Prudence will not permit
me to say to your Face. And may I ever find Credit with your Majesty, and
protection from Heaven, as what I now do, is free from Passion, Vanity or
Design, with which Actions of this Nature are too often accompanied. I am not
ignorant of the frequent Mischiefs wrought in the World by factious pretenses
of Religion; but were not Religion the most justifiable Cause, it would not be
made the most specious pretense. And your Majesty has always shown too
uninterested a Sense of Religion, to doubt the just Effects of it in one whose
Practices, have, I hope, never given the World cause to censure his real
conviction of it, or his backwardness to perform what his Honor and Conscience
prompt him to: How then can I longer disguise my just Concern for that Religion
in which I have been so happily Educated, which my Judgment thoroughly convinces
me to be best; and for the Support of which I am so highly interested in my
Native Country? And is not England now by the most endearing Tie become so?

Whilst the restless Spirits of the Enemies of the REFORMED RELIGION, backed by
the cruel Zeal and prevailing Power of France, justly alarm and unite all the
Protestant Princes of Christendom, and engage them in so vast an Expense for
the support of it, can I act so degenerous and mean a part, as to deny my
Concurrence to such worthy Endeavors for disabusing of your Majesty by the
Reinforcement of those Laws, and Establishment of that Government, on which
alone depends the well-being of your Majesty, and of the PROTESTANT RELIGION in
Europe? This, Sir, is that irresistible and only Cause that could come in
Competition with my Duty and Obligations to your Majesty, and be able to tear
me from You, whilst the same Affectionate Desire of serving You continues in
me. Could I secure your Person by the Hazard of my Life, I should think it
could not be better Employed: And would to God these Your distracted Kingdoms
might yet receive that satisfactory Compliance from your Majesty in all their
justifiable pretensions, as might upon the only sure Foundation, that of the
Love and Interest of your Subjects, establish your Government, and as strongly
Unite the Hearts of all your Subjects to You, as is that of,

SIR, Your Majesty's most Humble, and most Obedient Son and Servant.

The Lord Churchill 's Letter to the King.
SIR,
SInce Men are seldom suspected of Sincerity, when they act contrary to their
Interests; and though my dutiful Behavior to your Majesty in the worst of
Times, (for which I acknowledge my poor Services much over paid) may not be
sufficient to incline You to a charitable Interpretation of my Actions, yet I
hope, the great Advantage I enjoy under Your Majesty, which I can never expect
in any other change of Government, may reasonably convince Your Majesty and the
World, that I am acted by a higher Principle, when I offer that violence to my
inclination and interest, as to desert Your Majesty at a time when your Affairs
seem to challenge the strictest Obedience from all your Subjects, much more
from one who lies under the greatest personal Obligations imaginable to Your
Majesty. This Sir, could proceed from nothing but the inviolable Dictates of my
CONSCIENCE, and a necessary concern for my RELIGION (which no good man can
oppose) and with which I am instructed nothing ought to come in Competition.
Heaven knows with what partiality my dutiful Opinion of Your Majesty has
hitherto represented those unhappy Designs, which inconsiderate and
self-interested men have framed against Your Majesty's true Interest and the
Protestant Religion. But as I can no longer join with such to give a pretense
by Conquest to bring them to effect, so will I always with the hazard of my
Life and Fortune (so much your Majesty's due) endeavor to preserve Your Royal
Person and Lawful Rights, with all the tender Concern and dutiful Respect that
becomes,

SIR, Your Majesty's most Dutiful and most Obliged Subject and Servant.

The Princess Ann of Denmark 's Letter to the Queen.
Madam,
I Beg your pardon if I am so deeply affected with the surprising News of the
Princes being gone, as not to be able to see You, but to leave this Paper to
Express my humble Duty to the King and your Self; and to let You know that I am
(...) to absent my self to avoid the King's Displeasure, which I am not able to
bear ^ur there against the Prince or my Self: And I shall stay at so great a
distance, as not to return before I hear the happy News of a Reconcilement: And
as I am confident the Prince did not leave the King with any other design, than
to use all possible means for His Preservation; so I hope You will do me the
Justice to believe that I am incapable of following Him for any other End.
Never was any one in such an unhappy Condition, so divided between Duty and
Affection, to a Father, and a Husband; and therefore I know not what to do, but
to follow one to preserve the other. I see the general falling off of the
Nobility and Gentry, who avow to have no other end, than to prevail with the
King to secure their Religion, which they saw so much in danger by the Violent
Counsels of the Priests; who to promote their own Religion, did not care to
what dangers they exposed the King: I am fully persuaded that the Prince of
Orange designs the King's safety and preservation, and hope all things may be
composed without more Bloodshed, by the calling a Parliament. God grant a
happy End to these Troubles, that the King's Reign may be prosperous, and that
I may shortly meet You in perfect peace and safety; till when, let me beg You
to continue the same favorable Opinion that You have hitherto had of

Your most Obedient Daughter and Servant, ANNE.

A Memorial of the Protestants of the Church of England, Presented to their
Royal Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Orange.
YOur Royal Highnesses cannot be ignorant that the Protestants of England, who
continue true to their Religion and the Government Established by Law, have
been many ways troubled and vexed by restless contrivances and designs of the
Papists, under pretense of the Royal Authority, and things required of them
unaccountable before God and Man; Ecclesiastical Benefices and Preferments
taken from them, without any other Reason but the King's Pleasure; that they
have been summoned and sentenced by Ecclesiastical Commissioners, contrary to
Law, deprived of their Birthright in the free Choice of their Magistrates and
Representatives; diverse Corporations dissolved; the Legal Security of our
Religion and Liberty, established and ratified by King and Parliament, annulled
and overthrown by a pretended Dispensing Power; new and unheard of Maxims have
been preached, as if Subjects had no Right but what depends on the King's Will
and Pleasure. The Militia put into the Hands of persons not qualified by Law;
and a Popish Mercenary Army maintained in the Kingdom in time of Peace,
absolutely contrary to Law: The Execution of the Law against several high
Crimes and Misdemeanors superseded and prohibited; the Statutes against
Correspondence with the Court of Rome, Papal Jurisdiction, and Popish Priests,
suspended; that in Courts of Justice those Judges are displaced who dare acquit
them whom the King would have Condemned, as happened to Judge Powel and Holloway
for acquitting the Seven Bishops: Liberty of choosing Members of Parliament
notwithstanding all the Care taken, and Provision made by Law on that behalf)
wholly taken away by Quo Warranto's served against Corporations, and the three
known Questions. All things carried on in open view for the Propagation and
Growth of Popery; for which the Courts of England and France have so long
jointly labored with so much Application and Earnestness. Endeavors used to
persuade your Royal Highnesses to consent to Liberty of Conscience, and
abrogating the Penal Laws and Tests, wherein they fell short of their aim.

That they most humbly implore the Protection of your Royal Highnesses, as to
the (...) ending and encroachments made upon the Law for maintenance of the
Protestant Religion, our Civil and Fundamental Rights and Privilege; and that
Your Royal Highness would be pleased to insist, that the Free Parliament of
England, according to Law, may be restored, the Laws against Papists, Priests,
Papal Jurisdiction, etc. put in Execution, and the Suspending and Dispensing
Power declared null and void; the Rights and Privileges of the City of London,
the free Choice of their Magistrates, and the Li^^^ties as well of that as
other Corporations restored, and all things returned to their (...) Channel,
etc.

Admiral Herbert 's Letter to all Commanders of Ships and Seamen in His
Majesty's Fleet.
Gentlemen,
I Have little to add to what his Highness has expressed in general Terms,
besides laying before you the dangerous way you are at present in, where Ruin
or Infamy must inevitably attend you, if you don't join with the Prince in the
Common Cause, for the Defense of your Religion and Liberties; for should it
please God, for the sins of the English Nation, to suffer your Arms to prevail,
to what can your Victory serve you, but to enslave you deeper, and overthrow
the true Religion, in which you have lived, and your Fathers died? Of which, I
beg you, as a Friend, to consider the Consequences, and to reflect on the Blot
and Infamy it will bring on you, not only now, but in all After-Ages, That by
Your means the Protestant Religion was destroyed, and your Country deprived of
its Ancient Liberties: And if it pleases God to bless the Prince's Endeavors
with success, as I don't doubt but he will, consider then what their Condition
will be that oppose him in this so good a Design, where the greatest Favor
they can hope for, is, their being suffered to end their Days in Misery and
Want, detested and despised by all good Men.

It is therefore, and for many more Reasons, too long to insert here, that I,
as a true Englishman and your Friend, exhort you to join your Arms to the
Prince, for the Defense of the Common Cause, the Protestant Religion, and the
Liberties of your Country. It is what I am well assured the major and best part
of the Army, as well as the Nation, will do so soon as convenience is offered.
Prevent them in so good an Action whilst it is in your power; and may it
appear, That as the Kingdom has always depended on the Navy for its Defense,
so you will yet go further, by making it, as much as in you lies, the
Protection of her Religion and Liberties; and then you may assure your selves
of all Marks of Favor and Honor suitable to the Merits of so great and
glorious an Action. After this I ought not to add so inconsiderable a thing, as
that it will for ever engage me to be in a most particular manner,

Your faithful Friend, and humble Servant, AR. HERBERT.
Aboard the Leyden in the Gooree.
Lord Delamear 's Speech.
THE occasion of this, is to give you my Thoughts upon the present Conjuncture,
which concerns not only you, but every Protestant, and Freeborn Man of
England, I am confident, that wishes well to the Protestant Religion and his
Country; and I am persuaded that every Man of you thinks both in danger, and
now to lie at stake. I am also persuaded, that every Man of you will rejoice to
see Religion and Property settled; if so, then I am not mistaken in my
Conjectures concerning you. Can you ever hope for a better Occasion to root out
POPERY and SLAVERY, than by joining with the P. of O. whose Proposals contain
and speak the Desires of every Man that loves his Religion and Liberty? And in
saying this, I will invite you to nothing but what I will do my self; and I
will not desire any of you to go any further than I will move my self; neither
will I put you upon any Danger where I will not take share in it. I propose
this to you, not as you are my Tenants, but as my Friends, and as you are
Englishmen. No Man can love Fighting for its own sake, nor find any pleasure in
danger. And you may imagine, I would be very glad to spend the rest of my days
in peace, I having had so great a share in Troubles; but I see all lies at
stake, I am to choose whether I will be a Slave and a Papist, or a Protestant
and a Free man; and therefore the Case being thus, I shall think my self false
to my Country, if I sit still at this time. I am of Opinion, that when the
Nation is Delivered, it must be by Force or by Miracle: It would be too great a
presumption to expect the latter, and therefore our Deliverance must be by
Force, and I hope this is the Time for it; a Price is now put into our Hands,
and if it miscarry for want of Assistance, our Blood is upon our own Heads; and
he that is passive at this Time, may very well expect that God will mock when
the Fear of Affliction comes upon him, which he thought to avoid by being
indifferent.

If the King prevails, farewell Liberty of Conscience, which has hitherto been
allowed, not for the sake of the Protestants, but in order to settle Popery.
You may see what to expect if he get the better; and he has lately given you,
of this Town, a taste of the Method, whereby he will maintain his Army. And you
may see of what sort of People he intends his Army to consist; and if you have
not a mind to serve such Masters, then stand not by and see your Countrymen
perish, when they are endeavoring to defend you.

I promise this on my Word and Honor, to every Tenant that goes along with me,
That if he fall, I will make his Lease (...) good to his Family, as it was when
he went from home. The thing then which ^^se ^esire, and your Country does
expect from you, is this, That every Man that has a to^rable Horse, or can
procure one, will meet me on Boden-Downs to morrow, where I Rendezvous: But if
any of you is rendered unable by reason of Age, or any other just Excuse, then
that he would mount a fitter person, and put five Pounds in his Pocket. Those
that have not, nor cannot procure Horse, let them stay at home and assist with
their Purses, and send it to me with a particular of every Man's Contribution. I
impose on no Man, but let him lay his Hand on his Heart, and consider what he
is willing to give to recover his Religion and Liberty; and to such I promise,
and to all that go along with (...) if we prevail, I will be as industrious to
have him recompensed for his Charge and ^^azard, as I will be to seek it for my
self. This Advice I give to all that stay behind, That when you hear the
Papists have committed any Outrage, or any Rising, that you will get together;
for it is better to meet your danger than expect it. I have no more to say, but
that I am willing to lose my Life in the Cause, if God see it good, for I was
never unwilling to die for my Religion and Country.

An Engagement of the Noblemen, Knights and Gentlemen at Exeter, to Assist the
Prince of Orange, in the Defense of the Protestant Religion, Laws and Liberties
of the People of England, Scotland and Ireland.
WE do engage to Almighty God, and to his Highness the Prince of Orange, and
with one another, to stick firm to this Cause, and to one another in the
Defense of it, and never to depart from it, until our Religion, Laws, and
Liberties are so far secured to us in a Free-Parliament, that we shall be no
more in danger of falling under Popery and Slavery. And whereas we are engaged
in the Common Cause under the Protection of the Prince of Orange, by which
means his Person may be exposed to Danger, and to the desperate and cursed
Designs of Papists, and other bloody Men, we do therefore solemnly engage to
God and to one another, That if any such Attempts be made upon him, we will
pursue not only those that made them, but all their Adherents, and all we find
in Arms against us, with the utmost Severity of just Revenge in their Ruin and
Destruction; and that the executing any such Attempt (which God of his Infinite
Mercy forbid) shall not deprive us from pursuing this Cause which we do now
undertake, but that it shall encourage us to carry it on with all the Vigor
that so Barbarous Approach shall deserve.

The Declaration of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty at the Rendezvous at
Nottingham, Nov. 22. 1688.
WE the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of these Northern Counties assembled
together at Nottingham, for the Defense of the Laws, Religion, and Properties,
according to those freeborn Liberties and Privileges, descended to us from
our Ancestors, as the undoubted Birthright of the Subjects of this Kingdom of
England, (not doubting but the Infringers and Invaders of our Rights will
represent us to the rest of the Nation in the most malicious dress they can put
upon us) do here unanimously think it our Duty to declare to the rest of our
Protestant Fellow Subjects, the Grounds of our present Undertaking.

We are by innumerable Grievances made sensible, that the very Fundamentals of
our Religion, Liberties and Properties, are about to be rooted out by our late
Jesuitical Privy Council, as has been of late too apparent. 1. By the King's
dispensing with all the Established Laws at his pleasure. 2. By displacing all
Officers out of all Offices of Trust and Advantage, and placing others in their
room that are known Papists, deservedly made incapable by the Established Laws
of our Land. 3. By destroying the Charters of most Corporations in the Land. 4.
By discouraging all Persons that are not Papists, preferring such as turn to
Popery. 5. By displacing all honest and conscientious Judges, unless they
would, ^^ntrary to their Consciences, declare that to be Law which was merely
arbitrary. (...) By branding all Men with the name of Rebels, that but offered
to justify the Law (...) a legal course against the arbitrary proceedings of
the King, or any of his corrupt Ministers. 7. By burthening the Nation with an
Army, to maintain the Violation of the Rights of the Subjects. 8. By
discountenancing the Established Reformed Religion. 9. By forbidding the
Subjects the benefit of Petitioning, and const^^ing them Libellers; so rendering
the Laws a Nose of Wax, to serve their Arbitrary (...) And many more suchlike,
too long here to enumerate.

We being thus made sadly sensible o^ he Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government
that is by the Influence of Jesuitical Counsels coming upon us, do unanimously
declare, That not being willing to deliver our Posterity over to such a
Condition of Popery and Slavery, as the aforesaid Oppressions inevitably
threaten; we will, to the utmost of our power, oppose the same, by joining with
the Prince of Orange (whom we hope God Almighty has sent to rescue us from the
Oppressions aforesaid) will use our utmost Endeavors for the recovery of our
almost ruined Laws, Liberties and Religion: And herein we hope all good
Protestant Subjects will with their Lives and Fortunes be assistant to us, and
not be bugbear'd with the opprobrious Terms of Rebels, by which they would
fright us, to become perfect Slaves to their Tyrannical Insolences and
Usurpations; for we assure our selves, that no rational and unbyassed Person
will judge it Rebellion to defend our Laws and Religion, which all our Princes
have sworn at their Coronations: Which Oath, how well it has been observed of
late, we desire a Free Parliament may have the Consideration of.

We own it Rebellion to resist a King that governs by Law, but he was always
accounted a Tyrant that made his Will his Law, and to resist such an one we
justly esteem no Rebellion, but a necessary Defense: And in this Consideration
we doubt not of all Honest Men's Assistance, and humbly hope for, and implore
the great Gods Protection, that turns the Hearts of People as pleases him
best; it having been observed, That People can never be of one Mind without his
Inspiration, which has in all Ages confirmed that Observation, Vox Populi est
Vox Dei.

The present restoring of Charters, and reversing the oppressing and unjust
Judgment given on Magdalen College Fellows, is plain, are but to still the
People, like Plums to Children, by deceiving them for a while; but if they
shall by this Stratagem be fooled, till this present Storm that threatens the
Papists, be past, as soon as they shall be resetled, the former Oppression will
be put on with greater vigor: But we hope in vain is the Net spread in the
sight of the Birds; For (1.) the Papists old Rule is, That Faith is not to be
kept with Heretics, as they term Protestants, tho the Popish Religion is the
greatest Heresy. And (2.) Queen Mary's so ill observing her Promises to the
Suffolk-men that helped her to the Throne. And above all, (3.) the Popes
dispensing with the breach of Oaths, Treaties, or Promises, at his pleasure,
when it makes for the service of Holy Church, as they term it. These, we say,
are such convincing Reasons to hinder us from giving Credit to the aforesaid
Mock-Shews of Redress, that we think our selves bound in Conscience to rest on
no Security that shall not be approved by a Freely Elected Parliament, to whom,
under God, we refer our Cause.

His Grace the Duke of Norfolk 's Speech to the Mayor of Norwich, on the First
of December, in the Marketplace of Norwich.
Mr. Mayor,
NOT doubting but you and the rest of your Body, as well as the whole City and
Country, may be Alarmed by the great Concourse of Gentry, with the numerous
Appearance of their Friends and Servants, as well as of your own Militia, here
this Morning, I have thought this the most proper place, as being the most
public one, to give you an Account of our Intentions.

Out of the deep sense we had that in the present unhappy Juncture of Affairs,
nothing we could think of was possible to secure the Laws, Liberties, and
Protestant Religion, but a Free Parliament; WE ARE HERE MET TO DECLARE, That we
will do our utmost to defend the same, by declaring for such a Free Parliament.

And since His Majesty has been pleased (by the News we hear this day) to
order Writs for a Parliament to sit the Fifteenth of January next, I can only
add, in the name of my Self and all these Gentlemen, and others here met, That
we will ever be ready to support and defend the Laws, Liberties, and Protestant
Religion. And so GOD SAVE THE KING.

To this the Mayor, Aldermen, and the rest of the Corporation, and a numerous
Assembly, did concur with his Grace and the rest of the Gentry.

His Grace at his lighting from his Horse, perceiving great numbers of Common
People gathering together, called them to him, and told them, He desired they
would not take any occasion to commit any Disorder or Outrage, but go quietly
to their Homes; and acquainted them that the King had ordered a Free Parliament
to be called.

The Speech of the Prince of Orange, to some Principal Gentlemen of
Somersetshire and Dorsetshire, on their coming to join his Highness at Exeter
the 15th of Nov. 1688.
THO we know not all your Persons, yet we have a Catalogue of your Names, and
remember the Character of your Worth and Interest in your Country. You see we
are come according to your Invitation and our Promise. Our Duty to God obliges
us to protect the Protestant Religion; and our Love to Mankind, your Liberties
and Properties. We expected you that dwelt so near the place of our Landing,
would have joined us sooner, not that it is now too late, nor that we want your
Military Assistance so much as your Countenance and Presence, to justify our
declared Pretensions, rather than accomplish our good and gracious Designs. Tho
we have brought both a good Fleet, and a good Army, to render these Kingdoms
happy, by rescuing all Protestants from Popery, Slavery, and Arbitrary Power;
by restoring them to their Rights and Properties established by Law, and by
promoting of Peace and Trade, which is the Soul of Government, and the very
Lifeblood of a Nation; yet we rely more on the goodness of God and the Justice
of our Cause, than on any Humane Force and Power whatever. Yet since God is
pleased we shall make use of Human Means, and not expect Miracles, for our
Preservation and Happiness; let us not neglect making use of this gracious
Opportunity, but with Prudence and Courage put in Execution our so honorable
Purposes. Therefore, Gentlemen, Friends and Fellow-Protestants, we bid you and
all your Followers most heartily Welcome to our Court and Camp. Let the whole
World now judge, if our Pretensions are not Just, Generous, Sincere and above
Price; since we might have even a Bridge of Gold to return back: But it is our
Principle and Resolution, rather to die in a good Cause, than live in a bad
One, well knowing that Virtue and True Honor is its own Reward, and the
Happiness of Mankind Our Great and Only Design

The true Copy of a Paper delivered by the Lord Devonshire, to the Mayor of
Darby, where he quartered the one and twentieth of November, 1688.
WE the Nobility and Gentry of the Northern parts of England, being deeply
sensible of the Calamities that threaten these Kingdoms, do think it our Duty,
as Christians and good Subjects, to endeavor what in us lies, the Healing of
our present Distractions, and preventing greater: And as with grief we
apprehend the said Consequences that may arise from the Landing of an Army in
this Kingdom from Foreign parts; So we cannot but deplore the Occasion given
for it, by so many Invasions, made of late Years, on our Religion and Laws. And
whereas we cannot think of any other Expedient to compose our Differences, and
prevent Effusion of Blood, than that which procured a Settlement in these
Kingdoms, after the late Civil Wars, the Meeting and Sitting of a Parliament,
freely and duly Chosen, we think our selves obliged (as far as in us lies) to
promote it; And the rather, because the Prince of Orange (as appears by his
Declaration) is willing to submit his own Pretensions, and all other Matters,
to their Determination: We heartily Wish, and humbly Pray, That His Majesty
would Consent to this Expedient, in order to a future Settlement; And hope that
such a Temperament may be thought of, as that the Army now on Foot, may not
give any Interruption to the proceeding of a Parliament. But if to the great
Misfortune and Ruin of these Kingdoms, it should prove otherwise, we further
declare, That we will, to our utmost, defend the Protestant Religion, the Laws
of the Kingdom, and the Rights and Liberties of the Subject.

A Letter from a Gentleman at King's-Lynn, December 7. 1688. To his Friend in
London.
Sir,
THE Duke of Norfolk came to Town on Wednesday Night, with many of the chiefest
of the County; and yesterday in the Marketplace received the Address
following, which was presented by the Mayor, attended by the Body, and many
hundreds of the Inhabitants.

To his Grace the most Noble Henry Duke of Norfolk, Lord Marshal of England.
My Lord,
THE daily Allarms we receive, as well from Foreign as Domestic Enemies, give
us just Apprehensions of the approaching Danger which we conceive we are in;
and to apply with all earnestness to your Grace as your great Patron, in all
humble Confidence to succeed in our Expectations, That we may be put into such
a posture by your Grace's Directions and Conduct, as may make us appear as
zealous as any in the Defense of the Protestant Religion, the Laws and Ancient
Government of this Kingdom. Being the desire of many hundreds, who must humbly
callenge a Right of your Grace's Protection.

His Grace's Answer.
Mr. Mayor,
I Am very much obliged to you, and the rest of your Body, and those here
present, for your good Opinion of me; and the Confidence you have, that I will
do what in me lies to support and defend the Laws, Liberties, and Protestant
Religion, in which I will never deceive you.

And since the coming of the Prince of Orange has given us an opportunity to
declare for the defense of them; I can only assure you, that no Man will
venture his Life and Fortune more freely for the Defense of the Laws,
Liberties, and Protestant Religion, than I will do; and with all these
Gentlemen here present, and many more, will unanimously concur therein; and you
shall see that all possible Care shall be taken, that such a Defense shall be
made as you require.

AFter which the Duke was, with his Retinue, received at the Mayor's House at
Dinner, with great Acclamations; and his Proceedings therein have put our
County into a Condition of Defense, of which you shall hear further in a little
time, our Militia being ordered to be raised throughout the County.

Our Tradesmen, Seamen, and Mobile, have this morning generally put Orange
Ribbon on their Hats, Ecchoing Huzza's to the Prince of Orange and Duke of
Norfolk.

All are in a hot Ferment: God send us a good Issue of it.

Lynn-Regis, December. 10. 1688.
Sir,
BY mine of the 7th Instant, I gave you an Account of the Address of this
Corporation to his Grace the Duke of Norfolk, and of his Grace's Answer
thereto. Since which his Grace has sent for the Militia Troops, and put them in
a posture of Defense, as appears by the ensuing Speech.

The Duke of Norfolk's second Speech at Lynn.
I Hope you see I have endeavored to put you in the posture you desired, by
sending both for Horse and Foot of the Militia, and am very glad to see such an
Appearance of this Town in so good a Condition. And I do again renew my former
Assurances to you, that I will ever stand by you to Defend the Laws, Liberties,
and the Protestant Religion, and to procure a Settlement in Church and State,
in concurrence with the Lords and Gentlemen in the North, and pursuant to the
Declaration of the Prince of Orange.

And so God save the King.
The Declaration of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in and about the Cities
of London and Westminster, Assembled at Guild Hall, Dec. 1688.
WE doubt not but the World believes that in this great and dangerous
Conjuncture, we are heartily and zealously concerned for the Protestant
Religion, the Laws of the Land, and the Liberties and Properties of the
Subject. And we did reasonably Hope, that the King having Issued His
Proclamation and Writs for a Free Parliament, we might have rested Secure under
the Expectation of that Meeting: But His Majesty having withdrawn Himself, and,
as we apprehend, in order to His Departure out of this Kingdom, by the
pernicious Counsels of Persons ill-affected to our Nation and Religion, we
cannot, without being wanting to our Duty, be silent under those Calamities,
wherein the Popish Counsels, which so long prevailed, have miserably Involved
these Realms. We do therefore Unanimously resolve to apply our Selves to His
Highness the Prince of Orange, who with so great Kindness to these Kingdoms, so
vast Expense, and so much Hazard to his own Person, has Undertaken, by
endeavoring to procure a Free Parliament to rescue Us, with as little Effusion
as possible, of Christian Blood, from the Imminent Dangers of Popery and
Slavery.

And we do hereby Declare, That we will, with our utmost Endeavors, assist his
Highness in the obtaining such a Parliament with all speed, wherein our Laws,
our Liberties and Properties may be Secured, the Church of England in
particular; with a due Liberty to Protestant Dissenters, and in general the
Protestant Religion and Interest over the whole World may be Supported and
Encouraged, to the glory of God, the Happiness of the Established Government in
these Kingdoms, and the Advantage of all Princes and States in Christendom that
may be herein concerned.

In the mean time, we will endeavor to preserve, as much as in us lies, the
Peace and Security of these great and populous Cities of London and
Westminster, and the Parts adjacent, by taking care to Disarm all Papists, and
secure all Jesuits and Romish Priests, who are in our about the same.

And if there be any thing more to be performed by us, for promoting his
Highness's generous Intentions for the Public good, we shall be ready to do it
as occasion shall require.

W. Cant. Tho. Ebor. Pembroke. Dorset. Mulgrave. Thanet. Carlisle. Craven.
Ailesbury. Burlington. Sussex. Barkelay. Rochester. Newport. Waymouth. P.
Winchester. W. Asaph. Fran. Ely. Tho. Roffen. Tho. Petriberg. P. Wharton. North
and Gray. Chandos. Montague. T. Jermyn. Vaughan Carbery. Culpeper. Crewe.
Osulston.

WHereas His Majesty has privately this Morning withdrawn Himself, we the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, whose Names are subscribed, being assembled at
Guild Hall in London, having Agreed upon, and Signed a Declaration, Entitled,
The Declaration of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in and about the Cities of
London and Westminster, Assembled at Guild Hall, 11. December. 1688. Do desire
the Right Honorable the Earl of Pembroke, the Right Honorable the Lord
Viscount Weymouth, the Right Reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop of Ely, and
the Right Honorable the Lord Culpeper, forthwith to attend his Highness the
Prince of Orange with the said Declaration; and at the same time acquaint his
Highness with what we have further done at that Meeting. Dated at Guild Hall
the 11th of December, 1688.



A Paper delivered to his Highness the Prince of Orange, by the Commissioners
sent by his Majesty to treat with him. And his Highness's Answer.
WHereas on the 8th of December, 1688. at Hungerford, a Paper signed by the
Marquess of Hallifax, the Earl of Nottingham, and the Lord Godolphin,
Commissioners sent unto us from His Majesty, was delivered to Us in these Word
following, viz.

Sir,
THE King commanded us to acquaint You, That he observes all the Differences
and Causes of Complaint alleged by Your Highness seem to be referred to a Free
Parliament.

His Majesty, as He has already declared, was resolved before this to call
one, but thought that in the present State of Affairs it was advisable to defer
it till things were more composed.

Yet seeing that His People still continue to desire it; He has put forth His
Proclamation in order to it, and has issued forth His Writs for the calling of
it.

And to prevent any Cause of Interruption in it, He will consent to every thing
that can be reasonably required for the Security of all those that shall come
to it.

His Majesty has therefore sent Us to attend Your Highness for the adjusting
of all Matters that shall be agreed to be necessary to the Freedom of
Elections, and the Security of Sitting, and is ready immediately to enter into
a Treaty in Order to it.

His Majesty proposes that in the mean time the respective Armies may be
restrained within such Limits, and at such a Distance from London, as may
prevent the Apprehensions that the Parliament may in any kind be disturbed,
being desirous that the Meeting of it may be no longer delayed than it must be
by the usual and necessary Forms.

Hungerford, Dec. 8. 88. Signed, Hallifax, Nottingham, Godolphin.

We, with the Advice of the Lords and Gentlemen assembled with Us, have, in
Answer to the same, made these following Proposals.
I. THAT all Papists, and such Persons as are not qualified by Law, be
Disarmed, Disbanded, and Removed from all Employments, Civil and Military.

II. That all Proclamations which Reflect upon Us, or any that have come to Us,
or declared for Us, be recalled; and that if any Persons for having so
assisted, have been committed, that they be forthwith set at Liberty.

III. That for the Security and Safety of the City of London, the Custody and
Government of the Tower be immediately put into the Hands of the said City.

IV. That if His Majesty shall think fit to be at London, during the Sitting of
the Parliament, that We may be there also, with equal Number of our Guards. Or
if his Majesty shall please to be in any place from London, at whatever
distance he thinks fit, that We may be at a place of the same distance. And
that the respective Armies do remove from London Thirty Miles, and that no more
Foreign Forces be brought into the Kingdom.

V. That for the Security of the City of London and their Trade, Tilbury Fort
be put into the Hands of the said City.

VI. That to prevent the Landing of French, or other Foreign Troops, Portsmouth
may be put into such Hands, as by Your Majesty and Us shall be agreed upon.

VII. That some sufficient part of the Public Revenue be Assigned Us, for the
Maintaining of our Forces, until the Meeting of a Free Parliament. Given at
Littlecott, the Ninth of December, 1688.

W. H. Prince of Orange.

The Speech of the Recorder of Bristol to his Highness the Prince of Orange,
Monday, January the 7th 1688. The Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and Commons of the
Principal Citizens of the City of Bristol, waited upon the Prince of Orange,
being introduced by his Grace the Duke of Ormond, their High-Steward, and the
Earl of Shrewsbury: Where the Recorder spoke to this Effect.
May it please your Highness,
THE Restitution of our Religion, Laws and Liberties, and the Freeing us from
that Thraldom which has rendered us for many Years useless, and at last
dangerous to the Common Interest of the Protestant World, by your Highness's
singular Wisdom, Courage and Conduct, are not only a Stupendous Evidence of
the Divine Favor and Providence for our Preservation; but will be, and ought
to be an Everlasting Monument of your Highness's Magnanimity, and other the
Heroic Virtues which Adorn your great Soul, by whom such a Revolution is
wrought in this Nation, as is become the Joy and Comfort of the Present, and
will be the Wonder of all Succeeding Ages.

In the Contrivance and Preparation of which great Work, your Highness (like
the Heavens) did shed your propitious Influences upon us, whilst we slept, and
had scarce any prospect from whence we might expect our Redemption.

But as since your happy Arrival in England, we did among the first, Associate
our selves to assist and promote your Highness's most glorious Design, with our
Lives and Fortunes; so we now think our selves bound in the highest Obligation
of Gratitude, most humbly to present to your Highness our humble and hearty
Thanks, for this our Deliverance from Popery and Arbitrary Power; and likewise,
for declaring your gracious Intentions, That by the Advice of the Estates of
this Kingdom, you will rectify the late Disorders in the Government, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, according to the known Laws. The due and inviolable
Observation of which, will in our poor Opinion, be the only proper Means to
render the Sovereign Secure, and both Sovereign and Subject happy.

To which his Highness returned a most Gracious Answer.

By the Commissioners of Lieutenancy for the said City.
Guild Hall, London. December the 11th. 1688. Ordered,
THat Sir Robert Clayton, Knight. Sir William Russel, Knight. Sir Basil Firebrass Knight.
and Charles Duncomb, Esquire be a Committee from the said Lieutenancy to Attend his
Royal Highness the Prince of Orange, and present to his Highness the Address
agreed by the Lieutenancy for that purpose: And that they begin their Journey
to Morrow Morning.

By the Commissioners Command, Geo. Evans, Cl. Lieu. London.

To His Highness the Prince of Orange.
The Humble Address of the Lieutenancy of the City of London.
May it please Your Highness,
WE can never sufficiently express the deep Sense we have conceived, and shall
ever retain in our Hearts, That Your Highness has exposed Your Person to so
many Dangers, both by Sea and Land, for the Preservation of the Protestant
Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom; without which
unparalled Undertaking we must probably have suffered all the Miseries that
Popery and Slavery could have brought upon us.

We have been greatly concerned, that before this time we have not had any
seasonable Opportunity to give Your Highness and the World a real Testimony,
that it has been our firm Resolution to venture all that is Dear to Us to
attain those glorious Ends which Your Highness has proposed for restoring and
settling these Distracted Nations.

We therefore now unanimously present to Your Highness our just and due
Acknowledgments for the happy Relief You have brought to us; and that we may
not be wanting in this present Conjuncture, we have put our selves into such a
Posture, that (by the Blessing of God) we may be capable to prevent all ill
Designs, and to preserve this City in Peace and Safety till your Highness's
Happy Arrival.

We therefore humbly desire that your Highness will please to repair to this
City with what convenient speed you can, for the perfecting the great Work
which Your Highness has so happily begun, to the general Joy and Satisfaction
of us all.

December the 17th 1688.
THE said Committee this day made Report to the Lieutenancy, that they had
presented the said Address to the Prince of Orange, and that His Highness
received them very kindly.

December the 17th. 1688.
By the Lieutenancy.
Ordered,

That the said Order and Address be forwith Printed.

Geo. Evans.

To his Highness the Prince of Orange: The Humble Address of the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen and Commons of the City of London, in Common Council assembled.
May it please Your Highness,
WE taking into Consideration your Highness's fervent Zeal for the Protestant
Religion, manifested to the World, in your many and hazardous Enterprises,
which it has pleased Almighty God to bless You with miraculous Success. We
render our deepest Thanks to the Divine Majesty for the same; And beg leave to
present our most humble Thanks to your Highness, particularly for your
appearing in Arms in this Kingdom, to carry on and perfect your glorious
Design, to rescue England, Scotland and Ireland from Slavery and Popery, and in
a Free Parliament to establish the Religion, the Laws, and the Liberties of
these Kingdoms upon a sure and lasting Foundation.

We have hitherto looked for some Remedy for these Oppressions and Imminent
Dangers: We, together with our Protestant Fellow Subjects, labored under, from
His Majesty's Concessions and Concurrences with Your Highness's Just and Pious
purposes, expressed in Your gracious Declaration.

But herein finding Our Selves finally disappointed by his Majesty's
withdrawing Himself, We presume to make Your Highness Our Refuge: And do in the
Name of this Capital CITY, implore Your Highness's Protection; and most humbly
beseech Your Highness to vouchsafe to repair to this CITY, where Your Highness
will be received with Universal Joy and Satisfaction.

The Speech of Sir George Treby, Knight. Recorder of the Honorable City of London,
to his Highness the Prince of Orange, Dec. 20. 1688.
May it please your Highness,
THE Lord Mayor being disabled by Sickness, your Highness is attended by the
Aldermen and Commons of the Capital City of this Kingdom, deputed to
Congratulate your Highness upon this great and glorious Occasion.

In which, laboring for Words, we cannot but come short in Expression.

Reviewing our late Danger, we remember our Church and State, overrun by
Popery and Arbitrary Power, and brought to the Point of Destruction, by the
Conduct of Men (that were our true Invaders) that brake the Sacred Fences of
our Laws, and (which was worst) the very Constitution of our Legislature.

So that there was no Remedy left but the Last.

The only Person, under Heaven, that could apply this Remedy, was Your Highness.

You are of a Nation, whose Alliances in all Times, has been agreeable and
prosperous to us.

You are of a Family most Illustrious, Benefactors to Mankind. To have the
Title of Sovereign Prince, Stadtholder, and to have worn the Imperial Crown,
are among their lesser Dignities. They have long enjoyed a Dignity singular and
transcendent, viz. To be Champions of Almighty God, sent forth in several Ages,
to vindicate his Cause against the greatest Oppressions.

To this Divine Commission, our Nobles, our Gentry, and among them our brave
English Soldiers, rendered themselves and their Arms upon your appearing.

GREAT SIR, When we look back to the last Month, and contemplate the Swiftness
and Fullness of our present Deliverance, astonished, we think it miraculous.

Your Highness, led by the Hand of Heaven, and called by the Voice of the
People, has preserved our dearest Interests.

The Protestant Religion, which is Primitive Christianity restored.

Our Laws, which are our ancient Title to our Lives, Liberties and Estates, and
without which this World were a Wilderness.

But what Retribution can We make to your Highness?

Our Thoughts are full-charged with Gratitude.

Your Highness has a lasting Monument in the Hearts, in the Prayers, in the
Praises of all good Men among us. And late Posterity will celebrate your
ever-glorious Name, till Time shall be no more.

Chapman, Mayor. Cur' special' tent' die Jovis xx. die Decemb' 1688. Annoque
RR. Jacobi Secundi Angl' etc. quarto.
THIS Court does desire Mr. Recorder to print his Speech this day made to the
Prince of Orange at the time of this Court's attending his Highness with the
Deputies of the several Wards, and other Members of the Common Council.

Wagstaffe.

His Highness the Prince of Orange's Speech to the Scots Lords and Gentlemen.
With their Advice, and his Highness's Answer. With a true Account of what past
at their Meeting in the Council Chamger at Whitehall, January 7th. 168^.
His Highness the Prince of Orange having caused Advertise such of the Scots
Lords and Gentlemen as were in Town, met them in a Room at St. James's, upon
Monday the Seventh of January, at Three of the Clock in the Afternoon, and had
this Speech to them.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
THE only Reason that induced me to undergo so great an Undertaking, was, That
I saw the Laws and Liberties of these Kingdoms overturned, and the Protestant
Religion in Imminent Danger: And seeing you are here so many Noblemen and
Gentlemen, I have called you together, that I may have your Advice, what is to
be done for Securing the Protestant Religion, and Restoring your Laws and
Liberties, according to my Declaration.

As soon as his Highness had retired, the Lords and Gentlemen went to the
Council Chamger at Whitehall; and having chosen the Duke of Hamilton their
President, they fell a consulting, what Advice was fit to be given to his
Highness in this Conjuncture: And after some hours Reasoning, they agreed upon
the Materials of it, and appointed the Clerks, with such as were to assist
them, to draw up in Writing, what the Meeting thought expedient, to advise his
Highness, and to bring it in to the Meeting the next in the Afternoon.

Tuesday, the Eighth Instant, the Writing was presented in the Meeting: And
some time being spent in Reasoning about the fittest way of Coveening a General
Meeting of the Estates of Scotland. At last the Meeting came to agree in their
Opinion, and appointed the Advice to be writ clean over, according to the
Amendments. But as they were about to part for that Diet, the Earl of Arran
proposed to them, as his Lordship's Advice, that they should move the Prince of
Orange, to desire the King to return and call a Free Parliament, which would be
the best way to secure the Protestant Religion and Property, and to heal all
Breaches. This Proposal seemed to dissatisfie the whole Meeting, and the Duke
of Hamilton their President, Father to the Earl; but they presently parted.

Wednesday, the Ninth of January, they met at three of the Clock in the same
Room, and Sir Patrick Hume took notice of the Proposal made by the Earl of
Arran, and desired to know if there was any there that would second it: But
none appearing to do it, he said, That what the Earl had proposed, was
evidently opposite and inimicous to his Highness the Prince of Orange's
Undertaking, his Declaration, and the good Intentions of preserving the
Protestant Religion, and of Restoring their Laws and Liberties expressed in it;
and further, desired that the Meeting should declare this to be their Opinion
of it. The Lord Cardross seconded Sir Patrick's Motion: It was answered by the
Duke of Hamilton, President of the Meeting, That their Business was to prepare
an Advice to be offered to the Prince; and the Advice being now ready to go to
the Vote, there was no need that the Meeting should give their Sense of the
Earl's Proposal, which neither before nor after Sir Patrick's Motion, any had
pretended to own or second; so that it was fallen and out of doors; and that
the Vote of the Meeting, upon the Advice brought in by their Order, would
sufficiently declare their Opinion: This being seconded by the Earl of
Sutherland, the Lord Cardross and Sir Patrick did acquiesce in it; and the
Meeting Voted unanimously the Advice following.

To His Highness the Prince of Orange.
WE the Lords and Gentlemen of the Kingdom of Scotland, Assembled at your
Highness's desire, in this Extraordinary Conjunction, do give your Highness our
Humble and Hearty Thanks for your Pious and Generous Undertaking, for
Preserving of the Protestant Religion, and Restoring the Laws and Liberties of
these Kingdoms.

In order to the Attaining these Ends, our humble Advice and Desire is, That
your Highness take upon You the Administration of all Affairs, both Civil and
Military; the Disposal of the Public Revenues and Fortresses of the Kingdom of
Scotland, and the doing every Thing that is necessary for the Preservation of
the Peace of the Kingdom, until a general Meeting of the States of the Nation,
which we humbly desire your Highness to Call, to be holden at Edinburgh the
Fourteenth day of March next, by your Letters or Proclamation, to be published
at the Market-Cross of Edingburgh, and other Head-Boroughs of the several
Shires and Stewartries, as sufficient Intimation to All concerned, and
according to the Custom of the Kingdom: And that the Publication of these your
Letters or Proclamation, be by the Sheriffs, or Stewart Clerks, for the
Freeholders, who have the value of Lands, holden according to Law, for making
Elections; and by the Town-Clerks of the several Buroughs, for the meeting of
the whole Burgesses of the respective Royal Buroughs, to make their Elections
at least Fifteen Days before the Meeting of the Estates at Edingburgh; and the
Respective Clerks to make Intimation thereof, at least Ten Days before the
Meetings for Elections: And that the whole Electors and Members of the said
Meeting at Edingburgh, qualified as above Expressed, be Protestants, without any
other Exception or Limitation whatsoever; to Deliberate and Resolve what is to
be done for securing the Protestant Religion, and Restoring the Laws and
Liberties of the Kingdom, according to your Highness's Declaration. Dated at
the Council Chamger in White hall, the Tenth Day of January, 1689.

This Address being Subscribed by Thirty Lords, and about Eighty Gentlemen, was
presented in their presence at St. James's, by the Duke of Hamilton their
President, to his Highness the Prince of Orange, who thanked them for the Trust
they reposed in him, and desired time to consider upon so weighty an Affair.

Upon the Fourteenth of January, his Highness the Prince of Orange met again
with the Scots Lords and Gentlemen at St. James's; And spoke to them as follows.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
IN persuance of your Advice, I will, until the Meeting of the States in March
next, give such Orders concerning the Affairs of Scotland, as are necessary for
the Calling of the said Meeting, for the preserving of the peace; the applying
of the public Revenue to the most pressing Uses, and putting the Fortresses in
the Hands of persons, in whom the Nation can have a just Confidence: And I do
further assure you, That you will always find me ready to concur with you in
every Thing that may be found necessary for Securing the Protestant Religion,
and Restoring the Laws and Liberties of the Nation.

The Earl of Crawfourd desired of his Highness, That himself, the Earl of
Louthian, and others, come to Town since the Address was presented, might have
an opportunity to Subscribe it; which was accordingly done: His Highness
Retired, and all showed great Satisfaction with his Answer.

The Emperor of Germany 's Account of K. James 's Misgovernment in joining with
the King of France, ( the Common Enemy of Christendom) in his Letter to King
James, viz.
LEOPOLD, etc.

WE have received your Majesty's Letters, dated from St. Germans the sixth of
February last, by the Earl of Carlingford, your Envoy in our Court: By them we
have understood the Condition your Majesty is reduced to; and that you being
deserted after the Landing of the Prince of Orange, by your Army, and even by
your Domestic Servants, and by those you most consided in, and almost by all
your Subjects, you have been forced by a sudden Flight to provide for your own
Safety, and to seek Shelter and Protection in France: Lastly, that you desire
Assistance from us for the recovering your Kingdoms. We do assure your Majesty,
that as soon as we heard of this severe turn of Affairs, we were moved at it,
not only with the common sense of Humanity, but with much deeper Impressions
suitable to the sincere Affection which we have always born to you. And we were
heartily sorry that at last that was come to pass, which (tho we hoped for
better things) yet our own sad thoughts had suggested to us would ensue. If
your Majesty had rather given Credit to the Friendly Remonstrances that were
made you, by our late Envoy, the Count de Kaunitz, in our Name, than the
deceitful Insinuations of the French, whose chief aim was, by fomenting
continual Divisions between you and your People, to gain thereby an Opportunity
to insult the more securely over the rest of Christendom: And if your Majesty
had put a stop, by your Force and Authority, to their many Infractions of the
Peace, of which by the Treaty at Nimegen you are made the Guarantee, and to
that end, entered into Consultations with us, and such others as have the like
just Sentiments in this matter; We are verily persuaded that by this means you
should have in a great measure quieted the Minds of your People, which were so
much exasperated through their aversion to our Religion, and the public Peace
had been preserved as well in your Kingdoms as here in the Roman Empire. But
now we refer it even to your Majesty, to judge what condition we can be in to
afford you any Assistance, we being not only Engaged in a War with the Turks,
but finding our selves, at the same time unjustly and barbarously Attacked by
the French, contrary to, and against the Faith of Treaties, they then reckoning
themselves secure of England. And this ought not to be concealed; that the
greatest Injuries which have been done to our Religion have flowed from no
other than the French themselves; who not only esteem it lawful for them, to
make perfidious Leagues with the sworn Enemies of the Holy Cross, tending to
the destruction both of us and of the whole Christian World, in order to the
checking our Endeavors which were undertaken for the glory of God, and to stop
those Successes which it has pleased Almighty God to give us hitherto; but
further have heaped one Treuchery upon another, even within the Empire it self.
The Cities of the Empire which were Surrendered upon Articles, signed by the
Dauphin himself, have been exhausted by excessive Impositions; and after their
being exhausted, have been Plundered, and after Plundring have been Burned and
Razed. The Palaces of Princes, which in all times, and even in the most
destructive Wars, have been preserved, are now burnt down to the ground. The
Churches are Robbed, and such as submitted themselves to them are in a most
Barbarous manner, carried away as Slaves. In short, It is become a Diversion to
them to commit all manner of Insolences and Cruelties in many places, but
chiefly in Catholic Countries, exceeding the Cruelties of the Turks
themselves; which having imposed an absolute necessity upon us to secure our
selves and the holy Roman Empire by the best means we can think on, and that no
less against them than against the Turks; we promise our selves from your
Justice ready assent to this, That it ought not to be imputed to us, if we
endeavor to procure, by a just War, that security to our selves which we could
not hitherto obtain by so many Treaties; and that in order to the obtaining
thereof, we take measures for our mutual Defense of Preservation, with all
those who are equally concerned in the same Design with us. It remains that we
beg of God that he would Direct all things to his glory, and that he would
grant your Majesty true and solid Comforts under this your great Calamity; we
embrace you with tender Affections of a Brother.

At Vienna the 9th of April, 1689.
The Declaration of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons Assembled at
Westminster; concerning the Misgovernment of King James, and filling up the
Throne. Presented to King William and Queen Mary, by the right Honorable the
Marquess of Hallifax, Speaker to the House of Lords. With His Majesty's most
gracious Answer thereunto.
WHereas the late King James the Second, by the Assistance of diverse Evil
Counselors, Judges, and Ministers Employed by Him, did endeavor to Subvert
and Extirpate the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of this
Kingdom;

By Assuming and Exercising a Power of Dispensing with, and Suspending of Laws,
and the Execution of Laws, without consent of Parliament.

By Committing and Prosecuting diverse Worthy Prelates, for humbly Petitioning
to be Excused from concurring to the said assumed Power.

By (...), and causing to be executed, a Commission under the great Seal, for
erecting a Court called, The Court of Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Causes.

By Levying Money for and to the Use of the Crown, by pretense of Prerogative,
for other time, and in other manner, than the same was granted by Parliament.

By raising and keeping a standing Army within this Kingdom in the time of
Peace, whithout consent of Parliament; and Quartering Soldiers contrary to Law.

By causing several good Subjects, being Protestants, to be Disarmed at the
same time, when Papists were both Armed and Employed contrary to Law.

By violating the Freedom of Election of Members to serve in Parliament.

By Prosecutions in the Court of King's Bench for Matters and Causes cognizable
only in Parliament; and by diverse other Arbitrary and Illegal Courses.

And whereas of late Years, Partial, Corrupt, and Unqualified Persons, have
been returned and served on Juries in Trials, and particularly diverse Jurors in
Trials for High Treason, which were not Freeholders.

And Excessive Bail has been required of Persons committed in Criminal Cases,
to elude the Benefit of the Laws made for the Liberty of the Subjects.

And Excessive Fines have been Imposed.

And Illegal and Cruel Punishments inflicted.

And several Grants and Promises made of Fines and Forfeitures before any
Convictions or Judgment against the Persons upon whom the same were to be
Levied.

All which are utterly and directly contrary to the known Laws and Statutes,
and Freedom of this Realm.

And whereas the said late K. James the Second having abdicated the Government,
and the Throne being thereby vacant,

His Highness the Prince of Orange (whom it has pleased Almighty God to make
the glorious Instrument of Delivering this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary
Power) did (by the Advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and diverse
principal Persons of the Commons) cause Letters to be written to the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, being Protestants, and other Letters to the several
Counties, Cities, Universities, Buroughs, and Cinque Ports, for the Choosing of
such Persons to represent them, as were of Right to be sent to Parliament, to
Meet and Sit at Westminster upon the 22d Day of January in this Year 1688, in
order to such an Establishment, as that their Religion, Laws and Liberties,
might not again be in danger of being Subverted: Upon which Letters Elections
having been accordingly made;

And thereupon the said Lord's Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, pursuant to
their respective Letters and Elections, being now Assembled in a Full and Free
Representative of this Nation, taking into their most serious Consideration the
best Means for attaining the Ends aforesaid, do in the first place (as their
Ancestors in like Case have usually done) for the Vindicating and Asserting
their Ancient Rights and Liberties, Declare,

That the pretended Power of Suspending of Laws, or the Execution of Laws, by
Regal Authority, without Consent of Parliament, is Illegal.

That the pretended Power of Dispensing with Laws, or the Execution of Laws, by
Regal Authority, as it has been assumed and exercised of late, is Illegal.

That the Commission for erecting the late Court of Commissioners for
Ecclesiastical Causes, and all other Commissions and Courts of the like Nature,
are Illegal and Pernicious.

That levying of Money for or to the Use of the Crown, by pretense of
Prerogative, without grant of Parliament for longer time, or in other manner,
than the same is or shall be granted, is Illegal.

That it is the Right of the Subjects to Petition the King, and all Commitments
and Prosecutions for such Petitioning, are Illegal.

That the Raising or Keeping a standing Army within the Kingdom in time of
Peace, unless it be with Consent of Parliament, is against Law.

That the Subjects which are Protestants may have Arms for their Defense
suitable to their Condition, and as allowed by Law.

That Election of Members of Parliament ought to be Free.

That the Freedom of Speech, and Debates or Proceedings in Parliament, ought
not to be impeached or questioned in any Court or place out of Parliament.

That excessive Bail ought not to be required, nor excessive Fines imposed, nor
cruel and unusual Punishments inflicted.

That Jurors ought to be duly empannell'd and returned, and Jurors which pass
upon Men in Trials for High Treason ought to be Freeholders.

That all grants and promises of Fines and Forfeitures of particular Persons
before Conviction, are Illegal and Void.

And that for Redress of all Grievances, and for the amending, strengthening
and preserving of the Laws, Parliaments ought to be held frequently.

And they do claim, demand, and insist upon all and singular the Premises, as
their undoubted Rights and Liberties; and that no Declarations Judgments,
Doings, or Proceedings, to the prejudice of the People in any of the said
Premises, ought in any wise to be drawn hereafter into Consequence or Example.

To which Demand of their Rights they are particularly encouraged by the
Declaration of His Highness the Prince of Orange, as being the only Means for
obtaining a full redress and remedy therein.

Having therefore an entire Confidence, that his said Highness the Prince of
Orange will perfect the Deliverance so far advanced by Him, and will still
preserve them from the Violation of their Rights, which they have here
asserted, and from all other Attempts upon their Religion, Rights, and
Liberties;

The said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons Assembled at Westminster,
do resolve,

That William and Mary, Prince and Princess of Orange, be, and be declared,
King and Queen of England, France, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, to hold the Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms and
Dominions, to them the said Prince and Princess, during their Lives, and the
Life of the Survivor of them; And that the sole and full Exercise of the Regal
Power be only in, and executed by the said Prince of Orange, in the Names of
the said Prince and Princess during their joint lives; and after their
Deceases, the said Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms and Dominions
to be to the Heirs of the Body of the said Princess; and for default of such
Issue, to the Princess Ann of Denmark, and the Heirs of Her Body; and for
default of such Issue, to the Heirs of the Body of the said Prince of Orange.

And the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, do pray the said
Prince and Princess of Orange to accept the same accordingly.

And that the Oaths hereafter mentioned be taken by all Persons, of whom the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy might be required by Law, instead of them;
and that the said Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy be Abrogated.

I A. B. do sincerely promise and swear, That I will be Faithful, and bear true
Allegiance to their Majesty's King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.

So help me God.

I A. B. do swear, That I do from my Heart Abhor, Detest, and Abjure, as
Impious and Heretical, this Damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes
Excommunicated or Deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of Rome,
may be Deposed or Murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I
do declare, That no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, has,
or ought to have, any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preeminence, or
Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within this Realm.

So help me God. Jo. Brown, Cleric' Parl.

Die Veneris 15 Feb. 1688.
His Majesty's Gracious Answer, to the Declaration of both Houses.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THIS is certainly the greatest proof of the Trust you have in Us, that can be
given, which is the thing that makes us value it the more; and we thankfully
Accept what you have Offered. And as I had no other Intention in coming hither,
than to preserve your Religion, Laws and Liberties; so you may be sure, That I
shall endeavor to support them, and shall be willing to concur in any thing
that shall be for the Good of the Kingdom, and to do all that is in my Power to
advance the Welfare and Glory of the Nation.

Die Veneris (...) Februarii 1688.
ORdered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Assembled at Westminster, That
His Majesty's Gracious Answer to the Declaration of both Houses, and the
Declaration, be forthwith Printed and Published; And that His Majesty's
Gracious Answer this Day be added to the Engrossed Declaration in Parchment, to
be Enrolled in Parliament and Chancery.


Jo. Brown, Cleric' Parliamentorum.

A PROCLAMATION.
WHereas it has pleased Almighty God, in his Great Mercy to this Kingdom, to
Vouchsafe us a Miraculous Deliverance from Popery and Arbitrary Power; and that
our Preservation is due, next under God, to the Resolution and Conduct of His
Highness the Prince of ORANGE, whom God has Chosen to be the Glorious
Instrument of such an Inestimable Happiness to us and our Posterity: And being
highly sensible, and fully persuaded, of the Great and Eminent Virtues of Her
Highness the Princess of ORANGE, whose Zeal for the Protestant Religion, will,
no doubt, bring a Blessing along with Her upon this Nation. And whereas the
Lords and Commons, now Assembled at Westminster, have made a Declaration, and
Presented the same to the said Prince and Princess of ORANGE, and therein
desired them to Accept the Crown; who have Accepted the same Accordingly. We
therefore, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, together with the
Lord Mayor and Citizens of London, and others of the Commons of this Realm, do
with a full Consent Publish and Proclaim, according to the said Declaration,
WILLIAM and MARY, Prince and Princess of ORANGE, to be KING and QUEEN of
England, France and Ireland, with all the Dominions and Cerritories thereunto
belonging: Who are accordingly so to be Owned, Deemed, Accepted and taken by
all the People of the aforesaid Realms and Dominions, who are from henceforward
bound to Acknowledge and Pay unto them all Faith and true Allegiance;
Beseeching God, by whom Kings Reign, to Bless King WILLIAM and Queen MARY with
Long and Happy Years to Reign over Us.

God Save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
Jo. Brown, Cleric' Parliamentorum.

The Declaration of the Estates of Scotland concerning the Misgovernment of
King James the Seventh, and filling up the Throne with King William and Queen
Mary.
THAT King James the 7th had acted irregularly.

1. By His Erecting public Schools and Societies of the Jesuits; and not only
allowing Mass to be publicly said, but also inverting Protestant Chapels and
Churches, to Public Mass-houses, contrary to the express Laws against saying
and hearing of Mass.

2. By allowing Popish Books to be Printed and Dispersed, by a Gift to a Popish
Printer, designing him Printer to his Majesty's Household, College and Chapel,
contrary to the Laws.

3. By taking the Children of Protestant Noblemen and Gentlemen, sending them
abroad to be bred Papists, making great Funds and Donations to Popish Schools
and Colleges abroad; bestowing Pensions on Priests, and perverting Protestants
from their Religion, by Offers of Places, Preferments and Pensions.

4. By disarming Protestants, while at the same time he employed Papists in the
Places of greatest Trust, Civil and Military, such as Chancellor, Secretaries,
Privy Counselors, and Lords of Session, thrusting out Protestants, to make
room for Papists, and intrusting the Forts and Magazines of the Kingdom in
their hands.

5. By Imposing Oaths contrary to Law.

6. By giving Gifts and Grants for exacting of Money without Consent of
Parliament, or Convention of Estates.

7. By Levying and keeping on foot a standing Army in time of Peace, without
consent of Parliament; which Army did exact Locality, free and day Quarters.

8. By Employing the Officers of the Army, as Judges through the Kingdom, and
imposing them where there were held Offices and Jurisdictions, by whom many of
the Leiges were put to Death summarily without legal Trial, Jury or Record.

9. By imposing exorbitant Fines to the Value of the Parties Estates, exacting
extravagant Bail, and disposing Fines and Forfaulture before any Process or
Conviction.

10. By Imprisoning Persons without expressing the Reason, and delaying to put
them to Trial.

11. By causing pursue and forfault several Persons upon stretches of old and
obsolete Laws, upon frivolous and weak pretenses, upon lame and defective
Probations; as particularly the late Earl of Argyle, to the scandal and
reproach of the Justice of the Nation.

12. By Subverting the Right of the Royal Boroughs, the Third Estate of
Parliament, imposing upon them not only Magistrates, but also the whole Town
Council and Clerks, contrary to the Liberties and express Charters, without the
pretense either of Sentence, Surrender or Consent: So that the Commissioners to
Parliaments being chosen by the Magistrates and Councils, the King might in
effect as well nominate that entire Estate of Parliament; many of the said
Magistrates put in by him were avowed Papists; and the Burghs were forced to
pay Money for the Letters, imposing these Illegal Magistrates and Council upon
them.

13. By sending Letters to the chief Courts of Justice, not only ordering the
Judges to stop and desist sine die, to determine Causes, but also ordering and
commanding them how to proceed in Cases depending before them, contrary to the
express Laws: And by changing the Nature of the Judges Gifts, ad vitam aut
culpam, and giving them Commissions ad been placitum, to dispose them to
compliance by Arbitrary Courses, turning them out of their Offices when they
did not comply.

14. By granting Personal Protections for Civil Debts, contrary to Law.

All which are utterly and directly contrary to the known Laws, Freedoms and
Statutes of this Realm.

Therefore the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, find, and declare, That King
James the Seventh, being a professed papist, did assume the Regal Power, and
acted as a King, without ever taking the Oath required by Law; and have by
advice of Evil and Wicked Counselors invaded the Fundamental Constitution of
the Kingdom, and altered it from a Legal, limited Monarchy, to an Arbitrary and
Despotick Power; and has exercised the same to the subversion of the
Protestant Religion, and the violation of the Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom: Inverting all the Ends of Government, whereby he has forfaulted the
Right to the Crown, and the Throne is become vacant.

And whereas his Royal Highness, William, then Prince of Orange, now King of
England, whom it has pleased the Almighty God to make the glorious Instrument
of delivering these Kingdoms from Popery and Arbitrary Power, did, by advice of
several Lords and Gentlemen of this Nation, at London, for the time, call the
Estates of this Kingdom to meet the Fourteenth of March last, in order to such
an Establishment, as that their Religion, Laws and Liberties might not be again
in danger of being subverted. And the said Estates being now assembled, in a
full and free Representative of this Nation, taking to their most serious
consideration, the best means for attaining the Ends aforesaid, Do in the first
place, as their Ancestors in the like cases have usually done, for the
vindicating and asserting their Ancient Rights and Liberties, declare,

That by the Law of this Kingdom no Papist can be King or Queen of the Realm,
nor bear any Office whatsoever therein; nor can any Protestant Successor,
exercise the Regal Power, until he or she swear the Coronation Oath.

That all Proclamations asserting an Absolute Power, to cass, annul and disable
Laws; the erecting Schools and Colleges for Jesuits; the inverting Protestant
Chapels and Churches to public Mass-houses, and the allowing Mass to be said,
are contrary to Law.

That the allowing Popish Books to be printed and dispersed, is contrary to Law.

That the taking the Children of Noblemen, Gentlemen and others, sending and
keeping them abroad to be bred Papists: The making Funds and Donations to
Popish Schools and Colleges; the bestowing Pensions on Priests, and the
perverting Protestants from their Religion by offers of Places, Preferments and
Pensions, are contrary to Law.

That the disarming of Protestants, and employing Papists in the Places of
greatest Trust, both Civil and Military; the thrusting out Protestants to make
room for Papists, and the entrusting Papists with the Forts and Magazines of
the Kingdom, are contrary to Law.

That the Imposing Oaths, without Authority of Parliament, is contrary to Law.

That the giving Gifts or Grants for raising of Money without the Consent of
Parliament, or Convention of Estates, is contrary to Law.

That the employing Officers of the Army as Judges through the Kingdom, or
imposing them where there were several Offices and Jurisdictions, and the
putting the Lieges to death summarily, and without legal Trial, Jury or Record,
are contrary to Law.

That the imposing extraordinary Fines, the exacting of exorbitant Bail, and
the disposing of Fines and Forfaultures before Sentence, are contrary to Law.

That the Imprisoning Persons, without expressing the reason thereof, and
delaying to put them to Trial, are contrary to Law.

That the causing pursue and forfault Persons upon Stretches of old and
obsolete Laws, upon frivolous and weak Pretenses, upon lame and defective
Probation, as particularly the late Earl of Argyle, are contrary to Law.

That the nominating and imposing Magistrates, Councils and Clerks upon Burghs,
contrary to the Liberties and express Charters, is contrary to Law.

That the sending Letters to the Courts of Justice, ordaining the Judges to
stop or desist from determining Causes, or ordaining them how to proceed in
Causes depending before them; and the changing the Nature of the Judges Gifts
ad vitam aut culpam, unto Commissions Durante been placito, are contrary to Law.

That the granting Personal Protections for Civil Debts, is contrary to Law.

That the forcing the Lieges to depone against themselves in Capital Crimes,
however the Punishment be restricted, is contrary to Law.

That the using Torture without Evidence, or in ordinary Crimes, is contrary to
Law.

That the sending of an Army in a Hostile manner upon any part of the Kingdom,
in a peaceable time, and exacting of Locality, and any manner of free Quarter,
is contrary to Law.

That the charging the Lieges with Law-burroughs at the King's instance, and
the imposing of Bands without the Authority of Parliament, and the suspending
the Advocates from their Employments for not compearing when such Bands were
offered, were contrary to Law.

That the putting of Garrisons on private Men's Houses in a time of peace,
without the consent of the Authority of Parliament, is contrary to Law.

That the opinion of the Lords of Session in the two Causes following, were
contrary to Law (viz.) 1. That the concerting the demand of a Supply for a
Forfaulted Person, although not given, is Treason. (2.) That Persons refusing
to discover what are their private thoughts and judgments in relation to points
of Treason, or other Men's actions, are guilty of Treason.

That the fining Husbands for their Wives withdrawing from the Church, was
contrary to Law.

That Prelacy, and Superiority of any Office in the Church above Presbyters, is
and has been a great and unsupportable Grievance and Trouble to this Nation,
and contrary to the Inclinations of the Generality of the People ever since the
Reformation, they having Reformed from Popery by Presbyters, and therefore
ought to be abolished.

That it is the Right and Privilege of the Subjects to protest for remand of
Law to the King and Parliament, against Sentences pronounced by the Lords of
Session, providing the same do not stop execution of the said Sentences.

That it is the Right of the Subjects to Petition the King, and that all
Imprisonments and Prosecutions for such Petitions are contrary to Law.

That for redress of all Grievances, and for the amending, strengthening and
preserving of the Laws, Parliaments ought to be frequently called and allowed
to sit, and the freedom of Speech and Debate secured to the Members.

And they do claim and demand and insist upon all and sundry the Premises, as
their undoubted Right and Liberties, and that no Declarations, Doings or
Proceedings to the prejudice of the People in any of the said Premises, ought
in any ways to be drawn hereafter in consequence and example, but that all
Forfaultures, Fines, loss of Offices, Imprisonments, Banishments, Pursuits,
Persecutions and Rigorous Executions be considered, and the Parties seized, be
redressed.

To which demand of the Rights, and Redressing of their Grievances, they are
particularly encouraged by his Majesty the King of England his Declaration for
the Kingdom of Scotland of the (...) day of October last, as being the only
means for obtaining a full Redress and remead therein.

Having therefore an entire Confidence, That his said Majesty the King of
England, will perfyte the Deliverance so far advanced by him, and will still
preserve them from the Violation of the Rights which they have here asserted;
and from all other Attempts upon their Religion, Laws and Liberties,

The said Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, do resolve, That William and
Mary, King and Queen of England, France and Ireland, ^e and Be Declared King
and Queen of Scotland; to Hold the Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdom
of Scotland, to them the said King and Queen during their Lives, and the
longest Liver of them; and that the sole and full exercise of the Royal Power,
be only in, and exercised by him the said King, in the Names of the said King
and Queen, during their joint lives: And after their deceases, the said Crown
and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdom to be to the Heirs of the Body of the
said Queen. Which failing, to the Princess Ann of Denmark, and the Heirs of her
Body: Which also failing, to the Heirs of the Body of the said William King of
England.

And they do pray the said King and Queen of England to accept the same
accordingly.

And that the Oath hereafter mentioned be taken by all Protestants of whom the
Oath of Allegiance, and any other Oaths and Declarations might be required by
Law instead thereof. And that the said Oath of Allegiance, and other Oaths and
Declarations, may be Abrogated.

I A. B. Do sincerely Promise and Swear, That I will be Faithful and bear True
Allegiance to Their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary.

So help me God.
A Proclamation declaring William and Mary King and Queen of England, to be
King and Queen of Scotland. Edinburgh, April 11. 1689.
WHereas, the Estates of this Kingdom of Scotland, by their Act of the Date of
these Presents, have Resolved, That WILLIAM and MARY, King and Queen of
England, France and Ireland, Be, and Be declared King and Queen of Scotland, to
hold the Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdom of Scotland, to them the
said King and Queen, during their Lives, and the longest Liver of Them; and
that the Sole and Full Exercise of the Regal Power, be only in, and Exercised
by the said King, in the Names of the said King and Queen, during their joint
Libes. As also, the Estates having Resolved and Enacted an Instrument of
Government, or Claim of Right, to be presented with the Offer of the Crown, to
the said King and Queen. They do Statute and Ordain, that William and Mary,
King and Queen of England, France and Ireland, be accordingly forthwith
Proclaimed King and Queen of Scotland, at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, by the
Lion King at Arms, or his Deputs, his Brethren Heralds, Macers and Pursevants,
and at the Head-Burghs of all the Shires, Stewarties, Bailliaries, and
Regalities within the Kingdom, by Messengers at Arms. Extracted forth of the
Meeting of the Estates, by me,

Ja. Dalrymple, Cls.

God save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
The Manner of the King and Queen taking the Scottish Coronation Oath.
May 11. 1689.
THis day being appointed for the public Reception of the Commissioners, viz.
The Earl of Argyle, Sir James Montgomery of Skelmerly, and Sir John Dalrymple
of Stair younger, who were sent by the Meeting of the Estates of Scotland, with
an Offer of the Crown of that Kingdom to Their Majesty's, they accordingly, at
three of the Clock, met at the Council Chamger, and from thence were Conducted
by Sir Charles Cotterel, Master of the Ceremonies, attended by most of the
Nobility and Gentry of that Kingdom, who reside in and about this place, to the
Banqueting House; where the King and Queen came attended by many Persons of
Quality, the Sword being carried before them by the Lord Cardrosse, (and Their
Majesty's being placed on the Throne under a Rich Canopy) they first presented
a Letter from the Estates to his Majesty; then the Instrument of Government;
Thirdly, a Paper containing the Grievances, which they desired might be
Redressed; and Lastly, an Address to His Majesty for turning the Meeting of the
said Estates into a Parliament: All which being Signed by his Grace the Duke of
Hamilton, as President of the Meeting, and read to their Majesty's, the King
returned to the Commissioners the following Answer.

WHen I engaged in this Undertaking, I had particular Regard and Consideration
for Scotland, and therefore I did emit a Declaration in relation to That as
well as to this Kingdom, which I intend to make good and effectual to them. I
take it very kindly that Scotland has expressed so much Confidence in, and
Affection to Me; They shall find Me willing to assist them in every thing that
concerns the Weal and Interest of that Kingdom, by making what Laws shall be
necessary for the Security of their Religion, Property, and Liberty, and to
ease them of what may be justly grievous to them.

After which, the Coronation Oath was tendered to Their Majesty's, which the
Earl of Argyle spoke word by word directly, and the King and Queen repeated it
after him, holding Their Right Hands up after the manner of taking Oaths in
Scotland.

The Meeting of the Estates of Scotland did Authorize their Commissioners to
represent to His Majesty, That that Clause in the Oath in relation to the
rooting out of Heretics did not import the destroying of Heretics; And that
by the Law of Scotland no Man was to be persecuted for his private Opinion; And
even Obstinate and Convicted Heretics were only to be denounced Rebels or
Outlawed, whereby their Moveable Estates are Confiscated. His Majesty at the
repeating that Clause in the Oath, Did declare, that He did not mean by these
words, That He was under any Obligation to become a Persecutor. To which the
Commissioners made Answer, That neither the meaning of the Oath, or the Law of
Scotland did import it. Then the King replied, That He took the Oath in that
Sense, and called for Witnesses the Commissioners and others present; And then
both Their Majesty's Signed the said Coronation Oath.

After which the Commissioners and several of the Scottish Nobility kissed Their
Majesty's Hands.

The Coronation OATH of England.
The Archbishop or Bishop shall say, WIll You solemnly Promise and Swear to
govern the People of this Kingdom of England, and the Dominions thereto
belonging, according to the Statues in Parliament agreed on, and the Laws and
Customs of the same?


The King and Queen shall say, I solemnly Promise so to do.


Archbishop or Bishop. Will You to Your Power, cause Law and Justice in Mercy
to be Executed in all Your Judgments?


King and Queen. I Will.


Archbishop or Bishop. Will You to the utmost of Your Power Maintain the Laws
of God, the true Profession of the Gospel, and the Protestant Reformed Religion
Established by Law? And will You Preserve, unto the Bishops and Clergy of this
Realm, and to the Churches committed to their Charge, all such Rights and
Privileges as by Law do or shall appertain unto them, or any of them?


King and Queen. All this I Promise to do.


[After this, the King and Qeen laying His and Her Hand upon the Holy Gospels,
shall say,] King and Queen. The Things which I have here before Promised, I
will Perform and Keep. So help me God.


[Then the King and Queen shall kiss the Book.) The Coronation OATH of Scotland.
WE William and Mary, King and Queen of Scotland, faithfully Promise and Swear,
by this Our solemn Oath in presence of the Eternal God, that during the whole
course of Our Life, we will serve the same Eternal God, to the uttermost of Our
Power, according as he has required in his most holy Word, revealed and
contained in the New and Old Testament, and according to the same Word shall
maintain the True Religion of Christ Jesus, the Preaching of his holy Word, and
the due and right Ministration of the Sacraments, now Received and Preached
within the Realm of Scotland; and shall abolish and gainstand all false
Religion contrary to the same, and shall Rule the People committed to our
Charge, according to the Will and Command of God, revealed in his aforesaid
Word, and according to the laudable Laws and Constitutions received in this
Realm, no ways repugnant to the said Word of the Eternal God, and shall
procure, to the utmost of Our Power, to the Kirk of God, and whole Christian
People, true and perfect Peace in all time coming. That we shall preserve and
keep inviolated the Rights and Rents, with all just Privileges of the Crown of
Scotland, neither shall we transfer nor alienate the same; That we shall forbid
and repress in all Estates and Degrees, Reif, Oppression, and all kind of
wrong. And we shall Command and Procure that Justice and Equity in all
Judgments be kept to all persons without exception, as the Lord and Father of
all Mercies shall be merciful to us. And we shall be careful to root out all
Heretics and Enemies to the true Worship of God, that shall be Convicted by
the true Kirk of God of the aforesaid Crimes, out of Our Lands and Empire of
Scotland. And we faithfully affirm the things above written by Our Solemn Oath.

God save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
Proposals humbly offered to the Lords and Commons in the present Convention,
for settling of the Government, etc.
My Lords and Gentlemen;
YOU are Assembled upon Matters of the highest Importance to England and all
Christendom; and the result of your Thoughts, in this Convention, will make a
numerous Posterity Happy or Miserable. If therefore I have met with any Thing
that I think worthy of your Consideration, I should think my self wanting in
that duty which I owe to my Country and Mankind, if I should not lay it before
You. If there be (as some say) certain Lineaments in the Face of Truth, with
which one cannot be deceived, because they are not to be counterfeited; I hope,
the Considerations which I presume to offer You, will meet with your
Approbation: That, bringing back our Constitution to its first and purest
Original, refining it from some gross Abuses, and supplying its Defects, You
may be the Joy of the present Age, and the Glory of Posterity.

FIrst, It Is necessary to distinguish between Power it self, the Designation of
the Persons Governing, and the Form of Government. For,

1. All Power is from God as the Fountain and Original.

2. The Designation of the Persons, and the Form of Government, is either,
First, immediately from God, as in the Case of Saul and David, and the
Government of the Jews; or, Secondly, from the Community, choosing some Form of
Government, and subjecting themselves to it. But it must be noted, that though
Saul and David had a Divine Designation, yet the People assembled; and in a
General Assembly, by their Votes, freely chose them: Which proves, that there
can be no orderly or lasting Government, without Consent of the People Tacit or
Expressed; and God himself would not put Men under a Government without their
Consent. And in case of a Conquest, the People may be called Prisoners or
Slaves (which is a state contrary to the Nature of Man) but they cannot be
properly Subjects, till their Wills be brought to submit to the Government: So
that Conquest may make Way for a Government, but it cannot constitute it.

Secondly, There is a Supreme Power in every Community, essential to it, and
inseparable from it; by which, if it be not limited immediately by God, it can
form it self into any kind of Government. And in some extraordinary Occasions,
when the Safety and Peace of the Public necessarily require it, can supply the
Defects, reform the Abuses, and re-establish the true Fundamentals of the
Government; by Purging, Refining, and bringing Things back to their first
Original: Which Power may be called The Supreme Power Real.

Thirdly, When the Community has made choice of some Form of Government, and
subjected themselves to it, having invested some Person or Persons with the
Supreme Power: The Power in those Persons may be called, The Supreme Power
Personal.

Fourthly, If this Form be a mixed Government of Monarchy, Aristocracy and
Democracy; and for the easy Execution of the Laws, the Executive Power be
lodged in a single Person; He has, a Supreme Power Personal, quoad hoc.

Fifthly, The Supreme Power Personal of England, is in Kings, Lords and
Commons; and so it was in Effect agreed to, by King Charles the First, in his
Answer to the nineteen Popositions; and resolved by the Convention of the Lords
and Commons in the year 1660. And note, That the Acts of that Convention, though
never confirmed by Parliament have been taken for Law, and particularly by the
Lord Chief Justice Hales.

Sixthly, The Supreme Power Personal of England fails three Ways.

1. It Is dissolved: For two Essential Parts fail. 1. a King. 2. a House of
Commons; which cannot be called according to Constitution, the King being gone,
and the Freedom of Election being destroyed by the Kings Encroachments.

2. The King has forfeited his Power several Ways. Subjection to the Bishop of
Rome, is the Subjection against which our Laws cry loudest: And even Barclay
(that Monarchical Politician) acknowledges, That if a King alienate his
Kingdom, or subject it to another, he forfeits it. And Grotius asserts, That if
a King really attempt to deliver up or subject his Kingdom, he may be therein
resisted: And that, if the King have part of the Supreme Power, and the People
or Senate the other part, (the King invading that part which is not his) a just
Force may be opposed, and he may lose his Part of the Empire. Grotius de Bello,
etc. Cap. 72. But that the King has subjected the Kingdom to the Pope, needs no
Proof; That he has usurped an absolute Power superieur to all Laws; made the
Peoples Share in the Legislative Power impertinent and useless, and thereby
invaded their just Rights, none can deny. 'Twere in vain to multiply Instances
of his Forfeitures: And, if we consider the Power exercised by him of late, it
will most evidently appear to all who understand the English Constitution, that
it admits of no such King, nor any such Power.

3. The King has deserted,

(1.) By incapacitating himself by a Religion inconsistent with the
Fundamentals of our Government.

(2.) By forsaking the Power the Constitution allowed him, and usurping a
Foreign one: So that tho the Person remained, the King was gone long ago.

(3.) By Personal Withdrawing.

Seventhly, The Supreme Power Real remains in the Community; and they may act
by their Original Power: And tho every Particular Person is, notwithstanding
such Dissolution, Forfeiture, or Desertion, subject to the Laws which were made
by the Supreme Power Personal, when in Being; yet the Communities Power is not
bound by them, but is paramount all Laws made by the Supreme Power Personal:
And has a full Right to take such Measures for Settling the Government, as they
shall think most sure and effectual, for the lasting Security and Peace of the
Nation. For we must note, that it was the Community of England, which first
gave Being to both King and Parliament, and to all the other Parts of our
Constitution.

Eighthly, The most Renowned Politician observes, That those Kingdoms and
Republics subsist longest that are often renewed, or brought back to their
first Beginnings; which is an Observation of Self-evident Truth, and implies,
That the Supreme Power Real has a Right to renew, or bring back. And the
most-ingenious Lawson observes (in his Politica) That the Community of England,
in the late Times, had the greatest Advantage that they or their Ancestors had
had for many Ages, for this purpose; tho God hid it from their Eyes: But the
wonderful Concurrence of such a series of Providence, as we now see and
admire, gives ground to hope, That the Veil is removed, and the Nation will now
see the Things that concern their Peace.

Ninthly, The Acts done and executed by the Supreme Power Personal (when in
Being) have so modeled the Parts and Persons of the Community, that the
Original Constitution is the best, justest, and the most desirable. The Royal
Family affords a Person that both Heaven and Earth point out for King. There
are Lords, whose Nobility is not affected by the Dissolution of the Government,
and are the subject Matter of a House of Lords; And there are Places, which by
Custom or Charter have Right to choose Representatives of the Commons.

Tenthly, There are inextricable Difficulties in all other Methods. For,

1. There is no Demise of the King, neither Civil nor Natural.

2. There is consequently no Descent.

3. The Community only has a Right to take Advantage of the King's Forfeiture
or Desertion.

4. Whatever other Power may be imagined in the two Houses, as Houses of
Parliament, it cannot justify it self to the Reason of any, who understand the
Bottom of our Constitution.

5. By this Method all Popish Successors may be excluded; and the Government
secured, in case all the Protestants of the Family die without Issue: And this
by the very Constitution of England. And the Question can never arise about the
Force or the Lawfulness of a Bill of Exclusion.

6. The Convention will not be obliged to take Oaths, etc.

Eleventhly, If these things be granted, and the Community be at Liberty to act
as above; it will certainly be most advisable, not only for the Security and
Welfare of the Nation, but (if rightly understood) for the Interest of their
Royal Highnesses, to limit the Crown as follows: -- To the Prince of Orange
during his Life (yet with all possible Honor and Respect to the Princess,
whose Interests and Inclinations are inseparably the same with his) Remainder
to the Princess of Orange, and the Heirs of her Body; Remainder to the Princess
of Denmark, and the Heirs of her Body; Remainder to the Heirs of the Body of
the Prince of Orange; Remainder as an Act of Parliament shall appoint.

This will have these Conveniences among others.

1. Husband and Wife are but one Person in Law, and her Husbands Honor is hers.

2. It puts the present Kingly Power into the best Hand in the World; which
(without Flattery) is agreed on by all Men.

3. It asserts the above said Power in the Community.

4. It will be some Acknowledgment to the Prince for what he has done for the
Nation: And it is worthy Observation, that before the Theocracy of the Jews
ceased, the manner of the Divine Designation of their Judges, was by God's
giving the People some Deliverance by the hand of the Person, to whose
Government they ought to submit; and this even in that time of extraordinary
Revelations. Thus Othniel, Gideon, Jephthah, Sampson, and others were invested
by Heaven with the Supreme Authority: And though Joshua had an immediate
Command from God to succeed Moses, and an Anointing to that purpose, by the
laying on of Moses's Hands: Yet the Foundation of the People's Submission to
him was laid in Jordan. And I challenge the best Historians to give an Instance
(since that Theocracy ceased) of a Designation of any Person to any Government
more visibly Divine than that which we now admire. If the Hand of Providence
(miraculously and timely disposing Natural Things, in every Circumstance to the
best advantage) should have any influence upon Men's Minds; most certainly we
ought not here to be insensible. If the Voice of the People be the Voice of
God, it never spoke louder: If a Nation of various Opinions, Interests and
Factions, from a turbulent and fluctuating State, falls into a serene and quiet
Calm, and Men's Minds are strangely united on a sudden; it shows from whence
they are influenced. In a word, if the Hand of God is to be seen in Human
Affairs, and his Voice to be heard upon Earth; we cannot any where (since the
ceasing of Miracles) find a clearer and more remarkable Instance, than is to be
observed in the present Revolution. If one examines the Posture of Foreign
Affairs, making way for the Prince's Expedition by some sudden Events and
Occurrences, which no Human Wisdom or Power could have brought about; if one
observes that Divine Influence which has directed all his Counsels, and crowned
his Undertakings, notwithstanding such innumerable Dangers and Difficulties,
with constant Honor and Success: If one considers how happily and wonderfully
both Persons and Things are changed in a little time, and without Blood; it
looks like so many marks of God's Favor, by which he thinks fit to point him
out to us in this extraordinary Conjuncture.

I will trouble you but with one Consideration more; which is, That the two
things most necessary in this Affair, are Unanimity and Dispatch: For without
both these your Counsels will have little Effect. In most things it is good to
be long in resolving; but in some it is fatal not to conclude immediately: And
presence of Mind is as great a Virtue, as Rashness is a Vice. For the turns of
Fortune are sometimes so quick, that if Advantage be not taken in the critical
hour, it is for ever lost. But, I hope, your Lordships, and all those Gentlemen
who compose this August Assembly, will proceed with so much Zeal and Harmony,
that the Result of your present Consultations may be a lasting and grateful
Monument to Posterity, of your Integrity, Courage and Conduct.

The Late Honorable Convention proved a Legal Parliament.
I. THE necessity of a Parliament agreed by the Lords and Commons Voting that
the Throne is Vacant; for there being a Vacancy, there follows an immediate
necessity of settling the Government, especially the Writs being destroyed, and
the Great Seal carried away, put a period to all public Justice, and then
there must be a supply by such means as the necessity requires, or a failure of
Government.

II. Consider the Antecedents to the calling the Convention; that is, about
three hundred of the Commons. which is a majority of the fullest House that can
be made, above sixty Lords, being a greater number, than any part divided
amounted to at this great Meeting, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council
of the City of London, by application to His then Highness the Prince of
Orange, desired him to accept of the Administration of Public Affairs,
Military and Civil, which he was pleased to do, to the great satisfaction of
all good People, and after that His Highness was desired to Issue forth his
Circular Letters to the Lords; and the like to the Coroners, and in their
absence to the Clerks of the Peace, to Elect Knights, Citizens and Burgesses;
this was more than was done in fifty nine, for the calling a Parliament in
April 1660. for there the Summons was not real, but fictitious (i. e.) in the
names of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, a mere Notion set up as a
Form, there being no such Persons, but a mere Ens rationis, impossible really
to exist: so that here was much more done than in 1659, and all really done
which was possible to be invented, as the Affairs then stood. Besides King
Charles the 2d. had not abdicated the Kingdom, but was willing to return, and
was at Breda, whither they might have sent for Writs, and in the mean time have
kept their form of Keepers of the Liberties, etc. But in the present case there
was no King in being, nor any style or form of Government, neither real, or
notional left; so that in all these respects, more was done before, and at the
calling of this Great Convention, than for calling that Parliament (for so I
must call it) yet that Parliament made several Acts, in all thirty seven, as
appears by Keebles Statutes, and several of them not confirmed; I shall
instance but in one, but it is one which there was occasion to use in every
County of England; I mean the Act for Confirming and Restoring Ministers, being
the 17th. of that Sessions, all the Judges allowed of this as an Act of
Parliament, tho never confirmed, which is a stronger case than that in
question; for there was only fictitious Summons, here a real one.

III. That without the Consent of any Body of the People; this at the Request
of a Majority of the Lords, more than half the number of the Commons duly
chosen in King Chapter the 2d. time, besides the great Body of the City of London
being at least esteemed a 5th part of the Kingdom; yet after the King's Return,
he was so well satisfied with the calling of that Parliament, that it was
Enacted by the King, Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament; that the Lords
and Commons then Sitting at Westmiuster in the present Parliament, were the two
Houses of Parliament, notwithstanding any want of the Kings Writs or Writ of
Summons, or any defect whatsoever; and as if the King had been present at the
beginning of the Parliament; this I take to be a full Judgment in full
Parliament of the case in question, and much stronger than the present case is,
and this Parliament continued till the 29th. of December next following, and
made in all thirty seven Acts, as abovementioned.

The 13 Caroli 2. chap. 7. (a full Parliament called by the Kings Writ) recites
the other of 12 Caroli 2. and that after his Majesty's return they were
continued till the 29th. of December, and then dissolved, and that several Acts
passed; this is the plain Judgment of another Parliament.

1. Because it says they were continued, which shows they had a real being
capable of being continued; for a Confirmation of a void Grant has no effect,
and Confirmation shows a Grant only voidable, so the continuance there showed
it at most but voidable; and when the King came, and confirmed it, all was good.

2. The dissolving it then, shows they had a being, for, as ex nihilo nihil
fit, so super nihil nil operatur, as out of nothing nothing can be made, so
upon nothing nothing can operate.

Again, the King, Lords and Commons, make the great Corporation or Body of the
Kingdom, and the Commons are legally taken for the Freeholders, Inst. 4. p. 2.
Now the Lords and Commons having Proclaimed the King, the defect of this great
Corporation is cured, and all the Essential parts of this great Body Politic
united and made complete, as plainly as when the Mayor of a Corporation dies,
and another is chosen, the Corporation is again perfect; and to say, that which
perfects the great Body Politic should in the same instant destroy it, I mean
the Parliament, is to make contradictions true, simul and semel, the
perfection, and destruction of this great Body at one instant, and by the same
Act.

Then if necessity of Affairs was a forcible Argument in 1660, a time of great
peace, not only in England, but throughout Europe, and almost in all the World;
certainly it is of a greater force now, when England is scarce delivered from
Popery and Slavery; when Ireland has a mighty Army of Papists, and that Kingdom
in hazard of final destruction, if not speedily prevented; and when France has
destroyed most of the Protestants there, and threatens the ruin of the
Low Countries, from whence God has sent the wonderful Assistance of our
Gracious, and therefore most Glorious King; and England cannot promise safety
from that Foreign Power, when forty days delay, which is the least can be for a
new Parliament, and considering we can never hope to have one more freely
chosen, because first it was so free from Court-influence, or likelihood of all
design, that the Letters of Summons issued by him, whom the great God in
infinite Mercy raised to save us, to the hazard of his Life, and this done to
protect the Protestant Religion and at a time when the people were all
concerned for one Common interest of Religion, and Liberty, it would be vain
when we have the best King and Queen the World affords, a full house of Lords,
the most solemnly chosen Commons that ever were in the remembrance of any Man
Living, to spend Money and lose time (I had almost said to despise Providence)
and take great pains to destroy our selves.

If any object Acts of Parliament mentioning Writs and Summons, etc.

I answer, the Prededent in 1660 is after all those Acts.

In private cases as much as has been done in point of necessity; a Bishop
Provincial dies, and sede vacant a Clerk is presented to a Benefice, the
Presentation to the Dean and Chapter is good in this case of Necessity; and if
in a Vacancy by the Death of a Bishop a Presentation shall be good to the Dean
and Chapter, rather than a prejudice should happen by the Church lying void;
Surely a fortiori -- Vacancy of the Throne may be supplied without the
formality of a Writ, and the great Convention turned to a Real Parliament.

A Summons in all points is of the same real force as a Writ, for a Summons and
a Writ differ no more than in name, the thing is the same in all Substantial
parts; the Writ is Recorded in Chancery, so are His Highnesses Letters; the
proper Officer Endorses the Return, so he does here (for the Coroner in defect
of the Sheriff is the proper Officer) the People Choose by Virtue of the
Letters, etc. and quae re concordant parum differunt, they agree in Reality,
and then what difference is there between the one and the other?

Object. A Writ must be in Actions at Common Law, else all Pleading after, will
not make it good, but Judgment given may be Reversed by a Writ of Error.

Answ. The case differs, first, because Actions between party and party, are
Adversary Actions, but Summons to Parliament are not so, but are Mediums only
to have ^n Election.

2. In Actions at Law the Defendant may plead to the Writ, but there is no plea
to a Writ for electing Members to serve in Parliament; and for this I have
Littleton's Argument; there never was such a Plea, therefore none lies.

Object. That they have not taken the Test.

Answ. They may take the Test yet, and then all which they do will be good, for
the Test being the distinguishing Mark of a Protestant from a Papist, when that
is taken, the end of the Law is performed.

Object. That the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy ought to be taken, and that
the new ones are not legal.

Answ. The Convention being the Supreme Power, have abolished the old Oaths,
and have made new ones; and as to the making new Oaths, the like was done in
Alfreds time, when they chose him King, vide Mirror of Justice. Chap. 1. for
the Heptarchy being turned to a Monarchy, the precedent Oaths of the seven
Kings could not be the same King Alfred swore.

Many Precedents may be cited, where Laws have been made in Parliament, without
the King's Writ to summon them, which for brevity's sake I forbear to mention.

For a farewell, the Objections quarrel at our Happiness, fight against our
Safety, and aim at that which may endanger Destruction.

The Present Convention, a Parliament.
I. THat the formality of the Kings Writ of Summons is not so essential to an
English Parliament, but that the Peers of the Realm, and the Commons, by their
Representatives duly Elected, may legally act as the great Council and
representative Body of the Nation, though not summoned by the King, especially
when the circumstances of the time are such, that such Summons cannot be had,
will (I hope) appear by these following Observations.

First, The Saxon Government was transplanted hither out of Germany, where the
meeting of the Saxons in such Assemblies was at certain fixed times; viz. at
the New and Full Moon. But after their Transmigration hither, Religion
changing, other things changed with it; and the times for their public
Assemblies, in conformity to the great Solemnities celebrated by Christians,
came to be changed to the Feasts of Easter, Pentecost, and the Nativity. The
lower we come down in Story, the seldomer we find these General Assemblies to
have been held; and sometimes (even very anciently) when upon extraordinary
occasions, they met out of course, a Precept, an Edict, or Sanction is
mentioned to have Issued from the King: But the Times, and the very place of
their ordinary Meeting having been certain, and determined in the very first
and eldest times that we meet with any mention of such Assemblies, which times
are as ancient as any Memory of the Nation it self; hence I infer, that no
Summons from the King can be thought to have been necessary in those days,
because it was altogether needless.

Secondly, The Succession to the Crown did not in those days, nor till of late
years, run in a course of Lineal Succession by right of Inheritance: But upon
the death of a Prince, those Persons of the Realm that Composed the then
Parliament, Assembled in order to the choosing of another. That the Kingdom was
then Elective, though one or other of the Royal Blood was always chosen, but
the next in Lineal Succession very seldom, is evident from the Genealogies of
the Saxon Kings, from an old Law made at Calchuyth, appointing how, and by whom
Kings shall be chosen; and from many express and particular Accounts given by
our old Historians, of such Assemblies held for Electing of Kings. Now such
Assemblies could not be Summoned by any King; and yet in conjunction with the
King that themselves set up, they made Laws, binding the King and all the Realm.

Thirdly, After the Death of King William Rufus, Robert, his Elder Brother,
being then in the Holy Land, Henry, the younger Son of King William the First,
procured an Assembly of the Clergy and People of England, to whom he made large
Promises of his good Government, in case they would accept of him for their
King; and they agreeing, that if he would restore to them the Laws of King
Edward the Confessor, then they would consent to make him their King: He swore
that he would do so, and also free them from some oppressions, which the Nation
had groaned under in his Brothers and his Fathers time. Hereupon they chose him
King, and the Bishop of London, and the Archbishop of York, set the Crown upon
his Head: Which being done, a Confirmation of the English Liberties passed the
Royal Assent in that Assembly, the same in substance, though not so large as
King John's, and King Henry the Third's Magna Charta's afterward were.

Fourthly, After that King's Death, in such another Parliament, King Stephen
was Elected, and Mawd the Empress put by, though not without some stain of
perfidiousness upon all those, and Stephen himself especially, who had sworn in
her Fathers Lifetime, to acknowledge her for their Soveraing after his decease.

Fifthly, In King Richard the First's time, the King being absent in the Holy
Land, and the Bishop of Ely then his Chancellor, being Regent of the Kingdom in
his Absence, whose Government was intolerable to the People for his Insolence
and manifold Oppressions, a Parliament was convened at London, at the Instance
of Earl John, the Kings Brother, to treat of the great and weighty affairs of
the King and Kingdom; in which Parliament this same Regent was deposed from his
Government, and another set up, viz. the Archbishop of Roan in his stead. This
Assembly was not convened by the King, who was then in Palaestine, nor by any
Authority derived from him, for then the Regent and Chancellor must have called
them together; but they met, as the Historian says expressly, at the Instance of
Earl John. And yet, in the Kings Absence, they took upon them to settle the
public Affairs of the Nation without Him.

Sixthly, When King Henry the 3d. died, his Eldest Son, Prince Edward was then
in the Holy Land, and came not home till within the third year of his Reign;
yet, immediately upon the Fathers Death, all the Prelates and Nobles, and 4
Knights for every Shire, and 4 Burgesses for every Borough, Assembled together
in a great Council and settled the Government till the King should return: Made
a new Seal, and a Chancellor, etc.

I infer from what has been said, that Writs of Summons are not so Essential to
the being of Parliaments, but that the People of England, especially at a time
when they cannot be had, may by Law, and according to our old Constitution
Assemble together in a Parliamentary way without them, to treat of and settle
the public Affairs of the Nation. And that, if such Assemblies so convened,
find the Throne Vacant, they may proceed not only to set up a Prince, but with
the Assent and Concurrence of such Prince, to transact all Public business
whatsoever, without a new Election; they having as great Authority as the
People of England can deligate to their Representatives.

II. The Acts of Parliaments not Formal nor Legal in all their Circumstances,
are yet binding to the Nation so long as they continue in Force, and not liable
to be questioned as to the Validity of them, but in subsequent Parliaments.

First, The two Spencers, Temp. Edvardi Secundi, were banished by Act of
Parliament, and that Act of Parliament repealed by Dures and Force; yet was the
Act of Repeal a good Law, till it was Annulled 1 Ed. 3.

Secondly, Some Statutes of 11 Rich. 2. and attainders thereupon were repealed
in a Parliament held, Ann. 21. of that King, which Parliament was procured by
forced Elections; and yet the Repeal stood good, till such time as in 1 Henry
4. the Statutes of 11 Rich. 2. were revived and appointed to be firmly held and
kept.

Thirdly, The Parliament of 1 Hen. 4. consisted of the same Knights. Citizens
and Burgesses that had served in the then last dissolved Patliament, and those
Persons were by the Kings Writts to the Sheriffs commanded to be returned, and
yet they passed Acts; and their Acts tho never confirmed, continue to be Laws
at this day.

Fourthly, Queen Mary's Parliament that restored the Popes Supremacy, was
notoriously known to be packed, inso much that it was debated in Queen
Elizabeth's time, whether or no to declare all their Acts void by Act of
Parliament. That course was then upon some prudential considerations declined;
and therefore the Acts of that Parliament, not since repealed, continue binding
Laws to this day.

The reason of all this, is, Because no inferior Courts have Authority to
judge of the Validity or Invalidity of the Acts of such Assemblies, as have but
so much as a color of Parliamentary Authority.

The Acts of such Assemblies being Entered upon the Parliament-Roll, and
certified before the Judges of Westminster Hall as Acts of Parliament, are
conclusive and binding to them; because Parliaments are the only Judges of the
Imperfections, Invalidities, Illegalities, etc. of one another.

The Parliament that called in King Charles the Second, was not assembled by
the Kings Writ, and yet they made Acts, and the Royal assent was had to them;
many of which indeed were afterward confirmed, but not all, and those that had
no Confirmation, are undoubted Acts of Parliament without it, and have ever
since obtained as such.

Hence I infer that the present Convention, may, if they please, assume to
themselves a Parliamentary Power, and in conjunction with such King or Queen as
they shall declare, may give Laws to the Kingdom as a legal Parliament.

The Thoughts of a Private Person, about the Justice of the Gentlemen's
Undertaking at York, Nov. 1688. Wherein is showed, That it is neither against
Scripture, nor Moral honesty, to defend their Just and Legal Rights, against
the Illegal Invaders of them. Occasioned then by some Private Debates, and now
submitted to better Judgments.
The present Undertaking of the Gentlemen at York, Nov. 88. taken into
Consideration; wherein is showed, That it is neither against Scripture, nor
moral Honesty, to defend their Just and Legal Rights against the Illegal and
Unjust Invaders of them; by way of Objection and Answer.

1. THat it is not against Scripture is showed, Obj. 1, 2, 3. 2. That it is not
inconsistent with the Frame of the Government in General, Obj. 4. 3. Not
against the Law, but the Law-breakers, Obj. 5. 4. Not Rebellion, Obj. 6. 5. No
Usurpation of the Power of the Sword, Obj. 7. 6. No unlawful Act in a moral
Sense, Obj. 8. 7. Not against true Allegiance, Obj. 9. 8. Not against the
Declaration in a Legal Sense, Obj 10. 9. Not against Political Power, but Force
without Political Power, Obj. 11. 10. Not against any Royal Prerogative in
general, Obj. 12. 11. Not against the Supremacy, Obj. 13. 12. Not Criminal
Disobedience, Obj. 14. 13. Not incommodious or unsafe for the Public in
respect of the present and approaching Evils in removes, Obj. 15, 16. 14. No
disparagement to the Frame of the Government, that cannot otherwise decide an
obstinate difference between King and People, Obj. 17. Lastly, The Conclusion,
showing, That Non-resistance of illegal Force, does in effect make all Monarchs
Arbitrary, and the People Slaves.


The Thoughts of a Private Person, etc.
MEn have three Rules to walk by, which we may call Laws, that is, Nature,
Reason, and Religion; and answerable to these three a Christian has three
Principles, that is, Sensitive, Rational, and Spiritual, which I take to be the
distinction that St. Paul makes, 1 These. 5.23. I pray God your whole Spirit,
Soul and Body, be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Nature considers all Men as single Persons, and directs them to Self-interest
and Selfpreservation, as the chief end. Reason considers Men as sociable
Creatures, and directs them to unite the Government for the public Good
(inclusive of their own Safety) as the chief End. And the Spirit considers Men
as Candidates for Heaven, and directs them to live according to the Word of
God, that they may attain Eternal Happiness, the chief End of Man. All these
have the divine Warrant, and are of force where the Lower is not superseded by
the Higher. A single Person is not to expose himself to ruin, unless it be for
the Public good; and the Public are not to expose themselves to Beggary and
Slavery, unless it be for the Kingdom of Heaven.

Now though these Rules may be considered separate, and apart, yet they all
ought to be in a Christian Government. Laws for the public Good do not destroy
the Law of Nature, but supersede it for a greater Good; and the Laws of God do
not destroy the Law of Reason, but supersede it for a higher end, and so makes
it still more Reasonable to do so. Nothing therefore can justify a Private
Injury but the Public Good, and nothing can hinder the Public Good for being
carried on but Sin. For these Laws are not destructive but supportive of one
another, and all supportive of Man. When a Man cannot defend himself, by the
Method and Measures of the Public, (as in case of sudden Assaults) he may by
the Law of Nature, break the Peace and smite his Adversary to save his own
life, because humane Laws can reward no Person's obedience with so good a thing
as life, and therefore, the public good excepted, his life is to be preferred
before all forms of Law. But it is not so with the Laws of God; for if I be
urged to deny my Faith, or dye, I must dye rather than break God's Law, because
God will give me a better Life, and an infinite Reward. Necessity can suspend a
positive Law of Man, that is merely such, but it cannot supersede what is
established by God or Nature; an Act therefore that is civilly Unlawful, may
notwithstanding be Lawful, because it is not Lawless, but under a more
extensive Law. If it be according to the Laws of God, or sound Reason, the
Conscience is safe, and the Act commendable before God and good Men, though it
be against the form of Political Law: For though it be against the Form, it is
not against the Reason of that Law; and the Form not being extensive enough of
Man's safety, it must give place to necessity, and absolve him of his duty,
when his duty would destroy him.

The Safety of Man shows us both the Necessity and End of humane Government;
for when private Persons found they could not be Safe, they were willing to
enter into Compacts and Associations, and reposite their private Safety in the
public Interest: And therefore if after this Association some of their Fellows
will break the Covenants, and go about to destroy the Rest, it is lawful, both
by the Laws of God and Man, for the injured to defend themselves; and by the
Laws and Compacts by them made, and consented to, on both sides, for the
public Good. Otherwise it would be unlawful to resist Injustice, and
consequently a Thief or a Robber.

Object. 1. But you will say in all Governments there are Superiors and
Inferiors, and God has made Obedience a part of Religion, and consequently
conducive to a higher end than the Public Good; and therefore if the
Governors break the Laws, and introduce a Public Evil for a Private Interest,
they must not be resisted upon pain of Damnation.

Answ. This were a good Plea, if it were true, but God is not the Patron of
Injustice; and therefore he gives no Prince or Potentate more Authority over
the People than the Tables of the Government express, and of these there are
diverse degrees. Those that are Governed by the will of their Prince, whose
Word is a Law, if he command their Persons for Slaves, or Estates to serve his
Ambition, they must obey, and God requires it of them, because it is the
Princes Right. Arbitrary Princes have a Political Power to treat a Subject
cruelly and inhumanely; their Immorality is an offense against God not
injustice to the Subject who had given up himself to be used at their
discretion. But those that are to rule by Laws made for the Public good, and
such as render the Subjects Freemen, not Slaves; such as secures their
Religion, Liberty and Property; if these Princes contrary to Law imprison their
persons, or seize their Estates, they do it unjustly, without God's Warrant, or
any Political Authority, and may be resisted, or else we might not resist the
Devil, should he creep into the Court in a Jesuits habit, and Haman-like, get a
Commission to cut all our Throats.

If I be called to suffer for my Religion, or the Faith of Christ, I am bound
to suffer upon a mighty reasonable account: For first, It is the best way to
overcome, my Faith can Triumph so by no other Victory as by Death, for that is
a Victory never to be lost again. 2. Though I die, the Tyrant has not his end,
but is by that means utterly defeated of it. And 3. I shall be an infinite
gainer by it, for I shall have an infinite Reward for what I suffer, and what I
lose. But there is a vast difference between suffering for the Faith of Christ,
and for the frame of a Political Government; for if I may not resist I am
overcome. 2. If I am overcome, the Tyrantgets his End; namely, an Arbitrary
Power. And 3. He has promised no Reward for such Voluntary entering into
Bondage, or owning an usurped Authority. The Church and the frame of the State
stand upon Two several Bottoms, God has promised to support the Church, and
there needs no Arm of flesh to defend it under the worst of governments: But
the frame of every government is a Humane Structure; and though God does
empower and authorize every government, yet he has left the Choice of the
several kinds to the parties, and has promised to bless them in the just
Administration of their several Choices; but no where has he promised to
support the particular frame they chose, that as their prudence raised it, or
it must fall at every King's pleasure, and when they have chosen out the Frame,
God that approves it, grants neither the King nor the people greater
privileges than the Frame it self expresses, which in diverse Nations is
different, some submitting to be governed by the will of him they Voluntarily
chose. Others to one that will govern by Laws of their own making, and his
approving. Others to one of their precedent Kings Race or Line. Others to a
multitude. Others to a few of the best and presumptively wisest Persons, and
every peoples choice must be the measure of their Obedience, if they have made
an ill Bargain they must stand to it, and if they have made a good one they may
stand for it. If therefore any Governor challenge more of the Subject than is
in the Submission, That Subjects may by the Laws of God and Man deny to yield
it. And if the Prince deny to give the Subject as much as in the Grant, the
Subject may challenge his Right, and if by Force or Fraud, contrary to the
Frame of the government, the Governor will force the governed from his Right,
the Obligation of subjection ceases so far, and he may defend himself from the
oppression and injustice as well as he can.

Obj. 2. But he must defend himself in God's way, his defense must be without
Sin. And that is either by Prayers to God, or Entreaties to the Prince, or by
Suffering; for the Scripture says, all Power are of God, and they that resist
the Power, resist the Ordinance of God, Romans 13.2. And St. Peter gives
Christians in Charge, that they submit to every Odinance of Man for the Lord's
sake.

Answ. All Powers indeed are of God, that is every Government has God's Warrant
to proceed according to the Frame of the government, to the End of the
government, which is the public Good. The Power is of God, but the Restraint
of the Power is in the Frame of the government, and the Frame is an humane
Ordinance or Structure, as the Apostle elegantly Expresses it, (...) he
therefore that resists the government, proceeds according to the Frame of
thegovernment, resists the Ordinance of God. But if the Governor proceed
neither according to the Frame of the government, nor to the End, but against
it, such Process cannot be the Ordinance of God, unless God have two
contradictory Ordinances of Force, at one time in the same Government, and then
the command may be true and false, and the Subjects duty good and evil, and men
would be perpetually distracted with serving two Masters. This would make the
Government God's and the Devil's, and as no less than to put a Blasphemous
Juggle upon the Ordinance of God: which is always simple, and at one with it
self. These Scriptures therefore can tie us to obey the Governor contrary to
the Government, because they tie us to obey the government; and that this is
all they tie us from resisting, is evident by the Reason St. Paul gives, which
is, because the Resisters resist the Ordinance of God; and therefore it is
warily expressed, if it were but as warily read, for it is not whosoever
resists the person or the will of the Governor, but whosoever resists the
Power (and that Power is neither more nor less than the Frame of the government
expresses) resists the Ordinance of God, and to this Resistance the Penalty
is annexed.

But it does not follow, because I may not resist the Ordinance of God, that I
may not resist the powerless and inauthoritative, unjust Attempts of Superiors
upon me, for then a Soldier might not resist his Captain that would rob him,
nor a Married Manservant his Master that would force his Wise.

This I think evidences, That to resist a Superior and his evil Instruments
and Accomplices, while they Act contrary to the Frame of the Government, is not
to resist the Power of God, or the Ordinance of God, but to keep off those who
usurp upon the Power of God, and the Frame of the Government, and the just
Rights of others. For I would fain know of the Doctors of Non resistance,
whether the Act that contains the Test, have the stamp of God's Authority upon
it or no; if it have not, the Power of the King and Parliament is no Power of
God; if it have, then to resist, that is to resist the Ordinance of God: And
those Commissions that are contrary to it, have no power from God: If the
affirmative be true the negative is of no force. And therefore to resist such
Commissions, is not to resist the Ordinance of God, unless God's Ordinances be
contradictory, and that would render God guilty of double dealing, as well as
the Jesuits. Which being utterly impossible, it must be concluded, That the
resisting such Commissions, and the Instruments acting by them, is not to
resist Lawful Authority, but to remove Unlawful; not to do evil, but to hinder
it; not to sin, but to prevent Sinners for doing mischief; and it would be very
hard measure for a Man to be damned for doing such a good Office. Bishop
Bilson, therefore speaking of this Text, says, It is not resisting the King's
Will against Law, but according to Law that is forbidden. And both Barclay, and
Grotius affirm, That the People may in diverse Cases resist Kings that are tied
to govern by Law, which they could not do, did they think these Scriptures
forbad all resistance.

Much indeed is said from the Practice of the Jews, and the Primitive
Christians, and the Subjection of Servants, but nothing to the purpose; for
their Case is not ours, more than their frame of Government is ours; their
Servants were Slaves, and their Kings and Emperors Wills were their Laws;
their People had no Magna Charta's to show, nor Fundamental Compacts, and so
could plead no injustice in any command, the frame of the Government Warranted
all those commands that had the Royal pleasure: Their Political Power was more
extensive than their Moral Power. The People were wholly at the Mercy of the
Prince: All their Laws were Acts of Grace, not fundamental Reserves and
inherent Rights, and therefore in Spirituals they had no Cause to resist, and
in Temporals they might not, as was observed above. If they had been under
limited Governments as we are, we might have heard of Blows as well as Words,
St. Paul was never so virulent with his Tongue, as when he was smitten contrary
to Law.

Obj. 3. But the Person of the King is sacred, and must not he touched.

Answ. I say so too; but it is his just Power that makes him so. And therefore
in dangerous times, he is to be counseled and persuaded to secure himself, by
keeping within the Sanctuary of the Laws, and holding them forth for the
Public Good, by gaining the Affections of the People, and being content with
that measure of Power that is proper to the Government. For if he does not,
Right may and ought to be defended, and resistance (for the Public good) of
Illegal Commissioned Forces, is not resisting the King's Person, but his
Forces; nor his Power, but his Force without Power. If none would execute the
King's contradictory Commands, none would resist; and if he will against all
Justice, Prudence and Persuasions, join with wicked Men, and wilfully expose
himself to the mercy of blind Bullets, charge is to be given to all, that none
kill him wittingly or wilfully; the hand that lifted him up may not pull him
down: God forbid that any should think of killing him de industra, or despair
of his repentance before God does, nothing past can prejudice a Penitent before
God, and I hope not before Men; thus the King's person and power will be safe
in the midst of a Civil War, not so safe as in peaceable times, but as safe as
can consist with the Subjects Right, when their Religion and Laws, Liberty and
Property, are Violently invaded. And therefore if any thing befall his person
by their hands, it is but a chance and accidental thing, which may happen also
in peaceable times.

This shows that Resisting the King's illegal commissioned Forces, in defense
of their own just Rights, is not resisting the Ordinance of God, and
consequently no Sin; and then the Conscience is not tied otherwise than the
Laws of the Land, and the particular Frame of the government ties it.

Obj. 4. But to resist the King, or his Commissioners, is against the Frame of
the Government, it being a Monarchy, and against the Laws and Statutes of the
Realm.

Answ. If it be so, it is a great Sin; but as it is certain this is a Monarchy,
so it is certain that it is limited in the Foundation, otherwise the King would
have all the Legislative Power, and the Parliment no Authority or Right but
derived from him, and then he must be Arbitrary, and we Slaves, and all our
Laws must be acts of Grace, not Fundamental Rights: Not from any inherent power
reserved at the Institution to our selves, and never submitted to the Princes;
but from the gracious condescension of an Absolute Monarch, which is contrary
to the Story of all times, which shows that the people ever claimed Liberty and
Property, according to their Ancient Laws and Customs, not as a Gift, but as a
Right inherent in themselves, and never Transferred, Aliened, or Conveyed to
any King, but Declared. Recognized and Confirmed to them by many.

I shall therefore suppose (what I think none can upon sufficient grounds deny)
that the King is bound by all the sacred Ties of God and Man, to govern by the
Laws, and not otherwise, neither by a Foreign Law, nor by one of his own
framing, nor by any Word or Will contrary to Law, seeing nothing can have the
force of Law here, but what has the joint Consent of King and Parliament, and
that in a Parliamentary way, and this shows us in the Terms of Submission that
are sworn to on both sides. The King and the people by a joint consent makes
Laws, and make them the common Rule betwixt them, the King swears to observe
the Laws, and the people swear to obey the King, and to leave the Execution of
the Laws to the King to be managed for the public good.

Therefore as long as he governs by Law, he and all his Ministers are safe
enough from Resistance, the Resister being liable to be punished both by God
and Man; and the sole administration being left to the King, Subjects all but
himself to Criminal process, and even himself to Civil, but his person and
power are safe in both, he may be severe in the Execution of the Laws many
times, but not unjust; As, if he will not suspend a Burthensom Law, or Revive
an Antiquated one, when the public good requires it, This may render him
uncharitable or imprudent, but he is safe yet; For though he be bound to
proceed according to Law, yet he is not tied to proceed always according to the
best Methods, when there are diverse. But if he stop the Courts of Justice,
erect new ones, or proceed contrary to Law, he Acts without Authority and
against his own Authority, and puts on a kind of a Vizard, that his Subjects
can neither know him nor their Duty; for it is the Laws that direct them to the
person of the King, and their own Duty, without which they could know neither:
And if the End be not the public good it is downright Injustice, as well as
politically powerless. Necessity indeed may justify a Political, unlawful Act
for the Public good. As in case of an Invasion to burn a garrison rather than
it should be a refuge for the Enemy, or to open Sluices and to drown a part of
the Country, for though these things have not the form of the Law, they have
the reason, and that is Public good: And therefore it is not Law but
Necessity, not the King's Command but Public good, that warrants these Acts.
And when Peace returns, the Injured are to have satisfaction made by the
Public, not as of Charity, but as of Justice, which shows that the Law looks
upon it as a Trespass, justified only by Necessity and the Public good. And
the particular Persons here, have reason to be quiet and make no resistance,
because they shall reap double benefit by it, one in the Public good, and
another from the Public Treasure. But it does not follow, that if the King in
an angry mood, should command his guards to fire Newmarket, because he had lost
an Horse-race there, or had a mind to have a Bonefire, because he had won one,
that the Inhabitants might not resist them.

Obj. 5. By what Law? Not by the Law of the Land?

Answ. Yes, By the Law of the Land a Petty Constables word would justify
Resistance, better then the Kings Commission could justify the illegal
Attempt. But suppose there were no Person that had the least Authority, and
that the resistance could not be within the prescribed Form of government; yet
because the force is an unauthoritative force, and because there is greater
necessity of the End of the government than of the Form; Men may by the Law of
Nature and the Law of Reason proceed to the End, not without all Form, but
without the Political Form, for those proceedings that are according to Reason,
are not simply under no Law, but under a more extensive Law; and that Law
justifies resistance, even of Superiors, when there is no other way of defense
left the people. If the Case will admit of Entreaties, or sober Counsels, or
legal Appeals, they are to be used; but if there be no room for these, or if
they take no place, but illegal force be used, that force may, nay must be
resisted, or evil is consented to. For he that will not serve the public by
that means when there is no other, does actually consent to the ruin of it. He
that has his house on fire, and will not stir to quench the flames though he be
able, is willing sure it should be burnt. The Rules of prudence indeed are to
be observed, for if there be no probability that resistance will prevent the
Evil, the attempt is Folly, and if resistance will do more harm than good it is
inserviceable; and if there be any other means effectual it is unreasonable,
for it ought to be the last refuge, and then if the Cause be good, Necessity
justifies proceeding to the End: Not by illegal Means, but by suspending the
Political Form, and appealing to the Reason of Mankind, and introducing the Law
of Nature: And this is no more than when Judgment at Common Law is reversed in
Chancery, the Form of the Law gives place to Equity and sound Reason.

Obj. 6. But is it Rebellion?

Answ. I Answer, Rebellion is resisting the just Power of the Government, and
if so, then it is no Rebellion to resist the unjust and usurped Power, for then
it would be Rebellion to resist Rebellion, and there could be no such thing as
a just defense against the exorbitant Power of Princes; and then the King might
Commission a Captain, or a Colonel, to role up and down in the Country and
Plunder, and it would be Rebellion in the Posse Cum. (at least in any private
Family) to resist them. And a private Commission to cut our Throats would tie
our hands till the business were done. But the resisting such Force, as has
neither Moral nor political power, is no more Rebellion than to fight against a
Wild Beast, that came with Strength, but no Authority to devour them. The
Papists indeed have taken up Arms, without and against the just power of this
Land, not only against the Form of Law, but to the overthrow of the Laws, and
Fundamental Rights of this Government, directly against the Letter, the Power,
and the End of the Law, which is as inslaving to the Subjects as an usurping
Conquest; and it is no more Rebellion to resist them, than Wat Tyler or Jack
Cade: They are Rebels who Arm against the government, not they that defend it
by Arms Obj. 7. But this is to usurp the Power of the Sword, which by the Frame
of the Government is wholly in the Kings Hand.

Answ. The Political Power of the Sword indeed is in the King, but that does
not divest the Subject of all defense by Arms, but only of such defense as is
against or inconsistent with the Political Power. If force be offered that
wants Political Power, whoever does it, does it but in the Nature of a private
Person, and private Persons may resist such. The Right of Self-defence is a
precedent Right to all Policy; and every Man has so much of it still, as is not
given up unto the Political Power he lives under. They therefore that have
given themselves up to be governed by Law only, have Right to defend
themselves, not only against the private Assailant, which is allowed in all
Governments, but also against illegal Force. And this Resistance is no
Usurpation upon the Magistrates Power, because it is not an Act of Civil
Authority, but of Natural Right: And if thousands join in the Attempt, they are
all Volunteers; a Multitude, but no body Corporate; and such as challenge no
Authority over those they resist, but deny Subjection to such unauthoritative
Force: For such Force wanting Political Power, has no Power but Strength, and
Strength authorizes none to injure, but Natural Right authorizes every one to
defend himself; so that in this case, the Resister has a moral Power or
Warrant, but the illegal Invader none at all.

Obj. 8. But the Resisters ought not to do an unlawful Act to suppress such
illegal Force.

Answ. I Answer, That Act is not simply Unlawful that wants Political Power;
the Law is made for the public Good as the End, and therefore if the
prescribed means be not sufficient for the End, the Law permits that other
reasonable means be used, otherwise People might dwell upon the Shadow till
they have lost the Substance. The Posse Com. ought not by the prescribed form of
Law to go into another County; but if the other Country at that time had no
Sheriff, whereby the power of that County could not be raised to defend it
self; or if there were Ships in the Borders of the next County, to which the
Plunderers might escape if they were not hotly pursued, I question not but the
Posse Com. might do a commendable Act to pursue them, and take them in the next
County. The Law was made for the public Good, and not the Public Good for the
Law; and therefore when the Law cannot answer its own End, or prescribes
ineffectual Means, any just and honest Means may be used; and this is not
destructive of the Law, but suppletory; not a violating the Form prescribed,
but an improving it: And though a Man may be called to account for doing a Good
Act in such a manner, I suppose it is but to know the Truth of the Matter, and
to preserve the Reverence of the Laws; for he is already cleared in his own
Conscience, and in the Breasts of all Good Men; and a Pardon in that case does
but declare it is so, and ought of Right (not of Grace) to be granted. For it
is not necessary in respect of any Crime, but in respect of some defect in the
Law, which had not made sufficient provision for the Public Good.

Object. 9. But it is against true Allegiance, and an Oath must be kept though
it be to our own hurt.

Answ. True Allegiance must be proportioned to the Frame of the Government, and
the end of that Frame. Therefore if the Frame be to restrain Arbitrary Power,
the Subject cannot owe Arbitraty Allegiance. Allegiance is more in some Places
and less in others; but no Man can owe so much Duty to his Prince, as not to
have a Salvo for God and his Life; and here we can owe none that is against our
Laws and the Public Good, for that would destroy the Government. Our
Allegiance therefore must be bounded by our Laws, and not by the King's Word,
or Will: No Man can swear to obey the King's Word or Will simply, but according
to Law. It would be Sin to tie our selves to think, or speak, or do, what he
would have us at large. Our Allegiance therefore must be such as will consist
with the Frame of our Government, and that must be such as is couched in the
Body of our Laws. Other Allegiance there can be none, but what is wrapped up in
Courtesies and Formalities. For it seems the King, as well as the People, is
under the Law in some Sense, under the direction of it, though not under the
constraint; and therefore at his Coronation, he does a kind of Fealty to the
Laws and Government, and swears Allegiance to them, as to a Supreme Lord. The
Oath is not only, Will you grant the Laws, but will you grant and keep the Laws
and Customs of England; and the Answer is, I grant and promise to keep them. It
is certain therefore, no Allegiance to the King can be against Law, to which he
himself owes Allegiance.

The Case being thus far clear, That the Allegiance sworn to, is no other but
our Legal Duty; it does not hinder but that we may resist illegal Force. When
the King of the Scots swore allegiance to our King, it did not deprive him of a
just defense of his just Right, by taking up arms if he were oppressed. And the
King of England when he swore allegiance to the King of France, made no scruple
to take up arms against his Liege Lord, in defense of his just Rights: And the
Old Lawyers tell us, That the very Villain might in case of Rape and Murder
arm against his Lord; and if the Law arm a Villain against his Lord, Subjects
are worse than Villains, if they may not arm against their Sovereign Lord's
illegal Forces, in defense of their Laws, Lives, Estates, and the public good;
but what makes it most evident is the Clause in King Henry's Charter, which
says, If the King invade those Rights, it is Lawful for the Kingdom to rise
against him, and do him what injury they can, as though they owed him no
Allegiance; The Words are these (if my Author fail me not) Licet omnibus de
Regno nostro, contra nos insurgere, and omnia agere quae gravamen noster
respiciant, ac si nobis in nullo tenerentur. Much to the same purpose is in
King John's Charter, which I find thus quoted. Et Illi Barons, cum communa
totius terrae, distringent and gravabunt Nos. Modis omnibus quibus poterunt;
scilicet per captionem Castrorum, terrarum, possessionum, etalis modis quibus
potuerint, donet fuerint emendatum, secundum Arbitrium eorum, salva persona
nostra and Reginae nostrae and Liberorum nostrorum. Much may be said of this
Nature about the Old Allegiance, which was all couched in Homage and Fealty;
but this is enough to show that true Allegiance does not tie us from resisting
illegal Force, and Intolerable Encroachments upon our just Rights.

Obj. 10. But such Resistance would be against the Declaration, which says, It
is not Lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take up Arms against the King,
etc.

Answ. The Latitude of the word Lawful causes the Scruple, which at first View
seems to tell us, That it is sinful upon any pretense whatsoever, to take up
arms against the King, etc. But it is no good consequence to say, That it is
sinful because it is unlawful, unless the Discourse be restrained to the Laws
of God. I must confess it is politically unlawful for Subjects in any Case, or
for any Cause whatever, to take up arms against the King, and those
Commissioned by him; because such a taking up arms here can have no political
authority: But it is morally lawful in all limited Governments to resist that
Force that wants political power. The regal power is irresistible in all
Persons, from the King to the petty Constable; but it does not hinder but that
all these Persons may be resisted, when they do what they have no political
power to. They that have a limited power, and a prescribed Duty, may either act
against, or beyond their Commission; and when they so do they may be resisted:
For such acts have no political power in them, though the Persons have to other
purposes. If a Commission should be granted to a Company of Ruffians to plunder
and massacre, they might have something more of the King's Affections, but no
more of his authority than Private Robbers had; and consequently might be
resisted with equal Honesty. None therefore can make this Declaration in its
full Latitude, but upon this presumption, That the King and his Ministers keep
perpetually within the Bounds of the Law; otherwise they declare the King has
an arbitrary power, which is against the Fundamental Laws of this Land, and a
kind of Treason against the State: For if he may not be resisted in any Case,
he may be under some moral restraint, but under no political restraint; and
consequently the political frame of the Government must be arbitrary. The
meaning therefore of this Declaration can be no other, but that a Man can have
no Civil power or authority in any Case to take up arms against the King, etc.
But this does not debar any man of the Natural Right of Self-defence, by
private arms against Inauthoritative Force.

Obj. 11. To this some reply, that seeing God has placed the Governing (though
limited) Power in the King's Hand, no Man may, by any Natural Right or Private
Defense, resist his illegal Force; God s Power must not be resisted, though
abused.

Answ. There is a great difference between the abuse of power, and the want of
power; and therefore this argument either supposes the power greater than it
is, or concludes ill. The King and Parliament have indeed an arbitrary power (I
do not say Infinite, but as Extensive as the frame of government will bear) and
therefore if they make a very grievous Law (though they ought not, for they are
under a moral restraint though no political) neither the King nor any of his
Ministers may be resisted in the due Execution of it. But the King has no power
to burden us beyond or against Law; and we may thank our own Weakness if ever
he have Strength to do it. This shows us there is a great difference betwixt
the abuse of political power and the want of it. Abused power must not be
resisted, but Force without power may. The political power of arbitrary
Princes, is more extensive than their moral power: And this ties the Subject to
Non-resistance, when he is Immorally or Unchristianly used. They that subject
themselves to another Discretion, divest themselves of all defense. But they
that reserve property and liberty to themselves, may justly defend them, when
they are unjustly invaded. Had the King an arbitrary power, which he did abuse
to vex the Protestants, I for my part should think my self obliged to suffer
and not to resist, as I believe did all the Primitive Christians; but seeing he
has no political power to use me as he lists, and the most absolute Monarch has
no moral power to do an unjust Act to his Subject: I should be a senseless
Fool, if without any Obligation either from God or Man, I should stand Blows
rather than withstand them. The Truth is, Non-resistance stretched thus far,
under this government, would make us like the Two Fools that went to the Field
to fight with one Staff, with which Vice Versa, he that had it, cudgelled the
other, who stood all the while with his Hands in his pocket Valiantly bearing
all the blows his Brother Fool thought good to lay on.

2. Others conclude otherwise against this Doctrine, and say, The King having
the Sacred Power Lodged in him, may not be resisted, though he act without, or
against that power, for reverence of that Just power of God that is in him.

This looks like a piece of Courtship to God, and smells more of Superstition
than Divinity: God requires no Honor to the prejudice of Justice, or the
advancement of Injustice; but this too Devout kind of Reverence would enable a
bad Prince to injure the Innocent, and would leave Justice defenseless on
Earth. Just power is a Sanctuary indeed, but the Sanctuary is of no larger
extent than the power. This is evident by the Tenor of all Commissions, the
granter must have a competent power of what he grants, and that warrants the
Executor to proceed to the End of the grant; but the having power to one
purpose, cannot protect a Man from Resistance, if he proceed to another. The
Chimney man that is irresistible in his Office, is resistable if he gather the
Corn in the Town-fields; And the King that receives his Commission from the
King of Heaven to execute the Law, and is therefore Irresistible in the
execution of it, is yet resistable, if he shut up all the Courts of Justice,
and abuse his Subjects contrary to Law: In this case he acts not by the power
of God, but his Own; by an Arm of Flesh, or the Strength of Wicked men (not by
any political power or moral power) but by the Savage power of a Beast, or the
malicious power of Hell. And how any Honor should accrue to God by a Voluntary
submitting to such a power, is beyond my comprehension; they are most likely to
Honor God, that stand up most for his power, and will submit to no other.

I have brought in these Two Objections here, because the Declaration is the
most specious and obvious Plea for Non-resistance, and is usually backed with
one of these Conceits; that either want of political power, is but abuse of
political power; or that a limited political power is a Sanctuary for unlimited
Actions in whomsoever it rests.

Obj. 12. But to resist such Forces as are Commissioned by the King, is against
the Royal Prerogative of the Crown.

Answ. The King has no Prerogative, (except such as are wrapped up in honorary
Formalities) but what the Law gives him, we must not therefore presume a
Prerogative, and then conclude it Law; but first find the Law, and by it prove
the Prerogative; and when we have found the Prerogative, it must be measured by
what the Public Good will bear, and not by what the Absoluteness of the
Prerogative will admit: For no Prerogative can be used that is against the
frame of the government, or the public good. Interpretations of Law therefore
ought rather to favor Liberty and Property than Prerogative; because the
benefiting of the Subject comes nearer to the End of the government, than the
excessive Honoring the Prince. Honorary Prerogatives are in their Degree
necessary, and not superfluous; there must be something to maintain the
Reverence of Magistrates, but they ought to give way to public Interest; and
the rest are nothing but powers placed in the King to do good with, and not
good or ill as he pleases. A Prerogative therefore cannot destroy a Law, but it
may supply its Defects, pardoning a Condemned Innocent, or a hopeful penitent,
or dispencing with a Law, to one, that by particular Accident, the Law in its
Rigor would undo: But no Prerogative can empower the King to destroy the
peoples liberty or property. That dispencing power, that like a State Opium,
casts all the Laws asleep, and is an Engine of public Mischief, is no
Prerogative belonging to the Crown of England, but a Vice that does not belong
to it. For it brings guilt upon the King, and damage upon the Subject, and is a
real diminution of the Dignities of the Crown: For it, and such like, serve
only to Empower the King to do Mischief with securely; that is, they give an
Immunity from punishment, but not from guilt. As suppose the King by such a
claimed Prerogative, should shut up all the Courts of Justice, so that none
should be had; he might be free from punishment, but not from guilt; he is
clear by Necessity only, not by Right; the Case Transcends the Frame of the
government, none can Judge him that has neither Equals nor Superiors, and so he
escapes; because he cannot be punished, not because he deserves it not. Thus
the pretended Prerogative bespatters him, and so leaves him.

Obj. 13. But it is against the Supremacy; for the Supreme ought to have the
Supreme credit, both in judging what is Law, and what is for the Public Good.

Answ. As the King is Supreme in the Executive part, so the Parliament have a
share in the Legislative, which I take to be the very Apex of Supremacy, and
therefore they ought to have their share in interpreting Laws as well as the
King, or his Judges; because none knows the meaning so well as the Makers, if
they be alive; and if they be dead, none knows the public Necessities so well;
none so unlikely to deceive, or be deceived, being so numerous; none likely to
be so faithful, and so unlikely to be cortupted, having so great an interest in
the public good; none like to be so effectual in working a compliance in the
Peoples hearts, seeing it is in effect their own Determination: But yet they
cannot do it without the King, for that would place his Parliament above
himself.

The King indeed is Supreme in the Legislative part as well as in the Executive
part, but he has not the whole Supremacy in the Legislative part as he has in
the Executive: He is the Head of that Body in which it rests, but the Power
(like the Soul of Man) is in the whole Body, though most eminently in the Head.
The Parliament have their Existence, but not their Essence from him. When they
are called together, they Act by a proper and inherent Right of their own, and
not by the King's Commission and Direction. It may be good Manners to fall upon
what he directs them to first, but if any thing of greater Moment require
dispatch, they must wave a Complement to do a real kindness to the public
Interest; which they could not do, were they his Commissioners, and received
their power to act by from him: It is unnatural for the Stream to stop the
Fountain head. But seeing they act by their own inherent Power, when met, they
can restrain in the King that he cannot make a Law without them, or give such
an interpretation of any, either by himself or his Judges, as shall bind the
Subjects to follow, or is not Reversible in Parliament; for such Interpretation
is part of the Legislative power, and that rests in the King and Subjects
Conjunctim. Had the King Authority to bind his Interpretations for Law upon the
Subject, he might at Pleasure elude any Law, and Law would be but a Sconce for
Arbitrary power. The Opinion indeed of the Judges is reverend, but not
irreversible. None can finally bind an Interpretation on the Subject but those
that can make Law: Therefore if the King and Parliament differ about the sense
of a Law, it is not legally decided till both agree in one sense. But that
sense that is really for the public good has the Right of a Law, though not
the Form, and they that justify such an Interpretation, are justifiable by the
Law of Nature; for though it transcend the process of Courts, and cannot have
the force of a political Law, yet Reason (Mankinds prime Law) justifies Men to
prefer a public good before a private Interest; and what is for the public
good, they that feel are best able to Judge.

Obj. 14. But it is Disobedience.

Answ. Disobedience to a Lawful Command is a grievous Crime, and a great Sin;
but it may be a great duty to disobey an unlawful Command. Obedience is due as
far as the Law requires, and something farther; a particular person must suffer
rather than the Honor and Majesty of the Prince should be brought into
Contempt; for though the Law does not bind to this, yet Conscience and Reason
do, the public Interest must be promoted; Scandal prevented, and the
Government secured from Contempt, though it prejudice some particular person;
for such Contempt may arise from a just refusal of Obedience in some small and
single Instances, and may be of worse consequence to the public than a private
Injury, but if the thing commanded tend to destroy the Government, or introduce
a general Calamity, Disobedience becomes a Duty, and such commands (in this
government) are morally, politically, and divinely powerless; and the
Disobedient, in such a Case, does the King as good Service, as he that
discovers Treason; for he gives him Notice that his Foot is entering into a
Snare, and that his preservation stands in desisting, and repenting if he would
but heed it: And if the Disobedience be once good, the higher it goes the
better it is continuing still good; it is absurd to go from good to worse
extensively. Disobedience that is good, is still better as it is more likely to
prevent the Evil: And then Disobedience defensive, is doubtless better than
passive; for that would introduce the Evil Voluntarily, that is, they that were
not willing to do it themselves, were yet willing to let others do it; and how
far that can clear them I see not. For though it is not a downright consenting
to subvert the Government, yet it is a consenting that it shall be done, rather
than they will run the hazard to defend it, or prevent it; which is but
Pilate-like, to wash the Hands of what their Hearts tell them they are
Accessory to.

Obj. 15. But War is hurtful to the State.

Answ. The Arm that is broke cannot set it self, nor can he that sets it, set
it by any Natural Power derived, from the Spirit; but by a Violent disturbing
them again, the Bone-setter is often forced to pull them further asunder e're
he can join them well; and so it is when Wicked Men have disjoynted and broken
the Bones of State, the languishing Law cannot restore it self; nor can those
that seek to restore it, restore it without doing Violence to its broken part;
but it is better to do that Violence than to let them grow Crooked or Gangreen.
He that has taken Poison must suffer the Violence of a Vomit; and they that are
Sick must be made Sicker often before they can be made Well. The prejudice
therefore the Government receives, by those that go about to restore it, does
no more denominate them Enemies to the State than the little griping of Physic
can denominate Physicians Enemies to Nature. The Evil proceeds from the
Disease, not the Remedy, and the Guilt is upon them that gave the Wound not
those that dressed it; all the Anguish and Smart that follows the Skilful
Surgeons Hand, is not to be attributed to the Surgeon, but to the wicked
Assassine; and therefore though this Restoration have the Evil of a Civil War,
yet the Guilt of all that Evil lies upon the Causers. Men are not bound to lose
their Right for fear of harming Wicked Men, nor to save a less Good, by losing
a greater; a short Evil is to be chosen rather than a perpetual one: Men had
better drudge to preserve their own Freedom, than to enter into Bondage to
drudge for others; and the Patriots of our Country do well to bear the Burden
of a War, rather than to become Slaves themselves, and leave Popery, Beggary,
and Slavery to their Posterity.

Obj. 16. But it is an unsafe and dangerous Medicine, it opens a Gap to the
People to rebel at Pleasure, and may endanger the change of the Government.

Answ. A desperate Disease must have a desperate Cure; but doing right can no
way open to do wrong; resisting illegal Forces, is hedging up a Gap, not making
one. Raising of Men to take a Felon, will not excite the same Men to rise and
seize an honest Man. We must not therefore forbear to take up Arms in a just
Cause, lest it should encourage others to take up Arms in a bad Cause; for then
some that were breaking the Peace, and would not be quieted with Words, might
not be resisted, lest it should teach the People to break the Peace; but Blows
bestowed on such Malefactors is no breach of Peace, and therefore can teach the
People no such thing; if they do ill by that Example it is not long of the
Copy, but of those that do not heed to write by it.

2. I know Men in Passion, and heightened with Success, and backed with
Strength, are apt to soar with high, and fall in love with new Inventions. But
this hazard must be run, rather than a certain change admitted. Resisting
Illegalities, and Misgovernment, is the way to preserve Government; and as long
as the King is safe, and his just Power and Prerogatives, the Government is in
no danger; and there is not the least Color imaginable that those that have
surrendered their Offices and Honors, the Court and the King's Favor, for
preserving the Government, and are now ready to hazard their Lives in defense
of it, will ever alter it: No, their design is to preserve it; a greater
Evidence of which they could not give at present than to petition for a Free
Parliament.

Obj. 17. But this casts dirt upon the Frame of the Government, leaving room
for perpetual quarrelling.

Answ. 1. Neither this, nor any other Government that I know of, affords
absolute means of Peace and Preservation: The Government is effectual enough so
far as it reaches, but it is not extensive enough. If the Monarch were
Arbitrary, then no Cause could introduce Resistance; the Nation might be at
Peace, but the Subjects could not be safe, and Liberty and Property would be
lost: Therefore if Safety, Liberty and Property be worth the preserving, they
must be defended when wicked Men would wrest them from us. The Constitution of
this Government is such, That if the King and Parliament, or the King and the
Subjects differ about Fundamental Rights, they have no way to reconcile the
Difference but by their own Consent. If the King without the Parliament could
determine the Difference, he would be Arbitrary; and if the People, or the
Parliament, could determine it without him, they would be Supreme, and then it
could be no Monarchy; and if the Judges had the determining Power, they would
get the Supremacy from both; and if a Foreigner were to decide the Matter, he
would seek his own Advantage; so that they must either condescend for Peace
sake to one another Proposals, so as not to destroy the Government, or they
must suffer the Grievance, and let the Quarrel fall for a time, till the
injurious can be worn to a compliance, or they must fight it out; for that is
their going to Law, the Soldiers are their Jurymen, and Victory is their
Verdict. For the Question is not about breach of Government, but whether that
be the Government, or no; and seeing this Cause transcends the executive Part
of the Government, it cannot be decided by Legal Progress, but by Lawmakers;
and if they cannot agree, Men are at liberty to join with that side they judge
in the right: Reason and Conscience must be their Guide, the Law cannot, and
they that proceed on this ground are their own Warrants on either side, for
neither have a Legal Power to determine the other: Therefore the Power of
Judging is neither Authoritative nor Civil, and so argues no Superiority in
those that judge, but only a Power residing in reasonable Creatures, or judging
of their own Act, of which they never were divested by any lawful Authority,
and therefore may lawfully use upon such Occasions; and though the Government
does not Warrant a Civil War, in such a case, yet the End and Reason of this
Government does. For it being framed to prevent the exorbitant Power of the
Prince, for the public Good; he that fights for the public Good, against an
Usurped Power, or an Arbitrary Invader of the Governments Rights, is justified
by the design and intendment of the Frame, and consequently by the Equity of
the Government, though not by any prescribed Form. For seeing many things are
morally honest and profitable, that are not reduced into positive Laws, Men
cannot proceed to those things (if at any time they become necessary) by
prescribing Forms of Law, because they have none; and so, in this case, the
Question being not about Breach of Law, but what is Law. And the Law not able
to satisfy both King and People, each claiming contrary Rights from the same
Laws, the Decision of this Case, though it be very good and profitable for this
Nation, yet has no prescribed form of Law to direct us to; and therefore both
King and People are to proceed according to moral Honesty, to the end of the
Government, that is, the public Good.

The Conclusion of all which, is, That seeing resisting of Illegal and
Arbitrary Forces, in defense of the Laws and Public Interest of the Land, is
not against the Scriptures, and consequently no Sin; nor against moral Honesty,
and consequently no Crime (not against Law but Law-breakers, not against true
Allegiance, or any Prerogative of the Crown, no Rebellion, no Usurpation of the
Sword, nor Criminal Disobedience, and not incommodious or unsafe for the
Public, in respect of the impendant Injuries and Hazards it removes) nor
inconsistent with the Frame of Government, which cannot otherwise decide an
obstinate Difference betwixt King and People. I cannot but conclude it is a
very worthy and virtuous Act to be in Arms for defense of the Laws, the King's
just Rights, and the Public Good; and consequently that those Gentlemen, who
are in Arms for defense of our Laws, Liberties, and Lives, against Illegal
Forces, Arbitrary Commands, and Usurped Powers, are in a virtuous Post. For if
the Subjects Right might not be defended by this means, it would be all lost;
it being all one, in these days, to have no Right, and to have no sufficient
means to defend it. The Doctrine of Non-resistance plainly puts all we have
into an ill King's hands, and the good Ones will scarce part with what they are
apt to love so dearly, and we parted with so freely; should we therefore preach
this Doctrine to our Princes, and tell them that they might take what we have
without danger or opposition, we should teach them to try our Patience: if all
must be referred to their Consciences, they will soon (without the help of a
Jesuit) find case enough and cause enough to secure that, and leave the
examination of them to the latter Day; hatred of our Persons, love of our
Estates, disgust at our Words or Actions, or dislike of our Religion, will soon
judge us unworthy of our Liberty and Property, as well as it has already done of
our Offices, Honors, and Preferments: Passion and Scorn, Pride and Ambition,
Covetousness and Prodigality, would all prey upon what we had, with a quiet
(though not with a good) Conscience; but especially if the King were poor and
necessitous, either by wilful Profuseness or Negligence: for Nature would even
tell him in such a Case, That we had all better want than he, and then farewell
Property; the worst you could do him, was but to pet and cry a bit, and perhaps
that might become a Pleasure to him too; and then you had nothing to rest on,
but that God would give you the Kingdom of Heaven, for beggering your selves,
impoverishing the Church, and giving what you had to the Devil's Service; an
ill Ground for such costly Hopes to stand upon.

2. This Doctrine renders Government prejudicial to the greatest part of
Mankind, depriving them of all just Defense: For the illegal Force bars them of
legal Defense; and the Doctrine of Non-resistance bars them of Corporal, and so
Man (under one of the best Governments in the World) is left naked in the midst
of Savage Beasts, (for homo lupus) and must not, though he be able, make any
defense for himself. Thus all the Rights of Society and Nature, are sacrificed
to the Lust and Age of a wicked King, and his evil Instruments; and the Body
Politic is really in a worse Condition than an unlimited Multitude, for they
may defend themselves (if they will) against any Enemy; but these have an
Enemy, and may not defend themselves, though in never so just a Cause; and what
is worst of all, must hold their own Hands whilst others cut their Throats.

Lastly, This Doctrine would make all Monarchs Arbitrary Monarchs, and a like
in effect; for if the Subjects may not (nor ought if they were able) resist the
Prince any further than by refusing to join with him, then he were Arbitrary,
and might do what he pleased without opposition, he had but a Moral Restraint,
and the most absolute Monarch had that upon him; and all Limitations in the
Fundamentals of Government would be idle and superfluous, because they
contained only such Rights as others might take from us at pleasure, and we
might not defend or oppose. But the end of limited Monarchies is, not that the
Monarch might not lawfully or rightfully oppress; for an Arbitrary Monarch is
bound to all that: but the end of all Limitations in Government, is, That the
Prince may want Means as well as Right to oppress, that he may not be able to
injure the Subject at all, either lawfully or unlawfully; they are limited to
govern by Laws, that they may want Means as well as Right to include the
Subjects Property. But the Doctrine of Non-resistance give them Means for a
Temptation, and is indeed but a fair Bait to draw them into a Snare.

An Enquiry into the Measures of Submission to the SUPREME AUTHORITY: And of
the Grounds upon which it may be lawful or necessary for Subjects to defend
their Religion, Lives and Liberties.
THis Enquiry cannot be regularly made, but by taking in the first place, a
true and full view of the Nature of Civil Society, and more particularly of the
Nature of Supreme Power, whether it is lodged in one or more Persons?

I. It is certain, that the Law of Nature has put no difference nor
subordination among Men, except it be that of Children to Parents, or of Wives
to their Husbands; so that with relation to the Law of Nature, all Men are born
free: and this Liberty must still be supposed entire, unless so far as it is
limited by Contracts, Provisions and Laws. For a Man can either bind himself to
be a Slave, by which he becomes in the power of another, only so far as it was
provided by the Contract: since all that Liberty which was not expressly given
away, remains still entire: so that the Plea for Liberty always proves it self,
unless it appears that it is given up or limited by any special Agreement.

II. It is no less certain, that as the light of Nature has planted in all Men
a natural Principle of the Love of Life, and of a Desire to preserve it; so the
common Principles of all Religion agree in this, that God having set us in this
World, we are bound to preserve that Being, which he has given us, by all just
and lawful Ways. Now this Duty of Self-preservation, is exerted in Instances of
two sorts; the one are, in the resisting of violent Aggressors; the other are
the taking of just Revenges of those, who have invaded us so secretly, that we
could not prevent them, and so violently, that we could not resist them: In
which Cases the Principle of Self-preservation warrants us, both to recover
what is our own, with just Damages, and also to put such unjust Persons out of
a capacity of doing the like Injuries any more, either to our selves, or to any
others. Now in these Instances of Self-preservation, this difference is to be
observed; that the first cannot be limited by any slow Forms, since a pressing
Danger requires a vigorous Repulse, and cannot admit of Delays; whereas the
second, of taking Revenges, or Reparations, is not of such haste, but that it
may be brought under Rules and Forms.

III. The true and Original Notion of Civil Society and Government, is, that it
is a Compromise made by such a Body of Men, by which they resign up the right
of demanding Reparations, either in the way of Justice against one another, or
in the way of War against their Neighbors, to such a single Person, or to such
a Body of Men as they think fit to trust with this. And in the management of
this Civil Society, great distinction is to be made, between the Power of
making Laws for the Regulating the Conduct of it, and the Power of Executing
those Laws: The Supreme Authority must still be supposed to be lodged with
those who have the Legislative Power reserved to them; but not with those who
have only the Executive; which is plainly a Trust, when it is separated from
the Legislative Power; and all Trusts, by their Nature import, that those to
whom they are given, are accountable, even though it should not be expressly
specified in the words of the Trust it self.

IV. It cannot be supposed by the Principles of Natural Religion, that God has
authorized any one Form of Government, any other way than as the general Rules
of Order, and of Justice, oblige all Men not to subvert Constitutions, nor
disturb the Peace of Mankind, or invade those Rights with which the Law may
have vested some Persons; for it is certain, that as private Contracts lodge or
translate private Rights, so the public Laws can likewise lodge such Rights,
Prerogatives, and Revenues, in those, under whose Protection they put
themselves, and in such a manner, that they may come to have as good a Title to
these, as any private Person can have to his Property: so that it becomes an
Act of high Injustice and Violence, to invade these; which is so far a greater
Sin than any such Actions would be against a private Person, as the public
Peace and Order is preferrable to all private Considerations whatsoever. So
that in truth, the Principles of natural Religion, give those that are in
Authority no Power at all, but they do only secure them in the possession of
that which is theirs by Law. And as no Considerations of Religion can bind me
to pay another more than I indeed owe him, but do only bind me more strictly to
pay what I owe; so the Considerations of Religion do indeed bring Subjects
under stricter Obligations to pay all due Allegiance and Submission to their
Princes, but they do not at all extend that Allegiance further than the Law
carries it. And though a Man has no divine Right to his Property, but has
acquired it by human Means, such as Succession, or Industry, yet he has a
security for the Enjoyment of it from a Divine Right; so though Princes have no
immediate Warrants from Heaven, either for their original Titles, or for the
extent of them, yet they are secured in the possession of them by the
Principles and Rules of Natural Religion.

V. It is to be considered, that as a private Person can bind himself to
another Man's Service, by different Degrees, either as an ordinary Servant for
Wages, or as one appropriate for a longer time, as an Apprentice; or by a total
giving himself up to another, as in the case of Slavery: In all which Cases the
general Name of Master may be equally used; yet the Degrees of his Power are to
be judged by the Nature of the Contract: so likewise Bodies of Men can give
themselves up in different Degrees, to the Conduct of others: and therefore,
though all those may carry the same name of King, yet every ones Power is to be
taken from the Measures of that Authority which is lodged in him, and not from
any general Speculations founded on some equivocal Terms, such as King,
Sovereign, or Supreme.

VI. It is certain, that God, as the Creator and Governor of the World, may
set up whom he will, to rule over other Men: But this Declaration of his Will,
must be made evident by Prophets, or other extraordinary Men sent of him, who
have some manifest Proofs of the Divine Authority that is committed to them on
such Occasions; and upon such Persons declaring the Will of God, in favor of
any others, that Declaration is to be submitted to, and obeyed. But this
pretense of a Divine Delegation, can be carried no further than to those who
are thus expressly marked out, and is unjustly claimed by those who can prove no
such Declaration to have been ever made in favor of them, or their Families.
Nor does it appear reasonable to conclude from their being in possession, that
it is the Will of God that it should be so, this justifies all Usurpers when
they are successful.

VII. The Measures of Power, and by consequence of Obedience, must be taken
from the express Laws of any State, or Body of Men, from the Oaths that they
swear, or from immemorial Prescription, and a long Possession, which both give
a Title, and in a long tract of Time make a bad one become good, since
Prescription when it passes the Memory of Man, and is not disputed by any other
Pretender, gives by the common sense of all Men a just and good Title: So upon
the whole matter, the Degrees of all Civil Authority, are to be taken either
from express Laws, immemorial Customs, or from particular Oaths, which the
Subjects swear to their Princes: this being still to be laid down for a
Principle, that in all the Disputes between Power and Liberty, Power must
always be proved, but Liberty proves it self; the one being founded only upon
positive Law, and the other upon the Law of Nature.

VIII. If from the general Principles of human Society, and natural Religion,
we carry this matter to be examined by the Scriptures; it is clear that all the
Passages that are in the Old Testament, are not to be made use of in this
matter, of neither side. For as the Land of Canaan was given to the Jews by an
immediate Grant from Heaven, so God reserved still this to himself, and to the
Declarations that he should make from time to time, either by his Prophets, or
by the Answers that came from the Cloud of Glory that was between the
Cherubims, to set up Judges or Kings over them, and to pull them down again as
he thought fit. Here was an express Delegation made by God, and therefore all
that was done in that Dispensation, either for or against Princes, is not to be
made use of in any other State, that is founded on another Bottom and
Constitution, and all the Expressions in the Old Testament relating to Kings,
since they belong to Persons that were immediately designed by God, are without
any sort of Reason applied to those, who can pretend to no such designation,
neither for themselves nor for their Ancestors.

IX. As for the New Testament, it is plain, that there are no Rules given in
it, neither for the Forms of Government in general, nor for the Degrees of any
one Form in particular; but the general Rules of Justice, Order and Peace,
being established in it upon higher Motives, and more binding Considerations,
than ever they were in any other Religion whatsoever, we are most strictly
bound by it, to observe the Constitution in which we are; and it is plain, that
the Rules set us in the Gospel, can be carried no further. It is indeed clear
from the New Testament, that the Christian Religion, as such, gives us no
grounds to defend or propagate it by force. It is a Doctrine of the Cross, and
of Faith, and Patience under it: And if by the Order of Divine Providence, and
of any Constitution of Government, under which we are born, we are brought
under Sufferings for our professing of it, we may indeed retire and fly out of
any such Country, if we can; but if that is denied us, we must then according
to this Religion, submit to those Sufferings under which we may be brought,
considering that God will be glorified by us in so doing, and that he will both
support us under our Sufferings, and gloriously reward us for them.

This was the state of the Christian Religion, during the three first
Centuries, under Heathen Emperors, and a Constitution in which Paganism was
established by Law. But if by the Laws of any Government, the Christian
Religion, or any Form of it, is become a part of the Subjects Property, it then
falls under another Consideration, not as it is a Religion, but as it is become
one of the principal Rights of the Subjects, to believe and profess it: and
then we must judge of the Invasions made on that, as we do of any other Invasion
that is made on our other Rights.

X. All the Passages in the New Testament that relate to Civil Government, are
to be expounded as they were truly meant, in opposition to that false Notion of
the Jews, who believed themselves to be so immediately under the Divine
Authority, that they could not become the Subjects of any other Power;
particularly of one that was not of their Nation, or of their Religion;
therefore they thought they could not be under the Roman Yoke, nor bound to pay
Tribute to Caesar, but judged that they were only subject out of fear, by reason
of the force that lay on them, but not for Conscience sake: and so in all their
dispersion, both at Rome and elsewhere, they thought they were God's Freemen,
and made use of this pretended Liberty as a cloak of Maliciousness. In
opposition to all which, since in a course of many Years they had asked the
Protection of the Roman Yoke, and were come under their Authority, our Savior
ordered them to continue in that, by his saying, Render to Caesar that which is
Caesar 's; and both St. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, and St. Peter in his
General Epistle, have very positively condemned that pernicious Maxim; but
without any formal Declarations made of the Rules or Measures of Government.
And since both the People and Senate of Rome had acknowledged the Power that
Augustus had indeed violently usurped, it became Legal when it was thus
submitted to, and confirmed both by the Senate and People: and it was
established in his Family by a long Prescription, when those Epistles were
writ: so that upon the whole matter, all that is in the New Testament upon this
Subject, imports no more, but that all Christians are bound to acquiesce in the
Government, and submit to it, according to the Constitution that is settled by
Law.

XI. We are then at last brought to the Constitution of our English Government;
so that no general Considerations from Speculations about Sovereign Power, nor
from any Passages either of the Old and New Testament, ought to determine us in
this matter; which must be fixed from the Laws and Regulations that have been
made among us. It is then certain, that with relation to the executive Part of
the Government, the Law has lodged that singly in the King; so that the whole
Administration of it is in him: but the Legislative Power is lodged between the
King and the Two Houses of Parliament; so that the Power of making and
repealing Laws, is not singly in the King, but only so far as the Two Houses
concur with him. It is also clear, that the King has such a determined extent
of Prerogative, beyond which he has no Authority: as for instance, if he levies
Money of his People, without a Law impowring him to it, he goes beyond the
Limits of his Power, and asks that to which he has no right: so that there lies
no obligation on the Subject to grant it; and if any in his Name use Violence
for the obtaining it, they are to be looked on as so many Robbers, that invade
our Property, and they being violent Aggressours, the Principle of
Self-preservation seems here to take place, and to warrant as violent a
Resistance.

XII. There is nothing more evident, than that England is a free Nation, that
has its Liberties and Properties reserved to it by many positive and express
Laws: if then we have a right to our Property, we must likewise be supposed to
have a right to preserve it: for those Rights are by the Law secured against
the Invasions of the Prerogative, and by consequence we must have a right to
preserve them against those Invasions. It is also evidently declared by our
Law, that all Orders and Warrants that are issued out in opposition to them,
are null of themselves; and by consequence, any that pretend to have
Commissions from the King, for those ends, are to be considerd as if they had
none at all: since those Commissions being void of themselves, are indeed no
Commissions in the Construction of the Law; and therefore those who act in
virtue of them, are still to be considered as private Persons who come to
invade and disturb us. It is also to be observed, that there are some Points
that are justly disputable and doubtful, and others that are so manifest, that
it is plain that any Objections that can be made to them, are rather forced
Pretenses, than so much as plausible Colors. It is true, if the Case is
doubtful, the Interest of the public Peace and Order, ought to carry it; but
the Case is quite different when the Invasions that are made upon Liberty and
Property, are plain and visible to all that consider them.

XIII. The main and great Difficulty here, is, that though our Government does
indeed assert the Liberty of the Subject, yet there are many express Laws made,
that lodge the Militia singly in the King, that make it plainly unlawful upon
any pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against the King, or any commissioned by
him: And these Laws have been put in the form of an Oath, which all that have
born any Employment either in Church or State have sworn and therefore those
Laws, for the assuring our Liberties, do indeed bind the King's Conscience, and
may affect his Ministers: yet since it is a Maxim of our Law, that the King can
do no wrong, these cannot be carried so far as to justify our taking Arms
against him, be the Transgressions of Law ever so many and so manifest. And
since this has been the constant Doctrine of the Church of England, it will be
a very heavy Imputation on us, if it appears, that though we held those
Opinions as long as the Court and the Crown have favored us, yet as soon as
the Court turns against us, we change our Principles.

XIV. Here is a true Difficulty of this whole Matter, and therefore it ought to
be exactly considered: 1. All general Words, how large soever, are still
supposed to have a tacit exception, and reserve in them, if the Matter seems to
require it. Children are commanded to obey their Parents in all things: Wives
are declared by the Scripture to be subject to their Husbands in all things, as
the Church is unto Christ: And yet how comprehensive soever these Words may
seem to be, there is still a reserve to be understood in them; and though by
our Form of Marriage, the Parties swear to one another till Death them do part,
yet few doubt but that this Bond is dissolved by Adultery, though it is not
named; for odious things ought not to be suspected, and therefore not named
upon such Occasions: But when they fall out, they carry still their own force
with them. 2. When there seem to be a Contradiction between two Articles in the
Constitution, we ought to examine which of the two is the most evident, and the
most important, and so we ought to fix upon it, and then we must give such an
accommodating sense to that which seems to contradict it, that so we may
reconcile those together. Here then are two seeming Contradictions in our
Constitution: The one is the Public Liberty of the Nation; the other is the
renouncing of all Resistance, in case that were invaded. It is plain, that our
Liberty is only a thing that we enjoy at the King's Discretion, and during his
Pleasure, if the other against all Resistance is to be understood according to
the utmost extent of the Words. Therefore since the chief Design of our whole
Law, and of all the several Rules of our Constitution, is to secure and
maintain our Liberty, we ought to lay that down for a Conclusion, that it is
both the most plain and the most important of the two: And therefore the other
Article against Resistance, ought to be so softened, as that it do not destroy
this. 3. Since it is by a Law that Resistance is condemned, we ought to
understand it in such a sense, as that it does not destroy all other Laws: And
therefore the intent of this Law, must only relate to the Executive Power,
which is in the King, and not to the Legislative, in which we cannot suppose
that our Legislators, who made that Law, intended to give up that, which we
plainly see they resolved still to preserve entire, according to the Ancient
Constitution. So then, the not resisting the King, can only be applied to the
Executive Power, that so upon no pretense of ill Administrations in the
Execution of the Law, it should be lawful to resist him; but this cannot with
any reason be extended to an Invasion of the Legislative Power, or to a total
Subversion of the Government. For it being plain, that the Law did not design
to lodge that Power in the King; it is also plain, that it did not intend to
secure him in it, in case he should set about it. 4. The Law mentioning the
King, or those Commissionated by him, shows plainly, that it only designed to
secure the King in the Executive Power; for the word Commission necessarily
imports this, since if it is not according to Law, it is no Commission; and by
consequence, those who act in virtue of it, are not commissionated by the King
in the Sense of the Law. The King likewise imports a Prince clothed by Law with
the Regal Prerogative; but if he goes to subvert the whole Foundation of the
Government, he subverts that by which he himself has his Power, and by
consequence he annuls his own Power; and then he ceases to be King, having
endeavored to destroy that upon which his own Authority is founded.

XV. It is acknowledged by the greatest Assertors of Monarchial Power, that in
some Cases a King may fall from his Power, and in other Cases that he may fall
from the Exercise of it. His deserting his People, his going about to enslave,
or sell them to any other, or a furious going about to destroy them, are in the
opinion of the most Monarchical Lawyers, such Abuses, that they naturally
divest those that are guilty of them; of their whole Authority. Infancy or
Phrenzy, do also put them under the Guardianship of others. All the crowned
Heads of Europe have, at least secretly, approved of the putting the late King
of Portugal under a Guardianship, and the keeping him still Prisoner for a few
Acts of Rage, that had been fatal to a very few persons: And even our Court
gave the first countenance to it, though of all others the late King had the
most reason to have done it at least last of all; since it justified a younger
Brother's supplanting the Elder; yet the evidence of the thing carried it even
against Interest. Therefore if a King goes about to subvert the Government, and
to overturn the whole Constitution, he by this must be supposed either to fall
from his Power, or at least from the Exercise of it, so far as that he ought to
be put under Guardians; and according to the Case of Portugal, the next Heir
falls naturally to be the Guardian.

XVI. The next thing to be considered, is to see in Fact whether the
Foundations of this Government have been struck at, and whether those Errors,
that have been perhaps committed, are only such Malversations, as ought to be
imputed only to human Frailty, and to the Ignorance, Inadvertencies, or
Passions to which all Princes may be subject, as well as other Men. But this
will best appear if we consider what are the Fundamental Points of our
Government, and the chief Securities that we have for our Liberties.

The Authority of the Law is indeed all in one word, so that if the King
pretends to a Power to dispense with Laws, there is nothing left, upon which
the Subject can depend; and yet as if Dispensing Power were not enough, if Laws
are wholly suspended for all time coming, this is plainly a repealing of them,
when likewise the Men in whose hands the Administration of Justice is put by
Law, such as Judges and Sheriffs, are allowed to tread all Laws under foot,
even those that infer an Incapacity on themselves if they violate them; this is
such a breaking of the whole Constitution, that we can no more have the
Administration of Justice, so that it is really a Dissolution of the
Government; since all Trials, Sentences, and the Executions of them, are become
so many unlawful Acts, that are null and void of themselves.

The next thing in our Constitution, which secures to us our Laws and
Liberties, is a free and Lawful Parliament. Now not to mention the breach of
the Law of Triennial Parliaments, it being above three years since we had a
Session that enacted any Law, Methods have been taken, and are daily a taking,
that render this impossible. Parliaments ought to be chosen with an entire
Liberty, and without either Force or Preingagements: whereas if all Men are
required beforehand to enter into Engagements how they will vote if they are
chosen themselves, or how they will give their Voices in the Electing of
others? This is plainly such a preparation to a Parliament, as would indeed
make it no Parliament, but a Cabal, if one were chosen, after all that
Corruption of Persons, who had preingaged themselves; and after the Threatening
and Turning out of all Persons out of Employments who had refused to do it; and
if there are such daily Regulations made in the Towns, that it is plain those
who manage them intend at last to put such a number of Men in the Corporations
as will certainly choose the Persons who are recommended to them. But above all,
if there are such a number of Sheriffs and Mayors made over England, by whom
the Elections must be conducted and returned, who are now under an Incapacity
by Law, and so are no Legal Officers, and by consequence those Elections that
pass under their Authority are null and void; if, I say, it is clear that
things are brought to this, then the Government is dissolved, because it is
impossible to have a Free and Legal Parliament in this state of things. If then
both the Authority of the Law, and the Constitution of the Parliament are
struck at and dissolved, here is a plain Subversion of the whole Government.
But if we enter next into the particular Branches of the Government, we will
find the like Disorder among them all.

The Protestant Religion, and the Church of England, make a great Article of
our Government, the latter being secured not only of old by Magna Charta, but
by many special Laws made of late; and there are particular Laws made in K.
Charles the First, and the late King's time, securing them from all Commissions
that the King can raise for Judging or Censuring them: if then in opposition to
this, a Court so condemned is erected, which proceeds to judge and censure the
Clergy, and even to disseise them of their Freeholds, without so much as the
form of a Trial, though this is the most indispensable Law of all those that
secures the Property of England; and if the King pretends that he can require
the Clergy to publish all his Arbitrary Declarations, and in particular, one
that strikes at their whole Settlement, and has ordered Process to be begun
against all that disobeyed this illegal Warrant, and has treated so great a
number of the Bishops as Criminals, only for representing to him the Reasons of
their not obeying him; if likewise the King is not satisfied to profess his own
Religion openly, though even that is contrary to Law, but has sent Ambassadors
to Rome, and received Nuntio 's from thence, which is plainly Treason by Law;
if likewise many Popish Churches and Chapels have been publicly opened; if
several Colleges of Jesuits have been set up in diverse parts of the Nation,
and one of the Order has been made a Privy Counselor, and a principal Minister
of State; and if Papists, and even those who turn to that Religion, though
declared Traitors by Law, are brought into all the chief Employments, both
Military and Civil; then it is plain, That all the Rights of the Church of
England, and the whole establishment of the Protestant Religion are struck at,
and designed to be overturned; since all these things, as they are notoriously
illegal, so they evidently demonstrate, That the great design of them all, is
the rooting out of this Pestilent Heresy, in their style, I mean the Protestant
Religion.

In the next place, If in the whole Course of Justice, it is visible, that
there is a constant practicing upon the Judges, that they are turned out upon
their varying from the Intentions of the Court, and if Men of no Reputation nor
Abilities are put in their places; if an Army is kept up in time of Peace, and
Men who withdraw from that illegal Service are hanged up as Criminals, without
any color of Law, which by consequence are so many Murders; and if the
Soldiery are connived at, and encouraged in the most enormous Crimes, that so
they may be thereby prepared to commit greater ones, and from single Rapes and
Murders, proceed to a rape upon all our Liberties and a destruction of the
Nation: if, I say, all these things are true in fact, then it is plain, that
there is such a dissolution of the Government made, that there is not any one
part of it left found and entire; and if all these things are done now, it is
easy to imagine what may be expected, when Arbitrary Power that spares no Man,
and Popery that spares no Heretic, are finally established: Then we may look
for nothing but Gabelles, Tailles, Impositions, Benevolences, and all sorts of
illegal Taxes, as from the other we may expect Burnings, Massacres, and
Inquisitions. In what is doing in Scotland, we may gather what is to be
expected in England; where if the King has over and over again declared, that
he is vested with an Absolute Power, to which all are bound to obey without
reserve, and has upon that annulled almost all the Acts of Parliament that
passed in K. James the Ist's Minority, though they were ratified by himself
when he came to be of age, and were confirmed by all the subsequent Kings, not
excepting the present. We must then conclude from thence, what is resolved on
here in England, and what will be put in execution as soon as it is thought
that the Times can bear it. When likewise the whole Settlement of Ireland is
shaken, and the Army that was raised, and is maintained by Taxes, that were
given for an Army of English Protestants, to secure them from a new Massacre by
the Irish Papists, is now all filled with Irish Papists, as well as almost all
the other Employments; it is plain, That not only all the British Protestants
inhabiting that Island, are in daily danger of being butchered a second time,
but that the Crown of England is in danger of losing that Island, it being now
put wholly into the hands and power of the Native Irish, who, as they formerly
offered themselves up sometimes to the Crown of Spain, sometimes to the Pope,
and once to the Duke of Lorrain; so are they perhaps at this present treating
with another Court for the sale and surrender of the Island, and for the
Massacre of the English in it.

If thus all the several Branches of our Constitution are dissolved, it might
be at least expected, that one part should be left entire, and that is the
Regal Dignity, and yet even that is prostituted, when we see a young Child put
in the reversion of it, and pretended to be the Prince of Wales; concerning
whose being born of the Queen, there appear to be not only no certain Proofs,
but there are all the Presumptions that can possibly be imagined to the
contrary. No Proofs were ever given either to the Princess of Denmark, or to
any other Protestant Ladies, in whom we ought to repose any Confidence that the
Queen was ever with Child; that whole matter being managed with so much
Mysteriousness, that there were violent and public Suspicions of it before the
Birth. But the whole Contrivance of the Birth, the sending away the Princess of
Denmark, the sudden shortning of the Reckoning, the Queen's sudden going to St.
James's, her no less sudden pretended Delivery; the hurrying the Child into
another Room without showing it to those present, and without their hearing it
cry; and the mysterious Conduct of all since that time; no satisfaction being
given to the Princess of Denmark upon her Return from the Bath, nor to any
other Protestant Ladies, of the Queen's having been really brought to bed.
These are all such evident Indications of a base Imposture, in this matter,
that as the Nation has the justest reason in the World to doubt of it, so they
have all possible reason to be at no quiet till they see a Legal and Free
Parliament assembled, which may impartially, and without either Fear or
Corruption, examine that whole matter.

If all these Matters are true in fact, then I suppose no Man will doubt, that
the whole Foundations of this Government, and all the most sacred Parts of it,
are overturned. And as to the truth of all these Suppositions, that is left to
every Englishman's Judgment and Sense.

The Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy no Badges of Slavery.
THE Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the Crown of England, having been invaded
and broke in upon by the Power of the Court of Rome, in K. Henry the Eighth 's
time all Foreign Power was abolished, and the Ancient Legal Supremacy restored,
and by many additional Acts corroborated. But all that was done of that kind,
in K. Henry the Eighth 's time, was undone again in Queen Mary's; and therefore
in the first Year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, an Act of Parliament was made,
Entitled, All Ancient Jurisdiction restored to the Crown. A Repeal of diverse
Statutes, and Reviver of others: and all foreign Power Abolished. Which Act
recites, that whereas in the Reign of R. H. 8. diverse good Laws were made and
established, as well for the utter extinguishment and putting away of all
Usurped and Foreign Powers and Authorities out of this Realm, as also for
restoring and uniting to the Imperial Crown of this Realm the ancient
Jurisdictions, Authorities, Superiorities, and Preheminences to the same of
Right belonging and appertaining; by reason whereof, the Subjects of this Realm
were kept in good order, and disburthened of diverse great and intolerable
Charges and Exactions, until such time as all the said good Laws and Statutes
by one Act of Parliament made in the first and second Years of the Reigns of
King Philip and Queen Mary, were clearly repealed and made void; by reason of
which Act of Repeal, the Subjects of England were eftsoons brought under an
usurped Foreign Power and Authority, and yet remained in that Bondage to their
intolerable Charges; and then Enacts, that for the repressing of the said
usurped Foreign Power, and the restoring of the Rights, Jurisdictions and
Preheminences appertaining to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, The said Act
made in the first and second Years of the said late King Philip and Queen Mary
(except as therein is excepted) be repealed, void, and of none effect.

The said Act of Primo Elizabethae proceeds, First, to revive by express words
many Statutes that had been made in King Henry the Eighth's time, and repealed
in Queen Mary's; and Secondly, to abolish all Foreign Authority in these words;
[viz.] And to the intent that all Usurped and Foreign Power and Authority
Spiritual and Temporal, may for ever be clearly extinguished, and never to be
used or obeyed within this Realm, etc. May it please your Highness that it may
be Enacted, That no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate,
Spiritual or Temporal, shall at any time after the last day of this Session of
Parliament, use, enjoy, or exercise any manner of Power, Jurisdiction,
Superiority, Authority, Pre-eminence or Privilege, Spiritual or Ecclesiastical,
within this Realm, etc. but the same shall be clearly abolished out of this
Realm, etc. Any Statute, Custom, etc. to the contrary notwithstanding. Thirdly,
The said Act restores, in the next Paragraph, to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, such Jurisdictions, Privileges, Superiorities, etc. Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical, as by any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power or Authority had
heretofore been, or might lawfully be exercised or used, etc. Fourthly, the Act
impowers the Queen to assign Commissioners to exercise Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction. And Fifthly, For the better observation and maintenance of this
Act, imposes upon Ecclesiastical and Temporal Officers and Ministers, etc. the
Oath, commonly called the Oath of Supremacy, which runs thus; (viz.)

The Oath of SUPREMACY.
I A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my Conscience, that the Queen's
Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other her
Highness's Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
Things and Causes as Temporal; and that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State, or Potentate has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority,
Pre-eminence or Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm; And
therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all Foreign Jurisdictions, Powers,
Superiorities and Authorities, and do promise that from henceforth I shall bear
Faith and true Allegiance to the Queen's Highness, her Heirs and lawful
Successors; and to my Power shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Preheminencies and Authorities, granted or belonging to the
Queen's Highness, her Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm. So help me God, and by the Contents of this Book.

It cannot but be obvious to every impartial Peruser of the Statute, especially
if he have the least knowledge of what Condition the Government of this Nation
was reduced to by Papal Encroachments and Usurpations, That the Makers of this
Law, and the Sense of this Oath, was no other in general, than that the People
of this Realm should bear Faith and true Allegiance, even in Matters relating
to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the Queen's Highness, her Heirs and lawful
Successors, and not to the Pope or any foreign pretended Jurisdiction.

What the several Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences and Authorities,
granted or belonging to the Queen, her Heirs and Successors, are in particular;
and what the Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences and Authorities, United
and Annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, are in particular, is not
material here to be discoursed of; though the several Statutes made in King
Henry the Eighth's time, and King Edward the Sixth's, and revived in Queen
Elizabeth's, will unfold many of them; and clear the distinction, which the
OATH makes, betwixt Authorities granted or belonging to the King, and
Authorities united and annexed to the Imperial Crown; and Mr. Prynn's History
of the Pope's intolerable Usurpations upon the Liberties of the Kings and
Subjects of England and Ireland; together with Sir Roger Twisden's Historical
Vindication of the Church of England in point of Schism, will in a great
measure acquaint the Curious how matters stood with us here, with respect to
Church Government, before the Pope had wrested the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
almost wholly out of the hands of our Kings, our Parliaments and Courts of
Justice. In short, those Jurisdictions, etc. are such, as the Ancient Laws,
Customs, and Usages of the Realm, or latter Acts of Parliament have Created,
Given, Limited and Directed.

The Makers of this Law did not design to impose upon the People of England any
new Terms of Allegiance, but to secure the old ones, exclusive of any Pretenses
of the Pope or See of Rome.

Nor are there any words in this Oath more strong, more binding to Duty and
Allegiance, than are words which the old Oath of Fealty is conceived in; which
all Men were anciently obliged, and may yet be required to take to the King in
the Court Leet at twelve years of Age; which runs thus; (viz.)

You shall swear that from this day forward you shall be true and faithful to
our Sovereign Lord King James and his Heirs: And Faith and Truth shall bear of
Life and Limb, and terrene Honor. And you shall not know nor hear of any ill
or damage intended to him, that you shall not defend. So help you Almighty God.

This is as full and comprehensive, as the Oath of Supremacy; I do promise that
I shall bear faith and true Allegiance to the Queen's Highness, her Heirs and
lawful Successors, and to my power shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions,
etc. So that the true sense and meaning of the Oath of Supremacy, is this; viz.
I will be true and faithful to our Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and
lawful Successors, and will to my Power assist and defend all his Rights,
notwithstanding any pretense made by the Pope or any other Foreign Power to
exercise Jurisdiction within the Realm, all which Foreign Power I utterly
renounce in Matters Ecclesiastical as well as Temporal.

The Oath of Allegiance is appointed by the Act of 3 Jac. 1. Chap. 4.
Entitled, An Act for discovering and repressing of Popish Recusants. It
recites the daily Experiences that many of his Majesty's Subjects, that adhere
in their Hearts to the Popish Religion, by the Infection drawn from thence, by
the wicked and devilish Counsel of Jesuits, Seminaries, and other like Persons
dangerous to the Church and State, are so far perverted in the point of their
Loyalties and due Allegiance to the King's Majesty, and the Crown of England,
as they are ready to entertain and execute any Treasonable Conspiracies and
Practices: And for the better Trial how his Majesty's Subjects stand affected
in point of their Loyalties and due Obedience, Enacts, that it shall be lawful
for any Bishop in his Diocese, or any two Justices of the Peace, whereof one to
be of the Quorum, within the Limits of their Jurisdiction, out of the Session,
to require any Person of the age of eighteen Years or above, which shall be
convict or indicted of Recusancy, other than Noblemen, etc. or which shall not
have received the Sacrament twice within the Year then next past, or any Person
passing in or through the Country, unknown, that being examined upon Oath shall
confess, or not deny him or her self to be a Recusant, and to take the Oath
therein after expressed; viz. etc. The Oath of Allegiance.

So that by the occasion of imposing the Oath, and by the appointing it to be
tendered only to Papists or suspected Papists, it is apparent that the Design of
the Lawmakers was to detect such Persons as were perverted, or in danger to be
perverted in their Loyalty, by Infection drawn from the Popish Religion.

The form of the Oath makes it yet more evident, being wholly levelled against
any Opinion of the Lawfulness of deposing the King, or practicing any Treason
against him, upon pretense of his being excommunicated or deprived by the Pope,
and against any Opinion of the Pope's Power to discharge Subjects from their
Oaths of Fidelity to their Princes. It runs thus; viz.

I A. B. Do truly and sincerely profess, testify and declare in my Conscience
before God and the World, that our Sovereign Lord King James, is lawful and
rightful King of this Realm, and of all his Majesty's Dominions and Countries:
And that the Pope, neither of himself, nor by any Authority of the Church or
See of Rome, or by any other means, with any other, has any Power or Authority
to depose the King, or to dispose any of his Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions,
or to authorize any Foreign Prince to invade or annoy him, or his Countries, or
to discharge any of his Subjects of their Allegiance or Obedience to his
Majesty, or to give license or leave to any of them to bear Arms, raise
Tumults, or to offer any Violence or Hurt to his Majesty's Royal Person, State
or Government, or to any of his Majesty's Subjects within his Majesty's
Dominions.

Also I do swear from my Heart, that notwithstanding any Declaration or
Sentence of Excommunication, or Deprivation made or granted, or to be made or
granted by the Pope or his Successors, or by any Authority derived or pretended
to be derived from him or his See, against the said King, his Heirs and
Successors, or any Absolution of the said Subjects from their Obedience, I will
bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and
him and them will defend to the uttermost of my Power against all Conspiracies
and Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his or their Persons,
their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of any such Sentence or
Declaration, or otherwise; and will do my best endeavor to disclose and make
known unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and traitorous
Conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of to be against him, or any of them.

And I do further swear, that I do from my Heart abhor and detest and abjure,
as impious and heretical, this damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes
which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by
their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do believe, and in Conscience am persuaded, that neither the Pope nor
any Person whatsoever, has Power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part
thereof, which I acknowledge by good and lawful Authority to be lawfully
administered unto me, and I do renounce all Parsons and Dispensations to the
contrary. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear,
according to these express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and
common Sense and Understanding of the same words, without any Equivocation, or
mental Evasion, or secret Reservation whatsoever. And I do make this
Recognition and Acknowledgment heartily, willingly and truly, upon the true
Faith of a Christian. So help me God.

And the Statute of 7 Jacobi cap. 6. recites; that Whereas by a Statute made in
the third Year of the said King's Reign, the form of an Oath to be ministered
and given to certain Persons in the same Act mentioned, is limited and
prescribed, tending only to the Declaration of such Duty as every true and well
affected Subject, not only by bond of Allegiance, but also by the Commandment
of Almighty God, ought to bear to the King, his Heirs and Successors; Which
Oath such are infected with Popish Superstition do oppugn with many false and
unsound Arguments, the just defense whereof the King had therefore undertaken
and worthily performed, to the great contentment of all his Subjects,
notwithstanding the Gainsayings of Contentious Adversaries. And to show how
greatly the King's Loyal Subjects do approve the said Oath, they beseech his
Majesty, that the said Oath be administered to all his Subjects.

The Pope, and Authority of the Sea of Rome, run through the first Paragraph;
Notwithstanding any Declaration, or Sentence of Excommunication, etc. Governs
the second Paragraph: Excommunicated and deprived the Pope are the material
words in the third Paragraph. The fourth is added in Majorem cautelam, in
opposition to the Popish Doctrine of Dispensing with Oaths, Absolving Subjects
from their Allegiance, Equivocations, Mental Evasions, etc.

So that as the Oath of Supremacy did but enforce the Ancient Oath of Fealty,
with an acknowledgment of the Queen's supreme Authority in Ecclesiastial Causes
and things, as well as Temporal, and a Renunciation of all Foreign
Jurisdictions; so the Oath of Allegiance does but enforce the same old Oath of
Fealty, by obliging the Subjects of England expressly to disown any lawful
Authority in the Pope or See of Rome to depose, invade or annoy the King, his
Dominions or Subjects. And notwithstanding any Sentence of Excommunication,
Deprivation, etc. by the Pope, etc. to bear Faith and true Allegiance to the
King, his Heirs and lawful Successors; And to abjure that Position, that it is
lawful to depose Princes that are Excommunicated or Deprived by the Pope.

Whatever is added, is either Oath over and above what was expressed in the old
Oath of Fealty, is but as Explanatory of it, and branching it out into such
Particulars, as time and occasion required.

So that the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance not having altered the terms of
Allegiance, due from the People of England to their Princes, if their Princes
by ancient Laws of the Realm, and by the Practice of our Forefathers, were
liable to be deposed by the great Councils of the Nation, for
Maladministration, Oppressions, and other Exorbitances, for not keeping their
Coronation-Oaths, for Insufficiency to govern, etc. then they continue still
liable to be deposed in like manner, the said Oaths, or any Obligation
contracted thereby, notwithstanding.

For the Practice of former times, I shall begin with a very ancient Precedent
in the Kingdom of the West Saxons, (viz.)

Cudred King of West-Saxony being dead, Sigebert his Kinsman succeeded him in
that Kingdom, and held it but a small time; for being puffed up with Pride by the
Successes of King Cudred his Predecessor, he grew insolent, and became
intolerable to his People. And when he evil entreated them all manner of ways,
and either wrested the Laws for his own Ends, or eluded them for his own
Advantage; Cumbra one of his chief Officers, at the request of the whole
People, intimated their Complaints to the Savage King. And because he persuaded
the King to govern his People more mildly, and that laying aside his Barbarity,
he would endeavor to appear acceptable to God and Man; the King immediately
commanded him to be put to Death, and increasing his Tyranny, became more cruel
and intolerable than before: whereupon in the beginning of the second Year of
his Reign, because he was arrived to an incorrigible pitch of Pride and
Wickedness, the NOBLES and the PEOPLE OF THE WHOLE KINGDOM assembled together,
and upon MATURE DELIBERATION, did by UNANIMOUS CONSENT OF THEM ALL, drive him
out of the Kingdom. In whose stead they chose Kenwolph an excellent Youth, and
of the Royal Blood, to be King over the People and Kingdom of the West Saxons.
Collect. p. 769, 770. ibid. p. 795, 796.

Cudredo Rege West-Saxiae defuncto, Sigebertus Cognatus ejus sibi in eodem
Regno successit; brevi tamen tempore Regnum tenens, nam ex Cudredi Regis
Precessoris sui eventibus tumefactus, and insolens intolerabilis suis fuit cum
autem eos modis omnibus male tractaret, legesque vel ad commodum suum
depravaret, vel pro commodo suo devitaret, Cumbra Consul ejus Nobilissimus
prece totius populi Regi fero eorum querimonias intimavit. Et quia ipse Regi
suaserat, ut lenius Populum suum regeret, and inhumanitate deposita Deo and
hominibus amabilis appareret, Rex eum impia nece mox interfici jubens, populo
saevior and intolerabilior quam prius suam tyrannidem augmentavit, unde in
principio secundi Anni Regni sui cum incorrigibilis superbiae and nequitiae
esset, Congregati sunt PROCERES and POPVLVS totius REGNI and eum PROVIDA
DELIBERATIONE a Regno VNANIMI CONSENSV OMNIVM expellebant. Cujus loco Kenwolfum
juvenem egregium de Regia stirpe oriundum, in Regem super Populum and Regnum
Wex-Saxiae elegerunt. Collect. 769, 770. ibidem, p. 795, 796.

This Deposition of King Sigebert appears to have been done in a formal and
orderly Manner; viz. in a Convention of the Proceres and the Populus totius
Regni; and it was done provida deliberatione and unanimi Omnium Consensu, and
consequently was not an Act of Heat, Rebellion, or Tumultuary Insurrection of
the People: But was what the whole Nation apprehended to be Legal, Just, and
according to the Constitution of their Government, and no breach of their Oaths
of Allegiance.

Nor have we any reason to wonder that the English Nation should free
themselves in such a manner from Oppression, if we consider that by an ancient
Positive Law, Enacted in K. Edward the Conf. time, and confirmed by William the
Conqueror, the Kings of England are liable to be deposed, if they turn Tyrants.

The King, because he is the Vicar of the Supreme King, is constituted to this
end and purpose, that he may govern his earthly Kingdom and the People of the
Lord, and especially to govern and reverence God's holy Church, and defend it
from Injuries, and root out, destroy, and wholly to extirpate all Wrong-doers.
Which if he do not perform, HE SHALL NOT RETAIN SO MUCH AS THE NAME OF A KING.
And a little after; The King must act all things according to Law, and by the
Judgment of the Proceres Regni. For Right and Justice ought to reign in the
Realm rather than a perverse Will. It is the Law that makes Right; but
Wilfulness, Violence and Force is not Right. The King ought above all things to
fear and love God, and to keep his Commandments throughout his Kingdom. He
ought also to preserve, to cherish, maintain, govern and defend against its
Adversaries, the Church within his Kingdom entirely and in all freedom,
according to the Constitutions of the Fathers and of his Predecessors, that God
may be honored above all things, and always be had before Men's Eyes. He ought
also to set up good Laws and approved Customs, and to abolish evil ones, and
put them away in his Kingdom. He ought to do right Judgment in his Kingdom, and
maintain Justice by advice of the Proceres Regni sui. All these things the
King, in proper Person, looking upon, and touching the Holy Gospels, and upon
the Holy and Sacred Relics, must swear in the Presence of his People and
Clergy to do, before he be crowned by the Archbishops and Bishops of the
Kingdom. Lamb. of the Ancient Laws of England, page 142.

Rex autem, quia Vicarius summi Regis est, ad hoc est constitutus, ut Regnum
terrenum and Populum Domini, and super omnia sanctam veneretur Ecclesiam ejus
and regat, and ab injuriosis defendat, and maleficos ab ea evellat and
destruat, and penitus disper. Quod nisi fecerit, nec nomen Regis in eo
constabit. Et paulo post; Debet Rex omnia rite facere in Regno, and per
Judicium Procerum Regni. Debet enim Jus and Justitia magis regnare in Regno,
quam voluntas prava. Lex est semper quod Jus facit; voluntas autem, Violentia
and Vis non est Jus. Debet vero Rex Deum timere super omnia and diligere, and
mandata ejus per totum Regum suum servare. Debet etiam sanctam Ecclesiam Regni
sui cum omni integritate and liberate, juxta Constitutiones Patrum and
Praedecessorum, servare, fovere, manutenere, regere, and contrainimicos
defendere, it a ut Deus prae coeteris honoretur, and prae oculis semper
habeatur. Debet etiam bonas Leges and Consuetudines approbat as erigere, pravas
autem delere, and omnes a Regno deponere. Debet Judicium rectum in Regno suo
facere, and Justitiam per Consil^um Procerum Regni sui tenere. Ista vero debet
omnia Rex in propria persona, inspectis and tactis sacrosanctis Evangeli is,
and super sacras and sanctas reliquias coram Regno and Sacerdotio and Clero
jurare, antequam ab Archiepiscopis and Episcopis Regni coronetur. Lamb. de
priscis Anglorum Legibus, p. 142.

Another Instance of the Deposition of a King of England, subsequent to this
Law, we find in King John's time, whose Oppressions and Tyrannical Government
our Histories are full of. Of which take this following Account out of a very
Ancient Historian.

Whereas the said John had sworn solemnly at his Coronation, as the manner is,
that he would preserve the Rights and Usages of the Church and Realm of
England, yet contrary to his Oath, he subjected, as far as in him lay, the
Kingdom of England, which has always been free, and made it tributary to the
Pope, without the Advice and Consent of his Barons; subverting good Customs,
and introducing evil ones, endeavoring by many Oppressions, and many ways, to
enslave both the Church and the Realm, which Oppressions you know better than
I, as having felt them by manifold Experience. For which Causes, when after
many Applications made, War was waged against him by his Barons; at last,
amongst other things it was agreed, with his express Consent, that in case the
said John should return to his former Villainies, the Barons should be at
liberty to recede from their Allegiance to him, never to return to him more.
But he, after a few days, made his latter end worse than his beginning,
endeavoring not only to oppress his Barons, but wholly to exterminate them;
who therefore in a GENERAL ASSEMBLY, and with the APPROBATION of ALL THE REALM,
adjudging him unworthy to be King, chose US for their Lord and King. Collect.
p. 1868, 1869. Chron. W. Thorn.

Cum praefatus Johannes in Coronatione sua solenniter, prout moris est,
jurasset, se Jura and Consuetudines Ecclesiae and Regni Angliae conservaturum,
contra juramentum suum absque consilio vel consensu Baronum suorum idem Regnum,
quod semper fuit liberum, quantum in ipso fuit, Domino Papa subjecit, and fecit
tributarium, bonas consuetudines subvertens, malas indutens, tam Ecclesiam quam
Regnum multis oppressionibus multisque modis studens ancellare, quas
oppressiones vos melius nostis, quam nos, ut qui eas familiari sensistis
experimento. Pro quibus, cum post multas requisitiones guerra mota esset contra
ipsum a Baronibus suis, tandem inter caetera de ejus expresso Consensu, it a
convenit, ut si idem Johannes ad flagitia prima rediret, ipse Barons ab ejus
fidelitate recederent, nunquam ad eum postmodum reversuri. Verum ipse
nihilominus paucis diebus evolutis, fecit novissima sua pejora prioribus,
studens Barons suos non tantum opprimere, sed potius penitus exterminare. Qui
DE COMMVNI REGNI CONSILIO and APPROBATIONE ipsum Regno judicantes indignum, nos
in Regem and Dominum elegerunt. Collect. 1868, 1869. Chron. W. Thorn: Lewis his
Letter to the Abbot of St. Austins, Canterbury.

The next Instance shall be that of King Edward the Second; the Record of whose
Deposition, if it were extant, would probably disclose all the Legal
Formalities that were then accounted proper for the deposing an Unjust,
Oppressive King: But they were cancelled and imbezled (as is highly probable
from Rastal's Stat. page 170, 171. compared with the Articles exhibited in
Parliament against King Richard the Second, of which hereafter) in King Richard
the Second's time, and by his Order: Yet the Articles themselves are preserved
in the Collect. and are as follows; viz.

Accord est que Sire Edward Fitz aisne du Roy ait le Government du Royalme and
soit Roy Couronne, pur les causes que s' ensuent.

1. Pur ceo que la Person le Roy n' est pas suffisant de Governer. Car en tout
son temps il ad estre mean and govern per auters que ly ont mavaisement
conseillez, a deshonour de ly and destruction de Saint Esglise, and de tout son
People sanz ceo que il le vousist veer ou conuster lequel il fust bon ou
mauvays ou remedy mettre, au fair le voufist quant il fuit requis par les
grants and sages de son Royalme, ou souffrir que amend fuist faite.

2. Item, Par son temps il ne se voloit doner a bon Counsel, ne le croire, ne a
bon Government de son Royalme, mes se ad done tous jours as Ouvrages and
Occupations nient Convenables, enterlessant l'esploit des besoignes de son
Royalme.

3. Item, Par defaut de bon government ad il perdu le Royalme d'Escoce, and
auters Terres and Seigneuries en Gascoyne and Hyrland, les queux son Pere le
leisa en pees and amiste du Roy de France, and dets mults des auters Grants.

4. Item, Par sa fierte and qualte and par mauvays Counsel ad il destruit Saint
Esglise, and les Persons de Saint Esglise tenus en prison les uns: and les
auters en distresce, and auxynt plusors Grants and Nobles de sa terre mys a
honteuse mort, enprisones, exulets and desheritez.

5. Item, La ou il est tenus par son serment a fair droit a toute il ne l' ad
pas volu fair, pur son propre proffitt and covetise de ly, and de ces maveis
consailires, que ount este pres de ly, ne ad guard les auters Points del
serment qu' il fist a son Coronement, si come il fuest tenus.

6. Item, Il deguerpist son Royalme and fist tant come en ly fust que son
Royalme and son People fust perduz, and que pys est, pur la cruaute de ly and
defaute de sa person il est trove incorrigible saunz esperance de amendment,
les queux chooses sont si notoires, qu' ils ne pount este desdits.

For these Causes, De consilio and assensu omnium Praelatorum, Comitum and
Baronum and totius Communitatis Regni, amotus est a regimine Regni. [Apolog.
Ade de Orleton Collect. p. 2765, 2766.]

It is accorded that Prince Edward, the King's eldest Son, shall have the
Government of the Kingdom, and be crowned King for the Causes following.

1. For that the Person of the King is insufficient to govern: for that during
his whole Reign he has been led and governed by others, who have given him evil
Counsel, to his Dishonor, and the Destruction of Holy-Church, and of all his
People; he being unwilling to consider or know what was good or evil, or to
provide remedy, even when it was required of him by the great and wise Men of
his Realm, or suffer any to be made.

2. Also, during all his time, he would neither hearken to, nor believe good
Counsel, nor apply himself to the good Government of his Realm, but has always
given himself over to Things and Occupations altogether inconvenient, omitting
in the mean time the necessary Affairs and Business of the Kingdom.

3. Also, For want of good Government, he has lost the Kingdom of Scotland,
and other Lands and Territories in Gascoin and Ireland, which his Father left
him in peace and friendship with the French King, and with many other Grandees.

4. Also, By his Pride and Arrogance and evil Counsel, he has destroyed
Holy-Church, imprisoning some Persons thereof, and put others in distress. And
also he has put to a shameful death, imprisoned and disinherited many of the
great Men, and Nobles of the Land.

5. Also, Whereas he is bound by his Oath to administer Justice to all, he
would not do it, through his own Covetousness, and that of Evil Counselors,
that were about him; neither has he kept the other Points of the Oath, which
he took at his Coronation, as he was bound.

6. Also, He has wasted his Kingdom, and did what in him lay, that his Realm
and People should be destroyed; and, which is worse, by his Cruelty and
personal Failings or Defects, he is found to be incorrigible, and past all
hopes of amendment. All which things are so notorious, that they cannot be
denied.

For these Causes, by advice and assent of all the Prelates, Earls and Barons,
and of the whole Commonalty of the Kingdom, he was deposed from the Government.
[ Apology of Adam de Orleton Collect. p. 2765, 2766.]

These Proceedings against King Edward the Second are nowhere extant but in
that Author. Which is the less to be wondered at, if we consider, that in King
Richard the Second's time the King's parasitical Court-Favourites so influenced
the Judges; That to the Question, How he was to be punished, that moved in the
Parliament, that the Statute should be sent for, whereby Edward, the Son of
King Edward, was another time indicted in the Parliament? They answered, That
as well he that moved, as the other who by force of the same motion brought the
said Statute into the Parliament House, be as Criminals and Traitors worthy to
be punished. V. Rastal 's Statutes, 170, 171. (Tho for that and other
extravagant, pernicious and treasonable Opinions delivered, those Judges were
severely punished, as is notoriously known.) And also, That it was afterward
one Article of Impeachment against King Richard the Second, That he had
cancelled and razed sundry Records.

In King Richard the Second's time, many Animosities arose from time to time
betwixt him and his Parliaments; insomuch, that in the eleventh year of his
Reign, the Parliament then sitting at London, the King absented himself from
them, and staid at Eltham, refusing to come at them, and join with them in the
Public Affairs: upon which occasion, the Lords and Commons sent Messengers to
him with an Address; which the Historian H. Knighton sets forth at large, and
which I will here give the Reader a Transcript of at large, because it will
afford many useful Inferences and Observations.

Salubri igitur usi consilio, miserunt de communi Assensu totius Parliamenti
Dominum Thomam de Wodestoke Ducem Glocestriae, and Thomam de Arundell Episcopum
Elyensem, ad Regem apud Eltham, qui salutarent eum ex part Procerum and
Communium Parliamenti sui, sub tali sensu verborum ei referentes vota eorum.

Domine Rex, Proceres and Domini atque totus populus Communitatis Parliamenti
vestri, cum humillima subjectione se commendant excellentissimo Regalis
Dignitatis vestrae, cupientes prosperum iter invincibilis honoris vestri contra
inimicorum potentiam, and validissimum vinculum pacis and dilectionis cordis
vestri erga subditos vestros, in augmentum commodi vestri erga Deum, and
salutem animae vestrae, and ad inedicibilem consolationem totius Populi vestri
quem regis: Ex quorum part haec vobis intimamus, Quod ex antiquo Statuto
habemus, and consuetudine laudabili and approbata, cujus contrarietati dici non
valebit, quod Rex noster convocare potest Dominos and Proceres Regni atque
Communes semel in anno ad Parliamentum suum, tanquam ad summam curiam totius
Regni, in qua omnis aequitas relucere deberet absque qualibet scrupulositate
vel nota, tanquam Sol in ascensu meridiei, ubi pauperes and divites pro
refrigerio tranquillitatis and pacis, and repulsione injuriarum, refugium
infallibile quaerere possent; ac etiam errata Regni reformare, and de Statu and
Gubernatione Regis and Regni cum sapientiori consilio tractare, and us inimici
Regis and Regni intrinseci and hosts extrinseci destruantur and repellantur,
quomodo convenientius and honorificentius fieri poterit cum salubri tractatu in
eo disponere and praevidere; qualiter quaeque onera incumbentia Regi and Regno
levius ad ediam communitatis supportari poterunt. Videtur etiam iis, quod ex
quo onera supportant incumbentia, habent etiam supervidere qualiter and per
quos eorum bona and catalla expendantur. Dicunt etiam, quod habent ex antiquo
Statuto, quod si Rex a Parliamento suo se alienaverit sua sponte, non aliqua
infirmitate, aut aliqua alia de causa necessitatis, sed per immoderatam
voluntatem proterve se subtraxerit per absentiam temporis quadraginta dierum,
tanquam de vexatione populi sui, and gravibus eorum expensis non curans, extunc
licitum omnibus and singulis eorum absque domigerio Regis redire ad propria,
and unicuique eorum in patriam suam remeare: Et jam vos ex longiore tempore
absentastis, and qua de causa nesciunt, venire renuistis. Ad haec Rex, Jam
plane consideramus, quod Populus noster atque Communes intendunt resistere,
atque contra nos insurgere moliuntur; and in tali infestatione melius nobis non
videtur, quin cognatum nostrum Regem Francia, and ab eo consilium and auxilium
petere contra insidiantes, and nos ei submittere potius quam succumbere
subditis nostris. Ad haec illi responderunt, Non est hoc vobis sanum consilium,
sed magis ducens ad inevitabile detrimentum; nam Rex Franciae capitalis
inimicus vester est, and Regni vestri adversarius permaximus; and si in terram
Regni vestri pedem figeret potius, vos spoliare laboraret, and Regnum vestrum
invadere, vosque a sublimitate Regalis solii expellere, quam vobis aliquatenus
manus adjutrices cum favore apponere; si, quod absit, ejus suffragio quandoque
indigeretis. Ad memoriam igitur revocetis, qualiter avus vester Edwardus
tertius Rex, and similiter pater Edwardus Princeps nomine ejus in sudore and
angustiis in omni tempore suo per innumerabiles labores in frigori and calore
certaverunt indefesse pro conquisitione Regni Franciae, quod eis jure
haereditario attinebat, and vobis per successionem post eos. Reminiscemini
quoque qualiter Domini Regni and Proceres atque Communes innumerahiles tam de
Regno Angliae quam Franciae, Reges quoque and Domini de aliis Regnis atque
populi innumerabiles in Guerra illa mortem and mortis periculum sustinuerunt,
bona quoque and catalla inaestimabilia and thesauros innumerabiles pro
sustentatione hujus guerrae, Communes Regni hujus indefesse effuderunt. Et quod
gravius dolendum est, jam in diebus vestris tanta onera iis imposita pro
guerris vestris sustinendis, supportaverunt, quod ad tantam pauperiem
incredibilem deducti sunt, quod nec reditus suos pro suis tenementis solvere
possunt, nec Regi subvenire, nec vitae necessaria sibi ipsis ministrare; and
depauperatur Regia potestas, and Dominorum Regni, and magnatum infelicitas
adducitur, atque totius populi debilitas. Nam Rex depauperari nequit, qui
divitem habet populum; nec dives esse potest, qui pauperes habet communes. Et
mala haec omnia redundant non solum Regi, sed and omnibus and singulis Dominis
and Proceribus Regni, unicuique in suo gradu. Et haec omnia eveniunt per
iniquos ministros Regis, qui male gubernaverunt Regem and Regnum usque in
praesens. Et nisi manus citius apponamus adjutrices, and remedii fulcimentum
adhibeamus, Regnum Angliae dolorose attenuabitur tempore, quo minus opinamur.
Sed and unum aliud de nuncio nostro superest nobis ex part populi vestri vobis
intimare. Habent enim EX ANTIQUO STATUTO, and de facto non long retroactis
temporibus experienter quod dolendum est habito, si Rex, EX MALIGNO CONSILIO
QUOCUNQUE, vel INEPTA CONTUMACIA, aut CONTEMPTU, seu PROTERVA VOLUNTATE
SINGULARI, aut QUOVIS MODO IRREGULARI, se alienaverit a populo suo, nec
voluerit per jura Regni, and Statuta ac laudabiles Ordinationes, cum salubri
consilio Dominorum and Procerum Regni gubernari and regulari, sed capitose in
suis insanis consiliis propriam voluntatem suam singularem proterve exercere,
extunc licitum est iis, cum communi assensu and consensu Populi Regni ipsum
REGEM DE REGALI SOLIO ABROGARE, and propinquiorem aliquem de stirpe Regia loco
ejus in Regni solio sublimare. H. Knighton, Collect. 2681.

Wherefore taking wholesome Advice, they sent by common Assent of the whole
Parliament, the Lord Thomas de Woodstock Duke of Gloucester, and Thomas de
Arundell Bishop of Ely, to the King to Eltham, to salute him on behalf of the
Lords and Commons of his Parliament, who expressed their Desires to the King to
this effect.

Sir, The Lords, and all the Commons of your Parliament, have themselves
commended to your most excellent Majesty, desiring the Success of your
invincible Honor against the Power of your Enemies, and a most firm Bond of
Peace and Love in your Heart toward your Subjects, for your good God-wards,
and the good of your Soul, and to the unspeakable Comfort of all your People
whom you govern: On whose behalf we intimate these things to you; That it
appears to us by an ancient Statute, and by laudable and approved Usage, which
cannot be denied, that our King can call together the Peers of the Realm, and
the Commons, once a year to his Parliament, as to the supreme Court of the
whole Kingdom, in which all Right and Justice ought to shine forth without any
doubt or stain, as the Sun at Noonday, where Poor and Rich may find an
infallible Refuge, to enjoy the Refreshments of Tranquillity and Peace, and for
repelling of Injuries; where also Errors in Government are to be reformed, and
the State and Government of King and Kingdom treated upon by sage Advice, and
the destroying and repelling of both intestine and foreign Enemies to the King
and Kingdom, with most Convenience and Honor, may be debated upon, and
provided for; as also in what manner the Charges incumbent upon the King and
Kingdom may be born with most ease to the Commonalty. They conceive likewise,
that since they bear the incumbent Charges, it concerns them to inspect how and
by whom their Goods and Chattels are expended. They say also, that it appears
to them by an ancient Statute, that if the King absent himself from his
Parliament voluntarily, not by reason of Sickness, or for any other necessary
cause, but through an inordinate Will shall wantonly absent himself by the
space of forty days, as not regarding the Vexation of his People, and their
great Expenses, it shall then be lawful to all and singular of them to return
to their own Homes without the King's leave: And you have now been longer
absent, and have refused to come to them, for what cause they know not. Then
said the King, I now plainly see that my People and the Commons design to
oppose me with Force, and are about to make an Insurrection against me: And if
I be so infested, I think the best course I can take will be to (...) my Cousin
the King of France, and ask his Advice, and pray in aid of him against those
that way-lay me, and rather to submit my self to him, than be foiled by my own
Subjects. To which they replied, That Counsel is not for your good, but will
inevitably tend to your ruin; for the King of France is your capital Enemy, and
the greatest Adversary that your Kingdom has, and if he should set his foot
within your Kingdom, he would rather endeavor to prey upon you, and invade
your Realm, and to depose you from your Royal Dignity, than afford you any
Assistance, if, which God forbid, you should stand in need of his help. Call to
mind therefore, how your Grandfather King Edward III, and your Father Prince
Edward for him, fought indefatigably in Sweat and Sorrow all their days, and
went through innumerable Hardships of Cold and Heat, to acquire the Kingdom of
France, which by hereditary Right appertained to Them, and does now to You by
Succession after them. Remember likewise, how innumerable Lords and Commons of
both Realms, and Kings and Gentlemen of other Kingdoms, and People innumerable,
perished, or hazarded perishing, in that War; and that the Commons of this
Realm poured out Goods of inestimable value, and innumerable Sums of Money, for
the carrying on of that same War; and, which is more to be lamented, they have
now in your days undergone such heavy Taxes toward the maintaining of your
Wars, that they are reduced to such incredible Poverty, that they cannot so
much as pay their Rents for their Farms, nor aid the King, nor afford
themselves Necessaries; and the King himself is impoverished, and the Lords
become uneasy, and all the People faint; for a King cannot become poor, that
has a rich People; nor can he be rich, whose People are poor. And all these
Mischiefs redound not to the King only, but also to all and singular the Peers
of the Realm, in proportion: And all these Mischiefs happen by means of the
King's Evil Ministers, who have hitherto misgovern'd both the King and Kingdom;
and if some course be not taken, the Kingdom of England will be miserably
diminished sooner than we are aware. But there remains yet another part of our
Message, which we have to impart to you on the behalf of your People. They find
in an ancient Statute, and it has been done in fact not long ago, That if the
King, through any Evil Counsel, or foolish Contumacy, or out of Scorn, or some
singular petulant Will of his own, or by any other irregular Means, shall
alienate himself from his People, and shall refuse to be governed and guided by
the Laws of the Realm, and the Statutes and laudable Ordinances thereof,
together with the wholesome Advice of the Lords and great Men of his Realm, but
persisting headstrong in his own hare-brain'd Counsels, shall petulantly
prosecute his own singular humor, That then it shall be lawful for them, with
the common assent and consent of the People of the Realm, to depose that same
King from his Regal Throne, and to set up some other of the Royal Blood in his
room. H. Knight. Coll. 2681.

No Man can imagine that the Lords and Commons in Parliament would have sent
the King such a Message, and have quoted to him an old Statute for deposing
Kings that would not govern according to Law, if the People of England had then
apprehended that an Obedience without reserve was due to the King, or if there
had not been such a Statute in being. And though the Record of that Excellent
Law be lost, as the Records of almost all our Ancient Laws are; yet is the
Testimony of so credible an Historian, who lived when these things were
transacted, sufficient to inform us, that such a Law was then known and in
being, and consequently that the Terms of English Allegiance, according to the
Constitution of our Government, are different from what some Modern Authors
would persuade us they are.

This Difference betwixt the said King and his Parliament ended amicably
betwixt them, in the punishment of many Evil Counselors, by whom the King had
been influenced to commit many Irregularities in Government.

But the Discontents of the People grew higher by his After-management of
Affairs, and ended in the Deposition of that King, and setting up of another,
who was not the next Heir in Lineal Succession.

The Articles against King Richard the Second may be read at large in H.
Knighton, Collect. 2746, 2747, etc. and are yet extant upon Record. An
Abridgment of them is in Cotton's Records, page 386, 387, 388. out of whom I
observe these few, there being in all Thirty three.

The First was, His wasting and bestowing the Lands of the Crown upon unworthy
Persons, and overcharging the Commons with Exactions. And that whereas certain
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, were assigned in Parliament to intend the
Government of the Kingdom, the King by a Conventicle of his own Accomplices
endeavored to impeach them of High Treason.

Another was, For that the King by undue means procured diverse Justices to
speak against the Law, to the destruction of the Duke of Gloucester, and the
Earls of Arundel and Warwick at Shrewsbury.

Another, For that the King, against his own Promise and Pardon at a solemn
Procession, apprehended the Duke of Gloucester, and sent him to Calice, there to
be choked and murdered, beheading the Earl of Arundel, and banishing the Earl
of Warwick, and the Lord Cobham.

Another, For that the King's Retinue, and a Rout gathered by him out of
Cheshire, committed diverse Murders, Rapes, and other Felonies, and refused to
pay for their Victuals.

Another, For that the Crown of England being freed from the Pope, and all
other Foreign Power, the King notwithstanding procured the Pope's
Excommunication on such as should break the Ordinances of the last Parliament,
in derogation of the Crown, Statutes and Laws of the Realm.

Another, That he made Men Sheriffs, who were not named to him by the Great
Officers, the Justices and others of his Council; and who were unfit, contrary
to the Laws of the Realm, and in manifest breach of his Oath.

Another, For that he did not repay to his Subjects the Debts that he had
borrowed of them.

Another, For that the King refused to execute the Laws, saying, That the Laws
were in his Mouth and Breast, and that himself alone could make and alter the
Laws.

Another, For causing Sheriffs to continue in Office above a Year, contrary to
the tenor of a Statute Law, thereby incurring notorious Perjury.

Another, For that the said King procured Knights of the Shires to be returned
to serve his own Will.

Another, For that many Justices, for their good Counsel given to the King,
were with evil Countenance and Threats rewarded.

Another, For that the King passing into Ireland, had carried with him, without
the Consent of the Estates of the Realm, the Treasure, Relics, and other
Jewels of the Realm, which were used safely to be kept in the King's own
Coffers from all hazard; And for that the said King cancelled and razed sundry
Records.

Another, For that the said King appeared by his Letters to the Pope, to
Foreign Princes, and to his Subjects, so variable, so dissembling, and so
unfaithful and inconstant, that no Man could trust him, that knew him;
insomuch, that he was a Scandal both to himself and the Kingdom.

Another, That the King would commonly say amongst the Nobles, that all
Subjects Lives, Lands and Goods were in his hands without any forfeiture; which
is altogether contrary to the Laws and Vsages of the Realm.

Another, For that he suffered his Subjects to be condemned by Martial-Law,
contrary to his Oath, and the Laws of the Realm.

Another, For that whereas the Subjects of England are sufficiently bound to
the King by their Allegiance, yet the said King compelled them to take new
Oaths.

These Articles, with some others, not altogether of so general a concern,
being considered, and the King himself confessing his Defects, the same seemed
sufficient to the whole Estates for the King's Deposition, and he was deposed
accordingly.

The Substance and Drift of all is, That our Kings were anciently liable to,
and might lawfully be deposed for Oppression and Tyranny, for Insufficiency to
govern, etc. in and by the great Council of the Nation, without any breach of
the old Oath of Fealty; because (to say nothing of the nature of our
Constitution) express and positive Laws warranted such Proceedings: And
therefore, the Frame of our Government being the same still, and the Terms of
our Allegiance being the same now that they were then, without any new
Obligations superinduced by the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, a King of
England may legally at this day, for sufficient cause, be deposed by the Lords
and Commons assembled in a Great Council of the Kingdom, without any breach of
the present Oaths of Supremacy or Allegiance. Quod erat demonstrandum.

MANTISSA.
WHen Stephen was King of England, whom the People had chosen rather than
submit to Mawd, tho the Great Men of the Realm had sworn Fealty to her in her
Father's lifetime, Henry Duke of Anjou, Son of the said Mawd, afterward King
Henry the Second, invaded the Kingdom An. Dom. 1153, which was toward the
latter-end of King Stephen's Reign; and Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury
endeavored to mediate a Peace betwixt them, speaking frequently with the King
in private, and sending many Messages to the Duke; and Henry Bishop of
Winchester took pains likewise to make them Friends. Factum est autem, ut mense
Novembris, in fine mensis, EX PRAECEPTO REGIS ET DUCIS, Collect. page 1374,
1375.
convenirent apud Wintoniam Praesules and Principes Regni, ut and ipsi jam
initae paci praeberent assensum, and unanimiter juramenti Sacramento
confirmarent, i.e. It came to pass, that in the Month of November, toward the
latter end of the Month, at the summons of the King and of the Duke, the
Prelates and Great Men of the Kingdom were assembled at Winchester, that they
also might assent to the Peace that was concluded, and unanimously swear to
observe it.

In that Parliament the Duke was declared King Stephen's adopted Son, and Heir
of the Kingdom, and the King to retain the Government during his Life.

I observe only upon this Authority, That there being a Controversy betwixt the
King and the Duke, which could no otherwise be determined and settled but in a
Parliament, the Summons of this Parliament were issued in the Names of both
Parties concerned.

Quisquis habet aures ad audiendum, audiat. FINIS.

