LETTERS and PAPERS Concerning some MATTERS in the last PARLIAMENT, Relating to
the Common Rights of all the Communs of England, Fit to be Considered in the
next, And by all the said COMMONS In the mean time.

LONDON: Printed for the Author in the Year 1700.

To the Knights, Gentlemen and Freeholders of the County of Gloucester.
Gentlemen,
THough I have left the Employments of the World, I have not left off my Love
and Good Will to my Country; either the Nation in general, or your particular
County: And therefore since you are e're long to have a New Election of Members
of Parliament, I think sit to give you Notice of some things fit to be
considered in Relation to that Business; a Business, which deserves to be
better considered by all the Commons of England than it has been hitherto. But
what does concern the Nation in General is fit to be said to all, and something
of that has been said already. It Is what does more especially concern your
County that I shall here offer to your Consideration. The Denial of Justice has
been always look upon as a great Grievance in a King, but a Capital Crime in a
Subject. The Preservation of our Rights, and of the free Course of Justice is a
principal part of the Trust reposed in our Representatives in Parliament. To
prefer our Petitions for matters of Common Concern to the House of Commons is
as much the Right of every Commoner of England, as to prefer an Indictment to a
Grand Jury in a County. And as the Misdemeanors of a particular Grand Jury-man
may be presented and enquired of by another Grand Jury, and the Misdemeanors of
a whole Jury upon an Attaint; So, the Misdemeanors not only of particular
Members, but of a whole House, or a whole Parliament, may be Corrected and
Redressed in another; and the Crimes of particular leading Members Punished.

This great, fundamental, and important Right, has been twice within few years,
violated, denied, or hindered and abused, by Members of your County; First by
one since deceased, who, having a Petition to present against the Speaker and
another Member, for no less a Crime than discouraging the Execution of the Law
and Contempt of her late Majesty's Authority; for Proof of which, there were no
less than seven Bishops, besides other considerable Persons, Witnesses, did by
Contrivance with the Criminals so time it, that at last, after much delay, it
was by a small Number of the Members gotten together with the Speaker, thrown
out without Reading. This was soon after complained of at the General Quarter
Sessions, and the Petition left with the Clerk of the Peace: And now again in
the last Session of Parliament in such manner, as is a Shame to themselves, the
whole House of Commons, and indeed to the whole Nation to have had such a Set
of Representatives: and most Just it was upon them, that they, who had no more
Regard to the Honor of the King, nay, to the Honor of God himself, should be
so infatuated as to expose their own Shame, and the Shame of the whole House,
and to the farther Shame of the Nation, if it be suffered to Pass without due
Correction. The Case is so plain and easy to be understood by the other two
Papers hereunto annexed, that I need say no more, than, as to Mr. How (whose
Name I spared, but they Printed) that the Words alleged to have been spoken by
him to my self, I can safely Testify upon Oath, if there were occasion, but I
presume he will not deny them. And as for Sir Richard Cox, I had by a former
Letter imminded him of the former Case; but it seems he was not so much
concerned for your Rights, as ever to move any thing concerning that. But upon
the motion of this, by a Person, if I be not misinformed, who had given such
Proofs of his Dis-respect, at several times, both to King and Commons, that I
have before now wondered that he has been so long permitted to have any Place
in an English Parliament; he was not only pleased to make a Wise Speech, as he
thought in the House, but to repeat it out of the House in Coffee-houses, and
Taverns, with so much Vanity, and so palpable Falsity, that the very perusal of
these Papers are sufficient to detect it, and as gave Offense to diverse who
heard him, and made some think a little Addition to his Name at the end, more
proper for him than that before it.

I presume you know who are concerned in the Case, and hope you will do at your
County Court, what may be a sufficient Indication, of your Sense of Religion,
of your Loyalty, and Regard to the Noble Constitution of our Government, and
your Concern for the Common Rights of the Commons of England. And indeed, it is
a kind of unavoidable Test of all these.

Your Humble Servant Edw. Stephens.

QUESTIONS OF Common Right, Proper and Necessary to be considered by all
Knights, Gentlemen, Freeholders, and Commoners of England, and especially
those of the Honorable Profession of the Law.
THE true English Government, excellently composed of the three Simple Species,
Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, I have long thought, and still think, to
be in its Constitution, one of the Best Governments in the World; and not more
excellent in it self, than well Accommodated to the Genius of the People; and
which is but the consequence of these, most Easy to be Exercised. This I think
very true, though it has already within our Memory, suffered such dismal
Concussions and Confusions, and, in my apprehension, is in in so great Danger
of more, as if there was nothing of Truth in it. But this does not proceed from
the Constitution; but from other Causes: Whereof one is Secret, The Judgment of
God, for a secret Root of Bitterness, little regarded by those, who ought to be
most Skilful in discerning, and most Active in amending such Matters. But there
are others manifest enough: One is a General Corruption of the Manners of the
People: Another notorious Corruption of their Deputies and Representatives,
both in Manners in general, and in respect of Justice and the Trust reposed in
them; in which respect, I have known some of themselves laugh, and say, that
they are the true Representatives of the Nation indeed. And though this of it
self has a Tendence to the Dissolution of the Government, yet there is another
more dangerous than this, if it be not looked to in time: and that is by
Popular Factions. For as Monarchies are apt to degenerate into Tyranny, so
Democracies are as apt to be dissolved by Factions: And though in the English
Constitution there is as good Provision against both these, as Humane Affairs
are capable of, yet are the Parts of which it is constituted, subject in some
sort, to the Corruptions of those simple Species, from which they are derived.
What was it but a secret Faction in the Long Parliament, which first cast out
the Bishops as Popishly affected, then the Lords as Useless and Dangerous, then
the greatest part of the Commons, except themselves, commonly called, The Rump;
then cut off the King's Head; and brought all into such Confusions as could
never be settled, until the old Form was restored again? What was it but a
Faction, which by no less than three several Acts of Parliament engaged the
Clergy, the Corporations, the Militia, and all the great Officers and
Magistrates of the Nation, in such Declarations, as justify or excuse the
Adversaries of the late Revolution and make the Severities against them and
Pretense of Forfeitures, inexcusable, unjust, and unreasonable? What is it but
a Faction, which has presumed with so much Insolence to offer such Indignities
to a Prince of so Great Courage and Conduct, as has been commonly believed and
talked to have been on purpose to affront him? How near have such Factions gone
to inslave the Nation, and set up the Monarchy to be Absolute and Arbitrary?
And how fairly have they begun to pull down that, and the Aristrocratical part,
and set up the Democracy, or themselves and they know not what; or rather to
introduce an Anarchy, and turn all into the like Confusions again. What such
things may come to in time, if neglected, no man knows; but what may be done to
prevent the Mischief, is fit to be considered. Miscarriages of Juries may be
inquired into: And what is done amiss in one Parliament may be rectified in
another. And where there is manifestly a Trust reposed, and so great a Trust,
it would be such a Fault in this Constitution as I never suspected, if it might
be falsisied in such Matters as these, and without Remedy. I have therefore
thought fit to propose the following QUESTIONS to the Consideration of all
Persons concerned, who think fit to concern themselves with them. But into so
great Degeneracy, Corruption of Manners and Audacious Impiety, is this Nation
Sunk, That it is rare to meet with Men, who dare to do their Duty, or so much
as assert their Common Rights, or the very Religion they Profess,
notwithstanding the Laws both of God and Man on their side, and even where they
have not only the greatest Obligation, but the greatest Privilege to do it
that can be. This is manifest beyond all Contradiction by some late Actions of
great Infolence, and no less Impiety: So that unless another Parliament, and a
Convocation of the Clergy take the Matter into good Consideration, and provide
a speedy Remedy, there is great Danger that the whole Nation will speedily fall
into great Confusion.

The QUESTIONS are these:

I. Whether the several Members of the House of Commons be not Authorized to
Sit and Act there, by their respective Counties, Cities, and Buroughs, by
Indenture under the Hands and Seals of the Principal Electors for themselves
and the rest, as Deputies and Trustees for them all?

II. Whether they ought not to receive Instructions from, and in all Matters of
moment consult and advise with their Principals?

III. Whether it be not the Right and Duty of every Knight, Gentleman,
Freehold, and Commoner of England, to represent to the House of Commons by
their proper Representatives, or any other Member of the House, all such
matters of Public Concern as are proper to be inquired of and considered there?

IV. Whether any Commoner of England may not require his proper Representative
to represent any such Matter to the House?

V. Whether it be not a Breach of Trust in any such Deputy or Representative
not to perform what is so required honestly and faithfully?

VI. Whether they be not accountable for their Behavior in Parliament to their
Principals, by and for whom they are deputed and entrusted; that is,
questionable by those of the Counties in their County Court (to which all owe
Suit and Service, but many neglect it to their common Prejudice) and those of
the Cities and Buroughs in their respective proper Courts and Assemblies, and
Punishable for any notorious Breach of their Trust upon Complaint in Parliament?

VII. Whether Matters touching the Honor of Religion, the Honor of the King,
the common Right of all the Commoners of England, and the Encouragement, or
Discouragement of the Execution of the Laws, be not proper Matters to be
represented, enquired and considered there?

VIII Whether it be not Vnparliamentary, a Breach of Trust, and great Violation
of a Fundamental Right of all the Commoners of England, for a small number of
the Members with their Speaker before the House be full, to Vote that a
Petition Exhibited for any such Matter, as aforesaid, should not be read?

IX. Whether it be Parliamentary or agreeable to the usual Course of
Parliaments, to Vote a Petition or Letter of Complaint for any Contempt of
Religion, or Dishonor or Indignity to the King, or Factions, or Seditious
Practices, to be a false and scandalous Libel, and the Complainant to be
prosecuted before he has been heard at the Bar, or had notice to appear and
prove his Complaint?

X. Whether the Fundamental and Common Rights of all the Commons of England be
not of greater Importance to be Preserved and Maintained Inviolably than any of
the Privileges of their Deputies, which they have only in Respect of their
Deputation and Trust reposed in them (of which some are often Complained of by
their Principals as Abused to their Prejudice?)

XI. Whether it be not the Common Interest of the Government of England, and of
all the Commons, and the Duty of every Subject to maintain and defend the
Honor and Dignity of the King, when there is occasion, as well as the Rights
and Liberties of themselves, and their Fellow-Commoners, by the Common Law of
Loyalty and Allegiance, and of all Members of Parliament, Magistrates and
Officers, etc. by special Obligation of their Solemn Oath?

XII. Whether all Conspiracies and Practices which have a natural Tendency to
dissolve, interrupt, or abate the mutual Considence that ought to be preserved
and maintained between the King and the People, and to draw the Affections of
the People from the King to the Conspirators; especially when on the one side
there is no special Occasion for them more than ordinary; and on the other,
there are such Popular Matters in agitation as give great Advantage to such a
Design, may not justly be suspected to be Treasonable, and by Consequence ought
to be stoutly and resolutely opposed by all Faithful and Loyal Subjects?

To the Knights, Gentlemen, Freeholders and Commons of England, EDWARD STEPHENS
wishes Prudence, Piety, Peace and Happiness.
Gentlemen and Fellow-Commoners,
What you see here Open (...) to diverse Members, your Trustees and (...)
^^^^^sentatives in Parliament, being then printed, not to be published, but
only a small number to be presented to them. But since they have pubublish*d
their V. Old English Loyalty. p. 13.14.
Votes concerning it; it is fit and but just you should see what it is they have
so Censured. I have many years endeavored to serve you to the best of my
Ability, without seeking Preferment or Reward from Men, or accepting of what
has been offered. What I have written lately for the Service of our Great
Master and your Selves, has been ill requited by the Prudential A name not
imposed, but assumed very properly.
Latitudinarian Bishops with False Reports and Calumnies, no less than of
Madness and Popery, like the False Prophets of old, and the Incendiaries of the
late Civil Wars: And what I have offered to the House for the same purpose,
both formerly, and now again, has been so treated as is very inconsistent
either with their Duty or our Right. For these things I appeal to the Righteous
Judgment of Almighty God, to your own Consciences, and to the next Parliament;
and to a Convention of the Clergy, as to what concerns the Bishops and the
false Charge of Popery. These Gentlemen, who set up themselves for our Masters,
receive all their Authority from Us, and under our Hands and Seals; and if we
do not let them know they are our our Servants, and accountable to Us for their
Behavior, We our selves are justly answerable for their Misbehaviour before
God and Man. And if we do not appear as well for the Honor of the King, when
there is occasion, as for the Rights of the Subject, we do not discharge our
Duty to our Country, perform our Oath to the King, or are Worthy of the Benefit
of so Noble a Government. I hope you will look better to your Election the next
time, and send up such Persons as have more sense of Religion and their Duty to
God, of the true English Government, and the Honor of the Ring, of your Rights
and the Trust reposed in them, and fit to enquire into the Miscarriages of
these.

To Sir Richard Cocks.
Sir Richard,
AS I am a Commoner of England, it is, as I told you before, my Right and my
Duty to take notice, and complain to the House of Commons, of all, or any such
matters of public Concern as are proper for the Inquiry or Consideration of
that House. And as I am a Christian, I am much more obliged to use that Right,
and discharge that Duty, when they are such as do affront, or do Contempt to
the Christian Religion, which is the Religion of the Nation, and so Essential a
part of this Constitution, that it is one of the Fundamental Principles of our
Laws, that whatever Laws are enacted in any thing contrary to this Religion,
they are so far void and null. This is the common Right and Duty of every
Commoner of England. But besides all this, I have been for some Years, by the
special Providence of Almighty God, engaged in his more immediate Service, and
without limitation to any special Charge; so that wherever I have opportunity
for his Service, I am obliged saithfully to discharge it. And besides all this,
I am obliged by Oath to be faithful to the present King, which I intend, by the
Grace of God, faithfully to perform, though for special, and, I think, good
Reasons, I refuse to take it again. These are great Obligations, and such as I
cannot discharge without taking notice and complaining of what I observe
greatly amiss in Both Houses of Parliament. And I shall do it first to you, as
my proper Representative; and by you desire it may be represented to the House,
as you will answer it to your Country, for which you serve.

In your House I observe such abominable Impiety, and Contempt of Religion, as
greater has rarely been known: I have heard it complained of by Members of the
House, that a Man can hardly mention any thing of God or Religion there, but he
shall be in danger to be ridiculed or laughed at. And when I have asked, why no
body moved the House that some of them might be called to the Bar, and made
Examples, the common Answer has been, It would be to no purpose. Which is the
Shame of the whole House, and notorious Evidence of their Impudence and
Ignorance of what becomes such Assemblies, in one part of them; and of such
Baseness, as makes them unworthy of the Name of Christians in the rest; as if
the generous Discharge of so great and noble a Duty, was not of it self a thing
to great purpose; as if the Fearful, or such as are ashamed of Christ, or his
Words, are not to have their part with Infidels and Unbelievers; that is, with
such as the rest of their Fellow Members of whom they complain; as if their
Baseness might not reasonably be imputed by the others to Infidelity and
Disbelief of the Religion, which they profess, to the Scandal of Religion, and
Hardening those poor Creatures in their Impiety. It is no wonder if the
whole-Nation abound in Infidelity, and all kind of Wickedness, when there is no
more Religion in those who should correct it among the Commons, and the Of
their Prudentials, I have long since noted one remarkable Instance in
Reflections on the Action at Sea, p. 29, 30, 31 and another lately in my
Narrative, besides others elsewhere.
Latitudinarian bishops among the Lords. And now I appeal to the Consciences of
all, who have any Sense of Religion, and to the dreadful Tribunal of Almighty
God, whether these things be not true, and whether there be not more danger to
the Nation from such a House of Commons, and such Bishops, than from Popery,
and from all the Priests and Jesuits in the Nation, if they were as many more
as they are.

And where there is no more Fear of God, it is no wonder if there be not that
Honor and Respect for the King, that there ought to be: Freedom of Debates in
Parliament is undoubtedly the Right of the Subject: But if under pretense of
Freedom of Debates any Members shall do acts of Insolence and Disrespect to the
King, that is no part of their Right, but a Violation of Duty to the King, and
tending to the Dissolution of the Government, and ought to be corrected.

That your late Votes, grounded upon a false and foolish Letter to a Member of
Parliament, was such, is believed by many, to get an advantage against the
King; and to prevent that, it is likely many did comply in their Votes, who did
not see any other reason for it; and the Choice of the Chairman for that
Committee, a Person, who was turned out of her Service by the late good Queen,
has declared openly in your Lobby to my self, that he thought Vice ought to be
encouraged, and is reported to have expressed no little disrespect to the King
in your House before now, is a considerable Aggravation of the Indignity. How
such things can be consistent either with Conscience and Religion, Civil Duty
to our Country, and one of the best Governments in the World, or their Oaths of
Fidelity to the King, I do not understand: Nor so much as with common Prudence
for themselves, and their own Rights. The King has showed himself a Prince of
great Courage, and of as great Prudence and Conduct. Almighty God has by him,
as his Instrument, in Confederacy with diverse of the chief Catholic Princes,
vouchsafed us a happy Peace, if we have the Discretion to use it as we ought,
and as becomes Persons sensible of his Goodness, and of the Respect they ought
to have for his Instruments in it. But I doubt these Politicians do but
egregiously befool themselves with a vain Conceit add Presumption of having the
Purse of the Nation. For certainly the King has as little need of them, as
they have of him: And by such Politics they do but provoke the just
Indignation, not only of a wise Prince, but of all honest and faithful
Subjects; and most of all, of those Confederates, who, if this King should die,
as he must one day, may by the just Judgment of God, enter into a Confederacy
of themselves to correct their Ingratitude and Folly. Nay, should the King but
dissolve this Parliament, and in a Declaration set out such Reasons as he may
for that, and for Calling of another, their little Politics with themselves
might probably be soon in the dirt. The Pretense of the There are other more
proper, natural, and effectual Means to remove all Fear of Popery, than such
Violence of Factions: of which the King cannot but know something.
Growth of Popery has been made use of to so ill purpose heretofore; has so
little ground at this time, more than what proceeds from the Negligence of the
Clergy in assisting condemned Persons, and visiting the Sick, and the Obstinacy
and Unconcernedness of a Party-of Prudential Latitudinarian Bishops, for what
does more properly belong to their Charge, and particularly for mending their
Cause, and making that sound, which is indefensible at present: and is raised,
I believe, so unseasonably to serve and support a lame and tottering Cause,
that it is like to prove the Shame and Confusion both of it, and of those who
make use of such indirect Means for that purpose. Let me but know who were the
Composers of that Letter, and had the Impudence and Folly to call me (as it is
commonly understood) Madman Convert, (two Lies at once) and I do not doubt but
to give you such Account of the whole Matter, as will sufficiently satifie both
the House and all honest and wise Men in the Nation. What I have more to say, I
shall reserve till I see what Use is made of this. I hope the House will
consider what is to be done, both to expiate that provoking Wickedness against
God, and to Correct, as they deserve, all Indignities done to the King: and you
shall always find me ready, in what belongs to me, to serve Both, and my
Country, in the best manner I can.

Your humble Servant, Edward Stephens.

THE CORRUPTION AND IMPIETY OF THE Common Members OF THE Late House of COMMONS.
IT is with the Best Governments, that all the Wit and Foresight of Man can
devise, as it is with Material Buildings. They are both alike subject to
Decays, which if not repaired in due time, inevitably bring Ruin and
Destruction at last. The true English Government is both in it self one of the
best Constitutions in the World, and most accomodate to the Nature and Genius
of the English People. And the People of this Nation have been heretofore as
Famous, not only for Courage and Hardiness, but also for Wisdom, Virtue and
Piety, as any People in the World. But at this present, both the Government is
fallen into great Decay, and the People become so degenerate, that they are
like to become the Scorn and Odium of all the rest of Mankind, if Matters be
not speedily amended. The whole Nation has seemed to me for some time, as under
an Enchantment. And I have known those, who in respect to the Notorious
Corruption of the House of Commons, have jestingly said, They were True
Representatives of the People; and yet when they themselves have gotten In
amongst them, have done nothing worthy of the Name of Englishmen toward any
Amendment, much less of Christians, though Professors of Religion of no
ordinary Form.

The Writers of Magic tell us, That such as are Initiate and Proficients in
the Black Art, can by the Assistance of their Familiar Spirits, so bind People
in some Particulars, that in those Particulars they cannot accomplish any
thing, though in all others they act as other People; and diverse such have I
seen and discoursed with. And whole Families have I known brought to
Desolation, in such manner as seemed very plain to me, to be by the secret
Operations of some invisible intelligent Powers, or some Secret Curse, which
did adhere to them, or both. And in some I have known a certain and manifest
Cause, and I doubt not, but there was the like in others, but unknown to any
but such as would not discover it. And this I have great reason to believe is
the true Case of this Nation; which will appear in time. But it is too sober a
Subject for so mad a Generation to be farther discoursed at present.

The Corruptions of the House of Commons is, what is at present necessary to be
considered, and is so Notorious, as needs not many Words to prove it. It has
been a common and known Practice for this Forty Years last past; for Men of
Confidence and ready Elocution, if they could but procure an Election in some
little Mercenary Borough, and so get into the House, presently to set
themselves to oppose the King and the Court, that they might be bought off by
some good Gratuity, Pension, or Place: and one while to Treat the King with the
greatest Insolence and Indignity; and another time the whole House of Commons;
and this either lightly laughed at, or gravely and prudentially passed by, by
the rest. Have we not seen after sufficient Insolence to the King on one side,
afterward the whole House of Commons Adjourned by the same Person, their
Speaker, without; nay, against their Consent, to please him; and yet this
Gentleman permitted constantly to be a Member to this Day? And what a Noise and
Clamor had we lately of the Growth of Popery, and a most unreasonable Act
passed upon it, when the Mystery of all was no other than to Lower King
William's Reputation with his Confederates beyond Sea, and ingratiate
themselves with the Abused People at home? Whether these things do not tend to
the Dissolution of the Government, and to introduce a Commonwealth, like to end
in Anarchy and Confusion, as heretofore, is not hard to be resolved, and
deserves to be well considered in time. And it may be worth the Consideration,
Whether the Mystery of some Peoples Heat about the Succession be not in the
bottom to make that a Step to the Alteration of the Government? So that there
seems two Dangerous Corruptions in the late Members of the House of Commons;
the one the Trade of Particular Members, of which I have mentioned but little
of what is known, or upon good grounds believed or suspected; whereby the
common Interest of the People is bought and sold by these Traders, or Traitors
if you will; the other a Conspiracy of a most wicked Faction of Apostates,
Deists, Socinians and Latudinarians, to subvert the Government, under pretense
of Preserving the Rights of the People; and to cast out Christianity, under
pretense of Securing the Protestant Religion. And how little there is of true
Religion amongst any of them all is Notorious by their Actions in the two last
Parliaments, upon the Letters in Print to Sir Richard Cocks, and to the
Knights, Gentlemen and Freeholders, and Commons of England. What a Charge of
Impiety is there upon the whole House of Commons! And what a silly and impious
Vote was passed upon it! And how Hypocritically and Scandalously have this last
deservedly short-lived House of Commons behaved themselves in their Formal
Address for a Solemn Day of Fasting and Prayer for the Blessing of God upon
their Consultations; and yet not one of them all so much as open his Mouth for
a due Correction of so great Impiety.

It is certain and unquestionable, that being ashamed of Christ or his Words,
and giving Offense or Scandal to Religion, are Two Capital Crimes in the Laws
of the Gospel, and terrible and severe Judgments denounced against them. And
nothing can be more Scandalous to Religion, than for a Man to make a high
Profession of Religion, and be ashamed or afraid to speak for it, when there is
so just and necessary occasion. So that the Sin and Danger of such Persons in
the House, I take to be the greatest of all, and that which is like to seal up
some Judgment of God upon the whole Nation, if some proper Course be not
speedily taken to prevent it.

God has already answered them in their own kind: for he has the Hearts of
Kings in his hands, and turns them as the Rivers of Water: And if the People
have not now a Care that they choose none of them again, they who do otherwise
may possibly find the Curse cleave to themselves, and to those they choose. And
as the King has done well to Dissolve them, so if he please to consult his
Judges, and the Learned in the Law, it is like he will find matter enough to
Correct the Insolence of some of the most active Conspirators. And then it may
be hoped, we may see a true English Parliament again. And then it may also be
hoped we may see the Decays, which have been too long neglected, effectually
repaired.

Part of the Letter to Sir RICHARD COCKS.
In your House I observe such abominable Impiety, and Contempt of Religion, as
greater has rarely been known: I have heard it complained of by Members of the
House, that a Man can hardly mention any thing of God or Religion there, but he
shall be in danger to be ridiculed or laughed at. And when I have asked, Why no
body moved the House, that some of them might de called to the Bar, and made
Examples? The common Answer has been, It would be to no purpose. Which is the
Shame of the whole House, and notorious Evidence of their Impudence and
Ignorance of what becomes such Assemblies, in one part of them; and of such
Baseness, as makes them unworthy of the Name of Christians in the rest; as if
the generous Discharge of so great and noble a Duty, was not of it self a thing
to great purpose; as if the Fearful, or such as are ashamed of Christ, or his
Words, are not to have their part with Infidels and Unbelievers; that is, with
such as the rest of their Fellow Members of whom they complain; as if their
Baseness might not reasonably be imputed by the others to Infidelity and
Disbelief of the Religion, which they profess, to the Scandal of Religion, and
Hardening those poor Creatures in their Impiety. It is no wonder if the whole
Nation abound in Infidelity, and all kind of Wickedness, when there is no more
Religion in those who should correct it.

The Letters at Large with other Papers, may be had at the New-Inn Coffee-House.

Printed in the Year 1701.

To the Knights, Gentlemen, Freeholders and Commons of England.
Gentlemen and Fellow-Commoners,
THO I have given sufficient Demonstration to all those few who know me, of my
good Will, Readiness, and Resolution for your Service, yet such has been the
Malice of some wicked men to defame me, which I could have born patiently did
it not disable me to serve you, as I would, that I Am compelled, as St. Paul was,
to say those things for my self, but for your sake, which nothing less should
have extorted from me.

I have lived now in the World above the ordinary Age of Man. My principal
Study from my Youth has been the Service of God and of my Country, upon all
Occasions, which I always looked upon as Calls to me. I always hated Knavery
and Falsehood, and was zealous for Truth and Righteousness; tho I have sometimes
been mistaken in matters of fact of others, yet never in my Principles that I
remember, or varied from them in deliberate Actions, so as to be justly charged
by Man, tho I dare not justify my self before the strict Justice of God. I have
spent my Life in this Service without soliciting for Preferment, or so much as
accepting what has been offered me both in Church and State. And to say nothing
of former times, I proved my self a Faithful Monitor to the late King and
Queen, and to my Country, all his time from first to last, and so as I doubt
not but Posterity will approve, whatever the present Generation does: and
should have done the like in the present Reign, had I had the like
Opportunities, nor have I been wanting in what I could do.

I drew a Specimen of a Declaration against Debauchery, before the Prince came
to London, which being approved by considerable Persons, was soon after
delivered to him, and the Care of it recommended to one, whose Advantages were
no less than his Duty to have promoted it: After he came to the Crown, I
presented him with a most faithful Admonition of what most concerned him, and
not only then complained in print of the shameful neglect of the Propagation of
Religion in Foreign Parts, and of Reformation of Manners at home, but some time
after actually begun that necessary Work, and had undoubtedly brought it to a
good Effect speedily, had not such as were actually engaged in it, and such as
were most of all obliged to promote it, unworthily deserted it, and set up a
little superficial Formality instead of it, which has more exposed it to
Contempt by great Ones, than promoted it among Inferiors.

I gave you not only Notice, but Example too, how to correct the Miscarriages
of your Trustees in Parliament, and to make them know, that they are not your
Masters but your Servants; but such as are most like to undo you, if you look
not better to them, and consider their Behavior at your County Courts and
General Quarter Sessions.

Considering of how great importance it is to have a Good Cause in all
Differences, and how much Religion is really concerned or pretended in the
present War, I began before it broke out again, in a Discourse dedicated to the
Judges, to show the necessity of mending our Cause in matters of Religion. And
have so asserted the Truth in several Particulars against four several Parties,
that not any one of any of them all has yet appeared publicly to resist it
(otherwise than by Lies and Calumnies, and discouraging the Booksellers from
printing or selling my Writings) or defend their own Cause against me; a thing
perhaps never known before, since Printing was known; and an Attestation to
Truth not inferior to a Miracle, being a plain accomplishment of our Savior's
Promise.

Most of these things have been presented to the Lower House of Convocation,
where they rest in Peace. And I have done the like in Civil Matters by just
Representations to our Representatives in Parliament: But there not only Truth
and Justice has been disregarded, but one of our principal fundamental Rights
violated, by those, whose principal Trust and Business it is to take Care to
preserve 'em. And several Papers of this sort, with others of a Collection,
entitled, A Message of Peace, etc. being stifled by the former Artifice, this
Nation seems now in the miserable Condition of the Jews of old lamented by the
Prophet, Jsa. 59.14, 15.

I could tell you of diverse other Matters, both Civil, and relating to Religion;
as for the better ordering of the Revenues of the Church in populous Parishes,
for more Assistants to take care of the Souls of the People; for better
Provision for the necessary Preparation of condemned Persons for their
Execution; for better and more reasonable Correction for Criminals than our
common Executions; and for such Reformation of our Gaols and Prisons, which are
now the Nurseries of all Vice and Wickedness, that they may be made Schools of
Virtue: All things very necessary, which I have endeavored to promote, but
with such Success, as, with the like in others, tempt me to suspect the whole
Nation to be in some sort under that wicked Power, whose Effigies is placed in
the Place of the Cross, upon the chief Spire of the City; especially when I
consider what Wickedness has been acted, how the Nation has been abused, and
the Judgments of God provoked by such Mysteries of Iniquity, as affront his
Omniscience, as well as his Justice, harden such as are concerned in them in
Aposzacy, now called Deism, and little less than Atheisin, and would sill the
Minds of all sober People with Horror, were they but commonly known and
understood. But a Spirit of Slumber does usually precede the greatest Judgments.

And this Suspicion is the more increased in me, when I consider how easily our
Divisions might be composed, and the Mischiefs and Confusions, which seem
coming on like a Torrent, be prevented, were it not for a Spirit of Faction and
Self-Interest, but mistaken Interest in all Parties, and the Abuses put upon
all by the false Pretenses of a few Sons of Bichri, who do more harm at home,
than all our foreign Adversaries abroad, and were it not for those, 'twere easy
to break all their measures more effectually, than all our Forces both by Sea
and Land are like to do.

But one of the greatest Vnhappinesses of Mankind in the State they are fallen
unto, is that they are generally like a Flock of silly Sheep, which are either
quietly fed and preserved in Safety, by faithful and careful Shepherds, or
exposed or frighted into Danger and Mischief by such as are careless of them,
but get in among them to serve themselves of them for some Designs of their
own. For they are very few who act upon sound and solid Judgment, but most upon
common Opinion, received by Education, taken up upon inconsiderate
Apprehension, or imposed upon them by the Crast and Subtlety of designing Men,
who abuse their Hopes and Confidence only to serve themselves.

Out of Pity therefore for the innocent Flocks, that they may beware of such
Shepherds, and of the Spirit of Faction in all Parties, are these Papers now
published. My Kindness expressed to the honest Quakers may possibly be
misconstru'd by some, especially of their sharpest Adversaries: But, besides
other reasons, the monstrous prevalence of the Spirit of Faction, even in such
as are in a suffering Case, and Persons otherwise of Learning and Ability to
consider, and yet will not receive the Truths they cannot fairly resist, was a
special Motive to me to accept the Invitations for farther Conference from a
People so despised in the sight of the Learned; tho I never use to decline to
answer any, either by Word or Writing, whom I find serious and pertinent. And I
do declare I do it sincerely and heartily, and will not be ashamed to assert
and maintain whatever Truth there is amongst them or any others, against any or
all Opposers of it. For Truth and Righteousness, by the Grace of God, I will
not desert in what Party soever. And if the honest and well-meaning People of
this Party will accept of my Advice and Assistance, I do not despair, through
Divine Assistance, but to help them, who are now the most despised of all
Sects, to become as truly honorable in real Worth and Virtue as any of them
all; and to maintain their Cause, not only by Principles of Religion, but also
by the true Principles of the Laws of England.

But for those Troublers of our Peace and Unity, those Roman Catholic
Missioners and Quaker Ministers, who obstinately resist the Truth, they cannot
with any sound reason gainsay, and notwithstanding continue with their
Sophistry and specious Pretenses to deceive the People, if the State please but
to afford me a reasonable Favor and Assistance of the Civil Authority, I hope
I shall easily demonstrate that they are so justly punishable by the I aws of
this Nation, antecedent to those made against them in particular, as will leave
them utterly inexcusable, and promote a good Service both to God and Man, much
more effectually. Which might have been put in practice before this time, if
such as, not long since, made the last great Clamor against the Growth of
Popery, had really designed to stop it, and not merely to abuse the People, to
ingratiate themselves with them, that they might use them at pleasure for their
own Advantage. This was undoubtedly the Mystery of the unreasonable be verity
of that Act, which has hitherto served rather for a Cover than any Restraint of
that Growth; and possibly might be so intended by such Juglers with all Parties
for their own Interest; who, when once discovered, can never after be safely
trusted by any, or will easily by such as are wise.

I know not any greater Service, which can be done to this Nation at this time,
than to undeceive and disabuse the innocent Flocks of this distracted and
divided People, by detecting the Deceivers and their several Arts and Abuses;
nor any one, who has endeavored it upon so clear and certain Principles in all
respects, or with equal Candor, Impartiality and Conviction, as I have done.
And therefore, by how much the greater are the Evidences of my Integrity,
Fidelity, and constant Zeal for your Service; that is, for the Service of my
Country, so much the more notorious is the Iniquity and evil Dispositions, of
such as by malicious Defamations, have not only grossly abused me (which I could
easily have born had that been all) but disabled me from farther Prosecution of
that Service hitherto, to which I am so heartily and entirely affected; and the
greater is the Evidence against them, that they are no true Friends to our
Country, but unfaithful treacherous Deceivers, who, under specious Pretenses,
seek to serve themselves, without due regard, if any at all, to the Service of
their Country. And they are of two sorts, either such as are or have been our
Trustees in Parliament, or of the Clergy of the Church of England. And these
latter have not only injured me and hindered me in your Service, but brought a
foul Scandal upon the Church of England; and therefore the Consideration of
that may be left to the supreme Authority, so lately asserted in all Causes as
well Spiritual as Temporal.

But for the others, who have not only injured me, and done you that
Disservice, but moreover foully broken the Trust reposed in them, in betraying
one of our principal and most necessary Rights; which if once lost our Servants
become our Masters, and more likely by their Tricking to bring all into
Confusion, than ever to do any thing truly for the Honor or Safety of this
Nation. I must therefore recommend that unto you with this FAITHFUL ADMONITION
AND ADVICE: Neglect no longer your own Interest at your COUNTY COURTS: Give
there your Instructions well considered to your Trustees, when you choose them,
and there confer constantly concerning their Behavior, and as occasion
requires, from thence admonish them of what you see necessary: And at your next
Court, or as soon as may be, assert, like true Englishmen, that ancient,
fundamental necessary Right of every Commoner of England, to have his Petitions
for proper matters to be presented to the House of Commons, by his
Representatives, and to be read, heard and considered, and duly answered there;
and the Duty of your Trustees to inquire into the Miscarriages in that respect.
This may be done also at your General Quarter Sessions, and by Cities and
Buroughs at their proper Courts,

June 19. 1704. Your Faithful Friend, Fellow-Commoner, and ready Servant in all
things of Truth and Righteousness, Edward Stephens.


