THE WAY of GOD WITH HIS PEOPLE IN THESE NATIONS.

Opened in A Thanksgiving Sermon, preached on the 5th of November, 1656. before
the Right Honorable, the High Court of Parliament.

By PETER STERRY.

LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole, Bookseller and Printer; and are to be sold at
his Shop at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange.
1657.

FOR THE RIGHT HONORABLE, The High Court of Parliament; The Epistle Dedicatory.
Right Honorable,
I Have obeyed your Commands in Printing this Sermon, as I did in Preaching it.
O that in both, the Sermon may prove an Alablaster Box, and the Name of Jesus
Christ, as an Ointment powered forth from it! We are in a Wilderness. Clouds of
Darkness, and Doubt; Fires of Danger, Dissension, and Wrath, are in the midst
of us, round about us. That the Presence of, Christ may be the Pillar of a
Cloud, and of Fire, to go before you as a Light in Difficulties, to stand
behind you as a Defense in Dangers, is the continual Prayer of

Your Honors most humble Servant in Christ, PETER STERRY.

Friday, the 7th of November. 1656.
ORdered by the Parliament, That Mr. Sterry have the Thanks of this House for
his great Pains taken in his Sermon preached before this House, at Margarets,
Westminster, on the 5 th of November. Being a day set apart for Public
Thanksgiving; and that he be desired to Print his Sermon; and that he have the
like Privilege in Printing, as has been formerly allowed to others in like
Cases.

And that Col. John Jones do give him the Thanks of this House accordingly.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.
A SERMON preached before the Right Honorable House of Parliament, on the 5. of
November, 1656. Being a Thanksgiving Day for the Victory over the Spaniards
West-Indie Fleet.
Isaiah, 9. 5. For every battle of the warrior is with confused noise and
Garments rolled in Blood; but this shall be with burning, and Fuel of fire.
THis verse is a Prophecy of the deliverance of Jerusalem from the siege by
Sennacherib; of which you have the complete Hystory afterward in this Book:
Chap. 36. Chap. 37.

In the first verse of this Chapter, mention is made of Two dark seasons, which
affected the Kingdom of Israel. One was, when Tiglath Pilezer invaded part of
the Land, and carried part of the people into Captivity; of which you may read,
2. Kings, 15. 29. The other was, when Salmanaser overrun the whole Land,
carried captive the generality of the people, and set an end to that Kingdom.
The Lord comfort his people of the Kingdom of Judah, that the trouble, which
was to come upon them by Sennacherib, should not be so grievous, as either of
these. For says he; Nevertheles the dimness shall not be such, as was in her
vexation; when at the first he lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun, and the
Land of Naphtali, and afterward did more grievously affict her by the way of
the Sea, Jordan in Galile of the Nations.

The second verse is a great Promise of Deliverance. The people that walked in
darkness, have seen a great light: they that dwell in the Land of the shadow of
death, upon them has the light shined. The Prophet speaks of all the Jews in
both Kingdoms, as one Body. When the Kingdom of Israel was laid wast, it is
probable, that many of those ten Tribes fled into the land of Judah. When
Sennacherib invaded Judah, ruining the Countries, as he passed, with his army;
the multitude of the people retired before him into Jerusalem. The King of
Assyria besieges that great City, and with his mighty Army over shadows it, as
with Darkness, and the shadow of Death. Now in the thickness of this darkness a
light arises, and shines forth upon the people by the prayer of Hezekiah, the
prophecy of Esaiah, the descent of the Lord from Heaven by a mighty Angel.

Behold the difference, which God makes between the Kingdom of Israel, and of
Judah; those, who set up Calves to themselves; who worship the maker of Heaven,
and Earth, after the Imaginations of their own heart, in the Images, and works
of their own hands: and those, who worship him in his own Temple at Jerusalem,
which is a figure of Jesus Christ, the only Image of the Invisible God, as he
makes himself known to us by his own Spirit.

You have three senses of the first part of the 3. verse, Thou have meltiplyed
the Nation, and have not increased the joy: Some apply this to Sennacheribs
Army, which was so numerous, and a Collection of so many Nations. The Heathen
were gathered together agaiust Jerusalem in vast numbers: but they had no joy
in it, proportionable to their Combinations, and their Confidence. Others
interpret it of the Jews shut up in Jerusalem, during the siege. You may read
the words, as the Margin points it out to you, in stead of; Thou have not
increased the joy; thou have increased the joy to hi^; that is to Hezekiah, who
was then King of Judah; as if he should say; Thou have by occasion of this
siege multiplied the people round about Hezekiah in Jerusalem, and now in the
Eyes of them al thou set him up on high, and increas^st his joy, by that
Miracle, which thou workest to deliver them for his sake. Or else, there is a
sweet Antithesis, or Opposition in the words. On Sennacheribs part thou
multipliest the Nation, his Army, and outward strengths: but thou increasest
the joy to Hezekiah. They joy before thee according to the joy of harvest, and
as men rejoice, when they divide the Spoil. This was the joy of the people of
God, when they came forth from the City, and found the dead bodies of their
enemies lying in the fields, like Corn newly cut down, and their treasures,
like full Ears of Corn.

We may observe two things from this verse.

First, The end of affliction frequently is to gather up believers close to
Jesus Christ in his own person, or in the Anoyntings of his spirit upon some
chosen ones; that he may increase the honor, and joy of these in the sight of
all the people, by that Salvation, which he works through them, and for their
sakes.

Secondly, The joy of the Saints in their deliverances is a Double joy; a
Harvest of spiritual glories, and consolations in the appearances of God to
them: the spoil of the enemy, whose Power, and wealth becomes theirs, while
they are cut off by the appearances of God for his beloved. Thus Jesus Christ
at the same time ascended into Heaven to the Father, and spoiled the powers,
and Principalities of this world, carrying Captivity Captive, Thus our Savior
tells the Saints, that what ever they lose, that is dear to them in this world,
they shall have it again an hundredfold, and everlasting Life. There is the
harvest of Spiritual joys, everlasting Life. There is the spoil of the enemy,
and Captivity Captivated, when they recover all the Beautys, joys, sweetnesses
of this world out of the hand of the enemy, and have them an hundredfold; by
possessing al, even that, which was the enemies too; by having al after a loss,
a fight, by a victory; having al natural joys heighthned by their Union with
spiritual enjoyments.

The deliverance of Jerusalem from Sennacherib is set out in verse, 4. by a
comparison with the destruction of Midian. Thou have broken the yoke of his
burden, and the staff of his Shoulder and the rod of his oppressor, as in the
day of Midian. You may see the story of Midian in the seventh Chapter of
Judges. It was wholly miraculous, and had these Eztraordinary things in it.
First, God divided Gideon's Army from him by one Division upon another, until
he had lessened it from thirty thousand, to three hundred; verse. 3. 6, 7.
Secondly, The terror upon the spirit of the Midianites, and courage infused
into Gideon by a dream; verse, 13, 14, 15. Thirdly, The manner of the victory
on Gideon's part, who with his men stood still, breaking their pitchers, holding
forth their Lamps, blowing with their Trumpets, crying; The Sword of the Lord,
and of Gideon; which were al signs of faith, and Prayer, of the virtue of the
Death, Resurrection, Glory, and Spirit of the Lord Jesus in the Gospel: verse,
20 21. Fourthly, the destruction of the Midianites one by another before that
Gideon, or his men strik one strok. The overthrow of Sennacherib, and his Army
holds a resemblance with that of Midian; in general, in the miraculousness of
it; in particulars; First, All the land of Judah was overrun, and only
Jerusalem left, where also was, as commentatours tell us from the Scripture, a
powerful, and numerous party divided from Hezekiah in a conspiracy to deliver
up the City to Sennacherib. Secondly, Hezehiah's mourning, and Humiliation was
the breaking of the Pitcher; Esaiah's prophecy, and message to him upon it,
which was full of spirituality, of Evangelicalness, of triumph, which was, the
Lamps shining forth upon the breaking of the pitcher; the Coming down of the
Angel, by which the Army perished,, was the sounding of the Trumpet, and the
cry of the Sword of the Lord. Thirdly, The Army was overthrown without a fight.
Fourthly Sennacherib was slain by his own Sons, as the Midianites set every
man his Sword against his fellow.

In the 9. verse, the Reason of this wonderful Salvation is given: For to us a
Child is born, to us a Son is given etc. This in the letter is expounded of
Hezekiah, as he was a figure of Christ. But the Jews themselves acknowledge this
whole Scripture to have a more sublime sense, and to relate to the Messiah,
which is Jesus Christ. We may learn this from it.

First, That all the eminent works, and wonders of God in the world, by which he
saves his people, or executes vengeance on his enemies, are figures, and
forerunners of the Day of Christ.

Secondly, Some new birth and bringing forth of Christ into the world in his
own Person, or in his spirit, or in some eminent Type, or Saint, or
Dispensation, is the ground, on which God builds his works of wonder in the
world for the good of his Church, or the Ruin of wicked men, and powers.

Having thus levelled the ground round about my Text, I come to my Text it
self, which compares the destruction of Sennacherib before Jerusalem with all
wars by way of transcendency. For every battle of the warrior is with
confused noise, and garments rolled in Blood: but this shall be with fire, and
burning of Fuel. The difference between every battle, and this slaughter of
the Assyrians is three fold: First, There are warriors on both sides: here
Fire, and Fuel meet. Secondly, There is a confused cry: here al is in silence.
Thirdly, There is a plentiful effusion of blood: Here no blood is shed. An
Angel went forth, and smote of the Assyrians in one night one hundred,
fourscore, and five thousand: Esa. 37. 36.

It is frequent in Scripture to set forth the Miraculous Appearances, and Works
of invisible Powers, either of God, or of the Angels, or of the Holy Ghost, by
Fire, both to the Ear, and to the Eye. A Pillar of Fire led the Children of
Israel through the Wilderness; Horses of fire, and Chariots of fire, carried up
Elijah into Heaven, and encompassed the Servant of Elishah, when he was afraid
of an Army of Enemies; the Holy Ghost descended in the form of fiery Tongues
upon the Apostles. The Lord promises by the Prophet Esaiah, to be a wall of
Fire round about his People. And John the Baptist tells us in the Gospel of St.
Matthew, that Jesus Christ shall Baptize his People with the Holy Ghost, and
with Fire.

Fire is the most potent, and glorious of all the Elements. Some say, that the
Sun, the chief, and the Golden Head of this visible World, is the Element of
Fire; and that Fire shall at last convert all the other Elements into it self,
and so give them their Perfection. Fire is Burning, and consuming only on
Earth, where it is straitened, and meets with resistance. But in Heaven it is
only vital, transparent, shining, cheering, incorruptible. In all these
respects, how proper is it to represent the Miraculous descents of God from
above upon the Earth, as he shines forth upon his Church, or flames forth upon
the world, by Fire.

The Doctrine which I shall observe to you from these words, and insist upon, is
this:

DOCT.

God makes it his Delight, and Praise, to go, New, and Extraordinary ways with
his Church, and with the World for his Churches sake.

I will give you Two Arguments, for the clearing, and proving of the Point: One
from Christ: The other from the Spirit.

Arg. 1.
The First Argument is taken from Christ. The way of God with his Church, and
with the World, in order to the Church, is in Christ. I entreat you for the
fuller understanding of this, and how it makes to the Point in hand, to lay
three Scriptures together. Ephesians. 3. 8, 9, 10. Matthew. 28. 8. Ephesians. 1. 20.

Ephesians. 3. 8. You read in the latter end of the verse, of the unsearchable
Riches of Christ. Two things go to make up Riches: Preciousness, and Plenty.
The things of Christ are Rarities, Precious things; such, as are no where to be
found in the Creature. They are the Things of God, the Righteousness of God,
the Wisdom of God, the Power, the Peace, the Grace, the Glory of God. Now Jesus
Christ has Plenty of these Precious things, and this makes him Rich. But the
Holy Ghost thinks not that word of Riches enough to express the Excellency, and
Fullness of Christ. Therefore he adds to Riches, Vnsearchableness, and calls
them the Unsearchable Riches of Christ. Vnsearchableness, respects the Nature,
or Number of things. The Excellencies of Christ are both ways Unsearchable.
Every thing of Christ is Invaluable: and those Invaluable things in Him, are
Innumerable. They are past our Understanding. We cannot comprehend the
Excellency, nor count the Number of them. They swallow us up, and lose us in
Admiration.

At Verse 9. St. Paul goes on to show, That the Mystery of these Riches, in
which al Saints, and Holy Spirits have an immortal Fellowship one with another,
as in a retired Paradise, is that secret Wheel, hidden in God, on which the
whole Creation is turned from the beginning to the End: And to make al men see,
what is the fellowship of the mystery, which from the beginning of the world is
hidden in God, who created al things by Jesus Christ.

Verse, 10 We are taught, that the intent of God in the Riches of Christ is,
that the Angels themselves, who rule the whole world, as the Heads of al Created
Beings, Power, and Operations, even the highest of them, and that in the midst
of their Heavenly Glories, should have new Discoveries of the Wisdom of God, in
the variety of its Ways, and Contrivances by the workings of God, according to
Christ in the Church, and from the Church upon the World: To the intent, That
now unto the Principalities, and Powers in Heavenly places may be known by the
Church the manifold wisdom of God: Verse 11. According to the Eternal purpose,
which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord. The only Rule and Line, by which
God walks and works, is the eternal Draught or Platform in the Person of Christ.

Let us now lay to this Scripture, that of Matt. 28. 18. All Power is given
unto me in Heaven and Earth. They are the words of our Savior, being risen from
the dead. The word Power, as it is in the Greek, signifies Eminency,
Authority, Magistracy, Rule. Heaven and Earth have Four Senses, which are all
intended here. First, These Heavens and Earth, which we see with our Eyes.
Secondly, Things Visible and Invisible. Thirdly, Grace, and Nature; or the
things of God, and of the Creature. Fourthly, The Church and Commonwealth;
Civil, and Religious Affairs, if this be a distinct Sense from that before it.
You see by this Scripture, what use Jesus Christ has for those Unsearchable
Riches mentioned in the former Scripture, and to what employment he puts them;
even to rule All in Heaven, and in Earth; among Spirits, Angels, and Men; in
Grace, and Nature; in Church, and Commonwealth.

I entreat you now to make a stand for a little while, and to look back upon
the joint sense of these two Scriptures; the Riches, and the Rule of Christ;
that we may see how they make for our present purpose, for the opening, and
proving of our Point; that God ^^lights to go new ways with his Church, and
with the World; as also that we may be affected with them in our own hearts.
The Lord says in the Gospel, That a good man out of the good Treasury of his
heart, brings forth good things. We know, that if a man speak, who is full,
and has much to say, he speaks quick, passes with a freshness from one thing
to another, and is still saying new things. What Rarities then, what great,
what new things may we expect every day in the Affairs of the world for the
Interest of the Church, when as the Person who has the Government of All, is
He, who has in himself Unsearchable Riches? What Comforts is this to
afflicted ones? what allurement to sinners? what ground of Hope, and rejoicing
to Believers? what Light, and Direction to Statesmen? what Humiliation in
themselves, what Exaltation in Christ, unto all? It is Jesus Christ, who has
all Power in Heaven and Earth; in Spiritual, Civil, and Natural things; who
rules them all according to the Unsearchable Riches, which he has in himself,
of Mercy, Righteousness, Holiness, Life, Joy, Glory, Wisdom, and Power. Let
every one now, that is weary, and heavy laden with any burden of sin, guilt,
wrath, sickness, or sorrow, cry out; O the Preciousness of the Love, and Virtue
of Christ! how unvaluable are they! O the Plentifulness of those Precious
Loves, and Virtues! how are they more for number, than the Sand on the
Seashore, or the Stars in Heaven! I will no more look down upon the Darkness
of mine own condition, nor round about for Help or Happiness from the Creature.
I will wait upon him for visits every morning, for influences every moment,
upon my Soul, Body, Relations, Affairs; and those Great above my Understanding,
or Expectation, New without Number, or End.

There is a third Scripture, which concurrs so fully with these Two mentioned
before, which so comprehends the sense of them both, which gives so much light,
and strength to our present buisness, that I may not omit it. Ephesians. 1. verse,
20, 21, 22. Which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and
set him at his own right hand in heavenly places, Far above al principality,
and power, and every name, that is named, not only in this world, but in that,
which is to come, And has put al things under his feet, and gave him to be the
head over al things to the Church.

Pray observe some few short Particulars, which lie fair in the very outside
of the words. First, The Lord Jesus stands not now in any Root of Nature, but
upon a supernatural Root in the Resurrection from the dead by the Almighty
power of the Father. Secondly, He is not in the Capacity of his Humane, but of
his divine Nature. He is at the Right Hand of God, that is, in the Love,
strength, Joy, Glory of the Godhead. As the Left Hand of God is his wrath, his
strange work, his Disguise: so his Right Hand is Love, his naked Face, his
proper form, where he is seen, as he is, as the Saints shall behold him.
Thirdly, He is not rank't in any order of the Creatures. He is set above al
ranks, and orders of Created things, both men, and Angels with their several
dignitys, and degrees: Far above principalitys and powers. Fourthly, He is
clothed with an Image, a form, which has no Proportion, Similitude, or
Agreement with any thing of the Creature. He has a Name above every Name, that
is Named in this world, and that, which is to come. The Name of Christ, which
is the Image of his Nature, is not only above Sun, Moon, and Stars with all
the powers of these Visible Heavens, and Living men upon the Earth: but also
above the Angelical world in its freshest glory, as it is that world, which is
next to be unvailed, and come forth upon the stage before the Eyes of men, when
the Saints shall be, as the Angels of God. Fifthly, Jesus Christ; as his Person
is thus stated, and in this Capacity; is made the Head over al things, to
contrive, command, work al every where, as the Head does in the body, which is
the seat of the understanding, the fountain of sense, and Motion. Sixthly, All this is in order to the Church, for the Churches sake He is given to be head
over all to the Church; that the Propriety, the pleasure, the Profit in his
Person, Power, and Rule might be the Churches.

A Miracle is defined to be that, which is Supra ordinem totius naturae
creatae, Above the order of al Created Nature. What new, what strange things,
what Miracles may we look for now in the government of the world, especially,
when the Church is concerned: seeing that our Lord Jesus in this Capacity, as
he is at the Right hand of God, set above al Ranks, and orders of the whole
Creation, is made Head over al things for the Church? Jesus Christ could work
no Miracles in one place, because of the unbeleefe of the Inhabitants. Our
unbelief, in that we see not the Lord Jesus, as Esaiah saw him by a Spirit of
Prophecy, fitting upon this Throne of the divine Nature, high and lifted up,
above every Principality, and Power, is the Reason, why we have no more
Miracles, no more of his new, and extraordinary Works in the midst of us. It is
our unbeleefe, that we do not see, and acknowledge, those wonders, which he has
wrought, and is still working, while he fills the whole earth with his glory from
his Throne.

John, 6. 57. Jesus says. He, that eats me shall Live by me, even, as I live by
the Father. Revel. 10. 9. 11. The Angel give St. John a Book to Eat, and then
tells him, that he must prophecy before many peoples, and Nations, and
Tongues, and Kings. If we did eat this spiritual, and Heavenly Person of
Christ, which is the Book of Life, that Word coming forth from the mouth of
God, on which alone man Lives; If we did by faith, in the unity of the spirit,
take in, concoct, digest, turn into Nature, and Nourishment these Evangelical
truths concerning the Person of Christ above al, given to his Church; the
Headship of Christ over al, for his Church: how certainly then, and how
speedily should we be fed with Honey from the Rock? we should live in our own
Persons, in our private, public Capacitys upon a constant, daily Stream of
Miracles coming down from the Father; we should draw down, and carry forth
waters of life from the depth of the Godhead, before the Kings of the Earth,
and into the midst of the Nations. Thus much for the First Argument taken from
Jesus Christ.

Arg. 2.
The Second Argument is drawn from the Holy Spirit. As the way of God is in
Christ having his New name written upon his Person: so the Way of Christ in his
Church, and in the world for his Church, is in the Spirit, and after the
Newness of that.

Rom 7. 6. But now we are delivered from the Law that being dead, wherein we
were held, that we should serve in Newness of spirit, and not in the oldness of
the Letter. The Soul of man is here set forth, as having two Husbands. The
first Husband is the First Adam, the Flesh, the Natural Man. This being slain
by the death of the Lord Jesus; the Soul is set free from him, and from his
Law, which is a Law of sin, and Death. Her second Husband, to whom she is
married upon the Death of the first, is the last man, the Glorified Person of
Christ, as He is in the Resurrection from the Dead. And now the Soul is subject
only to the Law of this Husband, which is the Law of Free Grace, of Love,
reigning by Righteousness, which is the Beavty in the Face of the Godhead,
unto Eternal Life, through Jesus Christ, by Virtue of our Marriage-union with
him; the Love, Righteousness, and Immortality of God the Father letting it self
forth upon his Person first, then in, and through him upon us, unto our
Justification, Sanctification, and Glory. That we should serve. As to Fear God
in the old Testament, and to believe in the new: so in both to serve him
comprehends al parts of Religion, the whole Communion between God, and the Soul;
by which God Ministers himself in streams of Truth, Grace, and joy to the Soul;
or the Soul Ministers to him, by recejving him, by recejving al from him, by
receiving him together with all, and by returning it self, and al things to him,
in Love, humility, obedience, thanksgiving.

The two ways of this Service are the Oldness of the Letter, and the newness of
Spirit. The Letter is that Law, which is proper, and fitted to the Principle of
Nature, the flesh, the first Adam in his power, and purity. The Spirit is the
Law of the New man, the Heavenly Image, and second Adam, as He is risen from
the dead, and stands in a Root of Glory, from thence blossoming, and bringing
forth fruit in all his Members. The Letter is like unto a Cestern. The Spirit is
the Fountain. The water in a Cestern has its stint, and set measure; it is a
standing water, which has no spring to quicken it, it is apt to corrupt with
standing, and to dry away. Such is the Law of the Letter. It is shut up in an
outward, narrow form, and measure; it has not its root in it self; it grows
old, it darkens, withers, and dies away. But the Spirit is a Fountain, and as a
Fountain has a Five-fold Newness; of Life, of Luster, of Purity, of Variety,
of Immortality.

But here now, although it may seem to be a digression from my present scope,
yet give me leave by the way to interpose a Caution very proper for this
discourse of the Letter, and the Spirit; which is, that you mistake not the
Riot, Excess, and Inordinacy of the flesh, for the Newness, Freedom, and
Extraordinariness of the Spirit. To assist you in this Caution, take this
Distinction between the Novelties, and Extravagancies of the flesh; and the
Newness, and Extraordinariness of the Spirit.

First: There is a Newness in which there is something unchangable, an inward
Principle, a hidden Nature, a Life, a Relish, which is ever the same; however,
the outward operations and manifestations vary. The Life of the Spirit is as a
Tree. The Tree is new in the Spring, the Summer, the Autumn; having for every
Season, its fresh puttings forth of Leaves, Blossoms, Fruit, ripe Fruit. Yet
the Tree is still the same, has the same Root, Sap, and Nature.

Secondly: There is a Newness, where all things are changed, not only the
outward puttings forth, but the most inward Principle, where there abides
nothing of the savor. This is like that change, where the Rod of Moses being
cast upon the ground, was made a real Serpent, and the Dust of Egypt being cast
up into the Air, became living Lice.

Now, as they say in Philosophy, Species, et Essentiae rerum sunt sempiternae,
et immobiles: The Essences, and Kinds of things, are ever the same; however,
there be an Infinitness of uncertainty, and change in the Individuals, by the
variety, and change of outward Accidents: So in a Saint compared with himself
through the whole time of his Regeneracy, or compared with all other Saints in
all Ages, there is the same new nature, the same inward saver in the Principle,
in the Spirit, although the inward forms upon the understanding, may have great
change according to the different degrees, and ways of Light; as also the
outward forms of life and Conversation, may have great variety in answer to the
Light within. But where you see Persons, while they profess themselves to be
Saints, changing all, having nothing of the same Nature, or Relish left; there
is great reason to fear, that this is not the Newness of the Spirit, but the
Wildness of the Flesh; not the freshness, and variety of the living Spring, but
the Endless turnings, and windings of the old Serpent.

But to return now, and to show you how this Scripture, which has occasioned
this short stay by the way, makes good that Doctrine, which we have in hand.
All the way of Jesus Christ in the Saints, and in the World for the sake of the
Saints, is after the newness of the spirit. It follows then, that it must be it
self New, and Extraordinary.

Another Scripture compared with this, will make the Proof from both more
strong, and clear. Es. 43. 18, 19, 20, 21. Remember ye not the former things,
neither consider ye the things of Old. Behold I will do a new thing: now it
shall spring forth; shall ye not know it? I will even make a way in the
Wilderness, and Rivers in the Desert. The Beast of the field shall honor me,
the Dragons, and the Owls, because I give Waters in the Wilderness, and Rivers
in the Desert, to give drink to my People, my Chosen. This People have I formed
for my self, they shall show forth my praise. There are Four Things to be taken
notice of in these words.

First: The Deliverance of the Jews from the Babylonians, is the proper subject
of this Prophecy in the Letter of it, as you shall see at verse 4. This
Deliverance from the Babylonians, is made in Scripture universally a Type of
every Deliverance of the People of God from the Powers of Darkness, and of this
world; but more particularly of the Deliverance of the Church in the last days
from Antichrist, which is Spiritual Babylon.

Secondly: In this Deliverance, the Lord lays aside all Presidents, every old
Form, and Custom; he works a New thing. What is this New thing? He makes a Way
in the Wilderness; and Rivers in the Desert. These Expressions look backward by
way of Allusion to the Coming of the Children of Israel out of Egypt, when the
Lord made a way for them through the Wilderness, going himself before them in
the Pillar of a Cloud, and of Fire, and gave them Rivers of Water from the
Rock, which followed them in the Desert. But this Literal Sense is not that
which the Lord here intends. For this had been no New thing, but had only
brought the former things to remembrance by the Imitation, and Re-iteration of
them. Therefore the words look forward to an Allegorical, and Mystical
accomplishment in the times of the Gospel. We all know, that Jesus Christ, is
frequently held forth in the Gospel, as the Way. John, 14. 6. He calls himself,
The Way. Heb. 10. 20. He is said to be the New, and Living Way, by the rending
of the Vail of his Flesh, and the raising of him up again in the Spirit. In
like manner it is an Evident thing, that the Spirit of Christ in the Gospel, is
resembled to Rivers of Water, as John, 7. 38. Out of his Belly shall flow
Rivers of Living Water, ver. 39. This spoke he of the Spirit.

This then is the New thing, which the Lord does. He turns the outward face of
things in Church and Commonwealth, into a Wilderness, puts al into Confusion,
that no humane Eye can see any way, either forward, or backward. Then he comes
forth with new, extraordinary appearances in Christ; as the Pillar of a Cloud
burying all the Light and Life of the Creature in the Darkness of Christ's
Death; as a Pillar of Fire, shining, and sparkling forth with a New Light, and
Heat, from the Glory of his Resurrection. These Extraordinary Appearances in
Christ the Lord makes his way, in which he walks, and into which he leads his
People to walk with him in his wonders through the Churches, and the Nations.

When the Spirit of man becomes a Desert, like a winter-brook, that is passed
away, and decives the expectation of the weary Traveller; all Springs of
Wisdom, Counsel, Help, Comfort in the Creature, are dried up: then the Lord
comes forth in mighty and miraculous workings after the Newness of the Spirit,
in the fresh flowings of that, and makes it to be, as Rivers in the Desert.
Rivers have these Properties: First, They are from a Living Spiring: Secondly,
They flow along with a great breadth, depth, and force: Thirdly, They flow
continually, running along still with a fresh succession of New waters from the
Head of the River: Fourthly, They make all things cheerful, and flourishing
round abont them. So does the Lord in the Desert of the Creature put forth
himself by his Spirit with an irresistible force, an uncessant Newness, with a
quickness of life, a breadth and depth of design, from the immediate Fountain
of the Godhead.

Thirdly, It is observable here, that the Saints are they, who peculiarly drink
of these Rivers. They have the immediate inward sense, Strength, Joy, Glory,
the chief ends, and benefit of these Outgoings of the Godhead. But natural
men signified by the Beasts of the field, the powers of this world; yea the
most ignorant, and unbeleeving, that sit in the greatest darkness, which are,
as the Owls; Nay more, than that, the Dragons, the profanenest, and wickedest
persons both Princes, and Stats, who have the greatest enmity to Christ, and
his Church; al these shall acknowledge, and give glory to the Lord in these
Miraculous workings of his from Heaven; partly for the greatness of the
Conviction by the presence and cleerness of the Appearances of God in the midst
of them, before their Eyes; as is signified, verse, 19. Now it shall spring
forth, shall ye not see it? partly for the relife, and the refreshing, which
shall be extended to them also in their natural Man, and civil affairs. For so
it is said; verse, 20. They shall honor me, because I give waters in the
wilderness etc.

Fourthly, The end of all this is for the Saints; that they may be formed, and
wrought up to God, to Spirituality and Heavenlyness, to his Likness, to one
Image, and Nature with him, to the Immediate enjoyment of him, to his Bosom,
his Throne; there to reign with him; from thence as chosen Vessels to carry
forth the Praises of God in the Gospel, of his Love, his Righteousness, his
Holiness, his Beauties, his Joys, his Glorys, into the Nations, that the Saints
may be as a Holy first fruits, and the Nations, as a sanctified Lump through
them. This people have I formed for myself, to show forth my praise. Verse, 21.
I have now finished the two Arguments for the making good of the Doctrine; one
taken from the Person, and Office of Christ; the other from the Influences, and
Operations of the Spirit; as both Christ, and the Spirit are in the Newness of
the highest, and most Evangelical Glory; as both stand in relation first to the
Church, then to the world for the Churches sake. I come now to the. Uses.

Use, 1.
The first Use is of Thankfulness. God makes it his delight and praise to go
new, and extraordinary ways with his Church, and with the world in order to
his Church. Let us then raise our delights, and his praises from the sense of
those new, and extraordinary paths, in which the Lord has walked forth before
our Eyes in the midst of all the nations round about us for our sake. That the
Newness of the divine footsteps in our dais, and in our Land may leave the
deeper print upon our spirits; let us consider it in these Six Particulars. 1.
Our Changes: 2. The Quickness of our changes. 3. The Freshness upon our
Changes. 4. The inward Life, whence our Changes spring. 5. The Seal upon our
Changes from their Living Principle. 6. The Spirit of Grace evidencing it self,
as the Principle, and the Seal.

First, The Changes, Which have been upon us, show the Newness of the Lords way
with us. Jerem 48. 11. The Lord complains. Moab, has been at ease from his
youth, and he has settled on his Lees, and he has not been emptyed from Vessel
to Vessel: therefore his taste remained in him, and his sent is not changed. How
often has England been changed from Peace to War, from one War to another,
from one form of Government to another, from Extremities to Enlargements, from
Enlargements to Extremities again? These Changes have been, as so many Vessels,
out of which, and into which we have been emptyed. Are we still upon the Lees of
Carnality, and Corruption? If we discern not God in a new Glory; if we discern
not Jesus Christ with his new name; if we discern not the Newness of the
Operations of the Spirit in all these things; then does our Earthly taste
hitherto remain, and our fleshly sent is not changed. O for a refinedness of
Soul now from the Lees of Earth to a pure wine of spirituality! O for a
heavenly taste, a heavenly sent! How should we relish this feast of new
delicacys, which the Lord sets forth for us? How should we love Jesus Christ
for the Savor of his new, and good Ointments; in which he powrs forth himself
into the midst of us?

Revel. 6. 12. We read of the Sun turning black, as Sack Cloth of Hair; the
Moon, as blood. verse. 13. Stars of Heaven fell unto the Earth, even as a
Fig Tree casts her untimely Figs being shaken by a mighty wind Verse, 14.
Heaven departed, as a Scroule, rolled together. Verse, 16. The reason of all this, i. e. The Face of him, that sits on the Throne, and the wrath of the
Lamb. Many times over in this our little world of these divided Islands we have
seen, the Sun of our Religious Forms, our Church State becoming black, as a
Sackcloth of Hair, which is a mourning weed; the Moon of our Civil affairs,
as Blood, Nay al Blood: we have seen the Heaven of the Supreme power pass away,
as a scrol of Parchment roled up, and laid by; our Eminent Persons, which were,
as Stars in the Heaven of that Power, shining with a Luster, and ruling with an
Influence of universal Authority, yet on a soden falling from this Heaven to
the Earth of a common rank, and obscure condition. Do we not through all this
perceive the Face of God sitting upon his Throne among us, a Throne of most
exalted Grace, and loving kindness to his people, but of the most exalted
vengeance, and wrath to his enemy? observe those two things, the Face, and the
Face of God sitting upon the Throne. What unvailings of new, and extraordinary
glorys do these Expressions speak forth? Are not these the Seal, to which these
Nations, as Wax are turned, and changed? Blessed are they, that stand within
these Wheels, to be carried a long by them, and move together with them. Over
others, who see them not, these Wheels pass, and break them to pieces.

Joel. 2. 30. The Lord says; I will show wonders in the Heavens and in the
Earth, Blood, and Fire, and pillars of smoke. Verse, 31. The Sun shall be
turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood before the great, and terrible
day of the Lord come. There are three days of the Lords coming: First, To a
Particular Nation: Secondly, At his Incarnation: Thirdly, To the last Judgment.
Al these are Capable of having this Scripture applied to them, especially where
the first of these days, the Coming of Christ to a Nation follows after the
Second day of his Incarnation, and borders upon the Third day of his last
coming. This Scripture has been literally fulfilled in our times, in our
land. What frequent Eclypses of Sun, and Moon have we seen? What Comets?
Concussions, and Prodigyes in all the Elements, Earthquakes, Tides changing
their Courses, Meteors of al sorts in the Air, Devouring Fires? Behold, the
Earth, the Air, the Waters, the Fire, the Heavens see the Lord, and are
troubled; shall his Saints be insensible of him? shall not they shout, and say:
This is the day, which no Created, or usual light, but the Lord has made by
his shinings forth; It is wonderful in our Eyes, beyond the whole Course of
Nature; we will rejoice, and he glad in it.

Secondly, The Quickness of our Changes. This is the Second thing, that argues
the Newness of Gods way with us. I entreat you here to compare 2 Scriptures;
Hagg. 2. 6. For thus says the Lord of hosts, Yet once it is a little while,
and I will shake the Heavens, and the Earth, and the Sea, and the dry land,
verse, 7. And I will shake al Nations, and the desire of all the Nations sh^l
come, and I will fill this House with glory, says the Lord of hosts. Hebr. 12.
26. Whose voice then shook the Earth: but he has promised saying; Yet once
more I shake not the Earth only, but also the Heaven: Verse, 27. And this word,
yet once more, signifies the removing of those things that are made, that
those things, which cannot be shaken, may remain The comparing of these two
Texts affords us these Particular Observations: First, This word, Once,
signifies one continued act of shaking unto an universal, and Total Change.
Secondly, That which maks this shaking is the Newness of Christ's coming forth
in the unchangable Glory of his Father, and of the Spirit. For, the Prophet
Haggi seeming to speak of the first coming of Christ in the flesh, to fill that
present Temple, which was then building, with the Glory of his Doctrine, and
Miracles, is by the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews interpreted of the
coming of Christ in Glory, as being the truth, and the end, to which the other
coming was only a Type, and a Preparation. So also, that which the Prophet
calls. The Desire of the Nations; is in the Hebrews, called, Those things,
which cannot be shaken, in opposition to things, that are made, and to be taken
away. Both together clearly describe Jesus Christ in the Newness of a Heavenly
Glory, which can never fade. It is before this Newness of Christ, at it
secretly beams forth into the Creation, that Old things shake, and fall away.
Thirdly, Jesus Christ, comes first in his Desirablenesses, to believers, to
those among the Nations, who desire him. This seems to be signified by that
expression: The desire of al Nations shall come. He shall come under that
formality, as the Desire of the Nations. The Saints in every Nation stand for
the whole Nation in the esteem of God, they being the Corn in the heap, the rest
of the nation, as the Chafe. Esa. 43. 4. The Lord says to his people: Since
thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, and I have Loved
thee: therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy life, or as it is
in the Margin, for thy person. Those whom the Lord loves in a Nation, are the
only Figures there; the rest are Ciphers, which signify nothing of themselves.
James. 1. 14. The Children of God are said to be a Kind of first fruits of his
Creatures. So are they the first fruits of every Nation. As the first fruits
were presented to God every year at the Tabernacle, or Temple by the hands of
the Priest in the stead of the whole Lump: so the believers are presented to God
in the spirit by Jesus Christ, as filling up the place of the whole Nation.

Upon this account, when the prophet has said: The desire of al Nations shall
come; he adds; He shall fill this House with his Glory. Under the Gospel, and in
the spiritual truth, which answers the Judaical Tipe, the Saints are the House
of God. 1 Corin. 3. 16. Know ye not, that ye are the Temple of God? When the
Lord comes to work his wonders in the world, he first comes into his Church,
into the spirits of his Saints, fills them with that spiritual Glory shining
from his own person, which is the sign of his outward commings forth, before he
comes; and the inside of them, when he is come. From hence, as from his Temple,
he shines forth by degrees upon the world; from these, as the first fruits; he
sends forth a blessing to the whole Lump of the Creatures. Fourthly, When these
shakings begin to break forth from the Spirits of the Saints into the World,
they are swift, and spreading. Yet a little while: And I will once more shake
Heaven, and Earth. As when a stone falls into the Water, the Circles in the
Water made round about it, do in a moment Multiply, and as they Multiply, grow
wider each than other: So when Jesus Christ comes with the Newness of a
spiritual Glory into his House, which is the heart of a Saint; from thence he
spreads himself in the newness of his Power, and mighty works over the Nation
round about; from thence enlarges himself in a wider Circle to the
Neyghbouring Nations; so he goes on, til he ouerspreade with his Changes not
the Earth only, but also the Heavens; and all this in a very little space, as
fire catches, or the lightning flies.

Now let us look home. Our Changes, since the beginning of these times, have
truly been so quick, and thick; that they may well appear one continued
shaking. You then in this Nation whose Souls love the Lord Jesus, is your
Desire come? while others as Ciphers, do bear the empty shadow of the outward
work in these new, and Extraordinary Motions; is his presence, his person, his
operation precious, and of great value to you? Does he fill you, who are his
house, with the freshness of his light, and Glory; while others stand without,
at a distance, seeing a throng of changes, and wonders; but know not, what is
the matter? Where then are your cries of Joy? The voice of our beloved! Behold,
he comes, leaping over the Hills, passing with swift changes over the powers of
this world; he comes consuming al old things, the old Heaven and Earth with the
heat of his presence; but changing his own and al things unto them into the
newness, and Immortality of the Spirit; making them new, together with a New
Heaven, and a New Earth round about them.

Thirdly, The freshness of our Changes. Prove. 25. 4, 5. Take away the dross
from the Silver, there shall come forth a Vessel for the finer. Take away the
wicked from the King, and his Throne shall be established in Righteousness. The
former of these verses is an Allegory explained in the latter. Both have a
Mystical sense pertaining to every Saint; and Typical concerning Jesus Christ.
Take away the Dross of Corruption out of the Heart from the Silver of Grace;
and the Saint will be a King in the Spirit upon a Throne of Glory founded on the
Righteousness of God, and his Spirit in Jesus Christ; this King will be a pure
Silver Vessel for God the finer to set on his table, and fill with the Treasure
of his Divinity. Take away the dross of Corruption from the Silver of the
Divine Image in the Creature; then will the whole Creation be a Vessel of honor
for the Father to fill with his Wine; then will it be a Throne founded on the
Eternal Rock, on which Jesus Christ shall sit down, as a King. This extends it
self to Nations, and Priuciples also. Let us take a view of our selves in the
Glass of this Truth.

If we look to the great Parliament from the beginning of it: was there not a
Silver there, a precious Metal of excellent principles, and Eminent persons?
But this Silver was mingled with the Dross of much Carnality, and Corruption.
Has not every change since that time been, as a fire, to take away the Dross
from the Silver? Has not every succeeding form of things when it has come
first out of the fire of the foregoing Change, bin as a Vessel for the finer,
with a greater Preciousness, Purity, Beauty, Luster, Life, and usefulness unto
God? How then is that day of the Lord risen upon us, which is to try al things?
How should our mouths be filled with laughter, and praises for this New thing,
which God does, this New day, which God brings forth from Heaven? Say now to
Hypocrites; Woe to you. But say to the Righteouss, It shall be well with you. For
the Beams of this day are a Manifesting light, a Refining fire to al: but they
are withal to the Saints a covering gloy, and a Cherishing Love. Our King is
come forth into our Land, not only to march through it with his troops; but to
establish his throne here in Righteonsness, and to sit down upon it. O Dross,
Dross, melt away before the presence of the Lord. For his Eyes are a flame of
fire. They are still Kindling fresh Furnaces of Change.

Fourthly, The Life in these Changes from which they flow. Romans 12. 11. you
have the knot of a threefold Precept held forth: Not slothful in business,
fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. This is likewise a Divine Character upon
the Newness of extraordinary Times, Works, and Persons. When the Lord has any
fresh, and peculiar piece of work, in which he is to be served, he fills men
with a strange unwonted vigor in his business, to contrive, attempt, and
execute wonderful things. To this end, as a man puts fire under a pot, so he
sends forth his Spirit after a new manner into their Hearts, that they boil,
and run over; they are no more in their own power, they can no longer contain
themselves. Such a Description as this, David makes of himself, Psalm. 39. 1. I
said I will take heed to my ways that I sin not with my tongue; I will keep my
mouth as with a Bridle, while the wicked are in presence: I was dumb with
silence, I held my peace from good, my sorrow was stirred: My heart was hot
within me, while I was musing, the fire burned; then spoke I with my tongue.
David, and Christ in him, were oppressed by wicked men. He resolves to suffer in
silence, and to suppress all Motions toward the outward advancement of
Goodness. At length the Word of the Lord comes to him, first it warms his
heart, by degrees it grows hotter, while he museth upon it, is irresolute,
unwilling to come forth openly upon the Stage; it becomes a fire, it breaks
forth, burns out like a mighty and irresistible flame.

You have an Example like to this in St. Paul; Acts, 20. 22. And behold now I
go bound in the Spirit unto Jerusalem, etc. God had a new, and great work for
St Paul to do, to testify to the Gospel of Christ, by preaching, and by
sufferings; at Jerusalem the chief City of the Jews; at Rome the Head City of
the World, before Rulers and Princes. And now though afflictions, and death
were Manifestly before his Eyes in this journey; though friends, Saints,
Prophets, his own heart lay Weeping, Bleeding Breaking in his way, to stop him
from going on in that course, from whence he should return no more; as ye may
see, verse, 23. 25. 27, 28. Chapter, 21. verse, 4. 11, 12, 13. Yet he shuts his
Ears, and his Eyes to al these, treads them under his feet: goes over them al.
Would you know the reason He was bound in Spirit. An extraordinary power of the
Spirit came upon him, bound* up al his facultys in its heavenly chains, and
carried him Captive to its Divin Force, and Will.

There are many witnesses, that the like unto this has been heard, known, and
felt often in our days, and affairs. Supernatural Impressions, Divine and
Irresistible Impulsions, as gales of wind from Heavem, have filled the Spirits,
affections, counsels, and actions of men, like sails, by which the ship of this
Commonwealth has bin carried on from port to port, from change to change.
When the two disciples were going to Emaus, and Jesus Christ in the midst of
them; they said; did not our hearts burn within us, while he talked with us?
but their Eyes were held that they could not know him. If Jesus Christ have
been in the midst of us, as a fire; if he have made the hearts of his Servants
to burn within them, yea, to flame forth, to lick up all the water of
opposition, to consume all the Damps of Discouragement, that have been cast
upon this fire, from their own reason, reputation, affections, purposes, former
principles within; from difficulties, dangers, disswasions of friends,
combinations of of Enemies without: Shall our Eyes still be held that we should
not know him, who is thus a burning, and shining Light among us? or shall our
spirits be held from rejoicing, and dancing in this Light, while its season
lasts?

Fifthly: The Inward Principle of Life being the Seal upon our Outward Changes.
2 Timothy 2. 16. Nevertheless the Foundation of the Lord stands sure, having
this Seal; the Lord knows who are his. And let every one that names the Name
of Christ, depart from iniquity. This word, Nevertheless, implies a tacit
Objection arising from the foregoing words of the Apostle, verse 17, 18.
Hymeneus and Philetus of eminent Believers, and Preachers of the Gospel, were
become Heretics, whose words did spread, and kill like a Gangrene; insomuch
that they had overthrown the says of some. Now might a poor Saint say; Good
God! what way is there to attain to a sound and saving Faith, which cannot be
overthrown? or when shall I know that my Faith is thus sound, and saving? Who
can be sure of their Faith, that it shall not fail them, when it has failed
these? The Apostle gives two Answers to this Objection: First, The Foundation
of the Lord stands sure. God the Father of our Lord Jesus, makes himself in
the hearts of his Children, to be a sure Foundation unto their Faith, so that
it can never be shaken. This Foundation he lays in the fair colors of his own
Spirit, of a mystical, and peculiar Union in the Spirit, of an especial work of
Grace flowing from this Union. Secondly, This sure Foundation at the bottom of
our hearts, and faith, is also the Seal of Assurance upon them both: Having
this Seal, the Lord knows who are his. In Spiritual things, that which is the
Life, is the only Light, which is therefore so called in the Gospel; the Light
of Life; the Principle is the Seal; Ye mere sealed with the Holy Spirit of
Promise, faith St. Paul, Ephesians. 1. That Light of Knowledge which is Originally
the Knowledge of the Lord in us, that Communicatively, by Virtue of the Union,
is our Knowledge, and this Knowledge is our Seal. As in Natural things the Eye
sees not alone, neither does the Soul; but both concur in every act of sight.
So is it in every act of Spiritual Sense; The Spirit of the Lord witnesses
together with our Spirits, says St. Paul, Romans 8. The Spirit of the Lord, and
our Spirit, like the Soul and the Eye, jointly concur in every act of Spiritual
Knowledge. The Lord knows in us, we know in the Lord that we are his. Thus
this Union, which is the Principle of Life in us, is in like manner the Seal of
Light.

Object.

The world has often objected to the servants of the Lord in the great Works
of our times: You plead inward Principles, Power, and Light, for your
Justification in extraordinary ways; that it is from the fervency of your
spirit in the Service of the Lord; and of the public welfare: How shall we know
this, that you do not Cloth contrary designs, and corrupt interests with
these pretenses? how can we, or you tell that your impressions are not delusions?

Answ.

What has the answer been? Has it not been, that of Jesus Christ to the Jews,
when they refused to mourn to his weeping, or to dance to his Music: Wisdom
is justified of her Children, Matthew. The Lord Jesus, as he is by his spirit the
Power of God in us; from which we act and on which we stand, as on a sure
Foundation. So is he in like manner the Wisdom of God in us, by which we know
him, and his outgoings, by which we are also known of him, and owned by him.
This is our Seal. As many, as have fellowship with us in the same principle of
divine Wisom, will according to the measure of it, so far, as they are free
from carnal prejudices, and temptations to exercise this Principle, know, and
own this Seal. The Manifestations of God are in the Flesh; but the
justification of those Manifestations is in the Spirit. And this is that, which
makes, the whole way of Godliness a Mystery: 1 Timothy 3. 16.

But now it is necessary to interpose two Cautions for the removing of two
Objections.

Object. 1.

This Principle seems to make the Light of Reason useless even in Civil things;
and to lay aside in Humane Affairs the common Principles of Natural Light, by
which we should converse with men, as men, and approve our selves to them.

Object. 2.

This makes a Gap in the Hedge of all Civil Government for Licenciousness; and
Confusion to break in; when every man may alike pretend to an Inward
Justification.

I entreat you therefore to keep your selves close to these Cautions, which I
shall now add for the clearing of this matter from these Aspersions.

Caut. 1.

It is the duty of every person in every Affair, to provide for things honest,
not only in the sight of God, but in the sight of all men. This is a Principle
and Law in Christianity: Rom 12. 19. Provide for things honest in the sight of
all men: Honest, or Beautiful and Comely; for so the word signifies; in the
sight of all men; that is, in that Light of Nature, which shines universally in all men. The Natural Light in the Conscience, and Understanding of Man, is a
Picture of the Spiritual Light, which is the Life. Reason is a Shadowy Figure
of Jesus Christ. Now as the Life, and the Picture, if it be true, answer one
another; and that which is beautiful in the one, will be so in the other too:
so the Spirit, and Reason, mutually give their testimony each to other; what is
comely in the eye of one, is so to both.

St. Paul prays, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. to be delivered from unreasonable men; for all
men have not Faith. It is true that those, who are not Spiritual, are also
unreasonable, the wordis (...) Absurd, incapable of any common place of Reason,
any common Principles of Natural light. In another place. Tit. 1. 15. The same
Apostle tells us, that to those, who are defiled, and unbeleeving al thing are
impure, even their minds, and consciences are defiled. As a Poet calls the light
of the Moon, when she is Ecclypsed by the interposal of the Earth between the
Sun, and her, that his beams cannot flow freely, and purely unto her, Lucem
Malignam, a Malignant light: so is it in men merely natural; the prince of
darkness and a principle of Corruption inwardly; the world with carnal
interests, and Humors outwardly, put in between the Face of God, the Fountain
of al light, and their Souls, to the making of such an Eclypse, that the light
of their Minds, the highest, and purest part of their spirits, the lights of
their Consciences, the divinest part of their Minds, like the tops of the
Mountain which receive the beams of the Sun nearest, first, and fairest; the
light of both these is defiled, and become Malignant. Upon this account, they
either are unable to judge a right of that Testimony, which the light of Nature
inwardly gives, or else unwilling outwardly to acknowledge this inward
Testimony; but do falsify, corrupt, deny it according to their fleshly lusts,
and ends. They only for the most part, in most affairs, can understand, and
submit to the light of Reason, and Nature, especially there, where Jesus Christ
comes forth in new, and extraordinary ways upon the Face of Nature, and Civil
things; who have the Spirit in them loosing their Reason, which Satan has
bowed down for so many years, like the Woman in the Gospel.

Yet notwithstanding all this, a Christian is in every thing to follow after,
whatsoever is praiseworthy, of good report, comely, with God, and with men, in
that, which is the true light of men, and right Reason. So, if their Minds be
not altogether reprobate, and their Consciences seared, if there be any spark
of Natural light left alive in them, you shall approve your selves to the
Consciences, and minds of men inwardly; although they outwardly speak evil of
you. As the Historian says of the Romans concerning that excellent Person,
their deliverer Camillus; simul oderant, et Mirati sunt: they will admire you,
while they hate you.

Answ. 2.

Caut 2. Let every one, that nams the name of Christ, depart from iniquity.
Whoever pleads a Spiritual life, and light for the Principle, and Seal of his
actions, ought to beware that he sow not diverse seeds in this field, that he
mingle not Fleshly designs with Spiritual discoverys. Cursed be he, that does
the work of the Lord deceitfully. If you undertake the work of the Lord to do
your own work the better; If you make a show of the work of the Lord, or make
use of the work of the Lord so far, to cover, and to bring forth the works of
the Flesh: there lies a curse upon you. The Name of the Lord Jesus is like the
water of Jealousy, which the suspected woman was to drink. If thou call the
name of the Lord Christ, and of his spirit to witness falsely, while thou art
unchaste, and untrue to thy spiritual principles, and ends; while thou know
thy spirit to have played the harlot, and to live in uncleanness with this
present world: this Name will, like that Drink, make thy belly to Swel, and thy
Bowels to rot within thee; it will certainly bring thee to destruction with
shame, and abhorrency.

He that sets upon Extraordinary things upon the account of an Extraordinary
Principle, Seal, has one of these two things to rely upon; First, A Divine
Power in an irresistible way to subdue the spirits, and Forces of men to him:
Secondly, or else a Divine Presence in an unexpressible sweetness to support
him, when he shall suffer in the thoughts of men, or at the Bar of Ordinary
powers. How watchful ought we to be in affairs of so high a nature, or
consequence, that neither Hypocricy, nor Delusion shut the Door to these
Confidences in us?

Sixthly, The spirit of Grace, the principle, and Seal of these Changes. This
is the last Argument of the Newness and Extraordinariness of the way of the
Lord Jesus in the midst of us. There are five Marks of the Spirit of Grace.

First, The Spirit of Grace is a Spirit of Prayer. Zach. 12. 9, 10. And it shall
come to pass in that day, that I will seek to destroy all the Nations, that come
against Jerusalem: And I will pour upon the House of David, and upon the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem a Spirit of Grace, and Supplication. Two things are
observable here: First, It is an Argument, that the Lord has a design by
himself to destroy the enemies of his people, when he pours out a Spirit of
Grace upon his people. Secondly, He always, and more especially, when he is
seeking the ruin of his enemies, joins these two, a Spirit of Grace, and of
Supplication. Are there not many, that can testify by their own experience
concerning the works of these times; that the Heart of God, in a Spirit of
Grace has bin let down into the Bosom of his beloved ones; that thus their
hearts have bin by a Spirit of Supplication drawn up into the Bosom of God, and
have drawn forth these deliverances from the Wells of Salvation there? These
Wells are Deep, the Deep things of God, his Love, his Wisdom, his
Righteousness, his power, his Glory, as these lie in the very depths of his
Essence, and Divine Nature. But Saints have had their Buckets, their Hearts, to
draw with; and a line, a Spirit of Supplication, long, and sure enough to let
down their hearts into these deep Wels of Salvation, which are in the Heart of
God. These Wells are still full of living Waters; and these Buckets are still
going. Saints keep your expectiations still fresh.

Secondly, The spirit of Grace is a spirit of Prophecy. Esai. 43. 9. God
challenges all the Nations: Let them bring forth their witnesses, who among
them can show us former things? that is, things before they come to pass, or,
things before their times, before the world, by a spirit of Prophecy. Verse,
12. I have declared, and have saved, and I have showed, when there was no
strange God among you: therefore ye are my witnesses, says the Lord, that I am
God. Has not the Lord many Witnesses in these Nations, yea, here present? I
know, he has. In the former days, when ye were with him at your Banquets of
spiritual enjoyments, on your Bed of spiritual Loves; then did he by his spirit
before hand signify within you the snfferings of these times, and the Glory,
which has risen out of them. And as he has declared, so has he saved us, by
the same Spirit. And now tell me, ye that are the Lords witnesses; when ye are
in your holiest seasons, when there is no strange God, or Love, but Jesus
Christ alone shines in the midst of your spirit; does he not still show you
greater things, than these, which are yet to come?

Thirdly, The spirit of Grace is a spirit of Holiness. Ephesians. 1. 13. It is
called a Holy spirit. Ye were sealed with the Holy spirit of Promise. Holiness
is the Character, and Seal of that spirit of Grace, which is promised to the
Saints. Psalm. 99. 8. Thou answeredst them, O Lord our God; thou were a God that
forgavest them, though thou take Vengeance of their iniquities. The Lord
testified his presence with the Jews in the Wilderness by his Holiness, in
taking Vengeance of their Inventions.

There is a Three fold Vengance, which the Lord takes for Sin. First, On the
Persons, and this three ways: 1. By Casting them off for ever: 2. By Cutting
of the inward Beams of spiritual Communion between himself, and them for a
season, perhaps for all their life long. 3. By Clouding their outward Man with
trouble, and sorrow. God always pardons iniquity to the Persons of his
Children in respect to the first of these Vengances; He cannot give them over
or cease to love them: sometimes also in respect to the second, and third. He
continues the sweetness of their Communion with him, and the Serenity of their
natural comforts un-interrupted. Secondly, The Second Vengance for sin is on
the public Cause. Thus the Lord did forgive the Israelites in the Wilderness,
and not take Vengeance on the public Cause. For though they al died in the
desert, yet the Lord kept his cause a live, carried that Victoriously over
Jordan into the Land of Canaan, and planted it to grow there for many
generations. The Third Vengance on the Inventions, on the Corruptions, and
Idols of the Heart. In this sense the Lord never pardons any.

The Spirit, which has bin our guide, has Signally declared it self a Spirit
of Grace by its abundant Forgivenesses, and a Spirit of Holiness by the
Vengance, which it has taken for Sin. When any have risen up against him, his
Purity, his Progress, from the Enmity of the Serpent; he has made the Earth to
open, and swallow them up into the darknesses below by a Natural, or Civil
Death: he has made fire to come down from Heaven, a spiritual fire of Divine
judgment, and wrath, by which they have bin so withered, dried, and burnt up;
that they have lost all that Greenness of Religion, Honor, Honesty, Morality,
Natural light, which they seemed before to have; and have fallen to open
Perfidiousness, to ranting Profanenesses, to a reprobate Sense, a stupid
Atheisticalness. But, when the Children of the Kingdom have transgressed by
temptations of Covetousness, Ambition, Fleshliness, Passion, Delusions,
Spiritual Pride, have fallen to Murmurings, Divisions, Sensuality, Worldly
Designs: although this Spirit may have pardoned all this to their Persons,
hiding them in the cleft of the Rock, in the wounds of Christ, there preserving
their Outward, their Inward Life, and Peace, while he has passed by: yet has
he taken open Vengeance of their Inventions, by manifest, eminent
Disappointments in their Expectations, and endless confusions in the way of
their Designs. Yet all this while has the Holy Spirit pardoned the sins of all
Parties to the Cause. He has not suffered that to fall, but has gone on when
it seems to faint, renewing its strength, carrying it up on high, as on an
Eagles wing, enlarging it in Victory, Peace, Spiritual Liberties at home;
spreading its Branches over the Seas, and to Foreign, far distant Lands;
breaking the Head of the Leviathan, the chief strength of Antichrist in the
deep Waters.

Fourthly: The Spirit of Grace is a Spirit of Unity. Ephel. 4. 3. Endeavoring
to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace. Unity is the Character,
the most immediate and inseparable Property of the Spirit. The Bond of Peace
has its strength, and root in the Unity of the Spirit: as the Sympathy and
Union of all the Fellow members in the Body arise from, and is preserved by One
Soul, by the Unity of the Soul.

There is a Twofold Unity. First, of Inward Affection. Secondly, of Outward
Effect. As to the Latter of these, I had rather much speak in silent Groans to
God, than by words to men; bleed inwardly, than breath forth outward Complaints
for the Breaches of the Daughter of my People. But so far, as concerns the
First of these, the Inward Affection to Unity, let me call forth you, who have
the Testimony in your selves, that it has been the Spirit in the Living
Creatures in the Hearts of the Saints, quickened by the Life of Christ, which
has been in the Wheels, that have turned about, and carried on this whole work
from the beginning hitherto; I appeal to you. What are the Meltings, the
Weepings over the Divisions among the Saints? What Yearnings, and turnings of
Bowels after a Reunion? Do you not in the secret of your hearts, in your secret
Meetings, bleed forth your souls before the feet of your Savior, at every
breach in his Body; as at a Wound, or the Cutting off of some Member in your
own Body? As Jacob lamented over the loss of his Children: Joseph is not,
Simeon is taken away from me, you would have Benjamin also; all these things
are against me: So you mourn; such Brethren left us at such a change; these
Saints are not with us in this change; and there are others ready to divide
themselves from us at the next turn of affairs: al these things are against us.
As the spirit of God spreads it self over the deep of darkness at the beginning
of the Creation, like a Bird over her naked young ones, till they be hatched up,
and fledged, to form it to a beautiful, and harmonious World, Light and Order:
Do you not after the same manner perceive the Spirit of Unity on your souls
stretch forth it self over all your fellow Members, that lie in a Chaos, in a
Deep of Darkness, Division, and Confusion? As Jesus Christ once wept forth
these Words over Jerusalem: As a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings;
How often would I have gathered thee, but thou would not? So he weeps, so he
speaks the same words in your Souls to all his divided Brethren in these
Nations: as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wing; how long have I called
and waited, and longed to gather you up into the Unity of my Spirit, that you
might not by your scatterings become a prey to the Kite? but hitherto you will
not. Joseph when he thought fit to speak roughly, and deal severely with his
Brethren; with much difficulty concealed his affections, was forced to make
have into a private room to weep. Has this been your temper, when the wisdom
of State, or the season has made it seem necessary to you to handle any one of
Christ's Flock roughly? have your Bowels been turned within you? has it been
hard, and grievous to you to act this strange part, and to hide your
affections? have you inwardly, and privately melted into tears while you have
openly thundered out hard speeches? Do you not much more contend with God by
Spiritual Wrastlings to have the hearts of all his People, that differ from
you; than you do by outward force, or policy, with them, to have the upper hand
of them?

If these things be thus, go on, and prosper. When Esau came with an Army
against Jacob his Brother, Jacob wrastled with God, at Penuel, which signifies
the Face, or Vision of God, he conquered his Brother the most excellent way,
like a Prince, in conquering God, and carrying away a Blessing by Conquest.
Esau, when he met him, instead of drawing his Sword upon Jacob, embraced him,
and offers him those Bands for his Guard, which came forth Enemies. Could one
Jacob thus subdue the Heart of rough Esau? and shall not many Jacobs by their
strong cries in the Ears of God, and tears in his Bosom, prevail with God for a
Victory of Love over the Hearts of many Jacobs, only disguised, and concealed
under the rough hairy Garments of Esau? Yes, the hour is coming, in which you
shall come forth hand in hand in Spiritual Dances, and answer one another with
Spiritual Songs, saying; These our Brethren were lost, but now are they found
in our arms: These Brethren were dead one to another, but now behold they live
together in the Unity of the Spirit. As Joseph, and his Brethren; so shall you
after long Concealments be discovered one to another, in a Light of Heavenly
Love; then shall ye fall one upon another Necks, and weep for joy; then shall you
say, We meant evil, but it was the Lords contrivance, who has turned all to
good. Thus shall ye receive one another into the Glory of God, as Christ has
received you.

Fifthly, The Spirit of Grace is a spirit of love to Jesus Christ. It makes his
person alone, and the Glory of that to be the Mark, and Price of our calling:
Phil. 3. 14. As water will ascend as high, as it first descends: so the spirit,
which is often compared to water, is like water in this, if it come down from
Christ, it will carry the aim, and affections of the soul to Christ. That which
is the first Principle, is the last end. If it be Jesus Christ, who has been
the first principle of motion in our hearts, he will be our only End, we shall
terminate, and rest no where, but in him. When Jacob had served an
Apprentice-ship of seven years for the Love of beautiful Rachel, he was married
by Laban to bleare-eyed Leah. Did this satissie Jacob? No, He chose to endure
the hardship of another service for seven years more, to suffer the heats by
day, and frosts by night in the open fields, that he might gain his first Love.
If it were a Conjugal Love to the person of Christ, which moved us to
undertake, and undergo the hard service of so many years in difficulty, danger;
in a field of war, Blood, and Death: we cannot now lie down, and take up our
rest in the Embraces of the blear-eyed Beavty of this World, though it be given
to us in marriage, and be exceedingly fruitful to us. No, We shall begin another
service of as many years more in prayers, in conflicts, in sufferings of al
sorts, til he, whom our Souls love, come, and give his own person into our
Arms. As the Spouse in the Canticles; Cant. 3, 4. We shall never cease, til we
hold his glorified person in our Marriage-Embraces, never to let him go more,
until we bring him into our Mothers house, into this visible World, to make al
things new, and to reign here as he does in Heaven. It is not this that a
Saint seeks through Seas of water and Blood, to rob the Nations of their Gold,
but to communicate to them this God. It is not this, which is his joy, and
triumph, to see his enemies drowned in the Floods: but to let in the Rivers of
Christ's blood upon them to over flow them, and that they may die the Death of
Christ only.

When Alexander drew near to Jerusalem with his conquering Army, he was met by
the High Priest in all his Ornaments, his Garment, his Girdle, his Ephod, his
Urim, and Thummim, of Gold, Silk, Sky-color, Purple, White, all sorts of
precious Stones, with the most Holy Crown upon his Head, which was the Figure
of the Glory of Jesus Christ at the right hand of the Father in Heaven, as he
is our true High Priest. Alexander seeing him, said; In this very form did that
God appear to me in a Dream by night in Macedonia, who commanded me to pass
over into Asia, and undertake this War. Upon this account he used the Jews with
all Kindness and Honor. My end in bringing in this Story, is to make this
Application of it: If we have had any glimpses in our Spirits of our dear
Savior in the Heavenly Beauty and Glory of his Person; if we have been carried
on to this Work by his Spiritual Appearances, and Power in us: then will not our
work be at an end, til we see him shining forth in the full Glory of his Person
and Spirit, not upon us only, but upon the whole Earth. The Vow of Christ is
upon us, not to give sleep to our Eyes, til we have found a settled Habitation
for our Lord Jesus, as he is clothed with all his Spiritual Glories, in our own
hearts, and with men. I have done now with the last Evidence of the Presence of
our God with us in the New way of his Son, and Spirit; which Evidence is this,
That the Spirit of Grace has been the Principle, and Seal of these great Works
and Changes in the midst of us. The Use that I would make of it, is to enlarge
us in our Praises, that we may now see, and say with joy; The Lord Jesus goes
up on high in our Land, he carries Captivity captive, he gives Gifts to men,
even to the rebellious, that himself may dwell among them. I have done with the
First Use.

Use 2. A Caution to beware of four things.
Caut. 1. Limit not God. This was the sin of the Jews in the Wilderness: They
limited the Holy One of Israel, Psalm. 7. 41. Princes love not to be prescribed,
much less does God. To what will ye liken God, and to what likeness will ye
compare him? Es. 40. 18. If the Lord be doing Great things among us, according
to the Exaltation of Christ, if he doing New things according to his own
Spirit; what measure will ye take, what President will ye make, what likeness
will ye frame of his Way, by things past, or present?

Take heed of Two Ways of Limiting God.

First, Shut not the Lord up into any Form, or way of Working. The Holy Ghost
complains of the Jews, Psalm. 78. 19. They spoke against God, they said, Can God
furnish a Table in the Wilderness? Let us take heed, that the Language of our
hearts and actions be not like to this, that we say not; If we have no set
Form, no Established way of Religion, or Civil Government, Can God in the
Wilderness, and Confusion of such a Condition, continue, or increase Truth,
Holiness, Prosperity, and Peace? Thus to limit God, is to speak against him.

Secondly: Shut not God out of any Form, or Way of working. I speak here of the
Lords Working in Love, not Wrath: and accordingly of those Forms, and Ways,
out of which he has not excluded his Love, by the contrariety between them,
and his Divine, Holy Nature. Nathaniel himself had like to have stumbled at
Christ by his narrow-sightedness in this kind. Can (said he) any good come out
of Nazareth? John, 1. 46. Yet, as Chrysostom tells us, Nazareth signifies a
flower, Christ out of Nazareth, was Flos e Flore, a Flower out of a Flower.
That form, or way which seems to thee most incapable of having any good in it
may be made by God a Sweet, and flourishing flower, out of which another more
glorious flower may spring, even Jesus Christ in the spiritual, Civil, and
natural Image of things. This is the first Caution.

Caut. 2. Murmr not against the Lord. When Jesus Christ had sent this mark
of his being come to John Baptist; That, To the poor the Gospel was preached,
or as some read it, and the Greek full, as well, bears it, The poor preach the
Gospel, he ads, and blessed is he, that is not offended at me; Matt. 11. 5, 6.
How apt are men to murmr against, to stumble at, to reject Jesus Christ
himself, even then, when he comes with glad tidings, with peace, and glory from
the Father in the Gospel, if the way, by which he conveighes these things to
them, answer not their imagination, and expectation, but be in any kind poor,
obscure, and dis-esteemed. There are two Cases, in which we are apt to be
ensnared in this kind.

First, The Jews had settled their expectation of the Messiah upon the Pomp,
and Power of an outward Kingdom. He comes with his cross instead of a Throne.
They therefore are offended at him, reject, and persecute him. So men generally
fix the accomplishment of promises, the answer of prayers, the works of God,
the administration of Christ, the operations of the Spirit in Religion, and
Civil things, upon some way, that is fairest in their fancyes, or
understandings. If God come not to bless them, and to save them in this way,
but by some other Person, or Thing, which is without comeliness in their Eye,
they murmur and refuse him.

Secondly, When the Soldiers had our faviour in their hands, they put a Crown
of Thorns upon his head, a Reed for a Scepter into his hand, a purple robe
upon his back, then they mock him, and spit in his Face. I humbly pray, that
this spirit be not powerful in us, who profess our selves Saints, and
peacemakers, that we do not after the same manner, when the Lord makes any
person, or way, which we have a low esteem of, to be the instrument of his
power, Majesty, and love, cloth it with the most contemtuous disguises of
Hypocrisy, delusion, Ambition, Licentiousness, falsehood, Atheism, and then
spit in the Face of it, persecute it with all bitterness, and scorn under this
Disguise.

Cant. 3. Judge not things by the outward apperance, but by the inward
principle. Solomon says: All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes: but
the Lord weighs the spirit: Prove. 16. 2. I have heard of a blind man, who
could distinguish, and judge of al metals or precious stones by weighing them
in his hand. Thus judge always, not by the beauty of the outward form, but by
the weight of the inward pinciple.

It was a Starr in the Region of the Air above the Earth, that led the wise
men to the House, where Christ was borne. So should it be the light of a
principle in the spirit above the outward form, by which we should be gvided in
our esteem, affections, and pursuits.

Cant. 4. Judge every principle in the Light of the Holy Spirit. Psalm. 73. 16,
17. Asaph professes that it was too painful for him to understand things in
this world by their outward Appearances, until he went into the Sanctuary of
God, then he understood the end, by discovring the principle, or beginning.
Before this he was Foolish, and Ignorant, as a beast, verse. 22. The Sanctuary
was a Figure of our Savior in his Holy Spirit.

Agur Complains, Prove. 30. 2, 3. That, He was more brutish, than any man; and
had not the understanding of a man. He gives the reason of this, because, He
had not learned Wisdom, which is the Knowledge and judgment of things in their
inward principles, and he was without this wisdom for want of the Knowledge of
the Holy. This expression of, the Holy, in Scripture signifies Glorified
Natures in Heaven sometimes, whether Angels, or Saints, sometimes Saints on
Earth, Whatever it be, the Knowledge of the Holy, is that alone, which comes by
the Infusion, and Illumination of the Holy Ghost. Cant. 1, 2, 3. For the Savor
of thy good Ointments, says the Spouse to Christ, thy name is, as an Ointment
powered forth. Therefore do the Virgins love thee. Draw us, and we will run
after thee. The spirit of Christ in the brightness, and sweetness of its light,
Purity, Love, Joy, is this Ointment powered forth. No Savor is good to a
Virgin-Spirit, but that alone of these Ointments. Where there is a Virgin love
to Jesus Christ, the Soul is drawn, to run after any excellency, only by this
Savor, by the light, and sweetness of the spirit, as this Ointment is poured
forth there.

As it is in the Objects of sight, there is the Material Object, and the
Formal. The Material is the thing seen, as a flower, a Picture. The Formal is
the colors, by which it is seen. Besides these is the Light in the Air, which
actuates these colors, and makes them to appear. So is it in things pertaining
to the understanding, and Judgment. The outward appearance is but the
Materiality of the Object, the shinings forth of the inward principle is the
Formality, the Color. But the Holy Spirit is the only Light, by which the
discoverys of the principles of things are drawn forth, and laid open. I have
done now with the Second Use, and come to the Third.

Use, 2. This is for Exhortation. If God go forth in New ways, let us be New,
that we may be fit to meet him, and go along with him. We read in the Gospel of
the Pool of Bethesda. John, 3. 2. An Angel at certain times came down into this
Pool, and troubling the waters infused a healing virtue into them. Many sick
persons lay round about the Pool ready to step in. There was also a House to
receive the poor, diseased waiters. This House was called Bethesda, which
signifies the House of Free Grace.

You who have the blackest Guilt, the deepest brand of any Lust, the darkest
despair upon your Spirits, behold here a way for you to be made new this very
moment. The Blood of Christ is before you, as a Healing, and Clensing Pool.
Your Savior himself is every moment descending into it from Heaven, and
ascending out of it to Heaven, by the Virtue of his Death, Resurrection, and
Ascension, to impart the Efficacy of al these to it, himself to take you into
his bosom in the midst of these Waters, to bath you thoroughly in them till you
become quite new; then to carry you up with himself into the Newness of the
Spirit, of Heaven, and of the Glory of the Father. But perhaps you will say; you
are so sick, so dead in sin, that you cannot move toward this Healing Pool. Let
not that discourage you, the Father himself is ready to take hold of you, and
by his strength to put you in. He draws us to Christ. It may be you will say,
that you are under the Wrath of the Father, and therefore cannot hope, that he
should give you his helping hand. To answer this, he has built a House of free
Grace, a Bethesda; he has called this Pool of most precious Blood, the Pool of
Bethesda, the Pool of free Grace. The Doors of this House stand continually
open, day and night. All Persons are invited, and pressed to come in. All, whom
the Father finds here, he himself takes, and carries in his own Arms to this
Pool, and lays them in the Arms of his Son, who is always descending into it,
waiting in the midst of it, and rejoicing exceedingly, when any sinful, sick
Soul comes thither to him. Open your Eyes, and see Oye Sons and Daughters of
Men. Here, now, in this place, at this very hour, is the House of free Grace,
the Healing Pool before you, if you will enter into them. Nay, even here, and
now, you are already in the house of Free Grace, and in the Arms of the Father;
you are in this healing Poole of your Saviors blood, you are in your Saviors
Arms, he is come down to you, he is carrying you up with himself thither,
where al things are New, your being, Beauty, Life, company, delights new; if
only you will believe, if only you will open the Eye of your spirit to see the
truth, as it is in Jesus. The Lord Jesus is set down upon the Throne of Grace,
and fills the whole Earth with the Glory of his Mediation. Only the Eyes of men
are held, that they see not this Glory.

Use, 4. This is my last Use, which is for Consolation, and Encoragement. You
have now a war with the most potent Prince in the whole Christian world, who is
Chief staff of the Papal, Antichristian strength. You have reason to expect a
Combination of all the powers of darkness, and this world, Visible, and
Invisible, within, and without, from at home, and from abroad, against you. But
fear them not. This war shall not be like other wars, but after a new manner.
It shall be with the burning of a spiritual, and divine Fire.

Take notice here for your Comfort, that this Fire shall have contrary effects
upon the Saints, and upon their enemies.

First, This Fire upon your enemies shall have these Propertys; It shall be;
First, Dreadful, Secondly, Irresistible, Thirdly, Devouring, Fourthly,
Tormenting, Fifthly, Sodeine.

Secondly, This Fire to its friends shall have these Property. It shall be:
First, Cherishing, Secondly, Enlightening Thirdly, Defensive, as a Wall of
Diamonds, Fourthly, Heightning, Fifthly, Transforming into one glorious,
Heavenly, immortal nature with it self, Sixthly, Separating al dross from the
Gold, Seventhly, Uniting, melting the Gold, til it al run into one undivided
mass

I shall conclude this use, and my Sermon with an allusion to the story of
Eliah, who sat upon the top of Mount Carmel, when the Captains, and their
fiftys in the name of the King commanded the man of God to come down. But he
answered; if I be a man of God let fire come down from Heaven, and destroy you
with your fiftys. Carmel signifies the Vineyard of God. This top of Mount
Carmel is the Church in the spirit of glory, in the glorified person of Christ
her head, where she is as a flourishing Vineyard to God upon the top of a Mount
of spirituality. Let Kings with their Armies encompass us, if we be men of God,
the seed of God, if this be Mount Carmel, on the top of which we stand, the
cause of God, the Church, the spirit, the Mediation of Christ: then shall the
Holy Angels, the spirit, Christ himself, come down, as Fire from Heaven, upon
our enemies to consume them, but upon us to carry us up on high, as in the
Chariot of Eliah, burning with the Love, and Glory of God.

FINIS.
Books printed by Peter Cole, Printer, and Bookseller in Cornhil, at the
Printing-press.
Several New books of Mr. Thomas Hooker, made in New England. And Attested in
an Epistle by Mr. Thomas Goodwin, and Mr. Philip Nigh, To be written with the
Authors Own hand: None being written by himself before. One Volum being a
Comment upon Christ's last Prayer in the Seventeenth of John: wherein is
opened, The Union believers have with God and Christ, and the glorious
Privileges thereof. Besides many other Gospel Truths, there is also showed.
1 That the end why the Saints receive al glorious Grace, is, That they may be
one, as the Father and Christ are one. 2 That God the Father loves the
Faithful, as he loves Jesus Christ. 3 That our Savior desires to have the
Faithful in Heaven with himself. 4 That the happiness of our being in Heaven,
is to see Christ's Glory. 5 That there is much wanting in the knowledge of Gods
Love, in the most able Saints. 6 That the Lord Christ lends daily direction,
according to the daily need of his Servants. 7 That it is the desire, and
endeavor of our Savior, that the dearest of Gods Love, which was bestowed on
himself, should be given to his faithful Servants. 8 That our Union, and
Communion with God in Christ, is the top of our happiness in Heaven.
The first eight Books: of the Application of Redemption, By the effetual Work
of the Word, and Spirit of Christ for the bringing home of lost Sinners to God.
In which (besides many other seasonable, and Soul-searching Truths) there is
also largely showed.
1 Christ has purchased al spiritual good for HIS. 2 Christ puts al HIS into
possession of all that good that he has purchased. 3 The Soul must be fitted
for Christ before is can receive him: And a powerful Ministry is the ordinary
means to prepare the heart for Christ. 4 The work of God is free: And the day
of Salvation, is whil this Life last, and the Gospel continue. 5 God calls his
Elect at any Age, but the most before old Age. 6 The Soul is naturally settled
in a sinful security. 7 The heart of a Natural man it wholly unwilling to
submit, to the word that would sever him from his sins. 8 God the Father by a
holy kind of violence, plucks His out of their corruptions, and draws them to
believe in Christ.
The Ninth and Tenth Books of the Application of Redemption by the Effectual
Work of the Word, and spirit of Christ, for the bringing home of lost sinners
to God. Besides many other seasonable, and Soul-searching Truths, there is also
largely showed.
1 The heart must be humble and contrite before the Lord will dwell in it. 2
Stubborn, and bloody sinners may be made brokenhearted. 3 There must be true
sight of sin, ^fore the heart for the work can be broken for it. 4 Application
of special sins by the Ministry, is a means to bring men to sight of, and
sorrow for them. 5 Meditation of sin, a special means to break the heart. 6 The
same word is profitable to some, not to another. 7 The Lord sometimes makes the
word prevail most, when its most opposed. 8 Sins unrepented of, makes way for
piercing Terrors. 9 The Truth terible to a guilty consciente. 10 Gross and
scandallous sinners, God usually exercises with heavy breakings of heart,
before they be brought to Christ. 11 Sorrow for sin rightly set on, pierces
the heart of the sinner thoroughly. 12 They whose hearts are pierced by the
Word, are carried with love and respect to the Ministers of it: And are busy
to enquire, and ready to submit to the mind of God. 13 Sinners in distress of
conscience, are ignorant what they should do. 14 A contrite sinner sees a
necessity of coming out of his sinful condition. 15 There is a secret hope
wherewith the Lord supports the hearts of contrite sinners. 16 They who are
truly pierced for their sins, do prise and cover deliverance from their sins.
17 True contrition is accompanied with confession of sin, when God calls
thereunto. 18 The Soul that is pierced for sin, is carried with a restless
dislike against it
Twenty one several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into two Volumus.
Viz.
1 Scripture Light the most sure Light; compared with, 1. Revelations and
Visions 2. Natural and Supernatual Dreams. 3 Impressions with, and without Word
4. Light and Law within. 5. Divine Providence. 6. Christian Experience. 7.
Humane Reason. 8. Judicial Astrology. Delivered in Sermons, on 2 Pet. 1. 19. 2
Christ in Travel: Wherein, 1. The Travel of his soul. 2. The first and after
effects of his Death, 3. His Assurance of Issue. 4. And his satisfaction
therein: Are opened and cleared in Sermons, on Isa, 53 11. 3 A Lifting up for
the Cast-down, in case of, 1. Great sin. 2. Weakness of Grace. 3. Miscarriage
of Duties. 4. Want of Assurance, 5. Affliction. 6. Temptation. 7. Dissertion.
8. Unserviceableness. 9, Discouragements from the Condition it self. Delivered
in thirteen Sermons, on Psalm, 42. 11. His Four Sermons concerning, 4 Sin
against the Holy Ghost. 5 Sins of Infirmity. 6 The false Apostle tried and
discovered 7 The good and means of Establishment 8 The great things Faith can
do. 9 The great things Faith can suffer. 10 The Great Gospel Mystery of the
Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and applied from Christ's Priestly Office.
11 Satan's power to Tempt, and Christ's Love to, and Care of his People under
Temptaton 12 Thankfulness required in every Condition. 13 Grace for Grace. 14
The Spiritual Actings of Faith through Natural Impossibilities. 15 Evangelical
Repentance 16 The Spiritual Life, etc. 17 The Woman of Canaan. 18 The Saints
Hiding Place, etc. 19 Christ's Coming etc. 20 A Vindication of Gospel Ordinances
21 Grace and Love beyond Gifts
Twelve Books of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs lately published; also the Texts of
Scripture upon which they are grounded.
1 Gospel Reconciliation, Or Christ's Trumpet of Peace to the World. Wherein is
Opened Gods exceeding willingness to be Reconciled to Man; And Gods sending his
Ambassadors to that End. From. 2 Cor. 5 19, 20, 21. 2 The Rare Jewel of
Christian Contentment, on Phil. 4. 11. Wherein is showed, 1 What Contentment
is. 2. It is an Holy art and Mystery. 3 The Excellencies of it. 4 The Evil of
the contrary sin of Murmuring, and the Aggravations of it. 3 Gospel Worship, on
Levit. 10. 3. Wherein is showed, 1 The right manner of the Worship of God in
General; And particularly, In hearing the Word, Receiving the Lords supper, and
prayer. 4 Gospel-Conversation, on Phil. 1 17 Wherein is showed, 1 That the
Conversations of Believers must be above what could be by the Light of Nature.
2 Beyond those that lived under the Law. 3 And suitable to what Truths the
Gospel holds forth. To which is added, The Misery of those Men that have their
Portion in this Life only, on Psalm. 17. 14. 5 A Treatise of Earthly-mindedness;
Wherein is showed, 1 What Earthly-mindedness is, 2. The great Evil thereof, on
Phil. 3. part of the 19. verse. Also to the same Book is joined, A Treatise of
Heavenly-mindedness, and walking with God, on Genesis 5. 24. and on Phil. 3. 20. 6
An Exposition on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of the
Prophecy of Hosea. 7 An Exposition on the eight, ninth, and tenth Chapters of
Hosea. 8 An Exposition on the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth Chapters of
Hosea, being now complete. 9 The Evil of Evils, or the exceeding sinfulness of
sin, on Job 16. 21. 10 Precious Faith, on 2 Pet. 1. 1. 11 Of Hope, on 1 John 3.
3. 12 Of Walking by Faith, on 2 Cor. 5. 7.
Two Books by Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology.
I. The Practice of Physic, containing seventeen several Books. Wherein is
plainly set fort, The Nature, Cause, Differences, and several sorts of Signs;
Together with the Cure of al Diseases in the Body of Man. Being a Translation
of the Works of that Learned and Renowned Doctor, Lazarus Riverius, now living;
Councellor and Physician to the present King of France. Above fifteen thousand
of the said Books in Latin have been sold in a very few Years, having been
eight times printed, though all the former Impressions wanted the Nature,
Causes, Signs, and Differences of the Diseases, and had only the Medicines for
the cure for them; as plainly appears by the Authors Epistle. II. A Sure Guide*
To Physic and Chyrurgery: That is to say, The Arts of Healing by Medicine, and
Manual Operation. Being an Anatomical Description of the whole body of Man, and
its parts, with their Respective diseases, demonstrated from the Fabric and
use of the said Parts. In Six Books.

