AUTHORITY ABUSED BY The VINDICATION Of the Last Years Transactions, AND The
ABUSES DETECTED; WITH INLARGEMENTS upon some Particulars more briefly touched
in the Reflections upon the Occurrences of the Last Year.

TOGETHER WITH Some NOTES upon another Vindication, Entitled, The Third and
Last Part of the Magistracy and Government of England Vindicated.

By the Author of the REFLECTIONS.

Magna est VERITAS, and Praevalebit.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXC.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
WHEN I first came in to you to Sherborn, I came with as much Appetite, though
in an infirm Condition, to engage in the same Cause with you, as I could have
done to a good Meal when an hungered. And though you are now settled in the
Throne, and the Storms of War which then threatened this Nation, long since
blown over: Yet I have reason to believe I may run some Danger in what I now do
for the Service of your Majesty and my Country. And though I doubt not of the
Protection of Almighty God, and the powerful Supports of Truth, Justice, and a
good Conscience; yet because it is my Duty to neglect no honest Means for my
Safety and Quiet, having here performed an Act of Great Fidelity to your
Majesty, and the Government of my Country, I do claim as my Right the
Protection of both for my self, and my Labors. I have not written one Syllable
which I do not believe to be true; nor have I forborne a Word, which I thought
pertinent to my Subject, and necessary to your Service. And this being done,
not out of Discontent for any Disappointment Unworthily suggested, not without
the Check of his own Conscience, by the Writer of the Vindication. p. 30.
in quest of some Place, (for I never sought any, though I my self, with Five
Sons, are all ready to serve you, if you please to command it) nor to serve any
Faction or Party; but sincerely to preserve one of the Noblest Governments in
the World, (as I have long thought it) to serve a Just and Noble Cause, (as I
have else where, though briefly, proved) to serve my Country, to serve your
Majesty, and, which is above all, to serve Almighty God, is such an Act of
Fidelity, as is too rare to be met with in this Nation at this time: And I know
you cannot desert me in it, without deserting (more or less) all that I have
endeavored to serve: Nor can any one hurt or molest me (an innocent Man, and
endeavoring to do good) without bringing greater hurt upon themselves: Whereof
he who gave occasion of this Writing may be an Example:) And besides, without
striking at your Majesty and the Government, to say no more.

For the same intent and purpose, besides what I have said in the following
Sheets in common, I must crave the Favor of a few Words to your self in
particular: God by his Providence has brought you to one (as I said) of the
Noblest Governments in the World: That You and these Nations may enjoy the
Complete Benefit of so great a Favor, these things, I will presume to say, are
necessary, nay absolutely necessary, on your part. First, That you be very
careful to keep up such a firm and quick Sense of the Providence of God in
these things, that your Heart be neither so lifted up with any high Conceit of
your self for what you have already gotten, nor so involved in Cares and
Endeavors to keep that, or get more, that you forget him, and either take up
with the Enjoyment of these things, and neglect the further Prosecution of his
Service; or deserting your Confidence in him, decline to vulgar Policies for
your own Security or Advantage.

Secondly, That often contemplating the unconceivable Excellence of the Divine
Majesty, which has given Being to, and governs this vast Universe, whereof the
whole Earth is in comparison of the rest but a Point, and raising your Soul
above these transient things which the Vulgar admire, you look upon the
Acceptance of a Crown as an Act of Charity to poor Mortals, but your only true
Glory to consist in the Approbation of that excellent Majesty, and of his
Glorious, though to us Mortals Invisible, Ministers. Such as is the Applause
and Admiration of the Rabble to a great King; such, and no more, is the
Applause and Admiration of the greatest of Mortals to a truly Wise Man, without
the Approbation of the Celestial Spectators.

Thirdly, That assuring your self that you are raised up by the Providence of
this Glorious Majesty for his Service in these Nations at least, if not
further, you generously prosecute the same with all Fidelity, according to his
Will and Pleasure, that is, his Eternal Laws of Righteousness, his Express
Instructions and Commands, and the Constitution and just Laws of this
Government and Nation, which is the special Ordinance of God for this People,
that is, ordered and preserved by his Providence.

Fourthly, That for that purpose you generously and faithfully endeavor to
improve all the Advantages put into your Hand, and Talents committed to your
Trust, for the Honor of his Name, Worship, Laws and Institutions; that is, the
Exemplary Authority of your Royal Person, and of your Royal Family, (conniving
at no vicious Persons there, though otherwise never so great or necessary) the
Dispensations of your Honors and Favors, and the strict Execution of the
Laws, which is your proper part in the Government. The doing of this
magnanimously, slighting the vulgar Prudentials of Animal Politicians, is that
which in the Sacred Scripture is called Faith, and highly recommended. But to
boggle at any of this, will be dangerous to you, and may produce as great
Disappointments as those of the last Year, and make your Counsels prove
Abortive, and it may be as destructive as King James's did by the like means.
You have begun well in your Letter to the Bishops; but the like Care is to be
taken that the Laws be strictly executed by the Judges and Civil Magistrates.
Nor would this Debase, but Improve your Military Discipline, and make it more
prosperous and successful.

Fifthly, That to this end and purpose also you inform your self, as well as
may be, concerning the true Constitution of the English Government, and your
own Part therein, that you neither neglect, nor exceed your Duty, or fall into
any of the unhappy Miscarriages of some of your Predecessors, but wisely and
religiously contenting your self with what has been conferred upon you, and
justly belongs to you, to the others you generously secure to each their own.

Sixthly, That for Information in these matters you rely upon no private or
secret Counselors, but in the Intervals of Parliament, consult the Privy
Council and Judges; and the great Council of the Nation, as soon as may be:
This it was which raised you to the Throne. It is their Interest to preserve
the Hernour and Majesty of the Monarchy, and they will certainly do it. And it
was nothing but the Craft of ill Men, who kept our late Brinces in continual
Jenlousies, of Parliaments, to hold up a Faction for their own Advantage.

Seventhly, That if upon good Information you find that this is a mixed
Government, composed of the Three Simple Forms, the Enquiring Part belonging
more specially to the Commons, the Judiciary to the Lords, the Consultary and
Legislative to the King, Lords and Commons, and the Executive to the King,
which I believe is the truth, upon this Consideration, you look upon the Whole
as one great Body, whereof your self is indeed the Head in Honor and Degree,
but in effect rather the Hand, or if you will, the Right Hand; but however a
Part: And therefore that you always retain a great Respect for this Noble Body,
treating them with all Honor and Affection, reputing their Honor and Interest
your own, as Yours is Theirs, and will be so treated by them, if a fair
Correspondence be kept up between you; which will make you not only beloved at
home, but dreaded abroad.

Eighthly, That you be very tender and cautious of invading their Rights, or
neglecting their Counsel, in any matter of Importance; but especially of
holding up any Favorites against them; and to that end that you be very
jealous of that Generation, and those particular Persons, who have been the
Authors or Propagators of False Notions concerning the Constitution of this
Government, or of Evil Counsels and Courses among your Predecessors; and more
especially those, who have already by any Evil Counsels or Unfaithfulness in
not well informing you, betrayed your self into any Inconvenience: Whereof, if
you please to command me, I shall be ready to give you some plain Instances.

Ninthly, That you endeavor wisely to compose the Dissentions, and allay the
Heats and Animosities of the Nation, and to unite all in a mutual Assistance
for the Common Interest. Our Divisions, and the Heats of our Dissentions, are
for the most part the Relics of Popish Practices, and Effects of Evil
Policies of Courtiers. These have both conspired for different ends to divide
us both in Church and State, and to impose upon the People; so that it is the
truest Wisdom and greatest Interest of this Nation to endeavor so much the
more for an Union; and to that end to detect their Impostures. This Government
is in truth a Noble Commonwealth in the Root and Body, accommodated with the
Advantage, and adorned with the Honor and Majesty of a Monarchy in the
Execution. Crafty Men observing this, have practiced the Division in this
manner. First, By putting the Kings upon illegal Projects, till that produced
Jealousies of Arbitrary Designs, and then improving those to the raising of the
like Jealousies in those unhappy Kings of Republican Conspiracies. Thus were
multitudes imposed upon: Whereas the Subversion of the Commonwealth to support
the Monarchy, is no less Foily, Madness and Treachery in an English Man, than
is the pulling down the Monarchy to support the Commonwealth. Nor can any thing
endanger our Monarchs but themselves, by adhering to Evil Counselors,
rejecting or declining the Advice of the Great Council of the Nation, and
violating their Rights.

Lastly, That to this purpose you avoid all Favor and Encouragement to any
Faction; and make no other difference between Persons, but what the Law has
made; except only between the Virtuous and the Vicious, and between such as may
safely be trusted, and such as may not, (for which end for Parliament Men, and
persons admitted to great Offices of Trust, and Bishops, a Recognition by Act
of Parliament may be necessary;) but by a constant tenor and course of your
Actions demonstrate a cordial and universal Affection to All, and a great Zeal
and Activity for the Service of God, and for the Peace, Safety and Prosperity
of the Nation.

By these Means you will be a complete King, and rule in the Hearts of the
People: These will produce in them such a Trust and Confidence in you, as will
make your Government exceeding easy; and such a Government will make your Name
Honorable in the Roll of our English Kings: But if you once set up for a
Separate Interest, strike-in with, and make your self the Head of any Faction,
give your self up to the Conduct of particular Favorites, suffer the Public
Revenue and the Treasure of the Nation to be squandred away without any
Account, and the People to be injured by Exactions and Delays of Officers, and
tread in the steps of your Predecessors of the last Race, you will ipso facto
cease to do the part of a King, violate the Trust reposed in you, and your
Coronation Oath; and deceiving the Expectations of all Men, after such a
Succession of Kings, raise such Prejudice against Monarchy it self, as may
endanger this Noble Government, and the Settlement of the Nation, and make your
Name inglorious to all Posterity. But these are things so inconsistent with the
Reasons, for which you was invited hither, the Causes of your Expedition
expressed in your own Declaration, the Ends for which the Crown was first
offered to you, and after set upon your Head, the Honor and Safety of your
Government, and, which is more than all, the Righteous Laws of God, (who, as we
hope, raised you up to be an Instrument of Mercy, not of Vengeance to This
Nation) as no Man, who believes the Character we have received of your great
Virtue, can easily fear from you, though the notorious Miscarriages of the late
Reigns may have left some Impressions upon the Minds of some, which yet I hope
Experience of your Prudence and Justice will totally expunge. And I pray God
give you (as I hope he will) true Wisdom to know Him, to discern His Hand in
these things, and what He expects from you; to know what is your proper Part in
this great Affair, and to be more careful to discharge it well, than to enlarge
it beyond its just Bounds; and that all true Happiness may always attend your
Majesty.

Your Majesty's most Faithful and, Obedient Subject.

AUTHORITY ABUSED, BY THE Vindication of the Last Years Transactions, AND The
ABUSES DETECTED By the Author of the Reflections.
OF a great many Evil Arts and Practices, which in the late Reigns were used
for the Subversion of the True English Government, and Suppression of the most
ancient common Rights of the People of these Nations, one that was most
constantly used for that purpose, was the Employment of Mercenary Writers to
put a color of Words and Oratory upon those things, for which they had no
color of Law. And it would be a sad case with us, if after so glorious a
Deliverance, we should be already so far deserted by the Divine Providence, as
to stand in need of any such Practices or Assistance: Yet so it should seem to
be, unless the Pamphlet Entitled, The last Years Transactions Vindicated, be a
bold and impudent Imposture. For it will not be hard to prove, That that
Pamphlet is a False, Scandalous and Impious Libel: And to Print it not only as
under the Patronage of a Chief Secretary of State, but expressly as Published by
Authority, is either an Act of impudent Imposture, and a Cheat or Abuse; or it
may be feared we are again relapsing into the same unhappy Circumstances. But I
suppose I shall make it appear, that there is a double Imposture in it, that
is, That neither had the Writer that Authority for what he did, which was
designed he should be thought to have had; nor was it designed sincerely to
serve the Public Authority of the Nation, the Present Government; but to cover
the Evil Practices of those Persons, who were the Authors of our
Disappointments the last Year, that they may the better do the like again this.
And probably, if the business be well examined, he will be found to have been
employed by some of them (who are therefore the proper Authors of it) for that
end; and not by that Honorable Person, whom they have made so bold with by
this Dedication of what is written (as he says) in Defense of others.

There are three Phrases by which usually the Leave of Authority for the
Publication of Books is briefly expressed. The most common is Licensed; which
signifies a written License under the Hand of some Person authorized to give
it. Another is with Allowance, which implies a Verbal Leave, but of some Person
of great Place and Authority. The third is what the Authors have thought fit to
prefix to this Book, Published by Authority: And this (as I take it) implies
more than a bare leave, viz. Something of a Command, and of some great
Authority, more than a bare Allowance or License of a Secretary of State. But
what that Authority should be, by which this is published, I believe will not
be easy to find or discover: Only what it is not will not be difficult to
perceive, even from the consideration of the Book it self, and diverse Passages
in it.

Nothing can be so truly, innocently, honestly and plainly said, but it may be
contradicted or opposed by a Man of Wit and Parts, with some color and
appearance of Reason, of which the Oration of Carneades against Justice is a
sufficient Instance; and by one, who has no great store of either, with
Railing and Foul Language, of which this Pamphlet we are now considering
presents us with a pregnant Instance. No less than Folly, Enthusiasm, Visionar,
Enthusiastic Illumination, deluded Notion of Inspiration, Indiscretion,
Excentrick Zeal, Quakers Impulse, are all at one Volly let fly at the Author of
the Reflections by this mighty Champion, the Vindicator of the King, the
Parliament, and the whole State at his first Charge; all in one Paragraph
published by Authority, if we will believe him; besides diverse single Shots
afterward, as Silly, precipitant Zeal, hot Politician, Lucid Intervals,
Extatick Sermon, Revengeful Spirit, etc.

After such a Charge, it is no wonder to see such a Champion, with no little
Ostentation, insult over his vanquished Adversary, and upbraid him with his
confined Sphere, narrow Sphere, short Line, want of Knowledge of Affairs of
State, small Skill in Affairs abroad, gross Ignorance in the Affairs of Europe,
little Skill in Politics, none at all in History, unacquaintedness with
Philosophy, and such gross mistakes in the Motion of natural Bodies, as to
believe a moving Cart may be stayed by Witchcraft.

Such stuff as this is agreeable enough to the quality of a Mercenary Writer, a
temporizing Observator, a Mountebank, a Quack, and might have passed with some
ordinary Licencers: But as it does never advantage any Cause, so it is usually
a sign of either a very barren Cause, or a very shallow brain, where it is much
used without any Proof or Reason: And therefore Men in great Authority, do
rarely employ such Writers, or if they do, do it only by some Secret
Encouragement, not by any Public Authority.

And if this general consideration be not sufficient to render the Authors
suspected of Imposture in that respect, the Writer himself has supplied us in
the very next Page with special matter to help it out, telling us that the King
by a Prodigy of good Nature has laid aside the Resentment such a Pamphlet would
have met with in any Reign but His: And if this be not yet enough, he
immediately adds his own Sentence of Selfcondemnation: And where the King
forgives, its ill manners to stint the Royal Bounty by ill Treating the
Griminal. For if any one besides this Champion would be guilty of such ill
manners, it ought not certainly to be believed that any one near the King, or
of any great Authority would by Publicly Authorizing it: Much less that so ill
a treatment should be Authorized by that Noble Lord to whom they have presumed
to Dedicate it. Sure I am he had no great reason to do it, if he acted any
great part in the Transactions, and the Vindication be written in Defense of
others.

What is here inferred from the Modesty and Decency of the Terms and Language,
may likewise be inferred from the Truth and Honesty of the Suggestions,
Assertions, and Inferences. It would be too long to examine all, and besides
needless: I will therefore for brevity sake only confront three or four of the
Assertions with the words of the Reflections; and leave the Reader to consider
how proper and likely such Candor and Ingenuity is to be Published by Authority.

Page 9. He charge the Author of the Reflections, speaking of the Danish
Forces, with Asserting plainly They will prove a greater Burden than Advantage
to us. Whereas the words of the Reflections are only thus. The Season of the
year is now far gone, that they are more like to prove a Burden this Winter,
than any Advantage to us. And this is called a Calumny, Page 13. but with how
great reason the Reader may there see.

Again in the same, Page 13. reciting the words of the Reflections concerning
our Losses at Sea, he concludes Speaking of the Author, that He boldly add,
That our Merchants Ships have been made a prey to those who should have been
their Guide and Convey. Whereas the Reflections insted of holdly adding what he
says, cautiously premise a Parenthesis, which this honest and candid Gentleman
was so bold as to leave out. viz. (If the Complaints of our Merchants and their
Mariners be true.)

But never did our Champion behave himself more bravely and like himself than
when he comes to talk of the Abdication. That one Paragraph of the Reflections
makes him lay about him indeed like a Man of mettle, for three Paragraphs
together: It seems he was not a little concerned at it; and where the Concern
lay is not hard to be perceived. But here I shall only take notice of one
instance more for my present purpose, leaving the rest to the Readers
observation, Page 21. he tells us: Our new Politician is downright offended at
the Parliament for finding King James' Departure an Abdication of the
Government, etc. This certainly is no less than a piece of Jesuitical Modesty,
wherever this Traveller learnt it. The words of the Reflections are down
right the contrary: There was reason enough to declare the departure of King
James under his circumstances an Abdication of the Government, etc. And this is
not only said, but so cleared and demonstrated there in few lines, as has
given no little Satisfaction to some persons of no mean parts and learning; but
no less Disturbance, (it seems) to this Gentleman, as may be farther noted
hereafter.

Another Assertion or two I must take notice of, for the singular Charity
expressed in them. Those, as they are groundless, and cannot be deduced by any
good Inference from the Reflections, so may they be confronted with other
Writings of the same Authors in print: This Man (says he, speaking of the
Author of the Reflections) would drench the World in Blood, Sacrifice whole
Hecatombs to his Revenge, and once more set these Kingdoms off their Hinges by
a precipitate Method of rendering Men desperate, Page 21. Such another is the
Suggestion, page 22. Why should King James' s Ministers and Counselors, all of
them, without distinction, fall under the stroke? And again, page 23. Our
Author fondly concludes, etc. because he has not been glutted with the Blood
of the Delinquents. I need note no more of this kind. Those are so foul and
infamous Words, that if written and published without very good grounds, do of
themselves sufficiently make good one part of my Charge against this Pamphlet.
Certain I am, that no such thing was ever intended in the Reflections: And from
these Words in the Paragraph under his consideration, Not one of those, who by
their wicked Counsels and Compliances betrayed not only their Country, but
their King himself, etc. has yet been brought to condign Punishment, or from
any other in that Book, I do not see how any such matter can be deduced: But if
confronted with what the same Author has written in his Apology for Mr.
Stafford, page 17. and elsewhere, it will all there appear as false, as here it
does groundless.

What has been already noted, I suppose, is sufficient to make good the Charge
of a False and Infamous Libel. The Piety of it may be discerned by the Respect
therein given to the Sacred Scriptures, where he says, that the Expressions,
Taught of God, Children of Light, Sensual not having the Spirit, and many
others of that kind, smell of the late deluded Notion of Inspiration, page 2.
and by the regard therein expressed to the Providence of God, and to the Study
and Consideration of his Works and Dealings with the Sons of Men, page 26. and
by the Reproachful Terms, which, after the mode of the late Atheistical Times,
are very confidently bestowed upon sincere Piety, and genuine Religion. But I
have no mind to cast Pearls before Swine, by a full Explication of these
things; but leaving him, and such Abderites to the Correction of some
Hippocrates, shall content my self with those Evangelical Promises, Matthew.
5.11, 12. 1 Pet. 4.14. and rejoice in them too, while the Mercenary Writer may
chance to feel the smart of his own Profaneness, in selling his Conscience for
a Mess of Pottage.

And now to return to our Enquiry, What Authority it should be, which has
ordered the Publication of such a Libel? Of the King we are secure, that it was
not he, by what has been recited before; and of the Parliament, were we not
otherwise secure, this Writer has given us the like assurance, telling us, He
knows not but he may be blameable in playing the Advocate, or in daring to
suppose, that the great Council of the Nation needs a Vindication, page 16. And
the same we may conclude, for the same Reason, of that Noble Lord, whose
Patronage he thinks but reason he (should) allow to what is written in defense
of others. It remains then, that either he had none at all, and then he is an
Impostor upon that account; or that it was from some of those others, in whose
Defense it was written, and then is he no less an Impostor in concealing whose
it was, and giving occasion by this Dedication to make that Noble Person be
believed, by inobservant Readers, to be the Man. And this we have reason to
believe is the Truth, if the Scope and diverse Passages of this Vindication be
well considered.

It is true, he pretends much Zeal and Concern for the Vindication of the King,
and of the Parliament; but that is no more than every Knave and Cheat will do
to those he intends to abuse; the Officious Kisses of an Enemy; and therefore
whether sincere, or feigned, is to be determined by the concurrence of other
Indications. And

1. It appears by his own showing, that he is a very officious Advocate, and
was never retained or employed by either of them.

2. Nor was there much cause of Vindication in respect of either of them; for
most of the Transactions noted, were reflected on as matters of Disappointments
and Unhappiness, rather than Faults in them.

3. And these Disappointments being imputed not only by the Author of the
Reflections, but by the Parliament it self, to the unfaithfulness and Treachery
of Persons entrusted and employed, the Vindication of such Transactions could
not be sincerely intended to serve the King, or gratify the Parliament, but to
cover those Evil Practices and Persons, which not only the Author of the
Reflections, but the Parliament also, desired and endeavored to discover.

And that this was really the Design of this Mercenary Pamphlet, whoever had
their Hands in it, and all the Complements to the King, the Parliament, and the
Earl of Shrewsbury Principal Secretary of State, a mere Disguise to cover that
Design, and an Abuse upon that Noble Person at least, there are diverse
Observables in it persuade me to believe.

1. The very Beginning discovers his Mind, and what he was full of. It is a
Severe Censure against prying too narrowly into the Secrets of Government and
Mysteries of State: But if the Reflections be well considered, there is no
other occasion for it but Honest Endeavors for such a Discovery, as is before
mentioned, that is, of what his business was to cover.

2. He there also discovers, or to use his own term, bewrays himself to be a
genuine Disciple of the Mercenary Writers of the late Reigns, by magnifying the
Policy of a Foreign State, as if our Laws were defective; only he shows himself
but a Novice in the Trade, in that he takes his Precedent from Veuice, and not
from France or Turk^y. Of his sense of the English Constitution I shall take
notice hereafter.

3. And he presently after discovers his Affection to the English Nation, which
he more than once, without any just occasion that appears, terms an ungrateful
Nation.

4. He bewrays himself indeed, and discovers his rotten and unsound Notions and
Sentiments concerning our presen Settlement, and the Bight of King William and
Queen Mary to the Gevernment of these Kingdoms: And that he himself is either
one of that Mungrel Temporizing Party, which has obstructed our complete
Settlement and underhand retarded the Reduction of Ireland, or at least does
prostitute his Mercenary Pen to gratify that Party.

For he plainly unhinges King Williams Title, and sets it upon a false bottom,
while he makes King James's Abdication to consist only, in his Departure. This
is it which he finds fault with in the Reflections, that they do not admit the
Departure of King James to be an Abdication, without any regard to his
precedent Actions. And that this is his meaning does farther appear by his
quarrelling the Author for interpreting the Departure to be rather the flight
of a Criminal from Justice, than of an innocent Man; Metus causa and cum animo
reverlendi. And this being so, it cannot proceed but either from a dishonest
Mind, and an ill design to undermine the Justice of the present King's Title,
or from Ignorance: For no good Author ever yet called the Flight of an Innocent
Man Metus causa, an Abdication. And because his pretended great Learning and
Reading of History will not permit us to believe the latter, he can blame no
body but himself, if we impute it to the former; And the Truth is, I see not
how he can avoid that imputation: For if he really thinks what is there said,
to be a severe insinuation against the late King, and that no Kings are to be
brought to Justice, he is a temporizing Person, to comply and flatter a
Government erected upon no better ground than a pretended Abdication: But if he
really believes the grounds upon which the Convocation declared that Departure
an Abdication (which were that Kings precedent Actions) to be good, then is he
basely Mercenary, to dissemble his own Opinion in compliance with some of that
mungrel Party, who are still for a Regency. And this Government can never be
safe while such Persons are permitted to have access to any Office of Secretary
of State.

My Principles I had published in Print long since in the Important Questions,
and again lately, but before his Pamphlet came to the Press, in an Apology for
Mr. Stafford, and therefore had no Masque of my own for him to remove: But I
hope I have by this time taken off one from him, and shall presently take off
another; for I doubt not, but this Leaf and the first Leaf of the next Sheet
contain the Characters of those Persons, in whose Defense, this Masque called a
Vindication, was Written, and by whose Authority it was Published. It was not
the King, nor the Parliament, nor the Principal Secretary of State, for whom
this Service was designed: It was Written in the Defense of others; and who
those others were, we may here perceive plainly enough. They are of Three sorts;

1. The Regency-men, those who were principally designed to be gratified in the
Paragraph last mentioned, and indeed in the whole undertaking.

2. King James 's Counselors, Agents, and Accomplices, to be exempt from
condign Punishment.

3. One or Two in King Charles 's Reign, wrought upon through the Temptations
and Snares of a Court; and some Persons, who in either of the Two last Reigns,
had stumbled upon unwarrantable Measures; and these are to be received into
Favor.

There is one sort more they should also have put in, had it not been too gross
a matter to have been mentioned at this time, and that is the French Kings
Pensioners; who, there is reason to believe, had not left off their old trade
in the Transactions of the last Year; but there are none of them but may be
comprehended among some of these here specified. And as these plainly were
designed to be served by this Pamphlet, so I doubt not but some of these set
the Work on foot, and were the contrivers of its Dedication to the chief
Secretary of State, and are therefore properly the chief Authors of it. Qui
facit per alium, est perinde ac si faciat per seipsum c. qui facit de reg. jur.
6. As for the Person employed to write it, it seemed very apparent to me in the
perusal, to be in diverse passages a mere personated business, and to be written
invita Minerva, and which is worse, reluctante Conscientia; which when I
observed, it moved so much plty in me, that I presently struck out such
passages as would too plainly have discovered him, and I thought too severe for
a man in such a case; and I heartily pray God give him Repentance, and forgive
him. But for those who employed him (for that he wrote it not of himself, but
was put upon it by some others, is but a natural consequence of what I have
said) we may plainly discover something of their Character, by this Vindication.

First, It is plain that they are men of Craft and Tricks; for this is plainly
a trick put upon the Chief Secretary of State, to make the World believe that
he was concerned; and if they were so bold with him, the King himself may have
reason to look about him, lest he be tricked by them.

Secondly, They must be such as had some considerable concern in the pretended
Vindication, and acted a great and notable (not noble) part in the
Transactions, that is, immediately or mediately in our Disappointments; a much
different part from what was acted by the Noble Person whom they craftily apply
to, as one concerned by participation in the same actions with themselves; and
undoubtedly will be apt to play the like tricks with the King himself if they
can, by putting him upon such actions as may justify themselves at least, and
so engage him to stand by them in their illegal practices, an Artifice, by
which the last race of our Kings have been often abused, and not yet forgotten.

Thirdly, What I have before observed of the Writer, must be true also of the
principal Authors; nay more certainly true of them, whom he designed to please:
For whatever was his own Opinion, it was accomodated to the Sentiments of them
who employed him, and therefore they must be men of no good Opinion of this
Government, nor cordial Friends to the present King and Queen; so that this and
my last observation do mutually confirm each other.

Fourthly, Nor are they men of very sound notions concerning the true English
Constitution and Government, as may be collected from their slighting
expressions, used upon what in the Reflections is observed concerning the Privy
Council and secret Cabals, calling it the Authors Eutopean Model, and from some
expressions let fall concerning the Calling and Dissolving of Parliaments, of
which more hereafter.

Thus much of their Character may be easily and plainly perceived by this
Masque, which they call a Vindication; But because it is a matter of no small
importance to the present King and Queen, and to the Peace and Happiness of
these Nations, for our quiet Enjoyment of the admirable Mercy which Almighty
God has so graciously conferred upon us, and for our better improvement of the
Advantage he has put into our hands, that these Persons, who by their Craft
and evil Designs, have occasioned our former disappointments, may be more fully
detected, to prevent greater mischief for the future; I shall endeavor to
explain some of those Mysterious practices, which are used at this day, from
their very Original, in the days of King James the First; and then return to
what is necessary to be further observed upon this Vindication.

When that King after that horrid Plot of the Gunpowder Treason, being more
terrified with the Danger he had escaped, than animated by so great a
Deliverance, to dependence upon the Providence of God who preserved him, which
that Deliverance in a special manner obliged him to; deserting that great Duty,
and relying upon his own craft, sought to secure himself and his own Posterity,
by Compliance and Alliances with his Enemies, the Papists, like those who have
recourse to Witches and Conjurers; instead of that Security he expected, he
involved himself and his Posterity in such Snares, as were the real cause of
all those Evils which afterward befell them, and out of which they could never
after extricate themselves. During the long and happy Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
who generously performing that great Duty, kept them at a distance; all they
could do was only to contrive secret Plots against her Person, and Foreign
Invasions, and to sow Seeds of Division in secret Meetings, all which that
Providence of God, in which she confided, dissipated and turned to their own
Confusion. But when afterward they were favored and admitted to a nearer
Converse with our Princes, Statesmen and Bishops, they presently found their
Advantage to put in practice other Policies of a more deep, subtle, and
dangerous Nature, and under the cover of very plausible Pretenses, whereby they
and their Venom might insinuate the deeper. These were principally Three; 1.
To change the Government, and make it Arbitrary and Absolute in the Prince. 2.
To raise and heighten Divisions. 3. To corrupt the Manners of the Nation.

1. To endeavor a Change of the Government, they saw several Reasons. 1. They
plainly saw it to be utterly unpracticable to deal with the other two Estates,
to introduce their Religion. 2. They also understood very well that such
endeavors might be so managed as to ingratiate them with the Prince, and many
of the Courtiers, Ministers of State, and of the aspiring Clergy. 3. They also
foresaw, that by slighly insinuating into the Prince, and his Favorites and
Flatterers, such matters as tended to this; they should also by the same means
promote their other design of raising Divisions between the Prince and the
People.

2. To raise and heighten Divisions, they easily saw would not only weaken and
dissolve the strength of the Nation, but would also give them a fair
opportunity to shelter themselves under one Party or other, as they should see
occasion. These Advantages they might expect by Civil Dissentions; and these
and some more by Divisions also about matters of Religion, and therefore they
industriously promoted both.

3. And to corrupt the manners of the Nation, they might expect would give them
these Advantages, 1. It would weaken the strength of the Nation, making men
more inconsiderate and careless of any Public Concern, and indisposing them
for either Prudent Counsel or Generous Action. 2. It would make them more
indifferent in matters of Religion, and less apt to give them any disturbance
in the prosecution of their Designs. 3. And this indifference would dispose
them to the more easy admission of theirs when it should be seasonably and
prudently proposed to them under some plausible pretenses.

These were the Principal of their Policies, and the Grounds of them; which
were rational enough, though it pleased God, who has the Hearts of all Men at
his disposal, by his overruling Providence, in his own time, to defeat them
all. But the Contrivances, Methods, and particular Practices, which they used
for the promotion of these Policies and Designs, were too many to be here
discovered; nor is that my business at this time. I shall therefore only take
notice of such as are pertinent to the present occasion, that is, such as
aspiring Courtiers and Clergymen joined with them in, though for different ends
of their own, and such as we have still reason to beware of: Such as these;

1. Magnifying the Regal Power upon false Principles, beyond its true bounds,
according to the English Constitution, and Vilifying our Laws in general, as
rude and barbarous; and the Fundamentals of our Constitution, which limit and
restrain the Excesses of Regal Power, as encroachments of the People upon
Prerogative, and so possessing the King and many honest welmeaning People, not
sufficiently acquainted with the Excellence of our Laws and Constitutions, with
False, Dangerous, and Pernicious Notions concerning our Government. And having
by this means prepared the way, and insinuated themselves into Favor, they
never failed of some Project for their own ends, though never so illegal, to
put the King upon encouraging him to despise the just complaints of the People,
as clamours, and that which was below his Majesty to be awed by. And because
this could not but move all truly Loyal, honest and understanding Men, who saw
the dangerous Consequences to the King, as well as to the People, of such
Courses; it was very natural and easy to them to represent all such as Persons
of Antimonarchical and Republican Principles. And always by how much the more
notorious and illegal were their Practices, by so much the greater and louder
were the clamours against the Commonwealth Principles, and the noise of the
Dangers threatening the Monarchy. And by this means were our Kings kept in
continual Jealousy and ill Opinion of many of their best, most honest, Loyal
and most faithful Subjects.

But they could never have proceeded so far in these things had they not by
inculcating false Notions concerning one branch of the Regal Office, the
Calling, Proroguing, and Dissolving of Parliaments, and suggesting false Fears
and Dangers of the consequence of their Sitting, often prevailed with those
Kings to abuse the Trust, in that respect reposed in them, contrary to the
Constitution of this Government, to the most ancient Laws of this Nation, to
the true intent and meaning of the Statutes, then and still in Force, and to
their own true interest and safety, as I shall show hereafter.

By these means were our Civil Dissentions begun, and by degrees continually
heightened, till by these Practices, and the like, in matters of Religion, in
the Year Forty one, they involved the King in a Civil War to make good those
illegal Practices, which they before had engaged him in, and by consequence in
an ill Cause, against as good a Parliament, as perhaps this Nation ever had.
This will seem strange to some to come from me, who was from my Youth on the
Kings side, and at Fifteen Years of Age ventured my life for his Service. But I
know what I say, and will presently make it clear. The King might have trusted
that Parliament, they would never have hurt him, or diminished any thing of his
true Prerogative, but have secured him and it against the Abuses put upon him
and the whole Nation, by evil Men, under pretense of it, if he durst but have
truested them. This is very plain from the Prevalence of that part of the
Parliament, which, although the King had withdrawn another part to Oxford,
which would certainly have joined with them, were yet able to carry the Vote,
That the Kings Concessions were Satisfactory: Nor were that part, which
afterward brought the King to his Trial, able to have carried any thing against
him, had they not first by Force, which had never been raised, had not the King
been carried away by his criminal Favorites, secluded most of the Principal men
of the other part. But though the King might have trusted them, yet were there
those about him, who conscious of their own guilt, having been the evil
Counselors and Promoters of those illegal Practices, which occasioned the War,
durst not stand the Trial; and therefore, having first betrayed him into those
mischiefs before mentioned, betrayed him now a second time, by withdrawing him
for their own security from the Parliament, and with him diverse Members of both
Houses, who would have been more serviceable there both to him and to the
Kingdom, and so at length involved him in that fatal Civil War, for their own
defense, which brought him to that unhappy end. These were the true Authors of
that War; and these are the Forty one Men, who deserve to be remembered with no
less detestation by all Posterity, than those of Forty eight, who only finished
what the others had begun. This I have related the more largely, because I see
the same wicked Practices carried on by the Ringleaders of those, who have
Forty one much in their Mouths; and they who are not satisfied with may Reason,
may see it, if they please, confirmed by Authority of King and Parliament, in
the Preamble of the Act of Attainder, 12. Car. 2. c. 30.

2. The Methods for raising and heightning the Differences in the Church, were
first by improving the Prejudices which King James had conceived against some
Zealots in Scotland, into like prejudice, first against the Puritans in
England, then against all truly Religious and Conscientious People, as Puritans
and Precisians; and at last against all who discovered any great warmth against
Popery. By this means Formality and Indifference in Religion was brought into
fashion and encouraged, and sincere Religion and Devotion slighted and
discountenanced: And for this purpose was the Book of Sports upon the Lords day
set out, and ordered to be Read in Churches, and many good men put out of their
Livings for refusing to Read it. And when by these means, Formality and Popery
being favored, and sincere Religion not only slighted, but oppressed contrary
to Law, discontents could not but rise; these were again made use of to
represent the best part of the Nation as ill affected to Monarchy and the
Church, because they began to be sensible of the approaches of Tyranny and
Popery, and of the over-speading of Formality. And this is the true Original of
the great outcries, The Monarchy, and The Church being in danger, (as indeed
they were, but the one of degenerating into Tyranny, and the other into mear
Formality, if not Popery) whereby multitudes were imposed upon to put their
helping hands to overturn both one way, while they were craftily made believe,
that others were doing it the other; for these had their influence in producing
the late Civil War in conjunction with those before mentioned.

3. By the same means was the Foundation laid for the Corruption of the Manners
of the Nation: But by what Means and Methods that was promoted before the Kings
Restoration, and afterward raised to that height in his Reign, is not much to
my present purpose, though we feel the ill effects thereof, and are still like
to do so, if they be not reformed.

The Dismal Consequences of these things to the King, to the Church, and to the
whole Nation, sad Experience at length taught her careless and inconsiderate
Scholars, who disregarded the milder and safer Admonition of Provident Wisdom:
And though the Effects and Consequences were such, as one would think should
not easily or quickly be forgotten; yet because the Practices and Causes are so
little understood or considered by a great part of the Nation, that they seem
disposed to be as much imposed upon again, and run into the like Confusions, to
this brief and plain Narrative I will add some few Observations to stop the
Current, and give some warning against the Danger.

And First, To such as have any Sense of Religion, and Acquaintance with the
Works and Methods of the Divine Providence, it will not be hard to perceive,
That the Original of all those Evils, in which King James involved himself and
his Family, was his Deserting of that great Duty of Trust and Considence in,
and firm Dependence upon that Providence, which had with so much case and
safety brought him to the Throne of these Kingdoms beyond his expectation, and
given him so great an Experiment of its Protection, by so amazing a Deliverance
from so great and imminent a Danger, and applying himself to vain worldly
Wisdom, in seeking Security by Compliance and Alliances with Enemies; those
very Enemies, from whose subtle Machinations he had been so admirably
delivered; and prostituting his Religion to those Politics, which was somewhat
of Kin to the Sin of Jeroboam, which stuck so close to his House.

Secondly, The immediate Evil, which he and his Family thereby incurred, was a
most just and suitable Punishment, viz. To be deserted by that Providence,
which he first deserted, and be given up Rehoboam-like to the evil and
pernicious Counsels of those flattering and deceitful Favorites, whom they
chose and adhered to. This was one and a special part of the Fate of the
Family, out of which they never extricated themselves, though they had diverse
fair Opportunities, and very cogent Motives offered to them, to have done it.

Thirdly, That which exposed him and them the more to this Fate, and entangled
them the deeper therein, was an insatiable Desire and Affectation of an
absolute Dominion, which was not so much satisfied, as enlarged by the
Accession of those two Crowns of England and Ireland to his former one of
Scotland; and a certain Degeneracy of mind, the usual effect of unjustifiable
Actions, or insincere Designs, which made them neglect the Legal Privy Council,
and avoid the Presence of Parliaments, as People in a Fault do the sight of
their best Friends, till some necessity constrain them. And this gave
Opportunity and Encouragement to those Evil Counselors to entangle them more
and more in illegal Projects and Practices; which made them so much the more
afraid of Parliaments, to whom it belongs to enquire and consider of such
matters, and adhere the faster to those Favorites, till they became so united
to them, that they thought themselves struck at in whatever was done or
proposed against them.

Fourthly, This made them easy to be persuaded to believe that it was their
Prerogative to Call, and Prorogue, and Dissolve Parliaments at their own
Pleasure; and accordingly to do it, in effect at the pleasure, that is, at the
persuasion of those Favorites: Whereas not only the Notion is false, and set
up only for the Advantage of Favorites and Criminals; but the Practice was
doubly mischievous to the Kings themselves. For 1. It was a great cause of
Discontent, heightened the Differences between the King and the People, and made
the Kings Cause so much the worse in those Differences, and unjustifiable,
being often times a wilful and obstinate refusal of Justice, and Protection of
Criminals against the whole Nation. 2. It deprived the King, as well as the
People, of the proper Remedy of those Mischiefs. For Parliaments are the great
Security under God of Kings from Abuses, as well as of the People from
Oppression; and the Persons were either Guilty, or Not Guilty: If Guilty, they
ought to be tried, and either suffer according to their Crimes; or, if there
were any special reason for it, be pardoned. If not Guilty, yet ought they to
be tried, that their Innocence might be cleared, and the Nation satisfied.

Fifthly, The same may be observed concerning the great Noise that was made of
the Monarchy, and the Church, as if both were designed to be presently
destroyed; which were nothing but false Clamours to incense People, and raise a
Faction, by the Instigation of those evil Men for their own support and defense
against Justice. The just Punishment of Criminals, who betrayed both King and
People, was the Destruction of Monarchy, and Reformation of the manners of the
Clergy, the Subversion of the Church, in their account. But by these means were
a great many honest well-meaning People imposed upon, and a mighty Faction
raised. Whereas it is certain, that the English Monarchy, being not merely an
Honorary matter, but of great Use and Advantage to the whole Nation both at
home and abroad, if it be not abused, the People and their Representatives in
Parliament, have always so well understood their Interest therein, and do so at
this day; that nothing but some extraordinary matter ever could, or can
alienate their Affections from it. This is plain in the case of King Charles I.
when notwithstanding the great Provocations which are set out in the
Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, 15 Dec. 1642. and some others, that
Parliament would neither have destroyed the Monarchy, nor hurt the King,
(though out of those Confusions a violent Party was raised, which did both) nor
would the Nation after be quiet till his Son was restored. And for the Church,
the Bishops and Ecclesiastical Courts, might have been quiet, had they been
truly Christian, as they would be called. But that, which moved the Indignation
of most understanding and honest Men against them, was to see Christianity
profaned, and Offices of Religion sought and used as Secular Employments; to
see Formality encouraged, sincere Piety (though perhaps mixed with some
unnecessary Scrupulosity) oppressed, and the Ministers of the Righteous Kingdom
of Christ turn Promoters of Arbitrariness and Tyranny. And it is no wonder if
such Causes produce such Effects.

Sixthly, It was the raising and heightning of that Faction by the Favorites
and Criminal Party, that brought things to that Extremity of a War, which
otherwise might have been composed, and all satisfied with the Removal of a few
Evil Men from about the King, the Punishment of a few Criminals, and the
Reformation of a few necessary things. But while these Evil Counselors and
Favorites raised that Faction, for the security of themselves under the
pretense of the King and the Church, they thereby laid the Foundation of the
real Destruction of both for some time. And I wish all honest Men may take
warning by it now, and not suffer themselves to be imposed upon again after
such an Example. For there is Just such another Faction, which has gone very
high of late, especially in the business of Elections under the same Pretenses
of the Monarchy, and the Church, wherein the greatest Sticklers were those sort
of Persons, which the Vindicators of the last years Transactions recommend to
Favor, that is, the Criminals of the two last Reigns, the Counselors, Agents
and Accomplices of King James, and the Regency-men and Haesitators, who refuse
to act under King William, with whom the Papists joined underhand. And their
greatest Opposition was for the most part against such as were most Cordial and
Active for the present King and Queen.

I have but one thing more to observe, which comes now into my mind, and has
not been so well considered as it ought; and that is the great and mischievous
Influence, which such prodigal and unadvised conferring of Honors, as was
begun by King James I. and has been continued fince, is apt to have in the
producing of such Troubles. Honor and Riches are things, which may be of good
use for the Benefit of others, when they fall to the share of Good Men, who
have Hearts to make use of them for that purpose. But I very much doubt,
whether ever any Man was the better for them? On the contrary it is apparent,
that many, nay most, are the worse for them, if they be raised much above their
own Rank. And it is certain that they are no good Men, who are very greedy of
either; but such as will comply with the Means, whereby they are to be
obtained, be they what they will. If the Prince, who has the disposing of
Honors and Preferments, be wise and virtuous, be sparing and prudent, in
conferring them only upon consideration of Worth and Merit; it will be an
effectual means to incline the People to apply themselves to such means, which
will be of great advantage to the Commonwealth. But if he be prodigal and
inconsiderate in the disposing of them, he will not fail to attract to him many
ill Men of no virtue, who will certainly flatter and deceive him; make it their
business to please him for their own advantage, at any rate, rather than
faithfully serve him. And the more Honors he confers upon such, the greater
Burden he thereby brings upon himself: He must provide for his own Creatures;
and if he has not good and lawful means to provide for them, they will not
fail of Projects even of indirect means by him to provide for themselves.
Besides, the Appetite is unsatiable: The Man's no more satisfied when made a
Lord, than when but a Knight; I Am sure not more happy; nor when made an Earl,
than when but a Baron; nor when made a Marquis, than when but an Earl; but a
Baron, but a Knight, but a private Gentleman. But he needs more; his Needs are
increased, and must be supplied one way or other. And from this Root did spring
many of those Illegal Projects in the Reigns of King James I. and King Charles
I. which in the end produced those bitter Fruits we have been speaking of.

And now to return to our merciful Vindicator. He makes me think of the vulgar
Observation of March, that it comes in like a Lion, and goes out like a Lamb;
and he shows himself a right March Bird. Our Laws were not severe enough with
him at the beginning to punish the Author of the Reflections, whom yet he dares
not charge with any want of kindness to his Majesty, v. p. 2. But he must fetch
a Precedent as far as Venice, to show the heinousness of his Crimes in prying
into Secrets of State, to be no less than what is punishable with Death. But
when he comes to King James's Counselors, etc. how is the Lion changed into
the Lamb! But alas! it is only to those good People. So kind to them, that one
would think that this Vindicator had had some hand in the Letter and Bill of
Pardon for King James, which was found in the Speakers Chair. But to the Author
of the Reflections he presently turns Lion again, at least puts on the Lions
Skin. If he but complain for the just and necessary Assertion of our present
Settlement, that not one of King James's Instruments has been brought to
condign Punishment; how does this Lion roar and storm at this as a Revengeful
Spirit, that would drench the World in Blood! etc.

But the truth is, it seems but a Copy of his Countenance, a mere personated
Fury to please some body. But what their Sentiments are, who were to be pleased
with this, is not hard to be understood. They were, it seems, not only for
Pardon, but for Preferment too, for those honest Gentlemen, as such as do
deserve the return of our Gratitude. Sure this Writer had a mind to try his
Skill in Oratory, and after the Example of Carneades, try what he could add to
his Oration against Justice. And I should have thought that Carneades had got a
new Set of Scholars amongst us, since the late Revolution. For since I wrote
the last Period, I met with another Vindication so like this, that I dare
presume the Authors of both are pretty near of Kin. Only I find this vast
difference between him and them: What he did innocently only for a Trial of
Skill, to show his Wit and Oratory, and what an ingenious Man might be able to
say on an ill Subject; these Men do in good earnest, that is, strain all their
Faculties to the utmost in a real opposition of Justice. Nay, those who not
long since strained all their Wit and Parts, and the Law it self, to take away
Men's Lives under pretense of Justice, contrary to Law, now strain all to exempt
the most notorious Criminals, deserving the greatest Severity from condign
Punishment, by an Indefinite Act of Oblivion, and Universal Indemnity, wherein
I must confess they act very uniformly, before in suppressing, and now in
opposing of Law and Justice, and always for their own Interest.

So it must be; or, if we suppose them to believe that there is any such thing
as Justice at all, it must be granted that they have different Sentiments
concerning the Crimes than we imagine, or however, than we have. And this is
plainly the Truth. The one, in effect, will admit no Crime in King James
precedent to his Departure. And the other will admit none in his Ministers,
Officers or Instruments. That, which we take to be Justice in that case, he
calls Vengeance and Revenge, and those who are for it, Bloodhounds, Bellowers
for Vengeance, Hotheaded Animals, etc. What we take to be great and notorious
Crimes, he reputes Points Justifiable, or at least doubtful, wherein the
Justice of inflicting Punishments can never be vindicated; and begs the Readers
Pardon for the Impropriety of calling them Punishments, though he will not name
their proper Term. And a little after, Actions done in the last or former
Reigns, about which the World has been so much divided, if Lawful or not. And
if this be not sufficient to declare his Sentiments, concerning his proposed
Indefinite Act of Oblivion and universal Indemnity, he tells us plainly,
Lastly, Its consistent with, and promotive of the Truest and Highest Justice,
(that is, for King James) For in most of the Cases (the thirteen Heads he had
mentioned before, viz. The Heads Voted 23 Jan. to be Crimes for which some
Persons may justly be excepted out of the Bill of Indemnity) the Law is
doubtful. And to punish Opinion in matters of Law, is as unjust as to prosecute
Mistakes in matters of Religion is unchristian. So that here we have a
Vindication, not indeed of the last Years Transactions, but what is more, of
the Transactions of the last or former Reigns. And if this be good, my Opinion,
which according to this Lawyers Judgment is not punishable, being in matter of
Law, is, That King William has no good Title, but he is a mere Usurper, and we
have caught at an advantage against an Innocent Man upon a timorous Flight or
Departure, to keep him from his Right. My Opinion in this matter I have
published in Print more than once, and therefore will not repeat it here. But
this is so evident a Consequence of what he says, that it is his Opinion, that
I know not with what Color or Pretense he could deny it if he would. Other
Consequences of his Discourse I take no notice of, because not pertinent to my
present purpose. But I think I may reasonably recommend it to the consideration
of the Dissenters, as that which may in some things afford as proper Topics
for them, as for any sort of People of this Nation, that I know; and may be
alleged with much more reason for them, than for his Party of Criminals.
Veritas praevalebit one time or other.

By what has been said I suppose it is very evident, that the Authors of The
last Years Transactions Vindicated, and of the three Parts of The Magistracy
and Government of England Vindicated, are near of Kin, at least in their
Principles, and Sentiments of the present Government under King William and
Queen Mary, and of their Right and Title thereunto, and in the General Scope of
these Writings, as near as in their Titles. And therefore this last coming so
opportunely to my hand, it does not only confirm my Opinion of the former, but
gives me a fair occasion to consider the matter of both, so far as concerns my
Subject, with one and the same Labor. And therefore before I proceed to speak
of the Punishment of the Criminals in our Case, this Gentleman being a Lawyer,
gives me occasion to consider of the Law by which they may be punished: For if
there be no Law for it, he is in the right, That they are not properly
Punishments, but Violence, where the Justice of the thing is not clear and
undoubted. And so much by the way. I hope he will give me leave to say of the
Executions of Stephen College, my Lord Russel, Colonel Sidney, Sir Thomas
Armstrong, etc. that they were Violences, that is, in plain English, most
deliberate, wilful and wicked Murders, being committed under Color and
Pretense of Law; of most of which Judgment has been reversed by Authority of
Parliament; and that I think it differs not much in the fight of God, whether a
Man have his Hand or his Tongue dipped therein. And I doubt not but the great
and good Sir Matthew Hale would have been of the same Opinion; which this
Gentleman, who gives him those deserved Characters, will find some Reason to
believe, if he please to peruse but The Account of the Good Steward, concerning
the Gift of Elocution.

But to the business. The Votes of 23 Jan. have enumerated thirteen Heads of
Crimes, for every one of which some Persons may be excepted out of the Bill of
Indemnity. Against all Punishments of these our Lawyer takes Exception, as
Punishments never declared or promulged, and which by the Standing Laws and
Common Justice of the Realm could not be inflicted. That is to say, They are
neither Treason, Felony, nor Misdemeanors: For, for all those there are
Punishments declared, and to be inflicted by the Standing Laws and Common
Justice of the Realm. I must add, Nor Crimes punishable by any Statute. And
this is the least that these Words can imply. So that we must suppose that they
are nothing like any of those we meet with in the Impeachments, Indictment,
Articles, etc. against those Flatterers, and Evil Counselors and Instruments
of Princes, which my Lord Coke mentions in his Chapter of Flattery, or any
others to be found in our Records, Books of Entries, Reports, or Statutes, not
so much as those concerning the High Commission Court, 17 Car. I. But the
contrary of all this is so well known to all who have looked into the Records
and Books aforesaid, that it is as needless as improper for this Paper to offer
to recite them. But in stead of that, I will show him that which is more, that
is, That the Parliament may declare those things to be Treason, (the punishment
whereof is sufficiently known) which never were, nor can now by the Ordinary
Judges (though in the late Reigns they are believed to have exceeded their
Bounds) be judged such; and that by the express Words of the Statute 25 E. 3.
And because that many other like Cases of Treason may happen in time to come,
which a man cannot think or declare at this present time, it is accorded, That
if any other Case supposed Treason, which is not above specified, does happen
before any Justices, the Justices shall tarry without any going to Judgment of
the Treason, till the Cause be showed, and declared before the King and his
Parliament, whether it ought to be adjudged Treason or other Felony. Besides,
for such Crimes as are of their own Nature great Crimes, and not merely by some
positive Law of the State, there is neither Law nor Reason why the Legislative
Authority in any State should not order and inflict such Punishments as they
deserve. And among those may doubtless be reckoned all such as have a direct
tendency to the Subversion of the Laws and Government of any State^ But Treason
against the Kingdom, as well as against the King, may be found in our Books of
Law and History.

And now I know not what most to admire in this Gentleman, his profound Skill
in the Law, the Modesty of his Assertions, or his Honesty and Conscience. I
cannot but think him a very proper Person to have been one of the Servants of
former Crowns, one of the last Kings Ministers, Officers or Instruments of
Justice: He was certainly well qualified for lit, and his Zeal for their
Vindication discovers that he had some concern of his own in it. And so
confident a Gentleman, and so qualified, one would think should get in
somewhere now; at least into the Parliament, and no doubt but set up by the
Faction, and a great stickler there; one of those, who are recommended by our
Vindicators not only for Pardon and Indemnity, but for Favor and Employment to
our present King. And no doubt but he will be well served by them, as well as
he was the last Year.

I cannot let this pass without some further Reflection. It is not at all
besides the Design of my Writing, and no great Digression from that particular
matter I am now upon. Our other Vindicator tells us, that His Majesty came a
Stranger to England, and but darkly informed of the true. Arcana of the last
two Reigns, and of the Practices and Principles of particular Men; it being so
much their interest to vail them from his View: Whence it is to be supposed,
that at his coming to the Government, the Representation made him of Persons
and Things, could not but receive a Tincture of the many different Principles
and Interests of those who made them. Considering which, it is no wonder that in
such a Maze of Business and Mist of various Representations, his Majesty's
Bounty might happen to to be misplaced in some one or other, page 29. I know
not any thing more truly and reasonably said by that Writer. It was indeed a
great Disadvantage his Majesty was under, being unacquainted with the
Principles and Interests of Persons. And as that was just Cause both of Caution
in the Choice, and of Excuse of him from any ill Choice upon the recommendation
of others; so does it aggravate the Fault of such recommendations, and
recommend the Service of such as detect them. I shall therefore, for the more
comple at Detection of some ill Men, to what I have before observed, add this
for Confirmation.

1. That the Persons concerned in these Vindications are Men of dangerour
Principles in respect of the present Government. For if these Crimes be not
punishable by Law, then are all they, who invited the Prince of Orange to come
in with an Army, and all that associated with him, Traitors; and he himself an
Invader and Usurper.

2. They are Men of Arbitrary Principles, and so dangerous to the Nation, and
the true ancient Constitution of this Government. For if these Crimes be not
punishable by Law, our English Monarchy is gone, and we are already fallen into
a French or Turkish Tyranny.

3. They are dangerous Persons to be employed or trusted in respect of their
Genius, Men of smooth voluble Tongues, and of Confidence to impose any thing.
Of which I could add diverse Instances to those I have noted before: But I will
add only this, because it may serve also for another purpose: He tells us, If
the thirteen Heads, etc. had been reduced into a Law -- one third at least of
the Nation had been involved, who with their disobliged Relations and
Dependents, is not so contemptible a Flock, etc. Now if every one of this third
part had but one Relative or Dependent, they would make two thirds; if two,
they would make the complete number of the Nation; but if many of them have 10,
20, 100, as many certainly have, they would far exceed the number of the People
of this Nation. This I the rather mention, because I doubt not but they do
greatly impose upon some Persons, with this Pretense of their Number, which is
false; and would be much less than it is, if they had not somewhere met with
more Encouragement, than they expected.

4. They are of the very same kind and Genius with those Forty-One Mea I
mentioned before, who by their Flatteries to raise themselves, imposed upon
King Charles I. and so occasioned that Bloody War: And again in the beginning
of the Reign of King Charles II. to cover the Illegal Actions of themselves or
their Friends, imposed upon the whole Parliament, being then in a Transport,
those Declarations and Clauses in some Acts, which are the occasions of the
Mistakes and Dissatisfaction of diverse honest well-meaning Men now, and of such
Dissension an very much discompose and interrupt our complete Settlement.

These being so dangerous Persons both to the King and Kingdom, and having many
(though not so many as is pretended) of their Party and Principles, it cannot
but be necessary that not only the King he cautious not to employ or entrust
them in any great matters, but that some good Provision be made also by
Parliament to secure both against them. And what less can that be, than an Act
of Recognition, that the present King and Queen are rightful and lawful King
and Queen, and to disable all Persons from sitting in Parliament, or to hold
any Place or Office of Authority or Trust, who do not believe the same, and
upon Oath declare such their Relief and Recognitions accordingly?

And now for Bunishments. In all Punishments two things are to be considered:
The Proportion in respect of the Crime, and the Consequence. And as to the
Crimes, it may be fit to be considered in our Case, Whether besides the
Thirteen Heads of Crimes committed in the last Reigns, expressed in the Votes,
there have not been some of like nature already committed in this, for which
some Persons may justly be excepted out of such Bill of Indemnity? viz. Such as
these.

1. The publishing of such Libels, as by denying the Justice (of punishing the)
Crimes aforesaid, de manifestly undermine the very Grounds of our present
Settlement, and the true Constitution of the English Government.

2. The advising the present King to such things, as being done by the former
Kings contrary to Law, seems to justify their Illegal Actions, prejudice his
own Cause, and tend to the disturbance of the Government again. And it may be
some others.

As to the Punishment, Proportion and good Consequence are always to be
regarded. And therefore,

1. When the Punishment is less in Proportion than the Crime, and the
Consequence of Necessity or great Importance for a future Security, of other
public Good, it is not Mercy, but Injustice and Imprudence to forbear it, and
a greater kindness to Criminals than to the Innocent.

Such is the Excluding and disabling such Persons from Trusts and Employments,
is by former Violations and Misdemeanors have showed themselves unfit to be
further trusted.

This has indeed something Penal in it, but so little, that it is nor properly
a Punishment, but a necessary provident Provision. This is the Case of the late
King (of which more in the Apology for Mr. St.) and of his Counselors and
Agents. They who betrayed their Country and himself too by Evil Counsel or
Compliance, ought not presently to be admitted to Employments and Offices of
Trust, or to sit in Parliament. Neither ought they to be returned, for they are
not in truth beni and legates homines. I speak not of all his Counselors, etc.
without distinction, as the mercenary. Writer falsely suggests; but Evil
Counselors, etc. who betrayed him as well as their Country.

It will be a Blot and Mark of Ignominy upon this Generation to all Posterity,
to suffer those persons to sit as judges, where those Crimes are to be
considered, whereof they themselves are notoriously guilty. And upon this
occasion I must say farther, That it is a Dishonorable and an unreasonable
thing, to suffer persons who have: rashly (to say no more) foul'd their Hands
in Innocent Blood, to fit in that Assembly; to suffer their Counsels, which
should be Sacred, to be profaned by such Company. Dishonorable and
unreasonable are too soft Words for that; but I may very well use them
concerning the permitting of Minors, who are disable diary Law to dispose of
their own Estates, to sit there. The Honor and Dignity of Parliaments ought to
be preserved? And therefore also, they who did presume to Elect the same person
to serve in this, who was expelled the House the last Parliament, for their
Affront to the House ought to be corrected, at least by turning out Their
Member again, and allowing them no new Writ. For they deserve not to have a
Representative in such an Assembly, which they would presume so factiously to
affront; nor he to have a place there, who had so little regard to the Honor
of it, and so little consideration of what did become those who chose him. I
write not this out of any Ill Will to any person, but out of great Good Will
for the Honor and Service of my King and Country. In such as are obnoxious,
certainly Modesty, to abstain and retire for some time, would be the greatest
Prudence. But such as will impudently threst themselves in, ought deservedly to
be thrust out. The Honor of a Government ought not to be prostituted for the
sake of particular persons, be their Quality what it will. Nor are they Men of
Virtue or Worth, who would serve themselves at that rate. The Kingdom wants not
Men of unspotted and untainted Honesty and Fidelity to be employed: But usually
the worst are most forward.

Secondly, When the Punishment bears a just proportion to the Crimes, it ought
generally speaking, to be inflicted for the Maintenance of Justice, and
Restraint of Evil. But there may be special Reasons in respect of the
Consequence, either to inflict the Punishment, or pardon the Offenders.

Amongst the Thirteen Heads of Crimes, there are two at least, which I take to
be Treason, and ought to be adjudged so by Parliament, viz. The first
concerning the Dispensing Power, and the third concerning the Commission for
Ecclesiastical Causes. I know there is another Punishment of, this last by the
Statute of 17 Car. I. chapter 11. But in this Case the manifest Intention and
Design of the King and the Conspirators by those means to subvert the
Government and the Laws, make them both Treason.

These Crimes are of so high a Nature, and the King himself having already
suffered for the same Cause, both Justice and Prudence require, that all the
Criminals, by whose Unfaithfulness and Compliance the King was encouraged to
those Evil Courses, be brought to Trial, and have Sentence. Not only Justice,
but Prudence does require this, to assort a just and honest Cause, and to
terrify such as should dare to be concerned in such base and wicked Courses
hereafter. But above all, the Judges and Bishops, who betrayed also their own
Professions, ought to be made Examples. What special Reasons there may be to
mitigate any part of the Punishment in any of them, they being not many,
belongs to the Parliament to consider: But in general, they ought to be good
and weighty.

On the other side, when the Offenders are many, and the Grime and Punishment
Capital, it is usual and reasonable to punish only the Principals and most
notorious, and to pardon all the rest, as in cases of Rebellion and
Insurrections; because of the Evil Consequence of taking away the Lives of so
many Persons, whereof perhaps many were missed by the Principal of them, and
might prove good Men afterward. In such cases they are all to be looked upon as
one Body, and the taking off the Heads and Principals of them, is a kind of a
capital Punishment of that Body of Men.

But when the Crime and Punishment are of a lower Nature, as Misdemeanors,
(which being very various, the Punishment is more discretionary, as Fine, or
Fine and Imprisonment both, according to the nature of the Crime) it is not so,
nor is there any reason it should: For a Pecuniary Punishment may be inflicted
on many without any Inconvenience. And in the present Cases it may be
proportioned according to the Rates assessed upon the Criminals in some of the
late Taxes; and some Disabilities might very properly be made part of the
Punishment. But in these discretionary Punishments, diverse things are to be
taken into consideration. And one or two I will mention on the side of Mercy:
1. The Example of our Heavenly father now, in our own ease, who has showed
Mercy, and sent so great a Deliverance, notwithstanding the sinful and wicked
state of the Nation. 2. The Papists and the wicked Examples of those late
Popish Kings, have been the principal Corrupters of the Manners of the Nations;
and therefore if they who have been mislead by them, suffer not so deep, as
otherwise they ought, it is but reasonable.

So much for Punishment of Criminals, and now for Preferment. The Vindicators
think it an Invasion upon the Kings own Liberty, to deny him the use of such
Persons, as through the Temptations and Snares of a Court were guilty of
Compliance in things blamable, etc. if their great Parts and Acquaintance with
Affairs of State make them necessary: I have known some persons cried up for
notable, cunning and shrewd Men, whom when I have happened to understand more
nearly, I have found to be Men of Craft indeed, but such as did consist; not so
much in greater Knowledge of Business than other Men had, as in the use of a
greater Latitude in Acting than some other Men would use. And such Persons may
be so far from being necessary to a Prince, that they may be dangerous. As I
remember one of those cunning Men I mentioned, being applied to by three
Persons then of good Credit, for his Advice in a Cause, easy to have been
relieved in Chancery, as it was afterward, by his Cunning involved them all,
and some others for Witnesses, in a notorious Forgery, Subornation and Perjury.
Parts without Fidelity, which is inconsistent with Compliance in Blamable
things, ought not to recommend any Man to a Prince's Service. This I say to
show the Insufficiency of his Argument in that part. Nor am I so rigorous, as
not to agree with him in the former, as he states the Case; only the person
ought to be very necessary, and the Prince to be very cautious how far he
relies upon him. Nay, I will go further with him, and suppose the Person stand
accused, or even impeached in Parliament, I would not deny him the use of such
a person, in due time, that is, when he has been tried, and either cleared and
acquitted, or for some special good cause legally pardoned. Otherwise that,
which those persons say is an Invasion upon the Kings Liberty, to deny him, is
an affront to the Government, tends to the Subversion of the Constitution, and
to the disparagement of the present Cause both of the King and Kingdom, makes
it look like a matter of Trick and Violence, and not as I take it to be, of
clear and necessary Justice. The Protection and Employment of Criminals being
one of the great Grievances of former Reigns, and as pernicious to the Kings as
to the People. And if this be the Case of any person now employed, he cannot be
a a good Man, or worthy of any Favor at all, if he would, desire his own
Security at the rate of so great an Inconvenience both to the King, and to the
Government, and especially under our present Circumstances; and not rather
willingly retire for some time, and if innocent, modestly put himself upon a
fair Trial; or if Guilty of any thing considerable, humbly submit and beg
Pardon. And this is the truest Wisdom in such case: For they who obstinately
stand out in such cases, do usually bring mischief to themselves or the King;
and the more highly they carry it out among Men, the more they provoke the
Judgments of God upon themselves, of Excision, or in some remarkable manner,
according to the Nature of the Crime. All Courts and Judicatures ought to
maintain their Authority, and so much the more, when notoriously violated, or
when there are any attempts to evade or oppose it. And especially at this time
when we are either doing Justice and Equity against the late King himself, or
plainly playing Tricks with him, and exposing the Iniquity of our own Hearts.

There is but one thing more, which I think worth my taking notice of in this
Pamphlet, (for Trifles I have passed over good store all along) and that is
what he says, page 32. that The Calling, or Dissolving of Parliaments is
ordinarily one of the most mysterious Problems of State, and one of the truest
Touchstones of Skill in the Art of Government. To Men of ill Designs, or who
understand not the true Constitution of this Government, it may be so indeed:
But to honest and understanding Men nothing is more easy. It was the Law of
this Nation before Magna Charta, or any Statute now in Force was made, and it
is still the Law, That Parliaments be held once a year, or oftener if need be.
And I will tell this Gentleman in the Words of King James I. that which will
effectually explain this Mystery, and solve the Problem. A King (says he)
governing in a settled Kingdom, leaves to be a King, and degenerates into a
Tyrant, as soon as he leaves off to rule according to his Laws. And a little
after, Therefore all Kings, that are not Tyrants, or Perjured, will be glad to
bound themselves within the Limits of their Laws: And they who persuade them
the contrary, are Vipers and Pests, both against them and the Commonwealth.
Speech 21. March, 1609. This most ancient Institution, is not more ancient than
wise, useful and necessary, and of a just proportion to the other parts of the
Constitution. The Commons in the Counties are represented by the Grand Jury,
who are to enquire and present what is amiss there; and the Lords, by the
Freeholders, who are the Judges. And as the Counties have their Court once in
a Month, the Kingdom their Courts of Common Law for private and ordinary
matters, four times in the year, that is in effect, once in a Quarter, so the
whole State had, and still ought to have their Session for Public and
Extraordinary matters concerning the whole Kingdom, once in the year. The great
business of this is to enquire into, and inspect the Actions of the Great
Officers, Privy Counselors and Judges, etc. and of the King himself, if he do
any thing contrary to Law, and the common Interest of the Nation; to interpret
their own Laws, where there is occasion, and resolve other Difficulties; to
receive and hear Petitions, redress Grievances, and give Relief, etc. And this
is an Institution as much for the Honor, Safety and Ease of the Prince, as for
the Security and Commodity of the People. For if the Prince act as he ought to
do, by Advice of Privy Council, and of such persons as in their several Places
are by Law to advise him: The Parliament, being to convene within the year,
must needs be such a Check to them, that they will rarely dare to propose any
thing mischievous or illegal; and more rarely be able to bring it to effect;
and whatever it be, the King is secure, and the Counselor or Officer to answer
for it. Now an Institution of so great Antiquity, so agreeable to the other
parts of our Constitution, of so great Importance in the Government, secured by
two several Acts of Parliament in the Reign of that wise and magnanimous Prince
Edw. 3. still in force, besides others, ought not certainly to be eluded with
vain Pretenses of Reason of State, and abused, as it has been, by the whole
last Race of our Kings, to their own hurt, and to the great disturbance, and
almost Dissolution of a most Noble Constitution, to gratify ill Men, by long
Intermissions, abrupt Prorogations and Dissolutions, and by long Continuances
for no other reason but to corrupt the Members to betray their Trust. As by Law
they ought to be assembled once a year, so ought they also by Law to fit
effectually till all Grievances be redressed, and business dispatched before
their Departure, v. 4. Inst. p. 11. For if our Kings by their Oath, be obliged
to Govern according to Law, they are certainly obliged to it in this
particular, it being the chief part of the Government. Parliamentum departiri
non debet dummode aliqua Petitio pendeat indiscussa, vel ad minus ad quam non
fit determinatum Responsum. Et si Rex contrarium permittat perjurus est, says
the Ancient Modus tenendi Parliament. of which Mr. Seldom allows some Copies he
had seen to be as ancient as Edw. 3. Tit. of Hon. p. 611. But this is not a
place to insist more largely upon this matter; nor indeed does it need it.

FINIS.

