A CAVEAT AGAINST FLATTERY, AND PROFANATION OF Sacred things to Secular Ends:
UPON Sight of the Order of the Convention for the Thanksgiving, AND
Consideration of the Misgovernment and Misfortunes of the last Race of Kings of
this Nation.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXXIX.

A CAVEAT AGAINST FLATTERY, AND PROFANATION of Sacred things to Secular Ends.
I Was not more pleased with the first News of the Order of the present
Convention, for a Public Thanksgiving to Almighty God, upon so just and
admirable occasion, than I was otherwise moved and disturbed at the first Sight
of their Order; to see all that lively sense, which I expected, of such an
admirable Providence and Mercy of God to these Nations, in so seasonable, so
easy, and yet so great, and, if it be not our own fault, complete Deliverance,
to dwindle (in my apprehension) into a kind of mean, servile, fawning
Complement to the Prince, under a Formality of Religion. This has filled me
with variety of Thoughts, which I cannot forbear to communicate to some of
those who are concerned in it, I mean, the Members of the Convention.

The Prince I look upon as a person greatly to be esteemed, loved and honored,
both for the Character generally given of his Virtues, and more especially, for
that he seems to be chosen and designed, by the Providence of God, for a
special Instrument of great and desirable matters in this Age; and has been so
already to this Nation. And therefore to assist him, and concur with him to
those ends, is in my Opion, an Act of Subservience to the Divine Providence,
which is a Glorious and Angelical Employment: but yet to express our Respect to
him, in such a manner as this, whether through Flattery or Transport, I
conceive is neither proper, decent, nor safe, either for him, or for the Nation.

The Cause of this Public Thanksgiving to Almighty God, is thus expressed: For
having made His Highness, the Prince of Orange, the Glorious Instrument of the
Great Deliverance of this Kingdom, from Popery and Arbitrary Power. Whereas in
truth the principal Cause of it is, not the Instrument, but the Great, and very
great Deliverance; with many such Circumstances as are remarkable indications
of the special Providence, and overruling hand of God in it: And for this most
solemn Thanks, ought to have been paid to Almighty God by this Nation, whoever
had been the Instrument. And yet in this Order is there not one Word of this
Great Deliverance, more than was necessary to express what it was that the
Prince of Orange was the Glorious Instrument of; as if his being the
Instrument, was the Only, or the Principal thing, for which we were to give
Thanks. I deny not but there was special reason to give Thanks for that also,
as well as other Circumstances, but then it ought to have been expressed in its
proper manner and order; the Deliverance first expressly, with proper words of
its due amplification, as the principal: and then by what Instrument, as is
frequently added in the Scripture upon such occasions; by the hand of his
servant Moses. And as our common form expresses that which is above all, Gods
inestimable Love in the Redemption of the World by our Lord Jesus Christ. It
must therefore be confessed, that the principal matter of our Thanksgiving is
in this Order either omitted, or mentioned only occasionally, so as to serve
only to express the other, at best in a preposterous manner. And this Inversion
of the proper and most natural and easy Order, is an Argument that it was so
formed not by chance, but design, or to make the most charitable Construction,
through some inconsiderate Transport. And the same is observable in the
Epithets given to each.

I did never affect to contend about words, much less would I give occasion of
offense to such an Assembly, of such persons, for a trifle; besides, they that
know me, know me to be a cordial friend, and well wisher to this Convention,
and who desire to promote, not prejudice their Proceedings. But what I intend
in this is no slight matter, nor will it so much prejudice, as be useful to
them, and to others, if it be taken by the right handle, and as is intended.
For from hence I observe two things, which deserve very serious consideration
and reflection upon them.

The one a Defect of that due and profound Sense of so great and undeserved a
Mercy, and of that answerable Reverence and Gratitude to God, which our
circumstances and condition require. If we admit the form of the Order, to have
proceeded only through Transport of Affection to the Prince, which is the most
favorable construction we can make of it, yet even that is an evidence of what
I say, and that there was more respect to the Instrument, than to the Mercy it
self, or perhaps, to the Author of it, by some: for after the Author, the Mercy
it self is next to be considered before the Instrument, as the principal Motive
of our Gratitude; and the expressing it otherwise, is a kind or degree of
neglect or slighting of the Mercy, and of disrespect to the Author: which a man
may easily perceive, if he do but consider how such an expression of thanks,
for some rare favor, would be resented by a great Prince from some of his
meanest Subjects. Would he not think him an Impertinent Fellow, and unworthy to
be regarded, much more unworthy of such a special favor? And if we admit that
it passed the Houses merely through Inadvertence, which is also the most
favorable Construction we can make of that, this very Inadvertence is plainly
an evidence of the same: for had we been affected as we ought, that would have
made us more mindful and observant of such a matter.

But if it did proceed from Flattery, and design to Complement the Prince, and
pass, though observed, through Compliance, which might possibly be the case of
some; that is not only unbecoming and below the Gravity of such an Assembly,
but a plain Profanation of Religion to base and unworthy ends, and greatly
aggravates the former. And this is so plain of it self, that I need not say
more to prove or explain it. But whether either of these two, or both, was in
the bottom, it is not a matter to be slighted, or lightly passed over. How
great are the sins of unsuitable Returns for extraordinary Mercies, and of
Profanation of Religion to Secular ends, and the Judgments they usually
provoke, I leave to Divines to consider more fully: But what are their Natural
Effects and Consequences, and what the Mischiefs we have seen attending them, I
think greatly necessary to be explained for our common Benefit, and necessary
Caution for the future. We are just now entering upon a new Scene of Affairs,
and if we well consider the sad Catastrophes of the two preceding, and make
just Enquiry into the causes thereof, we may meet with much matter of
Admonition, Caution and Direction; and very pertinent to this purpose.

King James I. his Mother and Grandfather having both born their own burdens,
was, by the Providence of God, brought to the Throne of this Kingdom in Peace,
even beyond the expectation of himself and many others. And though the restless
and desperate attempts of the Papists, were otherwise enough to terrify a man
of greater natural Courage than himself, yet he had for his Encouragement, an
admirable experiment of the Special Providence of God, in the Preservation of
his next immediate Predecessor, Queen Elizabeth, through a long Reign of forty
four years, notwithstanding all their Conspiracies against her. And lest that
should not sufficiently affect him, he had moreover, in the very beginning of
his Reign, a like experiment thereof, in the Preservation of himself, and his
own Family from one of the most horrid, desperate, and secret Conspiracies,
that the World has ever heard of. And what did all this require of him? Could
it be any thing less than the highest demonstration of Gratitude to God, most
confident Dependence upon him, and entire Fidelity to him? And what less from
the Nation? But what was the Return?

It was wisely said at his first coming in, by one of his Scotch Courtiers, to
one of the English, We have brought you a good King, but you Court Flatterers
will soon spoil him. And so it proved. It was indeed a great happiness to have
all Causes of Dissension, not only in this Nation, but also between both
Nations, so plainly and fully extinguished in his person. But such was partly
the Transport of all sorts of people, and such the gross Flattery of many, that
nothing was enough to magnify either his Wisdom or his Power. This and the
pompous Titles of Monarch, Absolute, and Imperial Crown, etc. soon raised his
thoughts above the pitch of an English King. He thought himself as free to
exceed the Laws of the Land, as God the Laws of Nature, when he saw occasion
for it; though he thought in Prudence such extraordinary Acts, like Miracles in
Nature, were not ordinarily to be done. He thought the Rights and Liberties of
the People, were but Indulgences wrested from their Kings, his Predecessors,
(cujus contrarium est verum) and might thereupon infer, (and had wit enough to
do it) that it was but reasonable for him to regain by Policy, if he could,
what they had lost by Necessity or Constraint.

These fancies of his were continually fed and confirmed by self-seeking,
flattering persons; who, perceiving that to be the way to Preferment, strained
all their Wit and Parts to gratify his humor: and it was not long before he
found occasion to exercise that Freedom. The Discovery of that horrid
Conspiracy, which by his admirable Deliverance should have confirmed his
Dependence upon the Divine Providence for the future, having a contrary effect
upon him, he cast about to secure his Safety and Quiet by his own Craft and
Policy. And the only way for that he conceived was by making not only Amity and
Leagues, but the nearest Alliance that could be, with some Potent Prince of the
Popish Religion. And by all means he must have a match for his Son either from
France or Spain: for the Accomplishment whereof the Pope, whom he had before
asserted to be Antichrist, must be complemented with no meaner Title than
Sanctissime Pater; Indulgence to Papists, contrary to the Laws, must be agreed,
and the effectual Execution of the Laws against them actually stopped by secret
Orders; for a public Declaration for that purpose, would not then pass for a
Legal Act of Dispensing Power. And because they, who were most Zealous in
Religion, were like to be most averse from compliance in these things, the very
Power of Religion must be discountenanced under the Notion of Puritanism; and
Indifference and Formality encouraged under the Notion of Loyalty, Obedience
and Conformity. And to this end was the Book of Sports enjoined to be read in
Churches, and many Pious and able Divines put out of their Employments, if not
Freeholds too, for refusing to read it. Nor did he want encouragement in all
these things from Flatterers of all sorts, who easily prevailed against the
sounder and safer Counsels of others. And though some of them, who had
published their false and flattering Argument in Print, were questioned in
Parliament for it, both in King James, and in King Charles I time; yet even for
some of them did the King intercede in Parliament; as King James, 7. Jac. for
Dr. Cowel; and others were preferred or favored afterward, as Dr. Mainwaring
by King Charles I. as others since have gotten what they wrote for, and have
been well rewarded for their pains. Of the former sort see Rushworth, and Mr.
Petyts Miscellanea Parlementaria; of these latter, it is like the Parliament in
due time will take notice.

This unhappy Policy, as it was not unlike in its Principles to that of
Jeroboam, which became a sin to his House, even to cut it off, and destroy it
from off the face of the earth, so it proved also in its consequence. His
eldest and hopeful Son Prince Henry, was in the beginning of these courses, and
soon after the first proposal of such a match, taken away by an immature death;
and himself persisting therein, by a death questioned then, and in the dark to
this day, whether not untimely. His next Son and Successor King Charles I. whom
he had involved in these snares, but never lived to see his Marriage
accomplished, proceeding in the like courses, giving encouragement to
Flatterers, and through their false and deceitful Counsels, in many things
transgressing the Laws, indulging to Papists, and discouraging and oppressing
many of the most Religious and Conscientious of the Protestants, as Puritans
and Factious, and renewing with more severity, that unhappy Policy of the Book
of Sports; at last concluded this Scene with that unhappy Catastrophe, which is
well known to the World.

King Charles I. having also born his burden, to his Son, King Charles the
Second, after he had been tutored in a Wilderness of twelve years Exile, was
Almighty God pleased to open the Gates of his Mercy; and when all hopes either
from Foreign Assistance, or Domestic Conspiracies sailed, then by a favorable
and manifest Providence to admit, or rather conduct him to his Fathers Throne
in Peace, to the great Joy of himself and the whole Nation, putting into his
hand, upon terms of his Behavior, the prize of a fair opportunity, to have
made himself, and these Nations happy, had he had a heart to it, and they been
disposed for it. But such was the Transport they were all under at that time,
that they soon forgot themselves, forgot God, and, like Pigs to the Trough, ran
greedily to a brutish enjoyment of their unexpected Happiness; and through
their Ingratitude to God, instead of Blessings, which they might have been,
proved mutual Temptations, and occasions of Corruption and Debauchery each to
other; the new King by a most pernicious evil Example, and those about him by
self-seeking Flattery, Compliance, and Imitation: whereby they both encouraged
and hardened him in those evil Courses, and propagated the Imitation of it to
all ranks of people.

The Parliament it self, that is, the Majority, unadvisedly and contrary to the
true Constitution of this Government, declared him to be, by the Fundamental
Laws of this Kingdom, in effect above all Law, and his very Officers
irresistible; and required of all Officers of Corporations, Officers and
Soldiers in the Militia, and of the Clergy and Universities, a Declaration to
the same effect; subjected the Dwelling-houses of the People to be searched at
the pleasure of his Officers; formed a new Militia, and put it wholly into his
Hands; and profusely gave him vast sums of Money, out of the Estates of the
people, beyond all need, reason and justice. The Commissioners and Convocations
of the Clergy, in their new Additions to the Common Prayer, without any regard
to what he or his Successors might prove in time, or to the inconvenience they
might thereby bring upon themselves, needlessly gave him the Title of most
Religious and Gracious, in public forms of most solemn address to Almighty
God; and the Kings Arms were in diverse Churches in the City, set above the
Commandments of God in the place of most solemn Worship; whereas at Oxford, as
I have heard, the Founders Arms in the Theater, being placed above the Kings,
were ordered to be taken down for the Indecency. Agreeable hereunto was Loyalty
(as they called Compliance with the Will and Pleasure of the King, whether
legal or not) cried up as the only Honesty, and Non-Resistauce and
Passive-Obedience, as if they were the greatest and most necessary Doctrines of
Religion, by all who sought the Favor of the Times, in their ordinary
Discourse and Conversation, and publicly so asserted in Speeches, in Sermons
from the Pulpit, and in Printed Books, by such as expected any special Favor
or Preferment.

Nor stayed it here, for the King now assured by such Demonstrations of the
Obedience and Compliance of his People, and thereby encouraged to take the
Liberty to gratify his Lust more openly than otherwise perhaps he would have
done; and being a Person of a pleasant Wit, and delighting in Repertees, Jests
and such like Diversions from serious thoughts, the stream of the Courtiers,
Gallants, and all who affected to be reputed such, presently ran with a full
torrent into the same Chanel, and soon overspread a great part of the Nation.
And vain aerie Lightness, frothy and Obscene Discourse, profane and horrid
Swearing, and more then brutish satisfaction of Lust, and Contempt of all
Religion, were not only indulged, but affected too as generous qualities of a
Gentleman, and certain Notes and Evidences of Loyalty and Fidelity to the King,
and consormity to his own heart and mind. And those, who made any scruple of
Conscience to run to the same Excess of Riot, were looked upon and despised as
disaffected, disloyal, mean spirited fools, and Fanatics; but those who did
dare to oppose either the Debaucheries of these Loyalists, or the illegal
actions of the King, as Imprudent, Rash, and Madmen. And so great a Baseness
and Degeneracy thereupon presently seized and tainted many, that, not
considering the severe Denunciations of our Savior against such, they were
even out-faced and ashamed of their Religion, and became Hypocrites in
Debauchery; and, to avoid the Imputation and Reproach of being religious and
sneaking, did actually sneak to such degenerate and despicable Wretches, while
by base compliance in obscene Discourse and familiar Swearing, they gloried in
their shame, and would seem companions with them in such things, as yet they
never acted indeed. And in so degenerate a state what can be so absurd and
inconsistant that Men will not do? What wonder is it then to see Men at the
same time in Words applaud the Non-Obedience of the Bishops, and yet in their
acts comply with the Dispensing Power? To see those, who by their High
Professions of Loyalty and Non-Resistance, had invited and encouraged the King
to use his liberty to inslave them, when they found that he, presuming too much
upon their High Profession, was like indeed to involve them in the same Slavery
and Mischiefs with the rest, choose rather to enter with others into secret
Conspiracies for the Common Safety, than in time (to prevent that) with a true
and generous Loyalty and Fidelity openly oppose his Illegal Proceedings; These
things, with some few others made the Government of King Charles II. uneasy,
and brought King James II. to his Exit.

We are now entering, as I said, into a New Scene of Affairs: And that this may
proceed more happily, it cannot but be of great use to reflect upon and
consider well the Errors, Miscarriages, and true Causes of the unhappiness and
sad Catastrophes of the two former. I have already briefly touched some of the
more immediate and visible Causes, Historically as to the matter of Fact: But
to make a right use of them, it may be necessary to enquire a little more
deeply and Philosophically into them. These Causes therefore, to go to the
bottom, are twofold, Natural, and Divine, which does secretly but effectually
dispose and order the Natural. The Divine is by way of Judgment, which is
always just, and for some Sin, and does frequently proceed to Excision, cutting
off, and Extirpation of whole Families, when the sin is persisted in; though
for the most part, unless in case of some heinous crime, gradually giving fair
warnings and opportunities to one after another, to prevent by Reformation the
final and utter Extirpation of all. And though many times the Root of
Bitterness lie deep, and be hard by others to be detected, yet it is not seldom
that the Sin is legible and apparent in the Punishment; and certainly if we
well consider what a Sin it is to resist, oppose, and oppress the Truth when
offered, especially in matters of great consequence, and presented by some
special Providence of God, all who believe Popery to be an abominable Abuse and
Corruption of the genuine Christianity, tending to the defacing, enervating,
and subversion of it, and that the Reformation desired is nothing but the
Restitution of it to its pristine and genuine Luster and Power, must of
necessity believe that the Cherishing of Popery and Opposing of such a
Reformation, may be such a Sin as, being persisted in, may provoke as great
Judgments as this. And then if we reflect back as far as the Grandfather of
our King James the First, and thence observe how Indulgence and Favor to
Popery, from this first Opposing of the Reformation in Scotland, has been
continued and continually attended with destructive signal Judgments in his
Posterity ever since, beginning with one very Prodigious, a horrid Dream, of
the loss of both his Arms, and the sudden Death of both his Sons, all at
distant places in one Night, as may be seen in Spotswood; it will not be hard
to trace and detect the True Root which has born all this bitter Fruit in that
Family. And they who cannot discern this in that Family alone, may for their
confirmation take also into consideration the Occurrences of a contemporary
Family in our Neighbor County, France, that of Valois from Hen. 2. to its
Extirpation; and compare with these two the long and happy Reign of Q
Elizabeth, against which the Gates of Hell could not prevail. And if with all
these we consider also the Actions and Catastrophe of Hen. 4. of France, and
the monstrous Wickedness and Barbarous Cruelties of the present King, it will
not be hard to make a Moral Prediction of the like fate attending this Family
of Bourbon also. This, it is very probable, if we consider the Original and
Progress pari passu all along of both Sin and Punishment, was the Provoking Sin
and Root of Bitterness, which by Divine Judgment has exposed them to the
strong Delusions, which have been the more immediate and apparent Causes of all
their Miscarriages and Unhappiness. And though it may be hoped Men are now near
as well cured of Popery, as the Jews of Idolatry, yet may this Observation
afford us a very necessary Admonition at this time, if we be not like the Horse
and Mule: For certainly that Soul which in these occurrances of this Royal
Family within the Period before mentioned, cannot discern a continued course of
Providence powerfully operateing therein, is deeply immersed in Sensuality, and
very Brutish. It is therefore very reasonable that at this time we do seriously
consider the Course of Gods Providence and Judgments upon that Family; that it
was not any Favor to Popery, otherwise than as that is an Abuse and Opposition
of the true Religion, that was the Sin of that Family; nor was it that alone,
but that and other Abuses by Profanation and Connivance; That the Prince is
descended from that Family, from which he may derive a load of Guilt upon
himself, by participation in any of those sins, by forgetfulness of God, and by
neglect of those Duties, which this late extraordinary Providence calls him
unto: That the present State of the Nation is a most vicious and degenerate
State; and that so extraordinary Deliverance, when greater Judgments might
reasonably have been expected, obliges to great Seriousness, affectionate
Sense of the special Providence of God in it, and effectual Reformation: for
great and undeserved Mercies do not less oblige (either in force or extent)
than the most severe Judgments: And to consider that the same Providence of
God, which effected all this, can easily, and certainly will, turn all again
into Confusion and a greater Judgment, if we do not wisely endeavor to concur
with it, and answer his ends. He can take away the Prince, and incline the
Princess to recall the King; he can by impeding or crossing our Preparations
for Ireland, or an unexpected defeat of part of them, discourage the rest, and
encourage the Irish; he can raise up a desperate Party at home, and from a
cloud of an hand breadth make them cover the Land; he can send a Spirit of
Division amongst us and Confound our Counsels; of Infatuation, as he did
amongst the Papists, to resolve, with great imaginary Wisdom, and Subtilty,
upon the direct and most effectual means of our Ruin and Destruction. And by
these, and many other unconceiveable ways and means, can he easily and quickly
turn all our Transport into Mourning and Confusion.

This, I say, he can do, and we may provoke him to do it, in part or in whole,
if we, like Dogs, greedily catch up the Bone, and regard not the Masters hand
that threw it, but continue in that brutish Stupidity, which has so much
prevailed in this Nation. And it may be considered, whether we have not already
provoked him to let us struggle with some Difficulties, which might easily have
been prevented: The so easy Compliance, or Inadvertence, in passing the Order
in the Form aforesaid, was plainly a Fault, and such as I cannot think it
consistent with true Piety, and due sense of the Majesty and Honor of God, for
any Mortal to offer to excuse it; and certainly nothing could be a more proper
Correction of such an Easiness or Inadvertence, than to permit the same
persons, in their Debates, to run themselves into such Difficulties, with loss
of time, as might as easily have been avoided, as the Order have been amended.
We have been so long imposed upon with Words, that like Children, we are easily
allured and carried with some, and frighted with others, without any reason.
This being perceived, an Expedient was sought, but such an one chosen as made
all the Question; whereas I doubt not that the matter might have been proposed
at first in such commodious terms and expressions, and so enforced with Reasons
and Demonstrations, as that it would have passed as easily as another Vote did
at that time, and with no inconsiderable advantage. And if this be so, why
might there not be some secret energy of Providence, or Subtraction of a more
favorable Direction in it? This may be too nice a Speculation for this
Generation: But this I know, that the very thoughts of men are not so much in
their own power as they imagine, but are subject to the Power, not only of God,
but of much inferior Spirits by his permission; and he is no great
Philosopher, who does not perceive it, nor very knowing Christian, who does not
believe it. And were it understood how intimately and effectually his
Providence does interpose in all things, perhaps there would not be much doubt
of what I say: But they that understand these things may make their use of them.

Of the other more immediate and more apparent Causes, there is one that is
Profanation of Religion, which has a double Efficacy, Moral and Natural:
Moral, as a sin provoking Gods Displeasure and Judgments, and so is
comprehended in what I have said before. Natural in respect of its Contagious
and Spreading Nature, and of the mischievous Effects and Consequences of it.
All evil Examples, especially of persons of great Place, and among people
disposed to receive Impressions from them, are very Infectious; but none more
than Irreligion and Profaneness, partly through the Sensuality of men in the
Corrupt State of Nature, which is easily affected with Objects of Sense, and
therefore apt for them to neglect and contemn things of a more refined and
Spiritual Nature, and partly through the Impressions and Efficacy of the
envious Apostate Spirits, who, of all things, are most gratified with it, and
most active to promote it; and for this cause there is the more reason to check
and suppress the very first and least appearances of it; for a little Leven
leveneth the whole Lump; but yet more if we consider also the pernicious
Effects and Consequences of it, even of a natural growth and production: For it
is plainly a direct Introduction to Irreligion, and thereby an Inlet to all
manner of Disorder, in Persons, Families, and States, as may plainly be
perceived by this Consideration.

True Religion in man is a Celestial Influence and Divine Power, received and
embraced by a Soul rightly prepared and disposed by true Information and good
Instruction, whereby that Soul is ennobled and exalted to a degree of
Excellence above the Humane Nature, according to the Degree of that reception.
This illuminates his mind, and makes him sensible that he is a Dependant Being,
has his Dependence upon a Being most Excellent, and so affects him that he
rests on it, and directs all his motions to it, as his proper and only
Center: Hence proceed these happy Effects, he moves orderly, his Soul being
fixed upon its proper and satisfactory Object, runs not astray, nor affects any
other with any disorderly Motion; so that he keeps his rank and place in the
Universe, without disturbance to himself or others: and this produces a free
and generous Magnanimity, he admires not the Grandeur of the World, fears no
Man, flatters no Man, but deals plainly and sincerely with all; pitties their
Weakness, even in injuries and affronts to himself, as of People of distempered
mind, is Communicative, and ready and industrious to do good to all.

On the contrary Irreligion indisposeth the Soul for that Divine Principle,
whence it becomes dry and narrow, like a withered Branch, and unhingeth it from
its proper Center, whence proceeds all manner of Disorder: First, it directs
all its motions to it self, as its Center, as if it were independent. But not
being really so, it cannot rest there; but runs out after something else; and
missing its proper Object, falls upon some false Appearance, and prosecutes it,
as its proper Object with a motion suitable to that, and so exorbitant and
irregular. And hence proceeds all that Degeneracy of Mind, that Admiration and
Insatiable prosecution of the Pleasures of the Flesh, and Grandeur of the
World, and all that Baseness, Falseness, Flattery, Perfidiousness and Treachery
which has so infected and corrupted this Nation.

The Religion before deseribed is that which is proper to uncorrupted Nature:
The Christian Religion comprehends all that and more. It not only acquaints us
with the Original of all the Unhappiness of Mankind, which the sacred
Antiquities of the Jews did in some sort before; but it plainly reveals unto us
the proper and only Remedy, which the Jews Religion did but obscurely signify
by Types and Figures: That man is so inconsiderable a being in himself, and so
corrupted and polluted by Sin, that he cannot possibly have any access to the
Great, and Glorious, and Holy God, without which he must be eternally
miserable, but by a Holy Mediator: That the Great, and Glorious, and Holy God
notwithstanding out of mere compassion to his despicable Creature, has
provided such a Mediator for us, in whom he has united the Divine and Humane
Nature in one person: That this Mediator having upon the Theater of this Earth
performed a most exact obedience to the Will of God, even to death, did thereby
offer up the Humane Nature a Sacrifice, and consecrate it to God: That thereby
he obtained favor with God for all Mankind, and a Right of Dominion over them;
and is ascended into Heaven as the Captain of our Salvaton, where he interceeds
for, and thence disperses his Divine Gifts to all that receive him, and by
Purity, Holiness, and Righteousness, in Obedience to his Holy Law, and
Conformity to his most Holy Motions, firmly adhere to him; and in due time will
Judge and Condemn all his Enemies, and all those ungrateful and perfideous
Wretches, inveagled by them to desert his Service.

Concerning this Religion, it is a most true and excellent Observation and
Conclusion of that profound Searcher into Nature, Sir Francis Bacon (7. de
Augm. Sci. c. 1.) that in almost all Creatures, but especially in Man, if he be
not degenerate, there is an appetite to a twofold good, one of the Community,
the other of the individual, of which the former is the most prevalent, [as we
may observe in Animals, which will readily expose themselves to such danger for
the preservation of their young, from which they would otherwise most
timorously have fled for the preservation of themselves,] and that of all
Religions there is none, which does so much tend to the Promotion of the
Public Good before the Private, as the Holy Christian Religion. Vnde liquido
pateat, etc. From whence, says he, it does plainly appear, that it was one and
the same God, who gave to all his Creatures those Laws of Nature, and to Men
the Laws of Christ,

Upon these Considerations, which contain great truths, though but briefly and
plainly expressed, it is very evident That the true Christian Religion, even by
a natural way of causation, is a most excellent Means even for the temporal
Weal and Happiness of Persons, Families, and States, both Governors and
Governed: That it ought even upon that account by all wise Governors, to be
promoted as a matter of great concern, with all care and resolution: and that
Irreligion and Profaneness are even by way of natural causation the Inlets of
all manner of Evil and Mischief both to Persons, Families, and States; and
therefore strictly and severely to be suppressed in the very first eruption, as
a dangerous and contagious Plague.

Hence also it is evident, that the natural Effects of the Debaucheries of
Covetousness and Ambition, are as pernicious to all Societies as those of
Whoreing and Drinking, and produce as great Disorders: For when the Soul is
once unhinged from its proper Center, it prosecutes the mistaken Object, it
next fixes upon, be it what it will, with the same disorderly motions, because
it prosecuteth it instead of its proper Object, and under the notion of that:
and that therefore these are by all wise Governors to be taken care of, that
they be restrained and all incentives and occasions of them removed and avoided.

And here it may be fit to take notice of two great Occasions of this kind of
Debauchery amongst us, which were great Errors in Government in King James 1.
and his Posterity; the conferring of Titles of Honor, and the conferring of
Places and Preferments in Church and State upon improper and unworthy
Considerations.

As for Titles of Honor they are properly Ensigns of Virtue and Merit, and
ought to be Rewards only of that, and Encouragements to it; but when they are
conferred upon persons for Money, by way of Sale, or upon Men for their Estates
without any prospect of their Virtue or Merit, by this means these Rewards and
Encouragements, due only to Virtue and Merit, are withdrawn from it, and given
to Avarice and Ambition, and thereby made Incentives to them. And, to note it
by the by, the promiscuous conferring of Titles of Honor unduly makes them
insignificant, and is very injurious to all, who have justly obtained them.

And for Places and Preferments the granting of them for Money, or upon any
other consideration than the proper Qualifications of the persons for discharge
of the Duty, or even to covetous or ambitious persons, in many cases, though
otherwise well qualified, besides that it is a great Error in Government in
other respects, as to this present purpose, it gives great encouragement to
such to seek to get them by indirect means; and the evil Example of Men, in
seeking after Preferments, and in their behavior in them, tends very much to
the corrupting of the rest of the people, and infecting them with these Vices.

But no Examples of this kind are so pernicious as those of the Clergy. It is a
great truth that when Virtue fails in them, Faith will fail in the people. If
they who in their Baptismal Vows have renounced the World, the Pomps and
Vanities, and Superfluities of the World, and are moreover consecrated to the
special Service of God, and obliged by their Profession to teach, as well by
Example, as by Doctrine, Heavenly-mindedness and Contempt of the World, shall
so forsake that, and follow this World, as to turn that Sacred Profession into
a Trade as a means to get Riches and Honors, and live plentifully; and even
outdo the men of the World in unsatiable prosecution of these things; what a
Temptation must this be to all others to do the like in their way! Nothing can
be more absurd and inconsistent than Coveteousness, Ambition, Pride, and
Indulgence to the Enjoyments of the World, with the Profession of a Minister of
the Gospel of Christ. Even Riches and Wealth in a Clergyman, unless he be as
rich in Good Works, is, in my apprehension a Scandalous and Nauscious thing.
And such usually prove mischievous Instruments both in Church and State, if
favored, or suffered to grow too great in either.

King Charles II. by his Prodigality (which was increased by the Prodigality of
his Parliament) and by suffering himself to be cheated and abused, being often
in want of money, for supply of that was forced after some time to corrupt, by
Pensions and Perferments, the members of Parliament to betray their trust and
feed his Prodigality with the Peoples Money. These Examples of those who
notoriously cheated him, and of himself in corrupting those Public Trustees,
and other such abuses, were no less effectual to the Corrupting the Manners of
the Nation in respect of Justice and Honesty, than were his other Debaucheries
in respect of Temperance and Sobriety. And yet it may be a question, Whether
the greedy Pursuit of Preferments by our Clergymen, and their ill and
irregular Use of them, either hourding up Riches, or misemploying them in a
secular, or luxurious way of living, have not been as mischievous Examples to
infect peoples minds with Over-valuation of the World, and the Pomps and
Vanities thereof, as any of those other with other Vices? This is more
notorious than that I need either to scruple the mention, or use many words to
convince others of the truth of it; and does much incline me to think it very
necessary that some effectual course be taken, to reduce our Clergy to a more
Philosophical way of living, or that none but who are so disposed may be
admitted to any great Preferments.

This may possibly offend some, but no good Christian, I am confident: and
therefore to stop the Mouths of all such, I will give one instance of so
notorious a defect of good Employment of the large Revenues of our Church, as
shall make the best and greatest of our Clergymen lay their hands upon their
Mouths. It is now one hundred and forty years since the Reformed Religion,
which had received some interruption by Queen Mary, was restored and
established by Queen Elizabeth; about the beginning of that Age, Almighty God
by his Special Providence had produced two things of great Consequence in the
World, the Restoration of Learning, facilitated by a new and admirable
Invention of Printing, and a Discovery of a new World, of Barbarous Ignorant
People, by the help of another late Invention and Improvement of Navigation. We
have had as great advantages of access thither, and to all parts of the World
as any People; but what use have we made of this, and of all our great
Learning, and large Revenues? What sense have we expressed of the wonderful
Goodness of God to Mankind, of the Labors of our Savior and his Apostles, of
the Zeal of the primitive Christians, and of the Obligation of all these
Examples? What Devotion to God; What charity to the Souls of Men? So far have
we been from that, that the very Pharizaical Zeal of the Jesuits and other
Romish Emissaries could not move us to the least degred of Emulation, which
has not been wanting upon other occasions. But what wonder is all this when
our Devotion and Zeal for the Service of God and good of Souls has scarce
extended so sar as Ireland?

The truth is, it is no wonder if such Abundance of the World choke and stifle
all Motions and Activity of this kind. Our very Liturgy does reproach us with
Laziness and Coldness, and is a public Monument to condemn us. The very
Defects in our Reformation, which could not be remedied at the first composure
of that Book, but are there noted that it might be done in due time, remain
unreformed as they were to this very time, notwithstanding the various
conditions we have since been in, and the many other Alterations we could
easily make.

We have not restored any thing of the true Christian and Ancient Discipline of
the Church, but opposed and suppressed those who have desired it, and instead
thereof retained only a Popish Relict and Abuse of it; have by secular Laws
forced such into the Church, as according to the true Christian Discipline
ought to have been cast out; and instead of preserving the Honor of
Christianity, helped the Serpent to cast out a Flood of Scandals to eclipse it.
We have not restored the peculiar Solemnity of the Christian Worship, without
which our Service, in the judgment of Bishop Andrews, is imperfect and
defective, to its proper and frequent use; but instead thereof set up such a
kind of Form, to be read with great formality at the Altar, as was heretofore
introduced, and presently, after exploded in France, as a dry and barren
Novelty.

And for our Preaching in which we glory, how much has it been abused to
please Princes, and to please and maintain Parties; to persuade people out of
their natural rights under pretense of Loyalty, and into Slavery under the
notion of Passive Obedience, that thereby they might preach themselves into
Preferments! And for those great Christian Virtues of Humility, contempt of the
World, Heavenly-mindedness, Frequent and Earnest Prayers and Fasting, and Zeal
and Industry for the Service of God and Salvation of Souls, so much recommended
in the Gospel, not only by Word, but by the Example also of our Savior, his
Apostles, and the primitive Christians, and which are noted by a Heathen
Historian, to have made the Country Clergy in his time venerable in the sight
of God and Man, how little thereof is there now to be met with among our
Clergy? So little that I doubt not but we are now as much over spread with
Pharisnism, (except the best part of it) as were the Jews in our Saviors time.
And what may be the Cause into which all this may be truly resolved? Certainly
nothing but after an ill and inconsiderate Education, the false Appearances of
the World, and the great Preferments which are attainable by compliance with
the pleasure of those who have the disposing of them. This is it which has
betrayed both King and Country, as I shall presently show more particularly.

I do not impute it to the Greatness of the Preferments, which are Talents,
whereof a good Man may make a good use, though few have been made better men by
them, so much as to want of good Education, and the unhappy course which was
taken in the disposal of many of them. Great Preferments are Temptations and
Allurements to Covetous and Ambitious Men to use any means to obtain them.
These being all at the Disposal of the King, and King James I. dividing the
Common Interest, by setting up pretended Prorogative against the Laws, made use
of this Power to increase and strengthen his party. And though this course
proved very unsuccessful to Him and his Son; yet King Charles II. fell likewise
into the same Error, forgetting his Solemn Promises from Bredah, he
industriously, as some say, fomented differences between the two parties of the
Clergy; however he too easily consented to that mischievious Act of Uniformity,
which made an actual Division, and was therefore, as it is believed, secretly
promoted by the Papists. By this means were many good and useful men excluded
from all Preferments and Employments in the Church. And though of those who
conformed there were many too eminent for their Worth to be passed by, yet
generally Prerogative Men were the Men who were preferred. And this was it
which filled the Church with Covetous, Proud, Ambitious, Worldly Men, and Court
Flatterers.

And to note it by the way that cursed Dividing of the Church and Nation, by
that mischievous Act of Uniformty, no less contrary to Christian Prudence then
Christian Charity, proved another great Error in Policy and Government, no less
inconsistent with civil, than Christian Prudence, and made his Government
uneasy, which might otherwise by performance of his Word have been made most
easy through a general Unanimity, and mutual Emulations for his Service and
the Common Good.

Flattery, the other immediate and apparent cause of the Evils aforesaid, is
the natural product and offspring of those Debaucheries of Covetousness and
Ambition, whereof I have been speaking: For the Gratification of these is the
only or most common End it aims at. And its natural Effects are that it
subtly, dangerously, and perniciously abuses, deceives and betrays, under
the specious pretense of great Affection, Respect and Service; and so much the
more dangerously and perniciously, by how much the more subtly: and therefore
is in men of greatest parts (Clergy men especially) if once found Unsincere,
Covetous or Ambitious, with so much the greater Caution to be suspected and
avoided, even by the wisest of Men, who otherwise may be subject to its
insinuations, and imposed on by it.

King James the First was certainly a Man of no mean or ordinary Wit, and parts
in other respects, but his Affectation of an uncontrolable Absoluteness, and
his Timorousness, exposed him to the crafts of evil Men. He knew well enough
that he was bound and obliged by Laws: that was too plain to be denied, and
therefore he made no scruple to profess as much in general in Parliament. But
under the umbrage of that Profession, took liberty to transgress his bounds in
many Particulars, upon pretense of Law and Prorogative. To make this pass the
more clearly, it was necessary he should incline two sorts of Men, the Bishops
and the Judges, as much as might be to his Service, which could not better and
more craftily be effected, than by setting up the Authority of both as high as
might be: For this carried an appearance of Favor to them, and moreover made
them the more serviceable to him, he having the choice of the persons. Upon
this the Judges were apt to strain the Law to comply with his desires; but the
Bishops and their dependants, the Chancellors, and Civilians, and the Episcopal
Clergy, were generally for magnifying the Prorogative without consideration of,
or regard to the bounds prescribed by the Laws and Constitution of the
Government, partly as the common Interest of their party, but more especially
as the direct way to gain the Kings Favor and Preferments. This produced
Flatterers in abundance, who strained their Wits by plausible Arguments
grounded upon ambiguous Words and false Principles to represent the state of
this Government such as the King affected to have it. By this means was King
James himself in part imposed upon, (for Quicquid volumus facile credimus) but
his posterity more, and a great part of the Clergy, and others who adherd to
them, in so much that they could never since tell how to extricate themselves
out of those false Notions, into which the craft and knavery of these Flatters
had mislead them, especially under the Bias and Prejudice of a supposed
Interest. This tempted and encouraged the King many times upon occasion to
exercise his supposed Prerogative: But the people of England being an
understanding people, and well knowing their own Rights, could not so easily be
imposed upon by Fallacies contrary to their Interest. And hence arose the fatal
difference between King and People, and between the People themselves, while
part to maintain their illegal Assertions, to get Preferments, or being misled,
sided with the King; and part, and that the greatest and most considerable
part, stood firm to the Laws, and for maintenance of their Rights. And certain
it is that those very matters, wherein King James and his Successors thus
unhappily transgressed the Laws, were not at all for their benefit, but did
merely gratify insinuateing Courtiers and pernicious Flatterers, to the
alienation of the minds of the greatest and best part of the people: So that
their cause in these Differences, was both unjust, unprofitable, and pernicious
to themselves. And this was their Case in King Charles I. and ever since.

But of all the matters wherein they transgressed the Laws, none was more
pernicious, even to themselves, than Intermissions and unseasonable
Prorogations and Dissolutions of Parliaments contrary to the Laws. For certain
it is, and very apparent in the very Constitution of our Government and
constant Practice, that the People of England have as much Right to inspect the
Administration, as the King to exercise it. And had these Kings exercised this
part in summoning Parliaments and permiting them to sit and act according to
the Laws, which they are sworn to observe, this would certainly have prevented
the mischiefs which have befaln not only the Nation, but themselves more
especially. For the Majesty, Honor, and Prosperity of the King is for the
benefit of the Nation, and therefore desirable, and actually desired by the
English, as much as any people in the World. But these Intermissions and
Interruptions of Parliaments, as they served only for the security of
Malefactors and evil Counselors from condign Punishment, and were for that end
procured by them, so did they expose those Kings to their Knavery, and to be
misled by them to their own ruin.

The Consideration of the Causes of the Unhappiness of the last race of Kings
gives us a clear Prospect into the necessary Means to make the next, and the
Nation under them, more happy. Of which the first and principal is a constant
care and endeavor by all proper means to promote the Honor and Esteem, and
the sincere and cordial profession and practice of TRUE RELIGION AND VIRTUE:
and a resolved suppression with a generous indignation, of all Vice and
Debauchery, even those in maskarade, sordid Covetousnes, and empty Ambition.
This is the most direct and powerful Means both for the common good of all, and
for the private good of each particular, as its natural effect: and for
obtaining the Divine Favor and Blessing which alone gives life to all, as is
plain from what I have said before.

And the proper means to do this, are good Example; Acts of Grace and Favor,
or of Displeasure and Indignation, as occasion requires; Provident choice of
Ministers, Officers, and Servants; and strict execution of good and effectual
Laws.

Of the great power of Examples, when set upon the Beacons of high Places in a
State (which makes them, if good, as real Lights, and favorable Stars, to
stear by, if bad, as an Ignis fatuns to mislead poor blinded wandering Souls,)
we of this Nation cannot be insensible, who have seen and felt so great unhappy
effects of ill ones.

But it is not sufficient for a Prince to give good Example in his own person
and actions, unless he take great care also that the force of his own be not
enervated, baffled and affronted; through his connivance or remisness, by the
ill examples of those about him; but especially of his Ministers, Officers and
Servants; that there be not an Ignis fatuus among them, but that the whole
state may be like a clear Heaven, free from clouds and adorned with illustrious
radiant Stars; that by a favorable aspect and benign Influence he encourage
such, but with the Storms of Indignation disperse all noxious Meteors.

And to this not only the great Importance, but even Easiness of the work is no
mean Obligation. For DEBAUCHERY is a base, unmanly, degenerate thing; a
composition of Folly, Inconsiderateness, Impotence, Rashness, Madness; a mere
Imposture, nothing less than what it most affects to be thought; nothing but
frothy Wit or knavish Craft, instead of true Wisdom and solid Judgment;
Impudence and Rashness, instead of true generous Courage; nay, many times mere
Peusillanimity and Baseness; or foolish fear of the Imputation of Cowardice and
Censure of vain men, under the greatest appearance of Courage and Magnanimity;
in some a greater Monster among Rational creatures than ever Nature produced
among Animals.

Nor is it less base, degenerate, and unmanly, in persons of a higher rank in
State, Office, or Employment, than in the meanest, but on the contrary a
Degeneracy so much the greater, and more monstrous. A debauched Lord a
Scandalous Judge, a Covetous, Proud, and Haughty Clergyman, immersed in secular
business, are all gross Absurdities. It makes a Title of Honor to become a
Lie, and the person who bears it, an Impostor; such a person effectuually
abdicates the Nobility of his Ancessors, is no longer a real object of Honor
or Respect, but of Indignation and Contempt; and deserves to be treated as such
by all men. Such a Judge is worse: But such a Clergyman worst of all.

And therefore as it renders them unfit to be trusted or employed in great and
weighty business, so does it expose them to the contempt of all, but more
especially to the just Indignation of a Virtuous Prince. Besides though
Debauchery and Lycentiousness has long reigned under Impunity, and be grown to
a great height of Impudence, yet has it not yet so far spread and prevailed,
but that a generous correction and suppression of a thing so odious in its own
nature, would be very grateful to the best and greatest part of the Nation.

And thus much upon a civil Consideration: but we ought not to rest here: it is
a matter of greater importance than so. We ought to consider the greatness of
that Majesty, which is concerned in it; in comparison of whom the whole Earth
is but a Molehill, but as the dust of the Balance, and all mankind are
nothing. We ought to consider the State of the Nation polluted and defiled with
Presumptious and Impudent sin, with open contempt of Religion and of the
precepts of the Gospel. We ought to consider the Extraordinary Judgments of God
upon some of the chief Authors and Promoters, at least by Example and
Connivance, of all this Wickedness; how they have been blown away with a puff,
like chaff before the Wind. We ought to consider the admirable Mercy, Patience,
Longsuffering, and Clemency of God in granting us so extraordinary a
Deliverance, when in humane probability and consideration of our own demerit
and monstrous sins of the Nation, we had more reason to have expected nothing
but Confusion and some severe Judgments upon us. We ought also to consider the
Manner and Circumstances of all this, how God has therein made bare his Arm,
made his effectual Interposition so manifest and apparent, as is sufficient for
the conviction of all, who are not hardened and blinded. And when we have done
all this, we ought farther to consider what all this calls to us for, what
Obligations it lays upon us, what God expects from us, and what we have further
to expect from him according as we behave our selves.

The abominable abuses of Popery have run the Reformed Churches into some
contrary Errors and Mistakes in several particulars, and among the rest,
concerning external Acts of Repentance, if I mistake not. For public sins by
which the Holy Majesty of God is publicly dishonored, a public Satisfaction
(in the sense of the Ancient Christians) is to be made, both by particular
persons, and by whole Nations, when the sins are National, as they may be by
public Connivance, and other ways. When a Land is so polluted and defiled, it
must be purged by putting away the evil, by Severity upon the criminals, and by
some public Act of Repentance giving Glory to God; and if it do not thus judge
it self, it may expect to be judged of the Lord, and the more severely, by how
much the longer it is deferred. This is notoriously the case of this Nation at
this time, but what in particular is to be done in it, belongs to others to
consider; I mean as to such public Satisfaction, putting away the Evil, and
giving Glory to God.

But certainly whatever else be done, it will be to no good purpose, but rather
a greater Provocation to turn all our so favorable a Deliverance into a
severer Judgment, if there be not a speedy check and effectual stop put to
these Abominations, which has been too long neglected and over-looked already.
Let any man consider, especially a Prince, or man in great Authority, how he
would resent it to be publicly affronted and have his Laws or Orders openly
contemned. And though the transcendent Majesty of God, be far above the reach
of hurt or benefit by any actions of so despicable beings as mortal men, yet
such is his Goodness and Benignity to his poor Creatures, that what ever is
done, which tends to the real good or hurt of them, he reputes as Service or
Disservice to himself, and what is ill and presumptuously so done, as an
affront to himself. And therefore he is no good Christian, who is not far more
moved and concerned for the Honor of God and of his Laws, that they be not
publicly affronted and contemned by wicked men, than for any thing which may
touch his own Person or Dignity. That excellent Being does not frequently and
openly in an extraordinary way inflict his Divine Judgments upon notorious
Malefactors, because by his Providence he sets up Majestrates to do it in
ordinary way, as his Deputies, and he expects it from them. But he has in part
lately done it in this Nation, in very extraordinary manner: he has sent his
Fear and Dread upon our Adversaries, driven out the Heathen, the Cananites, the
Authors and Promotors of these abominations before us, and brought us into
their places of Authority and Power, and expects that we now apply our selves
to carry on this great Work, and utterly exterminate these relicts and old
companions of Idolatry and false Worship. And shall we notwithstanding sit down
to eat and to drink, and rise up to play? Set to build Houses for our selves,
to get Offices and Preferments, or at best to provide for our common Rights and
Properties; and let the House of God, his Temples in a Spiritual sense, be
defiled and run to ruin in our Land? He has so turned the Hearts of a
formidable Army, that they all have either come in and joined with us,
submitted to us, or fled from us. And shall we now after this make such doubt
of his further Divine Assistance and Blessing, as not dare to attempt the
Conquering of a few blustering Debauches, when God and the best part of the
Nation expect it from us, and are ready to approve and concur with us in it;
Shall we fool our selves in such a case as this with that base and narrow-sould
Worldly Wisdom? Let them still out face us, and, if not basely comply, yet,
which is next to it, connive at, and dissemble, what we cannot be ignorant of?
Nay, by partial and unworthy recommendations set up in great place in a
Christian State, such scandalous persons and evil Examples, as true Christian
Discipline would humble and cast out of the Church? and so cross the Providence
of God by setting up such as he is pulling down? Such Politicoes, who have no
more sense of the Honor of God, may possibly meet with their deserved
correction in an Eclipse of their own. But it concerns all, that we do not by
neglect or further delay of so great a Duty, to which we are lead in so special
a manner, provoake a change of the course of this propitious Providence, so as
to bring in the Philistines again upon us; or correct our laziness with some
new difficulties, or unexpected impediments. But so much for this.

There is one thing more in relation to Religion of great in portance, wherein
have been no small mistakes heretofore committed, and that is Unanimity in
Religion. This has been greatly disturbed and interrupted by inconsiderate
affectation of Uniformity, and improper and preposterous means for that
purpose. The most natural and proper means to promote both, are 1. To remove
all Force (which is contrary to the nature of Religion, as the Ancient
Christians generally agree) and Secular Punishments upon Ecclesiastical
Censures, 2. To remove all needless occasions of Difference, and unnecessary
Terms of Conformity, especially under Oaths and Subscriptions, 3. To reform the
Liturgy, so as might most conduce to Edification, and to gratify and satisfy
the Devotion of the most Sober and Religious Christians. Against this last I
have not known any thing Objected, but what are the plain Principles and usual
Arguments of the Papists against the Reformation of their Religion and their
Missal. This belongs to the Clergy to do, but they must be ordered and
commissionated to do it; the other two may be done by a short Act of Parliament
to repeal the Penal Statutes against Protestant Dissenters, the Act of
Uniformity, 14. C. 2. etc. and with them some others inconsistent with the true
Constitution of the English Government, and promoted by Popish Counsels to
alter the same for their advantage.

As for Civil Matters, the Fundamental Error of King James and his Successors
hitherto, (which it is very probable was promoted by the craft of the Romish
Emissaries, that they might strike in with one party) was that by setting up
for Prerogative against the Law, he divided the common Intrest; for the King
and the People have a mutual Intrest in each other, so that what is for the
real good of either, is for the common good of both; as in a natural body, what
is pernicious to any Member, damnifies the whole. The true Constitution of the
English Government was built upon solid Principles of Wisdom, to give to each
all that could be, without prejudice to the other: to the King all the Honor
and Majesty that might be, which was the Honor and Majesty of the whole; the
actual Administration, but by Officers authorized by Law, and sworn faithfully
to perform their Duty; large Revenues, but to use for the public good, not to
alienate at his Pleasure; and all things to be done in his Name, as the head of
the Society, but so as he cannot stay the ordinary course of Justice at his
pleasure, without violation of the Law: And to the people an Inspection into
the Administration, and Power to Enquire and Determine concerning the
Miscariages of it. All which being apparent and undeniable in practice, is a
certain argument that the Regal Administration was designed for the Common Good
of the whole, of King and People both, as one Body. The Preservation therefore
of this Constitution does necessarily tend to the security of the King, as well
as of the People; and there can be no better means for this Preservation, than
frequent Sessions of Parliament according to the Laws, that is, Annual; though
to prevent the so frequent trouble of Elections, it might be enacted that they
should be chosen but once in three Years, and sit at certain times, and when
the business is done, be adjourned or prorogued, but not dissolved till the
last Year of the three. A good Act to settle some such Course and regulate
Elections, would for the future prevent all such Mischiefs as have befallen our
late Kings, be the most effectual means to secure the Succession to their
posterity, and preserve them from all Temptations, and danger of being seduced
by evil Men. And by this means would Religion and Justice make the Nation
Flowrish, and King and People mutually Happy: which every good Man will
heartily wish and endeavor in his place.

The REVIEW.
THus have I followed the train of my thoughts, beyond what I first intended,
but not at all beyond, or besides my Design; which was only the Service of God,
and the Good of this little part of Mankind, my Country. And I have done it
with all Simplicity, Freedom and Plainness, without any regard to exactness of
Method, or any thing else but Truth and Usefulness; as I use to do with my
Friends, and those I most wish well to. It is true my good Will and Affection,
both to Church and State, has some times broaken out into warn expressitions,
which ingenuous Spirits and well disposed minds can never take amiss under our
Circumstances: For it is plainly no more than necessary. The times of this
(late) Ignorance, (tho many being willingly ignorant) God in great Mercy winked
at in our late Deliverance: But now he comcommandeth every one every where to
repent. I am, at least morally, certain, That this Church and State are in a
special manner at this time upon their good behavior; That if they acquit
themselves well, they may be exceeding prosperous and happy; If they rely too
much upon vulgar Politics, and that Bastard Wisdom of the World, they will be
entangled, and meet with many and great Impediments and Difficulties; But if
they wholly neglect to correspond and cooperate with the Designs of Gods
Providence in these extraordinary Revolutions, consider not how great things
the Lord has done for us, but still do wickedly, they shall be consumed, both
they and their King; and will soon fill up the measure of the former Iniquities.

For the Preventing of this, and Securing the Prosperity and Happiness before
mentioned, the most effectual Means and Method seems to be:

1. That a Day be appointed for a Solemn Humiliation, to represent truly and
plainly the Folly and Madness of the Abominable Sins, which have over spread
the Nation; to undeceive and drive us from our Security, and convince us that
the late Revolutions were an Actual Judgment upon those cast out, but to us
only an offer of Mercy, with Judgments still hanging over our heads, ready to
fall upon us, if we take not good heed in time; and therefore to excite us to
give Glory to God, by true Humiliation, and a speedy and effectual Reformation.

2. That for this purpose such Laws as we have already against any kind of
Debauchery or Profaneness, be spedily put in strict execution for the present;
and, to supply the the Defects in them, a more effectual Act be speedily
provided, with the most proper and natural Penalties: as, for the Nobility and
Gentry Degradation and Disability to hold any Place of Public Employment, or
sit in Parliament; for others Whiping, Pillory and Infamy; and further for all,
Disability to give Evidence upon Oath.

3. That the way may be cleared and enlarged for more Charity and Unanimity
among Protestants, by a Repeal of all Acts against Protestant Dissenters,
(which are both contrary to the Nature of Christianity, and to the genuine
Methods of the Propagation and Preservation of it, and have proved very
Unsuccessful and Mischievous) and especially the Act of Uniformity.

4. That some effectual Provision be made for the more easy removing of
Scandalous and unfit Ministers out of the Church, and that Ecclesiastical
Livings and Preferments may be committed only to fit and proper Persons for
that Sacred Employment; especially that the Bishoprics be committed to the
most pious prudent and industrious men. These and some other such may make us
happs.

FINIS.

