THE Whole Parable OF DIVES and LAZARUS, Explained and Applied: Being several
SERMONS Preached in Cripplegate and Lothbury CHURCHES.

By Joseph Stevens, Lecturer at both.

Published at the Request of the Hearers.

And recommended as Proper to be given at Funerals.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in Jewen-street, 1697.

To his beloved Hearers in the Parishes of St. Giles Cripplegate, and St.
Margaret Lothbury.
I Having been much importuned to publish these following Sermons, preached on
the Parable of Dives and Lazarus, I thought I could not dedicate them so
properly to any, as to You, who were constantly present when they were
delivered by me. I know that I must be subject to Censures; but since these
Discourses were well designed, and if they take that effect, I wish and
heartily pray for, I shall be the more easy under harsh Judgments. I have not
made any Alterations in them, but have sent them abroad in that Dress they were
preached in, on purpose that the meanest Capacities may understand, and be
benefited by them. And if so, I shall think my self well rewarded for my
Labors. They may serve to acquaint you with the after state of good and bad
Men, and to prepare you for those blessed Mansions above: And therefore I think
it not improper, if they were given away at Funerals, to prevent those
Discourses which are generally used by the invited Guests, and to possess their
Minds with the thoughts of another World, very suitable to such solemn
Occasions; Here Persons that mourn for the Deaths of good Friends and
Relations, may receive Comfort, their Souls being carried by the Angels into
Abraham 's Bosom. The Parable being so large and comprehensive, I shall say the
less concerning it, but refer you to the serious and candid perusal of the
several Discourses preached upon it: Which, that they may so affect, as to
reform and fit you for Heaven, is the earnest Wish, and hearty Prayer of your
unworthy Servant,

Joseph Stevens.

THE PARABLE OF Dives and Lazarus.
Luke XVI. Ver. 19. to the end.
Ver. 19. There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine
linen, and fared sumptuously every day.

Ver. 20. And there was a certain beggar, named Lazarus, which was laid at his
gates full of sores:

Ver. 21. And desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the rich man's
table: moreover, the dogs came and licked his sores.

Ver. 22. And it came to pass, that the beggar died, and was carried by the
angels into Abraham's bosom: the rich man also died, and was buried.

Ver. 23. And in hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and sees Abraham
afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom:

Ver. 24. And he cried, and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send
Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue,
for I am tormented in this flame.

Ver. 25. But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst
thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and
thou art tormented.

Ver. 26. And besides all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed,
so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot; neither can they pass
to us that would come from thence.

Ver. 27. Then he said, I pray thee therefore, father, that thou would send
him to my father's house:

Ver. 28. For I have five brethren; that he may testify unto them, lest they
also come into this place of torment.

Ver. 29. Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the prophets, let them
hear them.

Ver. 30. And he said, Nay, father Abraham; but if one went unto them from the
dead, they will repent.

Ver. 31. And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the prophets,
neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.

SERMON I.
Luke XVI. Ver. 19, 20, 21.
Ver. 19. There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine
linen, and faired sumptuously every day.

Ver. 20. And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his
gates full of sores:

Ver. 21. And desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the rich man's
table: moreover the dogs came and licked his sores.

THE Pharisees, who were present at our Savior's Conference with his
Disciples, in the former part of this Chapter, were so netled at his pithy and
home discourse, that they mocked at, and derided him, viz because he exclaimed
against those sins they were strongly prone to, and wilfully allowed themselves
in; namely, Covetousness and Uncharitableness: He therefore, to convince them
of their Folly, and, if possible, to reduce them to a more generous and humane
frame of Spirit, ushers in a very notable and affecting Parable, adorned with
illustrious Instances, and furnished with memorable Characters: There was, says
he, a certain noble Man, who lived softly, had many Attendants, full Tables, a
stately Palace, every thing that was great, good, and desirable in this Life.
And there was a poor indigent Man, called by the Name of Lazarus, destitute of
a comfortable Habitation, his Belly pinched with hunger, his Spirits
languishing for want of reviving draughts, his Countenance dejected and fading,
and his Flesh being exposed to stress of Weather, not having wherewith to
defend it from boisterous Winds, and other common Contingencies, broke out into
Ulcers and putrefying Sores. This miserable Creature makes to the rich Man's
Seat, and fills his Courts with the doleful Cries of a languishing Soul; he
begs, not for Dainties and sumptuous Diet, but only for waste Bread, the refuse
of the Servants; or rather for the Crumbs which usually fall under the Table at
Meals. This was the poor Man's request; that which is swept up with the rest of
the litter, and thrown out of Doors to the Dunghill, was all that this
distressed Lazarus most importunately desired, to allay the gripes and gnawings
which sharp Hunger had created within him: But though his Necessities were so
pressing, his Request so modest and reasonable, and his Sores so angry and
painful, (enough to have melted down an obdurate Heart into pity, and to have
obliged the meanest Person to have spared from himself, and nourished such an
afflicted Soul,) yet this avaricious and impregnable Wretch turns a deaf'ned
Ear, casts a disdainful Eye upon, and brow-beats this trembling Beggar, and
basely denies him that which his menial Servants scornfully rejected. The Dogs
which generally are currish and snarling, ready to snap at, and fly upon
Strangers, here change their Nature, and, as it were, express their Pity by
doleful howlings; and, as if this was too little, medendi gratia linguas suas
accommodant, run hastily to him, and endeavor the Cure of his Wounds by
licking them with their soft and easy Tongues: Thus these Creatures supplied
the Necessities of afflicted Lazarus, by the instinct of Nature, more than
their Masters by all the Ties and Obligations of Reason.

He was blessed with a flourishing Estate, nothing that the World esteemed good,
great, and desirable, was withheld from him; so that since Providence had thus
undeservedly crowned him with a plentiful Revenue, he could not, unless wraped
up in the Womb of Ingratitude, have denied a small part of so vast an Income to
this importunate Beggar; much less have refused him that inconsiderable Request
of his, namely, The crumbs which fell from his Table; such Offel which his Dogs
blowed upon: But brutishly forgetting from whence his Riches sprang, and
greedily fixing his Heart upon them, concludes it Prodigality and ill Husbandy
to part with any thing, though it were but a Rag to cover the Flesh, or a
morsel to sustain the Hunger, or a draught to revive the languishing Spirits of
a fainting Soul. Such dangerous temptations are Riches, if Men are not guarded
with Grace, and well consider the Design of God in bestowing them. Hence our
Savior pronounces, That it is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a
Needle, than for a rich Man to enter into the kingdom of Heaven. Not that
Riches are Evils in themselves, but they become such by an imprudent
Management, when Men suffer their Hearts to be drawn away by them. They are
commonly Blessings; they were so to Abraham, Lot, Isaac, and Jacob; to Job,
David, and Joseph of Arimathea: but such was the stupid brutishness of this
Miser, he contracted such an inordinate love to his Estate, that he had quite
lost all Humanity and Compassion: His only care was to keep what he had,
drowning his Senses in Gluttony, Drunkenness, and all kinds of Sensuality,
never once thinking of a life to come; but O sad Catastrophe, and dismal change
of Things! Riches, though they defend from Hunger, Thirst, and other exterior
contingencies, yet they cannot bribe, and stave off Death, neither insinuate
with the Judge Christ Jesus for a favorable Trial, nor purchase a Mansion
amongst the Saints; he dies, and awakes in the midst of soorching flames, and
bituminous smokes, scared at the ghastly Spectrums and hideous Noises he meets
with among Devils and damned Fiends. Lazarus also dies, and is carefully
conveyed into Abraham 's bosom, a safe Repository, and never to Hunger, Thirst,
and want more: But this I shall treat of in its proper place.

The words of the Text are properly divided into two special Parts. The

First is, A brief Narrative of a Rich Man's General Course of Living; he
clothes himself with rich, gay, and costly Raiment, and fares sumptuously
every Day. The

Second Part is, A description of the Calamities that attend Poverty; Lazarus
was full of Sores, almost Naked and Famished, he begs for a little Sustenance,
and that of the meanest kind, but was most uncharitably denied it. Now these
two Generals demonstrate to us,

First of all, That Riches are strong incentives to Luxury and Riotousness;
this Rich Man fared Sumptuously every Day, (...), he Entertained himself every
Day with Luxurious Delights.

Secondly, That Riches tempt to Pride, Haughtiness, and Uncharitableness. This
Elated Miser thought it beneath his Grandeur, either to look upon, or
commiserate afflicted and languishing Lazarus; and therefore chides him by his
Menial Servants, and sends him away empty as he came.

Thirdly, That Poverty is a despicable State, and renders a Man most vile and
mean in the Eye of others, how much soever good he has heretofore done with
what God had blessed him with.

These are the three Topics which will be the Subject of my ensuing Discourse;
only by the way it may not be improperly inserted, That by the Rich Man, and
Poor Lazarus, is figured out to us the different state of good and bad Men in
this Life: Good Men, for the most part, are in mean and low Circumstances, and
of small Account, but are rich toward God, precious in his sight, and have
their Portion treasured up with him, according to that of St. James, chap. 2.5.
God has chosen the Poor of this World heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven. The
Wicked generally flourish, the World's affluences tumble in upon them, but they
have their Portion in this Life; hereafter Fire and Brimstone, and an horrible
Tempest, shall be the Portion of their Cup, Psalm. 11.6.

But to proceed in order.

First, Riches are strong Incentives to Luxury and Riotousness. This Nobleman
fared Sumptuously every Day; he observed no Intervals for Mortification, no
time for holy Retirement, for a strict Examination of himself, for Prayer,
Repentance, and other necessary Duties: Nor was he so Morally useful to others
as was St. Augustine, who divided the Day into special Portions for needful
businesses; to reconcile disturbed Families, and linck together enraged
Neighbors in the Bonds of Amity, to observe and minister to the Necessities of
the Indigent, to instruct the Ignorant, counsel the less wary; and such like.
No, no, this wealthy Wretch lived every Day to himself, delighting his Palate
with luscious Viands, and Falernian Liquors, loading his Stomach with Morsels,
without any regard to Moderation; had no thoughts of, nor any earning bowels,
after those who wanted, and would be glad of the meanest bit at his Table.
After this Luxurious manner did he spend every Day; such strong and
irresistible temptations are Riches, when Men are without Grace, and consider
not the wise and holy purpose of God in bestowing them; for though they are the
proper and peculiar Gifts of Heaven, and were promised to, and bestowed upon
our Forefathers, as illustrious instances of the Divine favor, yet they are
not to be prostituted solely to our selves, that is, to nourish and maintain
our Lusts, for then they change their nature, and prove the manifest ruin of
Soul and Body. Upon which account, it may not be improper to insert this
Memorandum, That they who are blessed with Plenty and Store, ought to be very
importunate with God, that he would moderate, and rectify their Appetites, keep
and restrain their Hearts, curb and limit their Desires, that they may not be
so taken up, and charmed with their Wealth, as to forget the Concernments of
their Souls, and suffer them to live out a long Eternity with the Damned Crew,
in the unhappy Residences of Misery. Therefore our Savior, ever and anon, is
giving a special charge to Rich Men, that they be very cautious and wary, lest
they should be Enchanted, and betrayed by Superfluities, which, like the
Sirens, whom the Poets speak of, as it were, lie in wait for Men, and seduce
them by their pleasing, and almost irresistible Charms. It was an excellent
Prayer that of Agurs, Prove. 30.8, 9. O Lord, says he, Give me neither poverty
nor riches; feed me with food convenient for me: Lest I be full, and deny thee,
and say, Who is the Lord? or lest I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my
God in vain.

Having weighed in an even Balance both a prosperous and an adverse state, and
considering what inconveniences the extreme of either condition would bring
men into; the one tempting them to Luxury, Drunkenness, and Gluttony, the other
to Theft, Lying, and Perjury; Prostrates himself before God, with rectified
desires, a moderate appetite, and an humble heart, and beseeches him to bless
him with a condition neither too wealthy, nor too despicable; to the end he
might not be prompted to such enormous sins. When Riches are enjoyed without a
just sense and fear of God, they leadmen into manifold extravagancies; the
appetite which once perhaps was corrective, and as scanty as a mean competency,
now enlarges it self, and grows as comprehensive in its wishes as the Estate
abounds; Now the heart is fixed upon its desired Treasure; and no less taken
with all the pleasures and seemingly delights it can procure and purchase, to
violate a divine Commandment; when obedience thereto stands in competition with
Money, is thought no sin, but rather a special instance of policy and prudence.
In a word, and to borrow the expression, The love of Money spends all its
desires upon its self to purchase nothing but unsatisfying instruments of
Exchange, or Supernumerary Provisions; and ends in emptiness of Spirit.

This Rich man in the Text spent all his thoughts how he might advance to the
height of an Epicures Life; what shall I eat? or what shall I drink? or what
shall I put on? The world seemed too little to answer his greedy desires; too
empty to furnish his Table with such varieties, his extended appetite most
passionately craved after. His Estate was large, and his Mind answerable; nay,
rather more diffusive: So that though he was plentifully accomodated with the
sublimest rarities, yet he still seemed unsatisfied; but sure this is not the
end of our Creation; God has not designed us merely for these lower
entertainments. Our Spirits are capacious Beings, of eternal duration, and must
live in another world for ever; after this is consumed. Where then is thy
policy? O Dives! Where is the sense of thy Voluptuous faring? Thou must not
always abide here; thy Riches, Honors, and Luscious Delicates, all must perish
and thou stripped into a naked Spirit, and answer for all thy Transactions at the
Tremendous Bar of Justice, where neither thy Wealth nor Grandeur can procure
thy favor with Judge or Jury; the meanest Peasants shall then be as great as
thou, and find as much receptance at that Grand Assiizes. But to proceed to the
second general Head, namely,

Secondly, That as Riches are strong incentives to Luxury and Riotousness, so
to Pride, Haughtiness and Uncharitableness. This wealthy Miser thought it too
great a Reflection upon his Dignity and Person, to look upon, or commiserate
afflicted Lazarus; and therefore he imperiously charged his Servants to forbid
him begging, and to send him away empty as he came.

He considered that such an Estate as he was possessed of, called for lofty
looks, a starched carriage, big words, and full commands, a visible separation
of himself from his inferiors; and that which enhansed his Estate, speaking to
others by the mouth of his Servants, being difficult of access, and carrying it
in all things with Majesty, Pomp, and an imperious Deportment. It had therefore
been a visible slur upon his Person to have seemed afflicted with the
complaints of poor Lazarus, to have stepped from his seat, and viewed this
Begger's Condition, and commanded supplies for him. Should he, who was advanced
to the very top of honor and magnificence; he, who had attendance always at
hand, whose grandeur was noised abroad, and became the wonder and admiration of
the Neighboring Villages; he whose clothing was Royal Purple, whose Linen
the Richest that Acaiah could furnish him with; he whose Presence was the
Terror of his Household, and the astonishment of the Vulgar; Should such a one,
thus incircled with the rarest Accommodations of fortune, so far demean himself
to stoop to a Person fallen into the depth of Disgrace, attended with all the
Instances of Contempt and Derision, as was dejected Lazarus? No, no, let him
away from my Gates, and get his Belly full at some Cottage or other. Thus
Riches are apt to make us forget our selves, they Intoxicate our understanding,
and Prompt us to over-rate our selves; they lift us up above our Sphere, and
lead us to contemn and slight those who are not in such fortunate circumstances
as our selves. Common Experience gives us too many, and palpable Instances of
this kind; some who through meanness of Perentage, or other unhappy
Contingencies, have lived in an Ordinary Capacity, and while thus bereaved of
Fortunes, Cists, possibly were Humble, Meek, and Condescending, forward to
assist when useful, and apt to be affected with the calamities, and pressing
necessities of others; but when the tide has changed, either their Industry
blessed to a plentiful Estate, or they started into a wealthy Condition, by the
last Will and Testament of a deceased Friend, or familiar Acquaintance, their
disposition has changed to. Now their late Translation speaks greater things;
their Conversation must be with those who are of the same Rank and Quality with
themselves. Now their wonted Apparel, which was plain and suitable to their
Condition, must be of another Mode and Figure, set off with curious Trimmings,
and fashionable Appurtinances; their Carriage more Airy and Affected; their
Countenances more Elevated and Stately; their Speech more Majestic and
Uncooth, former Acquaintances must be buried in Oblivion, the poor not worthy
of their notice, or at least have nothing to spare for them; their Pride and
Grandeur must be maintained; but what an unfortunate case is this, that men
should forget from whence they are, and value themselves so much upon such
unconstant and perrishing things as Riches are? what art thou the better for
thy wealth? wherein do thou exceed thy meanest Brother? Reckon not upon
wealth, for God is no respecter of Persons. A Beggar, it may be, is more in
God's favor than thou, and shall be admitted within the vail to joy and feast
himself for ever with those rare, unseen repasts which Divine Wisdom has
contrived for those who express their Love and Loyalty to him, whilst thou
shall be dragged away by the common Accuser, and his Angels, into the
Repositories of shame and sorrow, there to suffer the uttmost heats of a
Sin-revenging God.

But besides the stupid folly of being puffed up in conceit because thy Lot is
fallen in a fair Heritage; Daily experience almost evinces us, that Riches are
Transient Pleasures, like unto the flower of the field, which to day is, blown,
gay, and beautiful, and to morrow faded, and fit for naught but to be heaped
together with the grass: Thou call thy self to day a substantial, wealthy
Person; Houses in abundance, Lands large, and fruitful, Baggs full, and running
over, but by the morrow perhaps thou may be weeping to see thy Tenements
laid in Ashes, thy Money snatched away by the silent crafty Thief, or perhaps,
thou weeping, sighing, and roaring in Hell; thou know not but the Sentence
is gone forth from God; Thou fool, this night shall thy Soul be required of
thee, and then whose shall those things be which thou have provided? But if it
so falls out, that thou should outlive thy Happiness, see thy self stripped
of all thy Pomp and Riches, thou may justly expect to meet with hard and
severe usage; for, (besides the many Reflections which would certainly be cast
upon thee, that this sad Catastrophe, and dismal change of things, is a just
Judgment upon thee for thy Pride, Arrogance, Self-conceitedness, and
Uncharitableness, during thy Prosperity,) Men would be so far from pitying thy
downfall, and considering thy necessities, that rather they would reproach thee
for thy Poverty, and laugh at thy Calamities. The World is apt to remember
faults, and never at a better time, than when Men are fallen to decay, and
stand in special need of common help, then the generality lay their heads
together, and recount as many failings, which may harden them against a
charitable disposition; but enough for the second general thing, namely, That
Riches are strong Temptations to Pride, Haughtiness, and Uncharitableness. The
other remaining Topic, namely, That Poverty is a most despicable state, and
renders a Man most vile and mean in the Eye of the World; drawn from the
miserable condition of Lazarus, and the base usage shown him in his Low
Circumstances By the Rich Man, shall be my business the next opportunity. I now
proceed to make some special Use of what has been said at this time, and so
conclude.

And the first Use is; That if Riches are such Lures and strong Temptations, it
should serve for an Admonition to those who are blessed with them, that they do
not set too great a value upon them, nor hugg them with too much eagerness and
desire; that they labor to make their love of Wealth subservient to their love
of Heaven, and heavenly things, that they learn to admire and adore their
Creator, who has cast their Lot in a fair Heritage, and rightly understand his
wise and holy Purpose, in crowning them with Prospeperity, that Riches are not
given to spend them upon our Lusts, to live sumptously every day, to trifle our
time in ease, Idleness, and security; this is the abusing of Riches; No, no,
they are given to more excellent ends; To encourage us in our Duty, to give our
Children good Education; to help the Fatherless and Widow, the Oppressed and
Stranger; it is sad to consider, how Lavish and Prodigal many are, whom fate
has blessed with plenty and store, laying out vast sums in beautifying buildings,
dainty fare, and well furnished Wardrobes, and the like, while the poor perish
at their Gates: Dives was so taken up with his various and extravagant
Diversions, that he could spare no time, or rather, would not, to hear the
doleful complaints of distressed Lazarus, or to see, consider, and relieve his
necessities. He was clothed in Purple and fine Linen; his belly filled with
the best of Provisions, and therefore considered not what it was to be Hungry,
Thirsty, Naked and Friendless, he was not tormented with that sharp Thorn which
so miserably afflicted Lazarus, that he cried, Oh! fill my craving Stomach with
the crumbs that fall under thy Table, with those superfluous morsels, which are
thy Dogs Food; I desire not that which thou feedest upon; nothing else but the
worst bit thy Servants leave; this is my request, this I should be glad of, and
without some speedy relief, I shall faint and drop, and perish at thy Gates.
This dismal story no way affected this Inexorable wretch, but he rather chid
him for his importunity, than pitied him for his poverty. One would have
thought that such expressions as these were enough to have pierced the most
obdurate heart, and to have melted it down into compassion; but such is the
unhappy proof of an heart enamoured with, and inseparably fixed upon Riches.
Let it therefore be a caveat to those who are favored with the smiles of
fortune, that they do not reckon too much upon their prosperous condition, nor
be too much in love with it.

Secondly, The second Use is, That since Riches are apt to seduce and betray
men, tempt them to forget God and themselves; let those whose fortunes are mean
in the world, learn to be content in their State. They have the more leisure to
look after the concernments of their Souls, and to provide for their long
Journey into Eternity; they are free from abundance of cares, fears, and
troubles; they are not perplexed with contriving how to purchase such an
Estate, nor overwhelmed with the fear of losing it, but have many fair
opportunities of preparing themselves for the embraces of the Father of
Spirits. Therefore Christian, grudge not that thy Portion in this life is so
narrow, if- thou art brought to a morsel of bread, to a draught of water; yet
even this is enough to bear thy charges to Heaven: But if thou art not so
fortunate to be Master of this meaner Diet, thy life will be only the shorter;
and possibly God keeps thee short here, that he may plentifully reward thee
hereafter; Heaven is sufficient to make thee satisfaction for all thy
sufferings; in Gods presence there is fullness of Joy, and at his right hand are
pleasures for evermore. To be received into that capacious world where are all
the instances of Joy, all the ingredients of felicity, to have all thy
faculties enlarged; to the end they may relish those hidden Comforts, to know
and understand the methods of providence, and to be made acquainted with the
Arcana Imperii, the secrets of Heaven.

In a word, to possess all that that is good, lovely and desirable, and that
for ever; The consideration of this is enough to bear us up under the sorest
Trials, and most pressing Calamities. To conclude. let us all endeavor to
answer the end of God in whatsoever condition we are; if we be Rich, let us be
Humble, Meek, and Modest, Affable, Courteous, and Charitable; if Poor, Content,
Thankful, and Holy. Now to the mighty Governor of the world, who loves
Mankind, and gives to all men according to his Infinite Wisdom, be given the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Soli Deo Gloria.

SERMON II.
Luke XVI. Ver. 19, 20, 21.
Ver. 19. There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine
linen, and faired sumptuously every day.

Ver. 20. And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his
gates full of sores.

Ver. 21. And desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the rich man's
table: moreover the dogs came and licked his sores.

AFter a plain and familiar descant upon this part of the Parable, in my last
Discourse; to the end it might be more emphatical and taking, I proceeded to
Division, and told you, That these words were separated into two Parts:

The first, Being a brief Narrative of a rich Man's general course of living;
that he lives softly, arrays himself splendidly, and fareeth sumptuously every
day:

The second, A description of the miseries which attend an impoverished state;
namely, Hunger, Thirst, declension of Health, Contempt, and the like. Lazarus
was naked, and almost famished; he begs for a little sustenance, and that of
the meanest sort too, but was scornfully denied it. From these two heads I took
occasion to show,

First of all, That Riches are strong incentives to Luxury and Riotousness.
Secondly, To Pride, Haughtiness, and Uncharitableness. Thirdly, That Poverty is
looked upon as a despicable state, and renders a Man vile and mean in the eye
of others.
As to the former of these; namely, That Riches strongly tempt to Luxury and
Riotousness; I urged the proof of this from this Noble man's daily voluptuous
fareing; every day was alike, he observed no intervals for Mortification, no
times for Holy Retirement: Religious Exercises were too dull and flatulent, of
an unsavory gust to him, whose Palate could only relish the choicest
Provisions; he had nothing else to do but to Sing his Quietus; Soul, take thine
ease, eat, drink, and be merry, for thou have much Goods laid up for many
years. Thus many, whom Fate has blessed with Plenty and Store, take up all
their thoughts what rare pleasures and gratifications they may purchase,
contriving how they may accommodate their Appetites with the choicest and most
select Dainties; but seldom or never think of their Spiritual Concernments, as
if these were such inferior businesses, requisite only for those of mean
Fortunes to employ themselves about.

Mortification to such Persons is, in a degree, as obnoxious as being stripped
of their Pomp and Riches: In a word, whatsoever may put them in mind of Death,
Judgment, and a future State, is as unwelcom to their thoughts, as was God's
Sentence to the Avaricious Miser in the Gospel; Thou fool, this night shall thy
soul be required of thee.

As to the second General head; namely, That Riches strongly tempt to Pride,
Haughtiness, and Uncharitableness: I endeavored the proof of this, from the
lofty carriage of this Nobleman, his chiding the Beggar for his bold
importunity, casting a disdainful Eye upon, and dismissing him from his Gates,
Hungry, Thirsty, Naked, and full of Sores, as he came; as if Dives, upon
hearing the doleful Complaints of Needy Lazarus, should have expressed himself
to this effect: What impertinent and audacious Person is that who knocks at my
Door, and fills my Ears with such a Din? Shall I, who am great and honorable,
richly clad, a Companion for noted Persons, cast such a visible slur upon my
Person and Dignity, as to change a word with such a contemptible Creature, or
be seen to take notice of one who is disfigured with Rags, so wan and
formidable, so pestered with Ulcers and putrefying Sores? No, no, let him be
removed from before my Gates, and get a Belly full where he can.

Such is the imperious Carriage of many toward those who beg their Charity,
and conclude it one of the most foul blots upon them, to lend an Ear to, or to
seem affected with their mournful complaints.

Thus far I went the last time, only adding some useful Inferences; I now go on
to what remains, namely, to the third general Thing.

Thirdly, That Poverty is a despicable State, or so accounted, and renders a
Man vile and mean in the Eye of others, how much good soever he may have
formerly done with what he had. Poor Lazarus, though he had a Soul as great and
good as the most Puissant Monarch, (but inward Endowments are not so much the
World's observation) was treated with Scorn and Infamy, because his outward
appearance was not comely and creditable, sightly and fashionable. Possibly,
that little Clothing he had, was Weather-beaten, and so shattered, that it
could scarce hang about him; his Face lean, wan, and ghastly, (those rarer
adornments of Nature being faded, by the sharpness of Hunger and Thirst) his
flesh full of Blotches and running Sotes, the whole Mass of Blood being
corrupted and gangreen'd for want of a vivid circulation. This miserable
Object, Inhumane Dives, scornfully rejects, and looks upon him fit for nothing
else but to be his Dogs Companion: But remember, thou disdainful wretch, the
time is coming, when thou shall be derided by the same Lazarus, whom now thou
treatest at thy Gates with contempt and disgrace; it is the Will of Heaven,
that his Portion here shall be narrow and scanty, that his Reward, in another
World, may be great and glorious, when thou, who art here Invested with the
rarest and most sublime Accommodations, shall be stripped of all, and become a
Victim to his Triumph. God may permit his Servants to be savagely used, to be a
Reproach, and Byword, in the World, because he has enough to make them
infinitely amends; but to illustrate the Subject, and enlarge the Matter of it,
I shall,

First of all, Show why the Generality of the World despise Poverty. Secondly,
The Unreasonableness of this Practice. And, Lastly, How infinitely we are
obliged to respect them which are poor.
First, Then, I am to show, why the generality of the World despise Poverty.
First, Because they are infected with wrong Notions of Things, and draw false
Conclusions. They look upon Poverty as a Judgment inflicted for some Wickedness
or other; as the Disciples did the blindness which seized the Man from his
birth, John 9.2. And, in favor to this Opinion, think it justifiable enough,
to contemn and slight it. For, say they, if God makes Poverty a visible Mark of
his Resentment of some open Indignities offered to him, it is but equal that we
also should express our aversion from it. But what an erroneous and rash
Judgment this is, will appear, if we consider, That though Poverty is the just
and most reasonable effect of Prodigality, or ill Husbandry, by which means
abundance have been reduced to a morsel of Bread, a draught of Water,
Nakedness, and the like; yet many, notwithstanding their industrious Care,
indefatigable Labors, early Risings, and late taking Rest, and all to get
subsistence, and an answerable competency in the World, are invisibly
frustrated; their simple and honest contrivances cannot arrive to Perfection,
but are blasted and nipped in their very birth. Now the Scripture says, They
that will not work, shall not eat; implying, that a plodding Head, industrious
Hands, and honest Endeavors, are the appointed means whereby Wealth is to be
obtained: Why therefore does Providence obstruct and hinder Success?

I answer; God knows Men better than they themselves, he understands their
Nature, and tendency of their Appetites; and possibly sees, that if they should
prosperously thrive, they would be apt to forget their Creator, and impute
their Substance to their own Industry: That they would be too much enamoured
with the World, and place all their Happiness in these lower Delights. So that,
though in the common judgment of Men, this seems a harsh Providence, yet thus
considered, it carries in it all the Instances of Love and Mercy. Poverty
therefore is not altogether a Judgment, (which is one reason why the ruder and
more unthinking part of the World despise and contemn it,) but very often the
effect of God's Goodness; a visible Indication of his Love to the Souls of Men.

Secondly, Another reason of the contempt of Poverty is, Men set too high a
value upon, and over-rate themselves; for, while carried upon the Wings of
Pride and Self-conceit, while thus elevated with great swelling Thoughts of
themselves, there is nothing more contemptible and mean in their Eye, than an
indigent Man, one whom Providence has denied those outward Blessings, which
make Men of some Figure and Repute in the World. Hence it is that such kind of
Persons affect much Homage and Obeisance, look for humble Addresses, frequent
Entreaties, and all other demonstrations of State and Grandeur, as if Nature
had framed them in a Mold of a separate make, and had distinguished them from
their fellow Creatures by visible Characters. Poor Lazarus, how often did
thou importune, beseech, and entreat Dives, to look upon, and commiserate thy
languishing condition? How often did thou bow and cringe, and all to affect
him with a sense of thy Misfortunes? But what a disdainful Eye did he cast upon
thee, thinking it beneath his Grandeur either to speak to thee, or relieve thy
present Needs? Neither thy mournful Gries, dejected Looks, mean Habit, nor
angry Sores, could work upon his Nature, or move him to a pliable and yearning
Disposition; from whence, O Dives, did thou spring? Art thou any thing else
but Dust? And must not thou return to it again? This is the end of all thy
Pomp; that Carcass of thine, which is clothed with Royal Purple, garnished
with soft and rich Linen, pampered with choice Provisions, eased upon a Velvet
Couch, and refreshed at Night with a Down-Bed: I say, that Body of thine, which
takes up all thy time in Catering for it, must Die, be rouled in a
Winding Sheet, crowded in a Coffin, and Interred in a Scanty Grave, where the
Vermin will make no distinction of Persons, but thou becomest their prey as
well as the meanest Peasant. Wherefore then do thou thus over-rate thy self,
and soar so high above thy meaner Brother, since he shall have a Chamber in the
Earth as well as thou, and is made in the same Mold, and compounded with the
same Matter? There is no greater Argument that Men have forgotten from whence
they came, how insufficient of themselves, and whither they must go, than when
they begin to look big, swell in fancy, and contemn their Brethren of low
degree; and this leads me in the second place, namely,

Secondly, To show the unreasonableness of this practice; and this I shall do,
by showing, First, That this is adding affliction to affliction, when
Providence, for most wise, and holy reasons, has ordained that some shall be
deprived of these lower Entertainments, and walk about the World, Empty, Mean,
and Unsightly; Destitute of comfortable Habitations, and other necessary
Accommodations, and often for want of considering Things, and drawing right
Conclusions; throws some into despair, as if God had marked them out by his
severe methods here, for his Vengeance hereafter; others more Choleric, and
less Corrective; Vent themselves into wishes for a sudden and speedy exit;
(Poverty being an Insupportable Burden, unless alleviated by the happy
Interposition of Grace.) I say, while Men are thus bemoaning their hard fate,
and groaning under an adverse providence; What greater aggravation of their
Misery can there be, than to be ridiculed, despised, hissed at, and shamefully
contemned? doubtless it was an heightning addition of Jobs Afflictions, when
his Friends, whom possibly he had obliged, when in Prosperity, loaded him with
reflections, Rejected, and Scoffed at him, while sitting on the Dunghill,
roaring for very Anguish, Naked, and Bereaved of outward comforts. Pity is the
least we can bestow upon Persons in Adversity; and though it does not furnish
them with necessaries, yet it serves to allay their grief, and sweeten their
bitter Cup, it bears them up under inward disturbances, and makes their burden
seemingly lighter. It will greatly add to the Torments of the Damned, for that
their lamentable Groans, loud Screeches, deep-fetched sighs, and incessant
weepings, will not incline the Almighty to compassion, to pity their remediless
condition; were they pitiable Objects, it would in some measure allay the
anguish of their doleful Lamentations, and it is certainly the rendering
adversity more uneasy and formidable, more Irksome, and less bearable, when
Men instead of pitying contemn and disregard it. Again,

Secondly, The unreasonableness of this appears yet farther; Hereby Men
violate that Golden Rule, which obliges to do unto others, as we would they
should do unto us; The which if generously observed, would prevent Hatred,
Revenge, Contempt and all other disorderly Practices: Suppose therefore, That
from a vast Estate and height of Honor, thou were lapsed into Poverty, and
sunk into the depth of disgrace, would thou be content to be excluded from
former Acquaintances, to be slighted, and become the Derision of thy
Neighbors? Would thou not rather think it cruel usage that thy wonted
greatness should be so soon buried in oblivion, and that thou, who were once
the veneration of others, should now become an Object of general Scorn and
Infamy? What can therefore be more unreasonable, than for Men to mete out such
measure to others, which they would not have dealt unto themselves? There is
not any thing shows more a mind void of all regard to Justice, nor a more rude
and undecent Spirit; Laberius, says the Poet Horace, dum Vixit, Credidit ingens
pauperiem Vitium; while he lived in Splendour and Pomp, and had the world at
Command, being possessed of a large Estate, looked upon nothing so criminal as
poverty, and therefore treated In digent, needy men with great contempt and
scorn: But when fate had altered his circumstances, changed the face of things,
and turned his wealth into emptiness; he was soon of another opinion, Then
Poverty was a Virtue, a state which deserved men's pity and assistance. Thus Men
are generally apt to be swelled in conceit while the World favors them, and to
reproach a mean Station; but if it chance to be their fortune to fall into it,
then nothing more unreasonable than to be despised.

Thus we observe from the Common Judgment of the world, that it is both unjust
and unequal to condemn Poverty; for though this is an usual practice, yet not
their Opinion, when fallen to decay.

From hence I proceed in the third place, namely,

Thirdly, To show how infinitely we are obliged to respect those who are poor.
And here, First, The meanest Peasants lay claim to the same parentage, which
the most Rich and mighty do; God is the common Father of all, from whom we
receive our Life, and Breath, and all things. Now to despise those of low
degree, is immediately to reflect upon our Creator, and a tacit calling his
Justice and Wisdom into question, who, for most wise, and holy Reasons, best
known to himself, has ordained prosperity and adversity, and who, as Lord of
all, and Father in Common, may dispense his Blessings in number and measure,
according to his most excellent Wisdom. And though some of his dear Children,
have scanty Portions here, yet they are not less in his favor, than they who
are blessed with his more liberal dispensations. Simple Poverty is no Argument of
Divine Anger, but rather of Love (though the unthinking part of the World
Conjecture otherwise) for the less we are entangled with Earthly goods, the
more time we have to busy our selves with things which relate to another life;
the affections will be more free and prompt, the mind more fixed and intent upon
our Spiritual concernments, and all our powers more readily disposed to join in
holy Duties; we shall not be so unwilling to part with the world, having so
small a part of its goods. That which makes this life so desirable is, the
having a great share of its comforts: Hence when Rich Men come to die, they
generally express a great reluctance, to part with their full Bags, honorable
Titles, stately Palaces, and all other their Appurtenances. Whereas when poor
Men are within a view of death, have no need to be sorry that they are bidding
a final adieu to this world, because they had so little in it; nor are their
precious minutes wasted in bequeathing Legacies, dividing Estates, and willing
Executors, (which too often is the unhappy business of wealthy Men, when they
should be dressing their Souls, for the embraces of their Redeemer.) No, no,
all that they have to do is, to renew their love to God, to perfect their
Repentance, and recommend their Spirits into the hands of their faithful
Creator. But to return, since we all descend from one common Parent, and since
what we enjoy, whether little or much, is according to his wise disposure of
things; and since the poor are the special concern of his providence; we are
highly obliged, as we would not be guilty of dishonouring God, of reflecting
upon that Being, from whom we received our Life and Breath, and calling his
Justice and Wisdom into question; to respect those that are fallen into
Poverty; to love them as our Brethren; to do good to them as Objects of our
Fathers own recommending.

To conclude this Point, I will speak in the Words of an Eminent Writer; Our
Lord (says he) is not ashamed to call the least amongst us his Brother, and his
Friend; and shall we then disdain to yield to such an one the regard and
treatment suitable to such a Ouality? Shall we not honor any Brother of our
Lords? Shall we not be civil and kind to any Friend of his? How can we pretend
to bear any true Respect or Affection to himself? It is his express Precept
that the greatest among us should, in imitation of his most Humble and
Charitable self, be ready to serve the meanest; and that we should in honor,
prefer one another, and in lowliness of mind, esteem others better than our
selves, Romans 12.10. Phil. 2.3. These are Apostolical Rules, extending
indifferently to Rich and Poor, which are plainly violated by disregarding the
Poor. But,

Secondly, Our blessed Savior was pleased to honor the state of Poverty; He
who was the Son of God, the Heir of Heaven, and the Worship of the glorious
Hierarchy, was born in a Stable, wrapped in Rags, laid in a Manger; His birth was
attended with all the Instances of meanness. When grown to Maturity, his glory
was yet Eclipsed with Poverty, he had not wherewith to lay his head. In a word,
his whole life was a full scene of Poverty; and therefore no disgrace to be
under ordinary Circumstances, since Christ himself condescended to be abased.
In honor therefore to him who has wrought our Redemption, we are obliged to
regard the poor, whom if we affront, or reproach, or despise, he tells us, we
do the like to him. And so much for this last Particular, which was, to show
how much we are obliged to respect those who are poor.

I shall now proceed to draw some useful inferences from the whole, and then
conclude.

First, If Poverty be a state thus sanctified, it is no small sin to cast
calumnious reslections upon it; though the truth of it is, nothing more common.
Daily experiences shows us, how that poor Men are a common reproach, the
ridicule of the Vulgar, the very Objects of the People; In them small faults
are discovered, but over-looked, and past by in those who make some figure in
the world. But certainly our Religion obliges us to be of another temper, to be
Humble, Gentle, and Condescending even to the meanest of the Brethren; and
propounds the Holy Jesus as our Pattern and Example, to whom we cannot pretend
respect and affection while we despise those, whom, while he was in the world,
he loved, and generally conversed with, and left a Commandment behind him, that
we should for his sake do likewise. The most Puissant Princes, the most Eminent
and Wealthy, but for one poor Beggar, had been irrecoverably undone, and lost
for ever: To Poverty it is we owe all our hopes of Heaven and Happiness, shall
we therefore be so disingenious to asperse and ridicule it? Thou proud and
lofty Wretch, where had thou been if thy Savior Christ had not become Poor?
Thou had now been roaring among Devils and Damned Fiends. When thou see an
indigent Man, the lively Portraicture of the Holy Jesus, how can thou pass by
him, and not call to mind the great things which have been done for thee by
him, who was in the form of a Servant, and made himself of no Reputation? Quum
pauperem Vidisti, Christum Vidisti. When thou meetest with a poor Man, imagine
thou see thy Savior; and regard him, if not for his own sake, yet for his,
whom thou art infinitely obliged to.

It is an unhappy thing that Men should be sunk into so vast a declension of
Manners, as to deride and scoff at Poverty, to which they owe their Redemption
and Salvation: That same forlorn wretch thou tramplest upon, has as much Right
to the Kingdom of Heaven as thou; for him Christ endured Pain, and suffered
Death, and did all a Savior could do to Entitle him to Glory and Happiness!
Where then is the distinction? What is it that thou valuest thy self upon?
Wherein is he thy Inferior? Because he has not a great Estate? Behold, Riches
approve not Men unto God; he values no Man's person for his Greatness, but for
his Goodness. In the final Disquisition, Men shall be rewarded according to
their Actions, not according to their State and Grandeur; upon which
consideration, a poor Lazarus will find as much acceptance, in the day of
Judgment, as a rich Dives; nay more, the one has received his good things in
this Life, the other evil things, and therefore the one shall be comforted, and
the other tormented; not because of his Wealth, but because he did no good with
it. Since God therefore is no respecter of Persons, let us also learn to make a
less distinction between our selves, to love and respect our meanest Brethren,
and to do to them all the good we can. Again;

Secondly, Let us learn to humble our selves with the consideration of our own
deserts. Observe we our petulant Follies, obstinate Perverseness, and
treacherous Infidelities; Nay, our daily wilful Miscarriages, the many Affronts
we offer to the Majesty of Heaven, our unmindfulness of his good Providence,
our unthankfulness for his Benefits, our neglect of holy Duties, our
backwardness in praying to, and acknowledging our dependence upon him? Were we
but pregnant with such considerations as these, we should not be so much puffed
up, nor value our selves upon Riches, remembering they are the Emanations of
Divine Goodness, not the just Retributions of our Merits. Should the quantum
meruit be the Question how much the best of us deserve, it may be answered,
Nothing but Hell, and an eternal Separation from God, and the sorest
Punishments he can inflict; a morsel of Bread, a draught of Water, even the
least Blessing we enjoy, is far beyond our Demerits: Let not therefore Riches
elate and swell, but humble us, like loaded Trees, bend the lower. In fine, let
the Christian Religion have its perfect influence upon us, that the same Mind
that was in Christ be also in us, following his Humility, his Meekness, his
Contempt of this World, and Worldly things, his Heavenly mindedness, and all
other his imitable Virtues; that at length we may live with him, be like him,
partake of his Glory, and never be separated from him more, Amen.

SERMON III.
Luke XIV. Ver. 22.
And it came to pass, that the beggar died, and was carried by the Angels into
Abraham's bosom:

THE former Part of this Parable has entertained us with the miserable and
afflicted Life of Lazarus, depainting it in all the Instances of Pity; he was
clothed with Rags, tormented with painful Sores, and racked and griped with
Hunger: Such a comfortless Condition, enough to make one weary of Life, and
wish for a sudden Exit! and the more when Succor is denied. From this poor
wretch, all outward comforts were withheld, not so much as the crumbs allowed
him which fell from the Rich Man's Table: It encourages, and bears a Man up,
under languishing circumstances, when he is caressed with pity, and gets some
relief, though but the fragments of a Meal. But such was the unfortunate Fate of
poor Lazarus, that notwithstanding his importunate cries, ghastly looks,
shattered clothes, and ulcerated flesh, none gave unto, nor condol'd with him;
hungry and thirsty, his Soul fainted in him; no Friends, nor wherewithal to
support him in this his distressed condition. But though he was thus inhumanely
dealt with, we read not that he reflected upon Providence, or charged God
foolishly, but humbly submitted himself to him who disposes all things,
patiently waiting for a happy change, either a sufficient competency while he
lived, or a translation out of this World into a better.

My Text therefore presents us with a sudden, but happy alteration of Lazarus's
condition.

It came to pass that the Beggar died: An end of all his wants, sorrows, and
conflicts. God has ever a gracious regard to the lamentable groans, and
afflicted state of his poor Servants; and though he sometimes seem long ere he
answers their request and expectation, yet in a time besitting his most
excellent Wisdom, he graciously crowns them with their hearts desire. Lazarus
not only died, but was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom: His Soul, not his
Body; probably that was exposed to ravenous Beasts, or Fowls, or else to
innumerable Vermin in the Grave, if any were so charitably disposed to bury
it, though reason enough there is to believe the contrary: For while he lived, he
could not get sustenance, his hunger, nakedness, and sores, no body regarded,
much less his dead Body, to give it a decent Interment. But no matter, his Soul
was returned to him that gave it; and his Body too, though never so much mangled,
and dispersed into never so many Atoms, shall be compacted together, made vivid
and formable, at the command of the great Creator.

Now the Text contains two Parts: The

First is, A Description of the Death of Lazarus: And it came to pass that the
Beggar died. The

Second, Gives an account of the condition and state of his Soul: And was
carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom.

From whence these two great Points are proved:

First, That the Soul is capable of an Existence separated from the Body. Let
that fond conjecture then of those be condemned, who imagine that the Soul,
together with the Body, declineth in the Earth.

Secondly, That the Souls of the Faithful, when they depart from their Bodies,
immediately pass into a fixed state of Blessedness. But that which I shall at
this time treat on, will be the Death of Lazarus; and in descanting upon this,
I shall,

First of all, Consider what were the immediate Causes of his Death. Secondly,
What kind of treatment he met with while languishing. And then, Lastly, What
became of his Body after Death.
First then, I am to consider what were the immediate Causes of Lazarus' s
Death: And here, if we reflect upon his circumstances while living, we may soon
conjecture. For,

First, He wanted the Staff of Life, namely, Bread: He desired to be fed with
the crumbs which fell from the Rich Man's Table, but was uncharitably refused
them. Hunger is a sharp Thorn, it dries up the Blood, it decays those rarer
Ornaments of Nature, Beauty, and a sanguine Complexion; it preys upon the
Spirits, and makes them faint and droop. In a word, Hunger destroys the Marrow,
weakens the Bones, and puts the whole frame of Nature into a grand disorder.
And here the griping pains, the gnawings this poor wretch endured, the
lamentable sighs and groans he fetched, the doleful complaints he made, (what a
gbastly countenance be had?) reduced to such a degree of weakness, that he
could not stand, for he lay at the Rich Man's Gates. Such a condition as this,
doubtless, makes Life burthensom, and Death more eligible. We observe by
constant Experience, that some who are of choleric and furious Dispositions,
vent themselves in wishes for a speedy Exit, when some less dangerous accidents
befall them; how much more therefore intolerable is it, to live, and (if I may
so say) stand and see ones self die; as properly speaking, they do, who suffer
Hunger, and have not intermissions of a reasonable satiety? This was the ill
fortune of poor Lazarus; he was reduced to that extremity, that he would have
been glad of the crumbs, the portiuncula, the least and worst fragments, which
dropped under the Rich Man's Table. It is to be presumed, that there are scarce
any, or at least very few, who are in such extremity; but doubtless, this was
one cause which hastened Lazarus's Death, namely, Hunger: For since nourishment
upholdeth Nature, reviving the Blood, recruiting the Spirits, feeding the Bones
and Marrow, whereby, Life is prolonged, the want of this must soon decay, and
overthrow the whole frame of Nature. Poor Lazarus! So hungry, and no body to
feed thee! Not one Morsel from a plentiful Table! If the Master of the House
was so seer'd and impenetrable, as to deny thy reasonable request, surely the
Servants might have accommodated thee with some of their Remains: No! What,
suffer thee to perish for want of that which themselves would not eat! O
unheard of Cruelty! O monstrous Barbarity! But,

Secondly, Another cause of Lazarus's Death, was those Ulcers and putrefying
Sores which had invaded and corrupted his flesh: He was laid at the rich man's
gate, full of sores. As he had no Friend to sustain his Hunger, neither was
there any found to bind up his Wounds: These, for want of application, infected
the whole Mass of Blood, seized his Vitals, and hastened the destruction of
Nature. O miserable Object! Starved with Hunger, and sull of Sores too: Without
Friend, and without Pity! Evil upon Evil! The Holy Jesus could not but cure the
Leper, when he saw him full of Sores. And Elisha could not, but out of
Humanity, teach Naaman the Syrian to wash himself in Jordan, that he might be
whole; but this Rich Man would not help Lazarus, but left him to languish and
die. Doubtless it was a great addition of his misery, to be full of Blotches
and running Ulcers; for as his Hunger tormented and gnawed upon his inwards, so
his Sores grieved and pained his flesh; both the one and the other, contriving
to storm his Soul out of the Outworks of Nature. But thus much for the first
thing; which was, To consider what were the proper Causes of Lazarus' s Death:
And from hence I proceed in the second place; namely,

Secondly, To consider what kind of treatment Lazarus met withal, while he was
languishing, or dying. We read of no Friends that came either to visit, or to
comfort him with Medicaments. Thus, generally, the poor Servants of God are
treated, when retained by a Fit of Sickness, and drawing near to a period; many
of them perish for want of reasonable applications: None, or very few,
vouchsafe them an hours consolation; they groan, they sigh, they pant, and die
without pity. Such usage as this Lazarus met withal, in his dying hours: Rich
Men are supplied with Physicians, furnished with Potions; and when dying, their
Friends stand shrieking about the Bed, and fill the Room with dolorous sounds:
They grieve for their approaching loss, and enhance their sorrows with the
repetition of former benefits; if it were possible they would conquer Death,
and rescue their departing Friends out of his clutches. But poor Lazarus, as he
had no inward applications, so no outward comforts; not a Bed to lie upon, the
Earth was his Pillow, the Element was his Covering, the Rich Man's Dogs were
his Visitants; not one of his Servants would vouchsafe him a reviving Draught,
or any thing that was comfortable, but there he lay, screeching with anguish,
sighing and groaning, waiting till Death would strike, and release him from his
great wants, and heavy conflicts. Now his Throat growing dry with crying, his
Heart fainting for want of comfort, his Tongue cleaving to the Roof of his
Mouth, being worn out with Fastings and Miseries, he gave a groan, and perished
at this wretches Gate. Was ever heart so hard! Could it be imagined, that a
rational Creature could be guilty of such Cruelty! and especially toward one
of his Fellow Creatures! It was inhumane in thee, O Dives, to have no
compassion upon poor Lazarus; but it argues much more a seared Nature, to
suffer him to faint and die at thy very Door, for want of a few fragments of
Bread! What was his request to thee? He asked not for dainty food, such which
was thy daily Entertainment, but only for those Scraps, which neither thy
Servants nor Dogs would eat, to save his Life: And was it such a matter, to
have granted him this his so reasonable desire? Will it not be a blemish on thy
Conscience, that thou should suffer a Soul to perish with hunger, when thou
had enough, and abundantly to spare? Could thou see Lazarus trembling and
quaking with cold, having only shattered Rags about him, and not cover his
nakedness, when thou had store of Cast-off Garments? Were his wounds so deep
and gaping upon thee, and neither thou, nor thy Servants, by thy order, pour
Oil into them? If the Stones could speak, they would cry, fie on thee: If thy
Dogs could utter themselves, they would charge thee with unmercifulness: If
Lazarus were alive, his Sores would gush out afresh in thy Face, and sound in
thine Ears, that thou art guilty of his Blood. Behold, the Sentence is gone
forth against thee; the blood of Lazarus, like the blood of Abel, cries aloud,
Let thy days be few, and let another take thine Office; Let thy Children be
Fatherless, and thy Wife a Widow; Let thy Children be Vagabonds, and beg their
Bread; let them seek it also out of desolate places. Let the Extortioner
consume all that thou have, and let the Stranger spoil thy labor: Let there be
no Man to pity thee, nor to have compassion on thy Fatherless Children: Let thy
Memorial be clean forgotten, and in the next Generation let thy Name be quite
blotted out. Let him be unsuccessful in every thing he takes in hand; let him
be Accursed when he goes out, and when he comes in. Let the Creator abandon
him, the Heavens frown upon him, and the Angels reject him; let him be a woeful
Example to the World. O Earth! open upon him, Hell receive him, Spirits tear
him, Devils torment him. Let no Mercy be expressed toward him, who shut up his
bowels of compassion against his distressed and afflicted Brother. The
sorrowful sighing of the Poor shall not always be forgotten, God will avenge
their injuries, if not in this Life, yet in that which is to come. But thus
much for the second thing, which was to consider what usage poor Lazarus met
with while he lay languishing, while he was hastening to a period. I am now to
go on in the third place;

Thirdly, To enquire what became of his dead Body. And here we cannot suppose
that his Body had any decent Interment; because, while living, it had not
wherewithal to sustain it. He was Brow-beaten, scoffed at, rejected, a
Companion for Dogs, the very abject of the People; those that passed by him,
upbraided his Poverty, turned their Heads away from the stench of his Sores,
and stopped their Ears to his woeful Complaints. Now if his hungry Stomach,
ulcerous Body, and fainting Spirits, and dismal Out cries, would not move to
pity, we may reasonably conjecture that his dead Body was not taken care of.
That it might not infect with strong and loathsome smells, it may be it was
crammed into some narrow hole in the Earth, or thrown into some rapid River or
other. No Bell to proclaim his Death, no Knell to usher him to the Grave, no
Friends to accompany his Corpse, which are the usual methods of a Funeral. Thus
poor Men slip silently into the Earth, and have none to mourn over them, but
their distressed Widows and Orphans, who miss those little Comforts they were
the Authors of; but yet poor Men's Souls are as precious in the sight of God as
rich Men's. The World distinguishes Men by their Rank and Quality, but God by
their Goodness; and how mean soever his Servants may be in this Life, yet they
shall be hereafter Kings and Priests, and reign with God for ever. It matters
not then, O Christian, though thou art poor and despicable, thou art not to live
here always; the time is coming, when all things will be set to rights, when
thou shall have amends made thee for thy scanty Portion, and those Indignities
offered thee for thy Poverty; then every Man shall be rewarded according to his
Works. A Nebuchadnezzar, a Nimrod, a Belteshazzar, a lofty Felix, and an
ambitious Herod, and other Grandees of the World, shall be no more respected
than thou: For God is no respecter of persons. It is no matter whether thy Body
be honorably buried or no, if thy Soul be but virtuous, and found in the ways
of holiness; then both shall be gloriously reunited, and live together in
Paradise for ever. Poor Lazarus lived miserably, died so, and his Body
probably, thrown into some Pit or other; but yet his Soul was carried by the
Angels into Abraham's bosom. And thus much for the death of Lazarus. I now
proceed to make some special Use of what has been said, and then conclude. And
here,

First, From hence we may learn, that it is very often the lot of God's dear
Children to suffer Affliction in this Life. Not that he delights in the
Miseries of his People, but because he would fit them for himself; draw their
Affections from things here below, let them see the vanity and emptiness of all
Worldly satisfactions, and put their confidence in him as a sure Refuge in time
of trouble. Such are the wise and holy ends of God toward his faithful
Servants. Job, a just Man, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil, was
woefully punished, his Children suddenly slain, his Plenty turned into Scarcity,
his Body afflicted with Swellings and Carbuncles, his Friends became his
Enemies, his Wife, in the midst of sufferings, tempting him; who would but
conclude that this was a Judgment upon him, for some great sin or other? And
yet is it left upon Record, that this change of things was only to try him, who
yet retaining his Integrity; was blessed with much more than ever he had. S.
James 1.2. says, Count it all joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations. As if
he had expressed himself thus: Be not disheartened and cast down if Calamities
besiege you, provided they be not of your own seeking, but by God's Providence;
for he has no other end upon you, but to make you yet better, and to fit you
more exactly for his heavenly Kingdom. And St. Paul, 12. Heb. 6. makes
affliction a special mark of God's love. Whom he loves, he rebukes, and
chastens every Son whom he receives. Then, Christian, bear up under thy
sufferings: Have thou but a scanty Portion, hardly enough to keep thee alive?
Be content, Heaven will be thine; and though it may seem long ere thou be in
possession of it, yet it will infinitely make thee amends when thou come
there. Art thou friendless? Do thou suffer Reproach, Calumnies? Do Men
despise thee? Does the World deny thee Peace? Have thou none that will take thy
part? Sink not under this calamity, for God is thy Friend, he hears thy Sighs
and Groans, records thy Prayers, and bottles up thy Tears, and will abundantly
recompense thee when thou come into his Kingdom. Put thy trust in him, keep
covenant with Christ, and get an interest in him, and fear not what Man can do
unto thee. It was this which encouraged the Martyrs under their Sufferings, and
made them even rejoice in the midst of their bitter conflicts; they made their
Calling and Election sure; all was well between God and their Spirits, and
therefore fainted not at the thought of being sent to him, though by the most
violent and cruel death. It is recorded of Ignatius, that when he was condemned
by that imperious Tyrant Trajan, to be torn apieces by wild Beasts, he replied,
I am not afraid to go out of the World this way, nor at the suddenness of my
departure; for I care not how soon, nor by what means, I hasten to my dear
Redeemer, whom I love more than Life, for that I can freely part with all for
his sake, who did so much for me; he did groan, and sigh, sweat, bleed, and die
for me, and therefore I can never forget him.

Secondly, From the death of Lazarus, we learn to be pitiful and compassionate
toward those that are Poor. Lazarus died with hunger. Had his Necessities been
supplied, he might have lived longer; but wanting Nourishment, he died. What a
sad Consideration is it, to send the hungry and thirsty away empty, when Men
have to spare? This argues an ungrateful Mind toward God, and an insensibility
of our own Demerits. If God Almighty should deal with us proportionably to our
deserts, Hell would become our Lot; but he deals not with us after our Sins,
nor rewards us according to our Iniquities; he overlooks our manifold
Weaknesses, passes by our many wilful Miscarriages, forgives the Affronts we
offer to his Divine Majesty, and crowns us with his Goodness; his providential
Hand is always heaping Blessings upon us, his Mercy triumphs over Judgment. Now
the mere Consideration of this, methinks, is enough to make Men of flexible,
condescending Humors, of compassionate, charitable Dispositions, and oblige
them to be as forward to give, as the Poor is to ask them; that is, according
to their Abilities. What a lamentable thing is it, when a poor Man, almost
famished, his Face wan, his Countenance ghastly, his Spirits fainting, and his
Tongue cleaving to the roof of his Mouth, and begs for God's sake, for Christ
Jesus sake, to satisfy his craving Stomach, and thirsly Soul, or else he must
perish, to send him away empty as he came! Suppose this pining Wretch should
drop, and die at thy Door, upon a denial; though this be not Murder in the sense
of ours, yet it is in the judgment of God's Laws, and his Blood thou must
answer for; and, O woeful Account in the Day of Inquisition! Christ, who is the
ordained Judge, has threatened to revenge the Indignities of his poor Servants,
in Matthew. 25. Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels; for I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye
gave me no drink; I was naked, and ye clothed me not; I was a stranger, and ye
took me not in; I was sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not. Then will the
uncharitable answer, and say, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, or a thirst,
or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee?
Then shall he answer them, In as much as ye did it not unto one of the least of
these my poer servants, ye did it not to me; and in denying of them, ye denied
me, and their cause I will espouse; and therefore go ye carsed into everlasting
fire. But,

Thirdly, From the death of Lazarus we learn to be content with our Condition,
though never so mean; and to keep our selves in the Exercise of Religion, though we
are deprived of this Worlds goods. Lazarus, though he was Hungry and Thirsty, his
Soul fainted in him; though he was Naked and full of Sores; yet he murmured not,
but committed himself to God, to whom his Soul was carried by the Angels, as
soon as separated from his Body. It is excellent to be Poor and Virtuous; for
it argues the strongest Faith, the best Hope, and the best Affections, because
there are not those outward encouragements to Goodness in Adversity, as
Prosperity. Poverty is looked upon as a kind of Judgment, as if God hates the
Person, and therefore makes him an Object of Scorn and Infamy; so that he is
apt to be discouraged, and can do nothing else but bewail, and lament his
unhappy circumstances, sit drooping and pausing on his low condition. But
however, the Scripture has well informed us, that God Almighty means no ill
toward his Creatures, and that when he changes things, and removes Prosperity
from the Door, it is only to try them, how they will manage themselves upon an
alteration, what kind of nature they will appear to have, whether they will
make application to him, and carry themselves in all Duty and Allegiance
toward him. And since such is God's Wise design, it is but very reasonable
that we should be as Good and Virtuous when poor, as well as when rich;
especially, considering that we deserve nothing at the Hands of God, nothing
but Fury and everlasting Damnation. Besides, the advantage of Piety; Is a Man
poor and low in the World? it does improve and sweeten even that State: It
keeps his Spirits up above dejection, desperation, and disconsolateness; it
frees him from all grievous solicitude vnd anxiety, showing him, that although he
seems to have little, yet he may be assured to want nothing, he having a
certain Succor, and never-failing supply from God's good Providence; that
notwithstanding the present straightness of his condition, or scantiness of
outward things, he has a title to goods infinitely more precious, and more
considerable.

To conclude, Let it be our main employ to improve our Judgments and
Understandings in things Spiritual, that we may have right notions of God, such
as become the perfections of his Nature, and the excellency of his Goodness;
that in whatsoever state and condition we are, we may glorify his Name. And
thus, when we have conquered our selves, and brought our Minds to a settlement
in the ways of Holiness, we shall resign our Concernments with more freedom to
God's wise disposal, and be submissive to his Laws, whatever our condition be.

May God assist us, by the influences of his Grace and blessed Spirit, so to
order and govern our Natures, that we may love him freely, believe in him
steadfastly, and serve him faithfully to our lives end. And this for Jesus
Christ's sake, to whom with the Father, and ever blessed Spirit, be given all
Honor, Praise, Thanksgiving and Obedience, now, henceforth, and for ever more.
Amen.

SERMON IV.
Luke XVI. part of the 22 Verse.
And was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom.

HAving in my last Discourse treated of the Death of Lazarus, and particularly
considered what were the immediate causes of his death: the manner and
circumstance of his dying, and how his dead body was probably disposed of: My
Text now leads me to consider the state and condition of his Soul; after
separation from the Body, It was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom.
Many differ in their sentiments about this Expression, and have conceived Witty
and Learned Notions of it, but yet seem to agree in this, that by Abraham's
bosom is meant Heaven; and the Reason of this phrase is, Abraham is styled, The
Father of the Faithful, and while he lived, a very Hospitable person; to him
was the Soul of Lazarus conveyed, as a Sanctuary of Rest and Peace; the just
reward of his patience, during his great want, and heavy conflicts. Some urge
it as a Metaphor from Parents, who imbosom and hug their Children, when tired
by running to and fro, or have met with some hurtful mischance, and come
weeping and lamenting themselves. A very adapt Parallel: The Soul of poor
Lazarus was grieved and wearied with Fastings and Miseries; perplexed and
overwhelmed with sorrows for the cruel treatment he met with in the world; it
was therefore conducted by the Heavenly Courtiers into Abraham's bosom, to be
succored and made amends for past indignities. He was carried by the Angels:
As if they contended who should usher it into Paradise. Now Lazarus thou
recountest with triumph; the difficulties thou have rubbed through, the
afflictions thou have endured, the shame, pain, and ignominy thou have
undergone for Christ's sake; Now thou art made acquainted with the Arcana
Imperii, the secrets of the other happy World, and rejoycest with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory. Nothing shall interrupt thy peace, nor call
thee off from thy enjoyments, but there thou shall swim in rapturous pleasures
for evermore. This may serve to prevent those who are in sorrow, trouble, or
any other adversity, from reflecting upon the Divine Justice, as if he
unequally distributed his Mercies. In this life, it matters not whether his
Servants be accommodated with sublunary affluences, or no, since he has
prepared a wide and capacious Heaven, to receive and replenish them; wherein
are all the instances of Joy, all the ingredients of felicity, and nothing else
to the contrary; all that can caress our powers, all that can ravish our
hearts, all that is good, lovely and desirable, is there to be compendiously
enjoyed. But to traverse the Text, The Soul of Lazarus was carried by the
Angels into Abraham's bosom, or Heaven; Which words afford us this matter.

First, That the Angels are employed to convey the Souls of true Believers into
a fixed state of blessedness: And to prove this, (granting that there are such
Beings as Angels, because the Scriptures often speak of them, I shall, First of
all, Undertake to show their Offices, as relating to God's faithful Children in
this life. Secondly, The great love and kindness they have for mankind.

First then, I am to distinguish their Offices, as relating to God's faithful
Children in this life. They are called in Heb. 1. ult. (...), ministering
spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be Heirs of Salvation. The
word (Angel) signifies an Ambassador, which is sent upon another's Errand; and
in Scripture sense it is restrainedly taken for a select, divine sort of
Emissaries, Spiritual Beings, created, commissioned, and employed by, and under
God. Now first, it is part of the Angels Employment, upon any urgency, to
reveal God's mind and will, and to bring Embassies from him to us, for our
instruction and good. Thus, while Abraham was sitting at the Tent-door, in the
Plains of Mamre, he beheld three Men, which were three Angels, who came to
inform him that a Son should shortly be born unto him, Genesis 18.10. Likewise,
while Lot was sitting in the Gate of Sodom, two Angels salute him, and deliver
their Message, saying, Hasten thou, and thine, out of this City, for the Lord
has commissioned us to destroy it, because of the wickedness of the people that
dwell therein, Genesis 19.12, 13. Again, when Balaam the Prophet was journying
upon an ill Errand, an Angel from the Lord interrupted him, cautioning him to
do according as God had commanded him, Numb. 22. v. 35. Those Visions of Daniel
were from an Angel, and being at a loss about their significancy and meaning,
Gabriel the Archangel, was dispatched to inform his understanding, and to give
him light into those dark and abstruse Mysteries, Dan. 8.16. and 9.22, 23. And
in the Gospel, we read of an Angel, who caressed Zecharias with the happy news
of a Son, who should be the Harbinger and Forerunner of the Messiah: That an
Angel addressed the Blessed Virgin Mary, acquainting her that she was appointed
by God to conceive and bear that Messiah. And that Angels surpised the drowsy
Shepherds in the Field by night, with the news of the Birth of the Child Jesus.
That an Angel appeared three times to Joseph; First, to encourage him to take
and own Mary his Espoused Wife; then to hasten him with the young Child, and
Mother, into Egypt, from the approaching fury and savageness of Herod; and
then, lastly to return again, when the Persecution was abated. When the
forgetful Disciples came to seek their Crucified Savior in the Sepulcher, the
Angels reminded them that he was risen from the dead, according as he had told
them when he was yet alive. I might insert many more Instances of this kind,
that the Angels are God's Ambassadors, upon an occasion, sent to reveal his
will, for our instruction and good. But concerning the Doctrinal Ministry of
Angels, we are not now to expect such extraordinary Revelations, because God
has appointed other Emissaries for the declaration of his mind to the World.
He has sent his Son, clothed with our Nature, who has given us a Specimen of
his Will; and, in his absence, substituted his Apostles to propagate the
Gospel, enabling them to continue a Succession of Ministers, to handle and
preach the Word, for the saving of Souls, as St. Paul speaks, Ephesians 4. v. 11, 12,
13. He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come into the
unity of the Faith, and knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto
the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. These Visible Ministers we
are now to hearken to, in the room of Angels, to receive and embrace their
Doctrine, as the means whereby we may be saved To these Ambassadors the Angels
themselves direct men under the Gospel. An Angel calls Philip toward the
South, on purpose to meet the Eunuch, that he might preach Jesus to him, Acts
8.26. When Cornelius had ended his Devotion, an Angel caresses him with this
Salutation, Thy prayers are come up for a memorial before God; but bids him
send to Joppa for one Simon Peter, an eminent Minister, who would instruct him
particularly what he ought to do, Acts 10.4, 5, 6. So bufie are these Heavenly
Spirits in promoting the knowledge of those blessed Mysteries, which themselves
look into with wonder and amazement. But,

Secondly, It is a part of the Angels Employment, to be our Guardians, to fence
us from eminent Evils, to shelter us from Dangers, and to direct us in ways of
Peril and Uncertainty. Thus the Royal Psalmist encourages God's faithful
Servants to persevere in Holiness, by telling them, That the Angel of the Lord
encampeth round about them that fear him, Psalm. 34.7. And there shall no evil
befall thee, for, he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all
thy ways; they shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot
against a stone, Psalm. 91.10, 11, 12. Doubtless these Celestial Spirits do us
many good Offices, they contrive our safety, and advance our happiness, and
promote our welfare, though we are not privy to their transactions. As before I
mentioned, our Savior was preserved from the furious rage, and implacable
malice of Herod, by an Angel's warning of Joseph to flee into Egypt. History
furnishes us with many Instances of this kind, how some, whose lives have been
secretly sought for, and the Emissaries of death have been coming forward
incognito, to embrue their hands in blood, have been rescued from those
Assassines, by the timely warnings of an Angel; others, who have simply
attempted their own Danger, and have just brought themselves to the brink of
destruction, have been wonderfully preserved by the opportune insinuation of an
Angel; Cave, beware. Again, others who have been surpised out of their sleep,
and cautioned to hasten with their Families out of the Towns wherein they have
lived, for that they would be suddenly visited with a sweeping Plague, and so
it happened a little time after their removal. Thus sollicitous, by Divine
appointment, are these heavenly Spirits, for the good and welfare of Mankind.
But again,

Thirdly, It is part of the Angels Ministry, not only to defend from danger,
and to screen from approaching evils; but to comfort the disconsolate, to help
in time of need, and to bring supplies in times of scarcity. When Elijah the
Prophet was threatened by Jezebel with death, for destroying the chief of Baal's
Followers, he fled to Beer-Sheba; and leaving his Servant there, he went a days
Journey into the Wilderness; and being overwhelmed with sorrow, he sat him
down under a Juniper-Tree, petitioning rather to die, than to live, and fell
asleep; in the interim an Angel touched him, and said, Arise and eat: And be
looked, and behold there was a Cake baken on the Coals, and a cruse of Water at
his head: And he did eat, and drink, and laid him down again. And the Angel of
the Lord came again the second time, and touched him, and said, Arise and eat,
because the Journey is too great for thee: And he arose, and did eat, and
drink, and went in the strengeh of that meat forty days, and forty nights, unto
Horeb the Mount of God, 1 Kings 19.5, 6, 7, 8. When Isaiah the Prophet cried
out, upon sight of the Vision; Woe is me! for I am unclean, because I am a man
of unclean lips, and dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips; there flew
one of the Seraphims unto him, having a live Coal in his hand, which he had
taken with the Tongs from off the Altar, and he laid it upon his Mouth, and
said, Lo this has touched thy lips, and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy
sin purged, Isa. 6.5, 6.7. When our dearest Lord was struggling in a mighty
Agony, that he sweat as it were great drops of blood, when the bitter cup was
presented to him, of which he was to drink, and which he prayed, if possible,
might be removed from him; in the midst of his conflicts the Angels, his
Attendants, came and strengthened him. When in the Wilderness, set on, and
tempted by the Devil, those Celestical Spirits came and Ministered unto him.
When Lot was in danger of being torn apieces by some of the vicious Sodomites,
two Angels haled him into his House from their fury, and struck those that
encompassed him with blindness, Genesis 19.10, 11. Shadrach, Meshech, and
Abednego, those true Servants of the most High God, being condemned by that
Tyrant Nebuchadnezzar, to be scorched to death in a Furnace seven times hotter
than ordinary, they were thrown in, bound hand and foot; but behold an Angel
indemnisied them, they were not singed, neither had the flames any power on
them. Did we not, says Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3.24, 25. cast three men bound into
the fiery furnace? Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire,
and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God. When
Daniel was doomed to the Lions Den, in order to be devoured by them; an Angel,
by an irresistible power, restrains the appetites of those voracious Beasts,
that he dwelt in safety in the midst of danger. My God, says he, has sent his
Angel, and has shut the Lions Mouths, that they have not hurt me; for as much
as before him Innocncy was found in me; and also before thee, O King, have I
done no hurt, Dan. 6.22. To name no more; When Peter was imprisoned by Herod,
and a strong watch ordered to keep him safe; Behold! an Angel came to him, and
unloosed his Chains, burst open the Prison-door, led him through the Wards, and
coming to the main Iron Gate, that opened of its own accord. This miraculous
deliverance did so amaze Peter, that he could scarce believe the truth of it,
till coming to himself, he humbly accknowledged, saying, Acts 12.11. Now I know
of a surety, that the Lord has sent his Angel, and has delivered me out of the
hand of Herod, and from all the expectation of the People of the Jews. Thus
these Celestial Spirits encamp round about them that fear the Lord. But,

Secondly, I am to consider the great love these Heavenly Courtiers bear to
Mankind. And here, doubtless their affection is infinitely great: For when the
Son of God descended from above, and Ecclipsed his glory with humane Nature, to
work the Redemption of man, these Celestial Ambassadors gathered together,
expressing their joy for the Restoration of lapsed Mortals, by a general
shout; and then joining in a Chorus, Sang, Glory be to God on High, and on
Earth Peace, good will toward men, Luke 2.14. They could not but celebrate
this stupendous act of Condescension, and loudly echo it in the Shepherds
ears. They seemed, as it were, transported that they had a message of this
kind, to deliver to undone Mortals, who were groaning under their own burden.
When a stuborn sinner returns from the error of his ways, bethinks himself,
alters his mind, and becomes a new Creature; these Heavenly Spirits are all in
a Rapture, and Exstacy; they break out into loud acclamations of joy, Luke
15.10. There is joy in the presence of the Angels of God, over one sinner that
repents. And the Reasons of this are,

First, Because their employment for God is increased. They are Ministering
Spirits, sent forth to Minister for those who shall be heirs of Salvation.

Secondly, Because every converted sinner adds to their Communion. In some
respects, even now, Angels are a Saint's Familiar, they have a special charge
over them, and pitch their Tents round about, and Minister unto them; but that
which enhances their gladness, they shall enjoy an everlasting Conversation
with them, Sing and praise the Lamb that sits upon the Throne together; Behold
the beauty, meditae upon the glorious perfections of God, and be swallowed up
in holy wonder. This it is which enjoins the Angels to take such care of the
Saints in this life, defending them from extraordinary mischiefs, guarding them
from the Power and Malice of the Devil, directing them in ways of uncertainty
and peril, watching over them by night, and conducting them by day; namely,
that their Communion may be improved, their Joys fulfilled, in an everlasting
harmony and mutual concord. And now, if God has thus. Commissioned his Angels
to Minister to his Saints, to defend and keep them, to guard and shield them
from dangers and mischiefs; and if these glorious Harbingers bear so great a
love to men, as has been plainly proved; doubtless they are very ready to
receive, and carry the Souls of good men into Heaven. One of the Fathers calls
the Angels (Evocatores animarum) The callers forth of Souls, and such as show
them (paraturam diversorii) the preparation of those Mansions they are going
to. Hence we observe, When good men are dying, they are often in silent
raptures, and express a kind of impatience, till they are dissolved. And why?
because they spiritually see what they cannot utter, as did St. Paul, when he
was wrapped up into the third Heaven. There is a kind of a draught presented to
them, by their Guardian Angels, of those transcendant joys they are almost
ready to enter in possession of; and therefore long, and pine, till they are
conveyed into that place of Unspeakable Felicity. These Heavenly Spirits
succor and support them under their pain and sickness; and when their Souls
are stormed out of their Bodies, they encompass and embrace them, soaring
through the Regions of evil Angels into Heaven. As my Text speaks concerning
Lazarus, that he was safely carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. And
thus much for the Proposition I raised from the words of the Text, namely, That
the Angels are employed to convey the Soul, of true Believers, as soon as
separated from their Bodies, into a fixed state of blessedness.

I now proceed to draw some practical Inferences from the whole, and so
conclude. And here,

First, We cannot but admire at Gods tender love to men, that he should create
such Beings to be our Guardians, to help and succout us in the time of our
Pilgrimage here. What is Man, that God should be so mindful of him? or the Son
of Man that he should so regard him? What tongue can be silent, upon a serious
thoughtfulness of the honor God conferreth upon Man? Let us then break out
with St. Bernard, Lord, what is Man, that thou think thus on him? Thou
sendest to him thine only begotten Son; thou sendest into him thy Holy Spirit;
thou promisest him the light of thy Countenance; and that nothing in the
Heavenly Region might be un-imployed in follicitude for him; thou sendest forth
also those blessed Spirits, the Angels, to Minister to us And with another of
the Ancients, who studiously contemplating this Subject, and reflecting upon
his own unworthiness thus uttered himself, When I remember these things, O Lord
I confess before thee, and praise thee for thy great benefits, wherewith thou
have honored us. Thou have given us all things under Heaven, and yet countedst
that but a small provision, unless thou had also given us the things above,
even those Angels of thine, as Ministering Spirits unto us? What is man that
thou thus respectest him?

Secondly, The consideration, that the Angels are about us, should fill us with
a reverential awe and dread, and oblige us to be circumspect and innocent in
our transactions. When Jacob saw a Ladder, reaching from Earth to Heaven, and
the Angels of God ascending and descending upon it, he said, How dreadful is
this place! his spirit was struck with fear. And certainly, if we confidered
that these Heavenly Courtiers were attending us, curiously observing our
actions, and taking cognizance of our behavior; we should be much more
cautious and wary in our prosecutions, especially in our demeanor while in
God's House. The Angels are our Guardians, directing and guiding us to good; it
should therefore be our care to manage our spiritual concernment; with such
Christian prudence, that they may continue our Keepers, while we live here; and
receive our Souls at our deaths, and convey them into Abraham 's bosom. It is
the highest ingratitude to slight their directions, besides a woeful
disadvantage: For being not under their protection, the Evil Spirits have the
opportunity of exercising their Wiles and Arts upon us, of filling us full of
all iniquity, and bringing us to destruction both of Body and Soul. The Devil
is called the Prince of the Air, and why he does us no more mischief, because
the Angels of God encamp round about us, to keep and preserve us from his
power. If then we foolishly throw our selves from under their care and
protection, by adhering to the lusts of the flesh; this Prince of the Air, with
his Diabolical Crew, having no obstruction, enters into us, and our latter end
becomes worse than the beginning.

Thirdly, The consideration, that the Angels are our Guardians, should
encourage us to persevere in our duty, and not be discouraged at difficulties;
remembering that we have more for, than against us. Being compassed with so
great a cloud of witnesses, and mighty helpers, we are to lay aside every
weight, and the sin which does so easily beset us, and to run with patience the
race that is set before us. And having so great encouragement and consolation,
we are not at any time to be weary of well doing, or frightened from it; but to
be sledfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, as it
becomes Persons of such hopes for hereafter, (the Heirs of Salvation) and such
security in the interim (attended with the Holy Angels.)

Lastly, The consideration, that these Heavenly Courtiers are our Attendants
and Guardians, should engage us to honor and esteem the meanest of Gods
Servants; not to despise, reproach and load them with oppressing calumnies. How
dare thou to contemn and slight one of Gods poor Servants, when they have
Celestial Spirits attending them? They are the Sons and Daughters of the great
King of Heaven and Earth, and born to a fair Inheritance, a transcendantly Rich
and Glorious Kingdom: And in the mean while, however thou may look upon them
as destitute and forsaken, they have an invisible Guard about them, upon
occasion to Minister for their supply, defense, and vindication; Such honor
have all his Saints. The Angels smote the Men of Sodom with blindness, because
they disturbed and provoked Lot. And though now adays God does not so
ordinarily resent the indignities of his poor Servants, by open Judgments; yet
he will be sure to right them in the other world, by condemning their Enemies.

Our Savior has represented the danger of contempt and uncharitableness
toward the poor, in the case of the Rich Man; In Hell he lifted up his eyes,
and sees Lazarus afar off, whom he suffered to perish at his Gates; Of whose
succor he would have been glad; Send Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his
finger in water and cool my Tongue, for I am tormented in this flame. Besides,
in despising the poor, we despise also Christ himself, who became poor, that we
might be made rich: And what punishment shall they be thought worthy of, who
trample under foot the Son of God? Let us therefore, since we all are partakers
of one hope of being Heirs of Salvation, High and Low, Rich and Poor, learn to
respect and honor the meanest among us; especially remembering, that God has
given them a mighty privilege of being attended and guarded by his Angels. But
to conclude.

Since these heavenly Guardians are holy, unspotted, and undefiled Beings and
delight continually to sing Praise, Honor, and Glory unto the Lamb that sits
upon the Throne; let us endeavor to emulabe them as much as is possible in
this our frail state; let us love and seek after those things which belong to
our everlasting peace. Let us exercise our selves in Religion, cheerfully and
frequently. If thou delight in the word of God, and prayer says devout Gerard,
thou shall be gratified with the Holy Angels patronage. While I was speaking
and praying and confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel, says the
Prophet Daniel, and presenting my suplication before the Lord my God, for the
Holy Mountain of my God; Yea, while I was speaking in prayer, the Man Gabriel,
whom I had seen in the Vision at the beginning, being caused to fly swiftly,
touched me about the time of the evening-oblation, Dan. 9.20, 21. This exercise
the Holy Angels delight in; May God grant that we may be governed and guided by
those Celestial Spirits, whom he has commissioned and charged to encamp about
us; that they may succor and defend us, while in this life; and when we dye,
receive and carry our Souls into Abraham's bosom. And this we beg for Jesus
Christ's sake. Amen.

SERMON V.
Luke XVI. 22, 23, 24.
Ver. 22. The rich man also dyed, and was buried.

Ver. 23. And in hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and sees Abraham
afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom:

Ver. 24. And he cried, and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send
Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue,
for I am tormented in this flame.

DEath is the Lot of us all, He invadeth the rich Man's Palace, as well as the
poor Man's Cottage; he storms the Princes Court, as well as the Peasants meaner
Habitation. High and Low, all must submit, when this grim Sergeant makes a
demand. Neither Wealth nor Honor; neither beauty, nor wisdom, nor any secular
regard, can plead against death, or privilege a Man from the Grave. Which
consideration should insinuate with Men to be less in love with this world, and
more thoughtful of that time when they must go into a fixed state, either of
eternal happiness, or misery. But such was the stupid folly of Dives, that to
dye was the least of his care, and the least in his mind. His chief study was,
what he should eat, drink, and put on; what sort of pleasures would best suit
with, and accommodate his senses. In sine, his happiness was fixed in these
perishing enjoyments, and so fondly imagined his condition immutable; But
behold a woeful change of things! In the midst of his carnal security, death
steps in, an unwelcome Guest, a frightful Spectrum, and irresistably hauls him
from all his darling repasts, and crowds him into the Region of damned Spirits.
Now he that was clothed with Purple and fine Linen, is inveloped in devouring
and unquenchable flames; he that fared sumptuously and deliciously every day,
is confined to a loathsome dungeon, and doomed to suster those intolerable
preparations. And to enhance his Misery, Lazarus, whom he uncharitably denied
the crumbs which fell from his Table, and without any reluctance permitted to
faint, languish, and dye at his Gates, is at a distance presented to his view
lying in Abraham's bosom, crowned with glory, and encircled with the rades of
eternal bliss. To Abraham he addresses himself, Pity my hard fate, consider my
woeful condition, see how the flames scorch and torment me, see how my tongue is
parched with heat; I am so miserably afflicted, that I cannot express my self;
I pray thee therefore to send Lazarus, with a drop of water to abate the
anguish, and allay the throbbing of my enflamed tongue. So great and vehement
are the plagues of Hell, that the damned Spirits there cry continually for help
and succor, but are not pitiable Objects, having withstood the frequent
tenders of grace and mercy.

Now from the words of the Text, we learn,

First, That as the Souls of true Believers, when they go out of their Bodies,
lance into a fixed state of happiness; so the Souls of wicked men, immediately
upon separation, go into a fixed state of misery. We no sooner read of the Rich
Man being dead and buried, but it follows, And in Hell he lifted up his eyes,
being in torment.

Secondly, That it will be a great part of the misery of the damned, to
understand those to be in Heaven, whom they in this life scorned, reproached,
and abused, and it may be were instruments of hastening them to those blessed
Mansions. It was doubtless an aggravation of the rich Man's torments, to see
Lazarus in Abraham's bosom; that Lazarus, whom be did brow-beat, and suffered to
perish with hunger at his own Gates.

Thirdly, That there will come a time, when the most proud and ambitious
sinners, would gladly be relieved by the meanest Saints. Father Abraham, says
the rich Man, send Lazarus, the very same who begged at my Gates for the crumbs
which fell from my Table.

Fourthly, That the state of the damned will be void of the least degrees of
comfort. The rich Man desired but the cooling of his tongue, with as much water
as could be brought upon the tip of Lazarus's finger.

Lastly, That the Tongue is a Member, the abuse of which in another life, will
lie very heavy upon lost Souls. The chief member, which the rich man complained
was most afflicted, was his Tongue; send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of
his finger in water, and could my tongue. Intolerable are those preparations in
the other miserable world. But concerning the former of these,

First, That the Souls of wicked men, as-soon as they go out of their bodies,
pass into a fixed state of misery; Which we learn from the former part of the
Text, The rich man also dyed, and was buried; and in Hell he lift up his eyes,
being in torments: That is, his Soul was hurried by evil Spirits into a state
of misery. His Body, we read, dyed, and was honorably and splendidly buried in
the Earth, and there must rest, till the great Creator bids it rise in the last
day, and then shall be reunited to its particular Spirit, and both share alike
in those unconceivable torments, which God has prepared for ungodly men. It is
therefore an idle fancy of some, who conceit that the Soul sleeps together
with the Body, and remains unactive and insensible as the body. The Soul
being a Spirit, cannot be subject to death; and though its agility is much
restrained, while confined in the body; yet as soon as it is delivered, it
swiftly returns to its own place, carried either by good Angels into a state of
happiness; or by evil Spirits, into a place of torments. And such is the
opinion of the wise man, Eccles. 12.7. The dust, that is, the body, so termed
from the matter of which it is compounded, returns to the Earth again, as it
was, and the Soul to him that gave it; to be sentenced either to dwell with
God, or damned Spirits for ever. And though the happiness, and misery of
departed Souls is not complete, at the highest perfection, till that day,
wherein Christ will come in the glory of his Father, with the Holy Angels, to
judge all the world; yet this no way favors the Romish Doctrine, which
insinuates a Purgatory, a place where departed Spirits are purged by fire, and
by the fervency of prayer, may be redeemed from thence, a most pernicious
principle. As the tree falls, so it lies, After this life, which is the time of
Trial and Probation, a fixed state, either of bliss or torment, commences: And
a good Soul cannot then be deprived of happiness, though not yet in the highest
degree; but with exceeding joy, and a kind of holy impatience, it waits for
the Day of Judgment, then to enter on the possession of those good things which
God has prepared for them who continue steadfast, unmovable, always abounding
in his work; Nor, on the other hand, can a wicked Soul be ransomed from Hell,
though it be not yet in the midst of most exquisite torments, but, with dread and
fear, sadly looks for the great and terrible day, wherein it must change its
unhappy condition, for a much worse. Those Angels which kept not their first
estate, are reserved in chains under darkness, unto the Judgment of the great
Day; that is, they are not yet afflicted with those punishments, which they
shall feel and endure, when Christ comes to separate the Sheep from the Goats.
They are therefore said to tremble at the thoughts of a Judgment, when Sentence
shall pass upon them to be confined in those unhappy Residencies of Misery, and
to undergo the utmost fury of an Omnipotent God. And though it is expressed, that
the Rich man being dead and buried, in Hell he lift up his Eyes, being in
torments; we are not to understand him in that place of Misery, which wicked
men shall be doomed to in the General Judgment; but in a state of despair of
Mercy, without any intermission of hope, weeping and wailing for the loss of
Heaven, which Lazarus, whom he reproached, reviled, and suffered to perish, has
a sure hope of. A state of dread and fear, being too well convinced, that he
must take up his Eternal Abode with Devils and damned Fiends. A state of
Torment too, his Conscience sadly bringing to his remembrance, that he played
away the Day of Grace, and wilfully rejected the Methods of Eternal Happiness:
That he was too much taken up with the Pomp and Pride of life, spending all his
time in catering for his Body, clothing it with Purple and fine Linen, and
gorging it with delicious fare, but had no regard to his Soul, which must live
for ever. This is Torment inexpressible, to reflect on those things which
cannot possibly be retrieved; to repent, and wish he had not been so foolish,
without the least hope of pardon; to sigh and sob, groan and howl, without
pity. We may, in some measure, conceive the uneasiness of this kind of Torment,
in some who are so unfortunate to be in such an ill frame of spirit, as to
imbibe unworthy thoughts of God, that he is an inxorable Being, that he
delights in the Miseries of his People, and will not be entreated for pardon,
after such an advancement in sin, no, though they seek it with floods of tears,
with many prayers and penitential groans. What an Hell is there within the
Breasts of these dejected Souls! What an abundance of melancholy and frightful
thoughts invade their minds! how do they wander hither and thither, like
despairing Ghosts, as if Sentence was already past upon them! Humane
Conversation, or other sublunary delights and pleasures become dull and
flatulent. Now, if in this life, such an unhappy frame of spirit, occasioned
either by strength of fancy, or too much tenderness of spirit, does disorder
and confuse the mind, and make men their own Tormentors, though there is yet
hopes of forgiveness from God; how infinitely more vexatious and afflicting
must it needs be in the other World, to reflect that the time of Mercy is past,
and that God will certainly pass Sentence of Eternal Death upon the Soul,
having no Advocate to plead, nor any Virtues to render it an Object of Mercy!
And here, by way of Digression, we will suppose the Cries, the woeful Complaints
of the Rich man's Soul in the other World; he is unexpectedly snatched away
from all his Pomp and Greatness, and surpised into the wide World of
Despairing Ghosts. Whither am I hurried? Oh the doleful sighs, and unutterable
groans I hear! Mercy, Mercy, but there is none. Cursed be my folly, in living
without a thought of this unhappy Region! Cursed be my heart, for loving so
much the World, and worldly things; cursed be my avaricious humor, in
retaining of pelf, as if I was never to die; cursed be my hands, that would not
liberally dispense to poor Lazarus. O that I was but to live my time over
again, I would alter my very Nature, and make amends for all the wrongs I have
done. Father Abraham, be moved by my recantation, pity me who am thus
tormented; Let Lazarus, whom it repents me that I did not consider and
relieve, when it was in my power, come with some cooling drops, and allay my
anguish. O that I had never been born! that I had given a groan, and dyed in my
Mothers Womb! May that day be darkness, wherein it was said, I was brought
forth. Cursed be my Father that begat me; cursed be my Mother that bare me;
cursed be the Place wherein I was Educated; cursed be the Purple and fine
Linen that clothed me, the delicious Meats which nouvished me, and the Estate
that made me live secure and thoughtless, till I was surprised into this place
of weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

But thus much for the first thing, namely, that the Souls of wicked Men, as
soon as they go out of their Bodies, pass into a fixed state of misery, though
not the extremity of it, till the day of Judgment; yet it is irreversible, for
there is no returning into this life again. I pass on to the second general
thing, namely,

Secondly, That it will be a great part of the misery of the Damned, to
understand those to be in Heaven, whom they in this life scorned, reproached,
and abused; and, it may be, were Instruments of hastening them to those blessed
Mansions. It was, doubtless, an aggravation of the Rich Man's torments, to see
Lazarus in Abraham's bosom; that Lazarus, whom he formerly Browbeat, and
suffered to perish with Hunger at his Gates. This Vision could not but enhance
his rage; he that was but a Beggar, the very abject of Mankind, he that bowed
and cringed for a little sustenance, and was the most despicable Object in
Nature, he that would have been glad of the crumbs which fell from my Table, Is
he thus advanced into Glory? And I, who once was of great repute, and had all
things that were great, good, and desirable, thus sunk into the depth of
Disgrace, and inveloped in a sad and woeful Eternity? O wretched change of
things! Doubtless it will be brought to the memory of the Damned, how cruelly,
despitefully, and disdainfully, they have treated the Servants of God in this
Life, and fill them with rage and passion: For if Hell be a place, wherein are
all the instances of torment, the perfection of misery; it must follow, that
whatsoever may tend to the unhappiness of those cursed inhabitants, will be
eternally present with them; not only the outward Senses, such as the Sight,
the Ear, the Smell, the Taste, and Touching, shall be proportionably tormented,
but the inferior faculties also.

First, The Imaginative Faculty shall be perplexed with horrid Idea's, more
terrible and affrighting than the most melancholy fancy in their Dreams, and
shall be hurried into strange consternations, surprised into a kind of
convulsive delirium; it shall never conceive a Notion, but what may disturb,
disquiet, and make it unconceiveably uneasy.

Secondly, The Appetites shall be tormented with the fury of their own
passions, and shall issue out, after a vehement manner; namely, fears,
heaviness, irksomness, agonies, anger, desperations, envyings, outrages, with
such a cruel War among themselves, that they shall clash, and make most horrid
noises.

Thirdly, The Intellectual Memory shall be tormented with a continual and fixed
Recordation, of the many opportunities and advantages there once were of
getting to Heaven; the many offers of Grace which have been stubbornly refused;
the many affronts and injuries that have been offered to God and his Saints;
the good things it formerly possessed; the evils it suffers at present, and
those it must painfully endure to all Eternity: So that it cannot think or
imagine any thing, but what will grieve and torment it.

Fourthly, The Understanding shall be darkened, without being able to discourse,
or understand any thing that may please it; it shall be full of Errors and
Illusions, pondering and exaggerating his own Evils, and judging, with a
furious boldness, that God Almighty does him wrong.

Fifthly, The Will shall be obstinate and obdurate in his sins, and in the
hatred of God and his Saints, without being able to be appeased or changed, or
to repent what it does; and desiring to do his own Will, he shall never be able
to do it in any thing that may be for his comfort; whereupon a Man's own Will,
not being fulfilled, shall be the Hell of it self, to chastize it for those
manifold times, that in this Life it was fulfilled, contrary to the Will of God.

But furthermore: It may chance to be objected, How shall the Damned know that
those are in Heaven, who in this Life they scorned and abused, and possibly
were Instruments, by some violent means, of hastening them thither? I answer;
That in the day of Judgment, when every Man's actions shall be disclosed, they
shall see those whom they oppressed, or reviled, or murdered, and shall be
Witnesses against them. Our Savior speaks in allusion to this, Matthew. 12.41,
42. The men of Nineveh shall rise up in judgment with this generation, and
condemn it; they shall appear as so many Witnesses against the Scribes and
Pharisees, and the other unbelieving Jews of this Age, and shall be
Instruments, as to that Condemnation which God shall that day pronounce against
them, because they repented not at the preaching of Jonah, but these would not
at the preaching of Christ. Then shall appear Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego,
against a wicked Nebuchadnezzar, who caused them to be bound hand and foot, and
cast into a fiery Furnace, for their Love and Loyalty to their God, the Martyrs
against their Executioners; and shall be visibly condemned, and haled into
their residences of Misery in the presence of the Saints. And, O the
unconceiveable rage and fury of those condemned Spirits, when all their
Villainies are brought fresh to their memories, to add to those other torments
which Divine Justice has prepared in the Regions below! O how will they curse
and blaspheme that God that has Doomed them to Hell, and burn with anger
against their Accusers! And that which enhances their torments, is, That it is
out of their power to harm them. Hell is therefore represented in Scripture. A
place where is gnashing of Teeth; which betokens rage, malice, and envy. And
thus much for the second thing we learn from the words of the Text, namely,
That it will be a great part of the misery of the Damned, to understand that
they are in Heaven, who in this Life they scorned, reproached, and abused; and,
it may be, were Instruments of hastening them thither.

The other remaining Heads, namely,

Thirdly, That the time is coming, when the most proud and ambitious Sinners
would gladly be relieved by the meanest Saints; gathered from the Petition of
the Rich Man to Abraham; Father Abraham, send Lazarus, the same whom I denied
the crumbs which fell from my Table.

Fourthly, That the state of the Damned will be void of the least degree of
comfort.

And Lastly, That the Tongue is a Member, the abuse of which in this Life, will
lie very heavy upon lost Souls.

These, by Divine permission, shall be my business to prove, the next
opportunity. I shall proceed now to make some special use of what has been
said, and so conclude. And here,

First, Has God prepared a Hell for ungodly Men? A place where shall be eternal
weeping, wailing, and gnashing of Teeth? Let it then be our greatest Industry,
so to live, as to avoid it. Certainly the pleasures of Sin are not so
profitable and ravishing, as to charm Men into endless Misery. For, alas, what
will it avail a damned Ghost, that he once had his fill of sensual Delights and
Satisfactions, that he lived in Ease and Security, since now all Objects are
removed from him, wherein he solaced himself, and he doomed to suffer the dire
effects of an unappeased Vengeance for ever? To be wracked and tormented by the
never-dying Worm, and to endure the vehement heat of an unquenchable Fire. Is
there any compare between the pleasures of Sin, which are but for a moment, and
a lamentable Eternity? An Hell, which is a fixed state of Misery, wherein Men
have bid adieu to the pleasures of Earth, and all hopes of Heaven; the memory
of past Pleasures does but increase their Pain; and, what is beyond all the
misery of this World, they enjoy not so much as the deceitful dreams of
flattering hopes. An Hell, where there is no delight, nor ease, nor God, nor
any harmless pleasure to divert the pain a moment. An Hell, where only the
wretched Objects of an incensed God do for ever weep and wail. Are you able to
live out an eternity among these dreadful Preparations? And why therefore will
you love and practice Sin, which is threatened with eternal death? Is there any
greater Folly imaginable, than to hug our own Ruin, and to play with Hell?
Consider, I beseech you, how terrible it is, to be for ever banished from God,
Angels, and Saints; confined in the Regions of Darkness, and tormented in
Flames which cannot be quenched. To be whipped with Snakes, stung with
Scorpions, and to have all the Instruments of Torture applied to the Body:
These are infinitely more tolerable, than those Pains which God has provided
for ungodly Sinners. O that Men were so wise, to consider these things, and
labor, by a prudent management of their Concerns, to avoid them.

Secondly, And in consideration, that the Soul passes into a fixed state, as
soon as it goes out of the Body; it is Folly in the highest degree, to delay
and put off our Repentance, and Preparation for a long Eternity; because we
hang but by slender Strings, a little Breath that expires every minute, over
the bottomless Pit. We are subject to so many Accidents and Casualties, that,
as it were, we carry our Lives in our Hands. And what a sad Consideration is
it, to be surprised into another World, and the work of our Souls left
unwrought and imperfect? Then the time of Trial is over, and as we died, so
will our Portion be. The tenders of Grace and Mercy then cease, and we wait
with the sad expectation of a general Judgment, then to receive according to
that we have done in the Flesh. How terrible, O impenitent Sinner, will Death
be to thee? and what a concern will thou be in at its approach? when thou must
leave all the pleasures of thy Sins, and the remembrance of them fills thee
only with Terror and Astonishment; when all their false Charms, and
meretricious Looks, whereby they have before pleased and enchanted thee, go
off; and they now look ghastly and frightful, and stare thee in the Face with a
scaring appearance, and with the sad apprehension of what they are like to end
in. When a dreadful Eternity presents it self before thee, and is like to
swallow thee up in a horrid Abyss of Misery; when thou come so nigh to the
other World, that thou can look over as it were to it, and see the sad
reception thou art like to have there; when thou see Hell open before thee,
the bottomless Pit gaping to receive thee, and some of the Flames of it
flashing as it were out upon thee; when Death, like an Executioner, comes to
seize and apprehend thee, and hurry thee before the dreadful Tribunal, where
all thy past Actions must be examined, all thy secret Sins laid open, and a
dreadful Sentence shall be immediately pronounced upon thee. Is not the
Consideration of this, enough to prevail with Men, who have their Wits about
them, to break off their Sins timely by Repentance, and apply themselves to a
serious thoughtfulness of their latter end? Should a damned Spirit be permitted
to come from the Region of Misery, to tell thee how intolerable those
Preparations are, what Pain and Anguish those wretched Ghosts endure, thou
say it may be that thou would repent; but if thou will not be convinced by
the assertions of the Gospel, it is to be presumed nothing besides can have
effect upon thee, as Abraham answered the rich Man in that Parable, who desired
him to send some Spirit to his surviving Brethren, to scare them to
Repentance: If they will not believe Moses and the Prophets, they will not be
persuaded, though one rose from the dead.

Lastly: And since we are promised all the assistance imaginable, to fit us for
those Mansions of Bliss, let us not be so injurious to our selves, as to be
lacking on our parts. Let us offer violence to our stubborn Wills, wean our
Affections from the objects of Sin, and mortify the Flesh, till it is brought
in subjection to the Spirit, and entirely submissive to the Law of Reason. Let
us improve the means of Grace, and be purely governed by the motions of God's
Spirit. What a comfortable Death will such a regular and well-managed Life
produce? All slavish fears, misgivings, frightful thoughts, and terrible
apprehensions, will flee away, and a prospect of the Heavenly Canaan will
present it self; we shall have a view of that glorious reception we are like to
have, which will sweeten the agonies of Death, lift us up under the pressure of
a sore Disease, and carry us out of the World with a solid hope of entering
into our Masters joy. And here the Soliloquy of a Soul, that is ready to pass
out of this World into a better: I a poor Creature of this World below; I who
have felt the troubles of this Mortal State, been tortured by the Passions of
Flesh and Blood, Fears and Cares, Despair and Hopes; even I am going into a
Heaven, where none of these can enter, where I shall be made happy with these
Enjoyments, which make God and Angels so; I shall be made equal to the Angels
in Heaven, how far above them in my Happiness! For what a value will the
Experience of this World make me set upon the joys of another! The sense and
memory of Misery, will make my Heaven double. Oh! The mighty Raptures and
Ecstasies this holy Soul falls into, till it is swallowed up in uninterrupted
Joys, and holy Wonder! And since there is far less trouble in Virtue, than in
Sin; and since the Reward of each is so vastly different; how blameable, and
worthy of Condemnation are they, who refuse the former, and choose the latter?

Let none of us then, for the sake of a few short-lived Pleasures, run our
selves in danger of being cast into a miserable Eternity, wherein we shall
sorely repent of our Inadvertencies, and stubborn Perversenesses, and wish we
had been persuaded in time. Let us therefore, with our Church, pray; O Almighty
God, the Protector of all that trust in thee, without whom nothing is strong,
nothing is holy, increase and multiply upon us thy Mercy; that thou being our
Ruler and Guide, we may so pass through things Temporal, that we finally lose
not the things Eternal. And thus we beg for Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with
the Father, and the ever Blessed Spirit, be given all Honor, Praise,
Thanksgiving, and Obedience, now, henceforth, and for evermore. Amen.

SERMON VI.
Luke XVI. latter part of 22 verses.
-- The Rich man also died, and was buried.

And in Hell he lift up his Eyes, being in torments, and sees Abraham afar off,
and Lazarus in his bosom:

And he cried, and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus,
that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my Tongue: for I am
tormented in this flame.

WHen I entered upon these words, you may remember I raised these following
particulars from them. As First, That as the Souls of true Believers, when they
go out of their Bodies, launch into a fixed state of Blessedness; so the Souls
of wicked men pass into a fixed state of Misery. We no sooner read of the Rich
man's being dead and buried; but in Hell he lift up his Eyes, being in torment.
Secondly, That it will be a great part of the misery of the damned, to
understand those to be in Heaven, whom, in this life, they scorned, reproached,
and abused, and it may be were Instruments of hastening them to those blessed
Mansions. It was doubtless a great aggravation of the Rich man's misery, when
he saw Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, that Lazarus whom he suffered to perish with
hunger at his Gates. Thirdly, That the time will come, when the most proud and
ambitious Sinners would gladly be relieved by the meanest Saints: Father
Abraham, says the Rich man, send Lazarus, the very same who begged for the
crumbs which fell from my Table. Fourthly, That the state of the damned will be
void of the least degrees of comfort. The Rich man desired but the cooling of
his Tongue, but with as much Water as could be brought upon the tip of Lazarus
's finger. Fifthly, and lastly, That the Tongue is a member, the abuse of which
in another life, will lie very heavy upon lost Souls. The chief member which
the Rich man complained was most afflicted, was his Tongue; Send Lazarus, that
he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue. As concerning
the former of these That the Souls of wicked Men, when they go out of their
Bodies, pass into a fixed state of misery. I urged, that though their
punishment will not be complete till the day of Judgment, when Soul and Body
shall be reunited, and sentence pass upon them, yet their condition is
irreversible, no changing it for a better; but there they weep and howl for the
loss of Heaven, reproach themselves for their obstinate perversenesses, in
neglecting the opportunities, and slighting the means of happiness; and sadly
expect the day of Judgment, having too much Reason to believe, they shall be
cast and condemned at that formidable Audit Hence, I told you, the Devils are
said to fear and tremble, being convinced that they shall at the last reckoning
be thrown into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone. And therefore it is
spoken by St. Jude, concerning the fallen Angels, that kept not their first
Estate, having violated those everlasting Laws given to them by their Creator;
They are reserved in chains, under darkness, unto the judgment of the great
day. That is, they are not in that extremity of torment, which they shall
endure, when Jesus Christ comes with ten thousand of Saints, to convince all
that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds, which they have
ungodlily committed, and of all their ungodly speeches which ungodly sinners
have spoken against him. As to the second particular, namely, That it will be a
great part of the misery of the damned, to understand those to be in Heaven,
whom they, in this life scorned, reproached, and abused, and, it may be, were
instruments of hastening them to those blessed Mansions; I urged, that if Hell
be a Place, where all the victims to Divine Justice must for ever reside, and
where are all the instances of torment, it is not to be doubted but this will
be one instance of their punishment, to understand those are in a state of
glory, who, while in this world, they clothed with dishonor, and treated with
disgrace, and infamy, or suffering their rage and passion to froth up, and boil
against them, sent them into the other life before the time. There is nothing
more exasperates and frets a malicious man, than to see one whom he owes a
grudge, or has no common respect for, thrive and get wealth; this fills him
with indignation and fury, and makes him very uneasy, as often as he meets
with, or thinks of the Object of his hate, or when a Discourse arises about
him: Then is he big with wishes for his entire ruin; and that which improves
his unhappiness is, it is not in his power to mischief or harm him, by all his
base and envious contrivances against him. And what an aggravation of the
misery of the damned must it needs be, to know and understand those to be in
Heaven, whom they in this world envied, reproached and spoke all manner of evil
against. Whatsoever may torment the interior faculties, and make them at
discord and variance, shall not be wanting. And after an enlargement upon this
Point, I proceeded to draw some practical Inferences, and then closed. My
business then is now, to go on to the third Thing, namely,

Thirdly, That the time will come, when the most proud and ambitious sinners
would gladly be relieved by the meanest Saints. Father Abraham, says the Rich
Man, send Lazarus, that Lazarus who came to my Gates in tattered clothing,
with a wan, and meagre countenance, being pinched with hunger, and begged for
the crumbs which fell from my Table. We know how much against the grain it
goes, when fate so disposes matters, and turns the harmony of things, for a
man, who once lived in good repute and fashion, had all things which were
commodious and useful, and made his life pleasant and comfortable; to beg
courtesies of another, who was formerly poor and despicable, when he was a
favorite of fortune, and probably denied him both respect and supplies: how
does he pro and con with himself, before he can come to such an humble temper,
to ask the benevolence of an enemy whom he made so, and brook the insolent
language and flat denials, he may probably meet with from him? Former
unkindnesses do not presently slip out of mind. But the sense of his present
wants, and of the inconveniences which attend him by reason of his unfortunate
fall, out-weighs the sense of his ill natured carriage, and the reason he has
to fear, the same measure he met will be measured to him again. There is no
disputing the point, poverty and urgent necessity presses him to it against his
will. How much elated and puffed up soever he was, when in a flourshing state,
though then never so haughty and aspiring; yet now he must cringe and kneel,
change his ill nature, or at least dissemble a good one, and appear in all the
circumstances of an humble Supplicant. Now if such an alteration of affairs in
this life does grate upon the mind, and makes a man probably more unhappy, than
his present mean condition; what a torment will it be to the damned in Hell, to
be sensible that their miseries could be abated by the meanest Saints in
Heaven, even by those, whom they most scornfully treated, and shamefully abused
in this life? but shall beg, and wish, and desire, to no purpose; how will they
rage, and flame with indignation, against those glorified Souls who are carried
into Abraham's bosom, where they shall never weep, nor sigh, nor sorrow more,
where a part of their happiness is, to know that they are fallen as so many
victims to Divine Justice, who in this world grieved, and vexed, and harrassed
them, by their unreasonable dealings, and inhumane contrivances against them.
Could but the rays of bliss glance through some cranny into that dungeon of
darkness, this would administer some comfort; or if those happy Spirits above
would vouchsafe to descend, and visit those tormented Ghosts, and pity their
irreparable and lost condition, it would divert their anguish, and make their
long eternity more tolerable; but such is the contrivance and determinate will
of God, that those terrible preparations, which he has provided for his
Enemies, shall never be mingled with the least instance of consolation; as
those blessed Mansions he has fixed for the reception of his obedient Children,
shall never be interrupted with contrarieties; and so the Saints enjoy perfect
happiness, and the damned suffer perfect misery, being deprived of every thing
which may mitigate and assuage the pains of Hell, they must endure the absence
of all good, and suffer the presence of all evil. And here we will suppose the
conflicts of the rich man, and insert those probable lamentations he may make,
in his eternal banishment from all hopes of a return. When I was in prosperity,
I insulted over poverty, and foolishly imagined no evil should happen to me. I
lived splendidly every day, and had all things at my beck, which were ravishing
and pleasurable, and never considered the pressing wants, and extreme hardships
of indigent persons. I too sadly remember, how imperious and currish I behaved
my self to impoverished Lazarus, who was laid at my Gates full of the Leprosy,
and just famished; he begged, he beseeched me to help him in his extremity, but
I would not. Had he required any thing considerable, I might have denied him
with a plausible excuse; but he asked only for the wast crumbs which fell from
my Table; and I, wretch that I was, sent him away empty. What hardness
possessed me! To what a height of inhumanity was I arrived! And now what a
woeful change is here! That same Lazarus is in Heaven and made amends for those
hardships he patiently endured and suffered, in the other life, and I am sunk
down by the weight of my own guilt into the Eternal Abyss of Misery! How glad
should I be of the least comfort from him, if it were but a drop of water upon
the tip of his finger, to cool my Tongue! Father Abraham, dispatch him from
those glorious Regions, to answer my small request. Was I re-instated in my
wealth, pomp, and splendour, had I a Million of Gold, I would exchange it with
him for one drop of water. But it is too late to wish, and too late to beg for
mercy; the sentence is past, and I am condemned to suffer the extremity of it.
Doubtless it will be brought to the memories of the Damned, how cruelly,
despitefully, and disdainfully they have used the Saints; how industrious they
were in raising evil reports of them, how forward to revenge injuries upon
them, how bitter in denying them a morsel of bread to sustain their hunger; how
they mocked and scoffed at them, and triumphed over them in their extremity,
Every thing shall be brought to their remembrance, which may enhance their rage
and add to their torments. Methinks I hear one of those unhappy wretches thus
accusing himself, How many times might I have prayed, but foolishly spent that
time in play, but now I pay for it? How often ought I to have humbled and
mortified my flesh with fasting, but neglected it, to gratify my unsatiable
appetite? How many Objects of pity might I have relieved, but Epicure like
spent their portions in revells and excess? What opportunities have I had of
forgiving my Enemies, but, indulging a spleenfull and deadly Spirit, rather
chose to be revenged? How many fair invitations have I had to the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper, but not willing to quit the occasion of sinning, refused to
be a guest at his Table? There never wanted any means of serving God, but I,
inconsiderate wretch, had no inclination to use them; being too much inamoured
with the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life: Now it
repents me, that I was so thoughtless, and took so little care of my future
state; were I admitted to live the days that are past, over again, I would
consult new methods, and be very exact, just, and sincere, in all my actions
relating to God and Man: But these resolves are fruitless; my state is fixed,
the sentence is gone forth, and I doomed to suffer the most horrid and
intolerable effects of it. Thus, in Hell, shall every thing be revived, and
brought afresh to remembrance, which may add to the torment of the interior
faculties; and this is signified by that expression in Scripture, They shall be
cast into Hell, where the worm dies not, and where shall be everlasting
weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth. And thus much may suffice for the
third thing, namely, That the time will come, when the most proud and ambitious
Sinners would gladly be relieved by the meanest Saints in Heaven. And this
leads me on to the fourth;

Fourthly, That the State of the damned will be void of the least degrees of
comfort. The Rich man desired but the cooling of his tongue, with as much water
as could be brought upon the tip of Lazarus 's finger. One of the Ancients
describes Hell to be a place, where there is neque lumen, neque Deus, neque
bonum minimum; no light, no God, nor any harmless pleasure to divert the pains
there one moment. As Heaven is separate from from all evils, where those
glorified Inhabitants swim in rapturous pleasures without interruption, nothing
shall call them off from their enjoyments, no sad circumstances to imbitter
their delights; no fears or sollicitudes to abate their gladness, nor
temptation to disturb or molest them: So Hell is separate from every and the
least good; those damned wretches there shall have nothing in view, but
frightful shapes, and amazing appearances; nothing in Hearing, but dismal
groanings, screechings, the thunderings of God's unappeased anger, and other
unutterable noises; the sense of Touching shall be tortured with the quick and
piercing heat of unquenchable flames, their cries shall never move the Almighty
to dismiss either Angels or Saints to assuage their pains, or to shorten their
Eternity; when a thousand years are past in that loathsome and fiery Dungeon,
they will be but as one day. There they shall desire, without satisfaction;
wish, but not obtain; repent, without effect; and live out a long eternity in
unmixed perplexities. Aelian writes of Trizus the Tyrant, that he was such an
Enemy to the Liberty and Comfort of his Subjects, that he prohibited all
Conversation one with another, and using signatures or tokens, whereby they
might understand each others purposes and meanings, he forbad that also; they
lying under the burden of this unparalled Tyrany, met together at the
Marketplace to weep for their misfortunes, he interdicted this too, lest they
should mitigate their sorrows by condoling of one another. But greater shall be
the rigor in Hell, where ungodly Sinners shall not be permitted to speak one
word of comfort, nor ease their Maladies with Tears. Jeremiah the Prophet
lamented the unhappiness of Jerusalem, that she was brought into Bondage, and
became a Vassal and Tributary. But what Tears are sufficient to bewail the
damnation of a poor Soul, who, from an Heir of the Kingdom of Heaven, has made
himself a Slave to the Devil, and those eternal Punishments in Hell, unto which
he is to pay as many Tributes, as he has Senses, Powers, and Members? And thus
much for the Fourth Particular, namely, That the state of the Damned will be
void of the least degrees of Comfort; which we learn from the rich Man's
desiring but the cooling of his Tongue, with as much Water as could be brought
upon the tip of Lazarus 's Finger. I go on therefore to the Fifth and last
Particular, namely.

Fifthly, That the Tongue is a Member, the abuse of which, in another Life,
will lie very heavy upon lest Souls. The Rich Man complained that his Tongue in
chief was tormented: Father Abraham, says he, send Lazarus, that he may dip the
tip of his finger in water, and cool my Tongue. Whereby we are advised, that
the Damned suffer torments proportionable to their offenses; as this wicked
wretch suffered four exceeding terrible. The first of Flames, which covered him
all over, from the Feet unto the Head: I am tormented in this flame, because of
the vanity of the soft and purple Garments, wherewith he had been clothed. The
second of his Tongue, which as it was the Instrument of his Gluttony,
Intemperance, and Talkativeness; so was it burnt in the fire, and tormented
with most terrible Hunger, and enraged Thirst. The third of Envy, seeing by
revelation the comfortable and blessed Lot of Lazarus, of whom he durst demand
nothing, but of Abraham. The fourth of Contempt, and Dereliction of every one,
in chastisement of his cruelty, for which he found no mercy at the hands of
Abraham; not affording him the drop of Water, which he requested, because he
had denied those crumbs of Bread, which fell from his Table, to poor Lazarus:
nor did he deserve mercy, who showed none.

Whether there be a Material Fire in Hell, I cannot positively determine; yet
there are two Reasons to be given, which fairly argue that there is. The

First is, Our Blessed Saviors discoursing of the pains of Hell, not only
terms them weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth, and a never-dying Worm,
but flames that cannot be quenched. And St. John describes Hell, A Lake of Fire
and Brimstone, which torments the Damned day and night, for ever and ever, Rev.
20.10. The

Second Reason is, The same Bodies which are buried in the Earth, must be
raised again, and be reunited to their particular Spirits, and be made
Immortal. Now I cannot conceive how the Body can suffer pain, so much as by
Fire; and that being of a piercing nature, and most afflicting, we may very
reasonably conjecture, that there is a fire prepared by God for impenitent
Sinners, to chastize their Bodies for their acts of Lust: and in these flames
all the outward Senses shall be tormented, and all the Members, particularly
the Tongue, which in this Life was used to Cursing and Swearing, to Lying,
Cheating, and Flattary; which was accustomed to blaspheme God and Providence,
to ridicule his Religion and Worship, and to speak evil of the Saints; which
was Instrumental of Gluttony, Intemperance, and obscene Discourses: But how,
and in what nature, the Tongue must suffer, will be time enough for Sinners to
understand, when they come there. Certain it is, that Omnipotence has prepared
the most exquisite miseries for those who live and die in sin. In fine, all
that is evil and irksom, all that is grievous and painful, whatsoever may
complete and make up a miserable and woeful Eternity, is provided and made ready
for all those unfortunate wretches, who shall be sunk into the fatal Abyss, by
the weight of their own guilt. And thus much for the fifth and last particular,
That the Tongue is a Member, the abuse of which, in another life, will lie very
heavy upon lost Souls. And now I proceed to draw some Practical Inferences from
what has been said, and so conclude. And here,

First, What love and affection do we owe to Almighty God, for his tender
compassions toward us, in bearing with our weaknesses, and not revenging our
stubborn perversenesses, by suddenly casting us into this dismal place of Hell?
How many has he rigorously sent weeping into the fatal Abyss? The Angels had no
sooner committed the sin, but they were immediately banished from their
Happiness, and now are reserved in Chains under Darkness, unto the Judgment of
the Great Day. What multitudes of others are now suffering the dire effects of
an unappeas'd vengeance, for a less number of sins than we are guilty of; and
who, if they had been permitted to live, probably might have be thought
themselves, changed their Minds and Nature, and become as eminent for Virtue,
as ever they were notorious for Vice? Why does not Almighty Justice take the
advantage, and, for our Iniquities, tumble us into the Lake that burns with
fire and brimstone? Why does he yet bear with our insolent carriage, and suffer
the affronts we daily offer to his Majesty? Wherefore does he spare the
Blasphemous Person, the Common Swearer, who impudently rend his Sacred Name at
every turn? Wherefore does he, who can by a word of his Mouth, by a blast of
the breath of his Nostrils, crush proud Mortals into the unhappy Residences of
Misery, from whence there can be no Redemption, still endure their treacherous
Infidelities, and many wilful Miscarriages? What does he discern in us, that
should move him to such impunity and forbearance? Nothing in us, but it is his
Goodness, which dilates it self over the whole Earth. Can such Clemency and
Graciousness then slip out of our Minds, and be buried in Oblivion? Can we
think any thing too much to do for such a benign Being, who loves us far
beyond the love of Parents? Might any of those cursed Spirits below, be
permitted to re-enter this World, and live another life in this Mortal State,
how thankful would they be? How wary and circumspect in their respective
Vocations, how tender of their Innocence, how sincere in their Obedience? They
would pluck out a Right Eye, cut off a Right Hand, or Foot, rather than to have
all their Members, and cast into Hell, where the Worm dies not, and the Fire
is not quenched; they would celebrate the Memory of such a Redemption, with a
faithful and constant submission to the Will of God. How then should we live,
live to him, who yet spares us, and preserves us from the bottomless Pit? Let
us then shake off that improvidence which detaineth us, bethink our selves,
renew our Spirits, change our very Natures, and no longer live to our selves,
but unto him who loves us beyond measure. Our Debts are many and great, our
Scores with God are large and numerous, and he has not yet cast us into Prison,
from whence we must not come out till we have paid the uttermost farthing: Let
this merciful and gracious Creditor therefore be revered, honored, esteemed,
and served by us, so will he at length give us a clear discharge from all
future demands, and make us Rulers over all his Goods.

Secondly, From the premises, we learn to exercise our patience under the evils
and miseries of this Life. Worldly misfortunes are not to be compared to those
unhappinesses which attend lost Souls; the former, either by the help of
Friends, or some means or other, may be repaired; or if not, their malignity is
abated, by the consideration, that they will not last always; for we must die,
and there is an end of all Earthly troul les. But the torments of Hell are
durable and eternal, no redemption from thence, nor is there any thing that can
ease the miserable wretches there. There is no condition in this Life, though
never so uncomfortable, never so despicable and grievous, but the Damned would
very gladly exchange their state for it, and think themselves infinitely
bettered, as having parted with an eternally miserable condition, which admits
of no abatements, for a temporally evil one, and which may be accommodated by
some Instruments or other. When therefore thou fallest under Poverty, and the
World brow-beats thee, think of the Poverty the Damned endure; they are
deprived of the summum bonum, the chiefest good, even God, and in him of all
other sensible goods. When thou art despised and hated, that thou art ready to
be betrayed into dejection, desperation, and disconsolateness, ponder with thy
self, how the tormented Souls in Hell are rejected, despised, reproached by
God, Angels, and Saints, and that World without end, and must undergo the
unappeased vengeance of an offended Deity. When thou art seized and oppressed
with a Fever, and thy blood in a violent ferment, consider what heats and pains
lost Souls feel in Hell, inveloped in devouring flames, and every part and
member of their Bodies exposed to that scorching fire; doubtless it would very
much tend to the easement of Men's maladies, and render the worst condition in
this Life more tolerable, if Men did often entertain themselves with the
thoughts of those unspeakable preparations, which Divine Justice has provided
for impenitent sinners. Who would not rather suffer an Eye to be plucked out,
an Arm or Leg to be cut off; nay, to be Racked, or to have all the Instruments
of tortures applied to him, than to be cast both Soul and Body into Hell, where
the Worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched? The sense of a greater, does
divert a lesser affliction; and hereby Men are more appeased under unhappy
circumstances, when they see others more rigorously dealt with, and proclaim
their grievances with hideous cries, groans, and fearful lamentations. In like
manner, a view, by thought of the other miserable World, and the pains and
agonies the Damned there do suffer, will make Men bear any temporal affliction,
with more patience and submissiveness.

Thirdly and Lastly, We learn, from the consideration that God has prepared a
Hell, to torment and pain those who die in enmity with him, to hate every sin,
since it produces so woeful an effect This is it which God abhors and therefore
has contrived unconceiveable Plagues to punish it. Now he manifests his
aversion to sin, by menacing it with future torments; but hereafter his threats
will be put in execution, in raining down indignation and wrath, tribulation
and anguish, upon every Soul that dies in an impenitent state. Where is the
sense then, of sporting our selves in vicious repasts, if we are like to pay so
dear in another World for it? What is a Man profited, if he gain the whole
World, and lose his own Soul? What if he were as Wealthy as Croesus, as Great
as Alexander, had the whole Universe, and all the Delights and Pleasures
thereof at his beck, if, when he dies, he must descend into the Regions of
Sorrow, and be locked up in the Prison of Hell for ever and ever? What will it
avail him, that once he was Rich and Honorable, since now all the Goods that
ever he had are converted into flames? Hell comprehends a deprivation of all
Good, and the presence of every Evil; and one would imagine, that the very
thoughts of it were enough to damp Men's spirits, and to make them carefully
shun the breach of their Innocence; that they would caution them against
Temptations, and fill their Minds with Wise Considerations. When Men draw so
near to a woeful Eternity, that they can, as it were, look over to it; when they
see the Grim and Terrible Sergeant Death, coming to hale them into another
World, then they will be terrified and amazed, and cry out against those sins
they formerly delighted in, and will wish they had been so wise for themselves,
to have considered the unhappy and fatal consequences of Vice, that they might
have avoided it in time of health and strength. And why will not Sinners come
to a serious and a right frame of Mind now, since they know they shall repent
of those things with shame and sorrow, which now they glory in, when they lie
languishing?

If therefore we would escape those punishments, which God Almighty has
prepared in the other miserable World, let us so meditate and pause upon them,
as to shun those things which are threatened with the second Death. Therefore,
Beloved, since ye know these things, beware, lest ye fall from your
stedfastness; but grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, to whom, with the Father, and ever Blessed Spirit, be given all
Honor, Praise, Thanksgiving, and Obedience, now, henceforth, and for evermore.
Amen.

SERMON VII.
Luke XVI. 25, 26.
But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good
things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art
tormented.

And besides all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed, so that
they that would pass from hence to you, cannot; neither can they pass to us
that would come from thence.

THis is the Answer to the Rich Man's foregoing Request, That Abraham would
send Lazarus with a drop of Water to cool his Tongue. Abraham gives him the
Title of (Son,) either as he was lineally descended from him, or as he was a
Member of that Church, of which he was the Father, So he terms him, by way of
Irony, or Exprobration, that he might Remember, as an addition of his misery,
how basely he degenerated from the practice and example of the Father of the
Faithful; the advantages and opportunities of being happy he neglected, and his
folly in contenting himself with the bare denomination of being a Member of the
Church of Christ. Remember, that in the other life, thou enjoyedst the upper
and the nether Springs, had all the comfortable Accommodations the World
could present thee with; and in them all thy happiness was fixed, thy heart and
affections were wholly taken up with the pomp and pride of Life, thou had no
regard to, nor value for the things of another world; thou had neither
reverence for God, the Author and Giver of thy store; nor common compassion for
thy Fellow Creatures, driven to poverty and extreme want: Therefore art thou
now tormented, a wretched, and pitiless Object; Not because of thy riches, but
because thou did not employ them to those ends and purposes for the which
they were bestowed upon thee. Lazarus, whom thou desire to cool thy Tongue,
shall not bring thee the least comfort, because thou were so stubborn and
hard-hearted, to deny him the crumbs which fell from thy Table. He was poor and
despicable, appeared like one forsaken, had neither Friends nor Wealth; but
embracing such a poor condition with patience and thankfulness, is now made
amends for all, and enjoys all that can caress his powers, all that can ravish
his heart, all that is good, lovely, and desirable. But besides, there is a
great gulf fixed between you and us, that there is not a possibility for the
Saints to come to you, nor for you to come to us, both states are determined.
Thou therefore must endure hunger, and thirst, and the other direful torments
in Hell, without pity or succor; and Lazarus shall enjoy the sweet and
ravishing entertainments of Heaven, without let or hinderance, where no
satiety shall ever render his fruition lothsom or tedious, no sad circumstances
imbitter his delights, nor any temptation disturb or molest him. But Abraham
said, Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and
likewise Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted, and thou art termented.
And besides all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed; so that
they that would pass from hence to you, cannot; neither can they pass to us,
that would come from thence. From which words we are advised,

First of all, That it will be a great aggravation of the misery of the damned,
to consider, and recollect the former means and advantages they have been under
for Salvation, if they have descended from godly Parents, or have been Members
of the Church of Christ, initiated thereinto by Baptism, and have made an open
acknowledgement of its Faith and Doctrines. Son says Abraham to the rich Man,
remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things.

Secondly, That there is no commerce or intercourse between glorified Saints
and damned Spirits. The Papists passing from Purgatory to Heaven, is a new
found way: for if Purgatory be a place, as they fondly insinuate, where Souls
are tormented, it is to be wondered at, how they should pass over this gulf,
says Abraham, between us and you there is (...), a great gulf fixed; so that
they which would pass from hence to you, cannot; neither can they pass to us,
that would come from thence. But to begin with the former of these two.

First, That it will be a great aggravation of the misery of the damned, to
consider and recollect the former means and advantages they have been under for
Salvation, if they have descended from godly Parents, or have been Members of
the Church of Christ, initiated thereinto by Baptism, and have made an open
acknowledgment of its Faith and Doctrines. Son, says Abraham to the rich Man,
remember, that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things. As I have
already hinted, the interior faculties, as well as the outward senses, shall
be perplexed and tormented; or otherwise Hell could not properly be termed a
place wherein is the perfection of misery; nor would wicked men be punished
according to their offenses.

There are some who are not visibly vicious, and are probably in common esteem,
moral and regular; but yet very unholy and untoward within, in their thoughts,
recollections of memory, in their desires, and more secret wishes; who fearing
corporal punishments, or the loss of a good reputation, or the frowns and ill
will of Relations or Acquaintance, refrain from public wickednesses. Our
blessed Savior tells us, that the Pharisees were such a sort of People, they
were very exact as to their outward Morals, prayed devoutly, fasted frequently,
gave alms cordially, and went in a separate guard, to distinguish themselves
from the vulgar; so that if we were to judge of them by external
demonstrations, we should conclude them the strictest Christians; But the Holy
Jesus lets us know, that their ends and purposes were carnal and secular, and
that all their Ceremonies were only Cloaks to conceal their covetousness,
self-interest, pride, and lustfulness. Now if this people were only to be
judged for their Actions, they would be immortalized, and rewarded as Saints.
But the Scriptures inform us, that men shall be accountable for their Thoughts,
Desires, and Wishes, as well as for their Actions: Every secret thing shall be
brought into Judgment, says the wise Man, Eccles. 12. ult. Upon which account,
men may appear innocent and harmless to the World; and yet stand guilty before
God, by reason of their blasphemous, revengeful, impure, unchaste thoughts. With
these they may affront God, abuse the Saints, and in effect drag young Virgins
to an Adulterous Bed; and therefore it is but reasonable that they should be
punished for them. Now having made it manifest that the interior faculties, as
well as the outward senses, shall be tormented; we will go on, and consider
what they are, and particularly how, and after what manner, they shall be
perplexed. And here,

First of all, The [Understanding] that shall be tormented with the sense of
the loss sustained. A Celestial Paradise forfeited; a perpetual sequestration
from God, and in him from every created good; an eternal exclusion from that
rest and peace, which makes the Saints happy, and renders their fruition
joyous, and infinitely pleasant. And as the Understanding shall ponder these
things, so it shall be actuated by the apprehension of the present evils it
suffers, and of those it must unhappily undergo to eternity; chained in Hell,
fastened to unquenchable flames tormented by Devils, baited by the damned Crew,
kept waking without intermission of sleep, which would abate the pains; every
moment a fresh instance of misery, a new scene of Torment; and all this, as
long as there is a God to inflict and punish. Doubtless this is a most
exquisite Torment, to be always followed with a quick sense of the loss of
Heaven, and of the least degree of comfort, to exaggerate the evils present,
and those which must follow, without intermission or end. We may perceive this
by some likeness of things of this life; when a man discovers himself deprived
of an Estate or Inheritance, bequeathed him by the Will of his Parents, or
Relations, or Acquaintance, in what a turbulent commotion are all his senses?
How does he fret and fume? so uneasy and nettled, that food has lost its
nourishing faculty with him; a soft Bed, which rests the wearied bones, and
lulls a man into a refreshing slumber, is irksom and tedious to him. He sighs,
and pauzes upon his unfortunate hap; and it may be, by an uninterrupted musing,
falls into a frenzy, or deep melancholy, which preying upon his spirits, in a
short time sends him into another World before the time. Now if the sense of
the loss of finite and limited goods, does so much grieve the heart, and makes
a man his own unhappiness; how much more will the sense of the loss of infinite
and unlimited goods gall and torment, and gnaw upon the interior faculties? An
eternal loss, cannot but produce an eternal sense of it, especially if it be
the greatest good; because the greatest evil is always present; the feeling of
the latter revives the recognition of the former, whereby the sense of what is
last is much enhanced and aggravated. But,

Secondly, The Intellectual Memory, whereby we record things, and make those as
present, which were long ago committed. This shall be tormented with a
perpetual recordation of the many opportunities and advantages for Heaven,
which have been foolishly contemned and neglected. The folly and vanity of
those things which were preferred before the glories and felicities of the
other happy World. Then shall be sadly brought to remembrance, the happy
privilege of a liberal Education, the encouragement and example of pious and
holy Parents, the grave and wholesome counsels of God's Ministers, the
advantage of reading the Holy Bible, and other religious Books, and imitating
the virtuous Conversation of the Saints: All these privileges and fair
opportunities wholly disregarded, for the pleasures of sin, which are but for a
moment, if compared with a long Eternity which follows. Thus shall the Torments
of the Damned be multiplied, by recollecting the Ways and Means they used to
deprive themselves of the Inheritance of Heaven, to which they might have had
right, if they had not disinherited themselves. When a Son, by his extravagant
courses, and repeated acts of disobedience, has incensed his Father against
him, that he dashes him out of his Will, and excludes him from the enjoyment of
his estate after death, to which he might have had a filial propriety; when he
feels the deprivation of the goods, suffers the reproach and shame of a
disinherited Prodigal, and undergoes the infamy and scandal of a Cast-off; how
is he enraged against himself, for his folly in violating the easy Commands,
and refusing the good Counsels of his tender and indulgent Father, and thereby
forfeited his good Will, and his right to his appurtenances? He that might have
lived in repute and fashion, is now the ridicule and common talk of his
Acquaintance, and forced to be content with the meanest Treatments. And how
much more will it torment and grieve the Damned in Hell, when it shall be
brought to their remembrances, what a gracious Father God was once unto them,
how he entreated, counseled, and persuaded them to be happy; what reasonable,
easy, and fair Commands, he imposed upon them, and what a large Inheritance he
entailed upon them, if they had been obedient; how long he bore with their
insolent carriage and disingenuous deportment, how ready to pass by the
injuries offered to his Divine Majesty, promising them pardon and a free
forgiveness, if they would change their manners, and become more circumspect
for the time to come; but were not wrought upon by his impunity and
forbearance, slighting his love, abusing his gracious tenderness, and setting
the lowest value upon his rich and glorious Promises: And now his patience is
turned into fury, his indulgence into vengeance; and they, who once were Heirs
of the Kingdom of Heaven, are become Slaves to the Devil, and the Punishments
of Hell, to which they must pay as many Tributes, as they have senses, powers,
and members. What Scenes and Images of Terror will such an unhappy Recordation
present to the Damned! The imaginative faculty, the appetites, and the will,
all the interior powers and rational powers, shall be distinctly, and
eternally perplexed, according to their capacity And thus much for the first
thing deducible from the words of the Text, namely, That it will be a great
aggravation of the misery of the Damned, to consider and recollect the former
means and advantages they have been under for Salvation. I proceed from hence
to the second General thing, namely,

Secondly, That there is no commerce or intercourse between glorified and
damned Spirits. Between us and you, says Abraham, there is a great Gulf fixed;
so that they that would come from hence to you, cannot; neither can they pass
to us, that would come from thence. It is rendered in the Greek, (...), a great
Gulf, Quagmire, or Descent, so difficult and deep, that an attempt to pass it
would be to no purpose. It is thus expressed, to show the impossibility of the
glorified Saints bringing any comfort to the Damned, or of their being released
one minute from their pains. Both States are decreed, and irreversible; Heaven
shall be perfect bliss, and Hell perfect misery. They in Heaven, shall not have
their Joys sowred and interrupted, by hearing the doleful complaints, terrible
outcries, horrid screeches, blasphemies and curses, by seeing the bodies of
the damned inveloped in flames, their Tongues parched, their Throats scalded
with slaming brimstone, and those other miseries they endure: Neither shall
those cursed Wretches have the happiness to see the State and Grandeur of the
Saints, nor to hear those melodious noises, and harmonious Hallelujahs, which
they make, and sing to the Lamb that sits upon the Throne. They shall be locked
up among the Devils, with the Key of Eternity, and shall for ever weep, and
wail and gnash their teeth. It would in some measure aslwage their afflictions,
could they be permitted to feast their eyes with the Glory, Order, and Aeconomy
of Heaven; the Luster and Beauty of that place of (...) would swallow them up
in wonder and (...) and make them, if I may so say, forget their lamentable
Circumstances. We know what a comfortable thing it is in affliction, to be
caressed with Friendly visits, and entertained with some chearing discourse;
how soon does the extremity of our maladies abate, and what a refreshment do we
quickly perceive, till the Friends be gone, and we unhappily left to thought
and fancy. But in Hell are no vicisitudes of good and evil, no mixture or
allay, no harmless pleasure to divert the pain one moment; no commerce or
intercourse with Holy Angels, and Beatified Spirits; nothing that can be termed
a good; but all that is evil, and inexpressibly so; In Gehenna est omnium
malorum complicatio, says one; In the prison of Hell there is a complication of
all evils; nor will they be the more tolerable, or wear off by time, or change
their nature, because God, who is the summum bonum, the greatest good, and in
whom all other created goods concenter, will be eternally absent from Hell. But
here it may chance to be asked; that considering the humane Creature is finite
and temporary, and that all which proceeds from him is so, how can it stand
with the justice of Almighty God, whose will is the Rule of Justice and Equity,
who also is the source and fountain of mercy; that there should be such a
disproportion between the offense and the punishment, as to punish his poor,
frail, finite Creature, with infinite and eternal torment? To this I answer,
that though humane transgressions are finite, yet they are committed against an
infinite Majesty; and had the sinner who committed them, lived eternally, he
would have sinned eternally. Besides, God having reserved endless rewards for
temporary virtue, promised all that he has, all that he can give, and all that
he himself enjoys; it is but just, that the wilful forfeiture thereof should be
punished with eternal torments. And hereupon, as one observes, the pain of loss
will be more rigorous and bitter, than all the rest, because the loss of Heaven
is the foundation and cause of all the other infernal punishments.

What gross stupidity then possesses men! who, for temporary pleasures, for the
gratification of a foolish lust, will run the hazard of an infinite loss, even
God! To forfeit him, is to bid adieu to all that is good and desirable. Are
these fading delights so charming and great, as to content them to be banished
for ever from him who is the very source and sea of happiness? Were those
unhappy Souls beneath, who know and feel the pain of loss, admitted to assume
their Bodies, and live a time of trial again; how transported with joy would
they be, that they were put into a condition of regaining their loss? They
would generously deny a temptation to sin, be careful in their choice, consider
well before they act, and look upon all these earthly entertainments as vain,
empty, and worthless things. Their main employ and solicitude, would be to
prepare their Souls for Heaven; they would spend the time of their sojourning
here in fear, and daily exercise themselves to have a Conscience void of
offense, toward God, and toward Men. What a happiness then do we enjoy? that
still we are in a state of hope, and, if not wanting to our selves, may
commence an eternity with God, and all the Host of Heaven. It will be but a sad
consideration, that after we have lived our time under the sound of the Gospel,
have enjoyed the means of Grace, and all other advantages, and opportunities of
Salvation; that when we come to dye, we forrowfully discover, that we are
nothing the better for these mighty helps, not a whit qualified for the
enjoyment of God no more, than if we never heard of a Gospel, or Jesus Christ.
Then it will enrage us against our selves, that from the hopes of Heaven, we
have precipitated our selves into a desparate state; and for the gratification
of a foolish lust, have plunged our selves into the Ocean of misery It is
therefore necessary, that now I proceed, in the last place, to draw some
Practical Inferences from what has been said, and then close my Discourse. And
here,

First, Will it be a great aggravation of the misery of the damned, to
consider, and recollect the former means and advantages they have been under
for Salvation, if they have descended from godly Parents, or have been Members
of the Church of Christ, initiated thereinto by Baptism, and have made an open
acknowledgment of its Faith and Doctrines? let then the consideration of this
warn us from slighting, mis-using and neglecting these privileges and happy
advantages; and lay a necessity upon us, to join our own endeavors with these
means, that they may be a favor of life to us. Neither the eminence of a fair
and ingenuous Education, nor the honor of being a Member of the Christian
Church, nor an open acknowledgment of its Institutions, will be of any avail,
unless they work together, by our own studious industry, to the reforming of
our lives, correcting of our ruder passions, and the reducing us to the
evennesses of virtue, and a good disposition. Doubtless there are a great many
in the Regions of despair and sorrow, who had godly Parents, and the advantage
of a liberal Education, were baptized into the Church of Christ, and made an
ample profession of its Doctrines and Truths. Their torment is so far from
being lessened, because of these privileges, that it is infinitely enhaunced
and aggravated; as sadly remembering how happy they might have been, what means
of Salvation are quite lost and thrown away upon them. It will not so much be
the enquiry in the day of Judgment, whether we were baptized, as whether we
have lived up to the Rule of God's word. He is not a Jew, who is one outwardly;
neither is that circumcision, which is outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew,
which is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in the Spirit,
and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God, says St. Paul,
Romans 2.28, 29. Thou may go down into Hell with the water of baptism in thy
forehead, with the name of God in thy mouth: for he is not affected with the
ceremonial, without the internal part of Religion; Bodily worship, separate
from the concurrence of the heart, he terms, Impudent and barefaced
Hypocrisy, as he speaks concerning the Oral Worship of the Pharisees, Matthew.
15.8, 9. This people draws nigh unto me with their Mouth, and honors me
with their lips; but their heart is far from me, and in vain do they worship
me. Though thou speak with the tongue of Men and Angels; though thou have the
gift of Prophecy, and understandest all Mysteries, and all Knowledge: and
though thou had all Faith, so that thou could remove Mountains; though thou
bestowedst all thy goods to feed the poor, and though thou give thy body to
be burned, yet if thou do not truly love God, if thou art not conformable in
Will and Affection to his Will and Law; all this will profit thee nothing, 1
Cor. 13.1, 2, etc. It must be a renewed mind, estranged from the lusts and
vanities of the world, a new birth, a life of grace and faith, that will
entitle us Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven, and qualify us for the society of
Angels and beatified Spirits.

Secondly, And is there no commerce or intercourse between glorified and damned
Spirits? The consideration of this should engage us to honor, esteem,
reverence, and kindly treat the Saints of God in this life. To love them for
their piety, to converse with them for their example, to be thankful to them
for the many devout prayers they put up to God for our Reformation and
Salvation, to vindicate and justify them, against all the cavils, slanders,
and reproaches, of unreasonable and heady Men. How do they evidence their
respect to us, in fasting, and praying, in weeping, and sighing, and
expostulating with God, to avert his Judgments we deserve, and bless us by
pardoning of our sins, and crowning us with Glory hereafter? Let not a good
man's poverty be a motion to contemn him; for though he want the Accommodations
of this life, yet he is a chosen Heir to the Kingdom of Heaven; and remember
the good Offices he daily does for us. If he be hungry, feed him; if he be
thirsty, give him drink; if he be naked, cloth him; if he be sick, minister to
his infirmity; if in prison, visit him with comfortable refreshment: For he
that gives to drink, to one of these little ones, a cup of cold water in the
name of a Disciple, shall in no wise lose his reward, Matthew. 10.42.

It is a sad consideration, that goodness shall not be preferred before riches,
that wealth must take place before piety. What will that avail thee, when thou
art bidding adieu to the pleasures of earth, and preparing to make thy personal
appearance before the Judgment Seat of Christ? Thou must bring nothing there
but thy virtues, or thy vices; the Judge is no respecter of persons; If thou be
condemned, there is nothing to prevent the execution of that irreversible
sentence, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. Poverty is honorable, because Christ our Head chose to be poor; and to
despise that, is to fling dirt into his face, and reproach him from whom we
expect eternal life. Therefore how mean soever the Servants of God appear in
this World, how scanty soever their portion be; let us respect them, and do
them all the kind Offices we can; then, at the last and final reckoning, they
will appear for us, and declare the special acts of civility, the tender,
compassionate services we have done them, the respect and fingular regard we
had for them, and the generous treatments we exercise toward them; then, in
the face of the whole world, shall the Judge pronounce, Come ye blessed
Children of my Father, receive a Kingdom, prepared for you from the foundation
of the World: For I was hungry, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave
me drink; I was naked, and ye clothed me; I was a stranger, and ye took me in;
I was sick and in prison, and ye came unto me; for as much as ye have done it
unto the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me.

Thirdly, and Finally, We knowing the terrors of the Lord, let us be prevailed
with to consider our present State, to be perfectly acquainted with our selves,
how we have spent the former part of our lives, whether in Gods Service, or the
Devils Drudgery; and if, upon an impartial survey, we discover that we have
hitherto erred from the right end of our Creation, humbly to implore Gods
pardon, and to beg his grace for the time to come, that joining our own
endeavors with it, we may redeem the time we have lost, by breaking off our
sins, and speedily applying our selves to the practice of true Religion.

It is very sad to continue in an unconverted state, because we know not how
soon it will be ere we be stripped into naked Spirits, and sent into an
irreversible state. And to be thus surprised, and the Work of our Souls left
unwrought, would be the worst of evils; and then what would we give, if
possible, that we might have again such opportunities and advantages of being
happy? consider therefore in time, repent and amend in this life of trial,
shake off that impovidence which detaineth you, make you a new heart, and a new
spirit; mortify and subdue your unruly will, wean your affections from the
pride of life; manfully deny all ungodliness, and wordly lusts, and live
soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world; looking for, without
wavering, the blessed hope, and the glorious appearance of the great God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

May God grant you, according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened
with might by his spirit in the inner man; that Christ may dwell in your hearts
by Faith; that you, being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to
comprehend with all Saints, what is the height, breadth, length and depth, and
to know the love of Christ, that ye may be filled with all the fullness of God.
Now unto the only wise God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, be given the Kingdom,
the Power, and the Glory, now, henceforth, and for evermore. Amen.

SERMON VIII.
Luke XVI. 27, 28, 29.
Then he said, I pray thee therefore, Father, that thou would send him to my
Fathers House.

For I have five Brethren, that he may testify unto them, lest they also come
into this place of torment.

Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them.

THe rich man having received a slat denial of that which he requested, that
Lazarus might be sent with a drop of water, to allay the heat and throbbing of
his parched tongue; and sadly perceiving himself a pitiless and miserable
Object; is here brought in entreating Abraham to dismiss Lazarus to his
Brethren who were yet alive, and to give them an account of his deceased
Brothers wretched and woeful State. Let him assume his Body, and go, and relate
what Torments I endure; that he saw me in the midst of Flames, my Flesh
broiling, my Tongue swollen with heat and pain; That he heard me weeping, and
sighing, and bemoaning my comfortless and irreparable Condition; That he saw
the damned Fiends employed in vexing and tormenting me, and that I have all the
Scenes and Images of Terror always in view. Let him tell them how I curse my
Folly, for living secure and careless, without thought of another World, or
what would become of me after death. Let him assert my Resolution, That if I
was admitted to re-enter the World, and live my Days over again that are past,
I would not be charmed with the flatteries of Lust and Sensuality; nor spending
my time in eating, drinking, and soft delights; in clothing my Body with gaudy
Raiment, nor bend my study to invent Recreations for my Appetite. I would limit
my Will, Desires, and Affections; and by a prudent management bring my Flesh
under, that it might be corrective and governed by the insinuations of Reason.
I would set an inestimable value upon the means of Salvation, which I foolishly
slighted, and turned into wantonness. That I would live in a constant
expectation of Death and Judgment. Such a Relation as this Father Abraham,
would astonish my Brethren, scare them from their Sins, and caution them
against those Imprudences, which were my destruction, and remediless ruin.
This would rouse them out of sleep, make them unravel all that they have done,
and put them upon other Methods. But is there any Charity in Hell? Are there
any in the Abyss of Misery, who wish the Conviction, Conversion, and Salvation
of Souls on Earth? Do they not rather envy the Privileges and Advantages of
Happiness they enjoy, and desire that they may be as miserable as themselves?
It is the Opinion of some sage and learned Writers, That the rich Man here
prays not so much for the reformation and final Good of his Brethren, as for
himself, that his Torments might not be the more aggravated, with the perpetual
sight and company of those, who, in this World, were his near Relations, or
familiar Acquaintance, and who were led and influenced by his base vicious
Examples. It will greatly add to the Afflictions of lost Souls, to see those in
Hell, who, when in the Body, were seduced and drawn away from Christianity by
their loose Practices. But to the Answer which Abraham makes to the rich Man's
Petition; Thy Brethren have Moses and the Prophets, those exact Transcribers of
God's Will, their Manuscripts are Truths delivered by the Holy Ghost; and
therein is dictated whatsoever God exacts from Men, and Directions how they may
please their Creator. He will not grant Men needless and extraordinary
Revelations, to gratify their vain Curiosity; since he has acquainted them
with every thing that is fit for them to know and practice. Thy Brethren cannot
plead Ignorance, when they are daily excited and admonished by God's
Ambassadors: And if they will not be reformed by these Means, and mighty Helps,
they cannot reasonably expect that God should send departed Souls with a
special Commission, and compel them to accept of the Terms of Happiness,
against their will. His Word is sufficient to prepare them for Heaven, if they
will but believe its Propositions, and live up to the Rule of Life prescribed
therein. But, if this prove not effectual, there is no probability of their
being saved. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them.

From which I raise these Doctrines:

First of all, That the Scriptures are the only means appointed by God, for the
Conviction, Conversion, and Salvation of Sinners. Abraham argues the
unreasonableness and impertinence of the Rich Man's request, that he would
dismiss Lazarus to his Brethren, by urging the advantages and fair
opportunities they had of making themselves for ever; They have Moses and the
Prophets, let them hear them. There is no need of extraordinary revelations,
since they have such an eminent privilege of hearing the Counsels and
Instructions of those worthy Men, commissioned by, and employed under God.

Secondly, That it is too plain an argument of great Infidelity, and hardness
of Heart, when the Word of God does not take place, convince Men of their sins,
and happily bring them from under the power of Satan unto God. I shall treat of
both these distinctly, beginning with the former.

First, That the Scriptures are the only means appointed by God, for the
Conviction, Conversion, and the Salvation of Sinners, drawn from Abraham's
answer to the Rich Man's Petition, that he would send Lazarus away, with a
special Commission, to his surviving Brethren: No, they have Moses and the
Prophets, let them hear them. The Word of God is a Declaration of his Will
concerning Mankind, who, desiring their eternal Good, has, by Moses and the
Prophets, sent, and commissioned after him, prescribed the Methods, in a plain
and familiar manner, to be used and prosecuted, to that end. He therefore
inserts his Prerogative, and the undeniable claim he has to our Worship, and
the best of our Services, as the Lord our God, the Contriver and Builder of the
Universe; our Creator, who breathed into us the breath of Life, and we became
living Souls. And to strengthen the belief of those Truths written and
dispersed, by his chosen Servants, graciously condescended to come down from
Heaven, eclipsed with Humanity, and supplied the defects of his Laws delivered
in the Minority of the World: And lest by additions, and seeming alterations,
the Jews, with whom he chiefly conversed, should stagger in the belief of the
Mosaical Traditions, tells them, Matthew. 5.17. Think not that I am come to
destroy the Law and the Prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill;
more emphatically, to reveal the full intent and meaning of the Law anciently
delivered, that Men may be put out of scruple and doubt concerning their Duty,
and the terms upon which their Salvation is promised. And therefore St. Paul,
to create a separate veneration and high esteem for Sacred Writ, gives an
excellent Commendation, and pathetick Encomium of it, 2. Tim. 3.16, 17. It is
profitable, says he, for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction
in righteousness; that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
all good works. That is, the holy Scriptures, termed the Old and New Testament,
are undeniably profitable to instruct us in the belief of those Propositions
absolutely necessary to Salvation, to convince us of any truth which consists
with our happiness; or of any sin, the allowed practice of which will sink us
into the Abyss of Misery; to correct us when straying, to show us the right
path, and to bring us to rights; to instruct us in that righteousness, in which
we must appear before God, to the end that Christians may be as perfect in this
frail state, as they can be aptly prepared to every good work, commendable and
praiseworthy in the sight of God. And in the 15th Verse he urges, That the
Scriptures are able to make us wise unto salvation, through faith, which is in
Christ Jesus; they have sufficiency of Doctrine, to make us wise enough to get
to Heaven, if we have a genuine Faith in Jesus Christ, receiving him as our
Savior, and a Faith assenting and agreeing to these holy Writings, as the
revelation of the Divine Will. So that it is fond flattery, for Men to
disregard the Oracles of God, as if they were only Human Inventions, composed
and written in a melancholy studious humor, or by strength of fancy, and
expect extraordinary revelations to convince and convert them; as an Angel from
above, clothed with the brightness of glory, with a special Commission in his
Hand, to make them believe that there is a Heaven; and a damned Spirit from
beneath, with the woeful marks of Divine vengeance upon him, wringing his hands,
tearing his hair, gnashing his teeth, and telling them what terrible
preparations God has provided for impenitent sinners, to beget in them the
belief of a Hell. God is not obliged to convert Men after such an extraordinary
manner; nor, indeed, is it reasonable he should, since he has revealed his mind
concerning Mankind to his Servant Moses, and to the Prophets after him, and
confirmed the same by his Son, working mighty Miracles, and astonishing
Wonders; and by him delivered to the Apostles, who converted many, convinced
them of their errors, and fixed them in the profession of Christianity, and by
them handed down to us. Wherefore should God detract from the power, authority,
and truth of his holy Word, by reforming Men after a strange and unusual
course? The nice and stubborn Pharisees, notwithstanding those numberless
Miracles which our Savior wrought in their view, to possess them with the
belief of his Divinity, and that he had his Commission from God the Father,
impertinently required a sign from him, something extraordinary, more than he
had already done, expecting that such a Mission should be so confirmed; Either,
perhaps, that he would alter the course of the Sun, or make it stand still, as
it did upon the Dial of Ahaz; or, that he would demand a Guard of Angels from
Heaven, who should testify his Authority, and that he was no Impostor, as they
profanely suspected; or, it may be, that he would cause a Voice from Heaven to
thunder in their Ears, that he was the Son of God, and threaten them with
Damnation if they disputed the Truth of it. To this our blessed Lord answers,
An evil and adulterous Generation seeks after a Sign, but there shall no Sign
be given them. I have wrought Miracles enough to convince them, if they were
not harder than the nethermost Millstone. I filled five thousand Persons with
five Loaves and two Fishes; and of the fragments thereof remained twelve
Baskets full. I raised Lazarus to life, who had been dead four days. With a
word I have cast out Devils, out of those who were possessed; opened the Eyes
of those who were born blind: A Woman that had an Issue of Blood twelve years,
and had spent all her Substance with Physicians for cure, was perfectly made
whole by touching the hem of my Garment. The Lame and Paralitick are restored
to Health and Strength by me, without medicinal Applications. The Widows Son of
Nain, who was carrying forth in order to be buried, received life again by my
command, Arise. Abundance more Miracles of this kind I have wrought before you,
O ye of little faith, to convince you that I am sent from God: But still
retaining Prejudice and Malice against me, whereby you are hardened and seared
with Infidelity; there shall no other Sign be shown, to satisfy your vain
Curiosity; since enough has been done, to make impartial and ingenuous Minds
believe, that I act by a Divine Power, and consequently have received my
Commission from God. To run parallel, God having revealed his Will concerning
Mankind, now called the Old and New Testament; the former relating to Moses and
the Prophets, who were chosen and peculiar Ambassadors, commissioned by, and
immediately employed under God, to spread the knowledge of his Laws, and to
insinuate with his Creatures to revere the Sanction thereof: The latter
pertaining to the Blessed Jesus, who was empowered and authorized by his Father
to perfect and promulge the intent and meaning of his Laws, that we might not
be be-wildred in Fancies and Illusions, grovel in the Dark, and perish in
Ignorance: If, notwithstanding this Pharos, or great Illuminary, which would
light and guide us to Heaven's Gates, we still wander and stray from the Truth,
expecting a miraculous Revelation, that God will convert us by some other
means, which we have no warrant for, nor have the least reason to suppose; we
shall be grossly deceived, and obstinately plunge our selves into remediless
Ruin; he having appointed no other means for our Conviction, Conversion, and
Salvation, than his Holy Word, which he has commissioned his Ministers to
preach and propagate. And thus much may suffice for the first thing, which I
proposed to speak to, namely, That the Word of God is the only Means appointed
to convert and bring us to the enjoyment of him. Which is the Argument Abraham
urges to the rich Man, to excuse the grant of his request, That Lazarus might
be sent to his Brethren to testify unto them: No, they have Moses and the
Prophets, the appointed means for Salvation, let them give heed to them: It is
but in vain for them to expect extraordinary Revelations, and for you to desire
them. From hence I proceed to the second general Thing, namely,

Secondly, That it is too plain an argument of a seared Heart, and strong
Infidelity; when the Word of God does not take place, convince Men of their
Sins, and happily bring them from under the power of Satan, unto God. And this
Abraham implies in his Answer to the rich Man; Thy Brethren have Moses and the
Prophets, who are sufficient to reclaim, and work a reformation in them, unless
their Heart be like an Adamant, stubborn and impenetrable: For their Commission
is immediately from God, and that which they preach, is by his special
Inspiration. St. Paul asserts, Heb. 4.12. That the word of God is quick and
powerful, and sharper than any two-edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing
asunder of Soul and Spirit; that is, it is convincing and influential, of
mighty force and sagacity, active and searching. Now it evidently follows, that
Men must be prodigiously hardened, and arrived to a very high pitch of
Infidelity, when this quickening and converting Word of God loses its Virtue,
and seems no more than an idle Tale to them. For no more it is in effect, while
Men continue in sin, and live secure and thoughtless, under the sound and
preaching of it. The Eunuch, who had but a small sense of God, as he was
journying, accidentally pitching upon Isai. 53.7. where he read; He was led as
a Sheep to the slaughter; and like a Lamb dumb before his Shearers; so he
opened not his Mouth: In his humiliation, his judgment was taken away, and who
shall declare his generation? For his life is taken from the Earth, Being
affected with the Expression, asks Philip of whom the Prophet spoke? Philip
answered, Of Jesus; and preaching him to him, and the necessity of being
admitted into his Fold; he seeing a large Pool, says, What does hinder me to
be baptized? And Philip said, If thou believe thou may: He answered, I do
believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God; and was immediately baptized, Acts
8. from 30, to 39. Of such Force and Energy is the Word of God, when it is read
with Care, heard with Attention, and received into a flexible and unprejudiced
Heart. While St. Peter was Expounding, and preaching the Scriptures, about
three thousand Souls at once were converted from Judaisin, and made eminent
Proselites of the holy Jesus, Acts 2.41. While St. Paul was preaching to Felix
the Governor, concerning Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come; the
Text says, he fell a trembling, Acts 24.25. The Word preached, searched him to
the bottom, and filled him with a sense of his own guilt; it dictated to him
that he was the Man, though his own perverseness defeated its healing Operation
upon him. It is Men's infidelity and stubbornness of Heart, which they have
contracted by customary sinning, which choaks the Word, that it becomes
unfruitful. Or otherwise, could they read and hear God speaking to them to
break off their Sins, and exert new and virtuous Habits, beseeching and
entreating them to be wise for themselves; that God, who can every moment, by
an invisible and irresistible Power, revenge himself on disobedient Man, and
send him roaring into the infernal Pit; I say, could Men live under the
constant sound of the Word of God, and yet remain unconvinced and unaffected,
unless they were seared against Reproof, and impregnable to good Advice; did a
Man absolutely, without any reserve, believe that God will certainly punish all
proud Contemners of his Laws; that his threatenings, without any respect of
Persons, will be executed upon every one that shall be found in Rebellion
against him; would he, think you, dare to love his Sins, and spend his time in
vain Sports and Pastimes? Would he not rather presently bethink himself, change
his mind, and resolve to be conformable, in Action, and Affection, to the Word
of Truth? Did a Man fear God, as he ought, which implies a belief in him in the
construction of the Scriptures; he would dread his displeasure, and prudently
withdraw himself from those Vices which will incur it. As a Man fears thee, so
is thy displeasure, says the Psalmist, Psalm 90.11. Or, more plainly, according
as Men's Thoughts are of God, so are their Lives. And from hence we may, without
being censured as uncharitable, conclude, whether Men revere or contemn God, by
the general course of their Actions. It is an andeniable Argument of a profound
love, belief, and fear of God, when a Man makes the Scripture his Rule; when he
avoids those things it interdicts, and cheerfully does those it commands As on
the contrary, when Men Swear, blaspheme God, and and his Religion, Cheat,
Oppress, Lie, commit Adultery, and the like, and allow themselves herein, with
delight and complacency: This is Proof, beyond all contradiction, that God is
not in all their Thoughts, that his Word is as a Cipher; that they either
conclude him a Being, which does not disturb himself by taking cognizance of
Things committed here below; or, if he does, yet will not be so rigid to call
them to Account; and thus give themselves encouragement to follow their own
Inventions, and to sin without Concern or Thought: And when once Men are deaf
to the Calls of the Gospel, despise its Promises, and contemn its Threatenings;
when neither Moses, nor the Prophets, nor Christ Jesus, nor his Substitutes,
can work upon them to renounce their Impieties, and to order their Conversation
as becomes Christians; I say, if these mighty Helps prove ineffectual, it is is
to be reasonably presumed, that nothing besides, no, not an Angel from Heaven,
nor a damned Spirit from beneath, could ever reach, or have any influence upon
them. And thus much for the second Thng, namely, That it is too great an
Argument of a seared Heart, and strong Infidelity, when the Word of God does
not take place, convince Men of their Sins, and happily bring them from under
the power of Satan, unto God.

And now I proceed to draw some Inferences from the whole, and so conclude. And
here,

First, We learn what a mighty Privilege and Advantage we are partakers of,
that Almighty God should honor us, sinful Creatures, with the declaration of
his Will, the which is a guide to conduct us through cragged and uneven ways, a
glass to discover our nakedness, the spots and stains upon our Souls, that we
may wipe them out by repentance, and a new life, and a Lamp to light us to
Heaven: We might still have been bewildered with foolish fancies, and gross
illusions, have followed the ignis fatuus of our heady Minds, and run violently
into the Ocean of Misery, if God, who cares for us, and highly values our
good, had not set out this great illuminary, his Word, to bring us back, and
call us from the destruction we were ignorantly posting to. What an esteem and
veneration ought we to have then for the Scriptures? How dear should they be to
us? We cannot read and meditate on them too often, we cannot be too wise for
Heaven, nor too much acquainted with our selves. Our selves are a great
Mystery, which requires a good Judgment, a discerning Spirit, and a sagacious
Mind, to comprehend; and the Scriputres mightily help us in the knowledge of
our selves; by them, as one of the Fathers has it, all Men may be amended, the
weak strengthened, and the strong confirmed; so that surely there are none, who
are enemies to the reading of God's Word, but such as either be so ignorant,
that they know not how wholesome and salvisick it is, or else be so sick, that
they loath and stomach at the most comfortable and adapt Medicines to heal
their malady; or so ungodly, that they would with all persons might continue in
blindness, and gross ignorance of God and themselves. It is a lamentable
consideration, that the Bible, which treats of Men's salvation, and teaches
them how they may make sure of Heaven, should be so much slighted as it is;
that Novels, Romantic, Hisicries, and Pedantick Poetry, all but human Wit and
Invention, should be read with such attention and curiosity, with an eager
appetite, and a well-pleased fancy, and the Word of God, which has brought
light and immortality into the World, hurried over, and slovenly perused, as if
it were a dull, sapless, and heavy composition, not worth Men's while to carry
in their memories. It will turn to a dismal after-reckoning, when God shall
judge the contemners and despisers of his Oracles; when they shall be tried by
that Word, which now they disdain; and the threatenings therein denounced, which
now they laugh at, shall be put in full execution; better they had never heard
of a Gospel, or a Jesus Christ; better they had lived in some dark corner of
the earth, where the Sun of righteousness never shined.

Secondly, If we hope and wish for the continuance of God's Word among us, if
we would that it may be a savor of life unto life to us; in fine, if we would
have that righteousness wherein we must stand before the Son of Man, when he
comes attended with his mighty Angels to judge the World, and to determine
every Man's final state, then it highly concerns us to put a separate value upon
the Scriptures, to read them as the Oracles of God, to believe them as the
contents of his Will concerning us, and to order our Lives and Conversations
according as they direct us. To revere them, as they bring the glad tidings of
Salvation, and to admire them as they contain wonderful expressions of the
Divine Love to us. They instruct us how to behave our selves in all conditions
of Life. If we are rich, they counsel us to be humble, meek, and condescending;
to be indifferently affected with our Wealth, that we may not be too much
incumbered with cares, fears, and uneasy jealousies, which disturb the Mind,
distract the Thoughts, and make Men unapt for the Kingdom of Heaven. If we be
poor, the Bible even improves and sweetens an adverse state, by counselling us
to cast all our care upon God, who cares for us, to put our confidence in him;
to present our Pravers to him, who, if he grant not those things we pray for,
yet some other he knows most suitable and convenient for us, and at last will
reward us with the felicities of his Kingdom, for our faith, patience, and
continuing in well-doing.

In fine, the Bible has a Salve for every Sore, Medicaments of all sorts; it
cures blindness of Heart, weakness of Judgment, the inconstancy of Faith, and
makes a Christian such a one as God would have him to be. Is then this Book to
be slighted, and thrown by as useless? Can Men be unwilling to peruse and
meditate upon it, or think their time ill spent in reading it? Can they be
better employed than in acquainting themselves with God's Will, and searching
how they may fulfill it? How they may pass through this troublesome and
vexatious World blameless, that they may commence a happy and blessed Eternity?
What can be compared with the Soul? And what loss so irreparable as the loss of
it? Insomuch that our Savior says, What will it avail a Man, if he had the
Worlds wealth, every thing that is great, good, and desirable in it, and lose
his Soul? All that he has cannot make him satisfaction, or repair his damage.
What therefore should be every Man's study so much, as to provide for the after
state of his Soul, to read and ponder the ways and means he must use to prepare
his Soul for the embraces of the Father of Spirits? How melancholy soever Men
may think it is, to fill their Minds with the thoughts of Death, Judgment, and
Eternity, yet when they come to die, they will earnestly wish themselves well
provided for their Voyage into another World. Let them therefore lose no time
in health, but read diligently, meditate seriously, and practice conscionably,
the Word of God; which, by Divine Grace, and their own endeavors, will make
them wise unto Salvation.

Finally, and to conclude; As we are Christians, let us have a special regard
to God's Word, and, with the Psalmist, hide it in our hearts, that we may not
sin against our Maker. Let it be our Counselor, our Guide, and Director, that
all our Actions, Words and Thoughts, may be pure and blameless. And that we may
thus order our steps, let us pray as our Church: O Blessed Lord, who have
caused all Holy Scriptures to be written for our Learning, grant that we may in
such-wise hear them, read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest them, that by
patience and comfort of thy holy Word, we may embrace, and ever hold fast the
blessed hope of everlasting Life, which thou have given us in thy Son Jesus
Christ our Lord; to whom, with the Father, and the ever Blessed Spirit, be
given all Honor, Praise, Thanksgiving, and Obedience, now, henceforth, and for
evermore. Amend.

SERMON IX.
Luke XVI. 30, 31.
And he said, Nay, Father Abraham; but if one went unto them from the dead,
they will repent.

And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.

THE Rich Man still pursues his Request, not being satisfied with that answer
Abraham made him; If one whom my Brethren knew was dead, should appear, and
speak to them, giving them a Relation, that he saw their Friend in a very
miserable and afflicted State, covered with unquenchable flames, from the head
unto the foot; and that if they did not reform, and take up, they must
certainly undergo the like torments: This would be an irresistible argument,
and have such a powerful effect upon them, that they would presently bethink
themselves, change their lives, and thoroughly repent of their past misspent
time. The slight, and hollow speech of a Ghost would fright them into better
manners, and sensibly convince them. To this Abraham replies, If thy Brethren
hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose
from the dead. If the standing Revelation of God, so well attested, be not
sufficient to confute them of their errors, and bring them to rights; in all
probability, they would be as stubborn and inflexible, if God should work a
special miracle in order to their Conversion. As for instance, if he should
dispatch a deceased Soul, and charge it to testify unto them, that if they
will not forsake their debaucheries, and exert new and virtuous Habits, they
shall certainly fall as so many Victims to his Vengeance. There is hardly any
passage in Scripture, which more asserts the stubbornness and inflexibleness of
sinners hearts, than this; nor any text that looks more dismally upon persons
sitting under the means of Grace, reading and hearing the word of God, and yet
perceive not their hearts softened, and brought to yield, by its quickening and
converting Power. It is a very reasonable conclusion; that if the Holy
Scriptures, which have brought many out of darkness and gross ignorance,
humbled many a perverse, and molified many a seared heart, and fetched
abundance of Strangers home to Christ Jesus's fold; I say, if these convincing
and influential means work not upon sinners, to repent, believe, and live up to
that express holiness which they require; it is very much to be doubted,
whether any extraordinary Revelations would ever effect or reach them. For
though sensible demonstration be the greatest advantage imaginable, to moral
persuasion; yet these things are under no Divine appointment to such an effect.
It is not so much to be wondered at, that the intemperate see their
fellow-sinners struck suddenly dead by an invisible hand, and yet unconcernedly
drink to excess, and every day gratify their luxurious and thirsty appetites
with large and unlimitted draughts. That multitudes of sinners are unexpectedly
hurried into the other miserable world, and their Companions not in the least
affected with such instances of Divine Vengeance; but obstinately persist in
iniquity, as if there was no God to condemn, nor a Devil to punish them. What
can awake and rouse Men out of the sleep of sin if such sensible evidences as
these, such special demonstrations of Gods fury, does not alarm and strike them
with fear and trembling? but to the further prosecution of the Text; The rich
Man says to Abraham, Nay, but if one meant from the dead to my Brethren, they
would repent. Abraham says unto him, If they believe not Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead. That
which is very naturally proposed to our consideration from the words, is this,
(Viz.) That if men give no heed to the written word of God, attested and
confirmed by mighty miracles, and astonishing nonders, if they are not
persuaded to quit their sine to change their evil minds, and walk with care and
circumspection, by the Holy Scripture; in all probability they would not be
Converted, if some mighty miracle was wrought, in order to their Reformation;
As for (...), If a departed Soul was commissioned by God to appear to them. And
this shall be the subject of my ensuing Discourse to prove And in order to
this, it is necessary to make out these two Things.

First, That the fixed Revelation of Gods Will, has more power and force to
convince and reform men, than a singular, special miracle, wrought to that
purpose, can have.

Secondly, That should God condescend to gratify a wicked Man's vain
curiosity, by causing one to rise from the dead, and to testify unto him, that
the course he takes, without speedy amendment, will be the eternal ruin of
him, and that the preparations in Hell are very terrible and insupportable; yet
he will invent arguments, and propound reasons, to fortify himself, that he
may not be affected with, and influenced by an such apparition, and frightful
Relation; as he heretofore did to withstand the prevalent motives of Religion.
If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though
one rose from the dead. I begin with the former of these two, namely,

First, That the fixed Revelation of Gods Will, here in the Text, termed, Moses
and the Prophets, has more power and force, to convince and reform Men, than a
singular, special miracle wrought to that purpose, can have. The less may be
said under this Head, because I have very largely treated of the Scripture, as
the only appointed means, for the Conviction, Conversion, and Salvation of
sinners, in my last Discourse, wherein I urged, that most excellent and
comprehensive character, the Apostle St. Paul has left upon record, of Gods
Holy Word, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. It is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness; that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, that is, it will, if good
heed be given to it, make a Christian as complete, as possibly he can be in
this life. As also that other most eloquent and affecting commendation, the
same Apostle elsewhere expresses of the Scripture, Heb. 4.12. It is quick and
powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword; piercing even to the dividing
asunder of Soul and Spirit, of the joints and marrow; and is a dijcerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart. Meaning in brief, That the word of God is so
sagacious and searching, that it is able to work a thorough Reformation in men;
not only with respect to their outward Actions, and more visible Morals, but
with regard also to the I houghts and Purposes of their Hearts; making them
Pure and Blameless, Holy and Innocent; that so men may be absolutely prepared
for Heaven, being not only outwardly, but inwardly virtuous. But that which I
shall further urge for the proof of this Point, namely, That the standing
Revelation of Gods will, here called in the Text, Moses and the Prophets, has
more power and force to convince and reform Men, than a singular, special
miracle wrought to that purpose can have; is this; It is not only the appointed
means, but God has ordained no other to reclaim men. He will not that they be
convinced, so much by Sense, as by Reason; not so much by Ocular Demonstration,
as Rational Conclusions. And therefore it argues, that those men, who are not
won and brought over by the insinuations of the Gospel, but expect some
extraordinary dealings to convict them, are desperately hardened, and must
perish without remedy. It would infinitely detract from the power and authority
of Gods word, and render it insignificant and invalid, if, when men out of a
fond humor, and perverse disposition, refuse to hearken to, and be converted
by it, God should deviate from the ordinary rule, by permitting Spectrums or
Apparitions to discourse with, and persuade them to break off their sins by a
timely repentance. His promises and threatenings would take but little effect,
nay, men would scarce have Faith enough to believe them, if such extraordinary
methods were commonly used to cure Men of their obstinate blindness, and
perverse infidelity. But wherefore should God answer Men's vain curiosity? Why
should he confute them of their Errors, by new and strange means, when the
truth of Christianity has been attested by wonders and miracles, by the blood
of Martyrs, who died for the Confirmation of it and by the Conversion of many
thousands since? It must be concluded, that they were weary of their lives,
very soft, and easy, melancholy, fanciful Persons, who would thus embrace
death, relinquish their interests, goods, and possessions, for the sake of the
Truth, of which they had no apparent testimony. They must imagine, the world
has lain a long while in Ignorance and Darkness, amused only with fictious
Relations, and vain Genealogies; and that those who died long since in the
belief of the Scripture, are without hope; Or, otherwise how is it, that the
Oracles of God are not more credited by them? Why are men so seared and
impenitrable, that the word of God, which is quick and powerful, and sharper
than any two-edged Sword, loses its Virtue, and its healing Operations upon
them quit defeated? And furthermore,

If God had discovered any insufficiency in his Holy Word, that it was not able
to turn men's hearts; he would have used some other methods to that end, and not
have permitted so many thousands to have lived and dyed in their sins, to whom
is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. He would not suffer poor Souls
to run into the Labyrinth of Despair, nor others to be hardened, if his word
alone, which has brought Life and Immortality into the world, was not capable,
or had not sufficiency of Doctrine, to instruct and guide them in the path that
leads to Heaven: Nor would our blessed Savior have pronounced such terrible
woes against the Unbelieving Jews, nor had Divine providence cursed them, who
were once his peculiar People, a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, as he
did by scattering them all the world over, but no where incorporated into a
Nation, a standing and visible mark of Vengeance upon them; I say, this people
would not have been so severely dealt with, upon the account of their
infidelity; If the word preached by the Holy Jesus, and confirmed by miracles
and unusual signs, was not convincing and influential. Wherefore it is sadly
recorded of them, John 12.40. That God has blinded their eyes, and hardened
their heart, that they should not see with their eyes, and understand with
their heart and be converted.

From hence I draw this Conclusion, That when men arrive to such a pitch of
daring presumption, as to give little or no heed to the written word of God;
all other means used for their Conversion, such as Preaching, friendly Counsel,
and Admonishment, seldom affects, or works a change in them. Hence a Friend
becomes another Enemy, because he tells him the truth, mildly reproves him
for his sin, sorrowfully tells him what a desperate condition he is in, and
what he must expect if he persists and dies in an irrepentant state. By such,
Gods Ministers, and their wholesome Discourses, are reproached; those Sermons
which they should use as medicaments to heal their wounded Souls, are made
their sport and pastime, fitting only to be Subjects of vain wit, and frothy
drollery. It is a sad presage of final ruin, when the standing Revelation of
Gods Will does not work upon men, to the changing of their manners and turning
them from under the power of Satan, unto God. In all probability neither an
Angel from Heaven, nor a damned Ghost from beneath, could ever reach and
overcome them. For if that word, which was ushered into the world with
Thundrings and Lightnings, delivered by the Prophets by God's special Order and
Inspiration; and to strengthen the credibility of it, was rehearsed and
promulged by Jesus Christ, and that the knowledge thereof might be universally
spread, was delivered by the same Jesus to the Apostles; and, that succeeding
ages might not be brought up in ignorance, and live and dye without the
knowledge of God, and their Duty, was handed down from the Apostles to Us; That
word, that reformed three thousand Souls at one time, Converted Heathens, who
had no other sense of their Maker, than what they received from the Book of
Nature; and brought over multitudes to the Profession and Practice of
Christianity, who never heard of it before. I say, if this word of God, which
has abundantly evidenced its power and efficacy, and is the means of that Piety
and Religion practiced in our days, cannot prevail with men, their stubbornness
and wilful infidelity, defeating its aptness and influence; we may very
reasonably conclude, that if a special miracle was wrought to convert them, it
would be to no purpose. But here, notwithstanding what has been already urged,
some may yet say in the Language of the Text, But if one rose from the dead, we
would repent. The Motives and Arguments of the Gospel being still, and the
same, and which by experience we find have not power enough to reclaim us: some
new method used for our Conversion, as an Apparition or Ghost, would, above any
thing else, persuade us. Now how little this would affect them, I shall show in
the prosecution of the second Point, which is,

Secondly, That should God condescend to gratify a Wicked Man's vain Curiosity,
by causing one to rise from the dead, and to testify unto him, that the course
he takes, without speedy amendment, will be the eternal ruin of him, and that
the preparations in Hell are very terrible and insupportable; yet he will
invent Arguments, and propound Reasons, to fortisie himself that he may not be
affected with, and instuenced by such an Apparition, and frightful Relation; as
heretofore he did, to withstand the prevalent Motives of Religion. It is not to
be disputed, but that if a Spectrum or Ghost should appear to a very wicked
man, suppose it to be an aerial Representation of his Companion; who, with a
hollow Voice, dreadful Visage, and lamentable Utterance, tells him, that there
is a God, both just and powerful, and that there is an eternally happy, and
miserable state; and that it is his misfortune to be doomed to the latter
which, in his lifetime, he used all the means he could to banish from his
thoughts; and that if he does not speedily amend his life, and heartily repent
of the many wickednesses he has wilfully, and presumptuously committed, as they
were formerly Companions in sin, so they would be unhappy Fellow Sufferers, in
a lamentable Eternity.

I say, I question not, but if a Ghost should appear to any of us after this
manner, it would make some impression upon us. But then, whether or no this
miracle wrought, would so prevail with a man who has habituated himself to
Wickedness, as to work a Reformation in him? It is to be supposed, No: For
after the surprise is over, those heats allayed, which were at first stirred up
in him, he will quickly invent excuses and arguments, why he should not effect
that Reformation, he has so much aversion from. For,

First, Though he was deeply touched at first, and all his Powers in such a
consternation that he was scarce himself, yet being recovered from the fright,
the inclination he has to sin will put him upon doubt and scrutiny, and to
question the reality of the thing: He knows not but the Vision was only the
effect of Melancholy, and a drooping Mind, or the imagination of a distempered
Brain. He knows, that when Persons lie under the extremity of a Fever, their
fancies are very whimsical, and suppose they see frightful shapes, and a
company of Fiends about their Beds, or that they see Hell open, and abundance
of Souls tormenting there. That some, who are naturally frightful, suppose an
Apparition instead of their shadow, and will scarce be beaten out of that
strong Illusion; and thus the World comes to be filled with relations of Ghosts
or Apparitions. He knows that some, by strength of fancy, will imagine a
cluster of Clouds to be an Army of Men engaged in a pitched Battle; and why may
not the Vision, which he saw, be only an imaginative shape, nothing real, but a
thing framed in his disordered Mind? It is easy for a Man, who is not willing
to believe any thing of this nature, to bring himself to such an opinion, to
evade and shift off the thoughts of it, that they might not disturb and trouble
him in his wickednesses. But then he is much more encouraged, when he tells his
idle and wanton Companions the relation, who, upon hearing it, will not forbear
jesting him out of the conceit; nor will they want arguments to convince him,
that he was either in a Dream, or was pensively musing, or was employing his
thoughts about Stories which tell of Ghosts and Spirits, and so giving way to
them, foolishly conjectured that his melancholy fancy metamorphos'd it self
into form and shape. But he must banish all such whimsical Notions, and never
credit any thing of that kind, or otherwise he must forsake their Society, and
not din their ears with such Nonsense, but those who are easy, too credulous
Persons, who spend their time in carrying such ridiculous relations up and down
the World. But,

Secondly, Supposing, that notwithstanding all this, he cannot easily baffle
the credit of his Senses; for though he has hitherto used all the means he could,
to banish the belief of the Vision, yet he cannot be fully persuaded, but that
there was somewhat in it. My blood, says he, would not so suddenly, without
some extraordinary cause, fly in my face; nor would my powers ruffle together
in such confusion, if something praeter-natural had not made toward me. I was
neither a sleep, nor musing, but perfectly in my senses, when I saw the
Apparition; and therefore I cannot deny Matter of Fact. But still the great
love he bears to sin, will put him upon framing another Argument. It is true, I
was amazed at a Vision, but how do I know that it was one risen from the Dead?
It might, peradventure, be a human Body, dressed up in Grave-cloaths, imitating
the walk and gesture of a Ghost, who intended, by this Religious fraud, to
scare me from my sins; but it so confounded him, that he could not distinguish
truly between the Imposture, or the Reality. But supposing it is no fraud, but
indeed a Spirit, yet he knows not whether it be his Friend; if he was convinced
of this, he would credit his relation, and immediately change upon it. But, for
ought he knows, it may be one of those evil Spirits in the Air, who disturb and
fluster Men, and possess them with strange whimsies, fancies, and frightful
imaginations; and therefore, till further conviction to the contrary, he will
not be influenced, and wrought upon, by any Spirit of that Order, since I know,
and have heard, that they are maliciously bent against us, and would do us much
more mischief than they do, if they were not limited and restrained by a
superior Power. But,

Thirdly, As it is not to be doubted, that such a Man as I am now speaking of,
will create and raise many Arguments, to withstand the force and influence of
such a Miracle wrought in order to his Conversion, so there is one more yet
remaining, which he may probably urge, to sortifie himself against Conviction
and Conversion: And that is, the unusualness of such kind of means, as a
Spirit, or Apparition, to bring Men to Repentance. It is true, he has been
haunted; but why he, above the rest of Mankind? The singularity of the thing
will increase his doubt. If the Neighborhood where he lives were thus
disturbed, or if any of his near Acquaintance should come and tell him, that at
such a time they were surprised by a Ghost, who told them, That if they
continued in that course of Life they so vigorously prosecuted, they would be
as miscrable as himself, who suffers eternal torments for committing the very
same sins they now live in, this relation would indeed alarm him, and make him
suspect his present circumstances, and leave those Vices he is diss waded from.
But since none that he knows of are thus handled, he has no reason to credit
the relation of the Spirit. If such means of Conviction were rational and
powerful, doubtless others would be afforded them as well as he; but since he
hears, nor knows of none, he shall not take things upon trust, but continue
unperswaded as he is. Thus we see how Men, who withstand the Motives of
Christianity, refuse to be reformed by Moses and the Prophets, by Jesus Christ
and his Apostles; will also find out shifts and ways to evade the force and
argument of a Spirit, should one be sent on purpose to convert them. And thus
is Abraham's Answer made good to the Rich Man, who importunately desired him to
send Lazarus from the dead, to testify to his Brethren, for that they could
not withstand the force of such a Miracle wrought for their Reformation. No,
says Abraham, If they will not believe Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be persuaded though one rose from the dead. And now I proceed to make some
special application of the whole, and then conclude. And here,

First, We learn the danger of refusing to be reformed by the public and
standing revelation of God's Will; that we become so de perately hardened, that
nothing else, no not a Miracle, would have any influence upon us, because we
dis-believe that Word which is so well attested by Moses and the Prophets, by
Jesus Christ and his Apostles, and the blood of Martyrs; and an Apparition does
not carry along with it such a rational Conviction. Besides, we have already
heard how many ways the force of an argument, drawn from ones appearance from
the dead, may be evaded; but now none of these pretenses can be made against
the evidence of a standing revelation, so well attested, and confirmed by
Miracles, Signs, and Wonders. It is the fond and vain fancy of some, that if
they had lived in our Saviors time, and had seen him work Miracles, restore
the Lame and Paralytick, raise the Dead to Life, open the Eyes of those that
never saw, and the like; or if they had seen him hanging on the Cross, in a
great agony, and giving up the Ghost; or if they had seen him after his
Resurrection, they should certainly have been Converted, and become eminently
holy Persons. What a gross illusion is this? If now they will not be reformed
by the Motives of the Gospel, which in time was faithfully penned by the
Evangelists, who both knew and conversed with our Savior, heard his Sermons,
and saw those mighty Wonders that he wrought; who were Witnesses of his
Resurrection, and held Conferences with him after he rose from the Dead: I say,
if they will not be reformed by the Writings of the Evangelists, neither would
they if they had lived in the days of our Savior. Again; some wait for the
powerful influences of the Blessed Spirit; that is, sin on, till God shall
please to turn their hearts. Wherefore look they for any other means, than the
Rule of the Scriptures, which, though indeed they are not absolutely
converting, without the assistance of Divine Grace, yet they are in order to
it: And we know not any, who prize and venerate the Word of God, make it their
constant study, and earnest desire, to believe the Propositions, and live up to
the Rule of Life therein prescribed, but are enabled, and wonderfully assisted
in their pious endeavors. And if Men are void of Grace, it is because they
make not a right use of the written Word; which bids them ask, and they shall
receive; to seek and they shall find; to knock, and it shall be opened: which
bids them humbly to read, and search, and in them they shall find eternal life.
It is Men's wilfully shutting their Eyes, and hardening their Hearts against the
knowledge of the truth, which makes them so little benefited by the Gospel.

Secondly, From what has been said, we learn how guilty and inexcusable they
are who still continue in Insidelity, or are vicious in their Lives and
Conversations, notwithstanding the goodness of God in vouchsafing them the
light and liberty of the Gospel. What will these kind of Men be able to plead
for themselves, when they are, by the sound of the last Trump, summoned to
Judgment? Will they vainly pretend that the Word of God was not influential
enough, or the Motives used therein too weak to work upon them? Their own
Hearts will confute them, and too plainly manifest their own stubbornness. How
faithless or perverse soever Men be in this life, yet in the other they will be
more slexible and believing; and to their own shame confess, that God Almighty
did all that became such a Being to make them happy; that nothing was left
undone, or that was necessary to convince their Reason and Understanding; but
it was their petulant follies, obstinate perversenesses, and treacherous
infidelities, presumptuously shutting their eyes, and hardening their hearts,
which were the cause of their unhappiness. How will the Rich Man, and his five
Brethren, rise up in Judgment against such Infidels! They would not believe
Moses and the Prophets; but these would not believe, neither Moses, nor the
Prophets, nor Jesus Christ, nor his Apostles. The Pagans, Turks, and the rest
of those ignorant People, whom Moses never watered with the Dew of Heavenly
Doctrine, will rise up in Judgment against them, who having no more knowledge
of their Creator, than they learn from the Book of Nature, live more morally
than many of us do. Certainly such Men have no thought, how they shall be able
to stand before the Son of Man when he comes to Judgment; they do not consider
what it is to appear before the tremendous Bar of Justice unprepared, there to
give an Account of the Sins of a whole Life, and not one of them repented of.
To appear before an earthly Judge in a bad Cause, and to be too well convinced
that there are Witnesses enough to condemn us; this is Matter of great Trouble
and Concern, and makes a Man very uneasy: But to appear before the Judge of
Judges, who sits upon eternal Life and Death, as a Malefactor, who lived and
died so, and to have the glorious Company of the Apostles, the goodly
Fellowship of the Prophets, and the noble Army of Martyrs, a great Cloud of
Witnesses against us, is infinitely more furprising and terrible. And, O, the
great Condemnation of those, who have a long time lived under the sound and
preaching of the Gospel, and have had the tenders of Salvation again and again
offered to them! It had been better for them, if they had never been born; it
shall be much more tolerable, in the day of Judgment, for the Sodomites and
Sidonians, than for them.

To conclude; As we hope to fare well, when Jesus Christ comes to Judge the
World; as we would, that he should say unto us, Well done, good and faithful
Servants, enter ye into the Joy of your Lord: Let us be all convinced by the
public and standing Revelation of God's Will; that is, by the Gospel of Jesus
Christ. So, when he who is our Life shall appear, we also shall appear with him
in Glory, Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be given
all Honor, Praise, Thanksgiving, and Obedience, now, henceforth, and for
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
There is lately Published by Mr. Stevens, the Author of this Book, viz.
A Narrative of the extraordinary Penitence of Robert Maynard, who was
Condemned for the murder of John Stockton, late Victualler in Grub-street, and
Executed at Tyburn, May 4. Together with several Conserences held with him in
Newgate; As also a Copy of the Paper which he left to be published after his
Death. Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in Jewen-street. Price 6d.

Books lately printed for John Dunton.
THE whole PARABLE of Dives and Lazarus, Explained and Applied: Being several
SERMONS Preached in Cripplegate and Lothbury Churches. By Joseph Stevens,
Lecturer at both. Published at the request of the Hearers. And recommended as
Proper to be given at Funerals.

The Dying Pastor's last Farewell to his Friends in Froome, Selwood, Shepton
Mallet, Brewton, Wincalton, and the Adjacent Parts. Being several Sermons on 1
John 2.15. Preached by that Learned, and Pious Divine, Mr. Henry Albin, and
prepared for the Press with his own Hand a little before his Death. To which is
added by another Hand, An Elegy on Mrs. Mary Hamlen, late of Froome, in
Somersetshire. Price bound 1 s.

Poems on several Occasions, Written by the ingenious Pindarick Lady.

The Life of the Reverend Mr. Richard Baxter, left for the Press under his own
Hand, in Folio.

The first and second Volumes of the French Book of Martyrs, published in
English with Her Majesty's Royal Privilege. Price 20 s.

The Tigurine Liturgy, published with the Approbation of six Reverend Bishops.

Dr. Burthogg's Essay upon Reason, and the Nature of Spirits, dedicated to Mr.
Lock. Price 2 s. 6 d.

The Works of the Right Honorable Henry late Lord Delamere, and Earl of
Warrington, containing His Lordships Advice to his Children, several Speeches
in Parliament, etc. with many other Occasional Discourses on the Affairs of the
two last Reigns, being Original Manuscripts written with His Lordships own
Hand; never before Printed. Price bound 5 s.

Malbranch's Search after the Truth, complete in 2 Vol. Octav. -- To the second
part of this Work, is added the Authors defense against the Accusations of
Monsieur de la Ville, also the Life of F. Malbranch, of the Oratory at Paris;
with an Account of his Works, and several particulars of his controversy with
Monsieur Arnaud, Dr. of Sorborn, and Monsieur Regis, Professor in Philosophy at
Paris. Written by Monsieur Le Vassor, lately come over from Paris, done out of
French, from the last Edition, by Mr. Sault, Author of the New Treatise of
Algebra; both Volumes 10 s.

Ep. ^arlow's Genuine Remains, containing near 100 distinct Subjects,
Theological Philosophical, Historical, etc. Published from his Lordship's
Original Papers, by Sir Feter Pet, Knight. Advocate General for the Kingdom of
Ireland. Price bound 6 s.

Dr. Beekers Examination of the common Opinions concerning Spirits,
Apparitions, their Nature, Power, Administration and Operations; as also the
Effects Men are able to produce by their Communication.

Casuistical Morning Exercises, the 4th. Volume; by several Reverend Divines in
and about London, Price bound 6 s.

The Life of the Reverend Mr. T. Brand, written by Dr. Annesly. Price 1 s.

Heach of Agreement affented to by the United Ministers. Price 4 d.

The Countries Concurrence with the London United Ministers, by Mr. Chandler.
Pr. 1 s.

An Essay upon the Works of Creation and Providence, being an Introductory
Discourse to the [History of Remarkable Providences] now in the Press. To which
is added a Scheme of the said Undertaking, -- as also a further Specimen of the
Work it self, in which is inserted the Penitential Letter, written by Sir
Duncumb Colchester (late of Westbury in Glocestershire with other Remarkable
Instances of that Nature. Price bound 2 s.

The History of all Religions in the World, from the Creation down to this
present time, in two Parts; the first containing their Theory, and the other
relating their Practices, both written by W. Turner, M. A. and Vicar of
Walberton in Sussex.

The General History of the Quakers, both Men and Women, from the first Rise of
that Sect, down to this present time. Collected from Manuscripts, etc. A work
never attempted before in English, being Written Originally in Latin, by the
Learned Crosius, price bound 5 s.

A Collection of the Funeral Orations pronounced by public Authority in
Holland, upon the Death of the most serene and potent Princess Mary II. Queen
of Great Britain, etc. By Dr. James Perizonius, Professor of Eloquence,
History, and the Greek Tongue in Leyden, Dr. George Grevius, Professor of
Theology in Utrecht; and several other Learned Men -- wherein is given a very
particular Account of the Queens Life, during her Residence in Holland, etc.
Done into English from the Latin Original.

Some Remarkable Passages in the Life and Death of Her late Majesty, not
hitherto made public, as they were delivered in a Funeral Oration, pronounced
by public Authority, in the Hall of the most Elustrious States, upon the day
of the Royal Obsequies, March 5. 1695. By Francis Spanheimius, F. F. Chief
Professor of the Academy of Leyden. Done into English from the Latin Original,
and Printed in 4 to to bind up with the formentioned Orations.

A Sermon upon the Death of the Queen of England, Preached in the
Walloon-Church at the Hague, Feb. 6. 1695. Upon these words, Acts 9.36, 37.
There was at Joppa a certain Disciple whose name was Tabitha, which signifies
Dorcas, who was full of good Works, and the Alms-deeds which she did. It
happened in those days that she fell sick and dyed. By Isaac Claude, Minister
of the Walloon-Church Done into English from the second Edition Printed in
French.

Lachrymae Sacerdotis: A Pindarick Poem occasioned by the Death of that most
Excellent Princess, our late Gracious Sovereign Lady, Mary II. of Glorious
Memory; By Hen. Park, Curate of Wentworth in Yorkshire.

The Tragedies of sin contemplated in the Fall of Man, the Ruin of the Angels,
the Destruction of the Old World, the Confusion of Babel, and Conflagration of
Sodom; by Stephen Jay, Rector of Chinner in Oxfordshire. Price 2 s. 6 d.

A Practical Discourse on 1 These. 4.7. by John Brandon, Rector of Finchamsted.

A Treatise of Fornication, by Will Barlow, Rector of Chalgrave.

The Frailty and Uncertainty of the Life of Man, delivered in a Sermon at the
Funeral of a Person that died suddenly, by the Reverend Mr. W. Bush.

A Practical Discourse upon Col. 3.5. by R. Carr, Vicar of Sutton.

Dr. Singleton's Practical Discourses upon 1 John 12.28.

Practical Discourses on Sickness and Recovery, in several Sermons, as they
were lately Preached in a Congregation in London, by T. Rogers, M. A. after his
Recovery from a sickness of near 2 years continuance.

Early Religion, or a Discourse of the Duty and Interest of Youth. The 2 d
Edition. Price 1. s.

Fall not out by the way; or a persuasion to a Friendly Correspondence, between
the Conformists and Nonconformists, in a Funeral Discourse on Genesis 45.24.
occasioned by the desire of Mr. Anthony Dunwell, in his last Will. All three
written by T. Rogers. M. A. Price 1 s.

The Mourners Companion, or Funeral Discourses on several Texts; By J. Shower.
Price 1 s. 6 d.

Mr. Boyses Answer to Bp. King.

The VFanity and Impiety of Judicial Astrology. Price 3 d.

Mensalia Sacra, or Meditations on the Lord's Supper, both Written by the
Reverend M F. Crow, M. A. late Minister at Clare in Suffolk Price 1 s.

A Practical Discourse on the late Earthquakes, by a Reverend Divine. Price 6 d.

Tri unity: Or the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity asserted, in a Discourse on 2
Cor. 13.14. By Isaac Mauduit, Minister of the Gospel. Price 6 d.

An Earnest Call to Family Catechizing and Reformation, by a Reverend DIVINE.
Price 6 d or 50 for 20 s.

Comfort for Parents mourning over their hopeful Children that die young; By T.
Whitaker Minister at Leeds in Yorkshire.

The 3 d. Edition of the Life and Death of the Reverend Mr. John Elliot, who
was the first Preacher of the Gospel to the Indians in America, with an account
of the wonderful success which the Gospel has had amongst the Heathens in that
part of the World. Written by C. Mather. Pr. 1 s.

Gospel Truth stated and vindicated; the second Edition. Price 1 s.

A Defense of Gospel Truth. Price 6 d.

Man made Righteous by Christ's Obedience, being two Sermons at Pinners-Hall,
with inlargements.

The Vanity of Childhood and Youth; all four Written by D. Williams.

The Young Man's Claim to the Sacrament. By John Quick Price 6 d.

Mr. Barker's Flores Intellectuales. In two parts.

Some Remarkable Passages in the Life and Death of Mr. J. Mason, late Minister
of Water-Stafford, drawn up by a Reverend Divine, to which is added his
Christian Letters, printed from the Original Copies.

Proposals for a National Reformation of Manners, to which is added, the
Instrument for Reformation, etc. Price 6 d.

The Knowledge of the World, or the Art of well Educating Youth through the
various conditions of Life, by way of Letters to a Noble Lord; Vol. 1. to be
continued in that Method till the whole Design is finished. Printed first at
Paris, afterward Reprinted at Amsterdam, and now Done into English.

The Fourth Edition of the Lives, Trials, and dying Speeches of those Eminent
Protestants who fell in the West of England, and elsewhere, from the year 1678,
to 1689.

Complete Sets of the Athenian Mercury (being nineteen Volumes, etc.) resolving
all the most Nice and Curious Questions proposed by Ladies and Gentlemen for
the last five years.

The History of several Remarkable Penitents -- To which is added, a Sermon
Preached at Boston in New England, to a condemned Malefactor; By Increase
Mather.

A Narrative of the Conversion of Mackerness, late of March, in the Isle of
Ely; By Mr. Buroughs, Minister at Wisbech. Pr. 1 s.

The Trials of several Witches lately Executed in New England. Published by the
Governors order. The third Edition. Pr. 1 s.

The Trials of Peter Boss, George Keith, Tho. Budd, and Will. Bradford,
Quakers, for several Great Misdemeanors (as was pretended by their
Adversaries) before a Court of Quakers, at the Sessions held at Philadelphia,
in Pensylvania, the 9th, 10th, and 12th days of December, 1692. Giving also an
Account of the most Arbitrary procedure of that Court.

A Narrative of the extraordinary Cure wrought in an instant upon Mrs. Eliz.
Savage, Lame from her Birth, without the using any Natural Means; with the
Affidavits which were sworn before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, and the
Certificates of several Credible Persons, who knew her both before and since
her Cure. Pr. 6 d.

Directions, Prayers, and Ejaculations for such as lead a Military Life. Price
2 d. or 100 for 14 s.

A New Book of Trade, Entitled, Panarithmalogia: By W. Leybourn, Author of
Cursus Mathmaticus. Pr. 4 s. 6 d.

The Divine Captain Uncharacterized, in a Sermon published at the beggining of the
War with France.

The Lay-Clergy -- In a short Essay in Answer to this Query, -- Whither it be
lawful for Persons in holy Orders to txercise temporal Offices, Honors,
Jurisdictions and Authorities. -- With Arguments and Objections on both sides,
poyz'd, and indifferently weighed. Both Written by Edmund Hickeringil, Rector
of All Saints in Colchester.

Books now in the Press (and designed for it) Printing for John Dunton.
* A Complete History of the most Remarkable Providence both of Judgment and
Mercy, which have happened in this present Age; extracted from the best
Writers, the Authors own Observations, and the numerous Relations sent him from
diverse parts of the 3 Kingdoms. To which is added whatever is curious in the
Works of Nature and Art: The whole digested into one Volume, under proper
Heads, being a Work set on foot 30 years ago, by the Reverend Mr. Pool, and
since undertaken and finished by William Turner, M. A. Vicar of Walberton in
Sussex; recommended as useful to Ministers, in furnishing Topics of Reproof
and Exhortation, and to private Christians, for their Closets and Families This
undertaking has met with such general encouragement, that no more subscriptions
will be taken in, Proposals and Specimens giving a fuller account of it, are to
be had of J. Dunton at the Raven in Jewen-street, and of Edmund Richarsdin near
the Poultry Church.

A Compendious History in Folio, of the Lives and Deaths of all the most
eminent Persons from the Crucifixion of our blessed Savior to this time. By a
Learned Hand, who will add a Collection of several 100 modern Lives omitted in
all other works of this Nature.

The Church History of New England is now almost finished, including the Lives
of the most eminent Divines of that Country from the first planting of it down
to this present year, 1696. It Is Written by Mr. Cotton Mather, Pastor of a
Church in Boston, from whom I shall receive the Manuscript Copy as soon as
completed; and being a large Work, 'twill be printed in Folio, by way of
Subscription.

The third and fourth Volumes of the French Book of Martyrs, are now preparing
for the Press, and will be published with her Majesty's Royal Privilege.

The Lord Faulkland's Works, Secretary of State to King Charles the I. in Folio.

The second Edition of Right Christianity, by the Reverend Mr. Matthew Barker.

Private Minutes, which will be 5 s. bound.

Debates upon several Nice and Curious Points. Price 2 s. 6 d.

Conferences concerning the future State, etc.

FINIS.

