AN ABSTRACT OF Common Principles OF A Just Vindication OF THE RIGHTS OF THE
Kingdom of God Upon EARTH, Against the Politic Machinations of Erastian
Heretics; Out of the Vindication of the Deprived Bishops, etc. By a very
Learned Man of the Church of England.

LONDON, Printed, Anno Domini, 1700.

THE PREFACE.
THE Kingdom of God upon Earth is in its Institution, and in its own Nature,
really a Glorious Kingdom, though, through the ill Administration of those to
whom it has been committed, it has never yet appeared in its true and proper
Luster, and at present not only seems to be, but really is in a divided,
shattered, and dejected condition. God in great Wisdom does very often with
great Bodies of Men, as he does with particular Persons, put them to School to
the Mistress of Fools, leave them to eat the Fruit of their own doings, and to
learn Wisdom by their own Experience; to experiment and even feel the
Insufficiency of Humane Powers, the Deceitfulness of Humane Wisdom, the Malice,
Subtilty and Power of their Invisible Adversaries, and the Abundance of his
Goodness, the Infallibility of his Wisdom, and the Irresistibility of his
Power; and their own entire Dependence upon Him, and absolute need of continual
Supply of all these from Him, and of constant Subjection and Conformity
thereunto. If Men would therefore at last, after so long Experience, open their
Eyes, lift up their Heads, and well consider the Admirable Wisdom of his Divine
Institution, the Excellent Accommodation of it for the Good and Benefit of
Mankind; and of all Degrees, Orders, States, and Conditions amongst them; and
how and by what Ways and Means it has come to pass that the World has been so
little sensible of, and received no more Benefit from so powerful and effectual
a Divine Favor, as the Institution of this Kingdom is, and would have produced
long since, had it been improved as it ought; and lastly consider, every one in
his place, but especially they who are in chief Places in Church or State, what
the Interest of this blessed Kingdom, and the glorious King thereof, do require
of all, and of themselves in particular, for their own Good, and the common
Good of all, and then, without more a-do, apply themselves with full Resolution
to order all their Actions in Conformity thereunto, and to approve their
Fidelity to their Sovereign and his Interest, as becomes Good Subjects, they
would soon perceive and receive the Benefit thereof, and behold it in its
Glory. And though there is at present little appearance of any such Disposition
in those, who are first in place, that they will be forwardest in such Actions,
yet whoever will heartily do their part in this, as there is none but may do
something, so there is nothing that they can do so mean, if they do all they
can, but will obtain a Glorious Reward, far above all this World can afford.
But it will require no little Courage, Generosity, Magnanimity and Constancy to
perform it: for such is the Nature and Terms of true Loyalty in this Kingdom,
as will shake off Multitudes of Pretenders, when they come for Admittance. Yet
it is, in short, but first to dispose themselves for the receiving of Truth,
and then, when fairly proposed, cordially embrace it, own and profess it, stick
to it, and act accordingly. For the first of these there is lately printed a
short Recipe: and some of the most important and fundamental Truths for this
purpose are here treated in the following ABSTRACT by a very Learned Man of the
Church of England established by Law, and a great and zealous Champion for it.
It is true, it is but an Abstract, but an Abstract of what is very hard to be
met with, and of the very Marrow of it, the rest being only critical Learning,
of little or no use to the greatest part of even intelligent Readers; but only
for Scholars, and such as are curious in Matters of little moment. And for such
as desire to see more to this purpose, they may have recourse to a Learned Book
of the Sinfulness and Mischief of Schism, in 40. and another in 8vo. of One
Altar, and One Priesthood, besides a special Learned Defense of this
Vindication, much more common to be had than the Vindication it self.

More was intended concerning this Kingdom, and the true Subjects of it, for
the proper Use and Application of this Catholic Doctrine; but because it may
be more seasonable when the Doctrine has been received and digested, it may be
sufficient here to add only this Admonition: That Separation from Separatists
is no Separation from the One Body and Unity of this Kingdom: Nor is Visible or
Episcopal inconsistent with Schismatical; but a Schismatical Communion may be
really both, and has been heretofore; nay, most visible in the same City or
Country, and truly Episcopal, (though what is not so cannot but be Schismatical)
and, besides all this, Established by Law.

Common Principles Of a just Vindication of the Rights of the Kingdom of God
Upon EARTH, etc.
CHAP. I. That for Clergymen to appear in a Cause destructive of the Interest
of Religion in general, and of their own Function in particular, is inexcusable.
THAT the Laity should be favorable to Mistakes derogatory to the Sacred
Power, cannot be thought strange in an Age wherein they generally use so little
Diligence to inform themselves, or to receive Information from those who are
qualified to inform them, concerning the Rights of the Clergy: Their own
Interests are alone sufficient to make them partial in affairs of this nature,
though they were more sincerely influenced by Considerations of Religion, than we
generally find them: But that Clergymen should also favor them in
Encroachments on their own Function; that they should professedly patronize
Doctrines tending to lessen the Esteem of that greatest and most valuable of
all Authorities wherewith God has honored and entrusted none but them, that
they should make it depend on the Pleasure of the Magistrate, which was
designed for greater and more noble Ends than the Magistracy it self; that they
should put it in his Power to destroy the very Being of the Church, as a
Society, by a secular Deprivation; that they should not only Own, but Teach,
That none are obliged to adhere to themselves in such a Case wherein the
Magistrate is against them, no not so much as in regard of Conscience; that
they should by this means make the greatest and most momentous Concerns for
Souls subordinate to Worldly, Carnal Politics, and the far less weighty
Interests of Worldly Prosperity, and of particular Societies; that they should
hereby make it least capable of subsisting under a Persecution, which was the
Case most obvious in the View of our Blessed Savior and his Apostles, and
therefore most particularly provided for, if they took care for any thing
beyond their own time: These things, I say, would not be very credible, if they
were not very notorious. One would think none who valued the general good of
Religion, and the Catholic Church, and the Souls of Mankind, before the
temporal Prosperity of any particular State, (and it is hard to conceive how
any good Man can do otherwise) could even wish such Opinions true, though his
Wish alone were sufficient to make them so. How then is it agreeable, that
Clergymen of all Men should be the most favorable and zealous Advocates for
such Opinions, so manifestly destructive of those greatest Interests, which
they of all Men ought best to understand, and to be most zealously concerned
for? How is it agreeable, that they of all Men cannot be content to let the
Memory of ill Presidents die, but that they must alarm us with future Fears of
having them acted again by not only Abetting, but also Justifying them? How is
it agreeable, that they should do this in a Prospect, such as ours is, of a
Laity so little concerned for the Good of Religion, and the Church; when even
they who have any Principles, have such lax ones, and so very little obliging
them, even in Conscience, to venture any thing for any particular Communion?
That their preferring their Worldly Concerns, depending on the Pleasure of the
Magistrate, before the greater Concerns of Souls, and Eternity, is the true
Cause of it, is not to be believed, while there are any Reasons that might
induce them to it. Yet little Reasons cannot in Equity excuse, when the
Consequences ought to be so very valuable on that very account of Men's being
either Good or Religious. Much less when the Consequences of the Principles on
which they proceed are such in respect to the Public Interests even of their
own Church, as put it in the Power of a Popish or Schismatical Prince (and even
of a secret Infidel or Apostate) to dissolve it when they please. Suppose a
Popish Prince, with a Popish Parliament, should turn their Principles (that is,
the Principles of these Men) against themselves, and deprive all our Bishops
with one Act of State, I cannot see what these Fathers can pretend to secure
their Church, as a Society, and as a Communion, in Opposition to them. They
must ho longer pretend to Diocesses in England. They must not pretend to any
Obligation of their Protestant Clergy and Laity to stand by them, even in
Conscience. They must therefore never pretend to Communions in those Diocesses,
which are plainly Exercises of Spiritual Authority in them. Nor can they then
justify, or even excuse, any Assemblies for Religion, when forbidden by the
Civil Magistrate, who is only supposed, by these Principles, to have also the
Right to that Spiritual Authority by which alone they can be justified. And are
these the ways to secure our Religion against Popery? No open Persecutions
whatsoever can ever ruin us so effectually as these Doctrines will, if ever we
receive them. Doctrines of our own will break our Union among our selves, more
than any of our Adversaries open Violencies.

CHAP. II. That the Church of Christ is not to be considered merely as a Sect,
but as a Sacred Society; and that its being a Society is a Fundamental Doctrine.
MEN (amongst us in this and the last Age) have hitherto considered the Church
rather as a Sect, than as a Society; and have therefore usually had no regard
to the Doctrines Fundamental to it as a Society, if they did not withal
concern it as a Sect, and Antecedently to its being a Society. But there seems
very little Reason for their doing so, if they will be pleased impartially to
reflect on it. It is very true, its Notion as a Sect is antecedent to its being
a Society, because it is a Society into which Men find themselves obliged to
enter by the Doctrines they must be supposed to believe, if they own it as a
Sect. But even thence it appears, that the Doctrines which concern it as a
Sect, do withal make it necessary it should be a Society. These two
Considerations therefore are by no means to be separated. Nay, it hence
appears, that the Doctrines constituting it as a Sect, do also by a near, and
unavoidable, and evident Consequence, make it a Society. Thus therefore the
Fundamentals of its being a Society, will be included in that System of
Doctrines which concern it as a Sect. And then what Matter is it that one of
these Notions is antecedent, and the other, consequent? Thus much at least will
follow, that there is no subverting it as a Society, without subverting it also
as a Sect; because those very Doctrines which make it a Sect, do also
consequently oblige it to be a Society. For my part, I believe those Doctrines
of the Trinity and Incarnation, which all who believe any Fundamentals proper
to the Christian Religion, as Revealed by God, do reckon among Fundamentals,
not to have been revealed for Speculation only, but purposely to oblige Men to
unite in it as a Society. The Unity in Trinity, which is the principal thing
insisted on in the Doctrine of the Trinity, as revealed in the Scripture, was
purposely to let Men see the Extent of the Mystical Union to which they were
entitled by the External Union with the visible Church, that by partaking in
the Orthodox Communion, the (...) mentioned by St. John, they had also a (...)
with the Father and the Son, 1 John 1.3. For it was manifest they must also
partake of the Spirit, because he who had not the Spirit of Christ was none of
his. It was therefore supposed, that by partaking of the Trinity we are made
one Mystically, and that by being united visibly to the Church, we are entitled
to that Mystical Union. So whoever is united visibly to the Church, is thereby,
if he be not wanting to himself in due Conditions, united also Mystically to
the Trinity; and that whoever is divided externally from the Church, is thereby
also dis-united from this Communion and Union with the Trinity. And what more
prevaeiling Inducements could be thought of to oblige Men to keep in a Society?
So also the design of the Incarnation was, by Christ's taking upon him our Body
and our Flesh, to make us also one Body and one Flesh with Him, thereby to
entitle our Bodies to a Resurrection; but then our being one Body and one Flesh
with Him, depended on our being Members of the Church, which is called his
Body, his Flesh, his Bones. We were to be Baptized into this one Body, and
become one Body, by partaking of one Bread. Which plainly show that all the
Benefits of the Incarnation are derived to us by our partaking of the
Sacraments, and therefore by our adhering inseparably to them who alone are
authorized by God to administer them. Thus plain it is that those very
Fundamentals of our revealed Religion, as revealed, are revealed and designed
for this purpose of making the Church a Society. How can therefore our
Adversaries make these Doctrines Fundamental, if this be not Fundamental also,
that the Church was by God designed to be a Society?

This at least is certain, that we are entitled to all the Benefits of our
Religion, by our owning the Church not only as a Sect, but as a Society also;
and that though we believe all its Doctrines as it is a Sect, yet if we be
divided from it as a Society, that Belief alone will not secure us a Title to
any of the Benefits of our Religion. Excommunicates, however Orthodox in their
Opinions, were never supposed, in the Discipline of the Church, to have any
actual Title to the Benefits of Religion, if they persisted wilfully in that
State of Excommunication. The same is to be observed concerning the Case of
Schismatics, on the Principles of the early Age of St. Cyprian. Hence
therefore it appears, that this Notion of the Church, as a Society, whatever it
be in its self, is at least Fundamental as to us, in order to our partaking of
any of the Benefits of Religion: That is, indeed it is Fundamental to all
intents and purposes that we can think worthy our Enquiry. Without this, the
other Notions, if any be, will never be beneficial to us. So that whatever
those other Notions may be, in order of Reasoning; yet this Notion of the
Church, as a Society, must be Fundamental to them in order to their being
beneficial; that is, as far as we have any reason to concern our selves for
them. These things ought certainly to be taken for Fundamental, as to the
Discipline and Censures of the Church. She ought certainly to be most concerned
for those things that are most influential on the Interests of Souls; and those
are so whose Belief is most beneficial, and their Dis-belief most hurtful to
those most valuable Interests. I cannot therefore see why she should not think
Doctrines of this kind Fundamental, and reckon them among those Fundamentals on
which she ought to lay out her principal Care. If therefore she ought to
excommunicate for any Errors at all, certainly she ought in the first place to
do it for Errors so destructive of all Obligation to her Communion it self, and
of her Authority of Excommunicating; that is, indeed so destructive to all that
Power she has either for the Preservation of Truth, or the Prohibition of Error
in general. And if she ought not to inflict her Censures, at least these
highest of them, for any Errors but those which are Fundamental; it will
plainly follow, that Errors of this kind must be reckoned for Fundamental ones.
Our Adversaries would have Errors in Fundamentals published, and punished as a
Spiritual Crime, by a purely Spiritual Authority; but they do not, in the mean
time, seem to be aware how Fundamental this very Notion of the Church, as a
distinct and spiritual Society, is to its having any Authority, or Power, to
punish so much as Spiritually. All they can do as a Sect, is only to reason
with Heretics concerning their Errors; and all the Means to reduce them are
those reasons which can no farther prevail with them than as they may seem
convictive in the Judgment of the Heretics themselves. But on that account
they stand on even Terms with the Heretics, whose Reasons ought also to take
place with the Ecclesiastics, so far as they are also in Conscience convinced
by them. A true Authority, and a Power of punishing refractory Persons, by
excluding from Communion, do Fudamentally suppose a spiritual Society over
which they are to exercise this Authority, and from which Delinquents are to be
excluded by spiritual Censures and Excommunications. How can they therefore
avoid reckoning those Errors from being Fundamental ones as punishable by a
spiritual Authority, which ruin Fundamentally that very Authority by which
such Errors are to be punished; which destroy the Society on which that
Authority is grounded Fundamentally.

If there be degrees of Fundamentals, I should think the Fundamentals
concerning the Church, as a Society, to be of the greatest consequence, and
therefore Fundamental in the highest degree. The Church is indeed obliged to
keep the (...), Heb. 5.11. 1 Timothy 1.16.
the (...). These are the Expressions by which our Adversaries themselves, I
believe, conceive the Articles themselves call Fundamental to be signified. But
she is obliged to keep them as a (...), 1 Timothy 6.20.
as a Trust committed to her. How so? by avoiding Disputings, by stopping the
Mouths of Heretics, by rebuking them with all Authority, by rejecting and
avoiding not their Doctrines only, but their Persons also, when they prove
incorrigible. Now these things plainly suppose Governors invested with
Spiritual Authority, and a Communion from whence incurable Heretics are to be
rejected. So that in order to the keeping these other Fundamentals, the Church,
as a Society, is supposed antecedently as a Condition that alone can qualify
her for having such a Trust committed to her. This Notion therefore as
antecedent must be Fundamental to those other Fundamentals, and therefore
Fundamental in a higher sense than those things can be whose Security is
superstructed upon it. And accordingly the Damage of the Public in subverting
these Notions of the Church, as a Society, is proportionably greater than that
which follows from the denial of other particular Articles which are commonly
taken for Fundamental. He that denies one of the other Articles, may yet
believe all the rest, and zealously defend them, and that by Principles too,
against all other Heretics. But he that denies the Church, as a Society,
invested with a spiritual Authority, does as effectually contribute to the
Ruin of all the other Fundamentals at once, as he does to the Ruin of a
House, who subverts the Foundations of it. It brings in Impunity for Heresy in
general, and suffers Heretics still to hope as well in their separate Sects,
as if they were in the Orhtodox Communion. It leaves them destitute of even any
Presumptions that might oblige them to judge in Favor of the Church's
Doctrine, as the safest Error, if it should prove one. It does by this means
reduce the trial of the Cause to the Reasons themselves, and their native
Evidence, and puts it in the Power of assuming Men to pretend greater Evidence
than either they have, or they really believe. And things being reduced to this
pass, it is more God's Providence, than the Security of Principles, that
hinders any Heretic, who disputes any one of the other Articles, from
questioning all the rest.

CHAP. III. That the contrary Doctrine is a Fundamental Error, and obstinately
asserted Heresy, very pernicious to the Church of Christ, and to the Assertors
of it themselves.
ST. Augustine observes, that Schisms generally end in Heresy: That is the
natural consequence of Defending it, as our Adversaries do, by Principles. A
single Act of Vndutifulness to Superiors will in course pass away with those
who are guilty of it; so that Posterity will not be concerned in it: But when
it is defended by Principles, it turns into false Doctrine, and Doctrine of
that pernicious Consequence, that the Church is obliged to take notice of it,
as she will be faithful to her Trust, in securing her Body from the like
Divisions for the future. Thus the Donatists took the first occasion for their
Schism from the pretended Personal Faults of Caecilian and his Ordainers. This,
whilst it was a particular Case, went no farther than that particular Schism:
But when it turned into a general Doctrine, that Personal Faults were
sufficient to justify Separation, then it laid a Foundation of frequent
Schisms, as often as any Criminals got into Places of Trust, and either
Evidence was wanting, or themselves too powerful to be contested with: Then it
concerned Ecclesiastical Governors to condemn this Doctrine, that encouraged
even Men of Conscience to divide designedly and frequently. And when that
Doctrine was thus condemned by the Church, and was notwithstanding maintained
by the Donatists as a Principle on which they subsisted as an opposite
Communion, it then became a Character of a Party to maintain it, and from that
time forward the Donatists were reckoned among Heretics, as well as
Schismatics: For this was the true Notion of Heresy in those Ages, as
contradistinct from Schism: Both of them supposed a Division of Communion, or
tended to it. But that Division was called Schism, which only broke the
Political Union of the Society, without any difference of Principles; as when
Thieves or Robbers transgress their Duties without any pretense of Principles
authorizing them to do so. So whilst Resentment alone was the reason that made
Subjects separate from the Communion of their Ecclesiastical Governors, or
whilst Ambition alone made any to invade the Office of his Bishop, and to erect
an opposite Communion, this was Schism properly so called, as contradistinct
from Heresy. But when the Schism is patronized by Doctrines, and justified as
well done, and consistently with Conscience; such Divisions, besides their
being Schismatical, were Heretical also in the sense of the Ancients, and such
Doctrines, as Characteristical of a distinct Communion, were properly called
Heresies. On this account the same Doctrine of the original Identity of Bishops
and Presbyters was no Heresy in S. Hierome, who notwithstanding kept Communion
with the Bishops of the Jurisdictions he lived in; and yet was Heresy in
Aaerius, when upon account of that pretended Identity he presumed to pay no
more Duty to the Bishops of the respective Jurisdictions, than he would have
done to single Presbyters. This is the most agreeable account of the Heresies,
not only in Philastrius, but in other more judicious Collectors of Catalogues
of Heresies. And it is very agreeable with the Notion of that Term among the
Philosophers, from whom the Christians derived it. All Notions that were proper
and characteristical to particular Schools among them made Heresies, not those
which were received n common among them. Answerably whereunto those Differences
only in Opinion made Heresies in the Church, which were the Notes of different
Communions, not those which went no farther than Speculation.

I am very well aware how surprising this will be to those who, upon popular
Opinions, have used to believe no Opinion Heresy that was not against
Fundamentals. But if they will for a while lay aside their Prejudices, they
will possibly find this as slightly grounded as many other popular Opinions
are. The very distinction between Fundamentals and Non-Fundamentals, is not,
that I know of, ever taken notice of by the Primitive Christians, either in the
same, or in equivalent Terms. And if a Person will needs make a Breach on
account of an Opinion, it rather aggravates than diminishes his Guilt, that the
Opinion is of little consequence: His own Will is more concerned in it; that
is, his (...); and he is therefore more a Heretic, and, as Heretics were,
more self-condemned, Tit. 3.2. if, even in his own Opinion, the Matter for
which he separates be not of any considerable Importance. Even a Truth, and a
Truth that has great Evidence of its being so, may make a Heresy, if it be no
way conducive nor disadvantageous to the good of Souls; and yet the Person who
maintains it will by no means endure Communion with those who are of another
Mind. He might have more pretense of Zeal, though Mistaken, if the Mistake on the
Church's side did indeed concern Souls, and seemed, at least, of dangerous
consequence to them. When he has not even that to pretend for himself, who can
impute his breaking on such accounts to any other Original than an assuming
Imperiousness of Temper, and a love of Contention, which we generally
acknowledge to be the principal Ingredients of Heresy? Certain it is, that
such a Breach for Opinions, though true, yet of no consequence, is highly
culpable, and destructive to that Unity which Christ designed for his Church,
and the more culpable for that very reason, that the Opinion is of little
consequence. Yet it cannot properly be called Schism, which is only a Breach,
like those which fall out frequently in Secular Affairs, when Men fall into
Parties, on account of a Temper ungovernable, or ambitions, without any proper
difference of Opinion and Doctrine. And it being no Schism, what can we call it
in the Discipline of the Church, if it be not Heresy?

These Opinions therefore which are not otherwise Heretical on account of the
Nature of the Opinions themselves, do then begin to be Heretical when they
begin to be characteristical of distinct Communions. And that they do, not only
when Men designedly separate from others on that very account, because they are
not of the same Opinions; but also when they venture on such Practices on
account of their singular Opinions, wherein others cannot communicate with
them, for that very reason because they cannot join with them in those their
singular Opinions. Then plainly the differing in such Opinions, makes a
difference of Communion unavoidable; and therefore the Opinions themselves, in
such a Case as this is, are Signals of different Communions, which will come
under the charge of Heresy, as contradistinct from Schism, in the Notion now
described of the Primitive Church. Thus, had S. Hierome proceeded as far as
Aerius in the Practice of his Opinion concerning the Original Identity of
Bishops and Presbyters, and had thereupon broken himself off from his Duty to
the Bishop of the Diocese, and by that means either made or countenanced a
Schism, which he had never countenanced but on account of this Doctrine of his
which he held in Common with the Aerians, that Doctrine had been Heresy in
him, as well as the Aerians. So also Opiuions do then begin to be Treasonable,
when they are actually productive of Treasonable Actions. Thus Latitudinarian
Opinions in the Church do always weaken or dissolve the Obligation in
Conscience to maintain the Church, as a Society, in a time of Persecution, from
the Civil Magistrate; yet till that Case fall out, and when Interest lies on
the Church's side, they often still keep one Communion who are for such
Opinions, and may continue in it while there are any other Inducements to keep
them in it besides those of Conscience. Only it may perhaps be fit to be
considered, whether it be prudent to trust such Persons with the Management of
the Government of the Church, who have no Obligation of Principles or
Conscience to maintain it as an independent Society, or to suffer for it; that
is, indeed who are never likely to maintain it in that very Case which was most
in our Savior's and the Apostles View; that is, of a Persecution. But when
they actually divide that Communion which they were never obliged in Conscience
to maintain, if they took the utmost Liberty their Latitudinarian Principles
would afford them; and when their lax Principles are the very grounds of their
dividing the Communion without any remorse of Conscience for doing so; when
they are hereby emboldned to do those things which inevitably cause a Breach
from those who cannot follow them in these very Principles. This is the Case
wherein these Principles are Characters of a distinct Communion; and therefore,
by the Reasoning now mentioned, become Heretical: Especially the Principles
being withal false, not only in the Opinion of those from whom they have
divided themselves, but also of our earliest purest Ancestors, even those of
the Apostolical Age it self.

Yet I deny not but that in this Case of Heresy, there is also regard to be
had to the Momentousness of the Opinion it self. Whoever sets up or abets a
Communion opposite to that of the Church, on account of Opinions, is, as I have
shown, in the Judgment of the Primitive Church, an Heretic; and is the more,
not the less so, if the Opinions be also frivolous. But for such Opinions the
Church would never have driven him out of her own Communion, if himself had
been pleased to have continued in it. Her Judiciary Censures ought, no doubt,
to be confined to Opinions Fundamental and of great Importance; especially if
an internal Assent be required, and that under pain of Excommunication.

CHAP. IV. That the Church of Christ is a Society independent on any of the
Powers of the World; and its Spiritual Rights, derived immediately from a
higher Authority, subject to none of them, according to the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church in the earliest Ages.
EVEN in the Age of St. Cyprian (which is the ancientest we know of that an
Anti-Bishop was set up against a Bishop in the same See) it is, 1st, very
notorious, that they then owned no such Power of the Secular Magistrate to
deprive Bishops of their purely Spiritual Power; and that the Church, as a
Society distinct from the State, subsisted on their not owning it, even as to a
Deprivation of their particular Districts and Jurisdictions. It is notorious,
and as notorious as any one Tradition of the Catholic Church in those Ages,
(not excepting that of the Canon of the New Testament it self) that Christians
then, and not only then, but in all the former Persecutions that had been from
the times of the Apostles to that very Age, did own themselves bound to adhere
to their Bishops, when it was notorious withal, that those Bishops were set up
and maintained against the Consent of the Civil Magistrate. It is as notorious
also, that this Adherence of theirs was not only Matter of Fact, (which is all
our Adversaries pretend here) but a Duty owned by them, as obliging in
Conscience, and as the result of Principles. This appears, not only by the
unquestionable Sincerity of the Christians of those Ages, who were generously
influenced by no Considerations but those of Conscience; not only by their
Suffering those severe Penances imposed on them, in order to their recovering
the Bishop's Communion, even when the Magistrate was against him, which no
other Considerations could recommend, but only those of Conscience: but from
the Principles themselves insisted on in the Reasonings of St. Cyprian. Such
were these: That all hopes of Pardon of Sin, of the Holy Ghost, of Eternal Life
on Performance of Duty, were confined to the visible Communion of the Church;
that their visible Communion with the Church could not appear but by their
visible Communion with the Bishop, as the Head of that Church, and the
Principle of its Unity; that who that Bishop was, to whom any particular Person
owed his Duty, was not then any otherwise distinguishable, but by the visible
Districts in which themselves lived, and to which he was therefore supposed to
have a Title, whether the Magistrate would or no. It is also as notorious, that
these Reasonings were not then the sense of private Persons, but the received
sense of Christians in general, and indeed Fundamental to that Catholic
Communion, which was then maintained wherever there were Christians. Not only
every particular Christian of a Diocese did thus assure himself of his Right to
Ecclesiastical Privileges, by his Communion with the Bishop of that particular
District; but he was entitled also to Communion with all the other Bishops of
the World, and consequently with the Catholic Church in general, by the
communicatory Letters of the Bishop of his own particular District. For it was
by the mutual Obligation all Bishops of the World had to ratify the Acts of
particular Districts, that he who was admitted a Member of one Church, was
entitled to the Communion of all; and that he who was excluded from one, was
excluded from all others also; because no other Bishop could justify his
Reception of a Christian of another Jurisdiction to his own Communion, if he
had not the communicatory Letters of his own Bishop. Thus it appears, that the
Obligation, even of particular Districts without Consent of the Magistrate, was
then Catholic Doctrine. Whence it plainly follows, that this Lay-deprivation,
which is all that can be pretended in the Case of our present Bishops, is, in
the Principles of the Catholic Church in St. Cyprian's Age, a perfect Nullity,
and consequently that, in regard to Conscience at least, our present Bishops
are still Bishops, and Bishops of those particular Districts, as much as ever;
and the Obligations of the Clergy and Laity in those Districts, as obliging to
them now as ever.

And it thence follows, 2dly, that Anti-Bishops, consecrated in Districts, no
otherwise vacated than by the Power of the Secular Magistrate, are, by the
Principles of that earliest Catholic Church, no Bishops at all, but divided
from the Church. It is plain, that Novatian was disowned as soon as ever it
appeared that Cornelius was canonically settled in Fabian's Chair before him,
and disowned universally, so universally, that who-ever did not disown him, was
for that very reason disowned himself. This is as clear as any Particular
mentioned in our Adversaries Collection. But we do not satisfy our selves with
that. It is also further as notorious, that he was disowned by Principles
obliging them in Conscience to disown him, and those again not private
Opinions, but Principles also Fundamental to the Correspondence then maintained
in the whole Catholic Church, as the other were that we mentioned under the
former Head. It was then a Principle, that Epist. 55. ad Antonianum, Edit.
Oxen, Cypr.
Secundus was Nullus, which will as much invalidate the Consecrations of the
present Anti-Bishops, as it did that of Novatian. This is a Principle so
universally acknowledged, wherever there can be but one, that it needs no
Authorities to recommend it. No Man can convey the same thing twice: and
therefore if there be two Bonds for the same thing to several Persons, the
second can never be thought obliging, but by supposing the Invalidity of the
first. So also in all Monarchical Districts, none can suppose an Anti-Monarch's
Title good, till he has shown that the first Monarch's Title is not so. Thus
this Principle needed no Authority, and yet it had all the Authority of the
whole Catholic Church of that Age. The whole Collegium of Catholic Bishops
(that is St. Cyprian's Term) gave their communicatory Letters, not to Novatian,
but Cornelius; and received none to their own Communion on the communicatory
Letters of Novatian, but only on those of Cornelius. And that upon this same
common Principle, that Cornelius being once validly Bishop of Rome, Novatian
could never be a Bishop of that same District without the Death, or Cession, or
Deprivation of Cornelius; and that supposing him no Bishop of that Place to
which he was consecrated, he could be no Bishop at all. So far they were then
from our late Fancy, of a Bishop of the Catholic Church without a particular
District. Had they thought so, they might have ratified Novatian's Acts, as a
Bishop, because he had received his Power from Bishops, though not as Bishop of
Rome. Comparing the Catholic Church to a Fanum, or Temple, he was Profanus, as
not being in the Temple, nor having a Right to enter into it. Comparing it to
the House in which the Passover was to be eaten by the Jews, he was Foris, not
in that House, in which alone the Passover was to be eaten. These were the
Notions of St. Cyprian, and were by him and his Colleagues understood of the
Catholic Church in general, when they all supposed Novatian out of the
Catholic in general, by being out of that particular Church of Rome, of which
he had formerly been a Member. Just as in ordinary Excommunications, they also
always supposed, that he who was by any Act of obliging Authority deprived of
his Right to his own particular Church, had also lost his Right thereby to all
the particular Churches in the World. And they also supposed Novatian to have
cast himself out of his own Body, by assuming to himself the Name of a Head of
that Body, which already had a Head, and could have no more than one. And these
Notions, and this Language of St. Cyprian, were supposed and owned universally
by the whole Body of the Catholic Bishops of his Time, when they acted
consequently to them, and took them for the Measures, by which they either
granted or refused their own Communion. Nor is it to be thought strange, that
these Notions should be received, and received universally, not as the Opinions
of private Persons, but as the public Doctrine, and Fundamental to the
Catholic Communion, as practiced not only in that early Age of St. Cyprian,
but as derived from the Apostles themselves, and the very first Originals of
Christianity: For these were not, (as private Opinions usually were) only the
result of private Reasonings; they were received as the Fundamentals of
Christianity, (which were not as new Revelations generally were,...) from the
like Notions received among the Jews, and among them received not as private
Opinions, but as public Doctrines, and Fundamental to the then practiced
Sacrifical Communion of the then peculiar People, and only thence deduced (as
other things also are, in the Reasonings of the New Testament) to the Case of
the new Mystical Peculium, and their new Mystical Sacrifices. The Language of
erecting Altar against Altar in St. Cyprian, is derived from the like earlier
Language received among the Jews, V. Discourse of one Altar, etc. Edit. Land.
1683. 80.
concerning the Samaritan Altar of Manasses, against the Jerusalem Altar of
Jaddus, that is, of a High Priest against a High Priest, when God had appointed
but one High Priest in the whole World, and him only at Jerusalem. And it is
also plain, that the Body of the Jews did look on such Schismatical High
Priests, and all their Communicants, as cut off from the Body of their
Peculium, and consequently from all their public Sacrifices, and all the
Privileges consequent to them. Why should we therefore think it strange, that
the Apostolical Christians should have the like Opinion of them, who set up
themselves as opposite Heads of their Mystical Sacrifices?

But this is not all. It is further as notorious, 3dly, St. Cyp. Epist. 43.
Edit. Oxon.
that all who any way professed themselves one with Novatian, were for that
very Reason of their doing so, taken for divided from the Catholic Church, as
well as he was with whom they were united. Here also the reason was very
evident, that he who professed, and, by public Profession, made himself one
with a Person divided, must, by the same Analogy of Interpretation, profess
himself divided, and, by that very Profession, actually divide himself also, by
making himself one with the Person supposed to be divided. Nor was this reason
more evident, than universally acknowledged in the Discipline of that Age. All
such Uniters with the Schismatic were refused to be admitted to Communion, not
by particular Bishops only, (as the Case would have been if the Opinion had
been singular) but by all the Bishops of one Communion in the World.

Not only so: But it is also as notorious, 4thly, from the Practice and
Discipline of that Age, that all whom they looked upon as united with Novatian,
they consequently looked on as divided from themselves: To be sure, in the
first place, those who had any hand in his pretended Consecration, which were
principally and particularly reflected on by Cornelius, in his Epistle to
Fabius of Antioch. Nor would his People be received to Communion by any
Catholic Bishop on the communicatory Letters of Novatian; and they could
expect none from Cornelius whilst they were divided from him. Thus all his
Subjects came to be involved as well as himself. But that which was highest of
all was, that even Bishops were supposed to have divided themselves from their
Brethren, if they communicated with him; that is, if, according to the custom
of that Age, they either gave communicatory Letters to him, or received any to
their own Communion on the like communicatory Letters received from him. This
appeared plainly in the Case of Martian of Arles, who was on this very account
denied the communicatory Letters of his Brethren; and would, no doubt, have
appeared also in the Case of Fabius of Antioch, if he had proceeded so far. And
this does plainly suppose, that such Bishops also had cut themselves off from
Catholic Communion by their own Act. And by this means it also appeared to
have been more than a private Opinion in that Age, when even no Bishop could be
permitted in the Communion of his Brethren, if he dissented from them in this
particular. Thus, to make Application to our present Case, all the Bishops will
be involved, who communicate either with the Principal Schismatics, or the
Schismatical Consecrators. And this will also take in, by the same Principles,
all Communicants with such Bishops. For when the Bishop was refused Communion,
the Effect of such refusal was, that none should thence-forwards expect to be
received to the Communion of those who had refused him on his communicatory
Letters; and no other communicatory Letters could be hoped for whilst they
continued in Communion with him.

And then, 5thly, it is also as notorious, on the same Principles of St.
Cyprian's Age, that such Schism from the visible Communion of the Catholic
Church, was also supposed to deprive the Person so divided of all the invisible
Benefits of Church Communion. God was supposed obliged to ratify in Heaven,
what was done by those whom he authorized to represent Him on Earth. He avenged
the Contempts of his Ministers, and would not be a Father to those who would
not own his Church for their Mother, by paying her a Filial respect. They were
not to expect any Pardon of their Sins: They could not hope for the Holy Ghost,
who dissolved the Unity of the Spirit: V. Cypr. de Unitate Eccl. Ep. 49. Edit.
Ox. Ep. 52, 54, 55.
They were incapable of the Crown of Martyrdom, whatever they suffered in the
State of Separation. This is the result of many of St. Cyprian's Discourses on
this Argument: And indeed it is very agreeable with the Design of God, that
they who cut themselves off from the Peculium, should, by their doing so, lose
all their pretensions to the Rights and Privileges of it. Not only so, but that
they should also incurr all the Mischiefs to which they were supposed liable,
who had lost their Right of being Members of the peculiar People. Accordingly
as they believed all Persons, at their first Admission into the Church, to be
turned from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God; so upon
their leaving the Church, or their being cast out of it by the judicial act of
their Superiors, they were supposed to return into the State of Heathens, to
lose the Protection of those good Spirits who minister only to the Heirs of
Salvation, and again to relapse into their former condition of Darkness, and
being consequently obnoxious to be infested by the Devil, and his Powers of
Darkness. And that this was so, appeared by several ordinary Experiments in
those earlier Ages, not only of the Apostles, but that also of St. Cyprian, who
has many Examples of it in his Book de Lapsis. And this Confinement of the
Spiritual Privileges of the peculiar People to the external Communion of the
Church, as it was Fundamental to their Discipline, so it was rational
consequently to their other Principles. God was not thought obliged to confer
those Privileges, but by the Act of those whom Himself had authorized to oblige
Him. But Dividers were supposed not to belong to that Body to which the
Promises were made; and ambitious Intruders into other Men's Offices could not
in any Equity pretend to have their Acts ratified by God, from whom they could
not be supposed to receive any Authority, when they did not receive it by the
Rules and Orders of the Society established by Him. These things were then
believed, and believed universally. Indeed nothing but an universal Belief of
them would have maintained that Discipline, which was then observed in the
Church; could have obliged them generally to suffer, as they did then, the
severest Inflictions from the Magistrate, rather than incurr the much more
feared Displeasure of their Ecclesiastical Superiors. When we are also of the
same Mind, and alike influenced by Principles and Regard to Conscience, then
indeed, and then alone, we may pretend to be a Posterity not degenerous from
the great Examples of those glorious Ancestors: Then it will not be in the
Power of Acts of Parliament to drive us from our Principles, and bring a
Scandal on our Religion: Then where our Bishops follow Christ, we shall follow
them, and it will not be in the Power of the Worldly Magistrate, or the Gates
of Hell it self, to prevail against our Church, and to dissolve the Union
between us: Then Magistrates themselves will be more wary of involving
Consciences on occasion of their little Worldly Politics; at least they will
not pretend Religion, and the Religion of that very Church which suffers by
them for doing so. May we live at length to see that happy day! However it will
hence appear how impossible it will be to excuse our Adversaries present Case
from Schism, if it be tried by that Antiquity which we do indeed profess to
imitate and allege.

Now in this Case I am discoursing of, I have purposely selected the Instances
of St. Cyprian's Age rather than any other, not only because they are the
Ancientest, indeed the first we know of, of one Bishop's invading another's
Chair not vacant; but because we have withal in him the most distinct account
of the Sense of the Church in his Age of such Facts, and of the Principles on
which they proceeded in condemning them. He had occasion given him to be so
distinct by two Schisms, one of his own Church in Carthage, where Felicissimus
was set up against himself; another (that I have principally insisted on) of
Novatian, set up against Cornelius in Rome. On these Occasions he has written
one just Discourse, besides several Epistles. But these Principles were not
singular and proper to that Age; they descended lower, and are insisted on by
Optatus and St. Augustine in their Disputes with the Donatists, whenever they
dispute the Question of their Schism, without relation to their particular
Opinions.

We have here given them the sense of the Church, in an Age wherein her
Testimony is every way unexceptionable, wherein she had certain means of
knowing the Truth, and withal valued it as it deserved. Even there we find the
Principles now mentioned universally received, and universally received as the
Grounds of that universal Catholic Communion, which she had received by an
uninterrupted Tradition from the Apostles to that very Time. Even there, I say,
we find them received, where nothing could have been received universally that
had been an Innovation. In so short a time it was hard to bring in Variations
from the Primitive Rule, and harder yet, that all the Churches could have been
unanimous in them, if they had been Variations, as Tertullian reasons in his
Prescriptions; especially when there was no Universal Authority received over
the whole Catholic Church that could induce them to it. From the Time of
Trajan, the Succession of our Savior's Family failed in the Church of
Jerusalem, to which all particular Churches paid a Deference. From the Time of
Hadrian, there could be no pretense for that Church above others, when it
consisted not of Jews, but Greeks and Romans. What was there therefore that
could make them unanimous in Variations, and Variations of such Importance as
this had been? They had then no General Councils: And the absolute Supremacy of
particular Bishops in their proper Districts, is by none maintained more
expressly, and more zealously, than by St. Cyprian, with particular regard to
all other Powers, that in later times have pretended to oblige Bishops; that
is, to Councils, and the Bishop of Rome. This Catholic Communion, grounded on
the common Interest of all the Bishops, to have all their Acts of Discipline in
their particular Districts ratified over the whole World, might have brought in
other things that were consequential to these common Interests. But there was
nothing antecedent that can be imagined, that could have brought in this
Catholic Communion of those times, among such a multitude of absolute and
independent Societies, as the Churches were then, if it had not been brought in
from their very first Originals. And yet these Notions we were speaking of were
Fundamental to that Catholic Communion it self, as managed in those earlier
Ages.

CHAP. V. That Intruders, or Anti-Bishops, (by Lay-Authority) cannot be
defended but by Principles fundamentally destructive of the Church, as a
Society distinct from the State, in time of Persecution.
IF those Errors, that destroy the very Being of the Church, as a Society, be
Fundamental, I cannot for my part see how such Anti-Bishops, and all that own
them, can be excused by Principles from Erring fundamentally. Their being
Bishops supposes such Doctrines as, if they be once admitted, make it
impossible for the Church to subsist as a Spiritual Society, whenever the State
is pleased to persecute it. They cannot possibly be supposed Bishops of those
Dioceses to which they are consecrated, till it first be supposed that their
Predecessors are validly deprived, and consequently that the Sees are vacant in
Gonscience. If it should prove otherwise, the Clergy and Laity of those same
Jurisdictions will still be obliged in. Conscience, as much as ever, to adhere
to their Canonical Bishops till they be Canonically deprived, and to disown
such Intruders as are put over them, not only without any Canonical Procedure,
but without any Authority also that can oblige in Conscience. The only
Principle therefore on which they can pretend that their Rival Bishops have
lost their Right, as to Conscience, must be the Power that even the
Lay-Magistrate has to deprive Bishops even with regard to Conscience. If
therefore they will defend their Schism by Principles, it will be necessary
that they defend this Principle also, without which it is not possible that it
should ever be defended. They have no Ecclesiastical Judicatory, Just or
Unjust, that they can so much as pretend in this Case. And the defending this
is that which will increase their Guilt, and will add to their charge of
Schism, the aggravation of Heresy also. For in order to the asserting such a
Right as this to the Secular Magistrate, it will be necessary to assert that
the Authority of the Church, even as to Spirituals, is, in Conscience, the
Right of the Civil Magistrate. If it should not be so, then the Subjects of the
respective Dioceses may still be at liberty in Conscience to adhere to their
deprived Bishops. And if they may, they must, because then all their former
Obligations in Conscience will still hold as obliging in Conscience to it is
impossible that those antecedent Obligations in Conscience to adhere to their
spiritual Superiors can be dis-anulled, or diminished by a Power that can
pretend no Right in such Matters with regard to Conscience. But if we grant
this Power to the Magistrate, this will perfectly overthrow the Church as a
Society distinct from the State, and perfectly disable it to subsist as a
Society in a time of Persecution. For when the Magistrate persecutes it, it
cannot then subsist as a Society without a Government, and a Government
obliging in Conscience, and not derived from the persecuting Magistrate. But if
the Right of that spiritual Government be in Conscience the Magistrate's Right,
it must be an invading the Magistrate's Right to pretend to it, when he
expressly forbids it. And if so, how can spiritual Governors in such a Case
pretend to it? How can they pretend to a Right that is none of their own,
consistently with Conscience? How can their pretending to it with ill
Consciences oblige their Subjects to adhere to them on account of Conscience?
Nay, how can it even excuse them in Conscience for not adhering rather to him
whose Right it is supposed to be, and that even in Conscience? No Necessity
whatsoever can excuse a Sin, much less lay an Obligation in Conscience on
Subjects to abet it, least of all lay an Obligation on God to ratify such Acts
of Authority as must be supposed no better than Usurpations. And yet all Acts
of Ecclesiastical Authority in a time of Persecution can signify nothing if
they be not such as may oblige in Conscience, and such as God as well as Men is
obliged to ratify. Thus it had been Sin in the Romans to set up Cornelius (as
plainly they did) not only without the Consent, but against the Will of Decius.
It had been Sin in him, and not in him only, but in all the Bishops of his Age,
to pretend to any Districts in the Roman Empire. It had been Sin in them to
exercise Authority in Districts not belonging to them. Thus the Church had been
perfectly dissolved, as a Society at least, within the Roman Empire, unless we
can suppose a Notion of a Society without Governors, without Districts,
without any lawful Exercises of Authority. And yet the Bishops of those Ages
never thought themselves obliged in Conscience to go out of the Roman Empire to
retrieve the Power which is pretended to belong to them as Bishops of the
Catholic Church. And very probably it had signified nothing to have done so.
They could have gone into no civilized inhabited Countries, but they must have
expected Magistrates who could pretend to the same Right, as well as Decius,
and who were as much disposed as he to use their Right to the Prejudice of the
Christian Religion. What therefore would our Adversaries have advised the
Christians of those Ages to have preserved themselves in a Society? Would they
have had them retired into unoccupied Wildernesses? But how could they make
Societies there where there were no Numbers of Subjects requisite to make a
Society? Plainly therefore, the Catholic Church had then been dissolved as
Societies, if these New Principles had been maintained in those earlier Ages.
And these same Principles do still put it as evidently in the Power of the
Civil Magistrate to dissolve the Church, as a Society, within his own
Dominions. For how can a Church continue a Society where Bishops are in
Conscience deprived of their Spiritual Authority, and where Subjects are also
absolved from their Obligations in Conscience to obey them? And this is also a
dissolving the Catholic Church as to such as live in such Dominions, and as to
any Benefits they can derive from the Catholic Church also. For Subjects of
particular Districts are no otherwise received into the Catholic Church, than
as they derive a Right to Communion with all the Churches in the World, by
their being admitted Members of the Churches of their particular Districts. And
they are also deprived of their Right of Catholic Communion when they are
Excommunicated by the lawful Authority of their particular Districts. I cannot
therefore see how our Adversaries can excuse themselves herein from Erring
fundamentally, if the Church's being a Society be admitted for a Fundamental.

CHAP. VI. Arguments and Objections against this Doctrine from Instances of
Fact, and Public Good, answered.
AGAINST this truly Catholic Doctrine two things were opposed by the
Adversaries: The one, a Collection of Eighteen Instances of Bishops, who being
deprived, and not for Heresy, did not insist on their Right, or were not
seconded by their Subjects, in the History of 900. Years. Which way of
Reasoning, he shows, is neither Conscientious, nor Prudent: For if Matters of
Fact so nakedly related, without Evidence of the Principles on which they were
acted, be urged as Precedents barely because done, and no Opposition against
them, it will be impossible to make any thing of such arguing from History. For
what History is there that in a Succession of 900. Years does not afford
Examples against Examples? And how easy were it for an Historian, by this way
of Reasoning, to justify the Wickedest things that can be? (. 9.) And in this
case are diverse circumstances, which not appearing in any of the Instances make
them insignificant.. 10-14. Nor do the Instances produced prove the Sense of
the Catholic Church, but only of the Greek, and especially of Constantinople:
nor even of that Church in the first and earliest Ages, (. 15.) but most of
modern, barbarous, and divided Ages, 22. and in different cases, Part 2.. 1.
and the Deprivations, either by Synods, or disagreeable to the Canons of that
very Church,. 8, 9, 11. and no such Power so much as pretended by the
Lay-Magistrate,. 3. but the Emperors endeavoring to obtain their Wills by
Authority of Synods; or by gross Violence murdering, disabling, or banishing
the Incumbents.

The other, their great Plea of the Public Good,. 47. which he well retorts
upon them: That the Eternal Interests of Souls and of Religion are more to be
valued in a Public Account, than Worldly Politics: That it is more the
Public Good of the Church, and of Religion, that Subordinations be preserved,
than that any particular Person be made a Bishop by offering Violence to them;
That the Glorious Passive Doctrines of the Church be maintained in opposition
to Worldly Interests, than seem prostituted to serve them; That the Credit of
the Clergy be maintained, than that they enjoy the Benefits of Worldly
Protection; And that the Independency of that Sacred Function on the State be
asserted, by challenging the Right, than that by yielding the Lay-Power should
be owned to have any Power of Depriving us of the Comfort of Sacraments in a
time of Persecution: And that this is more for the Interest of the State, even
of the Civil Magistracy, than what is like to obtain upon the Cession. Even the
State cannot subsist without Obligations of Conscience, and the Sacredness of
Oaths; This has respect to with he said before of the Sacred Vows of Canonical
Obedience, for securing that Right and Duty, where no Worldly Power can force
them to it; which no other Power in the World can dispense with, but that for
whose Interest they were imposed, and the dreadful Imprecations implied in them
as an Obligation for Performance.
which can signify nothing for the Security of any future Government, if they
must signify nothing for the time past. It is not for the Interest of the
Public to secure ill Titles in their Possession, and thereby to encourage the
Frequency of ill Titles, and frequent Subversions of the Fundamental
Constitutions, and all the Public Miseries that must follow on such changes.

But these things are more largely treated, and very solidly in the Defense of
the Vindication, upon a farther occasion. For the Adversaries being so home
pressed with this, that they had little to reply, were forced to seek for new
Arguments: And first, without any Answer to his Argument, and granting the
Proposition of the Invalidity of Lay-Deprivation, the Lawfulness of Submission
in the Ecclesiastical Subjects to Intruders, is only insisted on; and only from
other Later Facts, and pretense of Peace and Tranquillity of the Church. To
which it is replied, that such Submission is Sinful by the Law of God, makes
the Subjects Accomplices in the Injustice, and moreover in the Clergy, on
account of their Oaths of canonical Obedience, etc. and, That turning the
Dispute to later Facts draws it from a short and decisive, to a tedious and
litigious Issue, with which there is no reason to comply. And concerning the
Case of Abiathar, he shows, That the Fact is not commended in the Scripture as
a Precedent; That the Magistrate could not, by the Doctrine of that Age, have
any direct Power over the Priesthood; That in the Apostle's Age the Priesthood
was expressly owned to be far more Honorable than the Magistracy it self; and,
That Solomon's Act was only of Force, and what God had threatened against the
House of Eli: Nor was Abiathar then the High Priest properly so called, but
Zadoc, etc. Moreover, That Christian Bishops are properly Priests, and the
Gospel Priesthood more noble than that of Abiathar; and that these Principles
and Inferences were admitted in the Apostolic Age, etc. by Clemens Romanus,
etc.

But the Principal Pretense of all is proposed by another Author; That though the
Argument holds where the State are Infidels, and so the Church and State
distinct Bodies, yet not so where the State professes the Christian Religion:
And, That the Benefits of Protection, of Honor and Profit, of Security, and of
Assistance, which the Church receives from the State, require in Gratitude a
compensation. To which is replied, That more is required for such a Power than
merely being Christian, which gives no Title to any Spiritual Authority; That
the same Persons may be of distinct Societies; That the Church's Obligations
are more necessary for the Subsisting of the State, than those she receives
from the State for hers; That the Benefits also received from her by the State,
are greater than what she receives from it; That a Pious Magistrate would not
desire such a Recompense, if she could grant it: But it is not in the Power of
Ecclesiastical Governors to make such Contract; Nor is it agreeable to the
Mind of God that the Church should so incorporate with the State. To which may
be added, That the Catholic Church and particular States are, by order of
Divine Providence, of different, unequal, and inconsistent Dimensions: and,
That Particular States are many entire, independent Bodies; but all Particular
Churches, Members of One great Body, and subject to the Supreme and Universal
Authority thereof; Nor ought any State, Prince, or Emperor, be admitted or
reputed Christian, who will not submit all their Authority to the Authority of
Christ in his Kingdom upon Earth; Which being the Chief of all Powers; who-ever
resists, resists the Ordinance of God, and shall receive to themselves
Damnation, Romans 13.2.

CHAP. VII. Of the Authority of the Church of England; and that the Authority
of the Primitive Catholic Church is greater than that of any Modern Particular
one, and to be preferred before it.
THE last Refuge is Argumentum ad hominem; a poor Cause indeed that is reduced
to that; which though tolerable as an Adjective with others more substantial, yet
cannot stand alone, much less support such a Cause as this. Two things are
alleged, the Oath of Supremacy, and Deprivation of the Bishops in Q.
Elizabeth 's time for refusing that Oath, for Proof of the Doctrine of the
Church of England in this case. To all this in general our Author opposes the
Authority of the Church of Christ, the Catholic Church of the Primitive Ages;
which the Church of England it self admits: and, having set out the Objection
fully, makes this Reply.

I should most heartily congratulate the Zeal of these Objectors for our
Church, were it really such as it is pretended to be. But I can by no means
commend any Zeal for any particular modern Church whatsoever, in Opposition to
the Catholic Church of the first and purest Ages. We cannot take it for a
Reformation that differs from that Church, which ought to be the Standard of
Reformation to all later degenerous Ages, at least in things so essential to
the Subsistence and Perpetuity of the Church, as these are which concern the
Independence of the Sacred, on the Civil Authority. Nor is it for the Honor of
our dear Mother to own her Deviation, in things of so great Importance, from
the Primitive Rule; much less to pretend her Precedent for overruling an
Authority so much greater than hers, so much nearer the Originals, so much more
Universal, so much less capable of Corruption, or of Agreement in any Point
that had been really a Corruption. It is impossible that ever the present
Breaches of the Church can be reconciled, if no particular Churches must ever
allow themselves the Liberty of Varying from what has actually been received by
them, since the Ages of Divisions, the very Reception thereof having proved the
Cause of those Divisions. If therefore our modern Churches will ever expect to
be again united, it must be by Acknowledgment of Errors in particular Churches,
at least in such things as have made the Differences, and which (whilst they
are believed) must make them irreconcilable. Such things could never proceed
from Christ, who designing his whole Church for One Body, and One Communion,
could never teach Doctrines inconsistent with such Unity, and destructive of
Communion. And why should a Church, such as ours is, which acknowledges her
self Fallible, be too pertinacious in not acknowledging Mistakes in her self,
when the Differences, even between Churches, which cannot all pretend to be in
the Right whilst they differ, and differ so greatly from each other, are a
manifest Demonstration of Errors in Authorities, as great as her own? Nor can
any such acknowledgments of actual Errors be prejudicial to Authority, where
the Decisions of the Authority are to be overruled not by private Judgments,
but by a greater Authority. And if any Authority be admitted as competent for
arbitrating the present Differences of Communion between our modern Churches, I
know none that can so fairly pretend to it, as that of the Primitive Catholic
Church. Besides the other Advantages she had for knowing the Primitive
Doctrines above any Modern ones whatsoever, she has withal those Advantages
for a fair Decision, which recommend Arbitrators. She knew none of their
Differences, nor dividing Opinions, and therefore cannot be suspected of
Partiality. And it was withal an Argument of her being constituted agreeably
to the Mind of her blessed Lord, that she was so perfectly one Communion as he
designed her. And the Acquiescence of particular Churches in her Decision, is
easier and less mortifying than it would be to any other Arbitrator. To return
to her, is indeed no other than to return to what themselves were formerly
before their Divisions, or dividing Principles. So that indeed, for modern
Churches to be determined by Antiquity, is really no other than to make
themselves, in their purest, uncorruptest Condition, Judges of their own Case,
when they have not the like Security against Impurities and Corruptions. I
cannot understand therefore how, even on account of Authority, our late
Brethren can excuse their pretended Zeal for even our Common Mother, the Church
of England, when they presume to oppose her Authority to that of the Catholic
Church, and of the Catholic Church in the first and purest Ages. I am sure we
have been used to commend her for her Deference to Antiquity, and to have the
better Opinion of any thing in her Constitution, as it was most agreeable to
the Pattern of the Primitive Catholic Church.

CHAP. VIII. Archbishop Cranmer 's Opinion perfectly destructive of all
Spiritual Authority, and his Authority in these matters none at all.
FOR more particular Answer, he first shows the Author and Original, and so the
Novelty, of these pernicious Opinions in England; and then answers to both the
Allegations aforesaid: the first not being very long, and therefore recited in
his own Words at length, is as follows:

In Henry the Eighth's time, under whom the Oath of Supremacy was first
introduced, the Invasions of the Sacred Power were most manifest. Yet so that
even then they appear to have been Innovations and Invasions. But who can
wonder at his Success, considering the violent ways used by him? So many
executed by him for refusing the Oath? The whole Body of the Clergy brought
under a Praemunire, (for doing no more than himself had done, in owning the
Legatine Power of Cardinal Wolsey) and fined for it, and forced to Submissions
very different from the sense of the Majority of them? He did indeed pretend to
be advised by some of the Ecclesiastics, as appears from several of their
Papers still preserved. But they were only some few selected by himself, never
fairly permitted to a freedom and majority of Suffrages. And when even those
few had given their Opinion, yet still he reserved the Judgment of their
Reasons to himself. And to show how far he was from being indifferent, those of
them who were most open in betraying the Rights of their own Function, were
accordingly advanced to the higher degrees in his Favor, and were entrusted
with the Management of Ecclesiastical Affairs. None had a greater share in his
Ecclesiastical Councils than Archbishop Cranmer. Nor is there any who, upon
all the Questions proposed, wherein Ecclesiastical Power was concerned, does
more constantly side with the King's imperious Humor against the true Rights
of his own Order. He allows the King the Rights even of Preaching the Word, and
Administering the Sacraments, and allows neither of them to the Ecclesiastics,
any further than as they derived them from the Prince's Lay-Commissions. He
permitted indeed their Consecrations, as he had found them, by those of their
own Order; but derives nothing of their Power from those Consecrations. He
makes the Ceremonies of Consecration indifferent things, no way concerned in
conveying the Spiritual Power. That he derives wholly from their
Lay-Deputation. He gives them a Power of Preaching the Word, and Administering
the Sacraments, where the Lay-Powers allow it, and he allows them neither where
the Secular Magistrate forbids them. They must admit whom the Laws oblige them
to admit, and they must not excommunicate any whom the Secular Laws take into
their Protection. The Magistrate, notwithstanding his being a Layman, may
perform these Offices himself, if he pleased. And the Ecclesiastics,
notwithstanding their Consecration, are not by him permitted to perform them,
unless the Magistrate be pleased to give them leave. Nay, so far he proceeds in
his Flattery of the Civil Magistrate, that he allows no more Gifts of the Holy
Ghost, in the Laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery, than in the collation
of any Civil Office. Even in the Apostles themselves, he rather excuses than
commends all the Exercise of their Spiritual Authority, as necessitated to it
by the Exigency of their present Circumstances. As if any Necessity could
excuse Usurpation. As if any Exercise of a Power not belonging to them could
have been seconded by so visible manifestations of God himself, as that was
which was exercised by the Apostles. Yet even their Authority he makes
perfectly precarious. He owns no Obligation on the Consciences of the
Christians of those times to obey even the Apostles themselves, but ascribes
their Obedience then wholly to their good Will, so as to leave it to their own
Liberty, whether they would be subject or no. And why so? Only because the
Apostles had no Civil Empire. This wholly resolves all Obligation of Conscience
into Civil Empire, and makes it impossible for the Church to subsist as a
Society, and a Communion, without the Support of the Civil Magistrate.
Accordingly the same Archbishop Cranmer took out a Patent for his Episcopal
Power, And another before from King Henry, long before Bonner was Bishop: from
which; and from the Composure, it is plain who was the Projector.
preserved by Bishop Burnet, full of a Style so pernicious to Ecclesiastical
Authority. He there acknowledges all sort of Jurisdiction, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, to have slowed originally from the Regal Power, as
from a Supreme Head, and as a Fountain and Spring of all Magistracy within his
own Kingdom. He says, they who had exercised this Jurisdiction formerly, (for
which he took out this Patent) had done it only PRECARIO, and that they ought
with grateful Minds to acknowledge this Favor derived from the King's
Liberality and Indulgence, and that accordingly they ought to yield whenever
the King thought fit to require it from them. And to show what Particulars of
Ecclesiastical Power he meant, his Patent instances the Power of Ordering
Presbyters, and of Ecclesiastical Coercion, meaning (no doubt) that of
Excommunication. Nay further, the same Patent gives him a Power of Executing,
by the King's Authority, those very things which were known to have been
committed to him by God himself in the Scriptures, per and ultra caquae tibi ex
Sacris Literis divinitus commissa esse dignoscuntur. By which we understand,
that no Branch of Spiritual Power whatsoever was excepted. Yet all this Grant
was to last no longer than the King's Pleasure. I know not what the
Lay-Encroachers themselves can desire more. Here is so little Security for the
Church's subsisting, when the Secular Laws discountenance her, as that she is
not allowed the same Liberty that other Subjects have, of pleading the Secular
Laws already made in favor of her; but is left exposed to the Arbitrary
Pleasure of the Prince, which is thought hard in the case of other Subjects.
This Yoke the Politicians have lately imposed on the Church of Scotland: GOD,
in his good time, release her from it.

I have often wondered how the most learned Bishop Stilling fleet, who first
published the forementioned Papers, as far as they concerned Archbishop
Cranmer, could think them consistent with his own Principles: They are so
perfectly contradictory to his Discourse concerning the Power of
Excommunication subjoined in the Second Edition of the Irenicum, and indeed to
the Doctrine of the Irenicum it self, as far as it was consistent with it self,
or with any one Hypothesis. For sometimes he seems to doubt whether there can
be any Power properly so called without Coercion, or any Coercion without
external Force. As if indeed the Fears of the future Mischiefs attending
Exclusion from the Privileges of Church Communion had not been, in the purest
Ages of the Christian Religion, more properly Coercive, than the fear of any
Evils that were in the Power of the Secular Magistrate. It is certain, that
good Christians then chose rather to suffer any thing the Magistrate could
inflict, than Excommunication. But I more admire, that such a Betrayer of
Ecclesiastical Rights should, by our Ecclesiastical Historian of the
Reformation, be proposed as the Hero of his times, and as Exemplary to such as
might, in his Opinion, deserve the Name of Heroes still. Yet he calls it a
strange Commission in Bishop Bonner, when he took out a Commission from the
King as to his Spirituals, conceived in the same terms with that of Cranmer, in
the Particulars now mentioned. He grants that It is not only a groundless
Charge upon Bonner, but false; and disproved both by this, which discovers
Cranmer the Contriver, and by Evidence of Fact, that he and others took out
such Commissions long before Bonner. v. A. Harmar. page 51, 52. The Historian
to excuse Cranmer cast the Odium of it upon Bonner, and devised a reason to
render it credible.
Bonner's Inducement to take out that Commission was, that it was observed,
that Cranmer's great Interest in the King was chiefly grounded on some Opinions
he had of the Ecclesiastical Officers being as much subject to the King as all
other Civil Officers were. Yet Cranmer was to be excused, because that if he
followed that Opinion at all, it was out of Conscience. Why he should doubt,
whether he was of that Opinion, I cannot guess, when himself has published
those very Papers of the learned Bishop Stillingfleet, wherein Archbishop
Cranmer does so plainly own himself of that Opinion; when he has also published
Cranmer's own Commission to the same purpose. As little Reason I can see why he
should say, that Cranmer was once of that Opinion, as if he had afterward
retracted it. The Papers upon the Consult were written in Henry the Eighth's
time, in the Year 1540. And then, even by the Bishop's Observation, the Change
of his Opinion had lost his Interest with the King, if his Interest had been
grounded on that Opinion. But Cranmer kept to the same Opinions in the Reign of
King Edward the Sixth. Then it was he took out his Commission. The young King
himself seems to have been of the same Opinion, in his second Paper of the
Bishop's Collections, which I can ascribe to nothing more probably than to the
Instructions of his Godfather. Nor does it appear the Archbishop changed his
Mind afterward. The only thing insisted on by our Historian to prove it, is
his subscribing a Book set out soon after, which teaches the contrary. But
having already shown that he still retained the same Opinion in the time of
Edward the Sixth, his Subscription cannot prove any change of his Opinion, but
that he complied, whatever his Opinion was, when he found his noncompliance
could not hinder the contrary Opinion from being acceptable. But indeed that
Book was not so clear in that point that his Subscribing it would argue any
change from his former Opinions. But our Historian says, that when Cranmer
maintained that Opinion, he did it out of Conscience. Perhaps it might have
been so. But I am sure it is but an ill Argument to prove it so, that his
Interest in the King was visibly promoted by it. Yet if he had frequently
followed Opinions contrary to Worldly Interest, that, I grant, might have been
an Argument, that though his Interest was indeed promoted by this Opinion, yet
that might have been no Inducement to him why he did embrace it. But, on the
contrary, in the great Actions of his Life, it was the Serviceableness of his
Opinions to the Princa's Designs that principally recommended him. It was
notoriously his Opinion for the Divorce from Queen Katherine, that first
brought him into the Court, and into the King's Knowledge. Nor is it denied by
our Historian that it was so. And in the Case of Prosuming Consummation of
Marriage from Bedding, he gave contrary Judgments concerning the Marriage with
Queen Katherine, and that with Anne of Cleve, exactly according to the King's
Inclinations, and his own Interest in gratifying them. In Queen Katherine's
Case he allowed it for a good Presumption, but not so in the Case of Anne of
Cleve. Nay, when the Protestant Reformation it self was against his Interest
with the Prince then in Possession, he ranounced even that. Nor did he recant
that Recantation, at least he gave no public Signification of his recanting
it, till he was assured by Dr. Cole, in a Sermon before him at St. Mary's, that
even his Compliance should avail him nothing for the Saving of his Life. And
even in that compleater Collection published by Bishop Burnet, none of the
other Bishops or Divines consulted on that Occasion is so perpetually
thorough-paced for the King's Inclinations as he was. Which Singularity alone,
not only against the Interests, but the Suffrages of his Function, in Favor of
Encrcachments, sufficiently show how far he was from being Impartial in
Questions of this Nature.

Having given this account of the Worthy Author of this Doctrine, and of his
Principles, he proceeds farther to show, That it is not the Interest of the
Church, that his Authority in these things should be regarded; That neither He,
nor the Duke of Summerset, did deserve the Elegies by our Ecclesiastical
Historian bestowed upon them, nor the Historian himself any great Commendation
or Thanks for his mistaken Service in it; That there were many in those Reigns,
under which the Reformation was transacted, who very much promoted the
Reformation, but with no good Design on Religion or Reformation; as K. Henry
himself, Cromwell, and the Duke of Northumberland, who both at their Executions
declared themselves of the Roman Communion; That the part acted by Cranmer was
not really contributive to a Reformation; but if his Principles freed the
Church from the Tyranny then in being, they naturally introduced a Tyranny of
more pernicious Consequence, which perfectly destroys the Government of the
Church, and thereby dissolves the Society, which was the thing to be reformed;
That as little reason there is for that advantageous Character he gives his
other Hero, the Duke of This is but part of the Sacrilege he was guilty of: and
nothing of what he committed in Church Lands and Churches themselves for his
own use.
Summerset; for he was one that advanced the Sacrilege of the former Reign
against Monasteries; and in the time of his Protectorship against the
Universities themselves; and wrote a very angry Letter to Bishop Redley for
opposing his designed beginnings of it in the Suppression of Clare-Hall: and
how could he reconcile any true Zeal for Religion and the Church, with his
Sacrilegions Designs (and Practices too) against that very Church, whose
Communion was owned by him?

After this he shows, from the several Acts of Parliament, how the Impious
Notion of the Supremacy was by degrees settled by that Authority, and continued
in the Reign of Prince Edward, who lived not to the Maturity of Judgment to
discern the Falsehood and ill Tendency of those ill Principles so destructive to
all Religion, and to the very Fundamentals of the Church, as it is a Society
and Communion, which had been instilled into him by his Godfather (Cranmer,)
who was always the most forward Promoter of them.

And thus far our Author has proceeded very clearly: but his more particular
Answer to the two Objections being not fully concluded, but still under
Consideration, a more complete account of that is reserved for another
Occasion; but may be expected ere long. And in the mean time to do him right,
and gratify the Reader, we shall conclude with the recital of part of a. of
the Vindication, (which had been altered without his Consent) according to his
Mind and Original Manuscript. It is 25. Page 71. as follows.

-- neither did the Emperor think that his own Authority was alone sufficient
for the purpose. Calinicus by having his Eyes put out was incapacited, and by
that Incapacity deprived of his Office without a Judicial Sentence.
The way that was taken to deprive him was the same that was usually taken to
deprive Emperors, without taking away their Lives, who notwithstanding being
the supreme Authority, were never thought deprivable by any proper Exercise of
Authority. That was not by a Legal Sentence, but by reducing them to a natural
Incapacity for Government, by putting out their Eyes. This perfectly disabled
them to judge of the Decrees to be subscribed by them, without which it was
impossible for them to govern. Nor was it ever thought Vndatiful to deny such
Princes Subjection; whatever their Right was otherwise, when they once come to
be so incapacitated, however they came to be so. No more than if they were
Lunatic. Incapacity was alone sufficient for that. And this Incapacity was so
notorious, that we never read that even the Princes themselves, who had been
thus incapacitated, did ever judge so partially even in their own Case, as to
think fit to resume. Such a Case therefore as this did not put it in the Power,
even of partial Subjects, to deny their Duty where it ought not to have been
denied, by judging Incapacities where really there were none. And thus the Law
never designs an Office for a Person incapable of it, where the Incapacity is
so notorious as that it cannot be falsely applied by corrupt Interpretations.
Thus therefore that Emperor deprived this Patriarch Callinicus by putting out
his Eyes. Nor was this such a Maiming only as had made him at first unfit to be
elected, but such as disabled him to hold his Office, though the Emperor had
never taken it from him, however he had come to it by a Disease, or by any
other Providence. It was not like Antigonuss's biting of the Ear of Hyrcanus.
That only unqualified Hyrcanus for holding the Priesthood by the particular
Constitution of the Jews, which allowed none for Priests who had any such
corporal smperfections. Nor was it like the slitting of the Nose of this
Emperor Justinian. That only deprived him of the (...), the graceful and
Majestic Presence becoming a Prince; but was still consistent with the
Essential Qualifications for Government. But this Blindness perfectly disabled
our Patriarch Callinicus from ever Exercising any Patriarchal Office,
especially that most essential one of our Christian Eucharistical Sacrifice,
and no Law could ever design to keep an Office perpetually, unless by allowing
a perpetual unextinguishable Right in a Person who is under a perpetual natural
Incapacity of Exercising it. Thus therefore there was no need of a depriving
Sentence against Callinicus when he was under this Incapacity, himself could
now pretend no Right to an Office which he could never hope to be able to
exercise. What Pretense therefore could he have for Separating from the
Communion of Cyrus, when himself was disabled from Officiating in any
Communion? What pretense could the Church have for Questioning the Ordinations
of Cyrus, when his Rival was not capable of exercising any better Ordinations?
But, God be praised, this is none of our present Fathers Case. They are not
under any such Incapacities.

FINIS.

