A PLAIN RELATION Of the Late Action at Sea, Between the ENGLISH and DUTCH, and
the FRENCH FLEETS, From June 22. to July 5. last: WITH Reflections THEREUPON,
And upon the Present State of the Nation.

TOGETHER WITH A Preparation for Death, and a Persuasive to Criminals to do
Right to their Country; and a Specimen of a BILL for Reformation of Manners,
drawn for the Bishops, and mentioned in the following Reflections.

LONDON, Printed for John Harris at the Harrow in the Poultrey. MDCXC.

By whom also is Sold A Complete Collection of the late Writings of the same
Author, as, The true English Government, etc. Reflections upon the last Years
Occurrences, etc. An Apology for Mr. Stafford, etc. and others for the Service
of the Public.

TO THE READER.
READER,
WHoever thou art, if thou know it not already, know, that the Author of
these Papers is a sincere Friend and hearty Well-wisher to King William and
Queen Mary, the present Settlement, these Nations, and the Common Cause of the
Confederates, as very Just and Honorable; and no Enemy to the late King James,
the late Admiral Torrington, or to the Persons of any of those whom he believes
or suspects to have had an Influence in the Production of our Disappointments;
but to their Mi^carriages only, that they may be duly Corrected, Reformed, and
the like Prevented for the future: That he has Written nothing maliciously or
falsely to his own Knowledge, but all with great Candor and Integrity for the
Service of God, the Good of his Country, the Promotion of this Great and
Righteous Common Cause, against a Proud Insolent Nimrod, and for thy own Good,
if thou understandest it aright. Know therefore also, if thou can be offended
with him who Wishes so well to thy Country, and no ill to thy self, thou art
no good Man; and so wishing thou may^st be better and wiser, he bids thee
heartily Farewell.

Advertisement.
THere is newly Published, The present State of Europe: Or, the Historical and
Political Mercury: Giving an Account of all the public and private Occurrences
that are most considerable in every Court for the Month of September, 1690.
with Reflections upon every State; to be continued Monthly from the Original
published at the Hague by the Authority of the States of Holland and
West-Friezland.

The Mercury for the Month of August last is likewise done; they are both to be
Sold by John Harris at the Harrow in the Poultrey.

A Plain Relation Of the Late Action at Sea, BETWEEN The English and Dutch, and
the French FLEETS, from June 22. to July 5. last.
ON Sunday, June the 22. about Ten in the Morning, the French Fleet (which had
been seen the Friday before off of Plymouth, and the Saturday off of Portland)
were seen from the Isle of Wight off of Fresh-water-Bay; of which our Fleet
then riding in S. Helens road had no Notice, 'till about Ten that Night from
the shore: So that had not the Wind, which brought them with a very fresh Gale
as far as Fresh-water-Bay, where they Anchored, then slack'd and turned
Northerly, they had been in with us, and fired our Ships for want of Scouts out
(as some say) to give Notice. But that night upon that Notice we staved our
Cabins, made clear our Ships, and about 12. unmoor'd.

The next morning ( Monday the 23d.) the Admiral halled home his
Fore-top-sail-sheets, and fired a Gun to Weigh, and soon after all the Fleet
were under sail, and we stood out to Sea, and about 3 in the afternoon came to
an Anchor, Dunnose, S. W. and by W.

The next morning, ( Tuesday the 24th.) between 5 and 6 we weighed, and stood to
the S. E. and that Afternoon the Lion, and several Dutch Men of War, which made
them a Squadron of about 17. Ships, joined us S. E. of the Isle of Wight. And
at 9 at night we anchored, Culver Cliff, N. W. and by W. about 7 Leagues.

Wednesday the 25th. at 6. in the morning we weighed, the Wind N. N. E. and
about 8. the Weather, which was thick before, clearing up, we saw the French
Fleet, the Body of them bearing W. S. W. about 3 Leagues distant: And we had a
fair Opportunity to engage them, the Wind S. S. E. and they under our Lee,
between us and the English shore, in very much Disorder: And in all probability
had we then Engaged them, we had beaten them down upon our English shore; our
Fleet being very well provided for it, our Ships all in good Order, and our Men
full of Courage and very desirous of Action. At 12. Culver Cliff, N. W. half N.
4. Leagues off, the Wind S. S. E. and between 7. and 8. we Anchored, Dunnose,
N. W. and by N. 5. Leagues, the French Fleet Leeward about 3. Leagues.

The next morning, ( Thursday the 26th.) the Admiral made a Signal, and called
a Council of Flagg-Officers; where it was agreed not to fight the French,
supposing them too strong for us, but to plye to the East, (the Wind being E.)
as far as the Flats of the Foreland, and there entangle them in the Sands,
rather than fight them; but yet to keep sight of them, least they should land;
which notwithstanding we did not, but plied out of sight, so that they might
have landed if they would.

From that time he kept turning to the E. every Tide from day to day, (which
the French observing, kept turning after) 'till Sunday Evening, the Wind
continuing Easterly all that time, insomuch that the Seamen being greatly
discontented at it, began to murmur and exclaim against him for it: But then a
Signal was made for a Council of the Flagg-Officers, where it was resolved to
Fight the French the next day, but no Notice thereof was given to any of the
Fleet besides.

The next Morning being Monday the 30th. the Signal was given for a Line of
Battle, when most of our Ships having no Notice before were unprepared; yet our
Men threw up their Caps, and showed all demonstrations of Joy at the Notice,
and made ready as fast as they could; and, (the French probably supposing we
had still kept turning to the E. as we did before, and therefore turning after)
both Fleets came near about Eight that Morning in two Lines cross the Channel,
our Fleet standing about 4 Leagues to the West of the Beachy-Head, the Dutch
squadron in the Van toward the English shore, the Red in the Body, the Blew in
the Rear toward the French Coast; and the Bloody Flag being hoisted before,
about 9. both Fleets came to Engage.

The Dutch (leading the Van) and part of the Blew (in the Rear) joining near
them made them give way; but the Red (except two or three Ships) not going so
near as they should, (but standing aloof, which brought our Fleet into the form
of a Half moon,) the Body of the French Fleet having none to engage them, made
up with the Dutch, and did them great Damage; whereas at the same time the Rear
of the French ran from those of the Blew who fought them.

The Admiral, as I am informed by one of his Ship, fired many Guns; but as most
agree, stood at that distance, that no Man can tell to what purpose it was,
unless to wast Powder and Shot. There were others also of our Fleet, as it is
affirmed, which lay to the Windward and fired over our own Ships, and did some
of them no little Damage; insomuch that our Seamen were very much exasperated
at it.

The Engagement continued till about five of the Clock; but then the French
bore away, and so put an end to the Action of that Day; and both Fleets
Anchored that Night.

The next Morning both Fleets lay at Anchor, looking one upon the other, as if
neither had any Inclination to fight. And it is believed that had not the
English made the haste from them, which they did, they might very well have
sent away the disabled Ships, and saved them; and the French would never have
attacked us.

In this Engagement the French had one of that Squadron, which fought the Blew,
sunk, and the Quarter of another blown up, as is affirmed by many; besides what
other loss they had, which is believed to have been considerable, especially
from the Dutch Squadron, which is generally agreed to have behaved themselves
very bravely, tho the particulars are not yet known to us: But 1500 Men killed
and wounded they themselves confess, and Intelligence from France informs us
that they had diverse Vessels very much shattered. On our side there was not one
Ship lost in the Fight, unless one of the Dutch, (concerning which there is
some difference in Relations) only the Ann of the Blew, and about seven of the
Dutch, which were afterward burnt, and possibly some others, were disabled.

But on Tuesday Morning, as some say, a Dutch Vice Admiral being disabled, the
Men finding themselves among the French, fired their Ship, and got off to the
English shore, to the West of Shoram; which others say was fired the Day or
Night before. But the Ann, and the rest of the Dutch disabled Ships, were towed
into our Fleet, out of danger for the present: But that Night the Admiral
having ordered the Swallow and the York to towe the Ann, commanded all to turn
to the Windward: whereupon one of the Dutch Ships being left by the Fleet, the
Men were forced the next Day to burn the Ship, and get on shore as they could,
somewhere about Shoram; for the French observing the Motion of our Fleet, as
they turned, turned after them.

On Thursday three more of the Dutch Ships being likewise left, were forced to
do the like at or near Hastings: and the Captain of the Ann (which, as some
say, had been towed three Leagues to the E. of our Fleet, and was ordered to
bear into our Fleet again) being also left, was forced to make a Waff and fire
a Gun; and the Admiral thereupon sending his Yat, the Captain sent him word,
that unless he sent them more Assistance, they should be in danger to fall into
the hands of the Enemy; whereunto the Admiral returned Answer, That they must
take what course they could to save themselves, for he could not help them; and
so kept on turning to Windward, which the Enemy still observing, as he turned,
turned after him: so that upon Friday another of the Dutch Ships was forced to
do as their Fellows had done, fire their Ship, and get on shore near Hasting.
And upon the Saturday the Ann for want of Assistance was forced to do the like
between Hasting and Rye.

Whereas had the Admiral and his Squadron fought as the rest did, we had
undoubtedly obtained a considerable Victory over the French Fleet with less
Loss than we have now sustained: However, he might easily have saved those
Ships which were fired on Wednesday and afterward, had he but kept his station,
and not by turning as he did, invited the French to the Honor of following,
and the Pleasure of beholding the deserted Dutch day after day firing their own
Ships, lest they should fall into their hands.

This Relation was first taken from the Information of an honest Voluntier
Seaman, who was in the Fleet all the time above mentioned, and in the
Engagement; and afterward completed from the Informations of diverse others who
were also in the Fight, and in the Fleet, all the time aforesaid. And for the
Readers more full satisfaction I will here subjoin in English

A Copy of a Letter written to the (French) Court from on Board Mr de Tourville.
MOunsieur de Chateau Renault, who commanded the Rear-Guard composed of 21
Ships, had this day the Vanguard; the Blew Squadron of 25 Ships was the Body
of the Battle; and the Count d'Estree, whose Squadron was 23 Ships, had the
Rear-Guard. As to the Enemies, the Admiral of the Red, commanding the Red
Squadron, had the Body of the Battle composed of 22. Ships; the Hollanders to
the number of 22. Ships, led the Van Guard; and the Blew Squadron of 16 Ships,
had the Rear-Guard. They immediately stretched out their Line. The Hollanders
first charged our Vanguard, and they had already discharged their Broad-sides,
when the Sieur Herbert, called E. of Torrington, who commanded the Body of the
Battle, came to attack ours. It was believed at that time that he would have
sought out Mouns. de Tourville to fight with him, but instead of acting in that
manner, and as became a brave Admiral, he stopped at the last Ship of the White
Squadron, and the Marquess d' Amfreville, who was the Rear-Admiral, had to do
with the common Seamen, before with Herbert, Eut a fair aux Matet lots,
avanqu'a Herbert.
who even withdrew himself in less than half an hour. Never was seen a fairer
Vessel than that Red Admiral, and so ill commanded. And Mouns. Herbert lost
this Expedition the little Reputation he had remaining before. He did not shoot
but at a distance, and although he had the Advantage of the Wind, yet he never
approached within Cannon-shot. By this means our Division, which should have
sustained the greatest Fire, lost not above 5 men on board the Magnificent, and
some Shot in her Masts. The Hollanders attacked our Vanguard very vigorously;
but Herbert willing to sacrifice them, although he saw them fight like brave men,
and both Tiers of our Fleet slaughtering of them, never did his endeavor to
succor them; but on the contrary, retired out of Cannon-shot. We have not lost
in this Fight any Person of Note, except the Chevalier de Clermont: The
Agreeable, the Fleuron, and the Moderate, are the Ships which have suffered the
most: As to the killed and wounded, we have had about Fifteen hundred.

And now should we enter into a Computation of the particulars of our Loss, we
might set them down under several Heads, such as these:

Imprimis. Lucrum cessans, The Loss of a great Advantage we had to have gotten
a complete Victory over the French Fleet: as is apparent by what was done by
that part of our Fleet which fought, and not only withstood the force of their
whole Fleet, but made them bear away.

Item. Damnum emergens, Loss actually sustained in several respects. As,

It. Of Men.

It. Of Ships.

It. Of Rigging, etc.

It. Of Honor.

It. Of Time and Expenses in refitting.

It. Of Trade, while the French ride Masters at Sea.

It. Distraction of the Country from their Harvest to serve in the Militia,
upon Occasion of the French Fleet lying upon our Coast, to the great Charge of
the Country.

It. The Advantages gotten by our Enemies, which may be computed as a Loss to
us; such as these, 1. Of Honor. 2. Of Courage, they being animated by it. 3.
Of Leisure and Opportunity.


It. Disappointment for some time of the entire reducing of Ireland, proceeding
from the Enemies Apprehensions of our Disappointment at Sea, which occasions
the greater Charge and longer Diversion of our Forces from other Service;
besides the hazard of what may happen in the mean time, or upon that occasion.

And Lastly, Much of this Loss is a Loss, not only to the King, and to this
Nation, but to the Common Interest of the Confederates: So that the King and
this State are obliged, not only in Honor and Prudence for themselves, but
also in Justice to the Confederates, and especially to the Dutch, who behaved
themselves so bravely, were so basely deserted, and thereby suffered so much,
to enquire impartially into the Miscarriages, and punish them as they deserve.

REFLECTIONS Upon the Precedent Relation,
IN the Occurrences of the last Year, we had besides the Loss of our Expense
only a kind of Lucrum cessans, a Disappointment in the Opportunities and
Advantages we had to have promoted our own Settlement and the common Cause, to
compute: And therefore, as it was the more easy, for any one, who thought fit
to apply his mind to it, to invent some plausible Pretenses to cover the
Miscarriages, which were then committed in the Management of Affairs; so such
Pretenses then would the more easily pass, with such as were more concerned to
keep fair with all Men for their own advantage, than to promote the Public
Interest of their Country and the common Cause, especially by any such Means
as might possibly produce any Prejudice or Disadvantage to their own. But
besides all this, in the late Action at Sea, when the Heavens had favored us,
first with a special Deliverance from a very dangerous Surprise, and then with
as favorable Advantage as our Hearts could wish, and that continued for many
days together, not only to neglect the same, to neglect it though provoked, by
the Courage and by the Danger also of our Allies, and of some of our own Ships
besides; but moreover to desert such as were disabled, and so desert as by
turning against the Wind to invite and animate the Enemy, (who of themselves it
seems had otherwise no mind to it, but rather expected a more vigorous
Engagement of our whole Fleet) to follow and triumphantly seize or destroy
them, is such a Miscarriage, and that aggravated with so great a Loss, Damage,
and mischievous and dangerous Consequence, as requires a Person of rare
Invention, of equal Impudence, and void of all sense of Honor and Love to his
Country, to compose a Vindication of this Transaction, or so much as with
Confidence and hope of Success endeavor to cover it; and People of no less
stupidity and easiness to be imposed upon by such Pretenses. Indeed the
Miscarriage was so gross and palpable, as moved the Indignation even of some of
the Vindicators of the last Years Transactions to reslect with some warmth upon
it, and extorted their Remarks upon the ill Consequences of such Miscarriages
as were before palliated: Such in short as none will offer to excuse, who are
not either Partners in the Crime, or no good Friends to the Cause; or admit of
any Excuse who are not either such, or such as are too apt and easy to be
imposed upon by smooth Tongues and fallacious Pretenses of others.

And as the Miscarriage is too gross to be covered, so is the Loss, Damage, and
evil Consequence thereof too great to be buried in Oblivion. In point of Honor
it ought to be enquired into strictly, to the bottom, and punished severely,
for satisfaction to the World; and in point of Justice no less, for
satisfaction to all our Confederates in the same common Cause, which suffers
much by the Disappointment; but more especially the Dutch, who beside have
sustained so considerable a Loss peculiar to themselves: And certainly no less
ought to be done in point both of Justice and Interest for satisfaction at
home, both to the whole Nation in general, not well pleased to see their Trade
thus at a stand, and their Money the while wasted upon a Company of debanched,
impious, wicked Wretches, for two Years together, with so little effect; and
more particularly to the Seamen, who think it hard, that they who are Free
men, and willing to serve their Country under Officers whom they like, should
be pressed and forced, as if they were Gally slaves, to serve under such as
they think neither otherwise well-qualified, nor very good Friends either to
them, or to the Cause they engage in. To all which we must add another Point of
Prudence to prevent the like for the future, by Cashiering at least such as are
found guilty, or not well qualified for the Service, however they came by their
Places; and by good Examples of necessary Discipline to deterr others from
undertaking what they are not sit for, or from deserting or neglecting what
they have once undertaken. And certainly that to which so many Obligations and
considerable Motives concur, must needs be very necessary: and it would
therefore be a great sign of a very weak and languishing State, to let so great
and mischievous a Miscarriage be lightly passed over under the cover of such
superficial Pretenses as every Tarpaulin and common Seaman can see through,
without some proportionable Animadversion upon the Delinquents, and effectual
Purgation and Reformation of the Fleet upon so notorious an occasion.

All this Mischief, I know, is commonly imputed to our Admiral Torrington. Not
only the Letter printed in the French Gazet from the E. of Nottingham to my
Lord Dursley in Holland; but a Relation printed in France, as I am informed, by
that Kings Authority, lays it chiefly upon him. The Letter, amongst other
Passages concerning the Fight, has one to this effect: The Holland Squadron
behaved it self with so much Bravery, that if my Lord Torrington had done his
Duty, we should in all probability have had a Complete Victory; but at present
we retreat before the Enemy. Which is in few words the sum of what the
Relation of the honest Seaman has more particularly informed us, and no little
Confirmation of it.

And indeed he being so notoriously faulty, it cannot be expected that vulgar
Spectators should look any farther into the matter, but be well satisfied with
the just Punishment of him alone: For whoever else might be concerned in it,
they at Land being out of the Action, may be thought far enough out of
Suspicion; and they who at Sea were in the Action, (if it may be properly so
said of them who stood still and acted not at all, unless in retreating from
the Enemy,) they have a fair pretense of his Authority to cover their own
Miscarriages. And yet possibly none of them may be so secure as they thought
themselves: For his Honor is now so broken by this Miscarriage, and his case
so desparate, that I know not what should or can oblige or restrain him, not to
discharge himself of so much of the Odium, as is properly due to those, who by
any means either induced him to, or concurred with him in so base,
dishonorable, and mischievous a Miscarriage; or impose upon him either to
suffer himself to be abused and Colemanized with vain hopes and expectations;
or tamely bear the burden of others no better than himself, who by unfaithful
concurrence at least, were some occasion of his Unhappiness: and it is like,
when he is once gone, will be as forward as any to cast dirt upon his Memory,
to clear themselves of all suspicion. And if his Affliction, as sometimes it
does, should awaken in him any sense of Religion, Repentance, Justice, or love
to his Country, all these do plainly oblige him to detect all: He can
certainly make no such step toward a reparation to his King and Country, as by
detecting those who have already been unfaithful, or are unfit for such a
trust; that being difcharged, and otherwise punished as they deserve, they may
be prevented from doing the like mischief for the future. And for them it is in
truth (though this brutish, sensual Generation are not sensible of it) much
better, that they should be judged here, accept of their Punishment, and bear
their Iniquity, than be condemned hereaf^er.

But to retorn, that none should be culpable in this business but Lorrington,
does not at all seem probable to me. He was indeed the Principal in the
Miscarriage, because he had Authority sufficient to have prevented it, or at
least to have done so much as must have left some others inexcusable: But it is
not likely he would have behaved himself as he did, if he had not had some
Encouragement, at least by a willing and easy compliance. And it is likely, if
the truth were known, there were several Accessartes, not only at Sea, but at
Land also. Such was the Behavior of others at Sea, that the eamen generally
blame the Officers, very few excepted. And when the Commissioners, who were
sent to examine the matter, sat at Sheerness, it was observed, That several of
the Officers had prepared an Account of the Action in writing under their
hands, calculated for the Interest of Torrington, and were very high and upish
in the morning, and carried it toweringly, and jarring with some of the Blew
Squadron; though when they came after to be examined upon their Oaths, (which
it was guessed they did not expect,) and some of the Blew spoke their Judgments
freely, their Carriage was observed to be much altered, and they looked more
calmly. And upon the whole matter, there were some Observations then made,
which are very proper to be here inserted: viz.

1. That a great part of the Commanders of this Fleet are absolute Creatures of
Torrington: Otherwise, if they had been Men of Freedom and Principles, they
would have been more forward to have made their Complaints against him. And if
it be found a Fault in him, all those must be Fools or Knaves, that either did
not See it, or endeavored to Excuse it. And to speak plain, many of those
Gentlemen are esteemed to understand better how to Dress, and to Eat, and Drink
well, etc. than to perform a Charge, which requires great Discretion and
Resolution.

2. That the Conduct of those Gentlemen may be reflected upon, that have
suffered one Person almost to fill the Fleet with his own Creatures, and shown
no more regard to the Qualifications of Virtue and Merit, than to prefer many
Men merely for Favor and Affection, or according to the time they have served
in the Fleet: So that there are in some second and third Rates, Men that have
given little or no Proof of their Worth, when others that have eminently
distinguished themselves, have either been wholly neglected, or put into small
Ships.

3. That this sort of Commanders are grown to a kind of Faction, and make it
their Endeavor to introduce Men of their own Stamp into those Employments,
maintaining a kind of Animosity and Hatred against those Persons who are not of
their Temper, and are put into Men of War for the sake of their Experience or
Merit. Than which there can can be no readier way to introduce a Degeneracy
from Virtue and Bravery in our Navy, and to lose our Ancient Reputation for
Maritine Performances, when the Management shall come into the Hands of men of
little Experience or Conduct. Of which our late Disgrace is too fresh an
Instance.

4. That many of these Commanders are so hated by the Seamen, that a Mutiny is
rather to be apprehended from them, than a going cheerfully to adventure their
Lives with them.

5. That able Seamen are much wanting in the Fleet, and the Ships will require
longer fitting than is talked of; so that I scarcely expect this Fleet can go
out this Month.

6. That if this Commission of Enquiry were continued, with the addition of two
or three more Persons, as Assistants who were well skilled in Maritine Affairs,
and could not be imposed upon by fraudulent Answers, or invented Pretenses,
there might be matter enough found to charge diverse Officers, and show that
there is an absolute necessity of making a great Reform in the Fleet, and no
less in the Office of Admiralty.

7. That until we are so Reformed, I dare presume to say, without pretending
to be a Prophet, that we shall never regain our l^st Honor.

These are the Observations, which were made at that time, entire as they came
to my hand. By which it appears, that the Ge^^leman who made them, whoever he
was, was of the same Opinion, that there were Accessaries at Land as well as at
Sea to this Miscarriage. And it is probable that there were more than he had
then occasion to reflect upon, and such as were really and properly Accessaries
in that particular Miscarriage: Such as it is very fit, upon all the
Considerations before mentioned, that the State should inquire of.

But it is likely there are some who are and have been Accessaries, it may be
more remotely, and therefore not so easy to be charged; yet no less effectual,
but rather Prime Causes in this and all the rest of our Disappointments both of
this and the last Year; and, which is worse, are like still so to be, in more
for the future, unless the Occasions thereof be speedily taken into good
Consideration, and with great steadiness and Resolution as effectually reformed
and prevented as may be.

The Mischiefs thereby done to this Nation, and to the Common Cause, are
greater already than most Men are well aware of We have promoted nothing, are
in no better a condition than we were in the Spring last was twelve month. Our
Condition has been much like that of a bewitched Cart, we have whipped, and
heaved, and made a great stir, and yet are in effect but where we were, if
Ireland was now wholly reduced: For it might certainly have been reduced at
first with less difficulty than the taking of Limrick now at last. Tyrconnel
then wanted only some body to quit it to, with some such Force and Power, that
he might do it honorably. It is not to be doubted but there were some Hushat's
then about the King, who ^^^k the Occasion of his being a Stranger, to impose
upon him with specious dilatory Counsels, Misieprosentations of things, and ill
Recommendations of Persons, which was the more easy then to be done, when most
of our great Men were so intent upon improving the Opportunity for their own
peculiar Advantage, that they minded little else, 'till they had secured what
they could for themselves.

But this is not all; besides the Loss of so much Time, we have lost a great
many Lives; more without doing any thing, than were necessary to have secured
the whole Country at first: We have lost much of our Trade, not only at Sea,
but at Land also, as much as depends upon our Trade at Sea; and also lost
vastly in what we had out before, and was returning home, or sent out since;
and besides lost it to our Enemies, which makes it in effect a double loss to
us: And, (which by that means falls the heavyer upon the Nation) have not done
what we have done at last, without so great Expense as will make our Supplies
come so much the harder. And all these are Losses actually sustained: But in a
true and just Estimate of the Mischief, the Hazards and Dangers it has brought
us into, ought also to be computed; the common Hazard of War; the great Trouble
that a Disappointment at first in that Expedition might have occasioned; and
the Hazard of his Majesty's Person to prevent it: And one more, which is of
very great importance, but such as few are so sensible of it as it deserves,
and that is the Confederacy, lest a Dissolution, or such Interruption therein
as may retard their Proceedings, should happen: Which, all things considered,
may very easily be; and that makes the improvement of the Opportunity the more
valuable and ^o much the more aggravates the Miscarriage of those who hinder
it. And though no such has yet happened, yet are we by this means still in
more and more danger of it, both by reason of the Charges of the War so long
continued, and of many unexpected Accidents, which may occurr before the next
Summer. I say nothing here of the great Opportunity and Advantage of proceeding
against France, then under a great Consternation, which was lost: because it is
not understood or considered, nor perhaps will be believed. And without that,
the other Mischiefs and Disappointments we have had, and may still expect, if
the Occasions be not removed, are sufficient to make all that have any sense
and concern look about them.

The immediate Occasions of these Disappointments, which have all proceeded
from the Miscarriages of the Persons employed, were the employing of such
Persons as were not duly qualified: And this leads us directly to the Persons
who employed them; that is, who either by Authority, or by Recommendation were
the immediate Causes or Occasions that they were employed. It is true, they
were all employed by the King, in some respect, as by his Authority, but all or
most either immediately by others, who were entrusted and Commissioned by him,
or at least by the Recommendations, Persuasions or Advice of others: And if any
of these did act therein upon any sinister respects, they were really and
effectually Accessaries to the Disappointments, which proceeded from the
Miscarriages of the Persons so employed.

Now what Sinister Respects might prevail in this matter, and might therefore
be the Original Occasions of the Employment of such Persons, is not hard to be
perceived by any Man who considers the present Disposition of a great part of
this Nation, and especially of those who souffle for Places, or are very
forward to catch at them. There was not any Vice more propagated by the Evil
Example of King Charles the Second, than Greediness, Unfaithfulness and
Knavery. The Nation was cheated of their Money, by corrupting their Trustees,
(their Representatives in Parliament;) which was one of the greatest Knaveries
that could be practiced: And this came at last to some of the grossest,
Shutting up the Exchequer, seizing peoples Charity for the Redemption of
Slaves, and surprising the Dutch Smyrna Fleet. And by such means were those
about him taught to do the like, and even to cheat himself; which produced such
a general Corruption in that respect, that Cheating and Knavery came into
Fashion, and was affected, so it could be done neatly, as a recommendation of
Wit and Parts; and Honesty and Plain-dealing was despised as Ignorance of the
World, and Folly: And so notorious were the Frauds and Cheats practiced in his
Reign, as had never been known in this Nation before. But this was not all, it
had this other pernicious Influence, that many even of those, who were not
corrupted by it, so far as to plain Knavery, were yet plainly thereby infected
with insatiable Avarice and Over-valuation of the things of the World; and
those generous and heroic Virtues of Piety and Charity, and Faith, which
overcomes the World, which make Men more active for the Service of God and
their Country, than for the Advancement of themselves or their Families in
Estates or Honor among Men; were either totally extinguished and suppressed,
or at least despised and reproached, if they dared to appear with any
confidence of their Innocence and Sincerity, as Folly, Madness, Enthusiasm,
Fanaticism, Precipitant Zeal, Indiscretion, Melancholy, and whatever the
selfish temporizing Genius of the times could imagine: And the only Wisdom then
in Fashion was Self-preservation, and Self-seeking Pretenses of Loyalty and
Zeal for the Government; and Self-Interest passed current, as an excusable, if
not commendable End of all Men's Actions: But the improvement of all Advantages,
and making the best of ones own, was unquestionable. And such in particular was
the Selling of Places, receiving of Gratifications for them, or conferring them
by way of Gratification, or for Affection to Relations or Friends, without much
regard to the Service of the Public. This had so far prevailed then, and
excited such Emulation and Appetite in most Spectators, and many who were then
kept off at a distance, that it is not credible that it should have ceased of
it self since the late Revolution, which brought many new Incentives with it,
but has not yet produced any such Charms as were like to lay it. This
therefore may very well be believed to be one of these Sinister respects which
may have prevailed in this Case: And as there is no small reason from what I
have said to believe it, so I find it commonly believed by those, who in all
probability little considering these things which I have now mentioned, must
therefore have some other reasons from matter of Fact for their belief. We have
seen Remarks upon the ill Consequences of Buying and Selling of Offices lately
published in Print, and by a public Intelligencer, who had either reason to
believe that it is our own Case, or his Remarks were very impertinent, and not
only impertinent but something worse; and if he did believe it, his expressing
himself as far from granting any such Practices to be in use here in England,
savours more of that vulgar Wisdom lately in fashion, than of those Virtues I
mentioned before. For my own part I was never privy to any such Negotiations,
and therefore can say nothing of it of my own particular knowledge; but for the
reasons before mentioned, and others, besides common report upon the
Observation of the course of our Affairs, I make no question of it. And this I
can say, that when not long since I recommended a Person, who was a stranger to
me, but I understood by others, and by a Certificate under his Captains hand,
had behaved himself well in the last Eagagement, and deserved Preferment, to a
Noble Lord, to be by him recommended to the Commissioners of the Admiralty, I
understood by him that such Recommendations were not well taken there. Which, I
confess, looks to me as a sign of some Sinister Respects too prevalent amongst
them; for otherwise such Recommendation of such Persons is a thing desirable
for the Service of the King and Kingdom. And I hope the late Miscarriages at
Sea will make this business be more narrowly looked into for the future: For I
cannot think that Torrington alone could ever have done so great Mischief, if
there had not been others too ready to comply with him. And to conclude this
matter, I look upon Insatiable Desire of the superfluous things of the World to
be one of the great Corruptions of all sorts of People of this Nation at this
time, and a principal Impediment of generous Actions for the Public Good, even
in those who are otherwise Wellwishers to it.

They, who have so little sense of the Concerns of their Country, as to
dispose of Public Places and Offices of Trust for private Gain to themselves,
will be apt to do as much for Favor and Affection to their private Friends and
Relations, without regard to their Merit or Qualifications for the Service of
the Public. But besides these, there is another sinister Respect, which is
very prevalent upon many, who it may be scorn to take Money upon any such
account, and usually imposes upon them under the Appearance of Service to the
Public, to the King and Government, and that is Faction. This has had no
small share in the introducing of many very ill men into Employments, and
keeping out many very good, cordially affected to the Government, and as well
qualified for the Service; and by these, and other Means besides, has been a
principal Occasion of retarding our Progress, and of the Disappointments we
have met with.

This Nation has been long pestered with a Combination of two pernicious
Factions, and from them and the Principles of their generation, has lately
upon the late Revolution proceeded a third; and that the most dangerous of all:
So that now it is become a Tripple Faction, a Beast with three Heads, according
to the Sacred Representations of such things. The two former were the Old Court
Faction, and the Old Church Faction. The third, which has risen of late, do
most of them agree with the former in other matters; but being persuaded that
King James could not any way forfeit his Right, nor did really abdicate it,
believe he has still a Right; and yet not satisfied to sit still and enjoy
their Estates, their Rights, their Religion, and their Consciences under the
present Settlement in quiet, and be thankful to God for their Deliverance from
those dangerous Conspiracies which began to be put in practice, (as diverse
worthy Persons, who have otherwise the same sentiments with themselves do,)
will needs engage in such Employments as oblige them to act in Council, or in
War against him, whom notwitstanding they believe to be their King de Jure: And
thus while they own two Masters, and cannot possibly serve both, they are in
great danger to serve neither faithfully.

As to the disposing of Places, they all agree in this, to keep out all they
can, who are not of their Party, though otherwise never so cordial Friends to
K. William and Qu. Mary, and the present Settlement, never so zealous for the
Common Cause, never so well qualified for the Service, never so Pious and
Virtuous, if they be not of the Party or Faction: But be they but zealous for
the interest of their Party, tho they be never so vicious, debauched or
profane; never so empty and shallow, never so blustering and inconsiderate,
never so meanly qualified, they shall be embraced as honest Men, nay, as good
Church of England Men, and recommended to serve not only in Parliament, (for
which there are none now who think not themselves sufficiently qualified) but
other Employments of greatest weight and moment. And while they all agree to
keep out all that are not of their party, this new Faction take care to bring
in as many as they can of theirs; that is, such as acknowledging King James his
Right still to remain and continue, are not satisfied to enjoy their own in
quiet, but for their own advantage will pretend and undertake to act against
him. By these means is the King and Kingdom deprived of the Service of a great
part of the best and most serviceable of the People: and our Offices and Places
are filled with Persons of no Worth, or of as little Affection to the Service;
and such as are apt upon occasion by secret Services, to ingratiate themselves
with King James; and so wise, as not to disoblige him by overacting to his
prejudice, when they can with any color avoid it. And how any great Work
managed by people so affected to it, is like to succeed, is no hard matter to
guess.

That this is plainly our Case, cannot, I am persuaded, but be casily perceived
by all Parties; by some with no little satisfaction, and by others with no less
Indignation and Trouble, to see so Noble, and at first so prosperous a Cause,
thus obstructed and disappointed by a mixture of vicious and careless, and of
treacherous and unfaithful People; while others, who are both serious and
heartily affected to it, are kept out of the Service. But how it may most
effectually be helped, is not so easily apprehended, nor well understood. Two
or three things there are which may be proposed with a great deal of Reason,
and I confess do deserve to be well considered; yet if we look no farther, I am
well satisfied, will either never be effected, or if they be, will never of
themselves produce the Effects expected from them.

The first is, that the King, who has so far exposed his own Royal Person to
danger for us, and for the common Cause of the Confederates, may not be longer
deprived of the Service of such as are his sincere Friends, and ready to do the
like for him, for it, and for the whole Nation, by a superfluous clause in the
letter of the Law, no way necessary to the declared scope of it. I mean the
Stat. 25. Car. 2. c. 2. which among other things enacts, That all and every
Person and Persons so to be admitted as aforesaid, shall also receive the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper according to the usage of the Church of England,
within three months after his or their Admittance in, or receiving their said
Authority and Employment, in some public Church, upon some Lord's Day,
commonly called Sunday, immediately after Divine Service and Sermon. This Act
was made for preventing Dangers, which then might happen from Popish Recusants,
as appears by the Ti^^e, is declared in the very beginning of the Act, and is
emphatically expressed by the words Popish Recusants, which restrain it to them
alone of all Dissenters. And though there be some words, as, according to the
usage of the Church of England, and, in some Public Church, which restrain the
admittance to Conformists only; yet it is plain, that that restraint neither
was necessary, nor was designed by the Act for that purpose, or in order to
that end: and therefore considering the Practice of those Times, it is not to
be doubted but they were put in partly by the Papists, to divide the
Protestants in that as well as in matters of Religion, that so they might have
a party of Protestants in the same condition with themselves, which was a very
common Policy among them, and partly by the Faction, that they might ingross
all. And though at that time it might be thought fit to let it pass so, rather
than hazard the loss of the Bill; yet now that we have a Prince whom we may
safely trust, and great Reason to unite our whole strength against the common
Enemy, not to remove that Obstacle by so easy an Expedient, as instead of
according to the usage of the Church of England, in some Public Church, to
make it in some solemn or Public Assembly of Protestants, and the Certificates
to be by the Persons who administer, and three or four credible Persons of the
Assembly, or something to the like effect; may be thought in them who oppose
it, an argument of greater affection to the late King James, than to the
present King William, and to the Papists or the Faction, than to the true
Protestant Interest, since such an alteration does not in the least impede the
design of the Act so fully as before declared.

Another is, That we do not entangle our selves in our own Policies, by
stooping to little Arts and pieces of vulgar Craft, but proceeding steadily
upon Principles of Justice, Humanity, and true Wisdom, unnecessarily exasperate
none, give all fair and reasonable Terms, Conditions and Benefits that can be
desired to all; but never expose a good Cause by so mean Compliance, as to
commit matters of great Trust and weight to such as are not entirely for it,
but whose declared Principles make such a Condescension as little honorable as
safe. To be plain, the People of this Nation being divided in Opinion upon the
late Revolution, part holding that the Right of the late King James, by his own
Actions, and the Declaration thereupon of the Lords and Commons, by their
Representatives fairly chosen, is fully determined, and that the Royal
Authority is justly and effectually, to all intents and purposes transferred to
the present King and Queen; but others being of opinion that King James is
still King de Jure, and King William only King de Facto: These last are again
divided among themselves into two or three parties; one part being satisfied to
live peaceably and quietly under the present Government, but not to swear
Allegiance to the present King, nor act under him against the former; another
part being zealous for the restoring of King James: And a third of such, who
though they declare their Opinion, that King James is still King de Jure, yet
make no scruple to act under the present King, not only in little matters, but
in such matters of State and War, wherein they must either act directly against
him, whom they acknowledge to have the Right, or else be false to him who
entrusts 'em. And this is the Party that I mean: whom because I cannot see how
in Conscience they can act as they do, I cannot see how in prudence they can be
trusted. And therefore I should think it no hard or unreasonable matter to
secure the Government against all the Dangers which may arise from Men of those
Principles; for if they may freely enjoy not only their own private Rights, but
also all such public Employments and Preferments, as are confirment with their
Principles for them to execute, which is as much as in Honesty and Conscience
they can desire, or in Honor and Prudence can be committed to them, they have
no reason to complain, but rest satisfied therewith, and thankful to God for
his Deliverance from a worse condition: and those, who professing these
Principles are yet not satisfied with all that, may justly be suspected as
Persons either of vain and ambitious minds, or of turbulent and ill Designs,
and therefore not to be admitted to any public Employment at all, or to be
discharged if already in any such. For these are the Men whom I apprehend to
have been the most effectual Remora's in our Proceedings, and chief Occasions,
or Instruments in all our Disappointments.

And indeed I have all along from the beginning looked upon a certain
Condescension to a Compliance with some of this Party, to be one of the first
false Steps which have been made since the beginning of the Revolution; and a
Daubing, into which we were Betrayed by the pedantick Policies of some, who had
special reason to have made better use of a good Caution against it; a thing of
so pernicious Consequence to his Majesty, that I look upon the Miscarriage of
Torrington to be but a Trifle in comparison to it, and as inconsistent with
true Divinity, as with true Policy. Poor Prince! how did my Heart ache for him
about that time, though I knew not what was the matter. But Princes are Men,
and subject to the like Infirmities with other Men; and to such Oversights as
bring many times much Trouble and Disturbance after them. But what Error in
Divinity was here committed, I will leave to the Consideration of those, whose
Office it was to have discerned and given faithful Notice of it, rather than
prove a Temptation, and mislead into it; though I doubt the fault here in this
will be as little understood, as was that in the Order of the Parliament for
the Thanksgiving by the Vindicator. For when Men's Minds are much intended to
the things of the World, and bigg with the acquest of them, they are usually
thereby too much diverted and clouded to discern, and be of quick Understanding
in such matters, be the importance thereof what it will: But for the Error in
Policy, since we feel so much of it, I think it greatly concerns the King and
Kingdom, that it be well underderstood, and speedily redressed. By that one
Condescension which I mentioned before, was much of that great Authority, and
true Majesty, which the special Providence of God had conferred upon his
Instrument, and was really a Talent to be wisely used, unhappily lost and
subjected to a Party not entire for his Interest: For thereby was the whole
Party, whereof many were doubtful before, greatly confirmed, and animated, and
raised above their Expectations and themselves. Nor was this all: for this made
others, who were not otherwise of the Party, seeing the Stream run so strong
that way, presently fall in with them: So that their numbers were thereby
increased by the concurrence of many, who regarding only which side was most
prevalent, would as readily have joined with those, who being fully satisfied
with the Justice of the Cause, and of the Proceedings, were cordial and entire
Friends to it, had they appeared as powerful in Favor at the Court. And this,
as it made them appear more considerable to others, so that, when they observed
it made them still more confident to promote such Persons and Things, as, if
thoroughly examined, will be found to have been more for the Service of the late
King James, and the French King, than of the present King, and the
Confederates. Not only such, as were heretofore Creatures of the late King, but
such as few thought well affected to this, and are believed to have really done
no little Service to the former, and Disservice to this, by unfaithful
Management, have been first recommended, and afterward secured, even from the
effectual Proceedings of the Parliament it self. And this again has produced
another mischievous Consequence, that generally such as depend upon their
Employments, observing how all Miscarriages are covered, and either wholly
vindicated, or greatly extenuated, and the Agents protected and secured, they
dare not speak out what they know, for fear of disobliging not only this
powerful Party, but even the Criminals themselves. And as foul and gross a
Miscarriage as this has been of the late Admiral at Sea, it is generally
believed by such as converse much with Seamen, that many are afraid to
disoblige him if they should speak out. In these Observations I might proceed
one step further; but I think fit to stop here, this being sufficient to
demonstrate to any man of sense, in how dangerous a Condition the King and
Queen are, of being delivered up as an Expiatory Sacrifice to their Enemies,
and these Nations of being involved in Blood and Confusion; and from whence all
this Danger comes. And though other Instances might be given of such Counsels
and Proceedings as were of dangerous Consequence, and mischievous to the King
and his Interest; yet I desire not to exasperate or aggravate things
unnecessarily, this which I have said being alone sufficient to evince the
Error of that Policy, from which all has proceeded.

It makes me many times think of the Subtle Policies of King James the First,
who thought by his King-craft to have outdone all the World, but was in most
matters of moment overreached himself. Just such has proved this daubing
Policy of some conceited Politicians, impatient of delay in some expected
Preferments, who unhappily mislead the King at his first coming into so
dangerous and unsafe a Tract, and being better skilled in the Theory of vulgar
Policy, than in the Practice of that which is solid and substantial, by
over-doing have undone all, and built upon so false and sandy a Foundation, as
will bring all into Confusion, unless it be speedily prevented by some very
good and effectual Means. For otherwise as we have been betrayed all along, we
are like still so to be, till both King and Kingdom be surpised and involved
in some such Mischiefs as aforesaid. This, it is plain to all, who have Wit
enough to perceive it, and Honesty enough to confess it, was very near to have
been our Case this Summer, had not the special Providence of God interposed and
prevented it, by preserving both the Kings Person, and our Fleet, from the
nearest approaches of Destruction that could be. A Deliverance, perhaps, if
well understood, and considered in all its Circumstances, not inferior to
those of the Spanish Invasion, and Gunpowder Treason. And I wish we may be
wise, strengthen our selves indeed, and mark and see what we do: for at the
Return of the Year, those Syrians, if they find still such Encouragement from
home, will certainly again come up against us.

But what are these Good and Effectual Means, by which all this Mischief may be
prevented? Why, that also I will endeavor by the Grace of God to declare
plainly. And the plain truth is, it is mere Brutishness and Stupidity not to
look further than all this, and perceive a Precedent effectual Cause, to which
a proper application must be made, before any Relief or Amendment can be had;
and which, till that be done, will rankle, fester, and produce still worse
symptoms upon the use of whatever other Means we can think of. For all this is
of God, who has the Hearts of all Men in his Hand, and has done admirably in
all these things, has corrected us but in mercy, and given us fair warning. He
preserved our Fleet from surprise and sudden Destruction, when at anchor in St.
Hellens Bay, the French were so near as Fresh Water Bay before they knew it:
And he preserved the King's Person, when he yet suffered a Cannon Bullet to
come so very near as to touch him. He gave him a very Glorious Victory at Land,
and yet again so ordered it, that he should suffer a great Diminution of all
that Glory, by a baffle of his Fleet at Sea, and of his Army at Land against
Lymerick; whereas he could easily have prevented both if he had pleased; I wish
both King and People may lay these things to Heart, and consider wisely what is
fit to be done, least the next Buliet may be permitted, instead of the Skin to
take the Heart, and the next Engagement instead of Baffles, bring Confusion
upon the Nation: It is dangerous dallying in this Case, and dangerous trifling
in Sacred Things. I will not repeat what I have said before in my Reflections
upon the Occurrences of the last Year; indeed I need not, for I have too much
new Matter to mention. Nor does it belong to me to enquire what has been done
in pursuance of the King's Pious and Prudent Letter to the Bishop of London,
and the other Bishops; for that belongs to them to do. But this I will say,
though it make the Ears of all pious People that hear it to tingle, if by any
means I may raise up a better Spirit in the Nation, and shame the great Men of
it into better Manners in time, to prevent a more severe Correction. I had a
Message sent me by a very Pious and Reverend Divine of the Church of England,
That it was desired by diverse of the Bishops, that I would prepare a Bill for
them for an Act of Parliament, for more effectual correcting of the notorious
Sins and Vices of this Nation. Who those Bishops were, I was not told, nor was
it material; but I could not but readily embrace so pious a Motion, and
therefore presently set to work, drew up a foul Draught, and advised first with
some private Friends of good Ability, and at last with diverse of the Judges,
who were then in Town, about it. The Sins and Vices were the same which were
expressed in that good Letter before mentioned of the King to the Bishop of
London, and the Preamble most of it in the words, and to the effect of that
Letter; and the Punishments such as are warranted by the Laws of God and Man;
and being fair transcribed it was delivered to a very good Bishop, who was
spoken to by the Bishop of London to Preach before the Lords the Fast Day
before Easter: The good Man labored with much Zeal to promote it, and intended
to have recommended it to their Lordships at their House, before they went to
Church, as the most proper time that could be; but the Lords neither met at
their House, nor came to the Abbey Church, as is usual upon such Occasions, in a
Body (though an Omission apt to be imputed to want of Devotion to God in some,
and of Affection to the Cause in others;) and therefore being disappointed in
that, the next time they met he acquainted them with the Bill, and desired
Leave to bring it into the House, which was granted indeed, but the Motion so
entertained by some, that the most Prudential of our Bishops advised not to
venture the reading of it till a more favorable time, least it should be
rejected; and their Authority kept it out at that time, and I doubt will be apt
to do the like at any other, unless this plain dealing can help it, and
therefore I think fit to consider this Matter a little further.

And First, here is matter of very serious and sad Consideration, that Vice and
Wickedness should be so prevalent among the Nobility of this Nation, that the
whole Body of the Bishops of the Church of England should not dare to offer to
bring in a Bill for the Reformation thereof, least it should be rejected. And
if our Nobility be come to that Degree of Obstinacy and Impudence in Sin and
Wickedness, and Infatuation and Folly, as to outface the Gravity and Authority
of our Bishops, and that not severally, but when assembled together, and in so
solemn an Assembly, what good can we expect from them; but rather that they
should provoke the Judgments of God upon themselves and the whole Nation, for
the Chastisement of that which does so outface all Humane Authority?

Secondly, It is matter of as serious and sad Consideration, that the Bishops
of the Church of England should be sunk so low in their Authority, be become so
mean in that Esteem and Veneration with the People, which used to be paid to
Persons in that Sacred Function, and should retain so little of true Christian
Generosity and Magnanimity, as that the whole Body of them in such an Assembly
should not be able by their Gravity and weighty Admonitions to awe and confound
the Malapertness of a few inconsiderate Noblemen, if any such should appear,
though with the concurrence of diverse of the Temporal Lords, which doubtless
would not be wanting; and in case the leading Men among them did dislike that
Bill or any thing in it, that they who dislike it, should have so little Zeal
for the Honor and Service of God, the good of this Church and Nation, and the
Reputation of their own Order, as not of themselves to provide a better before
this time.

Thirdly, And this opens a very sad, but useful and necessary Prospect to all
the sincere and serious Friends of the Church of England; whereby we may come
to a better understanding both of our own Communion, and of the Dissenters; and
of our Behavior toward them, what it has been, and what it ought to be. For
our own Communion, we see here that which may correct and humble us for our
vain magnifying of our Church above all others, and our despising; villifying
and disturbing our Brethren, who are in many respects better than our selves;
and how properly applicable that Admonition of the Faithful Witness to the
Church of the Laodiceans is to us, Rev. 3.17. Thou say I am rich, and
increased with goods, and have need of nothing; and know not that thou art
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: And what reason we
have to fear least that Judgment denounced against them, be inflicted upon us,
who are so little behind them in the same fault: Because thou art lukewarm, and
neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out: For here we see the chief of our
Clergy and the chief of our Laity in one of our most solemn Civil Assemblies;
and if we look into those which should be Sacred Assemblies, we cannot deny but
that they are generally greatly profaned: For all these Persons, of whom our
whole Body of Bishops are so afraid, are all Members of our Church; not only
admitted into it by Baptism, but freely admitted to the most sacred Rites in
it. And as much overspread with Vice, Profaneness and Debauchery as this
Nation is, all is received with a full torrent into our Church: So that there
is scarce a notorious scandalous Person in the whole Nation, but is of our
Communion; and if he be a Person of Quality, and Zealous for the Church,
Complemented and Treated even by our Bishops themselves. Such is the Discipline
of our Church, the end of which among the ancient Christians was to preserve
the Honor and Integrity of our Holy Profession; but so little of that have we
remaining among us, that that Popish Relic which we have of Discipline, does
rather increase, what the genuine Christian Discipline would cure.

We are guilty of a like neglect in our Worship; only it is not peculiar to us,
but common to all the Reformation, which is very defective in that respect. Nor
is there any Excuse for us, that I know of, but Ignorance, which is shameful
enough among Men pretending so much to Learning: But if we can but purchase a
little more Humility, Modesty, and Condescension to the Infirmities of our
Brethren, by it, it will be well. I do not know of any Church in the World,
from the Passion of our Savior to the time of the Reformation, where the
Celebration of that blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, was not a part (as it
is the peculiar part of the Christian Worship) of their ordinary public
Worship of God, insomuch that it was commonly called Sacrificium quotidianum
their daily Sacrifice: The Principal Uses of it are: 1. A solemn Act of
Recognition of our Redemption, and of the Dominion of our Savior thereby
acquired over us. 2. A Representation of the Passion of our Savior to God the
Father in our solemn Assemblies, as effectual to all intents and purposes in
the Churches of the Gentiles, as were any or all the Sacrifices of the Jews
under the Law. 3. A Spiritual Communion between God and the Souls of the
Faithful, as real as was that between our Savior and the faithful Woman, who
touched his Garment, when he felt Virtue go out of him. 4. A Sacred Communion
and Confederation between the Faithful themselves: And where all this is
neglected, what can it be imputed to, but either want of Devotion and of a
grateful Sense of our Redemption, and a supine Neglect of our own greatest
Concern; or Infidelity and Ignorance, which, as I said, is the best, though
sufficiently shameful, excuse we can make? In the Greek Church where this
Neglect first began, as is noted by St. Ambrose, and much complained of by
Chrysostom, it was followed with dismal Contentions, Divisions and Confusions:
And I am of opinion, that not only the great Decay of Christian Piety, but the
unhappy Divisions of our Church, may be imputed to this Neglect among us, as
one principal Cause. And I am well satisfied that our want of a daily Christian
Sacrifice among us is one of the principal Prejudices, which hinder the
Reconciliation of the best of the English Papists to us; which would be much
more easy, if that and two or three more Points of Controversy were but a
little better looked into and settled. But our Second Service, as we use it,
with no little inconvenience in many Churches, is peculiar to us, a Novelty,
such as was once introduced in France, and called Missa sicca, and Missa
nautica, but soon exploded as a jejune and barren thing; and bears witness
against us for our neglect of that, without which our Liturgy or Service in the
Judgment of Learned Men, and of Bishop Andrews in particular, is imperfect.
Besides, our Offices and Collects are defective, and not sufficient for all
occasions (as may be perceived by the Bills which are daily put up to the
Readers) or to express the Devotion of many pious Souls in the ordinary Service.

For the Doctrine of the Church of England declared in our Articles, it is
certain that most of the Dissenters are as much for it as those of our
Communion, and more than diverse of them are; and therefore I need say nothing
of that. But much of the Doctrine which has been taught too often in our
Churches since the Return of King Charles the Second, with a great deal of
confidence, has been so far from the genuine Christian Doctrine, that it tends
very much to the Subversion thereof; to divert People from the Life and Power
of Religion by reproachful Imputation of Fanaticism and Enthusiasm; from the
strict conscientious observance of it by the like reproachful terms of Bigottry
and Presbyterianism; and to introduce instead of the Spiritual Life and
Heavenly Conversation of genuine Christians, a kind of superficial Formality
and Pharisaical Morality, abstaining indeed from gross, scandalous Sins, which
any Man of sense would do for his own Reputation; but leaving the Soul as much
immersed in terrene Affections, as if those eminent Virtues of Humility,
Contempt of the Word, Heavenly-mindedness, Devotion to God and universal
Charity to all sort of Men, so much studied and practiced by the Ancient
Christians, were things rather to be pitied in them as weakness, or unnecessary
trouble, or Superstition, than imitated by us.

Of our Clergy, I thank God, we have many of good Learning, Virtue and Piety;
Men of Moderation and Charity to all Men, but especially to all serious and
pious Christians, though of different opinions concerning many things disputed
in matters of Religion; and well content they should quietly enjoy the freedom
of their Religion, and Civil Rights, and serve their Country, and be admitted
into the Communion and Service of our Church upon as easy terms as may be. But
there are again, no small part who are grossly scandalous, or, if not so grossly
scandalous, yet make a Trade of Divinity, apply themselves to it as others do
to Trades and Civil Professions, to get their Living, Estates and Preferments
by it; preach indeed and read Prayers, if they cannot keep Curates; but have
little care more of the Souls committed to their charge, and therefore never
scruple at any charge though never so great, so the Profits to their Purse be
but great; and though not so grossly scandalous, give great offense to People of
the higher Ranks and Parts, by their eager and insatiable pursuit of
Preferments; and thereby tempt them to suspect that they believe not themselves
the Doctrine which they preach, as I was not long since upon such an occasion
told by a Person of great place and parts, that he thought them all Atheists;
which though, I suppose, more than he did indeed believe, yet shows how apt it
is to tempt Men to it, and I doubt not but prevails with some: And however that
be, it is certainly so great a temptation and incentive to Worldly-mindedness,
Covetousness, Pride and Ambition, that it utterly disables them to preach with
any Life and Success, against those Vices and Sins, which though not so
scandalous in vulgar Reputation as some others, are not less ensnaring to Souls
and pernicious to States and Human Societies. And indeed a great part of our
Clergy are plainly infected and overspread with Formality and Pharisaism,
almost in all the instances of it except the best, that is, Zeal for making
Proselites. But as to that, I doubt the whole Church of England has much to
answer for before God, who has left them destitute of no Means or Opportunity
to propagate the Gospel to the remotest parts of the World, yet have they not
all equalled what has been done by one single Gentleman, a Layman. Nay, even
at home; neither in England, Scotland or Ireland is the Gospel yet so thoroughly
planted, but that vast Fields may be truly said to lie still uncultivated. And
if we enter a little farther we shall see yet greater Abominations than these,
even in this great and populous City: What great numbers of People have we, who
have either no Parish-Churches to repair to, or not capacious enough to receive
them? and what numbers of Clergymen walking about the Streets seeking for
Employment? and some to my knowledge in great straits and necessities; (I could
say more, but I forbear) while the Fat of the Land is engrossed and devoured by
others; ill Husbandmen certainly, who will not provide Laborers, because they
are not willing to pay their Wages. But what does our Church in this case? Why
are not such Persons as will undertake great Charges, more than one, or two, or
more can sufficiently discharge, for the sake of great Revenues, admonished of
their Duty, what in Conscience they ought to do, by our Bishops in their
Visitations? Are they only the Canons of the Church, and the Laws of the Land
that the Bishops of our Church are to act by? Are the Admonitions of our
Bishops in Matters of Duty and Conscience of so little Authority with our own
Clergy, unless we have Canon or Statute to compel Conformity? And in case the
Revenues of such a place be not sufficient to maintain Laborers enough, where
is the Piety and Charity of our dignified Clergy, and the Use of our ample
Revenues in our Church, that we have no Evangelists sent out and maintained at
the charge of the Church to supply these and the like occasions? And where we
see so little Charity to the Souls of Men, what wonder is it if their Piety and
Devotion to God be proportionable? If they invite not others to the daily
worship of God in public, when we see it so rarely frequented by themselves?
Nay not used in many Churches but Sundays; or Sundays, Wedness days and
Fridays; or not at such hours as some of their charge, and such as they ought
to have a special care of-can only have for that service, without they will be
at the charge themselves to hire a Reader on purpose? and perhaps not so much
as that permitted without much entreaty nor enjoyed without disturbance
sometimes? as if Preaching were all their work, and Hearing all that is
necessary for the People; or common Civility all their Religion; but daily
presenting our selves before God to worship him in public, and assembling our
selves together in such holy Worship, to animate one another thereunto, and
beget and confirm mutual Charity and Piety, was not part of that Practice,
which is the very End of Preaching and Hearing. And what wonder if such
instruct not as they ought, and press not their People to frequent the most
solemn and peculiar part of our Christian Worship, and then to excuse their own
neglect falsely accuse their People, and charge it upon them?

More I might say, but I need say no more, nor have I said so much with any ill
mind, but besides other good Ends for the real Service of this Church, and the
good of those, who perhaps will some of them be offended at it, if there be any
so void of Piety and Consideration: That we may better know our selves, and be
humbled for what we really are, and not vainly vaunt of what we are not: That
finding our selves so faulty, we may learn more Moderation toward our
Brethren; lest by too severely judging them, instead of judging our selves as
we ought, we provoke the Judgment of God upon us; especially when we our selves
give the occasions of what we quarrel with them for, by a Phrisaical Exaction
of things not necessary, instead of Christian Condescension to the Infirmities
of the weak; by Pharisaical Persecution of Nonconformity to the Orders of Men,
and at the same time permitting notorious contempt of the Laws of God by our
own Members without check or control, or scarce serious resentment; by driving
them by our Profanation and want of Discipline from our Assemblies, and yet
like Madmen laboring by the unnatural means of Force to compel them thereunto:
(A Fanaticism indeed, justly to be charged upon many, who falsely charge it upon
others) For it is a truth too notorious to be denied, that we have few
Christian Assemblies, but those of the Dissenters, which can properly be called
Holy; being generally all profaned by scandalous Members, and most of all those
of our Chathedrals, even by scandalous Ministers, who officiate in the Choirs,
the exercise of our Discipline not extending so far as to the Reformation of
them who are so near at home. Lastly, that all serious, pious, virtuous and
considerate Men, who are true Lovers of their Country, may have a right
Information concerning these things; and seeing deeper into this Mystery of
Iniquity, may no longer suffer themselves to be abused and made Tools to
support a pernicious Faction of Men, who for their own worldly advantage cry
aloud for the Church, as if it was in danger by others, when they themselves do
most of all endanger it, by the Animosities, whereby they divide it, and the
Formality and Profanation, whereby it is exposed, to the great offense of many
serious and pious People; but as becomes wise Men and understanding Christians,
taking these things into serious consideration, apply our selves in good sober
sadness to the proper means to preserve both Church and State, that is, to
prevent the Judgments of God, which are otherwise like to overturn both by a
speedy and substantial Reformation, by sincerly seeking a Reconciliation with
our Brethren, whom we have offended by our Scandals and harsh and uncharitable
dealings, and all unite as fellow Christians and Compatriots, and join all our
strength and forces first to suppress and exterminate the Common Enemy at home,
our reigning Sins of Profaneness, Debauchery and Contempt of the Gospel, and
then select the most proper, the most faithful and best qualified, for Council,
Conduct, Industry and Courage, of what ever Rank, Degree or Profession they be,
if sober and virtuous, to employ both for management at home, and against our
Enemies abroad. Then may we hope to prosper, but not till then: For as the
Miscarriages of Princes often bring Mischiefs upon the People, so do the Sins
and Wickedness of the People as often bring Crosses and Disappointments upon
the most hopeful Enterprises of the best of Princes; not only as natural
Consequences, but by the special Judgments of God. And this brings me to my
next Observation upon that business of the Bill. And therefore,

Fourthly, This Prudential Advice, which prevailed to lay aside that Bill till
a more favorable time, may satifie us of the truth of what I mentioned in my
former Reflections modestly, and only as matter of suspicion, viz. That the
King had not been faithfully dealt with in a matter of the same nature, and of
great moment to himself, in respect of a special Duty incumbent upon him by a
special Obligation, as well as to the Nation. For as we see plainly that the
same Prudential Considerations prevailed in both, so there is no reason to
doubt but they came from the same Author; and if my Information fails me not,
these were not the only times they did so. I am sorry that this vain Worldly
Wisdom, which is Foolishness with God, should be so deeply imbibed by such as
should understand better things, and I doubt will one day be called to account
for it. But I do not a little rejoice to see that so plainly, which I hope may
mitigate much of the Offense in the King though it light so much the heavier
somewhere else. For I am so well satisfied that neither of these Prudential
Advices, which I have mentioned, are consistent either with true Policy or
sound Divinity, or free from such Sin, as does usually provoke at least smart
Corrections, that I dare undertake to make it good against the Author or
Authors of them, whoever he or they are. But as this is no proper place to add
more to what I have said already on that Subject; so I hope the fair
Admonitions, which our own Experience has already given us, will make it
needless. And therefore without further Reflections upon what is past, we are
now to look forward what is now to be done, and what are those Good and
Effectual Means to set us free from this impedited and enchanted Condition.

And the first thing to be done is to lay a good Foundation to secure the
Favor and Blessing of the Divine Providence; which alone can make all go on
prosperous and smooth, and very succesful; but without it, all other, the most
proper means that can be proposed, will still prove ineffectual and abortive,
and be retarded with perpetual cross Accidents and Disappointments; nay prove
themselves occasions of Mischief. And this in truth has been our Case, whether
it has been understood or not, from our first Attempts of reducing Ireland.
Miscarriages in Persons employed and entrusted I easily allow to be the
immediate Causes: But it is a superficial Inspection that can see no farther
into the Matter: The Original Cause lies a step or two farther back; but we are
here only to look forward: Therefore in short, the only true way, to obtain or
secure the Favor and Blessing of God, is to remove the Cursed Thing which has
all this while interposed and withheld them from us. And it must be begun by a
speedy, resolute and effectual Reformation of the great Impiety and Wickedness
of the Nation; and this must be begun by the King himself, and in another
manner than is yet done. His Letter to the Bishops is a good and pious Letter;
but what good it has done I know not. The Bishops I know, talked of other
Letters also of their own; but I see them not, or any good Effect of either.
But the King has a Civil Power, which must be exerted. It is his Office and
Duty, To see the Laws duly executed; and when he finds that neglected, to send
out his special Command to require and enjoin the due Execution of them; and to
punish or displace such as are Negligent and Remiss, and put others in their
places, who will more faithfully discharge their Duty. It is his Duty also to
recommend to the Parliament to make further Provision for such Laws as he finds
wanting to supply the Defects of those we have already: And it is likewise His
Duty, as well as His Wisdom to encourage Virtue and Piety, and discountenance
Vice and Wickedness, by the dispensation of his Favors, and demonstration of
his Displeasure accordingly. All this is most certainly his Duty, and if he
does not faithfully discharge it both to God and to the Nation, he cannot
expect either the Blessing of God or the faithful Concurrence of the People
with him. But because I find no reason to doubt of his own good Inclinations to
so good a Work, I see but two things further necessary to be noted to this
Purpose: The one, that he beware of, and banish from his Presence such Persons,
especially Clergymen, as he has found, either evil Counselors or false
Guides, in a Matter of so apparent Duty and great Importance to himself and the
Nation. The other, that he likewise beware, (and to that purpose give
encouragement to faithful Informations) that he partake not in the sins of the
late Kings, by setting up notorious Examples of Vice and Wickedness in Honor
or great Places. And upon this Occasion I cannot but take Notice of what I have
been told, by one who said he was present, that two of the Principal Officers
of our Fleet, (whom he Named) before the late Engagement, when they had
received the Sacrament to qualify them for their Employment, entertained
themselves at Dinner with pleasant Discourse of what Women and whose Wives they
had Debauched: And it is reported that a Person notorious over all England for
the like Injury, with some aggravation to a Person of Quality, is lately put
into a great Place in Ireland. Such impious Persons, who glory in their Impiety
and Contempt of Religion, ought to be abominated and detested by all Men, as
Enemies of God and Men, and Associates of Devils and Cursed damned Spirits.
Shall a mortal Man be moved at an Affront or Contempt offered to his Father or
his Friend, tho absent; and shall not all Men (even the Mob, as we call them,
who have more Steddiness, Constancy and Virtue, than a great part of our
Nobility and Gentry have had of late) express their Indignation against those,
who shall dare thus to Contemn and Affront the great and glorious Author of our
Being, upon whom we all continually depend, by such impudent Violation of his
righteous Laws? Be they Gentlemen or Noblemen, or what they will, they are ten
thousand times worse than the Dirt of the Streets, and ought to be trod upon by
the meanest of Humane Race. Nay, shall a King, who is but a mortal Worm, expect
Honor and Obedience, and Fidelity from his Fellow Creatures, and many of them
possibly upon a true estimate much better than Himself; and yet endure the
Majesty of Heaven, whose Deputy he is, to be so affronted, by those whom his
Divine Providence has subjected to his Power to be governed in all
Righteousness, and not exert the utmost of that Power, and use all means
possible to suppress them, tho it were to the hazard of twenty Kingdoms, and a
thousand Lives besides? Certainly Humane Nature, were it not mightily
corrupted, could not with any Patience endure such Contempt of our Creator and
Redeemer, and the Religion we profess. And besides all this, what good can we
expect with any Moral Assurance from People of so little Consideration and
Constancy, or Command of themselves, as to hazard their Souls, by prostituting
Religion to give Credentials to a vicious Prince, that they might more easily
obtain his Favor; or of so little Wit and Observation, as no better to
distinguish Times and Persons, but think this King must needs be such as
themselves are, or the former, that they impudently persist in the same wicked
Courses, and take this Liberty to affront Religion, which he professes, not in
show as the other did, but in reality? And therefore to conclude this Matter,
as it is the Kings Duty to remove such Abuses and scandalous Persons, it being
in his Power of himself to do it, so it is the Right of the Subject, and their
Duty too to God, to desire and demand it. For we cannot expect the Blessing of
God to be with us, 'till those Scandals and Abominations be removed, either by
the Reformation or Removal of the Persons, or by the Destruction of most of
them in a long continued War, without Honor to the King, or Satisfaction to
the People, 'till that be done. And I may be bold to say, it is desired and
expected of him, by all the Serious, Virtuous and Pious, (that is, the best,
and which will prove in conclusion the most prevalent Part) of the Nation.
Christianity will certainly revive here in a short time in its ancient Power
and Splendour; and nothing can be so glorious and advantageous to this King as
to be a vigorous Instrument in it.

This Foundation being well laid, we may proceed to the rest with Confidence of
the Divine Favor and Blessing upon us, and that no Opposition shall be able to
stand before us: And the next Business will be, to put the Management of our
Affairs into the hands of such as the King may reasonably Confide in, for their
Integrity and Affection to his Cause, and sufficient Qualifications for the
Employments committed to them. And this is a Duty which the King owes both to
the Kingdom, and to his Confederates in this great Cause, and he cannot in
Honor, no more than in Prudence do otherwise. Nay, I will say more, it is a
Duty, which he owes to God, whose Cause it is, who has raised him up to be his
Instrument in it, who has given him so great Experiments of his Conduct and
Protection, and is still ready to prosper him in it, provided he be faithful to
his Conduct, and do not dishonor him by relaxing his Confidence therein, and
yielding to the Temptation of vulgar Politics; which would but weaken his
Interest, and prove deceitful and a Snare to him. Fidelity of Soul to God is
the great business and exercise of all our Lives; but in them who are raised up
to be Instruments in any great Work, it is in a special manner required that it
be firm and steady, as becomes those who are experienced Masters in it, not
mutable and unstable like Novices and Learners. To this is required great
Courage and Vigor, grounded upon firm Trust and Confidence in the infallible
Wisdom and Power of God, with an entire resignation of the Event of all to his
Will: But there is also required true Wisdom to improve all Opportunities and
Advantages, and to avoid all Inconveniences, and truly to distinguish which are
which. And there is moreover required Righteousness, without which there can be
neither true Wisdom, whatever specious appearance it may have, nor Fidelity to
God; for it would be a departure from his Ways, and a Distrust of the
sufficiency of his Conduct, and a Dishonor to him. And whoever steps out of
his Way, will certainly entangle himself, and lose all his labor at the least.
Such courses shall never prosper, or bring a Man benefit, if they bring not
greater Mischief upon him. I speak of his good Instruments for good, and not of
his Instruments for Correction and Vengeance, such as Evil Spirits, and Evil
Men, whom he frequently lets loose to satisfy their own wicked Appetites for
punishment of others. I have already distinguished with relation to this
business four sorts of People in this Nation; one part who are zealous for
restoring of the late King James, and that these are not to be employed, I need
not use many words to demonstrate: but yet I think that they also are to be
distinguished; and that such of them as never submitted to this Government, but
appear fairly as Enemies, are to be treated no worse than Enemies of War, and
not as Traitors; but such as appear and act in public as Subjects, and yet
shall be found in secret Conspiracies against this Government, may justly be
dealt with as Traitors. Only thus much Favor I should be for ever for them;
that whereas I doubt not but there have been many this Summer actually engaged
in, or privy to a most dangerous Conspiracy, and that not only for their King
James, but under that pretense with the French, who are Enemies to their
Country; yet if they will confess how far they have been concerned in any such
matter, and either give sufficient assurance to submit and live peaceably for
the future, or declare themselves, and depart the Kingdom, they should be free
so to do: but they who will not, are to be looked upon as Traitors; and it is
part of that Fidelity which the King owes both to God, and to the People, who
entrusted him with the Government, to cause diligent and strict Enquiry to be
made into it, least we be involved in greater Michiefs before the next Summer
be over.

Another sort are such, who from some mistaken Notions of Government, which
they had unthinkingly imbibed, are persuaded that the late King James has
still a Right; but considering his Religion, and to whom he has subjected his
Conscience for Information and Direction, and what Confusions and Mischiefs
were thereby begun, and likely in time to have been brought upon these Nations,
and our Confederates, are sensible of the Providence and Mercy of God, in
sending us such a Deliverance; and therefore tho they will not foolishly and
ungratefully resist this gracious Providence of God, but are willing to enjoy
it in quiet; yet think fit not to stain or strain their Consciences in acting
against him, who they think has a Right. And these in my apprehension are
right honest Men, and deserve all the Favors and Kindness they can in reason
desire: And I shall endeavor in a more proper Place to do them some Service,
by showing them their Error; but I have no more to say of them here, in
relation to such Employments as I speak of, for like honest men they will not
accept them.

A third sort are of those, who have the same Opinion of the Right of King
James, that the former have, and will not recognize the present King and Queen
to be rightful King and Queen; yet make no scruple to swear Allegiance to them,
to act under their Authority, and not only so, but to act in Council and War
against him whom they believe to have the Right still, and they know has had
not long since the Possession also. I know very well that by our Laws what is
done for or against a King de Facto, is equally justifiable or punishable, as
if he was also King de Jure; and good reason there may be for it, viz. That
honest well-meaning People may not suffer for what they do in the sincerity of
their Hearts, believing it to be just and right, and, That the Peace of the
Kingdom may not be disturbed upon pretense of, or for the Right of a particular
Person, though King de Jure. But this just and reasonable Law, cannot, I doubt,
excuse, in foro Conscientiae, such as for private temporal respects, or
unnecessarily act against one whom they believe to have the Right, and to be
King de Jure. All honest Conscientious Men are very cautious, and not easily
persuaded to act in a doubtful Case, when without doubt they may lawfully
abstain; and therefore they who are easily persuaded to it upon a Prospect of
Preferment, may justly be suspected: But they who in such Case thrust
themselves forward, may be concluded to be Men of little Conscience, Honesty or
Honor: And therefore I am of Opinion that they, who believe in their
Conscience that the late King has yet a right to Reign, and that King William
and Queen Mary are only King and Queen de Facto, and therefore refuse and
oppose a Recognition of them to be rightful King and Queen, cannot in Honor
or Honesty act in Council or War in this Case. And for the same reason I am
also of Opinion, that neither can any Prince, who acts not as a private Man for
his own Interest, but as a public Person for a whole Society of Men, and, as
our present Case is, for the common Concern of diverse other Princes and People,
in Prudence or Honor commit any such Employment to any Person of that Opinion.
For it is plainly to tempt him first to be false to his own Conscience for the
sake of the Employment, and next to be false to him who employs him for the
sake of his Conscience: For no Man can long act vigorously and steddily,
reluctante Conscientia, and the Consideration that Right (that is, what he
takes to be so) may one day take place, will be a continual check upon him for
ever doing any considerable Service against it; and a continual Motive to
hearken to any probable Overtures for it. And this Consideration, that the King
cannot in Honor commit any such Employment to them, as things stand at
present, ought to be another Motive to them to abstain, even out of Respect to
the King, if they have any for him; and if they have not, he has the less
reason to employ them: But otherwise I would not have them abridged of the
least benefit of the Revolution that their Hearts can in reason desire.

These several sorts of Persons are most of them of the Nobility, Gentry,
Clergy, or Citizens of some particular Cities, or Officers in our Fleet and
Armies: But of all our Nobility, or however of our Gentry, Clergy and Citizens
of the several Cities of the Nation, I hope the greatest part by much, and our
Yeomanry, and the great Body of the People, and the Seamen, are beyond all
dispute generally all, entire for the present Settlement and Right of the
present King and Queen: And all these are also firm for the Protestant
Religion, and for the Common Good of the Nation, and for the Common Cause of
the Confederates. And therefore it is all the reason in the World that all
these, that is, the King and Queen, the Protestant Religion, the Common Good of
the Nation, and the Common Cause of all the Confederates, should have the
common and United Assistance of them all. Nor can I believe that any will
oppose it but such as are in truth, in the bottom, more hearty for a Party,
than for the Christian Religion; for a Faction, than for the common Good of the
Nation; for King James, than for King William; or for the Corruptions and
Abuses of Popery, than for the Purity and Power of the true Religion; and for
the Usurpations, Encroachments and Tyranny of the French Nimrod, than for the
just and noble Cause of the Confederates. And if this be true that I say, and I
be not greatly mistaken, it will hence follow that the King himself is obliged
in Prudence, in Justice and Honor to recommend the Removal of all Impediments,
by the Statutes of the two last Reigns, to the Parliament with all Earnestness;
and that he, being a Protestant Prince, has great reason to resent any
Opposition that shall be made to so necessary a Proposition; and to take Notice
of the Persons, and Places which send any of them, as such as are still so
levened with Faction, that they do not discern that the great Heats and
Animosities which have long disturbed this Nation, were principally occasioned
and heightened to serve the Interest of the Papists, or a mischievous Faction.
And since this Parliament was chosen before the Act of Pardon was passed, and
the Elections and Returns in many Corporations, (where were many Criminals,)
were made with great Heat and Faction by such as were concerned to save
themselves, and all the Interest they could make, (as appears in the many
Petitions before the Committee of Elections) if this Parliament will not agree
upon what is necessary for the Common Good, it may prove a good Expedient to
dissolve them and call another speedily, which probably may be chosen more
fairly and indifferently. And thus much I thought fit to add to what I had
mentioned before on the same Subjects, because they are matters of so great
Concern.

And now as to the special Qualifications of the Persons to be employed; this
poor Nation has been long in a very pitiful Condition in this respect, while
this, which ought principally to be regarded, has apparently been least and
last of all sought after: King Charles heartily favoring very few, who would
not either comply with him in his voluptuous Courses and Luxury, or serve him
either in his Illegal Projects and Designs, or in abusing the Nation out of
their Money; and King James as few, who would not one way or other serve the
Interest of Popery: And while these Princes studied only to serve themselves
and their own Humors, it is no wonder if they were served but by few who did
not the like, that is, more regarded their own private Gain and Advancement,
than the common Good of their Country. And though we have now a Prince of a
quite different Temper, who industriously and vigorously prosecutes the Public
Good not only of these Kingdoms, but of his Neighbors and Confederates also,
yet is he plainly under some difficulties by reason of the Persons he found in
Employments, and whose Qualifications he could not so well know 'till he had
some trial and experience of them: And therefore both the People of this
Nation, and our Confederates have great reason to bear patiently our
Disappointments hitherto, in great hopes to see things in a better posture
another Year.

But though this Experience may satisfy him of the Fidelity and good
Qualifications of many, and of the Unfitness of others to be employed or
trusted, yet will he stand in need of good Advice and Information concerning
others to supply their Places; and the more by reason of the great Corruption
of the Manners of this People by the last two Reigns, which has tainted them
(to say nothing here of other Immoralities) with Unfaithfulness, Greediness of
Gain, and narrow-soul'd Selfishness, under superficial Appearances and
plausible Pretenses, contrary to the true English Genius, which is plain,
honest, and trusty, and stout, hardy and industrious for the good of their
Country. And it is, I doubt, too true, that those who were nearest in Degree
or Employment to the Fountain of that Corruption, have been most infected by
it: So that two things seem very necessary for the King, in this respect
especially, and in his Case, as they are indeed always for all Princes, who
undertake great Enterprises: The one to have the best Information he can; the
other to use his own Liberty without confinement in the Choice of the fitest
Persons for his Service. These are both for his own Interest; and being no less
for the Interest of the Nation, they are also his Duty; so that no Man who is a
Friend either to him or his Country can be against it: And if due Care be
taken but to put the Navy and the Militia into good hands, I am well satisfied
that he has the great Body of the People so entire for him, that he may very
well despise all such Bugbear pretenses of the Power of any Persons or Parties,
as some have suggested and published in Print. Nay, and this which I say
(provided he make no Encroachment upon their Rights, and make but that
Inspection into Accounts, that they may see they are not unnecessarily burdened
with Taxes, and keep the Sea clear, and an open and free Trade) will certainly
more and more affect and unite the Hearts of all the People to him.

There are two things by which crafty Courtiers use to impose upon Princes,
(which in like manner are commonly practiced by unfaithful Servants with their
Masters of lower degree) and thereby greatly abuse both them and their People
for their own advantage. One is to divert them from too narrowly inspecting
Accounts and other Matters of State, by persuading them that it is below them
to trouble themselves much with such matters. Another is, to keep them as much
as may be from that Intelligence and Information of Affairs, which they might
have in a free and enlarged compass of Conversation, by persuading them that it
is below their Majesty to converse much with any below their Nobility. But as
no honest men will ever use or need such Arts, so never was any Prince Great
and Generous that would, or truly wise that could be so imposed upon. True
Majesty is a Composition of Rightful Power, real Magnanimity of Mind in
himself, and great Love and Esteem in the Hearts of a People, grounded upon
Intrinsic Worth and continual Communication thereof in studying and
industriously promoting the common Good and Welfare of a Nation. Without this
State and Grandeur, Guards and Ceremonies, and the External Ensigns of Majesty;
though they serve a little to awe and move admiration in rude and barbarous
People, yet among more intelligent People, such as are a great part of these
Nations, they rather move indignation and disdain, and serve but to alienate
their minds the more from them who unworthily use them. And indeed for any Man
much to regard them and pride himself in them, is a plain indication of a low
and narrow Soul, ignorant of the true valuation of things. For all the Pride of
Man is a lie, and the Product of Ignorance and Folly; whereas the Truth and a
right Understanding of the Worth and Use of things, cannot but produce at once
those noble Twins, the genuine Christian Humility and true Magnanimity, with
Contempt of those mean things which the vulgar and little-great Men of the
World admire. And besides by Affability and a more free Conversation a Prince
engages the Hearts of all; has a more free and unconfined Intelligence and
Information of things; has the greater awe upon such as are apt to impose upon
him; has an advantage to meet with better Instruments for his Service, than
are like to be recommended by the heads of any narrow Faction; and by the
Choice of such as are best deserving amongst all, raises an Emulation in
others to qualify themselves better for the Service of himself and their
Country: Whereas he who expects any great matter from these External Ensigns
of Majesty, without the Substance, will find it amount to no more in conclusion
than the admiration of the most rude and inconsiderable part of the People, and
that only while his Grandeur continues in its height, without any considerable
Diminution or Concussion.

But here I must put all such as have access to their Prince in mind of a great
Duty both to him and to their Country; that is, that laying aside all
Self-respect they conceal nothing from him which they think necessary for him
to know, and comes properly in their way to acquaint him with, though there may
be some Danger, that thereby they may incurr the Displeasure of some great
Courtier or Party. Every one will pretend that he is willing to venture his
Life and his Estate for his King and his Country, which is an indication that
most Men have a sense that it is their Duty so to do, as it is indeed: And were
those who pretend to that but honest and sincere therein, there would not need
many words to persuade them to the conscientions Discharge of this great Duty I
am now speaking of. For it is plainly a part of that Natural Fidelity and
Allegiance which we all owe to our King and our Country; and which all who
have taken the Oath of Fidelity are doubly obliged to perform. And the neglect
of it for fear of the displeasure of any great Person or Party, is not only a
piece of Baseness and Cowardice but of Unfaithfulness to their King and
Country; and, which is more than all this, even to God himself: It not only
gives the Lie to their pretenses of Loyalty, but it is fearing the Faces of Men
more than God himself; and Distrusting his Protection in their doing their
Duty, to which his Providence has lead them.

What I here recommend to others, I have hitherto in all Sincerity and
Integrity practiced my self; and being well satisfied that I was lead thereunto
by the special Providence of God, this very Consideration of Fidelity has been
a great Motive to me to do as I have done: And therefore that with the same
Fidelity and Integrity which I have used all along, I may bring these things,
which I have been discoursing, to the point in hand, I must say plainly, that
as our Fleets have been this Year baffled beyond the skill of any Vindicator to
cover; so it is as plain, that the Fault was not in our Mariners or Seamen:
For, to do them Right and Justice in this case, it is believed this Nation was
never better provided with able Seamen; and it is certain, there is no part of
the Nation more honest and firm for the Protestant Religion, the Prosperity and
Honor of their Country, and the present Government: And those who were at
Sea, were as ready and zealous to have showed so much in action, had they been
permitted by their Officers. But though we be also as well furnished with able
Captains, (for the English Genius, and such a Trade as we have, does naturally
produce a continual store of such) yet were our Men of War generally filled
with such Captains and Officers, as few Merchants would entrust with a Ship of
Two hundred Tun. And I find it the common Opinion of most Seamen and Merchants
I have discoursed with (and I have discoursed with many on purpose) that there
are but few amongst them that are any way qualified for that Service. And as
this does necessarily lead us to reflect upon the Commissioners of the
Admiralty, and our Ministers of State; so for ought I can perceive, it is the
general Opinion of our Merchants and Seamen, that the Commissioners themselves
(be they who they will, for I know none of them) are as ill qualified for their
undertaking, as the Officers they employ; and that not only in respect of skill
and ability, but it would tempt one to think in respect of Fidelity also, if
that be true, which is much talked on, that there have bin Lists offered to
them of very able Seamen for Captains and Officers, who were very ready to have
served their King and Country, and the Common Cause, (though wanting not
Employment or Estates they would neither purchase nor petition for any such)
yet were all neglected: That Commissions indeed have been offered to some, but
so far beneath their Quality, that it may be thought rather a Trick to affront
them, and make them refuse, and then pretend they would not serve, than any
honest intention to employ them: That, others who have been encouraged to raise
men; when they had raised them and brought them up at no little charge, have
themselves and their men been turned off without any satisfaction. Certain it
is, that this poor Nation has been long devoured and made a Prey of by a
Company of greedy Vermin, who have intruded into Offices without any sense of
the Service of the Public, but merely for their private advantage; and have
used them accordingly: and while we see the same evil Genius as busy as ever,
and such Disappointments, this is sufficient ground of suspicion. And therefore
since such things are talked on, it is fit they should be looked into: that if
upon an honest Inquiry they be found to be true, they may be duly punished and
redressed for the future; and if not true, that the minds of the People may be
satisfied upon good and solid grounds.

As for the Punishment of what is past, it may be fit to look back into the
Behavior of some of our Gentlemen the former Summer, and particularly among
the rest that at Baintree-bay, which I find our Seamen think not to have been
such as it ought. But for the Business of this Summer, besides the
Consideration of Justice and Prudence in other respects, the Eyes not only of
all the Nation, but of all the World, are upon the King, to see how he will
take it; so that he cannot in honor either neglect it, or suffer it to be
palliated, and himself abused with such Pretenses as will not pass with Men of
Understanding in the World. A Defeat in his Prosecution of this Matter might
prove as dishonorable to him, and almost as pernicious to his Interest, as the
Disappointment at Sea. And he has the more reason to look to it, because it is
suspected that other Matters have been so carried as might not be for his
Honor or Interest, by false People about him.

And for the Redress of these Matters for the future, to say nothing of the
great Importance of it to the Nation, and to all his Confederates; and how
greatly he is obliged both by God and Man, to take a special Care of it,
certainly he can take no better Method than that which I have already
mentioned; laying aside Ceremony and Complement, to send for some of the most
intelligent Merchants, that are entire and hearty for him; and some of the most
experienced and considerable Sea Captains and Commanders, who have been bred up
in that Employment, and not corrupted in the late Reigns, and discourse freely
with them alone, and encourage them to be free to speak their Opinions and
Knowledge. By this means he himself may come to a true understanding both of
Matters and Persons, and be able to make a better Choice than has yet been, or
is like to be made for him by others. And would he please to resolve in time,
to give Commissions to none but such as by their own Interest among the Seamen
were able to bring in most Men without Pressing, and to all such, we should see
matters soon well amended. This Nation at this time, notwithstanding all the
wicked Ars which have been used to corrupt and debase it, does not want Men fit
for Great Actions, if proper Methods were used to invite them to it: But the
Courses which have been used of late, have been so well fitted to attract only
the Scum and Froth of the Nation, that they may reasonably be thought to have
been introduced and promoted by such as had no great kindness for it.

What I have thus plainly and honestly discoursed, I doubt not but will be
approved by God, and all wise and honest Men in the World; and may be of great
use to the King, and to the Church, as well as to the whole Nation; if they
please to make a good use of it; to begin speedily, and in good earnest lay
such a good Foundation, as is recommended in it; cast out those cursed
Abominations, those notorious Examples of Wickedness and Impiety, out of great
Places, and provide some effectual Means for the Reformation of the Manners of
the rest: Otherwise I doubt it may seal up some heavier Judgment than we have
yet felt; in respect of which all our Disappointments hitherto both at Sea and
Land may prove but so many warnings. But as I wish, so I hope better things.

I Intended for the Service of those honest Persons I mentioned before, Page
45. to have added that, which I hope might have extricated most of them out of
those Toyss of Prejudice concerning the English Constitution and Government,
which have entangled the Consciences of many honest Men both formerly, and
especially since the late Revolution; and to have showed the Original Infusion
of that latent Poison which has for a full Age and more intoxicated the Heads
of many otherwise learned and honest Men in our Church and Universities: But I
am forced for want of leisure to rese^ve that for an APPENDIX, or a separate
Treatise.

A PREPARATION for DEATH, Recommended in A LETTER to a MALEFACTOR; But Useful
for all sorts of People.
Sept. 7. 1690. Mr. L
I Had really a kindness for you, because I had good hopes of you, that you
might become a good Man, if it pleased God to prolong your Life; and therefore
have done already what I can for you, and shall be ready to do more, if it
please God to give any opportunity. But because I find your Case very dangerous
in that respect, considering what has been sworn against you, and that this is
not the first Fault, and there being great Complaints to the Privy Council of
the frequent Crimes that are committed of that kind; insomuch that the Judge,
who is a very good Man, and as tender of the Life of a Man, as is consistent
with his Duty, cannot show you that Favor that otherwise he would, the
greatest Kindness that I can do you, is, to instruct you how to improve your
present Circumstances, which if you accordingly do, it will be ten thousand
times better than Life it self. You must therefore know that the Great Business
and End of our mortal Life in the Flesh is to work the Creature by various
Exercises to an entire Subjection to the Great Glorious and most Excellent
Creator; who is the Father of Spirits, and has not only a just and absolute
Right and Dominion over us by Creation, Sustentation and Redemption, but is in
himself of so transcendent Excellence, and so unconceivably Good and Gracious
to his poor despicable ^reatures (whereof the Love of Parents to their Children
is but a little Representation) that even Prudence and Gratitude, if it was
well considered, would effectually prevail with a Man of Sense to seek his
Favor, though by the most Absolute Subjection that can be conceived, were we
not obliged to it by his Absolute Dominion, and subject to his Irresistible
Power. And so that this entire Subjection be but effectually wrought in us, it
matters not whether our Life be long or short: Be it never so short, if the
Work be but perfectly done, it is the same thing as if it was longer; nay, in
some respects better; for then it is secure; whereas till then it is in danger;
only we are in the Hands of a Faithful Creator, and have continual Occasion of
Exercise of our Dependence upon him. Now to come to your particular Case: It
seeems you have ran a Course directly contrary; instead of exercising your self
to this Subjection, you perhaps have never in your Life been sensible of any
such Work you had to do; and not only not done any thing toward it, but done
the quite contrary; instead of subjecting your Sensual Appetites to your Reason
(which is the first part of this Exercise, and what all Mankind must account
for) you have subjected the Man to the Beast in you, and abused your natural
Faculties and Powers to serve and satisfy your Animal Affections; and instead
of subjecting your Will to the Holy and Righteous External Declarations of the
Will of God; you have yielded to the secret Motions of the Apostate Spirits in
your Animal Affections in Disobedience and Rebellion against that Holy Will of
God. And by this means instead of promoting the great Business of your Life,
you have run your self into a worse condition than when you were born and first
began to live; so that thus much of your Life is not only lost, but misspent
to your own Damage. And now to recover all again, and perfect this great Work,
for which you had a longer Life assigned you, in so short a time as is now
allowed you, you may think very hard, if not impossible. But be of good
comfort: Where Sin has abounded, Grace has much more abounded. God is able to
do greater matters than this, if he be graciously so pleased, in less time; but
then you must seek to him, and do what you can to prepare your self for his
Grace, and to be ready to cooperate with it faithfully. To this end you must
endeavor to banish all thoughts of this World, and even of your Temporal Life
it self, and enter into serious Consideration of the Great and Glorious Majesty
of God, who by his Wisdom and Power has Created and Governs the whole
Universe, whereof the whole Earth in respect of the rest is but as a drop of a
Bucket, and in respect of him as nothing; and then consider with your self,
what a despicable thing you are in comparison of the Earth and all its
Inhabitants, which yet altogether is so little as I have said in respect of
Almighty God; so despicable, if you were innocent and righteous; and therefore
that you should be so infatuated as to dare to transgress the least of his
Commands, does justly deserve not only Temporal Death, and to be cut off from
the Children of Men, to whom you have been an Enemy, and Confederated with the
Enemies of their Peace and Quiet, but Eternal Damnation, and to be for ever
separated from his Glorious Presence, against whom you have rebelled, and to
have your part with those Apostate Spirits, whose Motions you have obeyed, in
eternal Misery. And never cease musing and considering these great and plain
Truths, and lifting up your Heart to God with fervent Desires and Prayers, that
he will condescend to give you Grace, to enlighten your Mind, and mollisie your
Heart with a deep Sense of your miserable Condition, till you find your self so
affected and concerned for the Favor of God and the Salvation of your Soul,
that all Concern and Thought for your Temporal Life, as an inconsiderable thing
in respect of that, may wholly cease; and that your Soul be mightily humbled
with a deep Sense of your utter unworthiness, that that Great and Glorious and
most Holy Majesty should have any regard to so despicable and so sinful a
Wretch, with great Indignation against your Sin and Madness, and against those
cursed Apostate Spirits, which by their secret Impressions have pressed you on
into all this Wickedness and Mischief. When you have gotten thus far, those
wicked Spirits, when they find they can no longer keep you in Darkness and
Impenitence, will strive to thrust you headlong into Despair, and possess you
with dreadful Apprehensions of the Holiness, Justice, and Severity of God. And
therefore you must further know, that this Great and Glorious Majesty, though
most Holy, Righteous and Terrible to the Impenitent and Incorrigible, yet is of
unconceivable Mercy, Clemency and Goodness to truly humble and penitent
Sinners: And though he be a God of such Holiness and Purity that there is no
immediate Access to him for such despicable and polluted Creatures as the
Children of Men, yet has he in his great Mercy and Wisdom provided a most
admirable Expedient, whereby we may have access to him at all times with
Confidence and Assurance of Acceptance; and not only Pardon of Sin, but Grace
also, and Divine Power to serve him acceptably. And this is by Christ Jesus,
God and Man united in one Person, who having run the same Race and Exercise of
Subjection by Obedience even to Death, and the most shameful Death, the Death
of the Cross, and thereby obtained Favor for us with the Father, him has God
exalted to be Judge both of Quick and Dead, and to be a Prince and a Savior to
all that obey him, and are united to him by his Spirit residing and ruling in
their Hearts. Him has God proposed to be a Propitiation for us by his Passion
and Death, and raised up to be a Mediator and an Advocate for us with him in
Heaven; and by him, and in his Name, all who are Sealed with, and Partakers of
his Spirit, have Access and certain Acceptance with the Father. But that you
may be one of these, here is again, as before, something to be done by you. You
must ruminate much upon the admirable Clemency and Goodness of God to his poor
Creatures, for the recovery of them out of a most miserable Slavery to the
Powers of Darkness; and how admirable a Person this Christ Jesus is, who having
performed a perfect Obedience to the Father in our Nature, and by his Passion
consecrated it, and exalted it to Heaven to be there as a Magnet to attract all
who receive him, and give up themselves to obey him: And how great a new
Obligation this is upon us to do so: How great and admirable the Benefit and
Advantage is to our selves: And therefore how much common Prudence and
Gratitude should prevail with you for that purpose. And never cease musing and
thinking thereupon, and lifting up your Heart to God in earnest Desires and
Prayers in the Name of Christ Jesus, and for his Sake, that he will be pleased
to enlighten your Mind with a clear understanding of these admirable Truths,
and fill your Heart with such Love and Admiration of his Goodness so
demonstrated in this admirable Person, that all things in this World, your
Temporal Life in the Flesh, and all that you are or have, may appear to you, as
in truth they are, very mean and despicable, and nothing valuable and desirable
but Christ Jesus, and an inseparable Union with him; till you find your Heart
so affected with these things, that you become entirely resigned in all things
to the Will of God, be willing and even desirous to be Partaker of the
Sufferings of that Holy and Innocent Person, which you have justly deserved,
and with full purpose of Heart give up your self to an entire Subjection,
Obedience and Service of the Holy Trinity, to whom you have been dedicated in
your Baptism, to all Eternity. This is a great Work indeed; but God is able to
do this, and more than we can ask or think, in less time than you have to
prepare for it: And if he will be so gracious to you, you will be a happy
Creature, and have reason to admire and bless his Holy Providence, and abundant
Grace, which by so admirable Means has brought you to it; and then you will
have nothing more to do, but to perform some other Works of true Repentance,
which I shall presently show you, and wait upon God and stand ready for
whatever he shall call you to. These remaining Works of Repentance respect
either the particular Persons you have wronged, or the State and your Country
in general. To the particular Persons you must make Restitution as far as you
are able, pray to God to make up what is wanting by his Grace and Blessing to
them, and send to them and desire their Pardon; and heartily forgive all who
have injured you, acknowledging them, whatever they intended, to have been
God's Instruments for your just Punishment and Correction, and pray heartily to
God to pardon them. And to the State and your Country you must do what you can
to make Satisfaction and Restitution by these means: You must do what you can
to break those wicked Combinations, Confederations and ^ractices, by making all
the Discovery you can both of Robberies and such like Practices, and of the
Persons who either use such Practices, or harbor, or are any way Partners with
them therein. Only thus much I shall advise you, that you do it in Charity, not
only to your Country, but even to the Malefactors themselves, so as that they
may be reclaimed if possible; and therefore do it not to any one, but to such
as you think most like to use your Discoveries wisely and charitably, with due
care and respect even to them. And if you desire my Assistance therein, I will
endeavor to come to you on purpose, rather than you shall want Assistance. I
have no more now but my Prayers for you to Almighty God, that he will bless
these Instructions, make them effectual upon you, and by his powerful Grace
perfect this great and good Work in your Soul.

POSTSCRIPT.
IT is a common Opinion among Malefactors, that it is a dishonorable thing,
and therefore odious and detestable, to discover, (which they call betraying)
their Companions or Partners in their Crimes. But this is plainly a mere vulgar
Error, and a gross Mistake, and no less pernicious to themselves, and to their
Partners, than to their Country, and Mankind in General. The Fallacy lies in
the Misapplication of a true Principle. For the true reason why Breach of Faith
and Betraying of Trust is so odious a thing among all Men, is, because it is
not only injurious to the Person, but tends to the disturbance of Humane
Society: So that if it was generelly practiced, Men would not know how to deal
one with another, and would be deprived of mutual Assistance in many cases, and
of one of the greatest Comforts of Humane Life. But yet, as in many other
Cases, that which in the General is unlawful, dishonorable and odious, (as the
taking away the Life of a Man) may in a particular case, under some certain
Circumstances, become a necessary and commendable Duty, (as the Condemnation
and Execution of a Murderer, which is an Act both of Justice upon the
Malefactor, and of Charity to the rest of Mankind, by preventing and
discouraging other Murders) so it is in this: To discover a Secret committed to
ones Trust, which may lawfully be concealed; but especially, to do it for ones
own advantage, and to the prejudice of his Consident, is commonly reputed, and
very justly, a very base, unmanly, dishonest and dishonorable thing. But when
the Secret or Considence is in a thing wicked and unjust, injurious to other
Persons, and to the Society whereof a Man is a Member, as, to his Country; this
is no such Secret as can honestly be concealed; because it is a Breach of
Charity to the injured Persons, and a Violation of that Faith, which, by an
antecedent and greater Obligation, is due to the whole Society, whereof he is a
Member. Such mutual Confidences therefore are not properly Human Societies, but
a kind of Confederacies of Enemies and Disturbers of the proper Society, Peace
and Welfare of Men, tending to the Destruction thereof. And the Hypothesis upon
which they are built is for the same reason plainly a Delusion, and probably a
Stratagem of the Apostate Spirits and Enemies of Mankind, to strengthen their
Party and Interest among Men; so that as on the one hand this is no such Trust,
as it is dishonorable to any Person to break it, because it is a wicked thing
to engage in it; so on the other hand it is a Breach of Faith and Duty to the
Society not to break but conceal it, and thereby support a Confederacy of
Enemies and Disturbers of the Peace of his Country; so that the Person, who
conceals what he knows of that nature, becomes accessory, even after his Death,
to all the Evils which are afterward committed, and might have been prevented
by his Discovery. Bendes an obstinate and wilful Concealment even to the Death,
is not only a Confirmation of that particular wicked Confederacy wherein the
Person is engaged, or any way concerned or acquainted, but tends mightily to
harden others, and so to support all such wicked Confederacies in general.
Whereas did such Persons, at least when apprehended, in their Affliction become
serious, and not suffer themselves to be longer abused and imposed upon by such
a vulgar Error and Diabolical Delusion, but consider well, judge rightly, and
act accordingly, such wicked Confederacies could not subsist for want of mutual
Confidence. Nor is such Concealment only injurious to diverse other particular
Persons, and a Violation of that Faith and Love, which all Men owe to their
Country; but very pernicious, and of evil consequence to the Partners, and all
other such Criminals; because it encourages them to venture upon and persist
in such Courses as involve them more and more in Sin, whereby they treasure up
Wrath against the Day of Wrath; and expose them to all those temporal Evils,
which usually first or last over-take them. Whereas by such a Discovery, as I
have recommended, the Persons discovered might possibly be reclaimed and
brought to Repentance, at least might be hindered from so much increasing their
Score, which were better for them, though by an unnatural and otherwise
untimely Death, than that they should longer protract a miserable Life here to
the increase of their Misery hereafter. Nor is it less pernicious to the
Malefactor himself. For as without true Repentance no Pardon can be expected
with God: So whoever does not all he can to make Restitution, and repair all
the Evil and Damage he has done, and to prevent all he can for the future, can
be no true Penitent, holding still an implicit Confederacy at least, with
wickedness. And as he can expect no Favor from God, so is he to be looked upon
by Men, not as a Man of Honor in any respect, but as a reprobate, deluded, and
hardened Wretch, an Enemy to Mankind, and a Confederate with Death and Hell,
and the Kingdom of Darkness; an odious and detestable Creature, insted of being
in the least honorable as he vainly fancied. That, which only is Honorable or
Commendable in such Case, and the only true Wisdom, is, 1. To consider
seriously the unreasonableness and wickedness of the Crime, till such
consideration has produced a just Indignation and Abhorrence of it. 2. To
acknowledge ingenuously his own Folly and Impotence to yield to and be overcome
by such a Temptation, whatever it was, which induced him to it; and not rather
more manly to have born any hardships of a transitory human Life, than so
basely to have violated the Order of the Divine Providence, which assigned
those hardships for his Exercise, and the Laws of his Country. 3. To give Glory
to God, acknowledging the Justice of his Punishment, and the special Providence
of God, who has brought him to it not only in Justice, but in Mercy too, to
cut off his Sin, for Correction of his Miscarriages, and that he may not be
condemned with the World, if he truly and effectually repent, as is before
directed. 4. To endeavor, as far as possible he can, to break all such
Confederacies, and prevent all the Mischief which might otherwise be committed
by a plain Discovery of all he knows. This indeed would be an Evidence of
such a Change and Disposition of Mind, as is really valuable in the Judgment of
all Good and Wise Men, and acceptable in the sight of Almighty God, and
therefore truly Honorable with others, and the truest wisdom for himself.

What I have here said to Criminals is fit to be considered by all who have any
knowledge of any such Crimes. That which they may fancy to be Faithfulness, or
Charity, or Pity to Criminals, is a great Mistake and Delusion, and in truth
Unfaithfulness and want of due regard to their Country. That Malefactors be
brought to condign Punishment both Justice and Charity to our Country require;
which is to be preferred before the Consideration of any particular Person: And
therefore to hinder, or resuse ones Assistance to it, is to prefer a
Malefactor, and desert the Duty he ows his Country. But in other respects
Chatity and Humanity requires more to be done for them, than usually is with us.

THE END.
AN ACT FOR The more effectual Restraining and Suppressing of diverse notorious
Sins, and Reformation of the Manners of the People of this Nation.
WHereas the Advancement of the Honor and Service of Almighty God, and of the
Protestant Religion, which by his wonderful Providence has been Established
and Preserved in these Nations, ought at all times to be the Chief Part of the
Care as well of the Legistative as Executive Power of this Kingdom; but more
especially at this time, after so admirable a Deliverance from so great and
apparent Danger as lately threatened us: And for that End a General Reformation
of the Lives and Manners of all degrees of People of this Nation, is earnestly
desired by all good men, and by all Means to be endeavored, as that which must
Establish both the Church and State, and secure to all their Religion,
Happiness and Peace: All which seem to be in great Danger at this time, by
reason of the Overflowing of Vice, which is too notorious in this as well as
other neighboring Nations, and more particularly the Sins of Blasphemy,
Profane Swearing and Cursing, Perjury, Profanation of the Lords Day,
Adultery, Fornication, and Drunkenness.

Therefore for the better carrying on of so good a Work, and for the more
effectual preventing, correcting and suppressing of the Horrid and Hellish sins
of BLASPHEMY and profane Swearing and Cursing: Be it Enacted by the King and
Queens Majesty, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That if any
Person not disturbed in Brain by Sickness or otherwise, shall at any time
hereafter presume in word or writing to Blaspheme, or speak or write
contemptuously or scoffingly of God blessed for ever, his Providence, our
Blessed Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, the Holy Spirit, the Sacred Scriptures,
the Christian Religion, or any of them, the Person and persons in whose
presence or hearing such Offense shall be committed, shall and are hereby
required presently to set down the Words expressing the said ^^sence, or so
much thereof as he or they can remember, and the manner thereof, in writing;
and to give notice and testify his and their Knowledge thereof upon Oath
within the space of ten days, unto some Justice of the Peace of the County or
Place where the same shall be committed, who is hereby authorized and required
to administer the said Oath, and to take the Information of the said persons in
writing. And every Justice of the Peace, who shall have any knowledge of any
such Offense committed, either by his own hearing or view, or by any such
Testimony, or by Confession of the Party, is hereby authorized and required to
cause the said Offender to become bound to appear and answer for the same at
the next general Jail-deliver or Oyer and Terminer to be holden for that
County, and to be of Good Behavior in in the mean time. And likewise to cause
the said Witness and witnesses to be bound over to prosecute and give Evidence
against the said Offender, who at the said next Jail-deliver or Oyer and
Terminer if it may be, or otherwise as soon as may be, shall be Indicted for
his said Offense, and upon the Trial being found Guilty, shall forfeit the sum
of one moiety thereof to the King and Queen, their Heirs and Successors, and
the other moiety thereof to the Prosecutor, and shall by the Judge, before whom
such Trial shall be had, be committed to the Gaol, there to remain till he or
she shall have paid the said sum, and shall become bound with two good Sureties
to the Good Behavior for the space of seven years then next ensuing, in case
it be the Parties first Offense of that kind: but if it be the second Offense
of which he is so convicted, then to be of the Good Behavior during Life. And
if it be a third Offense and Conviction, then the Offender shall be committed
to the Gaol, there to remain till he or she shall abjure the Realm.

And be it likewise enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
Person and Persons who shall hereafter offend by PROFANE SWEARING or CURSING,
shall forfeit and pay for every such Offense to the use of the Poor of the
Parish where the same shall be committed, or if it be out of any Parish, to the
use of the Poor of such next adjoining Parish as the Justice or Justices
hereafter mentioned shall appoint, according to the Degree, and Quality of the
Person offending, in Manner and Form following, that is to say, every Peer and
Baron of this Realm, or other the Kings Dominions residing here, and every
Person holding and enjoying any Barony, the sum of twenty shillings, every
Baronet and Knight the sum of thirteen shillings and four pence, every
Esquire, and every Person having and enjoying any Office, Place, Dignity,
Promotion, or Employment, Ecclesiastical or Civil, of the value of one hundred
pounds per Annum, or more, the sum of Ten shillings, and every Gentleman and
Person in Holy Orders, every Graduate in either University, and every Person
having and enjoying any Office, Place, Dignity, Promotion, or Employment,
Ecclesiastical or Civil, under one hundred pounds per annum, the sum of six
shillings and eight pence; and every person keeping any Public House of
Entertainment, and every other Person under the degree of a Gentleman, (except
Laborers and poor people) the sum of five shillings, and every Labourer and
other poor person, the sum of two shillings and sixpence; and every married
Woman or Widow, according to the Degree and Quality of her present or last
Husband, and in case she was never Married, according to the degree and quality
of a younger Son of her Father. All which sums and forfeitures all and every
person and persons in whose presence or hearing any such Offense shall be
committed, are hereby Authorized and required to demand for the use of the Poor
of the said Parish, and in case the same shall be paid, to pay it over
immediately to the Overseers of the Poor for the use aforesaid. And in case the
person so offending shall upon such demand refuse to pay the sum by him so
forfeited, then the said persons in whose presence or hearing the said Offense
shall be committed, shall, and are hereby required presently thereupon to put
the words expressing the Offense into Writing, under his and their Hands, and
to give notice of the said Offense, demand and refusal, and to testify his or
their knowledge thereof upon Oath within the space of ten days unto some
Justice of the Peace, of the County or Place where the same Offense shall be
committed, who is hereby authorized and required to administer the said Oath,
and thereupon (unless the Offender be a Peer, or such other great Man of this
Realm, as in this Act hereafter is mentioned) to direct and send his Warrant to
the Constable, Tythingman, Churchwardens and Overseers of the poor of such
Parish as aforesaid, or of the Parish where the Offender shall inhabit, thereby
commanding them or some one or more of them to levy the sum and sums so
forfeited for the use of the poor of such parish as aforesaid, and likewise the
like sum to be paid to such Witness and Witnesses, for his and their time,
travel and pains employed about any such Information, by distress and sale of
the Goods of such Offender, rendering unto him or her the overplus: And in case
no such Distress can be had, to apprehend the said Offender, and him or her to
bring before the said Justice or some other Justice of the Peace of the said
County or place, who is hereby required to commit the said Offender to the
common Gaol, there to remain until the said Offender shall have paid the
several sums aforesaid, and full Costs and Charges to be taxed by the said
Justice for Apprehending and Conveying of such Offenders to the Gaol, if it be
the first Conviction for such Offense: But if the said Offender shall have been
before convicted as aforesaid of the like Offense and obstinate Refusal, then
to remain there until the said Offender shall moreover become bound before the
Justices of the Peace at their General Quarter Sessions, or the Judge of
Assize, General Gaol Delivery, or Oyer and Terminer, to be of the Good
Behavior for the space of then next ensuing. But in case it shall appear to
the said Justice, by Confession of the party, or otherwise, that the Offender
so convicted is not able to pay the said sever^l sums, then the said Offender
shall be set in the Stocks for three whole hours for his first Offense, and
shall be so set in the Stocks, and moreover be publicly whipped, not exceeding
ten lashes for the second, and every other Offense afterward.

And because it is found by common Experience, that Excess in Drinking does,
besides other inconveniences, very much dispose people to profane Swearing; and
that such Excesses are usually promoted by DRINKING HEALTHS: Be it therefore
enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every person who shall begin or pledge
any Health, shall forfeit and pay as is before enacted for profane Swearing,
to be levied in like manner, and for the same Uses; and all persons present
required to demand the forfeiture, and give Information of the Refusal, if any
be, as in the said Case is appointed, and the Justice thereupon to proceed
accordingly.

Provided, and it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if
any Peer of the Realm, Prelate, or other person expressed in the Statute of 2
Ri. 2. entitled, The Penalty for telling of slanderous Lies of the great Men
of the Realm, or any Baron of the Exchequer, upon committing any such Offense
of Profane Swearing or Cursing, as aforesaid, shall refuse to pay the Penalty
thereby forfeited, being demanded as aforesaid, the Justice of the Peace before
whom such Information shall be given, shall cause a Copy of the said
Information to be delivered to the said Offender, his Lady or Steward, and
shall bind over the Witness and Witnesses to prosecute and give Evidence of the
said Offense, Demand and Refusal at the next Jail-deliver, or Oyer and
Terminer to be holden for the County, or Division. Where such Offender having
notice as aforesaid, shall be obliged to appear and Travers his Endictment. And
in case he shall not appear, or upon his Appearance and Travers shall be found
Guilty, he shall incurr the several Disabilities hereafter mentioned, and
forfeit the sum of twenty pounds, one moity to the King and Queen, and the
other to the Prosecutor or Prosecutors.

And because it may be feared that Perjury is often committed in this Nation by
the Neglect of Officers and persons sworn to the due performance of their
Offices, Places, and Employments, or Duties: Be it therefore Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, for the preventing the like for the future, that every
wilful neglect after the 24th. day of June next, of any Officer or other
person, duly sworn to the performance of any Office, Place, Employment, or
Duty, in the due performance thereof, shall be deemed and adjudged Perjury, and
be prosecuted and punished as other Perjury by the Law of this Land.

And for the more effectual Execution of the Statutes heretofore made for the
Reformation of sundry Abuses, and better Observation of the LORDS DAY, commanly
called Sunday, 3 Car. 1 c. 2 29 Car. 2. c 7.
be it likewise Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
Constable, Tythingman, Headborough, Church Warden, and Overseer of the poor,
and other Officers in their respective Parishes, may and are hereby authorized
and required upon notice of any Offense contrary to the said Statutes, or
either of them, immediately to repair to the place where any such Offense is
said to be committed, and upon their own view thereof, without any Warrant from
any Justice of Peace to seize all such Goods as they shall at any time find
exposed to sale, contrary to the said Statutes or either of them, and to
dispose thereof as by the said Statutes, or either of them is directed; and
likewise to stop, apprehend, and secure all persons offending against the said
Statutes, or either of them, and them to carry before some Justice of the
Peace, to be dealt with according to the Law, unless the said Offender and
Offenders shall forthwith pay the penalty forfeited by the said Statutes to
such Officer or Officers.

And for suppressing of the brutish Sins of ADULTERY and FORNICATION, Be it
also enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Man after the tenth day of
June, in this present year of our Lord, 1690. shall have the carnal knowledge
of the Body of any Woman other than his Wife, (except in the case of a Rape,)
or shall be found in Bed, or in any such posture of Nakedness, with any other
Woman than his Wife, from which it may be reasonably presumed that any such Act
of carnal Copulation was committed by the said parties, either of the said
parties being at the same time in the State of lawful Matrimony with any other
person not absent beyond the Seas, or otherwise unknown to the said party to be
living, by the space of seven years, the same shall be taken, reputed, and
adjudged lawful and sufficient Evidence of ADULTERY, and the said parties being
thereof convicted by Verdict upon Indictment or presentment before any Judge or
Justices of Gaol Delivery, or Oyer and Terminer, shall suffer Death as in case
of Felony, without benefit of Clergy: But if neither of the said parties be at
the same time in such State of Matrimony, the same shall be taken, reputed, and
adjudged lawful and sufficient Evidence of Fornication only, for which being
thereof convicted as aforesaid, each of the said parties shall for every such
Offense be committed to the common Gaol without Bail or Mainprize, there to
continue for the space of and further until he or she respectively shall give
Security, to be taken by one or more Justice or Justices of the Peace of the
said County or place, to be of the Good Behavior for the space of Year then
next ensuing, if it be the first Offense, but if the second for the space of
Years, and if the third during life.

Provided that no Attainder by virtue hereof shall extend to Corruption of
Blood, or forfeiture of the Estate real or Personal of the person so attainted.

And for the better preventing of the said Sins for the time to come, be it
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Constable, or Tythingman, and the
Churchwardens of every parish for the time being, shall once every Month at
least, or oftener if they see cause, make diligent enquiry throughout their
respective Parishes, to discover all persons who shall prostitute themselves as
common Strumpets, and shall certify the Names, or reputed Names, and the
places of abode of all such persons as they shall find either by Information of
Neighbors, or other probable circumstances to be suspicious in that respect,
unto some Justice of the Peace residing in or near their respective Parishes,
who upon receipt of such Certificate, shall direct his Warrant to the Constable
or Officer of the Parish where any such suspected person shall be found, to
bring before him all or any such suspected person or persons: And shall examine
her or them, and such Witnesses as shall appear in their behalf, concerning
their way and course of livelihood. And that all such persons so suspected, and
not being able to give a good account of themselves, shall be punished as
Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars are liable to be punished by virtue of the
Statute made in the 39th year of the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth in that
behalf.

And be it further Enacted, that all such Persons as shall keep Houses of
Bawdry, or wittingly and knowingly admit lewd Persons, Men and Women, into
their Houses to Commit Uncleanness, or shall receive, or continue to entertain
in their Houses as Lodgers or otherwise any common Strumpet, knowing that she
continues such her lewd Course of Life, or shall wittingly and knowingly
procure Meetings between Men and Women in order to their committing Adultery or
Fornication together, shall forfeit for the first Offense the sum of 5 l. and
for the second the sum of 10 l. together with Costs of Suit to be recovered
by Action of Debt, Bill, plaint or Information, at the suit of such Person as
will prosecute for the same, to and for his or their own use, in which no
Essoyn, Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed: And in default of such
prosecution within six Months after each several Offense, shall forfeit the
like sum and sums, being thereof Convicted by Presentment or Indictment
before the Justices of the Peace at the Quarter Sessions to be held for such
County, Division, or Place where any such Offense shall happen to be committed
as aforesaid: One moi^ty to the King, and the other to the Poor of the Parish
where the Offense shall be committed. And moreover for such second Offense
shall be set in the Pillory in the next Market Town or open Place: And for the
third Offense upon Conviction shall abjure the Realm.

And be it further enacted for the end and purpose aforesaid, that no Person
whatsoever keeping or that keep any public Tavern, Alehouse, Tipling-house,
or other House of common Entertainment within the Cities of London or
Westminster, or Borough of Southwark, or places adjacent, shall keep any Organ
or other Instrument or Instruments of Music for the Entertainment of Guests,
on pain of forfeiting the sum of 20 l. being thereof lawfully convicted upon
Presentment or Indictment at the Quarter Sessions of the Peace, and upon the
further penalty of being disabled to sell Ale, Wine, or other Liquors by Retail
for the space of a twelve Month after such Conviction. And every person so
convicted and yet selling any such liquors, contrary to this Act, shall be
punished as selling the same without License.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any Women or
Woman shall at any time after Sunset and before Sunrising be entertained or
received into any Tavern, Alehouse, or other public House of Entertainment as
Guest or Guests (except in Case of Travelers received into their Inns) then
the Master, Mistress or Dame of such Tavern or House upon proof thereof made
before one or more Justice or Justices of the Peace shall forfeit 40 s. Unless
the said Master, Mistress or Dame, shall prove by good and sufficient
Testimony, that such Woman and Women are of good Behavior and Reputation: And
if afterward the said Master, Mistress or Dame, shall permit the like Offense,
the said Tavern or House shall be taken and deemed a Bawdy House, and the said
Master, Mistress and Dame, shall be punished as Keeper thereof.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any Offender
within this Act shall not be Convicted and Punished by the Justice of Peace,
nor prosecuted at the Suit of any Party, as is by this Act directed within the
space of Months after the Offense committed, that then the said Offender shall
and may be Prosecuted at the Quarter Sessions of the Peace, or at the Assizes
holden for the County where the Offense is committed, by Indictment or
Information within one Year after the Offense committed.

And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that when and as often as
any Person shall be Convicted upon Indictment for any Offense contrary to this
Act, the Judge, Justice and Justices before whom the Conviction shall be, shall
immediately thereupon signify the same to the Bishop of the Diocese where the
Offense shall be committed, to the end that he may thereupon proceed to
EXCOMMUNICATION of the Offender, who shall not be absolved but by special Order
of the Bishop, upon Certificate by the Parson or Vicar, and Churchwardens of
the Parish where the Offender shall inhabit, that the said Offender shall on
some Lord's Day in the Morning immediately after the Creed appointed for the
Communion Service, in the body or greatest I Will of the said Parish Church have
publicly confessed his or her Offense, and solemnly declared his or her
unfeigned Sorrow and Repentance for the same.

And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no Person
Excommunicated or bound to be of Good Behavior, or Convicted of any Crime or
Offense by Virtue or in pursuance of this Act, shall be admitted to Vote or sit
in Parliament, or be capable to be Elected to serve in Parliament, or to Act as
Judge, Justice of the Peace, or Minister of Justice, or to perform any public
Ecclesiastical Office within the Kingdom of England or Dominion of Wales, or to
maintain any Action of the Case for Scandalous Words, or upon the Statute de
Scandalis Magnatum, until he shall be duly discharged of his Scourity for the
good Behavior, and be absolved from his Excommunication as aforesaid; and
shall have paid and performed all Forfeitures, Pains, Penalties, Costs and
Charges, incurred, forfeited, taxed or imposed by Virtue of this Act, any
Privilege of Parliament or other whatever in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided that no Person excommunicate by Virtue or in pursuance of this Act,
shall by reason of any such Excommunication incurr or suffer any other temporal
Punishment, Disability or Incommodity than is by this Act appointed or
Ordained, any Law, Statute, Canon, Usage or Custom to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

And because the Effect of all Laws, and the Honor of the Government in that
respect does depend upon the due Execution thereof, to the end that this Act
may be the more effectually put in Execution, be it Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, that the same shall be publicly read in all Cathedral Collegiate
and Parish Churches, and in all Chapels, where the Common Prayers usually are
or ought to be read, immediately after the Creed appointed for the Communion
Service, on some Lord's Day before the 24th. day of June next, and afterward
once every Year upon the second Lord's Day in March; and that for that purpose
it shall be provided by the Churchwardens of every Parish, at the charge of
their respective Parishes: And that all Constables, Tything-men, Headboroughs
and Churchwardens shall at the time of their Entrance upon their respective
Offices be Sworn to put this Act in due Execution, and to give Information of
all Offenses committed in their respective Parishes, or by any person of the
same Parish contrary to this Act, or to the Statutes against Drunkenness, unto
some Justice of the Peace of the same County or Place within ten Days after
the same shall come to their knowledge, according to their best Skill and
Understanding: And also that this Act shall be given in Charge to the Grand
Jury by the Judges and Justices at their several Assizes and Quarter Sessions,
to enquire and present the several Offenses aforesaid, and all Neglects of
Justices, Constables, Churchwardens and other Officers and Persons in the due
Execution thereof.

And be it also Enacted, that the Judge, Justice and Justices, before whom any
Person shall be Convicted of any Offense by Virtue of this Act, shall Order and
cause to be paid unto such Prosecutor and Prosecutors, as shall otherwise
receive no benefit by this Act, and to the several Witnesses, such reasonable
Costs and Charges, and in such manner, as he or they shall think fit: And that
in any Action brought against any Justice, Constable, or other Officer or
Person for any thing done by Virtue or in pursuance of this Act, the Defendant
may Plead the General Issue, and give the special matter in Evidence, and upon
Verdict for him or Nonsuit of the Plaintiff shall recover his treble Costs.

The END.

