A KIND INVITATION To the PEOPLE called QUAKERS, To the due Consideration of
Some Important Truths: In a Letter and Twenty Questions, sent long since to
their Second-days Meeting, and now to them all. To both which, an ANSWER from
their present Yearly Meeting, 1697. is desired.
To William Penn, and the rest, etc. (...) Second-Days-Meeting.
WILLIAM, with the rest of (...) with thee,
MY Hearts desire and Prayer to God for you all, is, that ye may be Saved: for
I am persuaded that you have a Zeal of God, at least many of you, though not
according to Knowledge in some things. Nevertheless, whereto ye have attained,
in that I desire ye may be established, and that God will be graciously pleased
to reveal the rest to you, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing.
For which purpose I come, I trust by the Grace of God, with a Message of Grace
and Peace to you. I am well satisfied that it is no mere Humane Project or
Artifice that at first raised you up, and has conducted you hitherto: but a
Supernatural Power, and that it is of the Lord, some way or other, (as was the
Separation of the Ten Tribes from Rehoboam, 1 Kings 12.) for Correction and
Reformation of something amiss in this Church. And therefore I dare not
presume, either upon my own head, or by my own Ability, to intermeddle in it.
But my Heart is enlarged toward you upon these Considerations: 1. That ye do
assert one of the Great and Chief Principles of the Christian Religion, which I
have observed to be very unworthily and even despitefully treated by too many,
who have gotten into (or seek) Preferments and Employment in the Church,
without Check or Reproof; and so unworthily deserted by most, for fear of
Reproach, or Disgrace, or hindrance in their Preferment, that I have not known
it generously asserted by above two or three in the Pulpit, (but those great
Men indeed) though it be plainly a Doctrine most authentickly and solemnly
professed and declared in the Church of England. 2. That ye do bear a good
Testimony against other Abuses connived at; or tolerated amongst us. 3. I am
moved with Pity toward you, that you should have so great Causes of Offense or
Scandal given you, against the Holy and Established Institutions and Ordinances
of Christ, for the Ministerial Office; for the Admission of Proselytes; and for
the great Solemnity of the Christian Worship, which has been so long abused
with Controversies, that I know very few Persons now amongst us, who do rightly
and completely understand it; and even against the Person, Satisfaction, and
Merits of Christ himself. But when I consider your Notions and Sentiments
concerning these things, though I am well satisfied that you are under the
Conduct and Energy of some Spiritual Power; yet, What that Spirit is? and,
Whether One or Diverse? in my Judgment, does deserve very good Consideration. Ye
know what Spirit it was, which God sent between Abimilech and the Shechemites,
Judge. 9.23. and what that was, that was sent from the Lord to Saul, 1 Samuel
6.14. and what that was, that was commissioned by God in the case of Ahab, 1
King. 22.22, 23. and what that was, in the midst of the Princes of Noph, Isa.
19.14. which was from the Lord too. And that such a Spirit has been among some
called Quakers, is manifest both by their Actions, Speeches, and Writings; nay,
the very Spirit of the Devil, and of Antichrist, is apparent and undeniable,
from the Indignities offered, both in word and deed, to Holy things. But that
is not the thing now to be considered, what Spirits may have appeared among
them. For even among the Apostles, Satan had power to enter into Judas; and it
is not improbable but those, whom our Savior told, Ye know not what Spirit ye
are of; and even Peter himself, when our Savior said to him, Get thee behind
me, Satan, might not at the time be free from some Impressions of Evil Spirits.
That, it is likely, was a Peculiarity of our Saviors, for the Prince of this
World to have nothing in him. But the thing to be considered, is, What Spirit
that is which at first excited, and has now the Conduct of the whole Body of
this People? And, not, whether it be sent, or commissioned from God? but,
Whether it be one of the Ministering Spirits sent forth to minister for them,
who shall be Heirs of Salvation? or, One of those Seducing Spirits, to whom, in
the latter times, that some would give heed, was, in the times of the Apostles,
expressly said by the Spirit of God? And great Reason there is to take this
into very deep Consideration: 1. Because of the many and weighty Cautions given
by our Savior and his Apostles, and left upon record in the Sacred Scriptures,
for our warning in these latter times, to beware of them, and not to go out
after them; with Admonitions concerning their Subtilty, their Energy or Power,
and their strong Delusions to deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect; and
that even Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light, that is, puts on
the Appearance of an Angel of Light, (2 Cor. 11.14.) and, lastly, that we
should try the Spirits, (1 Jo. 4.1.) 2. Because, if the Trial be by Agreement
or Disagreement with the Doctrine, Institutions, and Ordinances of Christ, and
his Apostles authorized by him, they may seem to have apostatized and gone off,
or, at least, fallen short of them in matters of great moment, and special
concern, those beforementioned; and therefore to be Seduced by some Spirit of
Error: For I doubt not but the Devil himself has that Malice and Envy against
the Man Christ Jesus, by whom he has been Conquered and Vanquished, and
against the Solemn Memorial of that Victory, that could he but keep People from
engaging in that Holy Covenant with Him by Baptism, and from the Solemnity of
that Memorial, he would be willing himself to lead them into all other Truth,
upon that condition, rather than fail. Yet, notwithstanding, since they are a
Sober People, have received, retain^^ and do act upon one of the chief
Principles of Christianity, and have diverse commendable things in them; and
what Errors they have fallen into, have been occasioned by the Scandals and
Offenses given by those of the Church, who will have a sad account to answer
for it: I do hope, in the Mercy and Goodness of God, that if it be a good
Spirit which has the Conduct of them, he shall lead and dispose those who are
Sincere amongst them, to the acknowledgement of the Truth in those things
whereto they have not yet attained; and if it be otherwise, he shall be forced
to resign the Conduct of them to a more powerful and better Guide; and that we
shall see such a Society of Complete Christians come out of this despised
People, as are at this time hardly to be found in any part of the World, as I
know of. These are my Thougots, and Hopes concerning this People in general at
present. And Hopes, I say, grounded upon the Mercy of God, and Power of God,
which no Good Being would oppose; nor no Evil Power can stand before. And in
His Name I come unto you, knowing assuredly that neither I, nor any Humane
Ability, is able to prevail against the Power that is amongst you,
notwithstanding the Truths that I have mentioned already, and shall endeavor,
by the Grace and Assistance of God Almighty, through our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, more fully to explain unto you in due time: But, as I said, if it be a
good Power, it will favor me, and assist me in it, and rejoice in it too: and
if it be an evil Power commissioned, it must cease, and submit to that
Victorious and All-conquering Name: Its Enchantments must be dissolved, and its
Sophistry and Fallacies detected. I therefore, as an Ambassador of Christ, in
the Spirit and Meekness of Christ, beseech you, Be ye reconciled to the Truths
of God, and receive them with that Reverence and Gratitude that is meet,
without Cavelling, or regard to any Temporal concern. I do not invite you to
return to the Abuses and Corruptions which you have forsaken, but to those
Truths, and to the due use of those Holy things, against which you have been
Scandalized by those Abuses and Corruptions. Nor do I invite you to dissolve
your Society, or to leave off your Meetings, and drown your selves in a
promiscuous Multitude. No, you have in part born a good Testimony, and I would
have you do so still: But I invite you only to make your Testimony more
Complete, Illustrious and Irrefragable, by bearing your Testimony to the whole
Truth; and not any longer a Testimony, like the Feet of Daniel's Image, partly
strong, and partly weak, by a mixture of Truth with Falsehood; for that cannot
stand long together; but to strengthen the things that remain, and set in order
the things that are wanting, that ye may stand; for otherwise ye will be
certainly Broken to Pieces. I invite you but to what I am doing my self with a
small Company of Poor People, that is, bearing a Testimony for God, and
manifestly under his Conduct: But it is neglected by them, to whom it has been
offered for a sufficient Time, and in a sufficient Manner, considering their
Learning, and pretense to Knowledge: And now it is offered to you, a despised
People, that God may humble the Proud and High-minded, and confound the Wisdom
of the Wise, by mean and despicable things in the sight of Men. Be Wise, and
neglect not the Opportunity, and you, who were last in the Worlds account,
shall be first. Whatever you do, you will find there is solid Truth in the
Proposal, and I wish you may receive it to the Honor and Glory of God, and
your own Comfort and Salvation; and you will then find me to have been

Your Sincere and Cordial Friend, E. S.
31 August, 1696.
The Twenty Questions.
I. WHETHER there be not a great Party of fallen Angels and wicked Spirits,
which are Enemies to Mankind, and with all the Power, Activity and Subtilty
they can, do continually endeavor to hinder their Salvation, and Communion and
Union with the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit?

II. Whether the Word, which in the beginning was with God, and was God, was
not made Flesh, and dwelt amongst Men, being born of the Virgin Mary, and
called Jesus, which signifies a Savior, and Christ, the Messiah, the anointed
of God, and Jesus Christ of Nazareth?

III. Whether his Appearance in Mortal Flesh was not to destroy the Works of
the Devil, the Prince of the Party of fallen Angels and wicked Spirits; to be a
Prince and a Savior to Mankind, and the Captain of their Salvation to all who
receive him, and subject themselves entirely to his Teachings, by his Example,
and by his Doctrine, and Precepts, and Orders recorded in the Holy Scriptures,
and by the Motions of his Holy Spirit upon and in their Hearts and Minds?

IV. Whether he be not the Only Mediator between God and Man; so that Man can
have no Communion with the Holy God, or Participation of the Spirit of
Holiness, but by and through Him?

V. Whether that Party of fallen Angels and wicked Spirits, knowing this, do
not above all things endeavor, by all means, to withhold People from closing
and uniting with that Holy Mediator, and to withdraw as many as they can as
much as they can from Him?

VI. Whether their most dangerous and subtle Actings in this Opposition be not
principally, by Way of Deceit, under the Appearance and Pretense of Good to
Man, and of Good Spirits?

VII. Whether it has not been foretold, that, in the latter times especially,
there should be many false Teachers, who, with such specious Pretenses and
secret Energy, should endeavor to draw away People from the Faith, as to
deceive, if it was possible, the very Elect; and Warnings given to beware of
them, by Christ, and by his Apostles?

VIII. Whether the Spirit of God and the Spirit of Christ be not the same, and
a Holy and Pure Spirit, a Spirit of Truth and Righteousness, leading into all
necessary Truth, and from all Fraud, Deceit, and Fallacy, Cavils, and shuffling
Evasions?

IX. Whether it be not reasonable that Christ Jesus, who had done so much for
Man, should prescribe what Manner he pleased for his Peoples engaging with Him;
and for their recognizing Him, and making their Solemn Address to the Father by
Him; and what Orders he pleased, and would have observed and continued in his
Church?

X. Whether to oppose such Appointments, Prescriptions or Orders, or to cavil
at them, seek Evasions or Pretenses to neglect them, and yet pretend to be
Christians, be not a great Evidence of Insincerity, and of a subtle
Antichristian Spirit of Satan transformed into an Angel of Light?

XI. Whether Jesus Christ, besides his General Command to his Apostles after
his Resurrection, to go to the Gentiles, and teach all Nations, baptizing them
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, etc. did not
for forty days show himself to them, speaking of the things pertaining to the
Kingdom of God, until the day in which he was taken up, after that he, through
the Holy Ghost, had given Commandments unto them, and in or with those
Commandments give them sufficient Instructions and Directions for the
Constituting his Church, which he purchased with his Blood?

XII. Whether the Apostles did not in all things faithfully pursue his Commands
and Directions?

XIII. Whether besides his express Commands and Directions, they did not also
receive the Holy Spirit, according to his Promise in an extraordinary manner,
and had the same residing in them, and manifesting his Presence with them, by
extraordinary Operations, to guide and assist them in their Work?

XIV. Whether they having received the Command to make Disciples in all
Nations, (whether Jews or Gentiles) baptizing them, as aforesaid, and teaching
them to observe all things whatsoever he commanded them, did not in all places
Preach the Gospel, exhort the People to believe and be baptized, and baptized
with Water those who did believe, though baptized before with John's Baptism,
and though they had received the Holy Spirit, whether Jews or Gentiles?

XV. Whether the Apostles, and the People converted by them, after they had
received the Holy Ghost, did not, when they came together in one, or assembled
for the Solemn Worship of God, break Bread, and eat the Lord's Supper, and do
as their Lord did, and commanded them to do; and that so constantly, that there
is not known any Assembly of Christians in the time of the Apostles, nor in
many Ages after, to have been held for the Solemn Worship of God without it?

XVI. Whether the Apostles did not ordain Elders, and appoint others, by
special Appointment, to do the same in every City; by such Authority, that none
did presume to take the Office of Elder unto himself, but who was so ordained;
or the Office of Ordaining Elders, but who was so appointed; either in the
times of the Apostles, or afterward, but who have been Infamous ever since?

XVII. Whether seeing that our Savior himself, though he needed not, would
notwithstanding be baptized with Water, to fulfill all Righteousness, and
thereupon had sensible Approbation from Heaven, did also by his Apostles
baptize with Water; and that it is plain by their Practice, that his Apostles,
and the whole Church of Christ, did understand his Command to baptize all
Nations, of Baptizm by Water, and as necessary for Forgiveness of Sins; and
that Baptism with the Holy Ghost was peculiar to himself: whether, I say, this
being so, it be not a forced and strained Interpretation, without any sound
ground, and contrary to the most authentic means of explaining words, to
restrain that Command to Baptism by the Holy Ghost only?

XVIII. Whether, if such Construction be by any Spirit more than Humane, it be
not the Spirit of Antichrist, or Satan transformed, to withold Men under his
own Dominion, from Solemnly engaging with Christ, and from Forgiveness of their
Sins in his Name? or, If it be only by Opinion of Men, such Opinion obstinately
persisted in, be not a Damnable Sin, contrary to subjection of all Imaginations
to the Obedience of Christ, and subverting of Souls, and such Teachers to be
abominated and anathematized by all sincere Christians, as Seducers, and the
Ministers and Instruments of Satan, though they appear in Sheeps clothing?

XIX. Whether, it having been the constant Belief of all Nations, (whether Jews
or Gentiles) that they had a real, though Spiritual, Communion with the Gods
they worshipped, in their Participation of their Sacrifices, as St. Paul
intimates, 1 Cor. 10. and may be proved by good Authority; and Christians duly
disposed, having a like Communion with Christ in the participation of the
Consecrated Bread and Cup, as St. Paul affirms; and the Solemn Worshipping of
God, by presenting our Prayers to the Father, with those Memorials of our
Savior's Passion, being plainly a Recognition of our Redemption by Christ, and
of his Dominion over us, acquired by his Passion, and that that is the only
Propitiation, and He the only Mediator, by which, and by whom, we Mortals born
in Sin can have Access to, and Acceptance with the Father; and St. Paul having
received the Doctrine of what he taught concerning this, from the Lord; and the
ancient Christians frequenting this Ordinance, after they had manifestly
received the Holy Ghost: Whether, I say, this being so, to reject these either
as Types and Shadows, (which are indeed Antitypes, as the Grecians express it,
Solemn Memorials, and Sensible Declarations before God, Angels and Men, of
present internal Actions of our Minds, for the greater Manifestation and
Notoriety of the Fact) be not mere Sophistry, Shuffle and Evasion; or as
needless, upon pretense that Christ is come to them in the Spirit; or of their
having the Substance; be not to set up themselves in Pride above the Apostles
and Holy Christians, who had so manifestly the Spirit of God; nay, above Christ
himself, viz. to reject that as needless, which he instituted as necessary; and
a plain Evidence of the Subtilty and Delusion of Satan, to oppose Christ, and
detain and withdraw People from his Solemn Worship, and under the most specious
appearance of the Spirit of God, by sensible Motions to things appearing Good,
and by False Lights, to corrupt and adulterate them, and get and keep a
residence in them, as if it was the Spirit of Christ? Whether such Obstinacy,
such Fallacy, in such a Matter, of such Importance in Christianity, and yet so
easy to Man, and void of all Exceptions, be not plain Evidence of a Mystery of
Iniquity in it?

XX. Whether to deliver those things in the Name of the Lord, as immediately
from the Lord, and by his Spirit, which may be plainly perceived and detected
to proceed either from a Humane Spirit, or a Spirit of Error, be not a great
Presumption against the Holy Majesty of God, and a great Scandal to the Holy
Doctrine of the Guidance of the Spirit of God, and therefore a double and great
Sin; the Sin of the False Prophets of old, and that which in Germany formerly,
and since in this Nation, raised so great a Prejudice against the Truth?

ADVERTISEMENT.
TRacts Theological. 1. Asceticks, or the Heroic Piety and Virtue of the
Ancient Christian Anchorets and Coenobites. 2. The Life of St. Antony out of
the Greek of St. Athanasius. 3. The Antiquity and Tradition of Mystical
Divinity among the Gentiles. 4. Of the Guidance of the Spirit of God, upon a
Discourse of Sir Matthew Hale 's concerning it. 5. An Invitation to the
Quakers, to rectify some Errors, which through the Scandals given they have
fallen into.

Printed for the Author, for the Use and Benefit of a Religious Society: And
are to be Sold at Mr. Holder's House in Little-Trinity Lane, 1697.


