A Plain and Easy CALCULATION Of the NAME, MARK, and NUMBER of the Name Of the
BEAST. Wherein these three Points are declared: First, The Name (in the
Apocalyptical style) is no other, but the Universal Headship of the Beast,
opposed to the Name, Power, and Headship of the Lamb. Secondly, The Number, in
the same style, is the Number of Years to the setting up of this Name or
Headship; in which respect it is called, The Number of the Name. Thirdly, The
Truth of the Exposition is cleared, by agreement of all Particulars, both in
the Text, and in the whole Prophecy; and by the Event of things, a sure
Interpreter of Prophecy.

Humbly Presented To the studious Observers of Scripture-Prophecies, GOD'S
Works, and the Times, By NATHANIEL STEPHENS, Minister of Penny-Drayton in
Leicestershire.

Whereunto is prefixed, A Commendatory EPISTLE, written by Mr. Edm. Calamy.

LONDON: Printed by Ia. Cottrel, for Matthew: Keynton, at the Fountain; Nath:
Heathcoat, at the gilded Acorn, and Hen: Fletcher, at the three gilt Cups in S.
Paul's Churchyard, 1656.

To the Reader.
THat which one faith of the Book of Leviticus, Hier. in Levit. Quot verba, tot
mysteria; quot syllaba, tot sacramenta.
may be also truly said of the Book of the Revelation, That it contains as many
Mysteries as Words, and as many Sacraments as Syllables. Hence it was, that
Calvin, P. Martyr, Bucer, Melancthon, and Luther, profess, That they durst not
adventure upon the Interpretation of it, because of the difficulty they found
in it. Hence it is also, that so many, by adventuring into this Sea, have made
Shipwreck not only of their own Credit, but also of the Truth; and have rather
revealed their own weakness, then the meaning of the Revelation. And yet
notwithstanding, I dare not but much commend and encourage those that soberly,
humbly, diligently and devoutly endeavor to find out the meaning of this Book;
especially when I consider that saying of the holy Ghost, Blessed is he that
reads, and (...) (...)
they that hear the words of this Proph^y, and keep those things which are
written therein.

Only I crave leave to suggest, That whosoever will undertake to unfold these
heavenly Mysteries, must carefully avoid three Rocks.

1. He must take heed of indulging too much to Fancy: For Fancy is not a sure
Foundation to build Divine Interpretations upon. Many men have deceived
themselves and others, by trusting too much unto the Luxuriancy of their Fancy.
There is a learned man, that makes Eight Chapters (from the 4th to the 12th) to
be Predictions of the Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, etc. And he pleases
his Fancy, making the Seals and the Trumpets to agree to this Conceit of his.
But if those Visions were presented to Saint John in Domitians time, when he
was Banished into Patmos (which was after the Destruction of Jerusalem) then
surely this Fancy of his will prove a mere Dream and Delusion. Now that John
was banished in Domitians time, and that he then had these Apocalyptical
Visions made known to him, is the Opinion of Irenaeus, Tertullian, Eusebius,
Hierome, and diverse Iren. lib. 2. c. 39. l. 3. c. 3. ^us. l. 3. c. 23. Epiph.
Haeres. 51.
others. Indeed Epiphanius says twice, That he was banished in the time of
Claudius the Emperor: But Petavius, that Comments upon him, says, That he was
herein greatly mistaken. Paraeus says, It was (...) Epiphanii, in putting down
Claudius for Domitianus. Now to build such No^el Interpretations upon a Mistake
of Epiphanius, must needs it self be a great Mistake.

2. He must take heed, that he does not appropriate what is spoken in general
concerning the Churches of Christ in the world, unto that particular Church and
Nation in which he lives. This has been a common Error of many Interpreters.
Hence it is, that a learned man makes one of the Angels that poured out the
Vials, Rev. 16.
to be Queen Elizabeth; another, The Lord Cecil, Lord Treasurer of England.
Hence it is also, that we have been so much deceived in Expounding of the
meaning of the two Witnesses, and of their eminent slaughter at the end of
their prophesying in Sackcloth: Every Nation, according to the several
Persecutions which it has been under, laboring to make the eminent slaughter
of the Witnesses, to Syncronize with its sad condition. Some say, It is past:
Others say, It is yet to come. And if I may be so bold as to interpose my
judgment, I should conceive, That the latter of these two Opinions is the
truest. For if what this Author not only says, but solidly proves, be true,
That the Roman Antichrist did not arise till 606 years after Christ: And if
Antichrist must reign 1260 years; and if this eminent slaughter must not be
till toward the end of the Prophecy of the Witnesses: then it will necessarily
follow, That it must be many years before this eminent slaughter will happen.

3. He must take heed, that he be not too peremptory in determining of Times
and Seasons; especially of such times which are yet to be fulfilled. Our
Savior Christ says, Acts 1. 7.
It is not for you to know the Times or the Seasons, which the Father has put
in his own power. And we find by sad Experience, That they that have been most
confident in defining the time when the Jews shall be converted, and when
Antichrist shall be destroyed, have been woefully deceived. One learned man
makes the Conversion of the Jews to be in the year 1650: But we have lived to
see this bold Assertion confuted. Another will have it to happen 1655; but this
also we now know to be false. Another, upon very weak grounds, concludes, That
it will be in the year 1656. Another in the year 1665. Such peremptory
Assertions and Conclusions, argue great confidence, but are built upon such
weak Foundations, that in the issue it will appear, That they have deceived
both themselves and others.

The Reverend and Learned Author of this ensuing Tractate, has undertaken a
great and difficult task; that is, To unriddle not only the Name and Mark of
the Beast, but also the Number of his Name: which he has performed with so
much Modesty, Humility, Industry, and Exquisite Care, that I am much assured,
That whosoever will vouchsafe to read what he has written, though it may be he
will not accord with him in all that he says; yet he will much commend his
pains and learning, and bless God for the good he receives by it. It cost the
Author (no doubt) a great deal of time to compose it: And it is pity that so
much pains and study should not be exposed to Public view. If Renowned and
Learned Mr. VINES (to whom this Author was well known, and who had the perusal
of this Work) were now alive, it should have had his public Approbation: But
he is now with God. And therefore give me leave in his stead (Christian Reader)
to commend it to thy diligent perusal, and to accompany it with my Prayers to
God, That that Holy Spirit which at first made known the Revelation unto Saint
John, would reveal the meaning of it to thee, and me,

Your Servant in the Work of the LORD, Edm: Calamy.

TO THE CONSCIENTIOUS READER, Whosoever he be, that has a Mind given to him
to calculate the Times, and to search into the sense of the most admired Book
of the Revelation.
BEfore I come to the Body of the Treatise, it shall not be impertinent to
remove a few prejudices in the beginning; and that I may the better be
understood, briefly to show the whole Pattern of the Work. When the Spirit does
speak of the Name of the Beast, and the Number thereof, he does insinuate, that
every vulgar understanding is not fit for such a Computation: For, says he,
Here is wisdom; let him that has understanding count the Number of the Beast,
etc. Now I do not assume to my self such a peculiarity of wisdom above other
men; for none has greater cause to have the consideration of his own
unworthiness to be set before him. But because I have had a long time a great
inclination to the study of the Prophecies, to compare them with the stories of
the Church; and finding the Lords blessing upon mine endeavors, I am the more
willing to communicate that to others, which I have found to before my private
satisfaction. I may speak it with modesty, that I have spared no pains, to
compare the whole Body of the Prophecy, Period with Period, Time with Time,
Vision with Vision. I have perused many Commentaries, both of the Modern and
Ancient Times; and used all means convenient for the discovery of Truth. And
therefore, though in this kind of Learning, I will not take it upon me to be
(...), yet I may be (...)* though I have not this wisdom, I do profess my
self to be the lover and admirer of them that have it.

Now whereas it may be some prejudice, that in this Treatise mention is made of
a Fifth Monarchy, and the Reign of Christ upon the Earth: I must needs
acknowledge the truth of the Doctrine, rightly stated; but not as the Opinion
of the Chiliasts, which does ordinarily congregate with it, many Heterogeneal
Falsities, and Unsavory Errors. For though there may be cause to maintain the
Reign of Christ upon the Earth; yet it is not necessary, to maintain his
Visible and Personal Reign: And though there may be cause to defend the
Resurrection of the Martyrs slain in all the times of the Beasts Kingdom; yet
it is not necessary to defend their historical, literal, and corporal
Resurrection at the beginning of the thousand years. And though with Mr.
Brightman and Mr. Forbes, we hold the New Jerusalem to be the glorious state of
the Church upon Earth; yet we are far from the riot of their Opinions, who hold
that men shall live without Ordinances, without Sin and Misery, in those times.

But if it be further alleged, That they that are for this way, the very best
of them have many absurdities: I answer, That Piscator, Alstedius, Mede, and
some others, have but generally spoken of the thing, and have not descended to
particulars. And as they have had great reason to depart from other
interpreters: so have they used great moderation in managing the Point; leaving
many things for the discovery of future times. On the other side, for the 1000
years, I would gladly know of them that differ, Where they will seat this
period of time? If they will say, That it is the state of the Church in Heaven;
then let them show, what is the Battle of Gog and Magog; and how the Camp of
the Saints, and the Beloved City, may be besieged in Heaven. But if they take
it for the Reign of Christ upon the Earth; then they must necessarily come to
admit one member in this disjunctive: They must say, Either this period of time
is already past, or else it is to come: If it be already past; Where has the
Church enjoyed these years of her Felicity, and of her rest from Persecutions
upon Earth? Add moreover to all this, That the Reign of Christ for 1000 years,
is immediately opposed to the times of the Reign of the Beast; and the
Resurrection of the Martyrs, to their death that has been in all Antichristian
times: Those Souls are only represented in the figure to live again, that were
beheaded for the Word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus; that had not
Worshipped the Beast, nor received his Mark, etc. If therefore we will rightly
understand the meaning of these things, here is no Visible or Personal Reign,
as some do imagine: But when the Gospel of Christ is set up as the Regent-Law
among the Nations; then the Lord Christ does take the Kingdom, and does begin
to Reign. And this (the Lords Name be praised) is begun already, by the
Preaching of the Eternal Gospel by Luther and others, Rev. 14. 6, 7. For now
whole Nations, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, have set up the Faith of Christ,
as the Religion of the State; when it was persecuted and trodden down before,
by the Authority of the Bishop of Rome, and by all States and Governments that
did own and submit to him as Head of the Church. And for the Martyrs, I
conceive, That here is no li^eral and corporeal Resurrection of their Bodies:
only John in the Vision and in the Figure, saw the Souls of them that were
Beheaded for the Testimony of Jesus: And the times of the Antichristian Tyranny
being ended, he saw their deliverance and emersion from under this kind of
death.

These things I thought good more largely to note, to take off the prejudice of
the Millenarian Opinion. Mere necessity does compel me to maintain, that which
I conceive to be a truth of God: And if the matter were rightly stated, I
believe here will be nothing found, that will cross the Analogy of the
Christian Faith, the Authority of the Magistrate, and the support of the
Public Ministry; but rather it will establish all these things.

But to come a little more near to the main scope of the present Discourse:
Seeing I take 666 to be the Number of years to the setting up of the Name of
Universal Headship; in this, perhaps, they may be offended, that are against
all Calculation of Prophetical Numbers. But for such a way in general, we have
good ground from the Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament. If any have
gone too far in other Points, to determine to a particular year, before the
Prophecy has been fulfilled, and so have been mistaken; in the present case
there cannot be the same suspicion of Falsehood. When we say, That 666 is the
Number of years, to the setting up of the Name or Universal Headship of the
Beast (in which respect it is called the Number of the Name) in this we are on
the surer side; because the truth of the thing is already verified and made
good, in the experience of the Church. And whereas all the Reformed Churches,
and our late Assembly of Divines in their Confession of Faith, Chap. 25. Sect.
6. do place the formality of Antichristianism, in this, as the Bishop of Rome
does make himself Head of the Church, in the place of Christ, the true Head of
the Church; and so consequently, is no other but a counter-Christ: In this we
agree wi^h them; and it is the substance of the ensuing Discourse. And for a
particular accommodation of the Text, we will proceed in brief, to show what
understanding we have of those passages that have layen in the dark so long.
The Reader, perhaps, will be the better prepared to understand, when he shall
have a short Description of the things that shall more largely be delivered
afterward.

First, for the Name of the Beast, the subject of the Number, I do not take it
in the ordinary way, for Lateinos, or any such Grammatical Name: But the Name,
in the sense of the Prophecy, is the Power, Headship, and Dominion of the
Beast. If there had been a true discovery of the Name in this sense, I may
confidently believe, That the Mystery of the Number had not layen in obscurity
all this while.

Secondly, for the time of the manifestation of this Name or Headship, the
greater part of Protestant Writers, and in a manner all that have spoken of
these things with any solidity, affirm, That it began solemnly, publicly, and
by Authority, to be set up in the Decree, under the Emperor Phocas. This was
the remarkable time of the rising of the two-horned Beast out of the Earth; and
this we say is exactly 666 years, from the beginning of the Roman as the fourth
Metal-Kingdome. In which respect, the Number is called, The Number of the Name;
that is, the Number that does decypher, specify and characterize the Name or
Headship, in the most remarkable beginning and edition thereof.

But seeing the great Question will be, concerning the beginning of the Roman
as the fourth Metal-Kingdome; Let us consider the whole Systeme and Body of
these Kingdoms, and so proceed by Analogy.

The first is the Babylonian. Now if we enquire where this Kingdom did begin;
Not from Nabonasser, not from any Babylonian King immediately ensuing, but from
Nebuchadnezzar: For of him it is particularly said, Thou art this Head of Gold,
Dan. 2. He first brought the Church of the Jews under the obedience of the
People of Babel; and in him therefore we are to settle the beginning of the
Babylonian, as the first Metal-Kingdome.

The second is the Persian. And here also if we examine when this
Metal-Kingdome did begin; not simply from that time, when that people began to
have a Form of Government; but from that time, as they began to exercise
Monarchical Dominion in and over the Continent of the Church. This came to pass
in the times of Cyrus; in him therefore the Persian does commence, as the
second Metal-Kingdome.

The third is the Grecian. And if we proceed in the same method, we must not
generally and indefinitely look to the times when the people of Greece began to
have Rule and Government among them; but when they began their Sovereign
Dominion over the People of the Jews. Now this came to pas^ (...) (...) times
of Alexander the Great, who is (...) (...) in (...) particular sense, expressly
called The first King, Da^. 8. 21. In him then we are to fix the true (...) and
beginning of the Grecian, as the third Metal-Kingdome.

The fourth is the Roman. And if we proceed by the same Analogy, it will be
easy to find when that Nation did begin, as the fourth Metal-Kingdome: and
here we must not reckon from the time of Julius or Augustus Caesar, but from
that time when the Roman Legions first entered Jerusalem; when they brought the
Land of Judea in subjection; when they erected their Government in those
Countries, which formerly did belong to the House of David; and when in their
particular time, they did begin to exercise the same cruelty and hardness
against the people of the Jews, as the Babylonians, Persians, and Grecians had
done before, under each of their Empires respectively. Here we are to set the
beginning of the Roman, as the fourth Metal-Kingdome. Now this came to pass 60
years before the Birth of the Lord, and 666 before the going forth of the
Decree, That the Bishop of Rome should be Head over all Churches. And so we
have the clear meaning of the Text, Let him that has wisdom, count the Number
of the Beast; and he shall find, That the Number of his Name, Government, and
Universal Headship, in the first Institution thereof, is 666 years from the
beginning of the Roman as the fourth Metal-Kingdome. And therefore 666 is
rightly and Apocalyptically called, The Number of the Name. By this Character,
the Church in the days of John, and so downward, had they given themselves to
subtilty of observation, in the discovery of the Prophetical times; by wisdom
some of them, perhaps, might have found out the particular time of the rising
of the two-horned Beast out of the Earth; and the time of the first visible
appearing of this Name or Headship, set up in the greatest derogation to his
Sovereignty and Dominion, that is only Lord and Head of the Church.

There is one thing in the Text, which if it be attentively considered, will
abundantly confirm the truth of the Interpretation. It is expressly said, Let
him that has wisdom, count (...), the Number of the Beast; (...), for it is
the Number of a Man. Though there may seem to be great difference between these
two; yet in the case we now speak of, they are but one and the same. For as
Daniel numbreth the four great Empires and Revolutions of Time, by so many
Regions, Parts and Divisions of the Body of Man: In which regard, it is called
(...) The Number of a Man, Dan. 2. So he does decypher the same Tyrannical
Empires, and the same Revolutions of Time, by four great Beasts; in which
respect it is called, (...), The Number of the Beast.

To my understanding, the Spirit does as good as point with the finger to this
way of Interpretation. For if it be a duty for him that has wisdom, to count
the Number of the Beast; the Question will be, What Rule shall he number by,
that so he may find out the Account? The Answer is plain, (...), It is the
Number of a Man. Let him count by the changes of Empire, and by the Revolutions
of Time in Daniels Image; And so the event does fully answer the Prediction:
for from the beginning of the Roman as the fourth Metal-Kingdome, there are
exactly 666 years, to the setting up of the Name or Universal Headship of the
Bishop of Rome.

Only the followers of Iunius, such as Piscator, Polanus, Willet, Rolloc,
Deodate, and others, will say, How can the Number take date from the beginning
of the Roman as the fourth Metal-Kingdome, when the Roman is no Metal-Kingdome,
but does begin at the end of all those Kingdoms? To satisfy my own
understanding, and the understanding of others, I have bestowed the more pains,
to try the force of their Arguments: for either we or they must greatly mistake
in the Point. However, let it be true as they affirm, that not the Roman, but
the Seleucian, is the fourth and last Metal-Kingdome; then all the
Metal-Kingdomes must necessarily determine and expireat the destruction of the
Seleucian. And so, according to the tenor of this Doctrine, we shall have that
which will singularly agree with our way of Calculation. For if the account be
made from the end of all four Metal-Kingdomes, from the terminus ad quem; in
the same series and method of Computation, there will be 666 years to the
setting up of the Name or Headship of the Bishop of Rome. And so we shall
concord with the Principles of Iunius; and as to the Point in hand, he and we
shall facere paria.

This is in brief the understanding which I have, both of the Name of the
Beast, and the Number thereof. Now if any shall ask, What proof, or what
evidence I have to hold forth the truth of the thing? I answer, The process of
the Demonstration, is by Conglobation, and by a full Induction of Singulars;
and it is this in effect: Where there is a true correspondence with all the
Circumstances of the Text, the most remarkable Passages of the Prophecy, and
the Event of things; that is a true Interpretation. But the present is such:
Ergo, etc. All the burden of proof will rest upon the Assumption. I have to
this purpose applied it then to all the Circumstances of the Text, Chap. 13. I
have compared it with the main drift and scope of the Spirit, Chap. 17. I have
examined it by the tenor of the Apostles Doctrine, 2 Thessalonians. 2. And last of all,
I have showed how it does agree with the several passages in the body of the
Prophecy, and with the event of things.

And now, Reader, whosoever thou art, that have a mind given thee, rightly to
calculate the Number of the Beast, I leave it to thee to read, to meditate, to
examine, and to judge of the things that I have written. If I have anywhere
deviated from the Truth, I desire thy brotherly Admonition: And if anywhere it
shall please the Lord, to make this Treatise an Instrument of light to thy
understanding, know, That thou have this Treasure brought to thee in an earthen
Vessel, that the praise may be of God alone. And so I rest,

Thine in the LORD, N. S.

THE CONTENTS of the CHAPTERS Of the ensuing TREATISE.
CHAP. I. COncerning the Profitableness, and the Use of the Discovery, Page 1
CHAP. II. Concerning the Possibility of the Discovery; and how that there are
certain demonstrative Principles to bring the Truth to light, page 12 CHAP.
III. That the Name of the Beast is not the word Lateinos, or any other
Grammatical word; but the Name is, The Universal Power and Headship of the
Beast, immediately opposed to the Power, Dominion, and Headship of the Lamb,
page 18 CHAP. IV. Concerning the Number of the Name of the Beast; where it is
showed, That the Name or Universal Headship began publicly to he Established
under the Emperor Phocas, 666 years from the beginning of the Roman, as the
Fourth Metal-Kingdome, page 36 CHAP. V. That the Roman is the Fourth and Last
Metal-Kingdome in Daniels Image; and the truth of this is proved against the
Positions of Junius, Broughton, Piscator, Dr. Willet, and others, page 46 CHAP.
VI. That the Beginning of the Roman, as the Fourth Metal-Kingdome, is not from
the time of Julius, or Augustus Caesar, or from any other ^ulgar (...); but
precisely from that instant, when the (...) o^ God came under the Dominion of
the Romans, 60 years before the Birth of the Lord, and 666 before the going
^orth of the Dec^ee, That the Bishop of Rome should be Head o^r all the
Churches, page 116 CHAP. VII. The whole process of the Discourse is repeated:
That there are 666 years from the Beginning of the Roman as the Fourth
Metal-Kingdome, to the setting up of the Name or Universal Headship of the
Bishop of Rome; And that this is the meaning of the Spirit in the Revelation,
when he speaks of the Name of the Beast, and of the Number of the Name, page
158 CHAP. VIII. The Truth of the Interpretation is proved, from the remarkable
Circumstances of the Text it self, Revel. 13. 16, 17, 18. page 165 CHAP. IX.
The Truth of the Interpretation is further Confirmed, from the scope of the
Seventeenth Chapter of the Revelation, page 212 CHAP. X. A List of Fifteen
Principles drawn from the main sense of the Prophecy, concerning the Beast, his
Name, Mark, and Number; by the Position of which, the present Interpretation is
established. Also, the several Expositions of Mr. Potter and other Writers, are
brought to Trial, page 219 CHAP. XI. A brief Description of the Doctrine of S.
Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. And how he does fully agree with the present Interpretation,
page 238 CHAP. XII. The Application of the whole: Where mention is made first,
of those things that are directly Antichristian, page 247 CHAP. XIII.
Concerning that which is Antichristian by Analogy and Reduction, page 251
CHAP. XIV. What these things are which are Antichristian only by the Position
of some Circumstances, as they are truly Christian by the Position of others.
The Conclusion of the whole, page 277 CHAP. XV. Concerning those things which
are not Antichristian, but are only falsely so called by the Separation, page
291
There are diverse faults to be amended: some are lesser, which we leave to the
courtesy of the Reader to pass by; others there are that do more notably mar
and deface the sense: which we do desire that he will amend.

Page Line For Read 94 3 briefly fully 135 23 be brought be there brought 142
11 in the fourth is the fourth ibid. 27 secret sacred 185 29 seventh Angel
seven Angels 193 20 typical proof topical proof 216 21 Augustus Angulus 229 12
to that Government in that Government

Some Hebrew words are not right printed, page 51, 101, 118, 153. The terms in
the Conclusion of the first Argument, page 117. are misplaced. And so are the
words in another expression, page 57. lin. 17, 18.

A plain EXPOSITION OF THE Number of the Name of the Beast, Revel. 13. verse. 18.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Profitableness, and the Use of the Discovery.
BEfore I come positively to set down the meaning of the Number, and what the
Holy Spirit does hereby particularly intend, it shall be profitable to speak
Two things: First, Concerning the Use of the Discovery: Secondly, Concerning
the Possibility thereof.

For the Use: It is a matter of some Concernment, that I should treat of this
in the beginning; first, out of respect to that Common Maxim, Let all things
be done to Edification. I shall therefore endeavor to let it appear to the
Christian Reader, how he may be builded up in the Faith, and how in this
Argument he may have matter of Correction, Reproof, and Instruction in
Righteousness. I shall do it the rather, because many, in these times, are
preoccupated with prejudice. Paraeus in his Commentary upon the Revelation, and
in the Preface of the Work, has these words: Apocalypsin interpretari non est
nodos aenigmatum omnium solvere, apices omnes a^u fodere, nihil omnino
ignorare, vel quid Imago, quid Character, quid Numerus Nominis Bestiae, quid
Bestia ipsa, etc. By this it is evident, what the forenamed Interpreter does
judge concerning these Points; to wit, The Beast, the Name, the Mark, and the
Number of the Name. He takes them to be but Punctilio's and Niceties in this
kind of Learning. But saving the great worth of so judicious an Author, I shall
now endeavor to make good the Contradictory to his Assertion, and shall prove
these to be Points very Momentous, and much conducing to the knowledge of the
whole Prophecy.

First, If you take the Book of the Revelation in the main Scope, it is for the
most part carried on in the Description of the Kingdom of the Beast, in the
time of the beginning and continuance of that Kingdom as it stands in
Diametral opposition to the Kingdom of the Lamb, and of his Saints. The Lord
Jesus Christ, that sent his Angel of ^et purpose, to sig^e to the Churches
things that must shortly come to pass, ^endeth a great part of the Prophetical
Narration in the description of the Beasts Kingdom, and in the delineation of
the Name, Mark, and Number; the essential Badges and Characters of the Kingdom.
Therefore it must needs be a matter very behooveful to the right understanding
of other parts of the Prophecy, to define in the beginning what is signified
under these Em^ems, or typical Expressions.

Secondly, The holy Spirit speaking of the Image of the Beast, (...) Name,
Mark, and the Number of his Name, (...) (...), That i^ giving worship to the
Image, and in (...) (...) (...) Mark, the great sin of the world has consisted
in these latter times, chap. 13. verse. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Now then if the
great sin of the world has primarily and chiefly consisted in these things, it
is a most material Point to find out what the holy Spirit does mean by these
symbolical and figurative expressions. I cannot mourn for a sin privately in
heart, neither can I publicly reprove it in others, but I must first know what
the sin is. But that this Idolatry may more fully appear, let us amplify it by
two Circumstances.

First, By the Circumstance of Place, where, and how far it has been used. And
here it is plain, in all the parts of the Dominion of the Beast, none may buy
nor sell, but he that worshipeth the Image, and receives the Mark. He causes
all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to be subject to his
Laws. If you look to the Latitude of the Dominion, the Scripture speaks of a
very large and ample Dominion that the Beast has. For the Nations were
deceived, chap. 20. verse. 3. All the world worshipped the Beast, chap. 13. verse.
8. The Kings of the Earth did also agree to give their power to the Beast,
chap. 17. verse. 17. Therefore the Dominion of the Beast must be very great: and
by consequent, the sin must be an Ecumenical sin, practiced in all the parts
and precincts of so large a Dominion. Seeing also it is not the sin of one
particular Nation, City, or Church, but in a manner the general and the common
Apostasy of the times; therefore it is of great moment to be considered. The
sin of Jeroboam is much spoken of in the Scripture, that it was a sin of
departure from the true God, and that it continued long after his death: yet
for all this, it was only practiced within the compass of the Ten Tri^es, so
long as they continued a Kingdom. But now the worship of the Beast, and the
receiving of his Mark, have overspread all Nations in the Christian world; only
there have been some faithful Witnesses which have stood for the Truth, and
have been slain for the testimonies sake.

Secondly, For the Circumstance of time, how long shall it be that men must
worship the Beast and receive his Mark? This must be in all the times of the
Kingdom of the second Beast. For though I do not fully agree with Mr Mede (as
may appear by that which I shall afterward deliver) That the ten-horn'd and
the two-horn'd Beast are exact contemporaries in all their times; yet in
substance, and in the main, they are said to be of equal continuance. The time
of the ten-horn'd Beast is 42 months, or 1260 prophetical days, or ordinary
years. So then, some small proportion being deducted, this period will be the
time also of the two-horned Beast, and of the worlds receiving the Mark and the
Image which he made. Therefore seeing this sin shall continue many ages
together, it behooves us to make the more diligent search into the matter.
Nebuchadnezzar set up a great Image, as the type of the Babylonian Majesty; he
caused all the States of that Empire to come together to the Dedication of the
Image; he commanded them all under pain of death to fall down before it: He had
a note of distinction also, to discern between the worshipers of the Image, and
those that refused that worship. Yet all this was done as it were in an instant
of time. But for the Image of the Beast, set up in honor of the Roman Majesty;
this has continued many ages. Here all Nations, Languages, and People are
required to worship: here is a penalty laid upon all that shall refuse to yield
Obedience to the Command; and here is a mark to distinguish between those that
are the Beast's, and those that are none of his. These Tyrannical and
Idolatrous practices have continued, by the fore-appointment and counsel of
God, for many generations. Therefore considering the largeness of the place,
and the long continuance of the time that the world has sinned, and does yet
continue sinning against Christ in these very things; we may conclude, That it
is no nice curiosity to find what is meant by the Beast, his Name, Mark, and
the Number of the Name.

Thirdly, If we consider the grievous Judgments of God denounced against all
those that worship the Beast, his Image, and receive his Mark in their Forehead
and their Right hand, that they shall drink of the Wine of the wrath of God,
which is poured out without mixture in the Cup of his Indignation: Also, that
they shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy
Angels and of the Lamb; and the smoke of their burning shall ascend for ever
and ever, chap. 14. verse. 9, 10, 11. The learned Grasserus rightly observes,
That in the whole Canon of Scripture there is nowhere a more terrible judgment
threatened, than that which is here denounced against the men that worship the
Beast, and receive his Mark. And shall we account it but a curiosity, to find
out the meaning of Christ in these things, in which also the precious Souls of
many thousands are so deeply hazarded, and that for ever, to their eternal
perdition, if they repent not? Our Savior foreseeing the great Calamities
that should befall the Church and People of the Jews at the Destruction of
Jerusalem, had great tenderness of heart toward them. At the instant of his
Suffering, he said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your
selves, and for your Children: For the days are coming in which they shall
say, Blessed are the barren that do not bear, and the Papps that never gave
suck: Luke 23. 28, 29, 30. Even so at this present day, though the friends and
followers of the Church of Rome are the greatest Enemies that we have; yet
nevertheless had we the heart of Christ, and did we see the greatness of their
sin, and the grievousness of the wrath to come, we would have tender Affections
toward them, we would mourn over them with many tears. But how shall we do
this, if we our selves do not understand what this sin is, and what judgment
the Lord will bring upon them for these things? Therefore it is no idle
Speculation to meditate on this subject, which concerns the sin of the world,
and the great judgment of God because of the sin.

Fourthly, If we consider the special Cause of the Martyrdom and the Sufferings
of the Saints, it was specially for these things. And therefore in the
beginning of the Beasts Kingdom, and Edict was made, That all who would not
worship the Image should be put to death, chap. 13. verse. 15. The Victory of
the Saints also that stood upon the glassie Sea, mingled with fire, was of them
that had overcome the Beast, his Image, Mark, Name, and the Number of his Name,
chap. 15. v. 2, 3. At the beginning of the thousand years also, those Souls
sa^e upon Thrones, and judgment was given to them that were beheaded for the
witness of Jesus, and for the Word of God, that had not worshipped the Beast,
nor received his Mark. We may conclude then, That these were the special Causes
of the Martyrs Sufferings in all the times of the Beasts Kingdom, and were the
eminent object of their Victory and Crown in the end of the Kingdom. Now shall
we think the knowledge of these things to be a nice Speculation? I think that
there is nothing more seriously to be thought of; and I believe also that it is
the mind of Christ, that we should so judge of the matter.

Fifthly, If we consider the object of the Vials, upon what kind of persons
they are poured out. They are poured out upon a People that are distinguished
by such Badges and Cognizances as these, That had the Mark of the Beast, and
worshipped his Image, chap. 16. verse. 1, 2, 10, 13. Now then, if we would know
what the Vials are, and wherein the justice of God does appear in his pouring
forth of them in these times (for these are the times of the Vials) it would be
a Point very necessary and material to the opening of this Doctrine, to show
what is meant by the Image of the Beast, and the Mark of his Name: for the
Vials, full of the wrath of God, have their several and respective operations
upon these kind of men. Therefore it is no matter of light curiosity, to
discover what these things are, and what kind of persons are deciphered and set
forth under these Characters.

Sixthly, Considering the Promises that are made to the Church, That after the
time of the Beasts Kingdom, then the Dragon shall deceive the Nations no more,
chap. 20. v. 3. That wherein the Nations have been deceived, in all the times
of the Beasts Kingdom, is in the matter of worshipping the Beast, in adoring
his Image, and in receiving his Mark; as may appear, chap. 13. v. 13, 14. chap.
20. v. 3. Further, whereas it is said that the two-horned Beast did deceive
them that dwell on the Earth, by the means of those Miracles he had power to
do; Here we must not think that this deceiving of the Nations was only at that
instant; but he has deceived them, and does deceive them, and will deceive
them in all the times of his Kingdom. And it is particularly said of the Kings
of the Earth, to wit, The deluded Kings, that they shall agree to give their
Kingdoms to the Beast, till the words of God shall be fulfilled. When those
times are once fulfilled, the Dragon shall deceive the Nations no more. For
though he and the Beast are two, yet in this business they are but one. The
Dragon deceives the Nations by the Beast, the Beast is the Dragons Vicegerent
in deceiving the Nations. When the Beast is destroyed, the Dragon also shall be
bound up, that he shall deceive the Nations no more. If we descend to
particulars, and enquire wherein the Nations have been deceived, the whole
Scope of the Prophecy does direct us to the worship of the Beast, and to the
receiving of his Mark. It is no frivolous study then, to dive into the Sense,
and to search into the Meaning of these things, seeing they are the
subject matter of such an universal Delusion. And who can tell when these
things shall come to be more clearly known to the Consciences of them which
have been formerly seduced? When they shall come also more perfectly and fully
to know what the Spirit means by the Name of the Beast, his Mark, and Image,
and how they have greatly sinned against Christ in yielding to these things.
Who can tell what a mean this may be of their undeceiving? We may probably
suppose that the States and Governments of this world may more easily be
brought off from their subjection to the Beast, when we shall define the true
natural meaning of the Spirit, and lay the definition before the Conscience. In
the great Controversies betwixt the Sea of Rome and other States, it is
remarkable what the Champions of that Church do usually propound; they speak
much of the stability of that Seat, grounded upon the Promise, Tues Petrus,
etc. And in very deed, if we look to experience, how many Kingdoms, how many
Churches in the East and in the West have totally perished, and have come to
nothing, when that Church and See has continued in the greatest Glory, and
that for many Ages? Now this being laid as a Foundation, is not here great
reason alleged to the Conscience, that the States of Christendom should yet
continue their Obedience to the Catholic, Apostolic, Roman See, as they call
it? None can deny but That Authority has been wonderously and miraculosly
preserved in all times, and in all changes of time. And for mine own part, I do
openly confess, That to me it is a great wonder to see a State o^ Government to
continue so many Ages, and yet to abide one and the same still. But when I read
the Scriptures, I find that the Roman Dominion, in the last and Antichristian
Edition, must continue a long time, ^o the admiration of the world. The
Caesarean Majesty was to continue some good space of time; and that being cut
off, the Antichristian is to be restored, as the wonder of the world. And
therefore it is said, That all they whose Names are not written in the Book of
Life from the foundation of the world, shall admire when they behold the Beast,
that was, and is not, and yet is, chap. 17. verse. 8. Now then, if we can make
it appear what is the meaning of the Spirit in these things, when the
Antichristian Kingdom began and how long it must continue; if we can show what
is meant by the Name, Mark, and the Number of the Name, and how all these are
applicable to the universal headship of the Sea of Rome, and to the worlds
living in subjection to that headship; if these things can be cleared (as by
the Lords assistance I shall endeavor to clear them in the process of this
Treatise) I hope that this will not any longer be accounted a fruitless
inquiry, which may be the mean (under the grace of God) to redeem the Souls of
men from such a thraldom. For, put case you have to do with such a one who
places a great part of his Religion in yielding subjection to the universal
headship of the Bishop of Rome; You shall do much toward his Conviction, when
out of the Scriptures in general you shall be able to prove such an Obligation
to be contrary to Faith in Christ. And this many worthy Writers have done
already. Yet you shall do more, when out of this particular Scripture you shall
be able solidly to prove the Profession of such an Allegiance to be the Mark of
the Beast. If they that separate from our Church, and cite that Scripture, Come
out of Babylon my People, would first define what Babylon is, and that the
Church of England is the Babylon that St. John speaks of, they would carry on
their business more demonstratively and Apocalyptically. Till this be done,
they do but beat the Air. The same Law may be given to us, when we charge the
Roman Catholics that they are such that receive the Mark of the Beast. To
justify the charge, we should define in the first place what the Beast, his
Name, Mark, Image, and the Number of his Name do signify; and when this is
done, we should show how these things do agree to the head-ship of the Roman
Bishop. If there be no performance of this, how can we accuse them of a sin,
and we our selves be altogether ignorant what that sin is? Therefore the right
determination of these things is no trivial matter, as some imagine.

Seventhly, If we consider the Reign of Christ upon the Earth for 1000 years,
to the better understanding of this, it is behoveful for us, first of all to
know what is the Reign of the Beast over those that have the Mark, and worship
the Image. For it is the Scope of the Spirit to set the Reign of Christ in
immediate opposition to the Reign of the Beast. If therefore we can well
understand the nature and manner of the Beast's Reigning over those that have
his Mark, and worship his Image, we shall be the more able to see the nature of
the Reign of Christ. For the knowledge of one contrary does exceedingly conduce
to the knowledge of the other, specially in that Point wherein the contrariety
does stand; and the contrariety between the Lamb and the Beast does lie in the
Sovereignty. Now for the clearing of this Truth, we can prove it from the Scope
of the Prophecy, and from the coherence of the Visions. For in the former part
of the Prophecy, from the beginning of the 13 chapt. to the end of the 19, it
is the Plot of the Spirit to describe the Kingdom of the Beast in its first
Institution, in the greatness of its power, in its cruelty against the Saints,
in the time of its continuance, and in other Adjuncts of that Dominion. At the
end of the 19 chap. he shows how the Beast is cast into the Lake of Fire; and
when this is done, he begins to ^peak of the Reign of Christ, and of the
Resurrection of the Martyrs. From the whole Scope of the Prophecy it is
evident, That the Reign of the Beast is opposed to the Reign of Christ for 1000
years: where the Beast does make an end, at that instant of time the Reign of
Christ does begin; And where the death of the Martyrs is fully complete, there
the Resurrection and emersion out of the Antichristian Death does immediately
ensue.

Now for the Consequents that follow the destruction of the Beast's Kingdom,
John tells us, I saw an Angel come down from Heaven, having the Key of the
bottomless P^t, and a great chain in his hand; and he laid hold on the Dragon,
and bound him 1000 years. Further, he did cast him into the bottomless pit, and
set a Seal upon him, that he should deceive the Nations no more, chap. 20.
verse. 1, 2. Now if the question be put, How, and wherein were the Nations
deceived? I Answer, It was in the worship of the Beast, and in receiving his
Mark: for it is mentioned in the two last verses of the former Chapter, That
the false Prophet deceived them that received the Mark of the Beast, and
worshipped his Image. When the Beast was destroyed, then the Dragon was bound
up, and so an end was put to the deceiving of the Nations.

By all that has been spoken, it is evident, That the Reign of the Beast in
all his times, is immediately opposed to the thousand years of the Reign of
Christ. Therefore, if we would know the nature of the Reign of Christ, in what
manner he shall Reign upon the Earth, and how his Martyrs shall Reign with him;
it is needful that we should understand what is the Reign of the Beast over
those that receive his Mark, and worship his Image. It is needful also, that we
should understand the whole Antichrisian time, to be the season of the Death,
Sufferings, and Beheading of the Mar^yrs for the testimonies sake. When this
time is ended, then there shall be a rising, or a standing up from this Death.
The right stating of these things, will prepare the way for the discovery of
the 1000 years. And for ought as I can discern, one chief reason wherefore we
are so dark in the Apprehension, and confused in the Notion of the Reign of
Christ, is this, Because we do not first Expound, and make clear the Reign of
the Beast, what it is, what his Name, Mark, or Image are, nor what is the
Number of his Name.

These, and many other Reasons, might be brought to prove the Use and Profit of
the Discovery. But to gather up all into one Sum: If any think these things to
be a Nicety, ^et them consider, First, That these are the distinctive Badges of
the Beast's Kingdom. Secondly, That the great Sin of the Christian world for
many Ages, has been in worshipping the Image, and receiving the Mark. Thirdly,
The grievous Judgments of God denounced against men for these things.
Fourthly, The Cause of the Martyrs Sufferings, because they would not worship
the Beast, nor receive his Mark. Fifthly, The object of the Vials; they are
poured out upon a People distinguished by these Characters. Sixthly, The
deceiving of the Nations in the matter of the Mark of the Beast, and the
worship of his Image. Seventhly, The Reign of Christ upon the Earth; which will
be the more demonstratively understood, by the right Stating of the Reign of
the Beast ^ver those that worship the Image, and receive the Mark. All these
Considerations laid together, plainly show the Use and Profitableness of the
Discovery.

Now let us proceed to the second Point, to the Possibility thereof.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Possibility of the Discovery, and how that there are
certain Demonstrative Principles to bring the Truth to light.
THere are now living in these times many who think that there is no meddling
with this Prophecy, especially in the matter of the Beast, and the Number of
his Name. But I would entreat all such, seriously to ponder in their own
hearts, Whether by this Opinion of theirs, they do not secretly accuse the Lord
Christ, either for want of Truth, or want of Wisdom. For what man of Truth will
call that a Revelation, which is no Revelation at all? And what man of Wisdom
will say, Blessed is he that reads, and keeps the words of the Prophecy,
when there is no possibility to read it so, as to understand? And
particularly, Shall the Lord Jesus give serious warning to his Church and
People? shall he show them so long beforehand the great sin of the world,
which shall consist in the worship of the Beast, and in receiving of his Mark;
and when all comes to all, shall it be presumption to show what is the meaning
of Christ in these things? To what end were they Revealed, if there be no use
of the Revelation at all? and there is no use, if it be so difficult that it
cannot possibly be understood. It was a special part of Love in Christ, to send
and signify to his Servants, things that must come shortly to pass. But what
part of Love is it, to signify it in that manner, that they cannot possibly
understand what he means?

You will say, It was revealed to some Select ones. I grant that some of the
Servants of Christ have a peculiar Gift to understand the Typical Expressions
in this Prophecy (as every Member in the Church has his peculiar Gift
dispensed, to the edification of the whole Body) and therefore they are bound
to lay out their Talent this way, for the common good. But what shall we say of
them that account it curiosity in any whosoever, to meddle with these studies;
and are absolutely for the concealing of these things from the People?

But if it be alleged, That Experience shows how they have been deceived,
who have bestowed their pains in this kind of study:

I Answer; The same Experience plainly shows, That they who have come with a
sincere mind to find out the Truth, to study the whole Body of the Prophecy,
to compare Time with Time, Vision with Vision, and the Prophecies with the
Stories, have had a good return of their Labors. I may say, without prejudice
to those that went before, That Bullinger in his time, Brightman in his time,
Grasserus in his time, Mede in his time; each of these have made their several
and respective Additions to the clearing of the Prophecy. If we endeavor to
carry on the Work where they left it, at least with the same Industry and
Fidelity, we may (by the blessing of God) be the instruments of bringing those
Mysteries to light that were not discerned in former Ages. And for my part, I
do firmly believe, That God will not cease to raise up such, in the times
following, as shall clear the things that have layen dark in the Prophecies,
and do yet remain hid to us. But for the present, because many think that the
Name of the Beast, and the Number of the Name are unsearchable Mysteries; let
me lay down some Reasons to prove the Possibility and the Evidence of the
Discovery.

First, The Name of the Beast, and the Number of his Name, are the Essential
Characters of a State or Government obvious to the view of men. It is said of
the Writings of S. Paul, that there are many things in them hard to be
understood, 2 Pet. 3. 16. There may be good Reason given for this, to wit, The
sublimity, and the spiritualness of the matter: for a Natural man, that has no
Experience in his own heart, how can he judge of the meaning of the Apostle,
when he speaks of the Life of the Spirit, of the leading of the Spirit, of
the Comfort of the Spirit, of the putting off of the Old man, and the putting
on of the New? When a man has no experience, how can he understand these
things that are so largely spoken of in the Epistle to the Romans? Now it is
not so with the Name of the Beast and his Mark; these are the Badges of a
Government obvious to the Senses of all men. If there be any difficulty, it
lies only in the typical and figurative way of expression.

Secondly, The Name of the Beast, and the Number of the Name are the essential
Characters of a State or Government which the Church has had long experience
of for many Ages. For the Monarchical Kingdom of Christ that shall be over Jews
and Gentiles in the latter times, though there are many things spoken in the
Scriptures concerning this Dominion, yet there are sundry passages hard to be
determined, because the event has not yet showed the meaning of the Prophecy.
Now there is nothing wanting, so far as it concerns the event, to make known
to the Church what is meant by the Name of the Beast, and the Number of the
Name.

Thirdly, The Name of the Beast, and the Number of the Name, are such
Characters, that the Church in Being has the present Experience of. Many
things are dark in the Old Prophets, because the Stories of those times are
lost to us. The Jews could better understand the meaning of some Prophecies
than we can. And I believe, the greatest Knot in Expounding the 70 weeks of
Daniel, lies principally in this, To show precisely, and determinately, where
that Number of Time does begin. There is an excellent agreement between the
Greek Historians about the respective times of the Kings of Persia: But the
Knot lies in this, Rightly to determine who that Darius was in whose times the
Temple was built, and the City repaired. This thing was better known to the
ancient Jews than it is to us. But now for the Name of the Beast, the Mark, and
the Number of the Name, there is not the like Reason of darkness in these,
because they are in the present experience of men, and the Stories concerning
these things are in recent memory.

Fourthly, The Name of the Beast, and the Number of his Name are again and
again repeated in several parts of the Prophecy upon sundry occasions. And
therefore though one text be dark and obscure, it may be made more clear by
comparing it with parallel places. In the Description of the Vintage, we read
that blood came unto the horse bridles a thousand and six hundred furlongs,
Rev. 14 20. Now, so far as I apprehend, it is hard to show what is the Number
of Furlongs, seeing no other text does speak of the Number. But for the Name of
the Beast, and the Number of his Name, these are spoken of in diverse texts, and
therefore we have greater helps to understand the meaning of them: And
therefore if this text by it self be hard to be understood, yet it may be made
easy, being compared with many other places.

Fifthly, The Name of the Beast, his Mark, Image, and the Number of his Name
are so repeated, that their Repetition is in another place, and another manner;
and this conduces very much to the clearing of that which is obscure. The Four
Monarchical Kingdoms are something darkly set forth under the Type of the Four
Metals. To help this matter, the holy Ghost repeateth them again under the
Similitude of Four Beasts, chap. 7. Even so, the two-horned Beast that came out
of the Earth, which exercised all the power of the tenhorned Beast in his
presence, is something obscurely delivered, chap. 13. Now, to remedy the
Obscurity, the Holy Spirit delivers the same matter in another manner, chap.
17. There is the same delineation for the substance of the matter; but there a
Woman is said to ride a Scarlet-colored Beast, full of the Names of Blasphemy.
Therefore by the Name of the Woman, or the whorish Church, we may find out the
Name of the Beast: Seeing these are so many several forms of Expression of one
and the same matter.

Sixthly, The Name of the Beast, and the Number of his Name, are directly
opposed to the Name of the Lamb. It is well observed by Modern Expositors, That
in the whole Body of the Prophecy there is a direct Antithesis and
Contraposition between the Lamb and the Beast; the Kingdom of the Lamb and the
Kingdom of the Beast; the followers of the Lamb, and the followers of the
Beast: those that have the Name of the Father written in the forehead, and
those that have the Mark of the Beast. Therefore, if we can understand what is
meant by the Lamb, and those that have his Fathers Name written in their
foreheads; we may by these be guided to the knowledge of the Beast, his Name,
Mark, and those that have the Number of the Name.

Seventhly, It is expressly said in the Text, Let him that has Understanding,
count the Number of the Beast, etc. These words imply that the matter is not so
unsearchable, but by diligent and narrow enquiry, he that has wisdom may find
out what these things are, and what they signify. We read of the Number of the
144000 that were sealed in their forehead, chap. 7. But there is no mention
made of any such thing, that he that has Wisdom should count the Number of the
sealed ones. The Elect of God, that stand out for his truth in all the times of
Antichrists Kingdom, are peculiarly known to himself who they are, and what
they be: and therefore he does not require of any man to find out the meaning
of this Number. But when he speaks of the Beast, his Name, Number, and the
Mark of his Name, the will of the Lord Jesus is, That every man is so
concerned, that he should endeavor to find out the natural and genuine sense
of these Typical Expressions. And whereas it is said, Let him that has Wisdom,
count the Number of the Beast; the meaning is this, That they that have a
peculiar dexterity given them of God, to compare the Prophecies and the Stories
together, should do their endeavor to bring the truth to light for the public
good. If any be of that judgment, That this is a Secret that is impenetrable,
let him show the meaning of that Phrase, chap. 17. verse. 9. There the same
Expression is used, Here is the Mind that has Wisdom: the seven Heads are
seven Mountains on which the Woman sits. Now all the world knew, or might
know, that this is the City of Rome: but because the seven Hills are
Parabolically set forth by seven Heads; there is some kind of wisdom to be
used to show the meaning of the Expression. And so in the present case, when
the Spirit speaks of a Beast, his Name, Mark, and Number, all the wisdom here
required, is, to render these things plainly and nakedly, which the Spirit does
decypher Mystically and Figuratively. Now then, to Collect all together into
o^e Sum: 1. Seeing the Name of the Beast, and the Number, are the Characters of
a Government obvious to the senses of men. 2. Seeing also that the Church has
had long Experience of these things. 3. Seeing the Churches Experience is in
fresh and recent Memory. 4. Seeing that these Characters are again and again
repeated in several places of the Prophecy. 5. Seeing they are repeated in a
various and different manner. 6. Because there is an immediate contrariety
between the Beast and the Lamb; the Name of the Beast, and the Name of the
Lamb. 7. Because the Word it self says, That it is the duty of him that has
wisdom to calculate the Number. All the forementioned Reasons do plainly show,
That these Matters do carry Demonstration in them; and that there is a
possibility to find out the Name of the Beast, and the Number thereof. And
though many, both in these, and in former times, speak of such things, as the
ancient Geographers did of the Unhabitableness of the Torrid Zone; yet as
Experience has showed, that these Regions are well Inhabited; and though the
Heat of the Sun be very great, yet there are many Helps for Habitation: So in
like manner, though in the present case the Holy Spirit uses a dark and a
figurative way of Expression, yet we should not despair of a true Discovery of
these Mysteries. Rather, we should consider the many Helps which the Lord has
afforded us to find out the certainty of his meaning, when he speaks so
seriously to the Churches.

There is a wide Difference to be made between that Knowledge which is built
upon Opinion and Tradition, and that true Scientifical Knowledge founded upon
the cleerness of Demonstration. This in the General all will confess; but when
we come to Singulars, we are not so prompt to make the Distinction as we
should. For it comes to pass, that in some Subjects, which might be
Demonstratively handled, many times we Converse but Probably, and Topically:
And that which is more to be considered, in Demonstrative matter, we many times
content our selves with a bare conjectural Knowledge, and go no further. So in
the present case, touching the Beast, his Name, Mark, and Number, men do only
take up with a Topical Knowledge: yet I am persuaded, if they would look to the
Principles laid down in the whole Body of the Prophecy, they would find that
here is a certain Demonstration to be had, and that they need not go to literal
Names, to numeral Letters, to Anagrammatisms, and to suchlike uncertainties.

Thus I have passed through the two Prooemial Points: The First, Concerning the
Profit and Use of the Discovery: The Second, Concerning the Possibility
thereof; and that there are true Principles of Demonstration to Discover the
meaning of the Spirit. Now I will come to the Body of the Treatise.

CHAP. III. That the Name of the Beast is not the word Lateinos, or any other
Grammatical word; but the name is, The Universal Power and Headship of the
Beast, immediately opposed to the Power, Dominion, and Headship of the Lamb.
FOr the carrying on of the whole Work, we will divide the Matter into Two
Parts; into that which is Doctrinal, which concerns the Truth of the thing; and
into that which is Practical, which is for Use.

For the Doctrinal Part, We will First handle the Substance of the
Interpretation. Secondly, We will prove it by sundry places of Scripture, and
by the Harmony of the Prophecy.

For the Truth of the Interpretation, We will First show what is meant by the
Name: Secondly, What is meant by the Number of the Name.

For the Name, It is most necessary that we should begin with the Exposition,
what it signifies: For the right Stating of the Name does much conduce to the
Knowledge of the Number. It is the Number of the Name; and therefore unless we
show what the Name is, we cannot find out the Number. All true Learning
shows, That in every Demonstration we are to begin with a right Exposition of
the Subject.

And whereas, in a manner, all the Learned, down from the times of Irenaeus,
have taken Lateinos for the Name, and the Numeral Letters for the Number of the
Name; Herein they have been greatly deceived, as we can prove by many solid
Reasons. And some of our own Interpreters also have suspected the vanity of
this way. These are the words of Iunius, in his Notes upon the Revelation,
Chap. 13. verse. 18.

I am not ignorant (says he) that men bring other Interpretations of the
place; but by their leave, I also have brought my Interpretation to be
compared, and that for this reason, specially because to me it seems not
probable, nor like, That the Number of the Beast, or the Name of the Beast
ought so to be taken as the common strain of Interpretors will have it. For
(says he) this Number of the Beast, he ( scil. the Beast) teaches, gives,
and imprinteth, as the public Note of his own; which Note he highly rateth
above others, as the Note of his beloved Ones. Now these Interpretations seem
to be so far wide from the Propriety and Condition of this Number, whether we
respect the Name Latinus, or Titan, or any such like. For these the Beast does
not teach, give, nor imprint; but with the greatest care forbids them to be
taught, and boldly denies them. He does not allow, but disallow them; and
those which do so esteem of this Number, he does persecute with a direful
hatred. So far Iunius. Let us now add the words of Chamier, in his Panstratia,
Tom. 2. lib. 17. cap. 8. sect. 5, 6. Truly (says he) this way of
Interpretation ( that I may speak freely what I think) seems to be far wide
from the manner of the Spirit, and to come too near to the dreams of the
Cabalists. Whereas we read in the Sybils Verses, That Jesus is described by
888, this is a babble, and not from the Spirit of God. Secondly, This cannot be
the proper Name of one Man, seeing we have formerly showed the Error of them
who will have Antichrist to be one Individual Person. Therefore of necessity it
must be either a Name common, or a Name proper to some State: But by what right
may the Name of the Beast be called common? and for a Name proper to some
particular State, no man has brought that to Light. Thirdly, It is not said
that it is the Number of the Name only, but here is a prohibition to men, That
they shall not buy nor sell, that have not the Number of the Name. How this may
be understood of that Cabalistical supputation of the Letters, I cannot
discern: Neither can I discern how other men may have the Number of the Name.
Farther, What is the way of Computing? Is it Hebrew, Greek, or Latin? But it is
not the manner of the Latins to count by Letters; therefore it must be a Greek
or an Hebrew Name. But how can Antichrist assume such a Name to himself, that
is only peculiarly known in the Schools? So far Chamier. I might here recite
the words of Danaeus, Mr Forbes, and others; but these Testimonies shall
suffice to take away prejudice from me, because I do forsake the ordinary
stream of Interpreters, and do look after such a Name of the Beast which is
more true. The Work which I have more specially to perform, is positively to
prove, That the Name of the Beast is the Universal Headship of the Bishop of
Rome; and by the same Reasons, by, and through which I will disprove Lateinos,
I will prove the Universal Headship to be the Name of the Beast. And the
Reasons are as follows:

First, I argue from the main Scope of the Text concerning the Beast as he is a
Monarchical King: and here I say, his Name must necessarily be his Sovereign
Power and Headship. The Rabbis have a good Observation, What God himself is,
that his Name is. So I may say, What the Beast himself is, that his Name is.
The Beast, not only in this Text, but all the Prophecy throughout, is
described as a Monarchical King; therefore the Name of the Beast must be his
Universal Power and Headship.

Object. Seeing the Name of a thing, person, or State, is of so doubtful a
meaning; what warrant is there to take the Name of the Beast for his Sovereign
Power and Headship?

Answ. I confess, That the Name of a thing, person, or State, is ambiguously
taken. But yet for all this, it is not so Obscure, if we will take the right
course to understand the Scripture.

Inst. You will say, The great Question lies in finding the right course.

Rep. The right course lies in this, By looking to the main sense in each text
respectively; and the main sense will guide the Interpretation.

Let us come to give some Instances out of the Scripture, but more specially
out of the Book of the Revelation.

For Instances out of the Scripture; We often read of calling upon the Name of
the Lord; of trusting in the Name of the Lord. Now is not the calling upon the
Name of the Lord, the calling upon God himself? the trusting in the Name of the
Lord, the trusting upon the Lord himself? This does make good that former rule,
What the Name of God is, that God himself is. And so by way of Opposition, what
the Name of the Beast is, that is the Beast himself. If he be described as a
Mighty King, we have cause to take his Name for his Monarchical Power and
sovereignty.

Secondly, We often read in the New Testament of believing in the Name of the
Son of God, etc. we do not then look to the Name Jesus, or the Name Christ, as
though there were any Virtue or Efficacy in the Letters and Syllables of these
Names; but in this case, the sense of each Scripture must govern. And therefore
when the Apostles do Exhort us to believe on the Name of the Son of God, in
their sense we are exhorted to believe on the Lord Christ, for pardon of sin,
for help in temptation, and for supply in all our wants. We must not look to
Letters and syllables, but to the main sense of each Scripture. In like manner,
when we read of the Name of the Beast, and the Saints overcoming his Name,
Mark, and the Number of the Name, we are not here to look to the word Lateinos,
or any such Grammatical Name; but, according to the sense of the Prophecy, the
Name must be taken for the Potency of the Beast, as he is Opposed to the Lamb.

But let us come more largely to show some particular Instances out of the Book
of the Revelation, where the Name of a thing, person, or state is to be
expounded, according to the Analogy of the text.

We read that there were with the Lamb 144000, and that they had their Fathers
Name written in their Forehead, chap. 14. verse. 1. Now these 144000 are set in
direct Opposition to the followers of the Beast; and their Father's Name
written in their forehead, is contradistinct to the Mark of the Beast in the
forehead, and the right Hand. Now here, s^th there is mention made of the Name
of the Father, and of his Name written in the forehead of all the followers of
the Lamb, shall we think therefore that it is made out of the Alphabet, or that
it is a literal Name? Not so: we must look here to the main scope of the text,
and accordingly we must render the meaning of the words. They that have their
Father's Name written in their forehead, are such who in all the times of
Antichrist had consecrated, dedicated, and given themselves up to God the
Father, to live in subjection to his Commandments, and to take him as their
sovereign Lord; this was the Badge of their outward Profession. By the rule of
Opposition, they that had the Name of the Beast were such as did resign their
Obedience to him, as to their sovereign Lord: And the submission to this
Lordship, was the Badge and Livery of their outward Profession: this is clear
from the scope of the text.

Further, We read chap. 2. verse. 17. To him that overcomes will I give a white
Stone, and in the Stone a new Name written, that none can read but he that has
it. Now what is here meant by the Name written? shall we say that it is a Name
consisting of Letters and syllables? If we so affirm, we shall have as good
foundation for such a Position as they who take Lateinos to be the Name of the
Beast. But this is to trifle in a serious matter. Therefore we must have
recourse to the forementioned Principle, to wit, The scope of the text. When
the Lord Christ promises to give to him that overcomes a white stone, and in
the stone a Name written; this is nothing else but the inward testimony of the
Spirit, by, and through which he seals extraordinary Consolations to his
Martyrs and Witnesses, in the midst of their sufferings, under the tyrannical
States and Governments of the world. Many worthy Expositors take this for the
seal of the Spirit that follows Justification, as may be seen in several late
Treatises. But I take it, That the Promise in the text, and so commonly through
the whole Prophecy, is immediately made to him that overcomes in the times of
Persecution: And therefore these things do more immediately concern the
Martyrs; the in-coming of Christ into their hearts, and the divine Consolations
which they feel in the Name written, which none can read but they that have it.

Let us go to the meaning of that Promise, Rev. 3. 12. He that overcomes will
I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: and I
will write upon him the Name of my God, and the Name of the City of my God,
which is the new Jerusalem, which comes down from Heaven; and I will write
upon him my new Name. In these words, when the Lord Christ promises to him
that overcomes, That he will write upon him the Name of his God; does he
intend here a writing by Letters and syllables? This cannot be. But, according
to the scope of the place, this is the meaning of Christ, That they that
overcome, shall have this peculiar testimony given into their hearts, That the
Lord is theirs, and that they are his.

Further, Whereas it is said, I will write upon them the Name of the City of my
God: By this he does mean The true Catholic Church, represented Rev. chap. 21.
The scope of the words is this, That he will inroll them into the Number of
Citizens, and count them as Members of the true Church, his Mystical Body. And
for the truth of the Interpretation, we do chiefly build upon the scope of the
text.

But now let us go to other Scriptures, where usually the Name of a thing is
taken according to the Analogy of the text. It is said concerning the Church
of Sardis, Thou have a few Names which have not defiled their Garments, and
they shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy, Rev. 3. 4. Here then,
when it is said, Thou have a few Names; shall we understand this to be meant of
Grammatical Names? This cannot be. The drift of the text is concerning the
persons of men and women which did not defile themselves in the times of
general Pollution. And so at the destruction of Rome Antichristian, there was a
great Earthquake, and there were slain of the Names of men 7000, chap. 11.
verse. 13. Now for the Names of men, shall we understand Names consisting of
Letters and syllables? What a kind of slaughter would this be? According to the
scope of the text, and the manner of the Hebrew expression, we may say, That
such a Number of persons were slain in the Earthquake. Add moreover to this,
That the Beast which did carry the Whore was full of the Names of Blasphemy,
chap. 17. There is none so void of understanding to imagine, That the Spirit
speaks of such Names that do consist of Letters and syllables. We must here
go to the sense of the text which speaks of his Blasphemy against God. And so
the matter is expounded, Rev. 13. He opened his mouth in Blasphemies against
God, to Blaspheme his Name, his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven.
These, and the like places laid together, do plainly show, that the scope of
the text must circumscribe and limit the signification of the phrase so often
used in this Prophecy. Now if it be so, according to this tenor, we may say,
That the Name of the Beast must be expounded according to the Analogy of the
text. His Name then can be no other but his Universal Headship, as a
Counter-Christ, emulous of the Dignity of Christ.

But to go to further Instances, we do read that the deluded Kings were all
gathered together into a place called in the Hebrew Harmageddon, Rev. 16. 16.
Much ado is made by Expositors about the meaning of the word. Some take it for
the Mountain of Delights. Some, for the Hill of the Gospel. Some think there is
an Allusion to the slaughter of Josiah in the valley of Megiddo. And there is a
great Difference among them. But for my part, I do believe there can be no
other meaning but this, to wit, The destruction of a Troop, or Company: and my
Reasons are these; First, It is expressly said, That the Name of the place in
the Hebrew is called Harmageddon; that is, The destruction of a Troop: and
this Exposition is given by Grasserus, and others. Secondly, That which moves
me so to think, is the subject matter of the text; For the unclean Spirits like
Frogs did gather the deluded Kings to Battle, and they brought them into a
place called Harmageddon, which in the event proved the place of their
destruction. It is well known, That it is the manner of the Hebrews to give
Names to several places, in testimony of some famous Actions that have been
done in them. And it is as evident, that the Spirit in this Prophecy does
perpetually follow the Hebrew style. As in the times of the fifth Trumpet, when
the Locusts came out of the bottomless pit, they had a King over them, whose
Name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon; and in the Greek is Apollyon, chap. 9.
Now this Trumper, Mr Brightman, and Mr Mede, do rightly apply to the times of
the Sarazens. And because they did in great multitudes everywhere overspread
the Territories of the Church, they are therefore compared to Locusts. Now for
the Name of their King in the Greek or Hebrew tongues, we are not here so much
to look to Letters and syllables, as to the sense of the figurative expression.
Mr Mede then, in his Commentary upon the Revelation, does seem to me to be too
Cabalistical, when he does descant upon the Names of some Kings formerly
amongst the Arabians. We are not to trouble our selves with Letters and
syllables. Mahomet is the Head, or King of these Locusts, or rather the Devil
acting in, and by him. And too sad experience does show that his Name is called
in the Hebrew Abaddon, and in the Greek Apollyox. For what is Mahometism, but
the waster and destroyer of the Christian Faith? The Name does answer the
nature. In the times of the third Trumpet, we read, That a great star fell
into the third part of the Rivers, and the Name of the star is called Wormwood.
Interpreters upon the place do not look so much to a literal star, but it is so
called Effective, from the Effect, or Operation. By these, and many other
places, it is evident, when the Spirit speaks of a Name, Thing, Person, or
State, he does not aim so much at the bare formality of Letters and syllables,
as at the scope of the text. Upon these grounds, if the Beast be a King, or
Potentate, his Name is not a Grammatical Name; but, according to the scope of
the place, it must necessarily denote his Kingly Power, and Headship.

Let us come to a place mentioned in the Old Testament, which has been greatly
mistaken by the Jewish Rabbis, and by some others; the words are these: The
Lord said to Moses, I appeared to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, by the Name of God
Almighty; but by the Name Jehovah I was not known unto them. Exodus 6. 3. Here
great ado is made by the Rabbis aforementioned: they speak much of nomen
Tetragrammatum, of the word of four Letters, of the difficulty to pronounce
that Name, and of bables more than too many. And what is the reason of all
this? they look superficially upon the outward Letter, and neglect the main
sense and scope of the place. The main sense is this, That God appeared to
Moses, by the Name Jehovah, by, and through which, he did give Existence and
Being to his Promises. And yet we are not to take it absolutely, as though the
Lord did no way appear to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob by that Name. This cannot
be. We are therefore to take the words in a restrictive meaning, in respect to
that particular Promise, that he would give the Land of Canaan to Abraham and
his seed for a Possession, G^n. 15. 13, 14. Now in this particular sense, God
did not appear to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, by the Name Jehovah; they never
lived so long to see the performance of this promise. They did not see the end
of the 400 years Bondage, not the Deliverance out of Egypt, as Moses did. The
Lord only did appear to them by the Name of God Alsufficient; they might
believe that he was able to perform what he promised. In special relation then
to this particular Promise, the Lord says to Moses, By my Name Jehovah was I
not made known to them. If this be so, what a wild race have they run, who have
looked only after a Name consisting of Letters and syllables, and have not
observed the Truth of God in the performance of his Word? What is this, but to
make a Fable of the most important and comfortable Promises that be; to neglect
the substance, and to catch at a shadow? And the ground of all this is chiefly
from hence; they look to the outside and shell of a figurative expression, and
neglect the natural sense of the text, which in this case should principally
rule. In like manner, they who are for the word Lateinos, or for any such like
Name, must needs digress as much from the Truth. For it is not to be imagined,
that the Name of the Beast is merely a Name consisting of Letters and
syllables; neither can the Mark of the Beast be the Mark of such a Name,
according to the sense of the text, and the Analogy of the Prophecy. The Name
of the Beast therefore, must be his Universal Power and Headship; and the Mark
of the Name, must be the public Profession of subjection, allegiance, and
devotion to that Name, or Headship. And this is clear from the several
Instances fore-alledged, where the Name of a person, of a state, of a thing, is
always taken with correspondence to the text. But if it be alleged, That it
may be so taken in this place for Power and Headship, but it is not absolutely
necessary that we should build upon such a sense: I Answer; The Name of the
Beast must necessarily be construed and taken for his Power and Headship;
because, as a Potentate, he does confront the Lord Jesus Christ, the true Head
of the Church: this is the scope of the Prophecy, and therefore the Name of
the Beast cannot rationally and fairly be taken in any other sense. Paraeus, in
his Commentary upon the Romans, does open the meaning of these words; As I
live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall
confess to God, Romans 14. 11. From the misunderstanding of this place, he
tells us, That the superstitious bowing at the Name of Jesus had its first
original. And he does show the irrationality of that practice: For why (says
he) should men be uncovered? and why should they bow their knee at the Name of
Jesus, rather than at the Name of Christ, or at the Name of God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost? Further, He does insist upon the greatness of their
superstition, when men give worship to Letters and syllables, rather than to
the Person himself. And therefore he comes positively to define what is meant
by the Name of Jesus. And so he says, Nomen Jesus non est vox d^ssyllaba,
scripta, picta, aut pronunciata; sed persona, Majestas, and imperium
Serv^toris, cui omnes subjectionem debent. The Name of Jesus is not a word of
two Syllables, written, painted, or pronounced; but it is the Person, Majesty,
and Dominion of our Savior, to which all do owe Subjection. So I may say in
the present case, That the Name of the Beast, and the Number thereof, is his
sovereign Power and Authority, to which all his V^stals do yield their
subjection; and they have departed from the true meaning of the Spirit, who
have looked to the Name Lateinos, and the Numeral Letters of that Name: For the
Name is not a word of one, two, three, or four syllables, written, painted, or
pronounced; but the Name of the B^ast is his Power and Headship, standing in
immediate Opposition to the Name or Headship of the Lamb. But if you ask, What
certainty there is of this Interpretation? The ground I build upon is the rule
of Opposition, and the whole scope of the Prophecy. If we take the Name for a
Grammatical Name, what certainty can there be, and who can particularly define
what the Name is? Doctor Mayer upon the place, having rejected several Names,
and their Calculation by Numeral Letters, does thus determine; As long (says
he) as we go this way to work, we shall never be able to Convince the
Adversary, there being so many Names that do contain the Number. And for my
part, I do believe, That if men will peruse the Greek and Hebrew Lexicons, they
shall find many words, which either severally, or jointly, will make 666, by
the calculation of the Numeral Letters. Now, what certainty is in all this? On
the contrary, If we take the Name of the Beast for his Universal Power, this
does agree with the Circumstances of the text, with the Analogy of the
Prophecy; and there can be no good exception to the contrary.

Now to gather up all into one Sum: Though the Name of a Thing, the Name of a
Person, the Name of a Place, the Name of a State, or any suchlike, may be
ambiguors; yet we may find out from the scope of the text, that which will
determine the ambiguity. If any shall say, That the Name of the Beast may be
taken for any thing else as well as for his sovereign power; I yield that it
may be so: but if we look to Analogy in the Scripture, it must needs be taken
for his sovereignty. As therefore in the like cases, when the Scriptures speak
of believing in the Name of the Lord, of the writing of the Name of the new
Jerusalem, of the Name of the Lamb, of the Name Abaddon, Apollyon, Harmageddon;
of the Name of the Father in the foreheads of the 144000; of the Lords making
himself known to Moses by the Name Jehovah; of the Fathers giving to the Son a
Name above every Name, that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow: As in
these several Scriptures we are not to look after Names consisting of Letters
and syllables, but to judge of the Truth according to the scope of the text;
So, in the present case, we are not to look after such a Name of the Beast that
is merely literal, but after such a Name that will hold correspondency with the
subject matter of the text, and with the nature of the thing it self. If this
be so, it is easy to conclude, That the Name of the Beast is no other but his
Potency or Headship.

Secondly, We argue from the Condition and Quality of the Mark. For as a priori
we may come to the knowledge of the Mark by the right stating and defining of
the Name: So a posteriori, by the knowledge of the Mark we may come to
understand what is meant by the Name; seeing that it is called the Mark of the
Name: They shall be tormented day and night that receive (...), the Mark of the
Name, Rev. 14. 11. I find that many approved Commentators, who do much differ
from the Truth of our interpretation, do willingly agree, That the profession
of a Roman Catholic is the Mark of the Name. Now, upon their own grounds, do
they not affirm also in sense and substance, That the Universal Headship of the
Bishop of Rome is (...), that Name of the Beast? For what is the profession of
a Roman Catholic? Is he not such a one that does believe, receive, and profess
the Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome? Take away the Catholicism of the
Roman Bishop, the Faith and Profession of a Roman Catholic will be a mere
non-ens, or nullity. So then, if this Profession be the Mark of the Name, (as
Grasserus, Brightman, Piscator, and other Expositors will have it) I say, upon
their own grounds, the Universal Headship must be the Name it self, seeing the
profession of a Roman Catholic is (...), the Mark of the Name. And so our
Conclusion is proved a posteriori. From the Condition and Quality of the Mark,
we may know the nature of the Name.

The third Argument is drawn from the Image, which is Homogeneal and answerable
to the Name, in the nature and essence thereof. For the Image of the Beast, I
might take it as a thing already sufficiently declared in the Commentaries of
the Protestant Writers. In them, it is nothing else but that Expression of the
ancient Splendour and Glory of the Roman Majesty, anciently decayed in Rome
Imperial, and in the latter times repaired and revived in Rome Papal. The scope
of the text shows that this is the meaning, and that the Image was made to
the Beast which was wounded in one of its Heads, etc. Now then let us say, That
the Roman Majesty revived again from the dead, that this is the Image, how
shall the Name Lateinos, or any other such like Name consisting merely of
Letters and syllables, be answerable to such an Image as this? What Equipage or
Correspondence can there be between quid nominis, and quid rei? Shall we once
imagine that the repair of the Roman Majesty in these latter times is only of a
Name that consists of Letters and syllables, and such like elements of the
Greek and Hebrew Alphabet? Away with such a conceit. But if you take the Name
for the Universal Headship, you shall have a Name truly correspondent to the
Image and to the Mark. For when the Decree went forth, that the Bishop of Rome
should be Universal Head of the Church, then was the ancient Roman Sovereignty
repaired in the Popes, which was formerly lost in the Caesar's. Here both the
Name and the Image are equivalent each to other, and do differ only in a
certain consideration. And the Mark also agrees with both the former, seeing
it is but the public profession of subjection to that Name or Power.

The Fourth Argument is drawn from the Antithesis or Contraposition of the Name
of the Lamb to the Name of the Beast. By the description of one Opposite, we
may find out the Nature of the other. For the Name of the Lamb, it is
described, Revelation, chap. 19. verse. 16. He has on his vesture, and on his
thigh, a Name written; King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Here then, in this
Scripture, we do not look after a literal Name, but after his Power or
Sovereignty, as he is Lord or Head of the Church. We read also, Phil. 2. 9.
Because he humbled himself to the Death of the Cross, God highly exalted him,
and gave him a Name above every Name, that at the Name of Jesus every k^ee
should bow, etc. Here many in darker times have taken this for a literal Name;
and therefore it has been a great use to bow the knee when the Name of Jesus
was mentioned. But the ground of the mistake is this; They have not looked to
the main scope of the text, and the Nature of the Expression. For the Name in
the text is not the word Jesus, consisting of Letters and syllables; but the
sublime Power, Authority, Headship, Dominion, and Sovereign rule, that God the
Father did give to his Son after the suffering of Death. And this is so
expounded by the Apostle himself in another place; Which he wrought in Christ
when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in heavenly
places; far above all Principalities, and Powers, and Might, and Dominion, and
every Name that is named, not only in this world, but in that which is to come.
And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things
to the Church, Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22. Therefore the Name is no other but the
Sovereign Power that God the Father did give to his Son the Lord Jesus, as Head
of the Church. By the rule of contraries then, the Name of the Beast must needs
be his Universal Power and Headship, seeing in all respects he is emulous of
the Dignity of the Lamb. By the Nature of the one, we may understand the Nature
of the other contrary. If the Name of the Lamb be his Sovereign Dominion, King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords; the Name of the Beast, ex adverso, on the other
part, must be his Universal Headship over all Lords, and Kings, and earthly
Dominions.

The Fifth Argument is drawn from the parallel and resemblance with the Name of
the Whore. It is a good Observation of some Modern Interpreters, That the State
or Government described chap. 13. under the Type and Similitude of a Beast with
two Horns, is again more largely repeated under the resemblance of a Woman,
riding upon a Scarlet-colored Beast, R^v. 17. Now seeing there is such a
parallel between the descriptions in both Chapters, as to the substance of the
matter, let us then more diligently consider what is meant by the Name of the
Woman: Upon her Forehead was a Name written, Mystery, Babylon the Great, the
Mother of Harlots, and the Abominations of the Earth, verse. 5. Here, I think,
none will be so void of Judgment as to look after a literal Name, and a
literal Inscription in the forehead of the Woman. The Name is no other but that
Universal Maternity, or Motherhood (as I may so say) of her that professes
herself the Head, or Mother Church of all the Christian world, but is indeed,
and in truth, the Mother of all the Abominations and Idolatries of the Earth.
In like manner, when we read of the Name of the Beast, we are not to look
after a literal Name, (as Lateinos, and the like) but his Nam^ must be his
Universal Paternity, Fatherhood, Power, and Dominion. By the Analogy of one
Expression, we may ^e out the meaning of the other. If the Name of the Great
Whore be not a literal and syllabical Name, but in the figure does only denote
her general Motherhood; so proportionably, the N^ o^ the Beast is not a literal
Name, but in the Trope i^ ^oth only signify his Universal Dominion, and
Authority.

If we transfer Matters to Experience, we shall find the eve^ of things does
fully Answer these Characters of the Prop^ecie. It has been a general received
Maxim, in many Ages together, That out of our Holy Mother, the Church of Rome
(as they call it) there is no Salvation to be had; she is the Mother of all
true Catholics, with them that are her Admirers. But in the Scripture Language
she is called Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, and the Abominations of
the Earth. So it has been as generally received, That all are bound to submit
to the Authority of our Holy Father the Pope. But this in the
Scripture Language is the Name of the Beast, and the Mark of the Name. I think
it is not done without the special Wisdom and foreknowledge of God, that these
two things (in which the Christian world should err so greatly) should be set
forth with such remarkable Characters, to draw the admiration of all that read.
But leaving these things for a deeper enquire, it is sufficient for my present
purpose, to note, that the Name of Mystical Babylon is not a literal Name, but
the general Motherhood of that City and Church. So the Name of the Beast, by
way of parallel, is not a literal Name, but it is the Universal Headship of the
Beast, as Lord and Potenta^e.

The Sixth Argument is drawn from the Ground and Reason of the Imperial Edict,
chap. 13. verse. 16, 17. He causes all both small and great, bond and free, to
receive a Mark in their Forehead and their right hand; and that none might buy
nor sell, but he that has the Mark of the Name. Now then, if the Name be a
Title or Appellation, that consists only of Letters and syllables, how will
this redound to the benefit or perfection of the Beasts Kingdom; if men of all
Degrees and Orders shall receive a Name, merely consisting of Numeral Letters
and suchlike trifles? But if you take the Name for the sovereign Power and
Headship, there is nothing more rational and common, than for the Kingdoms of
this world to make Laws that all should live in subjection to their Power and
Authority. And Experience plainly shows, That in all the Kingdoms of the
Christian world, stricter Laws have been made for the Preservation of the
Dignity of the Catholic, Apostolic, Roman See, (as they call it,) and for the
maintenance of the Decrees made by that Authority; than there have been for the
support and Defense of their own Communities. Among many, take this one
Instance, of the Statute Ex Officio, made here in England in the times of Hen.
4. In which Statute it was provided, That all they should be Burned publicly
in the sight of the People, that did maintain, teach, inform, openly or in
secret, any thing contrary to the Catholic Faith, and the determination of the
Holy Church. And so in the times following, by virtue of this Law, the faithful
Martyrs, under the Title of Lollards, have been publicly burned for speaking,
preaching, writing, and declaring against the Decrees and Superstitions
established by the Authority of the Church of Rome. And it is as plain, That
neither the Scripture, nor any Article of the Creed, nor any other Point of the
Christian Faith is received among them, but that which is warranted by this
Authority. From whence we may easily collect, what is meant by the Law and
Injunction of the Beast, That none might buy nor sell, but such only that had
the Mark, and the Number of the Name. We are not to take the Name
Alphabetically; For, to what end should he command men to receive such a Name
as this? But if you take the Name for the Universal Headship, and the Mark for
the public owning of subjection to this Headship, there is great Reason given
for the making of such a Statute; and it is fully proved by the event.

The Seventh Argument is taken from the Essence of the great Antichrist, as he
is set forth 2 Thessalonians. 2. For the Pith and Marrow of the Apostle, in this
description, is to express the great sublimity of Power that the man of sin
should assume to himself, in and over the Church of God. These are the words of
the Text; He as God, sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is
God, verse. 4. From these words we may gather, the Essence of the Antichristian
Kingdom lies in the affectation of a kind of godlike Dominion and Headship, in
and over the Church of God. Now then, as the ^on of God has merited of his
Father to be only Head, and only Lord: So must our subjection be rendered to
him without communicability of such a prerogative to any other* For though
there be gods many, and lords many, there is but one Universal Head, on whom
the whole Body of the Church does depend. In this sense, as the Son has
merited of the Father to be the Supreme Lord, and Head; there is none de jure
can be, but himself only. Now then, when Paul in the Thessalonians does
describe the Essence of the Beast's Kingdom, he does show that it does chiefly
confist in the Headship and Dominion over the Church. And this is that which
John in the Revelation calls the Name of the Beast.

And so far we have gone in the Discovery of the Subject of the Number: We have
showed by many Reasons, That the Name is The Headship of the Beast.

Now we shall in the next Chapter endeavor to Calculate and Compute the Number.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Number of the Name of the Beast; where it is showed,
That the Name or Universal Headship began publicly to be Established under the
Emperor Phocas, 666 years from the beginning of the Roman, as the F^th Metal
Kingdom.
FOr the carrying on of this Complicate Proposition, we are to make Two things
clear: First, That the Name, or Sovereign Dominion of the Beast, began
precisely at that time of the Universal Headship under the Emperor Phocas.
Secondly, That there is a C^in of 666 years from the beginning of the Roman, as
the Fourth Metal Kingdom, to the Name, or Universal Headship afcre^aid.

First, Concerning the E^sion of the two-horned Beast out of the Earth, I find
a great consent in the Commentaries, Controversies, and Stories of the Church,
That the Two-Horned Beast began in the Universal Headship under the Emperor
Phocas. Crackan^orp, in his Treatise against Spala^, calls it the C^ one of
the Building. And in very deed, though many Authors do stiffly maintain, That
the Name is the word Lateinos, and that the Number is made out of the Numeral
Letters of that Name: yet if you put them upon it to state the Original of the
Beast's Kingdom, they do generally in a manner pitch upon the year aforesaid.
But we will not depend upon Authority. Therefore to the right computing of ^he
true Apocalyptical time, we will Observe these ensuing Principles.

Principle 1. There must be some particular instant of time when the
Antichristian state, Typed by the Beast with Two Horns, had its first visible
rising out of the Earth. This is proved from the words of the Text: And I
beheld another Beast coming out of the Earth, and he had Two Horns like the
Lamb, and he spoke as the Dragon, Rev. 13. 11. And therefore, as there was a
certain and determinate time, when the Babylonian Lion, and the Persian Bear
came up out of the Sea; that is, As there was a certain time when the
Babylolonian and Persian Monarchies began: so there must be a particular and
certain term of time, when the Antichristian Monarchy must come up out of the
Earth also. If this be well observed, it will cut off a multitude of
super^luous Di^putes concerning the Infancy, Childhood, Middle age, and other
degrees of the Antichristian state. In these points every man may abound in his
own Fancy; but sure I am, according to the true Apocalyptical process, there is
mention made but of one visible and remarkable beginning of the Two-Horned
Beast: And this is at the time of his rising ou^ of the Earth.

Princ. 2. Secondly, The time of the rising of this Beast must be after the
dissipation of the old Empire, and the beginning of the Ten Kings, Typed and
Figured by the rising of the Ten-Horned Beast out of the Sea.

There are Two Branches in this Principle.

The First is this, That the time of the beginning of the Two-Horned Beast must
needs be placed after the Fall of the Empire. This is clearly proved from the
Scope of the 13 and 17 Chapters of the Revelation. Both these Scriptures do
pitch upon this, that there must be a taking away of the Imperial Majesty, and
a kind of Chasm, or Intercision of that sovereignty, before the Roman Dominion
in the last, the re^aired and Antichristian state thereof. In the 13 Chapter it
is said, That the Ten-Horned Beast had a wound in one of his heads, verse. 3.
What is this wound, but an intercision or cessation of all Roman Majesty in the
world, at the rising of the Ten Kings? The Two-Horned beast by his De^es did
cure the wound, verse. 14, 15. What is this cure, but the renovation of the same
Sovereignty in the Popes, which was formerly lost in the Caesar's? So in the 17
Chapter it is said, That all the world worshipped the Beast; When they beheld
the Beast that was, is not, and yet is, v. 8. What is meant here, by the Beast
that is not? This notes the total cessation and abrogation of the Roman
Majesty at the Fall of the Empire. And, by the Beast that is; This ^eth the
re^ing of the Roman Majesty from the Dead, when it was formerly lost in the
Caesar's. Both Scriptures then do plainly show, and so does S. Paul in the
Thessalonians, That the Empire must first Fall, before the Antichristian times
can begin. They therefore that set the beginning of the Beast's Kingdom at the
time of Victor, or at Constantines removing the seat of the Empire to
Constantinople; or at the Reign of the Emperor Iul^an, or at any other time
before the Fall of the Empire: To my understanding they do anticipate the true
beginning of the Beast's Kingdom, and do go against the Grounds and Foundations
of all true Apocalyptical learning.

The Second Branch of this Principle is this also, That the time of the
beginning of the Beast with Two Horns, must be after the rising of the Ten
Kings, or the Ten-Horned Beast out of the Sea, chap. 13. verse. 1. For, though
the ancient Commentators take the first Beast to be the Old Empire, yet the
latter Interpreters, (such as Brightman, Peraeus, Mede, and others) do more
rightly understand this to be the rising of the Ten Kings out of the ruins of
the Empire. And in very deed, if we consider the time of the Beginning of this
Beast, it was presently and immediately after the Dragons Flood, scil. after
the Inundation of the Barbarous Nations. Secondly, The Manner of the Rising.
The Beast had Ten Crowns upon his Horns at the time of his Rising out of the
Sea, which notes the Division of the Roman into Ten inferior Kingdoms, in
that notable change of State. Thirdly, The time of his Continuance. He was to
continue 42 Months; and this is the exact time of the Sufferings of the Church
under the Antichristian Persecution. These, and many suchlike Reasons, do
strongly prove, That the Beast with Ten Horns, and his rising out of the Sea,
does Note and decypher, The standing up of the Ten Kings out of the Ruins of
the Empire. And here then, The beginning of the 42 Months, the time of the
Reign of this Beast, is set forth by a true Demonstrative Character; and we may
not doubt of the certainty thereof.

Further then, If we look to the scope of the Text, the rising of the Beast
with Two Horns must needs be after the rising of the Ten-Horned Beast; and so
consequently after the standing up of the Ten Kings out of the Ruins of the
Empire. And so the Visions will be rightly applied to their true times. I know
nothing of moment which does contradict this Assertion, but only that which is
spoken by Mr Mede in his Apocalyptical Key, Synchronism the second: Where he
endeavors to show, That the Ten-horned Beast, and the Beast with Two Horns,
are exact Contemporaries in all their times. These are his words; A se invic^nt
neque ortu suo, neque interitu separantur: quinetiam altera alterius potestatem
(...), hoc est in praesentia ipsius administrat. And then he concludes, Quis
non vidit illas omni aevo suo necessario contemporare? But saving the great
respect I bear to this Author, I cannot see, first, how this can agree with the
scope of the Scripture: Secondly, With the event of things: Thirdly, With the
Tenor of his own Doctrine, as he delivers it elsewhere: Fourthly, With the
Body of the best Protestant Expositors, who have spoken most Pro^atively
concerning the beginning of the Beast's Kingdom.

First, I cannot see how he agrees with the Scripture. For John saw first a
Beast come out of the Sea with seven Heads and ten Horns, and ten Crowns upon
his Horns; and after that he saw another second Beast which came out of the
Earth with Two Horns. From whence we may easily collect, That the rising of the
one, is in order of time before the rising of the other: and therefore they no
not ad amussim contemporare ortu suo, they do not exactly agree in the time of
their Original.

Secondly, I cannot see how he agrees with the event of things. For at that
time, when the Ten Kings arose out of the ruins of the Empire, there was no
Roman Sovereignty in the whole world. For, as we have formerly mentioned, The
Beast had a wound in one of his Heads; and therefore there was an intercision
and a cessation of that Potency for a time. We yield that the Two-Horned Beast
is the Restorer of the Ten-Horned Beast; he cured the wound, and made the Image
to speak, and live. It is true, that he revived the Roman Sovereignty from
Death to Life: but this reviving was not as soon as the Ten Kings rose out of
the Ruins of the Empire.

Thirdly, I cannot see how this agrees with Mr Mede's own Doctrine: For he
says, Apost. page 83. That the Fourth Beast is the Roman Kingdom; the Ten
Horns are the Ten Kings that arise out of the dissipation of the Empire; and
the little Horn he says expressly that it must arise after them, page 74. For
so he will have the Chaldee word to be all one with (...) of the 70; to wit,
That the little Horn must arise behind the Ten Horns. Now then, if the Papacy
must arise after, and behind the Ten Kings, it is plain, That he does
contemporate with them ortu suo, in his beginning; and that according to Mr
Mede's own Principles.

Fourthly, I cannot see how he can agree with the Body of the best Protestant
Expositors, who have demonstratively written of the beginning of the Beast's
Kingdom. For, as many almost who have spoken of the rising of the Two-Horned
Beast out of the Earth, have applied this beginning to the Bishop of Rome, in
the times after the Fall of the Empire, when the Decree went forth, That he
should be Head over all the Churches.

All the Circumstances of the Text laid together, prove the truth of this
Interpetation. We come now to the Third Principle.

Princ. 3. The time of the rising of the second Beast must be so stated, That
all the circumstances of the Text may agree to such a beginning. We must not
leave the times of the Fall of the Old Empire behind, and so going forward,
apply the rising of the Two-Horned Beast to what times we please. No: There is
some particular instant of time when the Beast rose up out of the Earth, when
his Name or Universal Headship began. And thi^ must needs be at the Decree
under the Emperor Phocas, when it was determined, That the Bishop of Rome
should be Head over all Churches.

So then, if we lay these Three Principles together; First, That the Beast had
a determinate Beginning of his Kingdom. Secondly, That this determinate
Beginning was after the Fall of the Empire. Thirdly, That it was after the Fall
of the Empire in such times when the Name or Universal Headship of the Bishop
of Rome began first publicly and solemnly to be established. If we put all
these Three together, we shall inevitably pi^ch upon that time when the Decree
went forth, That the Bishop of Rome should be the Head over all Churches. For
if we look to the Stories, we shall find, that presently after the Fall of the
Empire, the Bishop of Constantinople was to have equal Privileges with the
Bishop of Rome, by the Decree of the Council of Calcedon. Nay further, The
Bishop of Constantinople was in a fairer possibility for the Universal Headship
than was he of Rome. Only then in the time under the Emperor Phocas the Decree
was Enacted, That the Bishop of Rome should be the Head of all Churches. And
from that time downward, this has been a Privilege perpetually annexed to
that Chair. And so then we have the true beginning of the rising of the
Two-Horned Beast out of the Earth. And it is rightly and Apocalyptically
applied ^o the times, by the Position of the Three Principles aforenamed.

But here Bellarmine and Baronius deny, That the Universal Headship began in
the time of the Emperor Phocas. For, says Bellarmine, Phocas did not Ordain
this by way of a new Institution, but only by way of Declaration of a thing
ever before Acknowledged in the Church. In Answer to this, Mornay in his
History of the Papacy tells us, That all Historians down from that time, as
Paulus Diaconus, Freculphus, Rhegino, Anastasius, Sabelli^us, Blondus,
Pomponius Laetus, and others, agree in this beginning. Progress. 22. page 118.
And for Baronius, he says, An. 606. Therefore what did Phocas bestow upon the
Roman Church? Nothing truly: Only he did Declare by his Sentence, That the Name
of the Ecumenical Bishop was unlawfully Usurped by the Bishop of
Constantinople, when it was due, Romanae tantum Ecclesiae, only to the Roman
Church. I cannot but admire at the boldness of this great Annalist, that he
should go so palpably against the Stories of the Church, and against some chief
Records of their own. For if we look a little before, in the times of Gregory
the Great, we shall find that there was a sharp contest betwixt him and the
Bishop of Constantinople about the Primacy. For John the Fourth, surnamed the
Easter, Bishop of Constantinople, did begin to assume the Title of Universal
Bishop about the year of the Lord 580, 26 years before the matter was
determined for the Bishop of Rome. He was the more imboldened to do this,
because he saw the Seat of the Empire established at Constantinople, and the
City of Rome besieged by the Lombards: And consequently the Bishop of that City
brought to a low ebb. Now these attempts of the Bishops of Constantinople, they
of Rome did most strongly oppose, but none more than Gregory the Great, as may
appear by sundry passages in his Epistles at this very day. In them we find
everywhere, that he does strongly Dispute against the Name and Title of
Universal Bishop; and does say in effect, That it is the Name of the Beast. He
does again and again inculcate, That the Title is new, profane, contrary to
the scope of the Gospel, and the Use of the Church. And whereas Bellarmine and
Baronius have this creep-hole, that he did only inveigh against the
encroachments of the Bishop of Constantinople; he does again and again repeat,
That none of his Predecessors did ever use such a profane Title: Nullus
decessorum meorum hoc tam profano vocabulo uti consuevit, lib. 4. Epist. 80.
But that which is most to our purpo^e, he does everywhere place the formality
of Antichristianism in the Universal Headship. And they that affect so to be
called, he does expressly term them the praecursors and forerunners of
Antichrist. To let pass all others, we will recite those words of his, as they
are in his sixth Book and thirtieth Epistle to the Emperor Mauritius; Consider
(says he) that when Antichrist shall call himself God, the matter it self is
but small and frivolous, yet most pernicious: If you look to the quality of the
word, it consists only of two Syllables; but if you regard the weight of
iniquity, the matter is very great. For I may boldly say, That whosoever
calls himself, or desires to be called by others, The Universal Priest, or
Bishop, is in his elation of mind, the forerunner of Antichrist. In elatione
sua Antichristum praecurrit. Because in like pride he prefers himself before
others. And in his Fourth Book, Epist. 34. he writes to Constantia the
Empress: Be it far (says he) that your times should thus be defiled with the
Exaltation of one man: and then adds, In hac ejus superbia quid aliud nisi
propinqua ja^ Antichristi esse tempora designatur? By this Arrogance what else
is portended, but that the time of Antichrist is now at hand? And more fully to
John himself, he uses these words, lib. 4. Epist. 38. Tu quid Christo,
Universalis scilicet Ecclesiae capiti, in extremi judicii dicturus es examine,
qui cuncta ejus membra tibimet conaris Universalis appellatione supponere? What
will thou answer to Christ, the Head of the Universal Church, in the trial of
the Day of Judgment, seeing that by this Name Universal thou seek to
inthral the Members of his Body to thy self? And that which makes more to our
purpose; he tells him, That the times concerning the coming of Antichrist
begin to be fulfilled, and that there is ^ow a performance of the Prophecies.
Omnia enim quae praedicta sunt fiunt: Rex superbiae prope est, and (quod dici
nefas est) sacerdotum est praeparatus exercitus. All Prophecies begin now to be
fulfilled, and (that which I dread to speak) the King of Pride is at hand, and
an Army of Priests do attend him.

Now for these, and suchlike passages between Gregory and John of
Constantinople, I cannot think otherwise of them, but that they did happen by
the singular Providence of God, to excite the world to look after the
Revelation of the man of sin. For, as when our Lord Christ was born at
Bethlehem, there was a hurly-burly in Iudaea; the star appeared, the wise men
came to Jerusalem, and the whole City was troubled; What was the end of God in
all this, but to stir them up to attention, to look after the Messiah, of whom
so much was sooken in the Prophecies? So in the like case, many things being
foretold in the writings of the Apostles concerning the coming of Antichrist,
when that time should begin to draw near, the Lord was pleased to suffer such a
dust to be raised between Constantinople and Rome, to rouse up the spirits of
men to examine those things which were foretold in the Scriptures.

In the Book of the Revelation, there is much spoken concerning the Name of the
Beast, and the Mark of the Name: Now when this Name or Headship was come to the
beginning thereof, Gregory did plainly declare, That the formality of
Antichristianism did consist in this Title, and that the Man of sin was then at
the doors. And I wish one day his sayings do not strongly witness against all
his Successors, who with one joint consent, down from the year of our Lord 606,
have appropriated this Title to themselves, to the great dishonor of Christ,
the true Head of the Church.

But if they allege, That the Bishop of Rome is only a Ministerial head, as
Christ's Vicar;

To this I Answer, However they may evade by subtilty of words, indeed and in
truth, they have taken for many Ages together the Dignity of Christ, and have
made him only the titular Head of the Church. For is it not clear by the
Stories, That all does depend upon the Authority of the Roman See? The credit
of Scripture, the interpretation of Scripture, the making of Laws, the
abrogation of divine Laws, and all things in a manner have depended upon the
Authority of the Roman Bishop. What he would, he has set up; what he would, he
has plucked down: And when all this is done, is he only a titular Head? Indeed
and in ^uth, the Headship of Christ has been made but a cipher: and the words
of Gregory have been found too true in the event. But for the passages out of
him, two things are briefly to be observed:

First, If we go to the 600 years immediately after the birth of Christ, there
was then no Ecumenical Bishop. For though the Man of sin had gone very far,
and had made many progressions in the Mystery of Iniquity; yet the Authority
it self was not publicly established in all that time: If it were so, we may
believe that Gregory would not have inveighed against that Headship, as he did.

Secondly, In the year of the Lord 606, the Decree was Enacted, That the Bishop
of Rome should be Head over all Churches; which Dignity the whole Succession
have enjoyed now above this 1000 years. And that which Gregory did call
Antichristian in others, that all his followers have assumed to this very day.
Therefore Thuanus, in his 67 Book, does speak very pithily; Phocas Bonifacio
tertio insignes Episcopi Universalis titulos, quos nuper Gregorius in Iohanne
Constantinopolitano improbaverat, prolixe attribuit. Phocas did largely ascribe
to Boniface the third, those eminent titles of Universal Bishop, which Gregory
did lately inveigh against in John of Constantinople.

Now then, to gather all into one sum, we may see how the Prophecies and the
Stories of the Church do agree: First, That the two-horned Beast had a
determinate time when he rose up out of the Earth. Secondly, That this time is
after the rising of the ten-horned Beast, or the ten Kings, out of the ruins
of the Empire. Thirdly, It is to be applied to such a time only when the Name
and the Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome began publicly to be set up.
All these three laid together, do necessarily bring us to the Decree of the
Headship under the Emperor Phocas. And so we do Conclude, that this is the
Number of the Name of the Beast, as it is mentioned in the Prophecy.

Now by what Account the Number is 666, we will show in the Two Chapters
following.

CHAP. V. That the Roman is the Fourth and Last Metal-Kingdom in Daniels Image;
and the truth of this is proved against the Positions of Junius, Broughton,
Piscator, Dr. Willet, and others.
FOr the carrying on of our matter, we need not imbark in that great Question,
Whether the Roman be the Fourth Metal-Kingdom? Or, Whether the Opinion of
Junius and his followers be received? We are sure both ways to make the
Account good, That the Name, or Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome, is
666. The matter is so firmly grounded upon the event.

Let us then proceed according to Iunius his Method: let us say, that the
Babylonian is the first Metal-Kingdom, that the Mede-Persian is the second,
that the Macedonian in Alexander is the third, that the Seleucian is the
fourth. Here according to this Analogy there must be an end of all the four
Metal-Kingdoms at the destruction of the Seleucian; when Syria, Iudaea, and all
that Oriental tract came under the Obedience of the People of Rome. Now then,
if you reckon from the final Conclusion of all the four persecuting Empires,
and from the beginning of the Roman, as that Nation did succeed in the Rule
over the Church, there will be an exact period of 666 years to the setting up
of the Name or Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome: And so we do concord
with the Principles of Iunius.

But we do not say, That there was a dissolution of all four Metal-Kingdoms,
but only a dissolution of the third, and a beginning of the fourth. Now, from
the beginning of the Roman, or the fourth Kingdom, we make the account.

And for the clearer manifestation of the truth, we will Debate this Point more
fully: for it is a ruled case in Daniel and the Revelation, That one and the
same thing is variously repeated, for clearer explication. As for ensample: The
Antichristian Kingdom is more obscurely delivered, Revel. 11. Now, if we
compare it with the description chap. 13, and chap. 17. all three Scriptures
will exceedingly illustrate one and the same truth. And so in the present case,
if it can be solidly proved that the fourth Beast in Daniel is the Roman
Kingdom, we may safely conclude that the same matter is repeated more largely
in the Book of the Revelation. Mr Med^ speaks to very good purpose concerning
the description of the ten-horn'd Beast, Rev. 13. These are his words; To^a
autem haec descriptio petita est ex Prophe^ia Danielis, cap. 7. ubi de eadem
agitur qua hic, Bestia Romana status novissimi: sed quae ibi Danieli ab Angelo
succinctius narrantur, ea hic Iohanni, (interjecta quasi explicatione) fusius
deducuntur. Comment. Apocal. page 190. From which words of his it is clear,
that one and the same Roman Dominion, in the last and Antichristian State
thereof, is the subject matter of both Scriptures. And so we have a certain and
a demonstrative Principle to build upon. For, not only the Book of the
Revelation it self will be cleared by comparing one part with another, that
which is more dark with that which is more clear; but the times in the 7 of
Daniel also will be much illustrated, if we parallel them with the times of the
Revelation. Only here will lie the weight of the business, Whether the matter
is one and the same in both Prophecies? And it must necessarily be one and the
same, if we can solidly prove the ten-horned Beast in Daniel to be the Roman
Kingdom. All do agree that the ten-horned Beast in the Revelation is the Roman
Kingdom; and if we can make it appear that one and the same Kingdom is
described in the seventh of Daniel, this will be as it were a band, or
ligament, to couple both Prophecies together, and a mean to expound the one by
that conformity which it has to the other.

But because Iunius, and his followers, and by Name Dr Willet do so strongly
insist upon the Point, That the ten-horned Beast in both Prophecies is not one
and the same Roman Kingdom, but one and the same only in Analogy, and
similitude of expression: If they can make their words good, I confess that we
shall be liable to a great mistake, when we shall take that for really the
same, which is only the same in some similitude. Interpreters have gone too far
this way, as it is clear by experience. For Parae^, in the beginning of his
Commentary, treating of the Method of the Revelation, does draw three
Observations out of Augustine's 20 Book of the City of God, cap. 17. First,
says he, There are many things darkly delivered in the Prophecy, to exercise
the mind of the Reader. Secondly, There are some things delivered more clearly,
by the understanding of which, we may discover the other that are more dark, if
diligence be used. Thirdly, It does exceedingly conduce to the unfolding of the
Mysteries of this Book, that the same things are repeated in a different way of
expression. We do acknowledge that these Observations are of good use; but that
some Interpreters, as Paraeus himself in his Commentary, and Lampadius in his
(...) upon Sle^d in de 4 Imperiis, and some others, have gone too far this way.
There is some similitude between the seven Trumpets, and the seven Vials; but
the Authors aforenamed have much disturbed the true course of the Apocalyptical
times, when they take the Trumpets and the Seals for the same in matter, though
they differ in manner. To avoid the Rock, we will first prove the Identity of
two Scriptures, and then expound them by way of Parallel.

Upon this Consideration we do now fall upon the Work, to prove the Roman to be
the Fourth Kingdom: And if this can be made good, then it will be one and the
same Kingdom with that which is mentioned in the Revelation. And so we shall
parallel the one by the times of the other Prophecy.

Now let us hear what Iunius, Broughton, Piscator, and other Learned men can
allege to the contrary.

Junius.
There is none that is ignorant how variously the Fourth Kingdom is
interpreted: For some think this place to appertain to the four Monarchies, to
continue to the consummation of the world. Others will have the Monarchies here
meant to continue to the Kingdom of Christ only; in which Number they have
placed the Roman, their Free State and their Empire being united in one. And
truly the former Opinion all the Fathers have followed, being moved, as it is
probable, with this expression, There is a God in Heaven that makes known to
the King what shall be in the latter days, chap. 2. 28. But they have not well
observed the meaning of the text: for the Hebrew word does not signify that
which is last, but that which is latter; or that which comes after, though it
be not simply the last of all.

Answer.
If we observe the Rules laid down by Dr Willet, 1. That the Kingdoms here
described, are Monarchical Kingdoms. 2. Monarchical Kingdoms about the Borders
of the Church. 3. Such Monarchical Kingdoms where the latter do build
themselves upon the ruin of the former. If we observe these Rules, it will be
no difficult matter to define the Monarchies what they are, where they begin,
and where they make an end. There need be no variety of Opinion in a matter of
such common Experience. And in particular, the same Experience shows, That
the Roman must be the fourth particular Kingdom. As for those Interpreters who
will have this Kingdom to expire at the coming of Christ, they do not err in
taking the Roman for the Fourth Kingdom, nor in joining the Free State and the
Empire in one: but they err in this, That they end that Monarchy at the Coming
of Christ. For this is contrary to Experience, and the Testimony of the
Scriptures. For, what shall be the Ten Horns, or the Ten Kings? What shall be
the little Horn? What shall be all the other Properties of the Fourth Beast,
chap. 7.* How shall all these be attributed to the Roman Kingdom, if it End at
the Coming of Christ?

For the former Expositors, it is true that all Antiquity in a manner have
followed this way, To take the Roman for the Fourth Kingdom. To which I may
add, Many of the Interpreters of these times, and some eminent in the
Knowledge of the Prophetical Scriptures; as Brightman, Grasserus, Mede, and
others. But that this should be the principal Ground that moved them to take
the Roman for the Fourth Kingdom, because the Lord showed to Nebuchadnezzar
what should come to pass in the last times; this I cannot take to be the prime
foundation on which those Expositors do build: To my understanding, this phrase
in the latter days, or as it is in the Original, (...) in the extremity of
days; or as Piscator, Polanus, and others will have it, temporibus
consequentibus, in the times following: This expression nakedly considered,
inforceth nothing at all. Whereas Jacob assembled his Sons together to tell
them what should happen to them in the latter days: I do in this matter agree
with Dr Willet, That he did not assemble them together to tell what should
befall them in the end of the world, but in the times immediately following.
Yet this Expression is sometimes used to foretell what shall be done in the end
of the world. And therefore the Prophet Hosea says, That the Children of
Israel shall return and seek the Lord their God, and David their King; and
shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter days: or, as it is in the
Original, in the extremity of days. There is no doubt to be made but that the
Prophet speaks of the future Call of the Jews that shall be, and of their
living under the Reign of Christ; which things are to be finished in ^e end of
the world. And I see no reason but that the Lord might reveal the same things
to Daniel, at least the whole order of them, he living after the times of
Hosea, being also a man specially chosen of God to be acquainted with the
greatest Mysteries concerning the times of the Church. To let pass the
ambiguity of the phrase, let us seriously ponder the circumstances of the text.
The Lord did reveal to Nebuchadnezzar things that should come to pass in the
latter times. But the great Question is in specie, What latter times are here
intended? It is confessed by all, That the Monarchical Kingdoms were to
continue to the Coming of Christ; and the words of the text are clear, that the
Kingdom of Christ shall begin in the times of these Kingdoms. Now our Savior
was born, his Gospel was preached, and his Kingdom began, when the Earth, and
particularly that part of the Earth, was under the Sovereign Dominion of the
Romans. To me therefore it is an infallible Reason, That the Roman must be one
of the Monarchical Kingdoms, and the Fourth in particular, because the Kingdom
of Christ did then begin, when the Earth was under the Authority and Dominion
of that People. But let us go on.

Junius.
They which follow the latter Opinion, do well to end Daniel's Prophecy at
Christ. But this they ought to consider, that the Lord does not declare the
State of the world universally, but only so far as it concerns the Jews and
the People of God. And therefore in our judgment we cannot approve it, that
the Roman is the Fourth Kingdom.

Answer.
For the Maxim, That the Four Monarchies are described only in relation to the
Jews; I do yield it to be a truth, so far as the Jews were the only people of
God. But when the Gentiles also became his people, the Monarchies are described
in relation to them. So then the Metal-Kingdoms are not related to the Jews
only, nor to the Gentiles only, but to the People of God both of Jews and
Gentiles. Among many, this one Argument may be sufficient to clear the Truth of
that which we affirm. At the end of these Kingdoms it is mentioned, That the
Kingdom, and the Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole
Heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High, chap. 7.
verse. 27. Who are they that are the People of the Saints of the most High?
Shall we say, That they are only the People of the Jews? Then it will follow,
That the People of the Jews only shall Constitute and make up the Kingdom of
Christ and his Saints. And how contrary is this to all color and show of truth?

Secondly, Admit it should be granted that in the description of the
Metal-Kingdoms, the Lord should only have respect to the People of the Jews;
this does not exclude the Roman from being one of the Four Kingdoms. For as the
Jews were sometimes under the Babylonians, sometimes under the Persians,
sometimes under the Graecians; so sixty years before the Birth of our Lord, they
came under the Dominion of the People of Rome, who were the particular Nation
and State of whom the Prophet speaks: The people of the Prince that shall
come, shall destroy the City and Sanctuary, Dan. 9. 26. If you Number the times
from that instant when the Dominion of the Romans began, you shall find that
there were 130 years to the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus and Vespasian. So
long the Jewish Church and Nation were under the Roman Obedience. So then we
Conclude, If the Monarchies be Numbered only in relation to the Jews, the Roman
may be one of the Four, as well as the Babylonian, Persian, o^ Grecian: what
should hinder?

Junius.
They that so Number, must of necessity confound the popular State, with the
Sovereign Command of one, which is here only mentioned. Neither did the Romans
any ways afflict the Jews till the times of Cleopatra, or Herod.

Answer.
This is most true, That the Jews came under the Dominion of the Romans in the
times of their Free State: And therefore in these times we begin the Roman as
the Fourth Kingdom. Now whereas it is alleged, that in so doing we do confound
the Popular State and the Government by One: To this I Answer, We are not here
so much to look after the several forms of Roman Dominion, as upon one whole
Roman Kingdom opposed to one Babylonian, to one Persian, to one Grecian going
before. The Scripture looks to Four kinds of People, who in their respective
Seasons and Successions, should have absolute Dominion over the Earth, and
specially about the Confines of the Church: according to this Difference we
ought to distinguish each Monarchy as the Dominion passed from one people to
another, and not by the particular forms of Government observed by one people.
Therefore it does fully Answer our purpose, That the Church of the Jews came
under the Dominion and Lordship of the people of Rome 60 years before the Birth
of the Lord. Now, what Form of Dominion the Romans then had, is not to our
purpose.

Further, Whereas it is said, That the Romans did not afflict the Church of the
Jews till the times of Herod; Give me leave to Argue after the same manner.
Cyrus did not afflict the People of the Jews; Therefore the Persian tyranny
did not then begin: Alexander the Great did not persecute the Jews; Therefore
the Grecian Monarchy did not begin in his times. This way of Reasoning is
contrary to Scripture and Experience. For, to speak positively, Though Cyrus
did not afflict the Church of the Jews, yet he brought that Church and People
within the Verge of the Persian Dominion, which in all its times was a
Tyrannical State. So Alexander the Great did not persecute the Church, yet he
was the Founder of the Grecian Empire, which in the whole time thereof did
more or less afflict the Saints of the Jewish Church. The like may be said of
the Romans: though there was no eminent Persecution in the time of their
Free State, yet then the Church was brought within the compass of that Kingdom*
in which, under which, and by which there were the sorest Persecutions that
ever were; as appears by the Stories of the Evangel^sts, the Acts of the
Apostles, and the whole Book of the Revelation. Now let us Consider what is
spoken by Mr Broughton.

Mr Broughton.
The Book of Daniel handles principal points of the Jews thraldom in Babylon
for 70 years, and seven times that space unto Christ's Ascension, and the
destruction of the City and Temple: So that Jerusalem surprised by the
Chald^an, and razed by the Roman, is the limit of the Story.

Answer.
If it could be proved, That Jerusalem seized by the Chaldaean, and razed by
the Roman, that this is the limit of some of Daniel's Visions, and namely of
the 70 weeks, it does not follow that this is the boundary of all his Visions,
and particularly of all the Four Kingdoms typed in the Metals of the Image. I
shall endeavor in the process of this Discourse to make it appear that these
Kingdoms do continue to the time of the glorious Kingdom of the Saints, Rev.
20. But let us go on.

Mr Broughton.
The Kingdom of Babel is figured by a Tree, touching in height the Heavens, and
in breadth the corners of the Earth. Likewise the other Kingdoms a^e semblanced
to a Ram, and to a Goat, Buck, and both in sundry Horns. And now all the
Nations be named that be therein contained.

Answer.
First, For the great Tree, it is not so much a figure of the Babylonian
Kingdom, as of the King Nebuchadnezzar in his own personal greatness. For when
the Tree was cut down, and Nebuchadnezzar fell, the Babylonian Empire stood.
For the Kingdoms of Persia and Greece, it is not needful that these two should
be all the Nations which Daniel does Number after the Babylonians. First, How
does this distinguish the Monarchies after the Scripture-difference? The
Scripture distinguishes them according to the change from People to People,
chap. 2. verse. 44. chap. 7. verse. 27. If therefore the Babylonians, Persians,
Graecians, be all the People, how shall we make Four Monarchies of Three
People? Secondly, That of Persia and Greece are again repeated, chap. 8.
because they were more summarily described in the former Chapter. For if we
look narrowly to the matter, the Seventh Chapter is for the most part taken up
in the descrption of the Fourth Kingdom.

Mr Broughton.
The Legs of the Image, are the Successors of Alexander in the mightiest
Kingdoms, Syria and Egypt.

Answer.
Piscator does build much upon this Reason; and therefore to avoid repetition,
we will defer the Examination thereof till we come to him.

Mr Broughton.
Daniel, chap. 7. verse. 13. One like to the Son of man, etc. The Jews grant
Christ here to be meant: and if we had not deceived them by forging a general
Fourth Monarchy, by refusing the plainness of Daniel, they would have come to
the Faith long ago.

Answer.
This is a good Caution in the general, and Christian men ought to take heed
how they turn all into nice Disputes: Atheistical and gainsaying people will
soon take Advantage: Yet for all this, we have sufficient matter to convince
the Jew that their Messiah is come, that he is cut off, that the ^0 weeks of
Daniel are at an end, because Jerusalem has been destroyed long ago; and the
70 weeks do lead us to that fatal destruction.

For our Interpretation that the Roman is the Fourth Monarchy, it is not this
that keeps the Jew in his blindness and unbelief; but rather, it would be a
greater stumblingblock in his way, to take the Seleucian for the Fourth
Monarchy. Mr Broughton who affirms this to be a Fourth Monarchy, how can he
make it good, That the Kingdom of Christ was set up in the times of the
Seleucian? Suppose a Jew should read in the Gospel written by Saint Matthew,
that our Savior was Born in Bethlem in the times of the Romans; and as the
other Evangelists do expressly say, in the times of Augustus Caesar, who caused
all the world to be taxed, etc. Here then, if a Jew should be of the judgment
of these Learned men That the Roman is none of the Four Monarchies, and that
there was a total dissolution of the Four Metal-Kingdoms before the coming of
Christ, and the beginning of the Roman: In this method and way of
Interpretation, how can they possibly make good that Scripture forementioned?
In the days of these Kingdoms shall the God of Heaven raise up a Kingdom that
shall never be destroyed, Dan. 2. 44. If the Lord will raise up the Kingdom of
Christ in the days of the Four Metal-Kingdoms, and the Evangelists all with
one mouth do say, That the Kingdom was raised up in that time when all was
under the power of the Romans, we may safely Conclude, That the Roman must
needs be one of the Four Kingdoms; and in particular, the Fourth and the last
Kingdom.

And whereas it is alleged, One like the Son of Man came in the clouds of
Heaven, verse. 13. We do willingly yield, when the Roman Kingdom, in the last
and Antichristian state thereof, shall be brought to a final destruction, then
in those times the Kingdom of the Saints shall be set up upon the Earth in the
last days; and there shall be a Union betwixt Jews and Gentiles under Christ
their King, according to the Scriptures. And though we do not press the
strictness of the Letter for a Personal and visible Reign of Christ (as many
have done, and many now do) yet I trust that the Jew and the Gentile shall find
it true, That both People shall come under the Reign of Christ, when his Gospel
shall be the regent Law in the latter days. But of this matter something more
largely afterward.

Mr Broughton.
I will show thee what shall be in the latter end of wrath, chap. 8. verse. 21.
This place strongly overthrows their Error, that seign the Roman to be the
Fourth Kingdom, meant by the Legs of the Image, seeing the Greeks are the
Dealers in the latter end of wrath. And it had been a strange thing that this
last vision repeating the former, should neglect the Romans, if they had been
spoken of before.

Answer.
We have showed how the former Kingdoms (...) repeated in the latter Vision: we
yield that there is a repetiti^n of the Monarchical Kingdoms, but not a
repetition of them in the full Number. For what a way of Reasoning were this*
The Babylonian is not reckoned chap. 8. therefore he is none of the Four great
Empires mentioned in the Chapter going before? Let us come to the main Reason
which Mr Brought^ says, strongly overthrows their Error who feign the Roman
to be the Fourth Kingdom. His Argument is drawn from that Expression, I will
show thee what shall be in the last end of indignation. ^ll that may be
gathered from hence, is this, That the Greeks may be Dealers in the latter end
of wrath, if we compare them with the times of Daniel: yet according to this
sense, the Romans may be latter than they. Secondly, If we look to the true
translation of the word (as Iunius and Piscator have it) the Interpretation
must run thus: I will make known to thee what shall be in the extremity (...)
of that indignation, when Antiochus shall afflict the Church. And therefore the
Angel does expound what is meant by these words, In the latter end of their
Kingdom, when transgressors are come to a full end, a King of fierce
countenance shall stand up, verse. 23. So then, according to the true sense, the
Greeks are not so much the Dealers in the latter end of wrath, as Antiochus in
particular is a Dealer against the Saints in the latter end of the Grecian
tyranny. Here then is a plain fallacy, a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum
simplicitur.

Mr Broughton.
Chap. 12. verse. 1. And at that time shall Michael stand up that stands for
the Children of thy people. When Antiochus, going to War against Parthia, left
Lysias behind him to have rooted out the Jews; then Michael stood up. Here the
terms of Daniel's People must needs mean the Jews, and not the troubles of the
Christian Church. Now it is evident, That the Holy Jewish Nation was never
troubled in their whole State, but in the times of Antiochus Epiphanes: And
therefore it is clear that the Angel speaks of those days. And this one
speech might have kept Daniel in his true meaning, that we should not draw him
beyond Christ.

Answer.
If ^ may speak what I find by Experience, there is not any one place either in
Daniel or the Revelation, that seems to me to be more intricate than the
Number of time mentioned in this Chapter. It may be the Lord will have the time
to lie doubtful, and to be sealed to the time of the end, verse. 4, 9.

However it be, though I cannot positively prove the meaning of the text, yet
we may firmly conclude, That the periods of time do lead us to the end of the
world; and that they cannot possibly be restrained to the Persecution of
Antiochus Epiphanes, and to the times of the suffering of the Jews under that
tyranny.

But let us look to the Text: By the Children of thy people, we do willingly
acknowledge, That the People of the Jews are here meant. But we do not yield
that Mr Broughton does make a true Deduction from the meaning of these words.
He does infer, That in the time of Antiochus Epiphanes his persecuting the
Church, Michael may stand up, because the whole Nation of the Jews suffered
more eminently for Religion in those times. Now here I say, This cannot be the
time of the great Tribulation of the Jews, nor the time of the standing up of
Michael, seeing the Tribulation here spoken of is after the destruction of the
Seleucian Kingdom. For I would gladly know what the Angel does mean by these
words, He shall come to his end, and none shall help him, verse. 45. Is it not
clear, by the whole tenor and scope of the text, That he speaks of the King
of the North, or the Seleucian Kingdom? That this Tyranny shall come to its end
without help or remedy. And then afterward, (the Seleucian Kingdom being
destroyed) the great Calamity shall fall upon the Nation of the Jews in the
following times. Secondly, Our Savior himself, that best knew the meaning of
Daniel's Prophecy, does expressly speak of the standing up of the Abomination
of Desolation mentioned by Daniel the Prophet; he does speak of the greatest
wrath that ever was from the foundation of the world, that it should fall upon
the Nation of the Jews; and that for the Elects sake only those days should
be shortened. Now then, how does he apply these Predictions? not to the times
of Antiochus Epiphanes, which Mr Broughton here speaks of; but (as all the
Evangelists do agree) to the last and fatal destruction of Jerusalem by the
Romans; Matthew. 24. 21, 22. Mar. 13. 14, 15, etc. Luke 21. 20, 21, etc.

Now, whereas Daniel did put the Question partly out of a desire to pry into
these Mysteries, and partly to give information to the Church; he received an
Answer suitable to the Question which he did propound. The Question is this:
Then said I, O my Lord, what shall be the end of these things? verse. 8. And the
Answer of the Angel is this: From the time that the daily Sacrifice shall be
taken away, and the Abomination that makes Desolate shall be set up, there
shall be 1290 days. Blessed is he that waits, and comes to the 1335 days.
But go thy way till the end be, for thou shall rest, and stand in the lot at
the end of the days, verse. 11, 12, 13. From the scope of these words, if we
take it for granted, That the setting up of the Abomination of Desolation was
at the last and fatal destruction of Jerusalem; (for so our Savior does
expound the words of Daniel) then we do infer, from the destruction of that
City there will be 1290 days, and then again 1335 days to the time of the
end: And so we may conclude, That this period of time will not extend only to
the times of Christ, but very far beyond his times toward the end of the world.

But it may be alleged, seeing that I undertake to show the length of the
period, How long it shall continue, and the beginning from whence it shall
commence; why do not I speak Determinately concerning the time where it shall
end?

I do only so far undertake to speak of the length of this period, to show that
Daniel's Prophecy contains a great Number of years beyond the destruction of
Jerusalem. And this is enough to Confute Mr Broughton, and other Interpreters
of this way; though for my part I am not able to determine the Question why it
is said 1290 days, and then after that, 1335 days. There is a special reason
of doubling the Number; but yet for the accommodation of the time, I must
confess my ignorance. Only for the present purpose, it is enough to say in the
general, That there is a great Chain of years to begin after the destruction of
Jerusalem; and that the times of Daniel, and the times of the Revelation, do
both run parallel together, to the glorious Kingdom of the Saints. But for the
true concord of the times, I do profess that I lie in the mire.

Whereas the holy Prophet is commanded to seal and to shut up the Vision, we
are not to take this simply, as though there shall be a perpetual enclosure,
and an absolute concealment of the sense for ever; but only, that the
disclosing is referred to the time of the end. They that shall live near upon
the accomplishment of the Prophecy, upon the borders of the glorious Church,
at the times of the Calling of the Jews, perhaps they shall see that which
has lain hid in the Scriptures for many Ages. Though Daniel was to seal up the
Vision for the time present, yet in the latter days many shall run to and fro,
and knowledge shall be increased, verse. 4.

Object. But if it shall be said, That the great Question does lie in this,
From what beginning are we to fetch this period of time, or where is the date
thereof? Some place the beginning of these years in Antiochus Epiphanes; some,
in the Abomination of the Desolation set up by Julian the Apostate.

Sol. For the setting up of the Abomination of Desolation, there is no question
but that this is meant of the Calamity under the Romans; for so our Savior
does expound the meaning of the Prophecy: And there is good reason wherefore
we should rest in the Authority of such an interpreter. As for the setting up
of the Abomination of Desolation by Julian the Apostate; I marvel that such a
judicious Interpreter as Mr Brightman, should rest upon so groundless a
conceit. But as groundless as it is, I find that many men are carried away with
his Authority. But first of all, how was Julian a taker away of the daily
Sacrifice? He rather countenanced the Jews against the Christians, Socrat.
lib. 3. Secondly, how can we apply the taking away of the daily Sacrifice to
the times of Julian? and how can we make the account by the Abomination of
Desolation set up by Julian, when our Savior does speak so plainly of the
des^ruction of Jerusalem by the Romans? He speaks in this wise: These be the
days of Vengeance, that all things that are written, may be fulfilled. And
there shall be great distress upon this People, and they shall fall by the edge
of the Sword, and shall be led away Captive into all Nations; and Jerusalem
shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, till the times of the Gentiles be
fulfilled, Luke 21. 22, 23, etc. Here observe, First, our Savior speaks of
the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the scattering of the Jews, and of the
time of their dispersion. He does speak of these things as they were foretold
in the writings of the old Prophets, That all that is written might be
fulfilled. Now where may we conceive these things are written, but in the
Prophecy of Daniel? more briefly, chap. 9; and more largely, chap. 12. St.
Matthew therefore, when he speaks of the destruction of Jerusalem by the
Romans, does plainly show that this is but the fulfilling of that which was
formerly mentioned in the Prophecy of Daniel, Mat. 24. verse. 14, 15. If this
be so, why then should we look after the setting up of the Abomination of
Desolation in the times of the Emperor Julian, when in the Evangelist it is so
strictly limited to the destruction of Jerusalem? But let us come to the things
themselves; and here in the first place, concerning the wrath that shall be
upon the people of the Jews: it is expressly said, That they shall fall by the
edge of the Sword, and that they shall be carried Captive into all Nations.
This is the scope of our Saviors words, as we may see in the Story. Now then,
does not Daniel speak of the same things? of a time of trouble for the Children
of his People, such as never was since it was a Nation, verse. 1. And does he
not speak of the scattering of the Holy People, and of the continuance of their
dispersion to the time of the end? Secondly, for the time, how long the
dispersion shall continue; our Savior says, That the Jews shall be carried
Captive into all Nations, and Jerusalem shall be trodden under foot till the
time of the Gentiles be fulfilled. It is plain then, That the dispersion of the
Jews, and the conculcation of the literal Jerusalem, shall last to the
fulfilling of the times of the Gentiles. Now then, If we apply this to the
Prophecy of Daniel, does he not speak of the destruction of Jerusalem, and the
dispersion of the Holy People, and of the time of the dispersion, how long
shall it be to the end of these things? verse. 6. Thirdly, The Evangelist does
begin the time of the dispersion from the destruction of Jerusalem, as from the
Epoch and term thereof. And does not Daniel do the same? Does he not Number
1290 days, the time of the dispersion, from the destruction of Jerusalem?
Fourthly, The Evangelist says, That Jerusalem shall be trodden under foot till
the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. In which words he does secretly imply,
That after the completing of those times, there shall be a glorious Restoring
of that Church and Nation. The words of St. Paul are much to the same effect;
When the Fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, all Israel shall be saved, Romans
11. 25. He speaks of the Church of the Jews that shall be in the latter
times. And for the particular time, he does restrain it in this wise, When the
Fullness of the Gentiles shall come in: that is, When the Fullness of the Nations
shall be brought in to own Christ the Head of the Church, then the Nation of
the Jews shall be Called; And so Jews and Gentiles shall make one People under
Christ their Head in the latter days. And are not the words of Daniel much to
the same purpose? Does he not say, Blessed is he that waits, and comes to
the 1335 days, to the glorious Restoration of that Church and Nation?

But yet for a further amplification, let us consider what is spoken Dan. 9.
27. And here we shall find that this does parallel the two former Scriptures,
and that all three together do speak of the destruction of Jerusalem by the
Romans, and the continuance of the dispersion of that People after the
destruction. These are the words; He shall cause the Sacrifice and the Oblation
to cease; and for the overspreading of Abomination, (or as it is in the
Margin, with Abominable Armies) he shall make it desolate, even until the
consummation, and that determined shall be poured upon the desolate. In these
words, Note, First the Agent, who it is that shall make desolate; The People of
Rome, or the Prince of that People who shall come. Secondly, The Action it
self; he shall cause the Sacrifice and the Oblation to cease, and shall bring
in the Abomination that makes Desolate. Thirdly, The time when this Action
shall begin; to wit, After the cutting off of the Messiah: Then the People of
the Prince that shall come, shall destroy the City and the Sanctuary. And so
they did, as appears by the event. ^ourthly, For the time of the continuance
of the Desolation; it is said, He shall make it desolate even until the
consummation, and that determined shall be poured upon the desolate. He does
not speak of the desolation of Jerusalem only at that (...) ^nstant, but of the
continuance thereof, as the Lord had determined and Decreed it upon that City
and People. I^ is said to be determined, because (...) is precisely cut out,
de^ned, limited, and circumscribed, as was the period of the 70 weeks, verse.
24. Further, The Prophet Isaiah (...) of the casting away of the Jews, uses
the same expression, as is her^ used in the text of Daniel. For, (says he)
though thy People of Israel be as the sand of the Sea, yet a (...) of (...)
shall return* For (...) the consumption (...) (...) the p^ecise consummation
shall overflow (...) (...), chap. 10. verse. 22, 23. This is spoken of the (...)
fata^ ^cattering of the Jewish Nation, and the (...) (...) (...) (...) of that
dispersion, as the Apostle himself (...) ex^ound, Romans 9. 27, 28. So then, the
text does not only speak of the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, but of
a certain determinated time of the desolation of that People, how long it shall
continue. Now let us apply all these things to the controverted place, Dan. 12.
11, From the t^me that the daily Sacrifice shall be taken away, and the
Ab^nation that makes Des^late be set up, there shall be 1290 (...)* What is
more natural and consonant to the text, an^ (...) is more congruous to other
Scriptures, than to take the (...) up of the Abomination of Desolation for the
destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans? And that the 1290 days, the time of
the dispersion, does run from that begi^ (...)* We have good reason to take
this for an authentic (...)* because Dan^el in the 12 Chapter does more
largely repe^ (...) Desolation by the Romans, which he had more briefly (...)
chap. 9. We cannot be persuaded, but that the Prop^ (...) last Vision, went
farther into the times, than he did i^ (...) going before; at least, he went as
far. For (...) is expressly said concerning this last Vision, that the time was
long, and for many days. The word in the Original is (...) or as Mr Broughton
does well render it, the Army-like-ordered time was great. Piscator upon the
place also, does well observe the same propriety of the phrase; Vide ^r (...)
(...) ess^ Metaphora, quod in tempore determina^o parts convenienti ordine a
Deo sunt dispositae sicut Milites in exercitis. The s^emeth here to be a (...);
the parts in this determin^te time are so disposed of G^ Soldiers in an Army.
We may then safely conclude, (...) in this last Vision Daniel does go many
(...)-deep into the times, and much deeper than he did in the former Visions.
And therefore we may necessarily affirm, That he does lead us far beyond the
times of Christ. On the contrary, If these times end with the Persecution^
under Antiochus Epiphanes, (for so Mr Broughton and others will have it) how is
the time long? and how does the Lord speak of such notable events that should
befall Da^iel's People in the last and utmost Rere-ward of time? The destruction
of Jerusalem by the Romans, was 230 years after the death of Antiochus
Epiphanes: And therefore the Vision of the 70 weeks (if Mr Broughtons
interpretation be good) must go farther than this last Vision, by such a
Proportion and Number of years. Now, who can possibly believe this to be true,
that reads the three last Chapters of the Prophecy? Must the whole Narration
of all the things there declared end at Antiochus his death?

Now then, to gather all into one sum, we may safely collect, That Daniel in
this Vision does not only lead us to the destruction of Jerusalem by the
Romans, but he does speak also how long the Jews shall remain under that fatal
Dispersion. These things our Savior, the Apostle St. Paul, Isaiah, and Daniel,
all of them do speak: First, of the scattering of the Nation after the
destruction of Jerusalem, and of the time of their Dispersion till their
Calling again.

If any shall then require me to make good the Chronology of 1290 days, and
of 1335 days, I must confess that I am here at a loss; and it may be that they
who shall come in the Rere-ward of the (...) or the Army-like-ordered time,
shall see more. Then perhaps many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be
increased. If I may (to use the words of Mr Fox) vent (...) my Conjectures, I
should be willing to proceed in this manner: First, To speak of the time in a
Latitude. Secondly, To speak of it more particularly. If we speak of it in some
Latitude, and begin the 1290 days at the destruction of Jerusalem, this period
of time will bring us precisely to the year of the Lord 1359: And here, (as
Alstedius well observes in his Chronology, cap. 6.) the Saints did begin more
vigorously to testify against the Antichristian Idolatries. And in very deed,
if we diligently observe the times, with some subtilty of consideration, we
shall find, That from the taking of Constantinople, and the destruction of the
Greek Empire, in the East, the Languages have been revived, and the Witnesses
of Truth have been more effectually raised up in the West; and the light of the
Gospel does more and more increase. And it is very probable that these things
will go on, and never cease till the Kingdom of Christ be set up in its full
glory and Monarchical power over Jews and Gentiles.

This I take to be the meaning of the Prophecy, in the general accommodation
thereof. But for the more distinct and particular Application of the times,
this (as I have said before) I must leave to them that come after. Now let us
proceed to the words of Piscator in his Preface upon the Prophecy of Daniel.

Piscator.
The third Kingdom is not here rightly extended to the Successors of Alexander
the Great, so far at least as he is stated the first King of that Kingdom. For
though this is done, chap. 8. verse. 21. yet nevertheless, that Prophecy
differs much from this. For the Kingdom of the Greeks figured by the He-goat
is there expressly Named, and is divided into the Kingdom of Alexander, (who is
resembled by the notable Horn which the He-goat had between his eyes) and the
Kingdom of his Successors. So that this of Alexander is clearly to be
distinguished, as different from that of the Successors. For it is said, When
that Horn was br^ken, four stood up for it, or in the place of it; and
afterward those four are expressly called one Kingdom, verse. 23. Likewise it is
spoken concerning the Kingdom of Alexander, That it should be plucked up, and
that it should come to others, and not to his Posterity, Dan. 11. 4.

Answer.
I do not deny but in some sense the Kingdom of Alexander may be distinct from
that of his Successors: But (...), Whether in the present case it ou^ht to be
(...) distinguished. The Kingdoms of Media and Persia, are two distinct Realms,
Dan. 8. yet both these make but one silver-Metal. So the Kingdoms of Alexander
and his Successors, though they be distinguished, yet in the Notion, Relation,
and Distribution of the Kingdoms in the Image, they make but one Brass-metal,
or one Empire, typed by the third Beast with four Heads. In this case every
Metal signifies a distinct Kingdom in the fullness thereof. And therefore, as
the Golden-Head does signify the Babylonian-Kin^dom; and the Silver-Breast,
the Mede-Persian: So the Brazen-Belly and Thighs, do signify the whole
Grecian Empire. And as in this Acception the distinct Kingdoms of Media and
Persia do not make two, but one Silver-metal: So the Distinct Kingdoms of
Alexander and his Successors, do not make diverse, but one third Kingdom of
Brass. But yet further, If we should ask how every Metal-Kingdom comes to be
divided, it must be in relation as each People comes to have the sovereign
Dominion over the Earth; and therefore it is expressly said concerning the
Kingdom of Christ, That it shall not be left to other People, chap. 2. 44. And
in the end of the seventh Chapter, v. 27. these words are recited, The Kingdom,
and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom shall be given to the People of
the Saints of the most High: From whence we collect, That the Monarchies are to
be distinguished, as the Dominion does devolve and descend from one People to
another, till at last it comes to the turn of the Saints of the most High, to
be the Monarchical people. This being laid as a ground, we may say in the
particu^ar case alleged by Piscator, That though the Kingdom of Alexander was
plucked up by the Roots, and the Kingdoms of his Successors were set up upon
his ruins; yet for all this, there was no change of Dominion from People to
People. There was only a change from Alexander to his Successors; still one
Grecian People had the Empire over the Earth. And to put all out of questi^n,
That the Spirit does principally point to the Flux and Passage of the
Sovereignty from one People to another, and tha^ in this case he does not
distinguish the Kingdom of Alexander from that of his Successors; the ground
which we have to bui^d upon, i^, The resemblance of the He-goat* chap. 8. Now
under this similitude, the whole Grecian Empire, both of Alexander, and of his
four Successors, they are all comprehended together, as they were formerly set
forth under the Type of the Third Beast with four Heads. Now whereas (...)
alleges, That the He-goat is different from the Third Beast; and that the
Prophecy, chap. 8. Habet rationem diversam, a different way of Interpretation:
I Answer, The He goat and the Third Beast are all one, so farforth as both are
Types of the same Empire, under one and the same People. And for the Partition
of the Greek Kingdom, between Alexander and his Successors; this does no more
hinder the Type of that Kingdom by one Third Beast, then it does hinder the
delineation by one He-goat.

But now to produce some Reasons that Alexander divided from his Successors
cannot be the Third Kingdom Typed by the Brass-Metal, or the Third Beast.
First, All the Kingdoms were persecuting States, such that did afflict the
People of God. But Alexander, if you divide him from his Successors, did not
afflict the Church of the Jews, neither were they Persecuted in all the times
of his Empire. Secondly, The Metal-Kingdoms are so constituted, that the latter
are of a more hard and Tyrannical disposition against the Saints. Now take
Alexander, in sensu diviso, take him several from his Successors, how was his
Kingdom of more hard disposition against the Saints, than was either Babylon or
Persia going before? His Monarchy was but for a few years, and there was no
Persecution of the People of the Jews in all his time. Thirdly, The Beast that
came up our of the Sea after the Persian Bear, is expressly said to have four
Heads, verse. 6. Now take Alexander severally from his Successors, what four
Heads, or what four Divisions were there in his Kingdom? For in his time the
Beast was so far from having four Heads, that it had no Heads or Divisions at
all: Therefore we must necessarily conclude, That the Third Beast does
represent and fig^re the Grecian Kingdom, which in a famous revolution of
State, became divided into four Parts. Now, whereas the learned Interpreter
does distinguish the Kingdom of Alexander from the Dominion of his Successors,
I do yield this to be true: For Alexander being broken off* four Kingdoms did
stand up out of that Nation. But this is nothing to the purpose. For these
several Fractions and Divisions do not hinder the Unity of the Greek Monarchy.
If it had been the plot of the Spirit to make a Third Monarchy of Alexander,
and a Fourth of his Successors; why does he use the similitude of one He-goat
for the representation of two Monarchies? Why are two Empires set forth under
one figure? And whereas he strongly binds upon this, That all Four Successors
are expressly called, One Kingdom, verse. 23. Saving the great Worth and Learning
of the Author, he is deceived in this Point: For when it is said, In the latter
end of their Kingdom, when transgressors are come to the full; a King, of
fierce countenance, shall stand up: Now in these words, In the latter end of
their Kingdom; this is not only meant of the Kingdom of the Four Successors,
contradistinct to the Kingdom of Alexander; but the expression is concerning
the whole Kingdom of the Greeks, opposed to that of the Persians. In the
description of the He-goat, Four Kingdoms are said to rise up out of that
Nation; and in the latter end of their Kingdom (meaning the Greeks, when that
People shall have the Sovereignty over the Earth) a King of fierce countenance
shall arise. Therefore we conclude, That Alexander, and his Successors
together, make but one Greek Empire, under the similitude of one He-goat. Now
let us proceed.

Piscator.
By the Fourth Kingdom (which was prefigured by the Ironthighs of the Image) we
must understand the Kingdom of the Successors of Alexander the Great. This I
have already cleared, by comparing it with the Fourth Beast, chap. 7. To which
I now add another evident collation of chap. 2. verse. 43. with chap. 11. verse.
6. concerning the Feet of the Image (which pertain to the Fourth Kingdom)
Daniel speaking to Nebuchadnezzar, thus says, Whereas thou s^west the Iron
mixed with miry Clay, they shall mingle themselves with the seed of men, but
they shall not cleave one to the other, even as Iron is not mixed with Clay.
Now this very same thing the Angel Gabriel does declare concerning the
Successors of Alexander; to wit, The Seleucidae and the Lagidae, chap. 11. And
in the end of the years they shall join themselves together; for the King's
Daughter of the South shall come to the King of the North, to make an
Agreement; but she shall not retain the power of the Arm, neither shall he
stand, nor his Arm. From hence it is manifest, by the Fourth Kingdom,
Represented by the Feet of the Image, this cannot be understood of the Roman
Empire, seeing it was diverse from that of the Graecians.

Answer.
The Character of the mixture of Marriages drawn from that collation between
chap. 2. verse. 43. and chap. 11. verse 6. This, of all others, seems to be the
grand Argument. But to say the truth, and that upon trial, I here find that
Interpreters do usually build upon Three notable False Principles.

First, They take the Fourth Kingdom as divided in all time; and therefore they
look after the interchangable marriages of the Seleucidae and Lagidae to make
up the Union. But in this they err: For the Fourth Kingdom, as long as it is
in the Iron-Legs, it is not di^ided at all: It is one entire Dominion, and
therefore needs no Uniting by mixture of marriages. The Division begins
not till you come to the Feet, part of Iron, and part of Clay. But let us hear
the words themselves* And the Fourth Kingdom shall be strong as Iron, forasmuch
as Iron breaket^ in p^eces, and subdueth all things; and as Iron that breaks
all these, shall it break in pieces and bruise. So then, the Fourth Kingdom, so
long as it is in the Iron-Legs, is more strong than any going before. There
arose first a Kingdom of Gold, in all fullness of power^ an^ then afterwords, a
Kingdom of Silver: and a third (...) Brass, that should rule over all: and then
last of all, a Kingdom of Iron, which should break in pieces and su^due all the
former Metals. But how is this verified in the Fourth Kingdom? The strength and
power of the Kingdom was chiefly in the Iron-Legs: when it came to the Feet and
Toes, it then became divided; and was partly strong, and (...) broken. If we
look narrowly to the words, there is a description of the Fourth Kingdom in the
(...) ^ate thereof. First, It i^ described as one entire Kingdom ru^ing over
all the Earth; and so it was in the first times when it was in the Iron*Legs.
Secondly, It is described as a divided Kingdom into many parts; and so it was
in its last times in the Feet, part of Iron, and part of Clay: If this be so,
How far does Piscator, and other Interpreters of his way, depart from the Truth?

First, They make the Fourth, the mightiest Kingdom, to consist merely of the
Fragments and broken pieces of Alexander's Dominion. Secondly, That which is
more, They make it a Kingdom broken and divided in all its times; when it
became divided in its last times only. Thirdly, They plead the mixture of
Marriages between the Seleuc^dae and the Lagidae, in the Iron-Legs of the
Image: and yet it stands them upon to prove, That the Fourth Kingdom was
divided, when it was in the Iron-Legs. The Scripture says no such thing, but
rather the contrary: as long as it was in the Iron-Legs, it was an absolute,
entire, and undivided Kingdom. And therefore where there is no division into
pieces, what need is there of mingling to make an Union?

Secondly, They usually take it for granted, That the Fourth Kingdom is divided
into two parts; and therefore they mainly insist upon the division between the
Seleucidae and the Lagidae. We yield that there is a division in the Feet and
Toes of the Image: but how is it proved, That this is a division into Two parts
only, and no more? The words of the text are these: The Legs were of Iron, and
the Feet part of Iron, and part of Clay. The Chaldee has it, Out of those
parts that w^e of Iron, and those parts that were of Clay. The materials of the
Feet were Iron and Clay; of these the several parts of the Fourth Kingdom were
tempered. But how is it proved, That the Kingdom was divided into Two parts
only, and no more? They that build upon this, as upon an undoubted Principle,
should first make it appear, That it is so. For, where does Daniel in his
Exposition make mention of any such bipartite State? How can this be proved
from his words? For thus it is in the text; Whereas thou saw the Feet and
Toes, part of Potters Clay, and part of Iron; the Kingdom shall be divided: or,
(as Iunius renders it) R^gna erunt divers^, There shall be diverse Kingdoms.
But how is it proved, That the Kingdom is divided only into Two parts, and that
the diverse Kingdoms are only two and no more? Let us refer that matter to that
other description, chap. 7. And is there any thing there spoken, to prove the
bipartite State of the Fourth Kingdom? For if we must suppose, That the
Seleucidae and the Lagidae, are the Two Iron-Legs, or divisions of the Fourth
Empire, why is not this repeated again, or something to this purpose, in the
seventh Chapter? All agree in it, That there is a description of one and the
same Kingdom in both texts. Now then, in the seventh Chapter there is no
mention made of this division, only there it is said, That Ten Kings or
Kingdoms shall arise, and another shall arise up after them. Here it is plainly
said, what that Number of Kingdoms is, into which the Fourth Empire shall be
divided, scil. into Ten inferior Realms. These then are the parts of the
Fourth Empire that shall mingle themselves with the seed of men in the latter
times of that Dominion. There is nothing spoken in the text con^erning the
bipartite State, nothing concerning the Seleucidae and the Lagidae; but that
multiplicity of lesser States in the Feet and Toes of the Image, are here
defined and declared to be Ten in Number, the proper Character and print-mark
of the Roman Dominion, Rev. 17.

Object. You will say, That the two Legs of the Image do signify the double
state of the Fourth Kingdom; and these are the Seleucidae and the Lagidae.

Sol: This is but a Fancy, as I have formerly proved; for if you look to the
Exposition of the text in Daniel's own words, The Fourth Kingdom was so far
from being bipartite, that it was not at all partite or divided, as long as it
was in the Legs; the division beginning only in the Feet and Toes. But if any
stand upon the Analogy and similitude, That therefore the Kingdom must be
divided into Two parts, because there are two Legs in the Body of man; I would
here know also, by the same method of Interpretation, what is meant by the
Knees, the Ancles, and other parts of the Legs? Must we find out a
signification for all these? The Kingdom of Babel is compared to an Head of
Gold; must we look then what is signified by the Eyes, the Nose, the Mouth, the
Beard, the Lips, and other parts of the Head; and so apply several
significations to the Babylonian Kingdom? This were to trifle in a serious
matter. It is a good observation of Dr Willets, That the Image is no Natural,
but a voluntary sign; and therefore we are not to seek for a signification
beyond the intent of the Type. The intent of the Type, by the Legs of the
Image, as by the lowest region and part of the Body of Man, is to set forth the
Fourth and last Monarchical Kingdom, and the Fourth and last period of time. We
can prove no more by the simili^ude, than it will signify: and here it is
plain, That the Two Legs do signify no more than the Two Thighs, the Two
Sides; and these do not signify the bipartite State of the Third Kingdom.

Thirdly, They take it for a granted Truth, That the twodivided State is the
proper Character of the Grecian Kingdom; and therefore they look to the
Seleucidae, or Lagidae, as the immediate parts and divisions of that Empire.
But herein also they are greatly deceived: For it is plain from chap. 8. That
the Grecian is quadri-partite. In a famous change of State, that Empire became
divided into Four Kingdoms. The Goat is the Kingdom of Graecia; the Four Horns
are Four Kingdoms that shall arise (...) out of that Nation, verse. 22. And this
is the reason wherefore the Third Beast is said to have Four Heads, because of
the quadri-partite Estate of that Empire. From whence we collect, That
Piscator, and other Interpreters that follow his judgment, do err from the
Truth, when they would have the Seleucidae and the Lag^dae to be the two parts
of the Greek Empire. To speak properly, Neither the Grecian, nor the Roman,
can be set forth by this Character, since the Grecian is described in the
Scripture in the nature of a Tetrarchy, or a Kingdom divided into Four parts;
and the Roman in the nature of a Decarchy, or a Kingdom divided into ten
inferior Realms. These are the Three False Principles on which Interpreters do
usually build, and therefore the interpretation cannot be good that stands
upon such a sandy foundation.

For the mixture of Marriages, which Piscator calls Evidentem collationem, an
evident collation; I do acknowledge that the mixture of Marriages mentioned
chap. 2. is again repeated chap. 11. In the one text it is said, That they
shall mingle themselves with the seed of men: And in the other, That there is
an interchangeable Marriage, one or two, betwixt the Seleucidae and the
Lagidae. But what of all this? They that are like in some things, are not
altogether the same. If that general rule, Omne simile non est idem, were
observed in the Exposition of Daniel and the Revelation, we should have a
cleerer sense of some Visions then now we have. But this great Fallacy has
imposed upon Interpreters; they have taken that for the same, which is parallel
in some things only. There are some that have gone so far in these times, as
that they have taken the little Horn for some late Princes; some, for Mahomet,
and some for this, and some for that. Here I confess there may be a similitude
in some particulars, and the Allusion may hold in some few Circumstances: But
if you go to the whole Body of the notes of the little Horn, and to the scope
of the text, here it will be very hard to make good the Assertion. There is a
resemblance only between the Marriages, mentioned chap. 2. and chap. 11. But if
we go to the main scope, the whole carriage of the text does plainly show That
the Roman is the Fourth Kingdom; and so conseque^ly, the mixture of Marriages,
and the mingling (...) the seed of men, must necessarily be in the Roman
Kingdom.

And yet further, To satisfy the doubt, They who do look more diligently into
the sense of the Prophecy, they find many things in the Grecian, which are
but as Types and Figures of some notable events in the Roman Kingdom. Let us
take for Instance, the little Horn mentioned in the Eighth of Daniel. Now here
all do agree, That Antiochus Epiphanes is the little Horn meant in this
Chapter: yet whosoever he is that diligently reads the words of St. Paul, in
2 Thessalonians. 2. he shall find that the Apostle does apply many things to the Roman
Antichrist, and so does John in the Revelation, that are here ascribed to
Antiochus Epiphanes. To salve the matter, Interpreters tell us, That Antiochus
is the Figure of the Antichrist to come. We may proceed in the same Method, and
so we may say, That the interchangeable Marriages between the Seleuc^dae and
the Lagidae, are but Figures of the future mingling with the seed of men, and
of all other means that shall be used to the keeping up of the Roman Kingdom in
the last and Antichristian State thereof. But, let us proceed.

Piscator.
The same thing also may be clearly demonstrated from the words, verse. 34, 35.
where Daniel, among many other things, does speak unto the King; Thou saw
till that a stone was cut out without hands, which smote the Image upon the
Feet that were part of Iron, and part of Clay, and brake them to pieces: And
the stone which smote the Image, became a great Mountain, and filled the whole
Earth. This Stone Daniel does expound, verse. 44. to be the Kingdom that never
shall be destroyed, and is the Kingdom of Christ: for the Kingdom of Christ
began then to fill the whole Earth by the preaching of the Gospel, after the
overthrow of those Four Kingdoms, as it is evident from the text. And truly,
about the beginning of the Roman Empire, Christ was Born, when Augustus did
bear Rule, etc. In the 35 year from his Birth, he sent the holy Spirit from
Heaven into the Apostles, with whose Power they being endued, did Preach the
Gospel first at Jerusalem to the Jews, and then afterward everywhere in the
whole world to the Gentiles, as the Book of the Acts does testify. Therefore,
since at the Rising of the Kingdom of Christ, and at his filling the whole
Earth, the Fourth Kingdom, prefigured by this Image, was already destroyed: and
seeing also that the Roman Empire did continue at that time; it does
necessarily follow, That that Fourth Kingdom cannot any way be understood of
the Empire of the Romans.

Answer.
That the Stone cut out of the Mountain, is the Kingdom of Christ; to this we
freely Assent. But whereas Piscator does allege, That all the Four
Metal-Kingdoms did expire at the beginning of Christ's Kingdom; this we Deny.
Let us consider the words of the text, for they must govern in this case.

First, It is said, concerning the Kingdom represented by the Stone cut out of
the Mountain, That in the days of these Kingdoms, will the God of Heaven raise
up a Kingdom that never shall be destroyed. If this be so, it will necessarily
follow, That the Roman must be one of the Four Metal-Kingdoms; because our
Savior was Born, his Gospel was Preached, the Gentiles were brought to the
Faith, in those times when the Romans had the Sovereign Dominion over the
Earth; and particularly over those parts where the Church was seated. The
Seleucian Kingdom was destroyed, and all that tract of Land from Euphrates to
the Border of Egypt, was wholly brought under the power of the Romans.
Therefore, since the Kingdom of Christ began in the times of the Roman, the
Roman must necessarily be the Fourth, and the last Kingdom.

Secondl^, It is said, That the Stone became a great M^untain, and filled the
whole Earth. Now, when did thi^ come to pass? The Kingdom of Christ was weak
and small at his In^arnation, and in the times immediately following. But after
that the Stone smote the Image upon the Feet and Toes, after that he had broken
the Roman Kingdom, in the last and Antichristian state thereof; then, and not
till then, it became a Mountain, and filled the whole Earth. Now this was not
at the Incarnation, but we look for the performance thereof at the setting up
of the Majestical Kingdom of Christ; as it is plainly discovered in the whole
Book of the Revelation.

Thirdly, It is said, That the Stone smote the Image upon the Feet and Toes,
that were part of Iron, and part of Clay. This shows plainly, That the
Seleucidae and the Lagidae cannot be the Fourth and the last Metal-Kingdom For
the Kingdom of Christ did never so much as touch these Kingdoms. They were all
utterly destroyed by the power of the Romans before the Coming of Christ in the
Flesh.

Now, if you apply this to the Roman, as to the last of the Four Persecuting
Empires, the Kingdom of Christ in these last times must consume the Roman
Kingdom, in the Antichristian state thereof, as it is clear by the whole Book
of the Revelation.

Object. But whereas Piscator does allege, That the Kingdom of Christ did
begin to fill the whole Earth, when the Gentiles far and near, were brought to
the Faith, by the Preachi^g of the Apostles.

Sol. I do not Deny, but that the Kingdom of Christ in the Apostles time did
then begin to fill the Earth. For the bounds of his Spiritual Kingdom were much
enlarged by their travel* But what is this to the purpose? The text speaks
plainly of a Monarchical Kingdom; of such a Kingdom (opposed to the Four
Monarchies) that shall subdue, and fill the whole Earth. The Apostles Preached
the Gospel among all Nations; and by name, Saint Paul filled all places from
Jerusalem to Illyricum, with the Gospel of Christ. Yet nevertheless, for all
this large spreading of the Gospel, there was no destruction of the Roman
Kingdom. In those times, the Romans continued their Power and Tyranny, though
the Gospel of Christ was Preached everywhere. But when the stone shall become a
Mountain, and fill the whole Earth; before this can be done, the Stone must
strike the Image upon the Feet and Toes thereof. The Tyranny of the Roman
Kingdom must be broken by the Power of the Gospel, before the Kingdom of Christ
can be set up in the Throne. Now, if we apply these things to the times, we
shall find that the Church was in perpetual conflict with the Empire of the
Romans for 300 year^ together, in all the times of the Ten first Persecutions.
Now it is said of the Primitive Mareyrs, That they overcame him; to wit, The
Persecuting Empire, by the Blood of the Lamb, and by the Word of their
Testimony; and they loved not their lives unto the death, Rev. 12. 11. By the
scope of the place it is clear, That the Lord Christ by his Power, and his
Martyrs by their Sufferings, both together, did break the Tyranny of that
Persecuting Empire. It is said of them, That they overcame him, to wit, the
Dragon with Seven Heads and Ten Horns. The Saints by their Sufferings did
overcome him; and so the Gospel was set up as the regent Law. The Woman brought
forth a Man-Child that should Rule all Nations with a Rod of Iron. This is
meant of the Reign of Christ upon the Earth; and there were some beginnings
thereof in the times of Constantine the Great, as appears by the scope of the
text, verse. 9, 10, 11.

Now, whereas it came to pass afterward, That the Christian Empire was broken
to pieces by the coming down of the barbarous Nations out of the North, and Ten
Kings rose out of the Ruins of the Empire aforesaid; Then also, according to
the Prophecies, a New Persecuting Empire was Erected, to try the Faith and
Patience of the Saints. This in the whole Prophecy is called, The
Antichristian Empire, or, The Roman Kingdom in the last Edition thereof. Now,
this Kingdom also shall be broken in pieces by the Preaching of the eternal
Gospel; the Nations shall be undeceived, and the Gospel shall be set up as the
regent Law, as it began to be set up in the times of Constantine the Great, but
was hi^dered afterward. But now it shall be far otherwise: The Kingdom of
Christ shall be so set up, after the breaking in pieces of the Toes and Feet of
the Image, after the wearing out of the Antichristian Tyranny, that he shall
Reign 1000 years. From all that has been said, it is clear, That we must look
after the Monarchical beginning of the Kingdom of Christ according to the
Prophecies. Of this we shall have some occasion to speak more largely afterward.

Now let us consider what is Alleged by Polanus.

Polanus.
The Scope of Daniel, is, To speak of those great Empires only that should
stand up one after another till Christ, in those Territories where the
Babylonian began. Now the Roman had nothing that the Babylonian had, but only
Syria and Egypt: He had nothing that the Persian had, more than the Babylonian,
but Asia the Less. Therefore the Roman is not to be accounted one of the Four
Empires.

Answer.
It is true that the Roman went no further Eastward than the River Euphrates,
neither did he possess many of those Eastern Countries which were formerly
under the Babylonian and Persian Monarchies. But what of all this? It is enough
for our purpose, That he possessed all those Countries on this side Euphrates,
which were the Continent of the Church. In the Churches Continent the Roman was
the Successor of the Babylonian, Persian, and Grecian Empires. For look what
Monarchy the Babylonian began over the People of the Jews, the same was
continued by the Romans, when their time came to have the Monarchy over the
Church. If this be a truth, we may quickly Answer the Objection of Dr Willet,
which is much to the same effect. These are his words: This Vision of an humane
Image, signified one united Body, consisting of diverse Kingdoms, one succeeding
another, as the parts of the Body do join one to another, the Beginning and
Head of which was Babylon. And then he adds, The Roman Monarchy being distant
at least 1200 miles, could not make one united Body with it. Therefore that
Monarchy cannot here fitly be understood. By the same Reason he might Argue,
The Grecian Kingdom being distant many miles from the Babylonian and Persian,
therefore it cannot be compacted into the same Image of Persecuting Empires.
But this is not the Point which we are on. For we are not to measure the
Monarchies by the Longitude, Latitude, and Distance of place* but by the same
Succession of Monarchical Dominion over the Churches Territories* In this
sense, the Roman may be placed in the same Image of Monarchical Empires, as
long as he did continue the same Sovereignty over the Church which the
Babylonian began. And therefore when the Scriptures do call the City of Rome by
the Name of Babylon, it is a very proper Expression; for she did continue the
same Tyranny over the Saints which the Babylonians began. And it is clear also,
That the same Empire did Devolve and Descend upon the Romans in the Fourth
Alteration and Change of State. But let us proceed.

Polanus.
At the Coming of Christ, the Kingdom represented by the Feet and Toes, was
ruined; but so was not the Kingdom of the Romans, which was not complete till
the time of Trajan. Therefore the Roman is not the Fourth Kingdom.

Answer.
I have already touched this Point in my Answer to Piscator; but because I see
many Excellent Expositors build upon this Principle, That the Kingdom of Christ
Begins at the Dissolution of all Four Metal-Kingdoms, and that this
Dissolution was at his Incarnation: Because they build strongly upon this, we
will bestow the more pains to enquire into the matter. To the clearing of this,
let us look to that which the text naturally affords, and then let us make
Application. From the Second Chapter of Daniel, we gather these Four
Observations.

First, Concerning the time of the Beginning of the Kingdom of Christ, it must
be in the latter times. For though it is only said, That in the days of these
Kingdoms (speaking indefinitely) shall the God of Heaven raise up a Kingdom,
that never shall be destroyed: yet in the scope of the Vision, it is employed to
be in the times of the last Metal-Kingdom. For, according to the Order of the
Vision, Nebuchadnezzar first saw the Head of Gold, then the Breast of Silver,
the Belly and Thighs of Brass, the Legs of Iron, the Feet and Toes, part of
Iron, and part of Clay. And then after some consideration, he saw a Stone cut
out of the Mountain, that smote the Image upon his Feet. Therefore the
Beginnings of the Kingdom of Christ were in the latter times, when the Image
was in its last and lowest Region. At leastwise, the eminent operation of
Christ's Kingdom was upon the Feet and Toes of the Image.

Secondly, We are to observe, That the Kingdom of Christ was small in the
beginning: it was a little Stone cut out of the Mountain: For look what
difference there is betwixt a little Stone and a great Mountain; so the same
difference is betwixt the Kingdom of Christ when it began, and that Kingdom
when it self became a Mountain and filled the Earth. Calvin upon the place
speaks very well: Propheta admonet exordia Regni Christi fore contempta. The
Prophet does well admonish us, the beginnings of the Kingdom of Christ to be
weak and contemptible.

Thirdly, We are to Note also, That the progress of this Kingdom was from small
beginnings: First, it was a Stone cut out of the Mountain, and then by degrees
in time (though the space of time is not expressed in the text) it became a
Mountain, and filled the Earth.

Fourthly, Concerning the means of the increase, how it came to that
plentitude, or fullness of Power. It smote upon the Feet and Toes of the Image,
and so the Iron, the Clay, ^he Brass, the Silver, the Gold, were broken all
together, and the Stone became a Mountain and filled the Earth, verse. 34, 35.

These are the Four Observations drawn from the Second Chapter: Now let us
apply our selves to Polanus, and other Interpreters of that way. And here we
agree, That the Kingdom of Christ did in some sense begin at his Incarnation.
And this is one chief Argument to prove the Roman to be the Fourth Kingdom;
because the Lord Christ came in the Flesh, and his Gospel was Preached, and
many Churches were gathered, when the Romans did bear rule. But our Question
is, Whether did the Kingdom of Christ begin as the Fifth Monarchy, as a
Mountain that did fill the Earth? In this sense he cannot be said to begin in
that fullness and amplitude of power at the Incarnation. For, from the scope of
the text it is plain, That the Kingdom of Christ was small in the beginning:
Secondly, That it grew by degrees: Thirdly, That the means of the increase was
by wearing out the Fourth Kingdom. The Stone smote the Image upon the Feet and
Toes, and so became a Mountain, and filled the Earth. If we apply this to the
event, The Kingdom of Christ began when the Romans did bear rule. His Kingdom
was small in the beginning; but by degrees, first by wearing out Rome Imperial,
and after that, by wearing out Rome Papal, this Kingdom of Christ shall come to
the fullness of all Monarchical power over the whole Earth.

Now on the contrary; Let us suppose, That the Seleucidae and the Lagidae
jointly, or the Seleucidae alone, do make the Fourth Metal-Kingdom. For so
Iunius, Broughton, Piscator, Polanus, Hayne, Willet, and others, will have it.
Upon their Grounds, I Demand, First, How did the Kingdom of Christ begin in the
times of the Four Metal-Kingdoms, if the Seleucidae and the Lagidae do make the
Fourth Metal-Kingdom? Secondly, Seeing the Kingdom of Christ did begin as a
little Stone cut out of the Mountain, How do they prove that this Kingdom did
come to that small beginning in the times of the Seleucidae and the Lagidae?
Thirdly, Seeing the Kingdom of Christ did increase by decrees in the duration
of the Metal-Kingdoms, How did it increase in the duration of the times of the
Seleucidae and the Lagidae? Fourthly, Seeing the means of the increase was by
the wearing out of the Fourth Metal-Kingdom, ( the Stone smote the Image upon
the Feet,) How did the Kingdom of Christ wear out the Dominions of the
Seleucidae and Lagidae? Were they not totally destroyed some years before the
Coming of Christ in the Flesh, by the means of the Romans?

All these things put together, do weaken that Principle of the Dissolution of
all the Four Metal-Kingdoms at the Coming of Christ in the Flesh; and that the
Kingdom of Christ did begin at the Incarnation, in the fullness of Monarchical
Power. Now, because Mr Hayne In his Treatise concerning the Kingdom of Christ
upon the Earth.
has labored very much in this Point, we will take his Arguments into
Consideration.

Mr Hayne.
When Herod, Pilate, and the Jewish Rulers rose up against Jesus Christ, God
set him to be his King on Mount Sion, and gave him so Eminent a Kingdom, that
to it all Kings, Judges, and People must submit, or else be crushed with an
Iron-Scepter. But Herod, Pilate, and the Rulers of the Jews, rose up against
Jesus Christ 1500 years ago, and more. Therefore God set up Christ his King on
Mount Sion, and gave him a Kingdom so Eminent 1500 years ago, and more.

Answer.
For the beginning of the Kingdom of Christ 1500 years ago, I yield that this
is true according to the right meaning of the Scriptures. But the great
Question is, Whether the Monarchical Kingdom of Christ, when the Saints of the
most High shall become the Monarchical People, whether did that Kingdom begin
1500 years ago, yea or no? I do call that the Monarchical Kingdom of Christ (to
speak clearly in the Point) not when he has a power in himself greater than
any Earthly Dominion; not when by the merit of his death, and donation of his
Father, he begins to have right to all Earthly Kingdoms, for this was given
to him at his Ascension: But by the Monarchical Kingdom I understand, when the
Lord Christ, after the several and respective times of the Tyrannical Kingdoms
of this world, according to the free Dispensation of his Father, does actually
take into his Possession the Sovereignty over the Earth, and that his Gospel
comes to be the regent Law over the Nations. Now, this Monarchical Kingdom I
deny that it began 1500 years ago. It is not fully begun as yet, though we have
some beginnings thereof by the Preaching of the eternal Gospel by Luther and
those that follow. The scope of the Spirit in the Revelation is to show that
this Kingdom must begin at the end of the Dominion of the Beast, or the Roman
Kingdom of the latest Edition. But to come to particulars: It is mentioned,
Rev. 19. verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. That when the Saints did sing their Halelujah at
the Judgment upon the great Whore, then a voice was heard, The Lord God
Omnipotent Reigns, verse. 6. Here I demand, Did not the Lord God Omnipotent
Reign before? He did not Reign before, in the sense of that text* For the great
Who^e had Ruled all the world, and had corrupted the Earth by her Fornications:
all was under her Power, and she spilt the Blood of the Martyrs at her own
pleasure. But at her destruction the Lord Christ did begin to Reign, and that
was the time of the marriage of the Lamb, of the glory of the Gospel Church,
when the Lamb's Wife had made her self ready, verse. 7. So it is said, Rev. 11.
15. The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ; and he shall Reign for ever and ever. Here I demand, Were not the
Kingdoms of this world the Kingdoms of Christ before the sound of the Seventh
Trumpet, before the fall of the great City, before that time when the Kingdom
of the Beast began to be destroyed? I Answer, They were his Kingdoms jure by
Right, they were his by virtue of Purchase 1500 years ago, and more; but he
entered not into the actual Possession till the destruction of the Tyrannical
Kingdoms of this world. He received Institution* and jus ad rem, above 1500
years ago; but he had not In^uction and jus in re, till the destruction of the
Beast's Kingdom. And therefore these words are specially and Emphatically
added, (...), (...) Thou have taken to thy self thy great Power, and have
Reigned. In which words the holy Spirit does insinuate, That before the sound
of the Seventh Trumpet, the Lord Christ by his own free and voluntary
permission did suffer the Beast, and other Monarchical States to encroach upon
him, and to detain his Power for 1260 years. At the end of this time he does
resume and take the Power to himself alone. This is the scope of the Prophecy.
And for the Argument of Mr Hayne, That Christ was an established King upon
Mount Sion, when Herod and Pontius Pilate conspired against him; I will further
add, That in those times when the Beast ruled over all, and when all
worshipped his Image, and received his Mark, in those very times the Lamb stood
upon Mount Sion, and with him 144000, having their Fathers Name written in
their forehead, chap. 14. verse. 1. Now, I believe, none that understand the
scope of the Prophecy will affirm, That Christ was stated in his Monarchical
Kingdom in all the times of the Reign of Antichrist upon the Earth. To speak
properly, These were rather the times of the Patience of the Saints, and of the
Exinanition and concealment of the Glory of Christ's Kingdom. The Kings did
agree to give their Power to the Beast, and must do so till the Word of God be
fulfilled. When this is done, the Beast shall be destroyed, his Body shall be
given to the burning Fire; and then the Lord Christ shall begin to Reign.

Mr Hayne.
It must be granted, That Christ's Kingdom when it was set up, was more
powerful than Romes, which to this day never could (though assisted by the
Gates of Hell) either by Might or Policy, prevail against Christ's Kingdom.

Answer.
It is true, That the Kingdom of Christ is in it self stronger than any
Monarchical Kingdom whatsoever. But the great Question is, Whether it be his
mind at all times to e^ert and put forth his Power? If this had been his mind,
why did he not dash in pieces the Babylonian, the Persian, the Grecian, and
the Roman Powers as soon as they had any Being? Why had they any liberty
given*them to Afflict the Saints? In these Variations and Changes of Empire,
the Lord Christ would not put out his Power till the times of his Reign upon
the Earth should begin. Again, We do not absolutely and simply affirm, That the
Lord Christ did not exert and put out his Power in the times of the
Metal-Kingdoms: For, he armed his Saints with Faith and Patience, and made them
able to Suffer. But this we affirm, He did not put forth his Power to the
destruction of these Kingdoms in their Tyranny and Rage against the Church.
When the Babylonian stood in all greatness of Power, it could not overcome the
Spirit of Christ in the Three Children. And when the Ten Horns did agree
together to give their Power to the Beast, The Lamb did overcome them, for he
is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings; and they that are with him, are called,
and chosen, and faithful, chap. 17. verse. 14. It is manifest then, That the
Lord Christ did put out his Power to hold up the Faith of the Saints, and to
make them able to Suffer. But for the present he did not break those Tyrannical
Empires in pieces, to make them submit to the Laws of the Gospel. He did not,
nor will not exert and send forth that part of Power, till the time and season
does come when his Monarchical Kingdom shall begin. The Apostle says, 1 Timothy
cap. 6. verse. 15. In his times he will show who is the (...), the only
Potentate, the King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords. He will set forth his
Monarchical Sovereignty and Potency; but (...), in his own times, in that
season which the Father has appointed for his Sovereignty and Dominion. Now
that time, according to the Scriptures, is at the end of the Metal-Kingdoms,
and more particularly at the end of the Antichristian Kingdom. But let us
proceed.

Mr Hayne.
Christ in S. John's time was the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 1. 5.
Had all things given him by his Father, Luke 10. 22. All Power in Heaven and
Earth was given him before his Ascension, Matthew. 28. 18. So that he was the
Head of the Church his Body, and in Place far above all Principality, and
Power, and Domination, and every Title and Name that is Named, not in this
world only, but in the world to come, Ephesians. 1. 21, 22. Therefore at Christ's
being here on Earth, or near unto that time, he had an absolute and boundless
Sovereignty far above all Monarchs that here^ofore lived, or shall ever live
hereafter.

Answer.
To this matter I have spoken before, scil That the Kingdom given to the Son at
his Ascension, was far greater than any Earthly Kingdoms whatsoever. But the
Question here is, Whether did he enter into the Possession of that Kingdom, yea
or no? There was a Power given to Christ at his Ascension, by virtue of which
he was able to destroy the Beast, the false Prophet, the Dragon, Gog and Magog,
Death and Hell, and all other Enemies: yet we see that he does not, nor will
not execute and put forth his Power in their destruction, till the time
appointed of the Father, till the Saints have passed the time of their Patience
and Sufferings under these Tyrants. But in this matter, let us Answer Mr Hayne
with Mr Hayne. In the first Page of his Book he speaks of the Eternity of
Christ's Kingdom, and of its extent to the end of the world. And afterward in
the second Page he speaks as follows: Of this Extent (says he) is Christ's
Kingdom: yet in regard that God has so^etimes permitted Satan and wicked men
in extraordnary manner to domineer, and to exercise their worldly and ungodly
Power; and that at other times he has made his own Sovereignty by remarkable
Mercies and Judgments to appear; God and Christ, upon this more glorious
expression of their more Overruling Might, are then especially said to have a
Kingdom and to Reign, Because in such times their Glory and Majesty does more
manifestly show it self, Exodus 15. 18. 1 Samuel 12. 12. Obad. verse. 21. Rev. 12.
10. In like manner I may say, Though at the Ascension of Christ there was given
to him a Kingdom, far greater than all the Kingdoms of the world; yet in regard
that it has pleased God the Father, for many Ages together, to permit Rome
Imperial, and afterward Rome Papal, in an extraordinary manner to exercise
their worldly Power: And seeing also it is his pleasure, after some Ages, to
make his Sovereignty known, in the destruction of the Tyranny of these States,
and in setting up the Gospel as the regent Law; in this respect the Reign of
Christ may be said to begin at the Dissolution of the Fourth Kingdom, in the
last and Antichristian State thereof. But a little further to open the meaning
of the Scriptures. When Michael and his Angels, i. e. Christ and his Primitive
Martyrs, had conquered the Dragon, presently and immediately upon the Conquest
this Acclamation was heard: I heard a loud voice saying in Heaven, Now is come
Salvation, and Strength, and the Kingdom of our God, and the Power of his
Christ: for the Accuser of our Brethren is cast down, Rev. 12. 10. Here I
demand, what is meant by (...), by that Kingdom of God, and Power of Christ?
You are to Note, That the scope of the place is concerning the Fight between
the Lord Christ and his Primitive Martyrs on the one side, and the Powers of
the Persecuting Empire of the Romans on the otherside. After a long and
terrible Fight, the Dragon was overcome by the Faith and Patience of the
Martyrs, by the Prayer of Faith grounded upon the Promise of God. And in the
times of Constantine the Great, when the Christian Faith (as the best
Expositors will have it) became Religio Imperii, the Religion of the Empire;
then at that time the Kingdom of God, and the Power of his Christ was revealed
to the world. The Deliverance and Salvation of the Church from under the Ten
first Persecutions was much desired before, but it was not effected till the
days of Constantine the Great. To his times then that notable expression, (
the Kingdom of our God, and the Power of his Christ is come) is more
immediately ^o be applied. By that which the Church has had Experience of
already, we may learn what is the meaning of the Spirit, when he speaks of
her Deliverance from under Antichristian sufferings, and of the future Reign of
Christ upon the Earth for 1000 years. And though there was some beginning of
his Monarchical Reign in the days of Constantine, yet that was but radiatura
vel specimen Regni Christi, a glympse, or a hand^el as it were of the Kingdom
of Christ, and of the future liberty of the Church that shall be. For that
glory was Eclipsed, and the Church fell under Persecution in all Antichristian
times. When those times shall be fulfilled, the Kingdoms of this world shall
become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ. And so they shall continue
and remain for many years, when Jews and Gentiles, both together, shall make a
glorious Church under Christ their Head and King, in the latter days. After
the destruction of the Fourth Beast, it is expressly said, The Dominion under
the whole Heaven shall be given to the Saints of the most High; and that this
Dominion is to continue for ever, Dan. 7. 27. Now then, If the Monarchical
Kingdom of Christ did begin at the Incarnation, and so forward to continue for
ever, what shall we make of the Reign of Antichrist for so many Ages together?
Christ has Reigned but a little, if we look to an exterior Reign.

Mr Hayne.
The Reign of Antichrist, and of other Tyrants, is no impeachment to Christ's
absolute Sovereignty. The wickedness of Sons, takes not away the Fatherhood
and Authority of Parents; Nor a Debauched Servant's ill carriage, argue his
exemption from the Master he is subject to. David was, and continued a King,
though Ishbosheth, and Readiness House, though Absolon his own Son, though Sheba a
Benjamite, and many of Israel rose up against him, and submitted not to his
Scepter.

Answer.
We agree, That the Tyrannical States, and by Name the ^ntichristian, cannot be
such impeachments to Christ's Kingdom, so as absolutely and finally to obstruct
it in every part and point of Power. We yield also, That the Right belongs to
Christ, to be Universal Head of the Church, though Antichrist has Usurped his
Right for many Ages together. And further, Though his Jurisdiction has been
detained by others a long time, yet he has Power enough in himself to recover
it again, when the time appointed for the Dominion of the Tyrannical States is
once fulfilled. But to say for the present, That the Antichristian State is no
impeachment to the Kingdom of Christ, this is a marvelous thing. When a Usurpet
is in the place of Government, is this no impeachment to the lawful power? All
the world did agree together to worship the Beast, and to receive his Mark; and
was this no impeachment to the Kingdom of Christ? The great Whore corrupted the
Earth with her Fornications, and the Kings of the Earth agreed together to give
their Power to the Beast: and was this no impeachment to the Kingdom of Christ?
Though David was anointed King over Israel, and though by virtue of his Unction
he had true Title to the Kingdom; yet so long as Saul and Ishbosheth did bear
Rule, the Kingdom was not his. In like manner, Though the Lord Christ by
suffering Death, and by his Unction, had Title to all the Kingdoms of the
Earth; yet as long as the Tyrannical States of this world, and particularly the
Antichristian Kingdom do continue, the Kingdoms of this world (in that form and
manner as they shall be) are not his. And therefore at the Fall of the Great
City, this expression is used, The Kingdoms of this world are become the
Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ. Here is a tacit implication, That
they were none of his Kingdoms before, in that sense which the text intends.

Mr Hayne.
You much debase and vilify Christ and his Kingdom, in comparing it, and
counting it Inferior to Earthly Monarchies and Kingdoms.

Answer.
For the Kingdom of Christ, I acknowledge that it is far above Earthly
Monarchies in largeness of Dominion, in greatness of Power, in time of
continuance: Yet we do not vilify and debase it, by compa^ing it with the
Kingdoms of this world. We see both in Daniel and in the Revelation, That the
Kingdom of Christ, and the Monarchies, are all Numbered together, and are set
one in Opposition against the other; the Kingdom of Christ against the
Governments of this world.

Further, We have good Reason to Affirm, That this Kingdom is not begun in that
fullness and amplitude of Power as it shall have; because the Lord Christ has
not yet Ruled Universally over the known parts of the Earth, as Earthly
Monarchs have done.

Mr Hayne.
That Christ has not so Ruled, the Reason is easily given. Soloman, who
excelled in Abundance of all outward and royal Accoutrements, found all to be
vanity of vanities, and vexation of Spirit.

Answer.
That Christ has not so Ruled, is because the time of such a manner of Ruling
is not yet come to that fullness of Perfection as it shall have. The Scriptures
do everywhere speak of his Kingdom over Jews and Gentiles in the latter days:
and shall any imagine that there shall be no such Kingdom? And though that of
Solomon be rightly applied to the Kingdoms of this world, that they be all
vanity of vanities; yet we must take heed that the same things be not spoken of
the Kingdom of Christ. For the Nature of this Kingdom, we desire that we may
not be mistaken. We do not plead for a Personal Note.
Reign, nor a literal Resurrection of the Martyrs, nor a confluence of all
Sensual Delights, as many have done. That which we principally stand for, is,
The Universal Subjection of the Nations to the Laws of the Gospel, and the rest
of the Church from such Persecutions as have been in all Antichristian times,
when the Governments of this world have been engaged to Afflict the Church. For
as formerly, The Kings of the Earth being deceived, did yield a Universal
subjection to the Bishop of Rome, and to the Laws made by his Authority: So the
times shall be, when the spiritual Excellencies of the Gospel shall be
discovered to the world; then the Dominations, Dignities, States, and
Governments of the Earth, shall willingly submit to the Laws of Christ: Whole
Nations shall come in, in the time of the Gospel. They that will Note.
call such a Kingdom vanity of vanities, must needs call many Promises of the
Scriptures, Vanity of Vanities. For many Promises are concerning the bringing
in of the fullness of the Gentiles, when that Nation of the Jews shall be called.

Secondly, The Hall^lujah that was sung to the Lord Christ at the burning of
the Great Whore, was in reference to this, The Lord God Omnipotent Reigns,
chap. 19. verse. 6. For, as the Great Whore sometimes Reigned over the Nations,
when their Laws, Statutes, Customs, Privileges, and all other things were made
subject to the Authority of that Church: So the Lord Christ shall Reign, when
the Nations shall willingly yield themselves up to be governed by his Scepter,
and shall live in subordination to the Laws of the Gospel. Be it far therefore
from any to think, That the Hallelujah was sung to Christ in reference to his
Monarchical Reign, and such a Reign, when all comes to all, be but vanity of
vanities. But leaving this Point, let us come to that which is more pertinent
to our purpose; to the Discourse concerning the Four Metal-Kingdoms, and to the
Parallel between the Ten-Horned Beast in Dan. 7, and the Ten-Horned Beast in
the Book of the Revelation.

Mr Hayne.
The Beast, Rev. 13. expresses not the very same, but a like Kingdom to the
Fourth Kingdom, Dan. 7. Therefore it is not one and the same Roman Kingdom.
That the Beast, Rev. 1^. expresses not the very same, but a like Kingdom, I
thus prove: The Chief Mystical and Figurative terms in the Revelation, having
reference to some thing in the Old Testament, express some New matter like the
Old, yet not the same with the Old. But the Beast in the Revelation has in the
Figurative and Mystical terms thereof reference to the Old Testament; namely,
to the Fourth Beast in the Prophe^ie of Daniel. Therefore the Beast in the
Revelation expresses not the same, but a like Kingdom to that in Daniel's
Prophecy. What I Affirm of the chief Mystical and Figurative terms in the
Revelation, is evident. For Egypt, Babylon, the New Jerusalem the Wilderness,
Paradise, Manna, express new terms like (...) same.

Answer.
I can see no Reason but the Fourth Beast with Ten (...) in the Prophecy of
Daniel, is one and the same in substance with the Ten-Horned Beast in the
Revelation. They are ^et out by one and the same Character, with the same
circumstances, and both Prophecies do pitch upon one and the same Roman
Kingdom. And what Mr Hayne does Allege to (...) contrary, in my Apprehension
is not of such great moment. For, what if it happens many times, That the
(...) mystical terms in the Revelation, having reference to (...) in the Old
Testament, express some New matter (...) the Old, yet not the same with the
Old? What if this be true in many particulars, as in those aforenamed? yet it
does not follow, That it is true in every particular. We can show many
Instances to the contrary, That the same truth is literally and historically
mentioned in both Prophecies. First, The Kingdom of Christ is described to be
an everlasting Kingdom that shall not pass away, Dan. 2. And is not this one
and the same Numerical Kingdom with that which is mentioned in the Book of the
Revelation, concerning the Dominion of Christ, that he is Alpha and Omega, the
first and the last, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Lord
Almighty? Secondly, Much is spoken i^ the Old Prophets concerning the future
Glory of the Church of the Jews, that shall be at the Call of that Nation; and
are not the same things Numerically and in terms repeated by Paul in Romans 11,
and by John in the Revelation?

But now let us come more particularly to enquire concerning the Ten-Horned
Beast, whether he be one and the same in both Prophecies: for if Mr Hayne, or
other Interpreters of his way, can make it appear, That this Beast is the
Seleucian Kingdom, and the Ten Horns are the Ten Kings in a lineal Succession,
we will willingly yield the truth of that which he Affirms. But on the
contrary, if we can make it appear, and that by true Demonstration, That the
Roman is the Fourth Kingdom; then we may conclude, That one Kingdom is
Identically, Literally, and Historically spoken of in both prophecies* and that
John does but more fully declare those things which were more fully decyphered
in the prophecy of Daniel. This is that which we shoot at, to make it appear
that both Daniel and John do describe one and the same time of the Roman
Kingdom, under the Type of a Beast with Ten Horns. This being once explained,
the Doctrine of the Number 666, and other Apocalyptical Mysteries, will begin
to be made clear. But seeing that Dr Willet in his Commentary upon Daniel, and
in his Appendix against Grasserus, is something more copious in this matter, we
will therefore more diligently enquire, Whether the Fourth Beast in Daniel be
the Seleucian or the Roman Kingdom? The Queries are of Three sorts: The First,
From the Nature of the Fourth Beast; The Second, From the Ten Horns; The Third,
From the description of the little Horn.

The Queries, from the Nature of the Fourth Beast, are these:

Querie 1. How can the Seleucidae be the Fourth Kingdom upon the Earth under
the Type of the Fourth Beast, seeing they are one of the Four Heads of the
Third Beast going before? chap. 7. verse. 6. chap. 8. verse. 8, 22. If they make
one of the Four Heads with the rest of the Successors of Alexander, they cannot
be the Fourth Kingdom. The Fourth Beast must necessarily be the Roman, seeing
the Third with Four Heads is the Grecian going before. But Dr Willet thus
replieth:

Alexander's Four Captains were at the first Regents under him, and his
Successor Aridaeus; but they became the Fourth Beast, when they erected the
Kingdom to themselves.

If we put Alexander and his Successors together, we can give a clear Reason
why the Third Beast may be said to have Four Heads, because in the times of the
Monarchy of the People of Greece, that Nation became divided into Four
Kingdoms; as appears Dan. 8. 8, 22. But if we take Alexander and his
Successor Aridaeus asunder from the Four Successors, I cannot see possibly how
the Kingdom of Alexander in that abstract consideration may be said to have
Four Heads, or that it may be decyphered properly by such a character. The Four
Heads do signify the Four Divisions of the Greek Monarchy; and can this be a
Character of Alexander's Kingdom, which in it self considered had no Heads,
Parts, or Divisions at all? The Scriptures speak plainly, That the Grecian was
one entire Kingdom in him; and after his eradication, the Dominion began to be
divided into Four parts. Therefore his Successors, quatenus Heads, had no being
at all in all the times of his Dominion: Much less could they be the Characters
of his Kingdom, at whose only extirpation they were to begin as Heads of the
Grecian State. Besides, it would be a great work, to prove out of the Stories,
That the Kingdom of Alexander was Governed by Four principal Regents in his
time. And further, If it could be made appear, still this would be a great
Question, Whether in the Description of the Monarchies, the Scripture would
look to such inferior Administrations? Darius the King set over the
Mede-Persian Kingdom 120 Princes, Dan. 6. 1, 2, 3. and yet we do not read that
this Number of Regents is set forth as the special Character of that Monarchy.
We have a clear Reason in the Scriptures wherefore the Grecian State is
figured by the Type of Four Heads, scil. in relation to the quadri-partite
Division of Alexander's Kingdom^ after his death. Therefore the Notion of the
Four Regents of Alexander, during his life time, I take rather to be an
evasion, than a just Truth grounded upon the Prophecy, or the civil Stories.

Querie 2. How can the Kingdom of the Seleucidae be the Fourth Kingdom upon the
Earth, that shall be different from the former, and shall devour the whole
Earth, and tread it down, and break it in pieces? chap. 7. verse. 23. How can
this be applied to them? The Seleucidae were far inferior to the Kingdom of
Alexander. Four Kings or Kingdoms did arise out of him, but not (...) -- in his
Strength, chap. 8. verse. 22. Further, The Seleucians were far inferior to the
former Monarchies of Babel and Persia, in greatness of Power, and largeness of
Dominion. On the contrary, If we apply the Fourth Beast to the Roman, all the
properties of that Beast will be verified i^ him. First, The admirable
condition of the Fourth Beast above the former. Secondly, His multi-form, and
various shape. Thirdly, The greatness of terror. Fourthly, The highest degree
of strength. Fifthly, His Iron-Teeth and Brazen-Nayles. Sixthly, His Actions to
devour, and to break in pieces. Seventhly, The object of his Victory, to subdue
the whole Earth. Eighthly, The time of the continuance. And so the Earth has
longer continued under the Dominion of the Romans, than under any, nay, under
a^l the Metal-Kingdoms. All these properties agree to the Roman; and I cannot
possibly see how they may be applicable to the Seleucian Kingdom.

But Dr Willet replieth, That the Kingdom of the Seleucidae make the Fourth
Beast, not so much in respect of greater strength, as in respect of greater
cruelty and hardness of disposition against the People of God, the Jews. And
therefore when it is said of this Kingdom, That it did devour the whole Earth;
this is not simply the whole Earth, but the whole Earth about the Confines of
the Jewish Church.

If we should grant this Principle of cruel Disposition against the People of
the Jews, this would strongly prove the Roman to be the Fourth Kingdom. For the
Jews suffered much from the Babylonians, much from the Persians, more from the
Graecians, yet most of all from the Romans: They were under the Roman Tyranny
for the space of 130 years together; and then last of all, the Nation and
Church was destroyed by their means. The Sufferings of the Jews under Antiochus
were great, but they were not to be compared with the last and fatal
destruction of Jerusalem. Our Savior himself does testify as much, when he
speaks concerning the great calamity that should come by the Romans, Luke 21.
verse. 20, 21, 22, 23. And this also is well observed by a certain nameless
Writer, in a Tract concerning Antichrist and the Four Monarchies. For, (says
he) Quamvis Antiochus graviter afflixit Iu^aeos, tamen ea afflictio ad tempus
tantum duravit, and cum illa (...) quae a Romany facta est nequaquam
conferenda. Therefore, if the greatest degree of Cruelty against the People of
the Jews does give denomination to the Fourth Beast, the greatest Sufferings of
the Jews have been under the Romans.

Secondly, In the case of the Monarchies, in the Chaldee Visions I see no
reason why the Jews should be called, The only People of God. In Dan. 2. there
is mention made of the beginning of the Kingdom of Christ, and how that Kingdom
should break the Metal-Kingdoms. Now is this verified in the Nation of the
Jews? Do they only make the Kingdom of Christ? Or have they been only used as
Instruments to the Dissolution of the Fourth Kingdom? Again, It is mentioned,
That the little Horn did wear out the Saints of the most High, till the Saints
took the Kingdom: Now, what warrant is there to take them only for the Saints
of the Jewish Church? True indeed, in the Hebrew Visions there is some mention
made of the People of God: but then commonly you shall see some circumstances
in the text, to decypher the People of the Jews only. As for ensample: You
shall read something spoken of the Tsebi, or the pleasant Land; of the daily
Sacrifice; of the Sanctuary; of Daniel's People, and the like: But in the
Chaldee Visions there is no such thing mentioned; which makes me to think,
That the Saints there mentioned, are of a more general Nature, and concern the
People of God both Jews and Gentiles. Indeed it is often spoken concerning the
Saints of the most High, That the little Horn did wear them out and consume
them; and that at the time appointed they shall take the Kingdom. But yet it is
not specified in Daniel, what these Saints are, Whether they be the Saints of
the Jews, or the Gentiles, or both. Dr Willet seems to me to give a good
Reason why they should be called, The Saints of the most High, scil. in
reference to their most High Prince, the Lord Christ. The words of the text are
fair for this Interpretation: And the Kingdom and Dominion under the whole
Heaven, shall be given to the People of the Saints. And then in the words
immediately following, His Kingdom (...) is an everlasting Kingdom, and all
Dominions shall obey him, verse. 27. The Kingdom is given to the Son of man, as
to the Head; and by him it is communicated to his People and Subjects after
their Sufferings. By all that has been spoken, we may conclude, That the
Subjects of the Kingdom of Christ, the Members of his Mystical Body, are the
Objects of the Tyranny of the Fourth Beast.

Thirdly, The great Power and Cruelty of this Beast is not only against the
Saints, but against all the former Metal-Kingdoms; for, as Iron it shall break
them all in pieces, verse. 40. Therefore this Kingdom is said to be more Mighty
than any going before, in respect of the exercise and employment of strength
upon the former Kingdoms, and not only in respect of the particular exercise of
cruelty against the People of the Jews. If this be so, we cannot say, That the
Seleucian was such: but to the Roman all things agree.

Fourthly, I do yield also, that this Expression is used specially for that
part of the earth about the Confines of the Church of the Jews; yet it is not
the whole meaning of the text. When the Lord gave Nebuchadnezzar (the Head of
the Image) a Kingdom, Power, Strength, and Glory; And wheresoever the Children
of men dwelt, he gave them all into his hands; we cannot say, That he made him
Ruler over all in Judea only, but he made him Ruler over all the Eastern
Countries, far and near, round about the Confines of that Church and Nation. In
like manner, when the Fourth Kingdom arose and brought the Earth into a more
absolute subjection, we must not only confine this to the Countries of Judea,
but we must also expound the whole Earth by some Analogy to the former
Metal-Kingdoms. According to this sense, when the Fourth Kingdom comes to the
times of its Monarchical Dominion, it will be the most potent Kingdom that ever
was about the Confines of the Church, and it will bring the former Kingdoms
into the greatest subjection. If you apply this to the Kingdom of the
Seleucidae, there will be no correspondence at all; but to the Roman all things
do agree. For that Kingdom was absolutely the most mighty, and the most
powerful that ever was about the Church of the Jews. And, as the People of Rome
had Judea under their Obedience; so they had the greatest Empire about Judea,
from East to West, that ever was.

All these Reasons laid together, show plainly, That the Fourth Beast is the
Roman Kingdom; and so consequently the Ten-Horned Beast in Daniel and the
Revelation is all one. It is not only one and the same in Analogy and
similitude of Expression, but it is Literally and Historically one and the
same. The Roman Kingdom is described in both Prophecies by the same Emblems and
similitudes.

And thus much concerning the Queries of the Fourth Beast in the more general
Nature thereof. We will now descend more particularly to the Ten Horns. And
here we will show that they cannot be the Ten Kings lineally succeeding in the
Seleucian race; but they are so many inferior Realms of the Roman Empire.

Querie 1. If the Ten Horns be Ten Seleucian Kings, there will be Eleven Horns
in all: and how can Ten Horns be the Character of the Beast? If in the whole
succession the Number of Kings be Eleven in all, the Beast is more properly
called, Unde^em Cornupeta, the Beast with Eleven Horns. The words are plain:
The ten Horns are ten Kings that shall arise, and another shall arise up after
them, that shall be diverse from the first, verse. 24. Therefore if in the whole
succession there be Eleven Kings; first Ten, and then another that came up
after them; why is the Beast set forth by the special Character of Ten Horns?
The little Horn must needs be the more cruel, and more eminent, according to
the text: And yet by this rule, that which is more principal, shall be excluded
from the denomination. But Doctor Willet has this evasion; to wit, That the
little Horn did not come up after the ten, but it came up as the last of them.
And so Piscator renders the words: Et Cornua december ex illo Regno, nempe december
Reges exsurgent, and postremus resurget post illos, and is diversus erit a
prioribus. And in his Scholia upon the 8 verse, he thus speaks: Vox Chaldaica
(...) -- quae versu sexto and septimo significat alium, hic valet ultimum seu
postremum. Nam Antiochus Epiphanes, qui per Cornu illud figurabatur, fuit
ultimus inter december illos Reges qui hic per december Cornua figurantur. But let it
be supposed that the Chaldee word may indefinitely be taken, yet it is to our
purpose to consider what the scope of the text will admit. In the former
verses, when the description of the Babylonian-Lyon was ended, it is there
mentioned, I beheld (...) -- another Beast like a Bear, not a latter Beast that
came up out of the Sea. For the scope of the Spirit is to show the rising of
Four several Monarchies, each one diverse from other. So in the present case,
after the description of the Ten Horns, the little Horn is said to be another
that came up after them, to show the notable diversity between it and the Horns
that came up before. And so this is the meaning of the text, That another Horn,
much differing from the former Ten in Nature and Condition, came up after them
in order of time. Secondly, Suppose we should let this Translation pass,
Postremum exsurget post illa, a latter shall arise after them: Here I ask,
What, and who are they after whom the little Horn shall arise? Are they not the
Ten Kings, signified by the Ten Horns? and is not then the little Horn the
Eleventh in the same succession? Mr Mede in his Apost. page 74. thinks that
the words do best run in this sense, Out of this Kingdom ten Kings shall arise,
and another shall arise (...) behind them, as the 70 translate (...). This
plainly shows the rising of Ten Horns, and the little Horn rose behind them
in the order of time. Thirdly, Let us go to the scope of the words going
before; For Daniel would know the truth of the Fourth Beast, and of the Ten
Horns, and of the little Horn that came up after them: And the Angel's Answer
is suitable to the Question: The ten Horns are ten Kings that shall arise, and
another shall arise up after them, and shall be diverse from the first, verse.
24. Now is not here a plain Antithesis, or Opposition betwixt the Ten Horns and
the little Horn that came up after? Upon these grounds we may conclude, That
there are Eleven Horns mentioned in the text. Now if these be Eleven Kings
lineally succeeding, why is the Beast called and set forth by the Character of
Ten Horns? Why is the most Tyrannical Prince left out of the Number? But on the
contrary, If you take the Fourth Beast for the Roman Kingdom, and the Ten Horns
for the Ten Kings that shall arise in a famous change of State, all things will
agree: For though the little Horn be more Tyrannical than any of the Ten, yet
it is not of that Edition of Horns from whence the Beast fetches his proper
denomination. In the Goat of Graeciae, chap. 8. there are Six Horns in all.
First, Alexander, the great Horn: Secondly, His Successors, Four notable Horns:
And then Thirdly, Out of one of them Antiochus Epiphanes, a little Horn. Yet we
do not say, That Six Horns, but Four Heads and Four Horns are the proper
Characters of the Grecian Kingdom. For in a famous mutation of State, that
Monarchy became Divided into Four Realms. So likewise, though the little Horn,
scil. the Papacy, was more terrible than any of the Ten going before; yet the
Ten Horns give the denomination to the Beast, because the Roman in a famous
alteration of Government was par^ed into Ten inferior Dominions. There is a
delineation of the Roman by the same Character, in the Book of the Revelation,
chap. 17. verse. 12. Now whereas Dr Willet makes the Question, How ten Kings
may arise out of one Kingdom at one time? I Answer, As well as Four Kings or
Realms may arise out of one Grecian Kingdom at one time. The Four Horns are
Four Kings or Kingdoms which shall stand up (...) out of that Nation, chap. 8.
verse. 22. So the Ten Horns are Ten Kings that shall arise (...) -- ex Regno,
out of that Fourth or Roman Kingdom, chap. 7. verse. 24.

Querie 2. If the Ten Horns be Ten Kings in a lineal succession, and the little
Horn is one in the same row or order, why does the Spirit put such a difference
between the one and the other? According to the text, there is a great distance
between them: they were of a former Edition, this of a latter: They came up
together, and were of the same kind; this after some pause or interval of time
came up after them, was diverse from them, before whom Three of the former were
plucked up by the roots. If you apply this to the row of Seleucian Kings, I
cannot see how this can be true, either in the general, or in the particular
accommodation. In the general it is not true; for the Seleucian Kings Reigning
one after another, make but one Dynastie. For though some of the Kings were
more mighty than others, and some more cruel against the Saints of the Jewish
Church; yet all make but one succession of Kings in the same Kingdom. Now, if
you look to the text, there is mention made of a double change or form of
State: the first is when the Ten Kings arose; the second, when the little Horn
arose up after them, which was diverse from them, and subdued three of the
former Kings, and so became Great. The scope of this Scripture is concerning
the Division of the Fourth Kingdom into Ten Regencies or Divisions at one time:
and after some space of time, it shows how the little Horn arose and subdued
three of the former Realms. We cannot see how this can be spoken so properly of
Kings Reigning one after another in the same Policy or Government. Neither is
it true in the particular Accommodation: for they that will have Antiochus
Epiphanes to be the little Horn, they have not yet cleared the Point, First,
How Antiochus Epiphanes was the tenth Seleucian King: Secondly, How he was more
Potent than his Father Antiochus Magnus, or Seleuc^ Nicanor: Thirdly, How he
did pluck up three of the former Seleucian Kings by the roots: Fourthly, How he
did wear out the Saints of the most High, till the Saints did take the Kingdom
which should be for ever and ever. Fifthly, How he did continue his Dominion
and Persecution so long till the Beast was destroyed, and his Body given to the
burning fire. All these Particulars have not yet* been cleared in Antiochus
Epiphanes. Something has been spoken in the Commentaries, which I take rather
to be Evasions, than just Answers. On the contrary, if you take the Roman for
the Fourth Kingdom, all things will agree. For in a famous Revolution of
Empire, that Monarchy became divided into ten inferior Realms, as it is set
forth by the rising of the Ten* Horned Beast our of the Sea, Rev. 13. 1. After
this, another rose out of the Earth. This in Daniel is called the little Horn,
which is the Emblem and Type of the Papal Government. Now to this last Edition
of Roman State, all the aforementioned particulars do agree. First, it is
evident, That this was more dreadful than any of the Horns going before.
Secondly, That it did eradicate some of the former, to have elbow-room in
Italy. Thirdly, That it did wear out the Saints a time, and times, and half a
time. Fourthly, That the wearing out of the Saints was till the Body of the
Beast was cast into the burning fire, and the Saints of the most High did begin
to Reign with Christ, chap. 19. verse. 20. and chap. 20. verse. 4.

Querie 3. If the Ten Horns be Ten Kings, and the little Horn the last King,
why is it said, I considered the Horns, and behold there came up amongst them
another little Horn? verse. 8. If these be so many Kings in a lineal succession,
how could the little Horn that came last of all, be said to come up, (...) --
inter ea, among them, to have Being and Existence with them? We do willingly
yield, That Antiochus Epiphanes was one of the Seleucian Kings, and reigned in
the same row with Antiochus Magnus, and Antiochus Theos. Yet we cannot say that
he came to reign with them; for when he began, they had no Being at all. This
is true in all successions; when he that comes after begins to Reign, then
they that go before cease to be. But it is otherwise spoken of the little Horn,
he came up among them, to wit, among the Ten Horns; he broke three of them in
pieces; and for the residue, they had their Existence and Being together at one
and the same time. You will say, That this is but a similitude, and similitudes
are not to be pressed in every particular. I Answer, That Types and Similitudes
used by the Holy Ghost, ought to be pressed so far as he intends. If
therefore by ten Horns he did intend a lineal succession of Kings, why did he
not keep the same method which he used to do in the description of such
Successions? In the former verses he speaks of the rising of Four Beasts out
of the Sea; the first like a Lion, the second like a Bear, the third like a
Leopard, the fourth was diverse from the former. All these are said to come up
out of the Sea one after another: by which it is clear, That there are so many
successions of Monarchy. But when he comes to describe the Ten Horns, there is
nothing to prove such a subalternation, or succession of one Horn after
another, but rather the contrary. The Ten Horns are Ten Kings that shall arise,
and after them a little Horn shall arise; and so all shall exist together: But
when the Babylonian-Lyon rose up out of the Sea, and after that the
Persian-Bear, and Graecian-Pard; it is no where said, That these Beasts did
arise up inter se invicem, and that they had an existence at one and the same
time. For, this were to confound that order, succession, and subalternation of
the Four Monarchies, which the holy Spirit intends.

But Dr Willet does make this Reply: The Beast in the Revelation is called a
Beast with seven Heads, which signify so many forms of Government in a lineal
Succession. So the Beast may be called a Beast with ten Horns, to wit, so many
Kings succeeding one another.

Answer. If he could show as good Reason wherefore the ten Horns are ten Kings
in a lineal succession, as the seven Heads of the Beast are so many successive
forms of Roman Government, we would yield up the Cause. For it is expressly
said, There are Seven Kings, five are fallen, one is, and the other is not yet
come, chap. 17. verse. 10. Now there is not the least iota, word, or apex in
Dan. 7. to prove such a succession, but rather the contrary. To me therefore it
is very strange, That the holy Spirit should depart from his usual method in
Typical and Periodical Prophecies; that he should speak of ten Kings lineally
succeeding, and yet leave no Character or Mark in the text to know the
succession. I may say, It is not ordinary with him so to do. Now, take the ten
Horns for the ten Kings of the Roman Empire, it is clear, That these had
Existence with the Papacy, or little Horn. The Angel thus speaks concerning
the ten Horns, These have no Kingdom as yet, but receive a Kingdom one hour
with the Beast, verse. 12. Both Scriptures plainly show, That the ten Kings are
of one and the same time, though in order of succession the little Horn came up
after the ten.

Querie 4. If the ten Horns be ten Kings, and the little Horn be the tenth, why
is it said, That only three of the former were plucked up by the roots? This
implies, That there was no eradication of the residue of Horns, but they had
some being with the little Horn. You will say, That only three were plucked up
by the roots, because the little Horn did actually subdue and humble three, as
the word (...) does signify. Well, be it so, still the Question is, which
three of the former ten were they that the little Horn did eradicate? Dr
Willet, and other Interpreters of his way, take it for a granted truth, That he
did pluck up Three Kings that Reigned immediately before. But now do they prove
this from the text? The words are without any restriction or limitation, He
shall subdue three Kings, verse. 24. Before whom three of the first Horns were
plucked up by the roots, ver. 8. Therefore to my understanding, when the
Scripture says, That the little Horn came up among the Ten, and did subdue
Three only, this is to me an Argument, That the residue of Horns were not
brought in subjection, but had an existence as Kings in the times of the little
Horn. Secondly, It is said of the little Horn, that he shall be diverse from
the first, and shall subdue three Kings. If you take the Three Kings for Three
lineally Reigning, how could the taking away of such a Number of Kings make the
little Horn more powerful than the former? In the corrupted State of the Ten
Tribes, we read sometimes, That he that came after did take away the life of the
Prince that went before; yet this was never judged as a cause of greater power
and strength to come to the Kingdom by such Usurpation, 2 King. 9. 3. Hos. 1.
4. On the contrary, If you take the Ten Horns for Ten States or Realms into
which the Fourth Monarchy became divided, here will be a clear Reason why the
little Horn became unlike to any of the former, because he brought Three
Kingdoms under his Dominion. We read that Alexander's Dominion was plucked up
by the roots; and this was the cause of the greatness of the King of the South,
and the King of the North, Dan. 11. 4, 5, 6. So in the present case, the
eradication of Three States or Dynasties before the little Horn, is the cause
of the greatness of his Dominion. Thirdly, Let us come to particulars: what
Three Kings were they whom Antiochus did subdue? They say, Ptolomaeus
Philopater the King of Egypt, Seleucus the Brother of Antiochus, and Demetrius.
But it is mentioned D^n. 11. 21. that he shall come peaceably into the
Province. Now what peaceable coming is this, when he shall begin with the
extirpation of Three Kings? Again, how can Ptolomaeus Philopater be one of the
Ten Kings of the Seleucian line? No Historian did ever reckon Ptolomaeus
Philopater among the Seleucians. And for his overrunning of Syria, this does
no more make him one of that Succession, than Tamerlains overrunning the
Turkish Empire does make him one of the Ottoman line. Now on the contrary, let
us take the little Horn in that sense as the text naturally requires, all
these difficulties will be avoided. The Beast with Ten Horns is the Roman, as
divided into Ten lesser Kingdoms. The little Horn is the Papacy. Now to give
elbow-room to this in Italy, Three of the Ten Kings, lately raised out of the
Ruins of the Empire, were all plucked up by the roots. By the conquering of
which Three, and by the voluntary resignation of the rest, the little Horn
became more stout than his fellows, being made greater than they in a triple
proportion.

Object. But you will say, Which are the three Kingdoms that the little Horn
did subdue? and how do you prove the truth of this out of the Stories?

Sol. The First is, The Kingdom of the Goths in Italy. For the Bishops of Rome
were under the Dominion of these Kings, they were sent as their Ambassadors,
and lived under the fear of continual Persecution; and there was nothing in the
Old Empire to keep back the Papal power in the growth and the increase thereof,
but there was the same impediment from these Gothish Kings. Now it is clear in
the Stories, That this Government was wholly extinguished by the valiant
Narses, in the time of the Emperor Justinian. And for the means to procure it,
we may easily believe, That the Bishop of Rome had some hand in the extirpation
of these Kings, that he might be freed from fear.

Secondly, After the Ruin of the Gothish Kings, the Exarchs of Ravenna had
some Dominion in Italy. Now when the Controversy grew hot, between the Bishops
of Rome and the Emperors of Constantinople, about the matter of Images (as
Mornay well obser^eth in his History of the Papacy, Progress. 27.) the Popes
then called in the Lombards against the Exarchs, to the ruin of both Estates.
And for the Dukedom of Rome (for so we must now call it) the People of that
City upon the Difference concerning Images in Churches, being engaged with the
Popes in Rebellion, wholly shook off the yoke of the Emperor, and took an Oath
to be subject to the Pope in all Points. And here (says Baronius, An. 726) was
an end of those Dukes and Governors which the Emperors were wont to send to
Command in Rome, and the Places adjoining. Sigonius also speaks much to the
same purpose, That the Dukedom of Rome was translated from the Graecians to the
Pope of Rome, by reason of their wicked Heresy and Impiety. But that which he
calls Heresy, is no other but Iconomachia, or a standing against Image Worship.

Thirdly, The Kingdom of the Lombards growing very Mi^hty, by the Conquests
over the Exarchs; these also the Bishop of Rome did subdue, humble, and
eradicate by a Foreign power: For, he brought in the French into Italy, which
did willingly hearken to the Motion. By these several passages it is clear,
That the Papacy did destroy Three new-Erected States; by means whereof, the
Temporal Dominion of that Church in Italy was much established. And so,
according to the Story, it is made clear, That the little Horn did humble and
subdue Three of the former Horns, and did pluck them up by the roots.

Querie 5. If the Ten Horns signify Ten Kings in a lineal Succession, Why is
it that in Daniel and the Revelation, the Beasts, their Heads, and Horns,
usually signify Realms and Dominions, and not Persons individually Reigning?
The Mede-Persian Monarchy is Typed by a Ram, and the two Horns are not two
particular Kings, but the two Kingdoms of Media and Persia, Dan. 8. verse. 24.
So the Goat is the Grecian Monarchy, and the Four Horns are Four Kingdoms that
shall arise out of that Nation, verse. 22. Also, the Ten Horns of the Beast in
the Revelation do not signify Ten particular Kings, but so many Realms and
Dominions of the Roman Kingdom. Further, The Beast which came out of the Earth
with Two Horns, Rev. 13. 11, signifies the Papacy; and the Two Horns his
bi-partite Jurisdiction; to wit, His Spiritual and his Temporal Dominion. There
is good Reason to be rendered for this, because Persons do change, Governments
do abide. And it is the manner of the Spirit, when he does describe the
Tyrannical Kingdoms of this world by Beasts, to decypher them by that which is
Permanent and Characteristical, and not by that which is fluent and changable
at every turn. To me therefore this is a good Reason (considering the Analogy
of both Prophecies) that the Fourth Beast should be set forth by the Character
of Ten Horns, and that these Horns should signify so many Realms and Dominions
of the Fourth Kingdom.

Object. But it will be objected, in the description of the Grecian State
under the similitude of an He-goat, That Alexander is the Great Horn that came
up, and Antiochus Epiphanes is the little Horn. Therefore the Beasts and their
Horns in Daniel and the Revelation, do not always signify Tyrannical Empires,
Dynasties, and Governments; but sometimes denote particular Persons that Reign.

Sol. One Exception must not prejudice a general Rule. He that can, let him
give another Example. Our Position is built upon the general use of both
Prophecies. But Dr Willet, and the Interpreter^ of that way, do build only upon
one particular Instance, exempt from the ordinary Method. Secondly, We grant,
That in the description of the He-goat, the first Horn is Alexander the Great,
and the little Horn is Antiochus Epiphanes; yet in the Case we speak, neither
of these are any way to be ranked in the Number of Horns, that do
Characteristically and specifically distinguish the Grecian from the other
Three Monarchies. It is expressly said, That a Third Beast come out of the Earth
with Four Heads. Now these are not such a Number of particular Kings, but they
are so many Realms, States, and Dominions that shall stand up ^ut of that
Nation, as we have above proved, and are the special Notes of that Kingdom. If
therefore the Ten Horns be the Characters and Badges of the Fourth Beast, they
are so many Realms, Divisions, and Regencies of the Fourth Empire. The course
of the Spirit, is to set forth different Empires under different Types, and to
distinguish Kings or Kingdoms of one and the same time, from those that come
after one another in a lineal Descent. Now they that hold the Ten Horns to be
so many Kings in the Seleucian line, what Letter or Syllable is in the text to
prove such a succession?

Querie 6. Sixthly, If the Ten Horns of the Fourth Beast be Ten Kings
succeeding one another, rather than one and the same Empire divided into Ten
inferior Realms; why should the holy Spirit in the Iron-Metal, chap. 2. speak
so much of the Division of this Kingdom, That in the Feet and Toes of the Image
it should be divided into a plurality of States, that these should mingle
themselves with the seed of men, to preserve an Union? All this shows, That
the Fourth Kingdom toward the latter times should be divided into many lesser
Dominions. And if we may interpret one Scripture by another, both speaking of
one and the same matter, the particular Number of Realms is represented by the
Ten Horns. Now, they that will have Ten Horns to be Ten Kings lineally
Reigning, cannot infer from hence any Division of the Fourth Kingdom; nor
consequently the need of any mixture of State. Kings Successively Reigning,
need no mingling one with another to preserve the Union of a Kingdom. On the
contrary, if we take the Ten Horns for Ten Kings or Kingdoms at one and the
same time, there is nothing more ordinary than to establish Leagues and
Confederacies betwixt Kingdoms and States that are contemporary each with
other. For that which they Allege concerning the Division betwixt the
Seleucidae and the Lagidae, we have spoken thereof already, and therefore we
will not repeat the same things again.

Let us now in the last place come to those Queries concerning the Collation of
the little Horn mentioned Dan. 7. and that little Horn spoken of chap. 8. For
they that differ from us, stand much upon this, That Antiochus Epiphanes is
signified in both Scriptures under the same Emblem.

Here we agree with them in Two Points: First, That the Prophecy of Daniel
does repeat one and the same thing, for the better understanding of the
Visions. But then there must be some good evidence from the text, to prove the
things repeated to be the same, though the Expression is diverse. Now what good
proof is there to make it appear that the little Horn, chap. 7. and that little
Horn, chap. 8. are one and the same? Secondly, We agree, That Antiochus
Epiphanes, the Grecian Antichrist, does resemble the Roman Antichrist in many
things; and that the one is the express Image and Type of the other. In these
particulars then they do agree, and are parallel.

Antiochus, the little Horn, Dan. 8. The Papacy, the little Horn, Dan. 7. 1.
Out of the Grecian Kingdom there came forth a little Horn, verse. 9. 1. After
the Ten Kings a little Horn did arise out of the Fourth Kingdom, verse. 8. 2. He
did destroy the Mighty, and the Holy People, verse. 24. 2. He shall wear out the
Saints of the Most High, verse. 21, 23. 3. He shall magnify himself in his
heart against the God of gods, verse. 25. 3. He shall speak great things against
the Most High, verse. 25. 4. By him the daily Sacrifice shall be taken away,
verse. 11. 4. He shall think to change Times and Laws, and they shall be given
into his hand, verse. 25.

In these several Particulars it is manifest, That the little Horn mentioned
chap. 7. and chap. 8. do both agree. But yet whosoever he is that diligently
considers the Scriptures, he shall find them to differ in the most remarkable
circumstances.

First, They differ in the State or Government where they arose; the little
Horn, chap. 8. rose out of one of the Four Divisions of the Grecian State; but
the little Horn, chap. 7. arose out of the Kingdom Typed by the Fourth Beast,
which all our Arguments asorementioned, prove to be the Roman Kingdom.

Secondly, They differ in the preparation and moulding of the State before the
rising of either of them. For the little Horn, chap. 8. arose out of one of the
Four Divisions of the Greek Empire: But the little Horn, chap. 7. arose after
the Division of the Roman Empire into Ten inferior Realms.

Thirdly, They differ in their Actions. For the little Horn, chap. 8. is only
said to rise out of one of the Four Kingdoms of the Grecian Empire; but the
little Horn, chap. 7. is said to arise after the Ten Kingdoms of the Roman
Empire: And that he did pluck up Three of the former Kingdoms by the roots.
This is clear from the scope of the text.

Fourthly, They differ in the object of their Tyranny. For though the little
Horn, chap. 8. is said to destroy the Holy People, verse. 24. yet the whole
scope of the text shows that only the People of the Jews are here intended.
Now for the little Horn, chap. 7. he is said to wear out the Saints of the Most
High, but there is no circumstance in the text to prove that these are the
People of the Jews. There is not one word of taking away the daily Sacrifice,
or of the setting up of the Abomination of Desolation, or of Daniel's People,
or the pleasant Land, or any such passages which the Prophet uses when he
speaks of the Jews. All that can be said, is this, That he shall change Laws
and times: But from hence we cannot infer, That these must be the Laws and
Times of the Jewish Church. For the Apostle, when he speaks of the Great
Antichrist, does use such an expression, He shall sit in the Temple of God,
showing himself that he is God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. And yet he does not mean the
literal Temple in Jerusalem.

Fifthly, They differ in the time of the Continuance of their Tyranny. The
little Horn, chap. 8. shall prevail, and the Sanctuary shall be trodden down
unto Evenings, Mornings 2300, verse. 14. Now for the little Horn, chap. 7. he
shall wear out the Saints a time, and times, and half a time, till the Saints
themselves take the Kingdom. How this time, and times, and half a time, should
be all one with the 2300 Evenings, Mornings, I cannot discern. If you apply
this to the Roman Antichrist, a time, and times, and half a time, is the full
sum of the Antichristian Tyranny, Rev. 12. 14.

Sixthly, They differ in the Event. For after the 2300 Evenings Mornings, the
Temple was cleansed, verse. 14. and after that the little Horn had finished his
times, he was broken without hand, verse. 25. All these things were truly
fulfilled in Antiochus Epiphanes. But if you apply the little Horn, chap. 7. to
Antiochus, there can be no right accommodation. First, That little Horn did
wear out the Saints till the Son of Man came in the clouds of Heaven: but so
did not Antiochus Epiphanes. Secondly, The little Horn did wear out the Saints
a time, and times, and half a time, till the Dominion under the whole Heaven
was given to the Saints: but so did not Antiochus Epiphanes. Thirdly, The
little Horn shall continue till the time of the Destruction of the Fourth
Beast. But the Kingdom of the Seleucians ended not at Antiochus; many of that
line succeeded afterward in the Kingdom. And there was a good space of time
from the death of Antiochus to the destruction of the Seleucian State by Pompey
the Great. But Dr Willet replieth, Though the Kingdom was not utterly ruined,
yet the Glory of it was much abated at Antiochus his death. By the like Reason
I might argue, That there was an end of the Babylonian Kingdom at the death of
Nebuchadnezzar, because the Glory of that Kingdom did afterward abate in
Evilmerodach. I might argue also, That the Grecian Kingdom ended in Alexander,
because the Kings that arose after him did not arise in his strength. Others
there are that do Allege the words of the Eleventh Verse: I beheld then,
because of the voice of the great words which the little Horn spoke. I beheld
even till the Beast was slain, and his Body given to the burning fire. From
hence they gather, That the little Horn was first broken off; and when the
Beast was Hornless and harmless, then he was destroyed. Such a sense may be
admitted. For we read in the Scripture, That the Davidical Kingdom should be
destroyed for the sins of Manasseth King of Judah, 2 King. 23. 26. yet the
destruction was many years after his death. Though such a sense may be
admitted, yet it will not stand in the present case; for in this Chapter the
little Horn is said to continue till the destruction of the Fourth Kingdom. It
is said in express terms in the 26 Verse, That the Judgment shall sit, and
they shall take away his Dominion, to consume and to destroy it to the time of
the end. Here I demand, Whose Dominion is it that they shall take away? Is it
the Dominion of the Fourth Beast, Hornless and harmless? No: This is
immediately spoken of the little Horn that should wear out the Saints of the
most High, and should change Laws and Times, a time, and times, and half a
time. Touching this little Horn it is said, That the Judgment shall sit, and
they shall take away (...) his Kingdom. They shall bereave him of his Dominion.
Therefore it is clear, That the times of the little Horn shall continue to the
end of the Beast's Kingdom, and to the beginning of the Kingdom of the Saints.
And yet further, Daniel did desire to know the truth of the Fourth Beast, and
of the Ten Horns, and of the little Horn that came up after them. I beheld,
(says he) and the same Horn made War with the Saints, and prevailed against
them, until the ancient of days came; and judgment was given to the Saints of
the most High, and the time came that the Saints possessed the Kingdom, verse.
22. From these words also it is manifest, That the times of the little Horn do
extend to the beginning of the Kingdom of the Saints. Now how this should be
verified in Antiochus Epiphanes, it is not as yet made so clear to me. But if
you apply this to the Papacy, all things will agree: for it is manifest, That
the Two-Horned Beast in the Revelation must wear out the Saints a time, and
times, and half a time, Rev. 12. 14. Rev. 11. 7, 8, 9. Now when this time is
once fulfilled, the Beast and the false Prophet shall both of them be cast into
the Lake of fire; and the Reign of Christ and of his Saints shall begin upon
the Earth, Rev. 19. 20. Rev. 20. 1, 2, 3, 4.

But by the way, because some stand for a Personal Reign of Christ at the end
of the Fourth Kingdom, because then the Note.
Son of Man is said to come in the clouds of Heaven; I Answer, That they have
no Reason to take that strictly, which we can prove from the Harmony of
Scripture, ought to be construed with some kind of Latitude. These things are
showed to Daniel (who saw afar off) as joined together; and yet in experience
they do not meet in the same juncture of time. As for example, A man that
traveleth in Wales, or some suchlike hilly Country, while he is yet at a long
distance, he may see the tops of two great Mountains as though they were near
together: yet when he comes to look upon them with a more distinct view, the
one may be ten or twelve Miles beyond the other in the distance of place. It is
well known also, That when the Apostles made mention of the coming of
Antichrist, they also spoke of the end of the world, 2 Thessalonians. 2. What then?
shall we argue, as many do, That the Discovery of Antichrist will not be till
the end of the world? This cannot be. We that live in these times, may see more
clearly, That Antichrist has been revealed many hundred years ago; and the end
of the world is not yet come. If therefore a Reason be demanded, why these two,
The Revelation of Antichrist, and the End of the World, are coupled together;
we may say, That the Apostles, who saw afar off, spoke of these things, because
they should happen in the last times; though in the particularity of time the
one might be before the other. In like manner, the Prophet Daniel, who lived
very remote from the Dissolution of the Fourth Kingdom, from the glorious
Kingdom of the Saints, and from the coming of the Son of Man in the clouds of
Heaven; to him all these things in the general, and in the lump may be
represented together, when in a more distinct and particular consideration, the
one may be before the other. The consuming of the Kingdom of Antichrist with
the word of his mouth, and the establishment of the Kingdom of the Saints, may
be before the Personal appearing of the Son of Man in the Clouds of Heaven.

But now it is not to our present purpose to meddle with this Difficulty. That
which we have to say, is only concerning the Fourth Beast, That either he must
signify the Seleucian or the Roman Kingdom. But, we have proved by many
Arguments, against Dr Willet, and others, That the Seleucian cannot here be
meant. Therefore we may safely conclude, That the Fourth Beast with Ten Horns,
is the proper Emblem Note.
and Type of the Roman Kingdom. From whence also we gather, That Daniel in his
Prophecy, and John in the Revelation (so far as this Point is concerned) do
speak of one and the same matter. And by the Interpretation of the one, we may
find out the sense of the other Prophecy. There is no Principle that can be
more useful and demonstrative than this, To discover the Truth by the Harmony
of the Prophecies.

Now, let us go to the beginning of the Roman, as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom, and
so let us see how there is a Chain of 666 years from that beginning, to the
Universal Headship of the Beast, This shall be the Subject of the Chapter
following.

CHAP. VI. That the Beginning of the Roman, as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom, is not
from the time of Julius, or Augustus Caesar, or from any other vulgar
Beginning; but precisely from that instant, when the Church of God came under
the Dominion of the Romans, 60 years before the Birth of the Lord, and 666
before the going forth of the Decree, That the Bishop of Rome should be Head
over all the Churches.
THere are in this Proposition Two Parts that need special Confirmation: First,
That the Roman did begin as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom, when the Church came
under the Dominion of that People. Secondly, That from this beginning there is
the space of 666 years, to the Universal Headship.

For the Beginning of the Dominion of the Romans, according to different
Relations, men may differently state the Epoch thereof. But laying aside all
other considerations, we are to note in what sense Daniel does begin it as the
Fourth Metal-Kingdom. And here I stand upon it, That we are principally to look
to the state of the Church; How the Church, and the Continent adjoining, came
under the Dominion of that People.

For the clearing of this, we will also demonstrate two things: First, That the
Beginning of this Fourth Monarchy is to be stated according to
Church-relations. Secondly, We will show, out of the Stories, in whose times,
and by whose means, the Church came first under the Dominion of that People.

Now, That the Roman does begin, as the Fourth of Daniel's Kingdoms, when the
Church came under the Obedience of that People, may be proved by these
Arguments.

ARGUMENT I.
Where the former Three Kingdoms in Daniel's Image did begin, by the same
Analogy we are to proceed in stating the Beginning of the Fourth Kingdom.

But the former Three Kingdoms in Daniel's Image, did begin, each of them in
their several times, when the Church and the Confines adjoining came under
their Dominion:

Therefore, the Roman, as the Fourth Kingdom in Daniel's Image, began when the
Church and the Confines about the Church came under the Obedience of that
People.

The Major is clear: For none will Deny but that the Roman does hold Analogy
with the three former Empires in their beginning. And for the Minor, we prove
it by Induction of Singulars. As for Ensample.

Example 1. First, In the Babylonian Kingdom (the first of Daniel's Four) there
were many Potent Kings that did Reign in that Succession, before the times of
Nebuchadnezzar; for he began to Reign in the 144 year of the Era of
Nabonazzar. Now the several Names of the Kings, the times of their Reign, and
the order of their Succession, are all set down in the famous Canon of Ptolomy,
as we shall show afterward. But not to go far for an Example; There is mention
made of one Merodach-Baladan, (in the Canon aforesaid, called by the Name of
(...)) that he sent Ambassadors to Hezekiah King of Judah, 2 King. 20. 12.
There was then a Succession of Babylonian Kings before Nebuchadnezzar. You will
say, Why is he then called, the Head of Gold, as much in sense as the first
Babylonian King? I Answer: Though he was not simply the first Babylonian King,
(others Reigning before him) yet he was the first Prince of the Babylonians
that brought the Jewish Church, and the Confines about that Church, within the
Babylonian Empire.

Example 2. Secondly, That Kingdom of the Medes and Persians, whereof Darius
and Cyrus were the Founders; if we go strictly to work, the Foundation of these
was laid before. For it is manifestly plain by the testimony of the Greek
Historians, and by the Chronographical Tables now in the hands of all men, That
there was a Potent Race of the Kings of Media, down from Arbaces the Mede. Yet
for all this, Darius and Cyrus are the true Founders of the Mede-Persian
Kingdom, because they first brought the Jewish Church under the power of the
Medes and Persians. And that which is very remarkable to our present purpose,
though it be a thing famously known among Historians, That Cyrus began to Reign
in the 55 Olympiad; though he subdued many Nations, and Propagated the Persian
Empire very far: yet the Scripture takes no notice of that beginning, but then
only when the Church came within the limits of the Persian Dominion. And
therefore it is well Observed by Piscator, in his Scholia upon Ezra, chap. 1.
verse. 2. That the Edict came forth in the first of Cyrus King of Persia. This
(says he) is the first year of his Reign in Babylon.

Example 3. The Third Kingdom in Daniel's Image, is that of the Graecians, of
which Alexander became the Head at the overthrow of Darius. The rough Goat is
said to be the Monarchy of the Graecians; and the Great Horn, to wit,
Alexander, is expressly called the first King, Dan. 8. 21. Now, How can he be
said to be the first King of the Graecians, seeing there were many Mighty Kings
before him, in, and over that Nation? To let pass all the other States of
Greece, in Macedonia it self, Philip, the Father of Alexander, was a Potent
Prince. But the Answer is, as before, He was the first Monarchical King that
subdued the Territories of the Church. There was never any Grecian Prince that
extended the Sovereign Rule of that People so far Eastward, to the Confines of
the Church, as he. And therefore he is expressly called, (...) the first King of
the Graecians.

From all the forementioned particulars, it is clear, That the former Three
Kingdoms in Daniel's Image began, each of them in their several times, when the
Church came under their respective Dominions. And so the Assumption is proved.
If then we proceed in the same Analogy, we must necessarily say, That the
Roman began as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom, when the Jewish Church, and the
Continent adjoining, came first under the Sovereign Lordship and Command of the
People of Rome.

But yet for further confirmation of this truth, we will produce some new
Arguments, to prove, That the Metal-Kingdoms are Numbered in relation to the
Church.

First, The Revelation of these Metal-Kingdoms was specially for the Saints and
People of God. For though one end was, to Discover to Nebuchadnezzar what
Successions of Tyranny there should be after him; yet this was principally for
the Churches sake, and the Churches use. And therefore it is mentioned, This
Secret is not revealed unto me for any wisdom that I have above all living, but
for their sakes that shall make known the Interpretation to the King, verse. 30.
Therefore in the delineation of these Tyrannical Empires, the Lord does
specially intend to Reveal to the Church those Changes and Vicissitudes of
times that she should meet withal. In Relation to her then, There is primarily
a Discovery of these things.

Secondly, These Metal-Kingdoms are also Discovered, to show in what Region, or
Part of Time, the Kingdom of Christ should begin. All the Scriptures in the Old
Testament, point mainly to Christ; some, point to his Parentage; others, to the
place of his Birth; others, to the Tribe that he should come of: So this in
special, points to that period of time when his Kingdom should begin. These
are the words of the text: In the days of these Kingdoms shall the God of
Heaven raise up a Kingdom that never shall be destroyed. From whence it is
manifest, That the Monarchies are reckoned according to the alterations which
shall be in and about the Borders of the Jewish Church. For, Where should
Christ be Born, but in Judea? And hereupon he is called, The King of the Jews.

Thirdly, If we go to that Expression so often mentioned, Dan. 11. where the
Seleucian is called, The King of the North; and the Dominion of the Lagidae,
The King of the South: Here we must necessarily Affirm, That these Empires are
said to be North and South in some special relation. And the Reason is clear,
Because Judea did lie in the midst betwixt them, as a Lamb betwixt Two
Wolves; having the Seleucidae on the North, and the Lagidae on the South. Now,
that the People of the Jews are herein principally respected, the words of the
Angel are clear: I am come to make Thee Understand what shall befall Thy People
in the latter days, Dan. 10. 14.

From all which we gather, That the Monarchies are specially Numbered according
to Church-relations. And therefore the Roman began as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom,
when the Church came first under the Obedience of that People. Let us now
proceed to the Second Argument.

ARGUMENT II.
Where the Grecian Kingdom, Typed by the Brass-Metal, and the Third Beast,
made an end; there did the Roman, typed by the Iron-Metal, and the Fourth
Beast, begin.

But at the overthrow of the Seleucian Kingdom in Asia, and at the Conquest of
Judea, the Grecian Kingdom, typed by the Brass-Metal, and the Third Beast, did
make an end:

Therefore, at the Overthrow of the Seleucian Kingdom, and at the Conquest of
Judea, the Roman, typed by the Iron-Metal, and the Fourth Beast, began.

The Major is evident; it being a ruled case in the Body of the Metal-Kingdoms,
That where the former cease, the latter does begin. All the Question is
concerning the Assumption, Whether the Grecian ended as the Third
Metal-Kingdom at the destruction of the Seleucian? Here I find that
Interpreters are greatly divided. They agree in it, That the Grecian is the
Third Kingdom; but they are divided about the particular time when that Empire
ended. For, all the Successors of Alexander came not under the power of the
Romans at one and the same time. His Successors in Greece ended, when Macedonia
was made a Roman Province by Aemilius the Consul, 166 years before the Birth of
our Lord. His Successors the Seleucidae in Syria and Judea, ended, when all
that tract of Land was brought under the power of the Romans by the means of
Pompey the Great; and this was done about 60 years before the Birth of our
Lord. His Successors, the Lagidae in Egypt, were made a Roman Province by
Augustus Caesar; and this was done 28 years before the Birth of the Lord. So
then it is plain, That all Alexander's Successors fell into the hands of the
Romans; yet all fell not under the Roman Obedience at one time. The great
Question is, Where we shall set the Ending of the Grecian Kingdom, as typed by
the Third Beast, and the Brass-Metal? And this, I say, must needs be at the
overthrow of the Seleucian, 60 years before the Birth of the Lord.

First, In the Original distribution of Alexander's Kingdom, Judea is pleaded
to belong to the Seleucian, Polyb. lib. 5. And therefore the Seleucian is that
Successor to whom the Title of the Monarchy does principally appertain. I do
not Deny but the Lagidae sometimes made their Incursions into Judea, as may be
seen, Dan. 11. But in the Original Constitution of the Kingdom, Judea was
allotted to the Seleucian. And that which may strengthen our Argument, if you
read Josephus, the Book of the Macchabees, and suchlike Stories, you shall
find, That the Sufferings of the People of the Jews have been wholly in a
manner from those Successors of Alexander, that were of the Seleucian line. And
this to me is a great Reason, wherefore the Grecian Kingdom, typed by the
Brass-Metal, is rather to end at the destruction of the Seleucian Kingdom.

Secondly, At the Overthrow of the Successors of Alexander at several times,
the Fall of the Seleucian was only at that time, when Judea, Jerusalem, and all
that Continent of Land fell under the Power of the Romans. Mr Mede, and some
Historians, do look principally when Greece, the Head-Province, was brought
into subjection to the Romans by Aemilius the Consul: they look here more
specially to the ending of the Greek, and beginning of the Roman Empire. But at
this very time, Judea was under the Tyranny of Antiochus Epiphanes; and the
true Grecian Kingdom, typed by the Brass-Metal, and the Third Beast, in great
vigor and sulness of strength. For, though in those times Greece, their Native
Country, was taken away from the Graecians; yet nevertheless, that People had
still the sovereign Dominion in and about the Borders of the Church. And this
continued for the space of 106 years, till the time of Pompey the Great; then
the Selcucian Kingdom, and together with it, all the Lands of the Jewish
Church, fell under the Dominion of the State of Rome.

And, that which may add to the force of this Reason, let us Consider, First,
The limits of the Land of Promise. Secondly, The Governments that there should
be erected. For the limits of the Land of Promise, (the Seat of the Church for
2000 years) these are the words of the Charter to Abraham: Unto thy Seed have I
given this Land, from the River of Egypt to the great River Euphrates, Genesis 15.
18, 19, 20. This was performed in the days of Joshua, who brought Israel into
the Possession thereof. Secondly, For the Governments here erected; The
Scriptures do take notice that these Countries were under the Government of the
Judges; and then after that, under the Kings of the Line of David, to the times
of the Captivity. And then it was revealed to Nibuchadn^zzar, in the Image of
Persecuting Empires, what Succession of Tyrannies should be in and over those
Countries. For as sometimes the Kings of the Line of David did bear Rule in the
Land of Promise: so they continued the Government till the People of Babel got
the Dominion. So the People of Babel carried on the times of the Golden-Metal,
till the People of Media and Persia did take the Kingdom. And after that, the
People of Media and Persia did continue the times of the Silver-Metal, till
they were subdued by the People of Greece, under the Conduct of Alexander the
Great. And after the Victories of Alexander, the People of Greece went on with
the sovereign Dominion over all the Territories of the Church, from the River
of Egypt, to the great River Euphrates, till the destruction of the Seleucian
Kingdom by Pompey the Great. And then all that tract of Land came under the
Dominion of the People of Rome. So then, we may conclude, As the Seleucian is
the immediate Successor of Alexander in and over the Continent of the Church:
So where he ended, as the Third Metal-Kingdom over the Church, there the Roman
did begin as the Fourth.

Object. But some, perhaps, may Reason, That the Lagidae, the Successors of
Alexander in Egypt, were not made Subject to the Romans, till the times of
Augustus.

Sol. Grant this to be true, That Augustus did extinguish the last Successor;
yet the Monarchy was taken from the People of Greece before, when the Romans
came into Asia, and brought all those Eastern Countries about Judea within the
compass of their great Empire. It is one thing for the People of Greece to have
a Fragment of the Kingdom of Alexander remaining; and another thing for that
People to have the sovereign Dominion over the Continent of the Land of
Promise. And this they had, till the Overthrow of the Seleucian Kingdom by the
Roman State.

But Helvicus, in a little Treatise entitled, Chronologia Universalis, does
stiffly argue the Point, That the Grecian Kingdom did not end as long as the
Lagidae, one of the Successors of Alexander, did remain. These are his words:
Quatuor Reg^aunam Monarchiam constituunt, non per se separat^m considerata, sed
conjunctim hoc axioma mereri, haud secus ac de mortuo Principe omnes Praefecti
Conjunctim repraesentant Principem: Adeo si pars Ditionis ab extero quodam
avellatur, illa non Praefecto sed toto Principatui decedat. Ita Romani, erepta
Asia, Occupata Macedonia, diminuere quidem Monarchiam, extinxisse vero and ad
se transtulisse dici non potuerant antequam ultimam partem, Aegyptum
subegerunt, page 50. From which words of his it is clear, That the Grecian
Empire was diminished only at the Overthrow of the Seleucian Kingdom; and it
was extinguished at that time only when the Lagidae were brought under the
Power of the Romans. But herein he is greatly deceived: for if we must Affirm,
That each Metal-Kingdom does continue as long as any Fragment thereof does
remain, what shall we say by the meaning of this Scripture, As for the rest of
the Beasts, their Dominion was taken away; but their Lives were prolonged for a
time? Dan. 11. 12. This plainly shows, That after the Imperial Dominion was
taken away, there might be some prolongation of life; some inferior Dominion,
as long as any Relic remains. This is true in some sense after the death of
Alexander the Great: when his Kingdom was divided among his Successors, there
was some diminution of the Monarchy, because these Successors did not stand up
in his strength; And yet for all this, the Empire of that Nation did still
abide. And further, when Aemilius the Consul subdued Perseus, there was a
greater defalcation; yet nevertheless, The Grecian Monarchy continued the most
prevailing about the Borders of the Church. But afterward in the times of
Pompey, when those Eastern Countries were brought under the People of Rome,
then there was not only a diminishing, but a plain abrogation of the Empire of
the Graecians. For then the Grecian did not only lose the Imperiality, in a
more general sense, but the Imperiality (here principally intended) about the
Borders of the Church. And therefore, where the Seleucian made an end, there
the Roman began.

Thirdly, The Seleucian, of the Four Successors of Alexander, was the most
prevailing, and the most eminent Prince: Therefore, at the Ruin of the
Seleucian, we do rather place the end of the Grecian Kingdom, typed by the
Brass-Metal, and the Third Beast.

That the Sele^cian was the most notable of all Alexander's Successors, we
prove,

First, From the Testimony of the Scriptures. For it is expressly said, That a
Mighty King (scil. Alexander the Great) shall stand up; but when he shall stand
up, his Kingdom shall be broken, Dan. 11. 3, 4, 5. Now, this came to pass after
his death; his Kingdom was divided to Four Successors, the Kings of Syria,
Egypt, Asia, Greece. For the Kingdom of Asia, that ^oon vanished: and the
Kingdom of Greece, or Macedonia, was very remote from the Confines of the
Church. All the description is limited to the Two Successors, Syria, and Egypt;
and of these Two, that of Syria was the more Potent. The King of the South
(meaning Egypt, shall be strong, and another of his Princes shall be stronger
than he, verse. 5. that is, The Seleucian Prince in Syria, called the King of
the North, shall be stronger than the other Succes^or. And further, Concerning
the Seleucian, it is added, His Dominion shall be a great Dominion. This
plainly shows, That the Seleucian is the most eminent, and the most notable
of all the Successors, according to the Testimony of Scripture. Secondly, This
is clear by the Testimony of Historians. For the Stories of the times plainly
show, That the Seleucidae did possess Syria, Babylon, and part of Asia; and, as
some will have it, they possessed all from Phrygia, to the River of Indus.
Thirdly, It may be confirmed by Reason: for the Antigonidae in Asia, that were
one of the Four Successors, were subdued by the Seleucian: and therefore by the
Addition of this, the Seleucian must needs be the greater Dominion. Fourthly,
Here is the Consent of Modern Expositors; for Iunius, Broughton, Rolloc,
Piscator, W^llet, and other Interpreters of this way, do pitch upon the
Seleucian as the principal Successor. I do not say, That their Position, in the
particular Application, is true: but that which I stand upon, is, The ground of
their Reasoning in a more general sense. For if they Affirm the Seleucian to be
the fourth Kingdom, in their judgment there must be something more eminent and
remarkable in that Potentate, above all the rest of the Successors. Wherefore
else should they appropriate the Fourth Metal-Kingdom to him only? Lastly, We
are to have special regard unto this, rather than to any of the other
Successors; because whatsoever is spoken in the Prophecy of Daniel concerning
the Grecian or the Third Metal-Kingdom, is specially meant of the Seleucian
Kings. As for Ensample: A great part of the description, chap. 8. and chap. 11.
is concerning Antiochus Epiphanes his rising, greatness, cruelty against the
Saints, and his polluting the Sanctuary. Now, out of which of the Four
Successors did he spring? Was not his Original out of the Seleucian stock? And
did he not Reign as a Seleucian King? For the Angel speaking of the Fall of
Alexander, and the Rising of the Four Successors, proceeds in these words:
(...) and out of one of them came forth another little Horn. Now, if you
enquire, which Successor was that One from whom Antiochus Epiphanes did spring;
Did he not arise out of the Seleucian Family?

By all that has been said, it is clear, by the Testimony of Scriptures, by
the authority of Historians, by the weight of Reason, by the consent of
Interpreters, and by the sufferings of the Church, That the Seleucian is the
most eminent and notable Successor of Alexander. Therefore we do conclude, That
we have more special Reason to end the Third Metal-Kingdom at the destruction
of the Seleucian, rather than at the destruction of any other successor. If we
must end at the the destruction of the Seleucian; where he ends, the Roman
must begin as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom.

ARGUMENT III.
When all things needful to the being of the Fourth Metal-Kingdom, began first
to be applicable to the Roman State, at that instant of time did the Roman
begin as the Fourth Kingdom.

But at the time of Pompey's Victory over the Seleucian, and his reducing of
the Territories of the Church, all things needful to the being of the Fourth
Metal-Kingdom, began to be applicable to the Roman State:

Therefore, at the time of Pompey's Victory over the Seleucian, and his
Reducing the Territories of the Church, the Roman did begin as the Fourth
Metal-Kingdom.

For the Major, none will Deny, That the Roman did then begin as the Fourth
Metal-Kingdom, when it did receive all things necessary to the being of that
Kingdom. Things do then begin, when they receive all things necessary to their
being. All the Controversy is about the Minor, to wit, That the Roman had all
things necessary to the being of the Fourth Kingdom and the destruction of the
Seleucian. This is proved in these Particulars.

Particular 1. When the Fourth Kingdom begins, it must exercise sovereign
Dominion over many inferior Kingdoms. And so far Melancthon's definition of a
Monarchy does hold true, though Bodin does much deride it in hi Method of
History, chap. 7. So says Melancthon: Monarchia est summa unius Reipublica
potentia, quae aliarum opes and cop as super are possit. A Monarchy is the
supreme Power of one Commonwealth, which can easily excel the Riches and
Plenty of all other Commonwealths whatsoever. And so could the Roman State, in
those times, go beyond all the Kingdoms of the Earth, when the ^ewish Church
came under the Obedience of that Nation or People.

Particular 2. When the Fourth Kingdom begins, it must not only exercise
sovereign Dominion over many inferior States, but also sovereign Dominion over
many inferior States in and about the Borders of the Church. Now, the Roman
did first begin to do this, at the destruction of the Seleucian Kingdom, and at
the reducing of Judea to the Obedience of the People of Rome.

Particular 3. The Fourth Kingdom did then begin, when all the Three former
Metal-Kingdoms had fulfilled their several and respective times. But the People
of Babel, of Persia, and Greece, had then only completed the times of their
Monarchical Rule in and about the Territories of the Jewish Church, at the
Overthrow of the Seleucian Kingdom: Ergo, etc.

If we put all these Particulars into one sum, The Fourth of Daniel's Kingdoms
may be thus described, To be the Fourth tyrannical State, which in its times,
at the end of the Three former, is to bear Rule over all the Earth; but more
specially in and over the Churches Continent. This is the true definition of
the Fourth Kingdom, so far as such a matter may be defined. For, First, The
thing Defined, and the Definition, are Convertible. Secondly, The most
Essential Attributes of the Fourth Kingdom are mentioned. Thirdly, They are all
mentioned, therefore this is a true Definition. Now, all these things,
necessary to the being of the Fourth Kingdom* began to be applicable to the
Roman State at the Overthrow of the Seleucian, and the Reducing of Judea by
Pompey the Great.

Object. But here perhaps some will Reply, Julius Caesar was the First Roman
Monarch: Therefore the Roman, quatenus the Fourth Monarchy, did begin at the
time of Julius Caesar, and no^ at the time of their Free State.

Sol. If you take a Monarchy for a Form of Government in and by One only, I
acknowledge Julius Caesar to be the Foundet of that Monarchy: For, he was the
first Prince that changed the Free State into the Government by O^e. But I
justly question, whether this be Daniel's meaning, That everywhere, and in
every point of time, these Dominions must necessarily be under one Head. To say
the truth, This is but a Tradition borrowed from the custom of Speech. They
take it for a granted truth, That these Kingdoms must be so Constituted; but
this does not always necessarily hold. The Grecian Kingdom, typed by the
Brass-Metal, was under one Head in Alexander the Great. But after that, it came
to be under Four Heads, in the times of his successors. Nay, in the
inter-Regnum, in the vacancie, it was scarcely under any Head at all. The Roman
Kingdom was under one Head in the time of the Caesar's. After that, it came
divided into Ten inferior Realms. Nay, there was a time when there was an
intercision of Roman Majesty; the Beast was wounded in one of his Heads. And
last of all, when the Fourth Kingdom was destroyed, the Dominion, and the
greatness of the Dominion under the whole Heaven, was given to the Saints of
the most High, Dan. 7. 27. This is expressly said to be given to the People of
the Saints, in opposition to Four kinds of People that had the Dominion in the
times of the Four Monarchies going before. All these Particulars show, That it
is not always necessary to the Being of Daniel's Four Kingdoms, That the
particular Form of Administration should be under one Head. It is a good and a
material Observation of Helvicus, in the aforementioned Treatise, page 3.
Quamobrem (says he) nihil movemur Aetymologiae Graeca ex (...) and (...) quam
Bodinus ostendit in Methodo Histor. cap. 7. Cum per Monarchiam nihil aliud
intelligan us quam imperium in mundo summum, a Daniele praesiguratum, quod Deus
potentia prae caeteris instruit, ut caetera illud respiciant. And in very deed,
if we narrowly look to the words of the text, though these Kingdoms are
familiarly called the Four Monarchies, this is meant chiefly of their Latitude
and sovereignty of Dominion, as they are so many summa Imperia. But it is not
necessary that these Dominions should be always under one Head: and therefore,
whereas it is said, That God gave to Nebuchadnezzar a great Kingdom, and a
second arose up after him, and a Third that should bear rule over all the
Earth; and lastly, a Fourth Kingdom, as strong as Iron, which shall bring all
into subjection: From all this we may collect, That these several Kingdoms must
have supreme Dominion over inferior Realms; but it is not necessary to supreme
Dominion, That one man always must bear Rule. And therefore look what
sovereign Dominion Nebuchadnezzar began over the Church, the same did descend
in as large a way, and in as ample a manner upon the Romans, in the times of
their Free State, when the Church came within the precincts of their Dominion.
There is nothing then does exclude, but that the Roman might begin as the
Fourth Empire in the time of their Freesta^e: For then they became supreme
Commanders about the Borders of the Church.

Object. 2. But if you Allege, That this is the way to confound the Free State
and the Monarchy of One together, which ought not to be done;

Answ. It is the plot of the Spirit not to look upon the several Forms of Roman
Dominion, but upon the Roman as opposed to one Grecian, one Persian, one
Babylonian Dominion going before. The scope of the Prophecy is to show, That
the Earth, especially the parts of the Earth about the Territories of the
Church, should fall under the sovereign Command of Four sorts of People. And
further, It is the scope of the Spirit to show, while these several Dominions
are in their flux and succession, Christ shall be born, and his Kingdom shall
be set up. If this be so, we need not fear the confounding together of Two
several kinds of Government into One. It is enough for our purpose, that the
Roman was Imperium in mundo summum, the prevailing Dominion over the Earth at
that time when the Church of the Jews came under their sovereign Lordship and
Power.

But yet further, They that stand for such a Beginning of the Roman Empire at
Julius Caesar, I desire they would Answer this Question. In the Tables of the
Consuls it is manifest, That there is the space of 17 years from the Conquest
of Judea to the Empire of Julius Caesar. Now concerning this Number of years,
it must be either reckoned as a Chasme in the Prophetical Chronology; or else
it must be applied to some one of the Four Metal-Kingdoms. But it cannot be
reckoned as a Chasme in the Prophetical Chronology. For it is clear from the
Scriptures, That these Four Monarchical States must continue one after another
in a lineal succession; and when their times are in flux and succession, then
the Kingdom of Christ shall begin. Therefore this portion of time from the
Conquest of Judea to the Monarchy of Caesar, must necessarily be reckoned as
appertaining to one of the Four Kingdoms. If so, it must either appertain to
the Grecian Kingdom typed by the Brass-Metal, or to the Roman typed by the
Iron-Metal. For none will be so absurd as to apply it either to Babel or
Persia, which were destroyed long before. Now, they that apply this term of
time to the Grecian Kingdom, how can they make their Position good, seeing
that People were brought under the Power of the Romans? But if you apply this
to the time of the Roman typed by the Iron-Metal, you give up the Cause, to
wit, That the Roman began as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom in the time of their
^ree-state.

Object. (...) (...) will Reply, The Four Pers^uting States of the world are
compacted together into one Image; but the Romans in the time of their
Free State did not Persecute the Church: Ergo.

Sol. By the like Reason you may argue, That Cyrus did not begin the Persian
Kingdom, nor Alexander the Grecian, because neither of these Monarchs did
actually afflict the Church. But if you shall say, Though they raised no actual
Persecution in their own persons, yet they did first bring the Church within
the verge of that Dominion, which in its times did notably afflict her; I may
say the same of the Romans. For if it may be supposed, That they did not
afflict the Church in the times of their Free State, yet then she came first
within the verge of that Dominion, where were the ^orest Persecutions that ever
were. In the Book of the Revelation, there is again and again mention made of
the Sufferings of the Church under Roman Tyranny; And when she was to bring
forth her Man-Child that should Rule all Nations with a Rod of Iron, when she
cried in pains to be Delivered, a great red Dragon with seven Heads and ten
Horns did lie in wait to Devour her Child, chap. 12. All do agree, That this
notes the Sufferings of the Church under Roman Tyranny. There must then be
some particular instant of time when the Church first came under that Tyranny,
and there we must set the date of the Tribulation.

Secondly, Whereas it is Affirmed, That the Romans did not Afflict the Church
in the times of their Free State; this I do plainly Deny. For let us hear what
is spoken by Josephus: for he, I presume, in this matter, is able to give us
the best information. Thus says he: Hircanus and Aristobulus, through their
Dissentions and civil Broils, were the cause of that Servitude that fell upon
the Jews. For, we have lost our Liberty, and have been subdued by the Romans,
Antiq. lib. 14. chapter 8. And further he adds; That which is to be lamented, the
Romans in a little time have drawn from us more than 10000 talents: and the
Royalty, which before was an Honor reserved to the High Priests, has been
bestowed upon men of obscurity, Antiq. l. 14. c. 8. But if we go to
Particulars, it is a thing famously known to * And besides the Testimonies of
Josephus, Dio the Historian (...). (...) (...) (...) Jews (...) Tax^d by
Gabinius, (...). 3^.
all Posterit^, how Crassus did rob the Temple at Jerusalem.

And when all this is done, shall we say, That the Jews suffered nothing from
the Romans during the times of their Free State? If we look to the times of
Nehemiah, we may well conceive that these were some of the best times of the
Jewish Church: Yet mark what is expressed in the Confession of the Levi^es:
Behold, we are Servants this day: and for the Land that thou gave unto our
Fathers to eat the Fruit thereof, and the good thereof; behold, we are
Servants in it, and it yields much increase unto the Kings whom thou have set
over us because of our sins. Also, they have Dominion over our Bodies, and over
our Cattle at their pleasure, and we are in great distress, chap. 9. verse. 36,
37. Here was then no public Persecution for Religion, only their Vassalage
under the Persian Kings is here noted. And may not all things be rightly
applied to the Romans when they came to have supreme Dominion in the Land of
Promise? Were not the Bodies, Lives, Goods, Cattle, of the Jews, and all that
they had, at the Roman devotion? Nay further, if we will compare the times that
went before, with those that come after, we shall find, before the Romans came
into Judea, that the Jews had indifferently well asserted their Liberty against
the Tyranny of the Seleucian Kings; as may appear in the Stories of the
Macchabees, that rose up for the defense of their Country. But from that time
as the Roman Legions entered Jerusalem, and a Conquest was made over the
Churches Continent, the Jews did totally and finally lose that Liberty, to the
destruction of their City and Temple. And that which is to be noted, The
Christian Church also has been under Roman Tyranny, more or less, to this very
day; as may appear by the Book of the Revelation, and the Stories of the Church.

Now then, if we put all together, we may conclude, That all things neeful to
the beginning of the Fourth Kingdom in Daniel's Image, began to be applicable
to the Roman State at the destruction of the Seleucian Kingdom, and at the
subduing the Territories of the Church. And therefore we do here fix the
beginning of the Roman as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom.

ARGUMENT IV.
Where the Story of the Gospel does insinuate the beginning of the Roman to be,
that is the true beginning of the Roman as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom.

But the Story of the Gospel does insinuate the beginning of the Roman to be in
the time of their Free State, when the Churches Continent came first within the
Verge of their Dominion:

Therefore, within the time of their Free State, when the Churches Continent
came under the Verge of that Dominion, is the true beginning of the Roman as
the Fourth Metal-Kingdom.

The Major is plain: for we cannot but think that the Story of the Gospel does
rightly expound the true beginning of the Fourth Kingdom. And for the Minor,
That the Story of the Gospel does insinuate the beginning of the Roman to be in
the time of their Free State, we have these Instances that follow.

The Evangelist being to write the Story of the Gospel, and particularly the
entrance of Christ into his Ministry, he has these words: In the fifteenth
year of the Reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being Governor of Judea,
and Herod being Tetrarch of Galilee, and his Brother Philip Tetrarch of Iturea
and of the Region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias the Tetrarch of Abilene; the
Word of the Lord came to John, the Son of Zacharias, in the Wilderness, Luke 3.
1, 2, 3. Here I demand, What has the Evangelist to do with the times of the
Romans, being a Government so alien to the affairs of the Church? I Answer:
There be Two Reasons wherefore he Numbreth the times according to the Roman
account.

The First is, To show the Truth of Daniel's Prophecy in the Image of
Persecuting States. For there it is expressly said, That in the days of these
Kingdoms shall the God of Heaven raise up a Kingdom that never shall be
destroyed, Dan. 2. 44. Now the Evangelist expounds this to be the Kingdom of
Christ, and that the Roman in particular is the Metal-Kingdom, in whose times
the Kingdom of Christ did begin. And he does leave it upon Record, That the
Lord Christ had a solemn Inauguration into his Office in that part of time when
Tiberius was Emperor, in the fifteenth year of his Reign, when Pontius Pilate
was Governor of Judea, etc. Now, if it be the scope of the Evangelist to show,
That the Lord did begin his Office in Preaching the Gospel when the Romans did
bea^ Rule, there must be a particular instant of time also, when all in Judea
fell under the Dominion of that People; and that in the sense of the Gospel
must be the Epoch, or term of the Roman Kingdom.

Secondly, The Evangelist does so punctually Number the times according to the
Roman Government, because then Judea (where the Gospel began to be Preached)
was under the Command of the People of Rome. And the Evangelist does no more in
the times of the New Testament, than what the Prophets and ancient Writers had
done in the times of the Old. As for Ensample: Those Prophets that lived in the
times of the Kings of Judah and Israel, as Isaiah, Jeremy, Hosea, dated their
Prophecies from the Reign of those Kings. And from that time that the Kings of
the Line of David were taken away, it was the use to reckon by the times of the
Four Monarchical States. So Daniel and Hez^kiel, who lived in the times of the
Babylonian Empire, do reckon their Visions by the times of the Babylonian
Kings: And after them, Ezrah, Nehemiah, Haggie, and Zachary, who lived in the
times of the Persian Monarchy, dated their times by the Reigns of the Kings of
Persia. And as for those Ecclesiastical Writers that lived in the times of the
Grecian Kingdom (as the Author of the Book of the Macchabees) they accounted
by the years of the Kingdom of the Greeks. In like manner, the Evangelists,
living in the times of the Romans, date the Story of the Gospel by the Roman
account. In all which they do secretly imply, That the Roman is the Fourth
Metal-Kingdom; and it began so to be, when the Church of the Jews became
subject to the People of Rome. So long the Stories of the Church were Numerable
by the Roman account.

But let us add another Testimony out of the same Evangelist, where he tells
us, chap. 2. verse. 2. A Decree went forth from Caesar Augustus, that all the
world should be taxed: (...) this taxing was first made when Cyreneus was
Governor of Syria. Now whereas he says, That all the world should be taxed;
this is meant only of the world under the Roman obedience. And here we Affirm,
When Judea and the Countries near Bordering, became Members of this (...) or
Roman world; then did the Roman begin as the Fourth of Daniel's Kingdoms. The
Evangelist being to speak of the Birth of the Kin^ of the Jews, his special
purpose is to show how that particular Continent was under the sovereign Power
of Augustus Caesar at that time*

Object. 1. But here it may be Objected, How could Augustus tax Judea, when it
was under the Power of Herod the King?

Sol. This matter is solidly Disputed by the learned Spanhemius, in his Dubia
Evangelica, part. 2. dub. 2. pa. 157. The sum of that which he does deliver,
comes to this issue: Though Herod was King, he had not jus summum, the supreme
Dominion; he had only jus subalternum, a Right and a Power merely by the
courtesy of Augustus. And therefore he cites a passage out of Appianus, That
as Darius was the King of Pontus, and Polemon of Cilicia; so Herod was King of
the Jews; that is, merely by favor and courtesy. Secondly, He shows, That
there were often Appeals from Herod to the Romans: and therefore he was
compelled to ple^ad for himself before Antonius at Laodicea; and before
Augustus, after the Battle of Actium at Rhodes. Many more Arguments he brought,
to prove that his Government was merely Precatious, and at the will of the
Romans. Now for that particular time when the Romans began to have the
sovereignty over the People of the Jews, this was at the times of Pompey the
Great. These are the Authors own words, page 160: At a sane erat conditio
populi Iudaici tempore Macchabaeorum qu indo a Judah Macchabaeo foedus primo cum
Romany initum ubi Iudae^ vocantur (...) populi Romani rescripto Sena* us ad
De^ctrium a quo premebantur, 1 Mac. 8. Sed quam^rimum a Pompeio Magno subacti
fuere, societatis nomen in servitutem ab^r, and illi aeque ac aliae gentes
d^victae Romany vectigales facti eorum imperio accessere. Ab e^ tempore
Iudaeorum gens in Clientela Romanorum fuit, a qu^bus Reges pro arbitrio
instituebantur vel destituebantur and tales quidem, quibus precarium and
limitatum erat imperium, a nutu eorum suspensum qui Romae rerum pot^ebantur. In
these words of his, he does plainly distinguish what the People of the Jews
were before the Conquest of Judea by Pompey, and what they were after. Before
the Conquest, they were Friends, Allies, and Auxiliaries; and after that, their
society was turned into servitude; and as other Conquered Nations, so the Jews
were made Tributaries to the Empire. From that time, the Nation of the Jews was
always under the Dominion of the Romans, by whom their Kings were either set
up, or plucked down at pleasure. And for the manner of their Rule, it was
merely limited, hanging upon the good will of them that had the supreme Command
at Rome. Now if this be so, I leave it to any man to judge when the Roman did
begin as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom. According to these Principles, he must needs
begin at the times of Pompey, when the Church was brought under the Power of
the Romans.

Object. 2. Why is it said, That the taxing was when Cyreneus was Governor of
Syria, and not rather when Herod was King of the Jews?

Sol. The Answer is clear; That though Herod was King of the Jews, yet Cyreneus
was the principal Agent of the Romans in the Tax; and Judea was but a Member
annexed to the Province of Syria. Maldonate upon the place (to my apprehension)
speaks satisfactorily: For, says he, Cyreneus was not the Governor of Judea,
but of Syria: but because Judea did then belong to the Province of Syria ( as
all Authors do deliver) it was his Office to tax not only Syria, but Judea
also. And in very deed, much is spoken in the Roman Story, That Judea was a
Member annexed; and Ios^phus calls it (...), the Apendix, or the Additament
of Syria. If we go to the Original, we shall find in the Stories. That when the
Seleucian Kingdom was destroyed, Syria and Judea, both together came under the
Power of the Romans, by the means of Pompe^ the Great. And here we set the
beginning of the Roman as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom.

But because Spanhemius does seem to go another way, and does stand upon it,
That Judea was not a Member annexed to Syria, till the time of Archelaus, when
Judea was made a Province. Let him now give his Answer, Why the Birth of Christ
is recorded by the Evangelist to be in the times of the Ecumenical Tax of the
Roman World? His Answer is this: Ut non tantum res tam illustris Charactere
temporis illustri consignaretur, sed and tali qui responderet vaticiniis
Propheticis: not only that so famous a matter should be decyphered by so famous
a Character of time, but by such a famous Character of time, which should
Answer the Predictions of the Prophets. And then in particular, he cites those
words of the Prophecy of Daniel, In the days of these Kingdoms shall the God
of Heaven raise up a Kingdom that never shall be destroyed, chap. 2. verse. 44.
And then he concludes upon the Premises, in these words: Descriptio enim
Iudaeorum sub Augusto erat publica servitutis professio, and tessera Obsequii
quod debebatur Principi Extero, adeoque (...) advenisse (...) illud (...) quo
Messiah nasci debuit, and lapis sine manibus e monte excindi. The Tax of the
Jews under Augustus, was a public profession of their Servitude, and a Badge
of that Homage which was due to a Foreign Prince; and therefore a clear
Demon^ation that that fullness of time was come, in which the Messiah should be
born, and in which the Stone should be cut out of the Mountain without hands.
From these words of his, we do conclude, That in the sense of the Evangelists,
the Roman is the Fourth and last Metal-Kingdom. For when the Lord Christ was
born, the Jews did yield their Homage and Obedience to the Romans, as to those
that were set over them. But if we do enquire after the time when they came to
be Homagers, it was at the time of Pompey the Great. Therefore in the sense of
the Evangelists, we must there set the beginning of the Roman, as the Fourth
Metal-Kingdom.

ARGUMENT V.
That which does necessarily spring from the^r Principles who do most
authentically expound the Monarchies, that is the true beginning of the Roman,
as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom.

But the beginning of the Roman, at the time of their Free State, when the
Church came first within the Verge of their Dominion, is such: Ergo.

The Major is plain: For we cannot reject that beginning of the Roman as the
Fourth Metal-Kingdom which does necessarily spring from the Principles of the
most Authentic Expositors. We do in substance take that for truth which is
employed, as that which is plainly expressed. But for the Minor, That the
beginning of the Roman Monarchy was at the time of their Free-stare; and that
this does spring from the Principles of the most Authentic Expositors: This is
proved by the enumeration of Singulars.

First, The most approved Interpreters do hold, That all the Four Tyrannical
Empires are compacted into one Image; and though they differ in some
particulars, yet they all agree in the greatness of Dominion. In this sense
nothing does exclude the Roman from being one of the Four.

Secondly, They agree, That all these Tyrannical Empires, compacted into one
Image, continue a succession of that Lordship which the first ( scil. the
Babylonian) did take from the People of the Jews. If this be so, the Roman must
begin as the Fourth of Daniel's Kingdoms at that time only when the Church of
the Jews came under their Dominion. For though the Romans were a mighty State,
and had gained to themselves a great Power in the West; yet they were not the
sucsessors of Nebuchadnezzar in that Monarchy which he had begun, till they had
taken in the Eastern Countries, and brought the Jewish Church within the Power
of their Kingdom. But when this matter was once effected, then did the Roman
begin as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom. And this does necessarily arise from the
Principles and Foundations of such as have best Expounded the Metal-Kingdoms.

Object. But some perhaps may allege, You have formerly taught, That the
Metal-Kingdoms do not only respect the People of the Jews, but the People of
the Gentiles also, when the Gentiles come to be the Church of Christ.

Sol. This I confess to be a Truth: Yet withal, in the right stating of the
beginning of the Four Kingdoms, we must have only respect to the Nation of the
Jews. For when all these Kingdoms began, and in particular the Fourth and the
last, there was no other Church in all the world, but that of the Jews only.
Afterward, by the Preaching of the Apostles, the Church did greatly increase;
and the whole Empire, in its just Latitude, from East to West, from North to
South, was the Seat, and the Place of the Church. And hence it is, That the
Spirit in the Revelation does discover her State according to the changes of
time in the Empire of the Romans. But yet however, The Doctrine of the
forementioned Interpreters will strongly enforce the beginning of the Roman,
when Judea came under the Power of that People, seeing there was no Church in
all the world but that of the Jews only.

Object. But if it be further Alleged, Why do you call this a Principle of the
most Approved Interpreters; seeing you your self do not Allow their Exposition
in some Particulars?

Sol. So far forth as the Exposition is Approved, I do build upon it; and it
does strongly enforce the Conclusion. And for the kinds of Interpreters, I will
show who are the most Approved, and why they are so called. After such times as
it pleased the Lord to Reveal to Daniel the Four Ages of the Church, under the
Type and Similitude of Four Metals in the Image; this Discovery has been
variously received. Some only having a glaring light of the Truth, have turned
it into Fables; and it is very probable, That Ovid in his Metamorphosis
received some hints of the Four Metals of Daniel's Image, when he spoke of the
Golden Age under Saturn, and of the Silver Age under Jupiter, etc. We must not
think whatsoever is spoken by this Poet, to be altogether a Fable: That which
he says concerning Deucalion's Flood, in many particulars it was a Fable of
his own making; yet in the general ground we all know that it is a
Scripture-Truth, that there was a Deluge to drown the world. So he speaks of
the Giants, and of their heaping of Pelion upon Ossa; we may conceive that in
this he had some respect to the Giants before the Flood, and to the building of
the Tower of Babel. So in the present case, when he spoke of the Four Ages of
the world, of the Golden, the Silver, the Brass, and the Iron-Ages; though in
this matter (to use the Apostles Expression) he turned the Truth of God into a
Lie, yet in the ground it is true, That the times of the Church are divided
into Four Ages; and these Ages are figured by so many Metals of the Image. In
after times, they that lived in the Church, and had the right Experience of
things, did expound the Babylonian to be the Head of Gold, the Mede-Persian to
be the Silver, the Grecian to be the Brass, and the Roman to be the Iron. This
is a true Exposition in the main; but in some particulars they have gone too
much after Ovid in his Metamorphosis. It is true, that the Babylonian Monarchy
is represented by the Golden-Metal: but it is a common Error in the Ancients,
and now generally among the Historians, Chronologers, and Writers, to begin the
Babylonian Monarchy at Ninus. Upon the front of many Chronological Tables you
shall find, That Ninus is Pictured as the Founder of the Babylonian, Cyrus of
the Persian, Alexander of the Grecian, Julius Caesar of the Roman Monarchy.
This distribution, though it may take in a greater compass of time, yet it does
not agree with the sense of the Holy Ghost in some chief Circumstances. For the
beginning of the Babylonian at Ninus, Historians have taken this out of their
own Heads, and not out of the Word of God. And from hence Bodin, in his Method
of History, chapter p. 7. has taken occasion to Dispute against the Scriptures,
and to strike out the Truth, because some have mingled their own Inventions
with the Word of God. He has taken this Advantage upon the private Errors of
some, who have stood for the Truth in the main. But the latter Expositors do
decline this Error of Ninus, and do pitch upon this, That Nebuchadnezzar is the
Head of Gold, and that the Babylonian Kingdom does begin from his Monarchy.
They find by Experience, That the Scriptures do chiefly point to those several
Empires that were to stand in fullness of Power one after another in those
Countries where sometimes the Kings of the Lineage of David did bear Rule. These
are the most approved Interpreters; which I so call, because they go according
to the mind of the Scriptures. Now, according to their grounds, it follows
by necessary consequence, That the Roman must begin as the Fourth Kingdom, in
the time of their Free State, when the Church, and all the Countries adjoining,
came under the Lordship and Dominion of the People of Rome. And whereas in the
Chronographical Tables Julius Caesar is set forth as the Founder of the Roman
Empire; this is as false an imagination as that of Ninus. First, It is clear,
That every Metal-Kingdom did rise and increase by the destruction of the Empire
that went before. Now, what part or parcel of the Grecian Empire did Julius
Caesar bring under the Power of the Romans? Secondly, What part or parcel of
the Nations about the Borders of the Church, did he bring under the Roman
Obedience? If we speak in a Latitude, Caesar did change the Free State into the
Government by One; yet to speak accurately, The Roman did not begin then as the
Fourth Metal-Kingdom, but in the times of Pompey, when the Jewish Church came
under the Obedience of that Nation. And so our Argument is Founded upon the
Principles of the best Expositors, for the true beginning of the Roman Kingdom.

Now then, to gather all into one sum, we may conclude the Roman to begin as
the Fourth Metal-Kingdom, when the Church came under the Dominion of that
People. This is demonstrated, First, By the Analogy of the Three former
Metal-Kingdoms, which did begin each one as the Church came under their
Dominion. Secondly, By the end of the Grecian Kingdom, typed by the
Brass-Metal. Where the Grecian ends, there the Roman begins. Thirdly, By
that which is necessary to the Being of the Fourth Metal-Kingdom, which began
to be applicable to the Roman in the time aforementioned. Fourthly, By the
Testimony of the Evangelist S. Luke, which does insinuate such a Beginning.
Fifthly, By the Principles of the latter and most Approved Interpreters, which
being rightly laid, do necessarily prove such a Beginning also.

Having thus laid the Foundation, I should now proceed to the Building. But
there are some few Objections that yet remain to be Answered.

Object. 1. Mr Mede stands upon it, That the Roman came up by the same
degrees as the Grecian went down: Therefore there can be no determinate and
set time of the Beginning of the Roman, as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom.

Sol. What he speaks in his Apostasy of the latter-times concerning the
gradual increase of the greatness of the Romans, we do yield to be a truth in
the main: But we here speak of the beginning of the Roman in a more strict
sense, in that acception as it is in the Fourth Metal-Kingdom. And here, as
there was a determinate time of the beginning of the Babylonian, Persian, and
Grecian Empires: So there must be a determinate beginning of the Roman, as the
Fourth Metal-Kingdom. Secondly, Daniel saw in the Vision the Four Beasts come
up out of the Sea one after another, and the Fourth Beast last of all: There
must then be some determinate time of the beginning of the Fourth Empire.
Thirdly, It is the plot of the Spirit, by the Four Empires, to decypher so many
periods of time. According to this Rule, If there be no certain beginning of
the Fourth Metal-Kingdom, there will be a Chasme; There will be some part of
time, which will be long to no Metal of the Image. For, as Mr Mede himself does
allow, The Image does comprehend Four great Revolutions of time, to begin one
after another in an orderly succession. These are his own words: Apost. page
69. For the true account of the times in Scripture, we must have recourse to
that Secret Calendar and Great Almanac of Prophecy, The Four Kingdoms of
Daniel, which are a Prophetical Chronology of times, measured by the
Succession of Four Principal Kingdoms, from the beginning of the Captivity of
Israel, until the Mystery of God should be finished. A course of time, during
which the Church and the Nation of the Jews, together with those whom, by
occasion of their unbelief in Christ, God should surrogate in their rooms, were
to remain under the Bondage of the Gentiles, and Oppression of Gentilism. But
these times, once fulfilled, all the Kingdoms of the World should become the
Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ. So far Mr Mede. In whose words I Note
these Three Points. First, That the Four Metal-Kingdoms in Daniel's Image, are
a Prophetical Chronology of the times. Secondly, That this Prophetical
Chronology begins at the Captivity of Babylon. Thirdly, That it ends at
the glorious Kingdom of the Saints. And for the Four Kingdoms, he Numbreth them
in this manner, First, The Babylonian; Secondly, The Mede-Persian; Thirdly, The
Grecian; Fourthly, The Roman. And for the beginning of the Roman, (the Point
that we now are upon) he has this Observation: In which quaternary of
Kingdoms, as the Roman, being the last of the Four, is the last Kingdom: So are
the times thereof the last times we seek for. During which times, says Daniel,
the God of Heaven shall raise up a Kingdom that never shall be destroyed, etc.
In these words also we do agree with the forenamed Author in Two Points. First,
In the Number of the Four Kingdoms. Secondly, In the date of the last times
from the beginning of the Fourth Kingdom. And this is that which we endeavor to
prove, That as soon as the Church came under the Dominion of the Romans, that
People became the Fourth Metal-Kingdom. And here also we do set the beginning
of those (...), or latter times so much spoken of. If therefore we set our
selves in this beginning, where, in Mr Mede's own Opinion, the latter times do
commence: If we Number 666 years, we shall come to that particular time, when
the Name, or Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome began to be set up. And
so every man may easily observe, That we go in the true Scripture-way of
account. But of this afterward. Now let us go on, and consider wherein we do
differ from Mr Mede about the true beginning of the Roman Kingdom. For either
(says he) we must set the beginning thereof when all Greece came under the
Roman Obedience, after the Conquest of Perseus; or else the Roman Kingdom must
begin by degrees. In which Opinion of his there are Two Errors: For that of the
beginning at Perseus, we have spoken already: And for the Roman Encroachment by
degrees, let it be what it will be, there must be a certain determinate time
where the Roman does begin as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom; unless we will admit of
a Chasme, or a vacuum, in the Prophetical Chronology. And yet further, Upon Mr
Mede's own grounds, we do desire to press this Argument: If the Babylonian did
begin as the first Metal-Kingdom, when the People of Israel came under the
Dominion of Babel; then the Roman will begin as the Fourth Metal Kingdom, when
the same People of Israel (...) under the (...) of Rome. But the former is
true: Ergo, the latter. The Consequence is clear, from Analogy; for the Roman
does but continue that Dominion which the Babylonian began. And for the Minor,
our Author says, That the Four Metal-Kingdoms did begin from the Captivity of
Israel, when that People fell under the power of the Babylonians. I say also,
When the same People of Israel came under the power of the Romans, there is the
true determinate beginning of the Roman, as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom. And this
is proved by such Principles as Mr Mede himself will allow.

Object. 2. Others do plead, That the Roman did begin as the Fourth
Metal-Kingdom, when it began to be the prevailing Dominion upon the Earth. But
they were so some years before the Jewish Church came under their Obedience.

Sol. It is true, That all the Monarchical Kingdoms were prevailing, when those
times came that were appointed of God that they should prevail. For
Nebuchadnezzar, the Scriptures speak very much how he carried all before him.
And for Cyrus, the Founder of the Persian Kingdom, Thus says the Lord to Cyrus
his anointed, whose right hand I have holden. The right hand is the instrument
of Action; and Conquerors prevail by the Lord's holding up their right hand. I
will loose the loins of Kings. When the loins of Kings are loosed, wherein
their strength lies, he must needs prevail against them. To open Before him
the two-leaved Gates. It was the Power of God that did go before him, and that
was the Petard to burst open the Gates of his Enemies, Isa. 45. v. 1, 2, 3, 4.
And for Alexander the Great, the Scripture says, Behold, an He-goat came from
the West, on the face of the whole Earth, and touched not the Ground, Dan. 8.
5. Livy is of Opinion, That if Alexander had turned his Arms against the
Western people, as he did against the Eastern, he would have failed of his
Conquests. And Caesar objected to Pompey, That the Wars waged against the
People of Asia, in respect of others, were rather against Women, than Men. But
these are only Observations of Statesmen and Soldiers, that look upon second
Causes. The Scripture yields us the true reason wherefore Alexander prevailed
against the Asiaticks, and carried his victories so far eastward: I saw an
He-goat come from the West to the East, and touched not the ground. This is the
true cause of the greatness and celerity of the Conquest of Alexander; He came
upon the face of the whole Earth, and touched not the ground. It is not the
situation of the People in the Western Hemisphere, that makes them prevail
over the Eastern; but they only shall prevail whom God will set up. We may see
on the contrary, That great Conquerors have come from East to West, as well as
they have passed from West to East. This may be seen in the Victories of Cyrus,
Belisarius, the Saracens, and now last of all, the Turks, which have come from
the East too too far (but only that God would have it so) into the Roman
Territories. Now, if you would know the true Reason of the prevailing of the
latter, their Commission lies in these words: Loose the Four Angels that are
bound in the Great River Euphrates: and the Four Angels were loosed, which were
prepared for an hour, and a day, and a month, and a year, for to slay the third
part of men, Rev. 9. 14, 15. For the Four Angels, the course of the Prophecy,
and the best Expositors, do plainly show, That this is meant of the Turkish
Nation, which Originally were divided into Four Families, and had power to come
over the River Euphrates, into the Territories of the Western World. And for
that famous Instance of Xerxes, That a few Graecians in the West, did defeat
multitudes of People that came out of the East; the reason lies not in the
situation of either People, in respect of the Hemisphere, but in the hand of
the Lord, that fought against the Persian Empire. For from that time that the
building of the Temple was hindered by the Persians, and Daniel mourned for it
full three weeks together; the Angel to comfort him, tells him plainly, Dan.
10. 20. I will return to fight with the Prince of Persia, and then the King of
Graecia shall come in. The meaning of which words is this, That the power of
the Empire of the Persians should be overthrown by the Graecians: and then he
comes to particulars, to speak of the expedition of Xerxes into Greece, how
that the Fourth King of the Persians should raise up great multitudes of People
against the Graecians. These are the words of the text: for speaking of Darius
the Mede, he says, In the first year of Darius the Mede, I stood up to
strengthen him, chap. 11. verse. 1. And then he adds: I will show thee the
truth; behold, there shall stand up three Kings in Persia, to wit, Cyrus,
Cambyses, Darius: And the Fourth (meaning Xerxes) shall be richer than they
all; and by his strength, through his riches, he shall stir up all against the
Realm of Graecia, verse. 2, 3. If we will go to the true Reason wherefore the
Graecians were so courageous at the Straits of Thermopylae, and wherefore they
did prevail against the Persians; the true cause does lie in these words: I
will fight against the Prince of Persia, and then the Kingdom of Graecia shall
come Note.
in. It was the secret and invisible hand of the Lord, that was the cause of
the declining of the Power of the Persians in the East, and the rising of the
Grecian in the West. It is true, That the He-goat passed from West to East,
upon the face of the whole Earth: and yet it is as true, That the Ram of Persia
did push to the three several Coasts, Westward, Northward, and Southward, chap.
8. verse. 4. By these words it is plain, If the Victories of the Graecians did
pass from West to East, then e converso, it is as true, That the Victories of
the Persians did pass from East to West. Let us hear the words of the Prophet
Isaiah, to put all out of question; for speaking of Cyrus, thus he says: I
have called a ravenous Bird out of the East, the man of my Counsel from a far
Country, chap. 46. 11. From hence it is plain, When God will, Conquerors shall
come out of the East. And in Allusion to this Story, those Kings that shall
deliver the Mystical Israel out of the Captivity of Western Babylon, are called
the Kings of the East in a Figure, Rev. 16. 12. It is not in the Climate, in
the Hemisphere, in the temper of the Heavens, in the better exercise of
Military Discipline, in the experience of old Soldiers, in the success of
fortunate Generals, or any other inferior cause; but in the immediate
Dispensation of God. Therefore, to add the words of the Psalmist, as an
Epiphonema, Lift not up your Horn on high, speak not with a stiff neck: for
promotion comes not from the East, not from the West; but God is judge; he
puts down one, and sets up another, Psalm. 75. 5, 6, 7.

I have staid the longer upon this digression, because I set that Statesmen,
Soldiers, and others of deepest wisdom, look to these subtilties. Hereupon
they trust in an Arm of Flesh, oppose the Gospel, perfecute the Saints, bear
themselves more high over those that are made subject to them; Make no
Conscience of Honesty, Truth, or Religion, when they have the Law in their own
hands. They should as well look to the invisible and spiritual causes of the
Changes of Empire, to the Providence of God, to the Revelations in the Word, to
the Angels fighting against the Kingdoms of this world, to the power of the
Saints Prayers that are offered upon the golden Altar. There is nothing more
divine, nothing more spiritual, and nothing more apt to carry up the Soul into
an high contemplation of the manifold wisdom, power, truth, and Fidelity of
God, then to behold, in the Prophecy of Daniel, and in the Book of the
Revelation, as in a Map, the several Empires of the world where the Church
should be seated; their times, their changes, and their causes of the change;
and this many hundred years before these Empires come to be set up.

They that read the Word, together with the Stories of the times, may see the
Fidelity of God, and may by this come to know him by the Name Jehovah. But so
much by the way, touching the sudden growth of the Grecian Empire from West
to East. Now we come to the Romans; and in the times of their Dominion they
must also have the strength of Iron, to subdue the whole Earth and break it in
pieces. And though great Nations and mighty Princes should rise against him, as
Pyrrhus, Hannibal, Perseus, Iugurtha, Sertorius, Methridates, Tigranes, etc.
yet in their times the Romans must be too hard for them all, and break them all
in pieces. And therefore when Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, Cicero, and others,
boast of the Roman Greatness, it may be said to them, as sometimes it was to
Cyrus, I have girded thee with strength, though thou know not me, Isa. 45.
1, 2. This was the true, though the invisible cause, why the Romans grew so
Great, and their Dominion reached to the ends of the Earth.

But now it is high time to return, (from whence we have made a digression) to
show when the Roman began as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom. Some think it was when
that Nation was the most prevailing Nation upon the Earth: But this cannot be.
For in the times of Antiochus the Great, but more specially in the times of
Antiochus Epiphanes, they were the more prevailing People: yet they did not
begin in those times as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom in Daniel's Image.

You will say then, Where shall we set the beginning of the Fourth Kingdom? I
Answer; In this case we must distinguish between the Latitude of the Roman
Dominion more absolutely considered, and the Latitude of the Dominion in and
about the Borders of the Church. If you speak of the Latitude of Dominion in a
more absolute consideration, then the Roman began as the more prevailing
Dominion, when it became more mighty than any other Empire of the world. But if
you speak in a more strict sense, it began then to be the Fourth Metal-Kingdom
in Daniel's Image, when it did begin to take in the greatest Amplitude and
largeness of Rule in and about the Confines of the Church. And this is to our
purpose.

Object. 3. Others perhaps may Allege, That we cannot begin the Roman as the
Fourth Metal-Kingdom, when the Jewish Church came under the Dominion of that
People. For (say they) it is foretoll in the Prophecy of Jacob; The Scepter
shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet until Shiloh
come, Genesis 49. 10.

Sol. I Answer: We must so expound the meaning of one, that it may not dash
against the main sense of another Scripture Now it is the manifest scope of
other Scriptures to show, That the Four Monarchies must come to bear Rule over
those Countries where the Kings of the Line of David had the power before. And
therefore it is mentioned, That a Rod shall come out of the stock of Iesse, and
a Branch shall come out of his Roots, Isa. 11. 1, 2. A Lapide upon the place
speaks very well: Christo enim nascente regia Davidis familia ad pauperes
redacta. When Christ was born, the Kingly Family of David was brought very low.
To this accords the Prophet Daniel: In the days of these Kingdoms shall the
God of Heaven raise up a Kingdom that shall never be destroyed, chap. 2. verse.
44. In these words he does insinuate, That when the Kingdom of Christ
begins, it shall be as it were a new-erected Kingdom, raised up out of the
rubbish. To me therefore Baronius in his Apparatus, seems to deliver a
strange Exposition of this Prophecy. For he speaks to this effect, That the
Kingdom was specially foretold to the Tribe of Judah above any other. To which
when that tribe had once attained in David, by a long race of Kings, it held
out to the Captivity of Babylon. And after the Captivity of Babylon (where
there was some intermission for a time) the Empire recovered again in
Zorobabel: And then, from him being derived, it held in his Posterity, without
any absolute interruption, to the second year of the 184 Olympiad, when Calvin
and Pollio were Consuls. Then Herod an Idumaean, a Gentile at the first, and
after that a Proselyte, by the courtesy of the Romans, took the Kingdom in
Judea; and so the Government was translated from the Natives to a Forreigner.
This is the sum of that which is more largely delivered. Where Three Errors are
to be noted.

First, That he makes the Davidical-Kingdom to last to the times of Herod.
Which cannot be. For the Kingdom was taken from the Kings of the Line of David
by the Babylonians. And by them it was transmitted to the Persians and
Graecians. And so last of all, it came to the Romans, in whose time Christ was
Born. Neither did Herod, a Forreigner, Reign any more by the courtesy and
favor of the Romans, than did Hyrcanus, his immediate Predecessor.

A Second is this, That he makes the Scepter to continue in the time of
Zorobabel: which is not so. For they that plead for an inferior way of Rule in
the High Priests, the men of the Great Sanhedr^m do not affirm, That all these
came of Zorobabel, no nor of David neither.

Thirdly, He erreth in this, That he makes the Scepter to depart from Judah in
the times of Herod; for the Jews had some form of Government, some Laws of
their own, which did continue to the destruction of Jerusalem. When the Lord
Christ had provided him a People amongst the Gentiles, then Jerusalem was
destroyed, and the Jews were cast away according to the Prophecies.

Object. You will say then, What is the true meaning of Jacob's Prophecy?

Sol. This is the meaning thereof, That there should be a Succession of Kings
in the Line of David, till the Captivity of Babylon. And though the other Ten
Tribes should be cast away; yet that Tribe should remain. And after the
Captivity, though the supreme Power should be taken away from them, yet still
among that People there should be a continuation of some Laws and forms of
Government under the Persians, Graecians, and Romans, till the coming of the
Messiah. When the Messiah shall be born, he shall raise up the Tabernacle of
David which has fallen down; he shall set up that Kingdom that never shall be
destroyed. And at the end he shall destroy all the Metal-Kingdoms, and fill the
Earth. And so by consequence the Kingdom of David shall continue for ever. This
is the full sense and the meaning of Jacob's Prophecy.

Piscator, in his Scholia upon this text, does confirm what we speak:
Gubernatio plena cujus princeps pars est potestas judiciorum capitalium,
adempta fuit Posteris Iudae per Pompeium, qui Iudaeam in formam Provinciae
redegit, imperioque Romanorum subjecit. Post quam gubernationis ademptionem
paulo post natus est Christus sub Augusto. Quod autem potestas illa Iudaeis per
Romanos fuerit adempta fatentur ipsi, Joh. 18. 31. Gubernatio vero imminuta
(adempta scilicet potestate Iudiciorum capitalium relicta Potestate Iudiciorum
civilium and Religionis) duravit usque ad tempus illud quo natus est Christus,
immo etiam quo patefactus est in orbo terrarum per praedicationem Apostolorum.
Quippe Iudaeos adhuc tempore passionis Christi habuisse potestatem aliquam
judiciorum patet ex verbis Pilati ad illos. In which words of his, there is a
plain distinction betwixt the Sovereign and Supreme Power, and that which is
subordinate. For the Sovereign and Supreme power in Capital Crimes, he faith
this was taken away from the Jews by the means of Pompey the Great, who first
brought that Nation in subjection, and made it Tributary to the Romans. And so
that speech of the Jews is to be expounded: It is not in our power to put any
man to death, Joh. 18. 31. For the subordinate Power, which he calls
gubernationem imminutam, a regulated, or limited power in Civil Causes and in
matters of Religion, this (says he) did continue to the destruction of
Jerusalem. And so those words are to be expounded: Ye have a Law, and judge ye
him according to your Law, Joh. 18. 31. By this then we may understand how
Judea may be made subject to the Romans before the coming of Christ, and yet
some form of Policy might continue among that People, to make good the
Prophecy of Jacob.

But if we must needs stand upon the words, That the Scepter was taken away by
the means of Pompey the Great, this has excellent ground in the Stories; and
it does make exceedingly for our purpose. For the ground in the Stories, we
shall find, That the Jews that were in Bondage, first, to the Babylonians;
secondly, to the Persians; thirdly, to the Graecians; that after the death of
Antiochus Epiphanes, they did assert their Liberty against the Graecians of the
Seleucian Line. And some Kings did Reign in Judea of the stock of the
Macchabees. But after such time as Pompey the Great brought Judea under the
power of the Romans, they never recovered their Liberty again. Now then, I
leave it to any to judge, Whether here is not the beginning of the Fourth
Metal-Kingdom in Daniel's Image? This we have confirmed by Reasons, and have
Answered such Objections as might be alleged to the contrary.

Now let us go to the second Point, to show the Order of the times, that there
is the space of 666 years from the beginning of the Roman as the Fourth
Metal-Kingdom, to the setting up of the Name, or Universal Headship of the
Bishop of Rome, under the Emperor Phocas.

And for the time, we cannot easily be deceived, because the words of Josephus
are so plain, That this came to pass in that year when Cicero and Antonius were
Consuls at Rome, in the 179 Olympiad, in the third Month, on a Fasting-day: he
says, That Pompey entered Jerusalem with the Roman Legions, Antiq. lib. 12.
cap. 8. And for their subjection to the Romans, he adds, That Syria and
Judea, and all places from the Borders of Egypt to Euphrates, were committed to
the tuition of Scaurus, Antiq. lib. 14. cap. 8. and de Bell. Iud. lib. 1. cap.
5. And here I find, That all Historians and Chronologers do agree in the
aforementioned year.

Now for the Number of time, That there are 666 years from this beginning to
the Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome under the Emperor Phocas; this is
clear also in all our ordinary Books of Chronology. Dr Willet, who does differ
from our Judgment about the Roman as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom, he in his
Synops. Papism. Quaest. de Antichr. part. 2. says, That the Scepter was taken
from Judah at that year when Cicero was Consul at Rome, which he affirms to
be 60 years before the Birth of the Lord, and 666 before the setting up of the
Headship of the Bishop of Rome. And in general, he does approve the truth of
our Interpretation, as Bale the Historian did before him. And whereas it may be
Alleged, That Calvisius, the most accurate Chronologer, does Number something
more than 60 years to the Birth of the Lord: To solve this Difficulty, let us
say as he does, That Cicero and Antonius did enter their Office about the 20 of
October, when all was full of troubles at Rome: And in the fourth of July
following, which was the 17 day of the Month Tamuz, the Romans entered
Jerusalem, and Pompey went into the Temple. To this if we add those Acts of
his, of breaking down the Wall of Jerusalem, of making Judea Tributary to the
Romans, and delivering all into the Power of Scaurus the Questor till further
Order should be taken by the Senate; These things must necessarily be done in
the latter end of the year, when C^cero and Antonius were Consuls; or rather*
in the beginning of the next year, which, according to Calvisius his account,
is the year of the world 3889. To which, if you add 666 years, the Number of
the Name of the Universal Headship of the Beast, this will make the year of the
world 4554. And this will bring us to that fatal year of the Universal Headship
of the Bishop of Rome under the Emperor Phocas. And so this present year will
be,

From The Creation of the World the 4555 Year.

From The Birth of the Lord the 606 Year.

From The Beginning of the Roman, as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom, the 666 Year.

For the Number of years, there is yet one main Objection. Some will have the
periods of time in Daniel's Image to be a mere Scholastical speculation.

Sol. We will go to the Scriptures, and to the Stories of the Church, to decide
the Question.

For the Scriptures, Let us first consider the words of Daniel's Thanksgiving,
upon the Revelation of the Mystery of the Four Metal-Kingdoms: Blessed be the
Name of God for ever; for Wisdom and Might are his: he changes the times, and
seasons: he removes Kings, and sets up Kings, Dan. 2. 20, 21. The scope of
the Vision is concerning the Four Metal-Kingdoms, and so many changes of time
answerable to those Four Mutations of Empire. But if we look more narrowly to
the text, the words in the Chaldee (...) -- are times, and revolutions of time.
For the word (...) signifies as much as tempus statutum and determinatum, an
appointed and determinate time. For the Lord having showed Nebuchadnezzar's
Dream to Daniel, and the substance of the Dream, That it concerned a Fourfold
change of Empire, and a Fourfold change of time upon the Earth; Upon this
Reason, the Prophet breaks forth into the praise of the Wisdom and the Power
of God, in a suitable manner to the present occasion. And in very deed, if we
look upon the translation of the Empire from the Babylonians to the Persians,
from the Persians to the Graecians, from the Graecians to the Romans; Here is a
notable Example of the Wisdom and the Power of God. And that which is more
considerable, The Lord speaks of the times of the sovereign Dominion of these
People, many years before they come to have the Dominion upon the Earth. For
this cause the Prophet breaks forth into the praises of the wisdom of God in
his disposing the changes of times, and the changes of Empire; and for the
communication of this deep secret to him and the other three Children; and by
their means, to the information of the Church. And when all this is done, shall
we say, That the Four changes of time, in the Image of the Metal-Kingdoms, are
but a curious speculation? Further, it is added, verse. 44. In the days of
these Kingdoms shall the God of Heaven raise up a Kingdom that shall never be
destroyed. This is spoken of the rising of the Kingdom of Christ in the time of
one of the Four Metal-Kingdoms. The Four periods of time then are not a bare
Speculation, but a plain Scripture-truth. For it is the plot of the Spirit to
show, That down from Nebuchadnezzar there should be Four Changes of Empire, and
Four notable Revolutions of time; and when these Changes should be in their
course and succession, then the Kingdom of Christ shall begin.

Now whereas Bodin, in his Method of History, chap. 7. takes a great deal of
pains in the Confutation of this; Let us Consider what he Alleges.

First, There be many things he confuteth, which we do not allow. For, as we
have formerly said, The Babylonian Empire did not begin at Ninus, but at
Nebuchadnezzar.

Secondly, He takes it as Granted, That only the Amplitude of Dominion, makes
a Monarchical Kingdom: And hereupon, Reasons, Why should not the Kingdoms of
the Parthians, Saracens, Turks, Tartars, go under the account of Monarchical
Kingdoms? Here he is to consider, That not only the greatness of Dominion, but
the greatness of Dominion over the Churches Continent, is necessary to the
Being of Daniel's Metal-Kingdoms. And therefore, look what Kingdom
Nebuchadnezzar did begin, it did orderly descend to the Persians, Graecians,
and Romans; and not to the Parthians, as experience shows. Therefore, a Beast
in Daniel or the Revelation does not signify a State or Government in the
General Notion; but a State or Government that is Idolatrous, and does
persecute the Church. Neither does it signify an Idolatrous Government in the
Latitude; but such an Idolatrous Government in and about the Borders of the
Church. If this distinction were well observed, They that are Enemies to
Magistracy, would not have such harbor in the Revelation, as they think they
have.

Thirdly, He disputes against those who stand for a German-Roman Empire. And
with him we do agree, That this is but a Fable. For the Empire, of the last
Edition, is the whole Body of the Kings that make one Catholic Communion under
the Pope their Head, Rev. 13. and chap. 17. In these Particulars, he does not
touch us in his Disputation; but them only who do maintain the Truth with some
mixtures of their own.

Secondly, For the Points wherein we differ: He stands hard upon this, That
the Roman cannot be called the Iron-Metal, seeing in these latter Ages,
Learning, Civility, Religion, Discoveries by Navigation, have been raised to a
higher perfection: and therefore the Roman cannot be set forth by a more
worthless Metal than the other Kingdoms.

Sol. But in this matter he does not Dispute so much against us, as against the
Scripture it self, and the scope of the Spirit. For is it not the scope of the
Spirit, to compare the Fourth Kingdom to Iron, because of the strength,
cruelty, and power to break all things in pieces in and about the Borders of
the Church? What good will Learning, Civility, Navigation, and other such
things do, when the Church of God is under Persecution?

But yet further, to Convince the Consciences of men, That the Four
Metal-Kingdoms in Daniel's Image, are no nice speculation; I would willingly
put it to men to Resolve me this Question: The Faithful that lived in the
Jewish Church some years before the coming of Christ, whether was it not their
practice, and some way their duty, to search after the time of his coming?
These are the words of Peter: Of which Salvation the Prophets have enquired and
searched diligently, who Prophesied of the Grace that should come unto you;
searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them
did signify, when it testified beforehand the Sufferings of Christ, and the
glory that should follow, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11. Out of these words Three Points no
necessarily issue. First, The coming of Christ, his Sufferings, and the glory
that followed; this was revealed to the Church of the Jews. Secondly, It was
revealed to them, in what period of time Christ should come. Thirdly, They did
diligently search the several periods and changes of time, to come to that
particular season when the Son of Man should come in the flesh. The words in
the Original are very Emphatical, (...). Piscator has it, Scrutantes inquem
and cujusmodi temporis articulum. Beza, In quem aut qualem temporis articulum.
But I think the words are more naturally rendered: Scrutantes ad quam aut
qualem temporis periodum: Searching to which, or to what kind of period of time
the Spirit should point, as with a finger, when he spoke of the coming of
Christ in the flesh. But let the Translation be what it will be, all is to this
sense, That the Believers of the Ancient Church did diligently search the
periods of time to the coming of Christ in the flesh. And our Savior does
blame the Jews for it, That they could discern the face of the sky, and yet
could not understand the signs of the times: that is, The signs of the times of
his coming in the flesh, Matt. 16. 1, 2, 3. Now for the periods of time to the
coming of the Son of Man in the flesh, there are none more clear and
demonstrative in the whole Old Testament, than those two in the Prophecy of
Daniel. The first is that of the Four Metal-Kingdoms, chap. 2. and the Second
is that of the 70 weeks, chap. 9. By these Two, the Saints and Prophets in the
Old Testament might periodically come to the times of the Messiah, and so might
discover his coming in the flesh a priori. Our Savior therefore does blame
them, that by the changes of State in Judea, First, From the Babylonians to the
Persians; Secondly, From the Persians to the Graecians; Thirdly, From the
Graecians to the Romans; that by these several Alterations of time they did not
discern the signs of his coming, nor the beginning of his Kingdom, which should
be set up when the Image should come to the last and lowest Region, to the
Fourth and the last Metal-Kingdom. In the times of this Kingdom, the God of
Heaven shall set up a Kingdom that never shall be destroyed, Dan. 2. 44.
Therefore when the times of the Romans were come, (the Fourth and the last
Monarchical People) the Jews, by the course of Daniel's periods, might easily
understand that they were not far from the times of the Messiah. And to put all
out of doubt, if they had Numbered 490 years, or 70 weeks of years, from the
building of the City and Temple in the days of Ezra and Nehemiah, by this
period also they might have come to the time of the cutting off of the Messiah,
and to the preaching of the Gospel among all Nations. By the Collation and
Parallel of these two periods, the Saints in the Jewish Church might have found
out in what Article or what period of time the Son of man should come in the
flesh. And shall we then say, That the Four periods of time in Daniel's Image,
is a Scholastical and nice speculation?

Thus I have largely insisted upon the Point; where Two things are made good:
First, That the Roman does begin as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom, when the Church
and the Continent of the Church, came under the Dominion of that People.
Secondly, That the Number of years are 666 to the setting up of the Universal
Headship of the Bishop of Rome under the Emperor Phocas, if the account be made
from the beginning of the Roman as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom. I have proved
also, That this Method of Account is no nice speculation, but a true
Scripture-way to calculate and Number the Prophetical times.

Let us now proceed to the next Chapter, to show the issue of the Discourse.

CHAP. VII. The whole Process of the Discourse is repeated: That there are 666
years from the beginning of the Roman as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom, to the
setting up of the Name, or Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome; And that
this is the meaning of the Spirit in the Revelation, when he speaks of the
Name of the Beast, and of the Number of the Name.
FOR the cleerer Demonstration of the Truth, it is necessary that I should
Repeat the sum of that which I have formerly delivered, that we may see the
whole Process of the Disputation. First, I have showed, That the Name of the
Beast is not the word Lateinos, nor any other Grammatical Name whatsoever; but
in the Apocalyptical style, it notes his Universal Headship or Power, standing
in immediate Opposition to the Name or Headship of the Lamb. Secondly, For the
time of the beginning of this Universal Headship, I have showed, That it had
not only a determinate beginning, but it began after the Fall of the Empire:
and not only so, but it began after the Fall of the Empire, in such a time when
the Universal Headship was ascribed to the Bishop of Rome. Now this I have
proved, out of the Stories, to begin under the Emperor Phocas, when the Decree
went forth, That the Bishop of Rome should be Head over all Churches. For the
Calculation of the times, I have showed, That there is a Chain of 666 years,
from the beginning of the Roman as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom, to the setting up
of the Name or Universal Headship aforesaid. To the clearer probation of which,
I have largely insisted upon two Points. First, That the Roman is the Fourth
Metal-Kingdom; against Iunius and his followers. Secondly, That the Roman does
begin, as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom, not from Julius or Augustus Caesar, but
from that time when the Church came under the Dominion of that People. Now from
this beginning, I do positively Affirm, That there is a Chain of 666 years to
the beginning of the Papacy, set forth by the Type or Emblem of the little
Horn, Dan. 7. And this is the true Accommodation and Application of Daniel's
Visions to the Stories of the Church.

And whereas John in the Revelation speaks of the rising of the Two-Horned
Beast out of the Earth, that the Number of the Name, or Universal Headship, of
this Beast is 666; His meaning is, That there are 666 years from the beginning
of the Roman as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom, to the setting up of the Name or
Universal Headship of the Beast. He does more fully repeat that which was more
briefly delivered before. And in these Calculations, he does but refer us to
Daniel's Chronology in the Image of persecuting States. This is the whole
process of the Discourse.

But before I come to the Point, I will remove a mistake in some of our latter
Commentaries, which will have Mahomet, or the Turk, to be the little Horn. This
is the Opinion of Grasserus, and Mr Brightman.

I have been held with some kind of admiration, to see two such worthy
Expositors to leave the Common and plain way, and to embrace a private Fancy of
their own, so contrary to the scope of the Scriptures, and to the ordinary
Reason of men.

But let us come to Argument.

First, The little Horn and the Ten Horns in the text, are set forth as the
parts that do integrate and make up the Roman as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom. But
so do neither Mahomet, nor the Turk, as it is plain by experience. For who can
say, That the Turk or Mahomet, are any integral parts of the Roman Kingdom,
being every way so contrary and opposite, having no union or conjunction at all?

Object. 1. But it may be Replied, The ten Kings that arose out of the Ruins
of the old Empire, are reckoned as Branches and Parts of the Roman Kingdom; and
yet they were the Princes by whom the Empire was destroyed.

Sol. To this I Reply; The forenamed Interpreters may easily give an Answer to
this Doubt, out of the Revelation. Though the Ten Kings did arise out of the
Ruins of the Empire, yet all of them afterward were united in one Roman Body
of the last Edition; but neither Mahomet nor the Turk ever came within this
union or combination.

Object. 2. But it may be further Alleged, That the little Horn did subdue
three of the former Horns; and this rather agrees to Mahomet and the Turk,
than to the Papacy, whose part it is to preserve them.

Sol. Among the many Notes of the little Horn, it is possible some few may be
applicable to Mahomet and to the Turk: but we should also consider the
multitude and Evidence of those others that do utterly reject such an
Application. Now there are many Notes that cannot possibly agree with Mahomet
or the Turk, if we should come to singulars. And for the eradication of Three
Horns, we have largely proved how the Papacy did humble Three Dominions, to
have elbow-room in Italy. He did cast down some of the former; and it is as
true, That he did preserve the union of the Residue, to make a Roman Catholic
Empire. Secondly, For the Blasphemies of the little Horn, The Beast was
destroyed, and his Body given to the burning fire. Now, what Congruity or
color of Reason is there, That the Roman Kingdom should be destroyed for the
Blasphemies of Mahomet? If you apply this to the Papacy, this is fully verified
in that which is spoken, The Beast was taken, and with him the false Prophet,
and they both were cast into the Lake of fire. Thirdly, In all the times of the
Roman Kingdom, from the beginning to the end, there was the greatest cruelty
exercised against the Saints in the times of the little Horn. Now, if you apply
this to Mahomet and the Turk, though they have made great waste in the
Christian world, yet the War has not been formerly against the Saints as such;
neither has their cruelty been the greatest that ever has been. But if we
apply this to the Papacy, here has been a War against the Saints, as Saints;
and here has been the greatest Persecutions that ever were, as appears by
the whole Book of the Revelation. Fourthly, The little Horn is said to continue
a time, times, and the dividing of time. This will not agree to the duration of
Mahomet; for, what place of Scripture does once mention such a thing? But it is
plainly applied to the Papacy, Rev. 12. 6. Rev. 13. 5.

These, and many more Reasons, may be produced to prove, That Mahomet cannot be
resembled by the little Horn: and the Reasons for the Affirmative are very weak
and feeble. On the contrary, if you take the whole Body of the Chapter, and the
whole Bundle of Notes, they will be wholly applied to the Bishop of Rome; and
strongly prove, That the Papacy is the little Horn.

Now I will try the truth of one Principle, on which the forenamed Authors do
build, when they take Mahomet to be the little Horn.

The chief Ground they build upon, is this, Because the Turk does hold all
those Countries in Asia, which were formerly the Continent of the Jewish
Church.

To this I have said before, That so long as the Jews were the only People of
God, the delineation of the Four Metal-Kingdoms was in special reference to
that Church. But they being cast off, the Metal-Kingdoms, so much of them as
does remain, does more immediately concern the Churches of the Gentiles. If
Mahomet be the little Horn, who were the Saints of the most High whom he did
wear cut? Will any man say That they were only the Saints of the Jewish Church?
Alas! the Jews were a People cast away some hundreds of years before the Name
of Mahomet was heard in the world: and they do remain till this day a People
not called again.

It may be more truly affirmed, That the Metal-Kingdoms in Daniel's Image, do
not concern the Jews only, nor the Gentiles only; but both Jews and Gentiles in
their several times. For proof of this, we will lay down some special
Observations.

First, In the Image of persecuting States, it is not the purpose of God only
to show Four Revolutions of Empire, but his more special intent is to show the
beginning of the Kingdom of his Son. Secondly, It is his purpose not to reveal
this only to the Jews, but to the People of the Gentiles also. This latter may
be proved from the person of Nebuchadnezzar, to whom this secret was revealed.
For if it had only concerned the National Church of the Jews, That the God of
Heaven will raise up a Kingdom that never shall be destroyed, Why was this
delivered to Nebuchadnezzar, an Heathen Man, and an Enemy of the Church? When
the Lord did reveal to Pharaoh the Dream of the seven fat Kine; and after, the
Dream of seven lean Kine, this was not only discovered for the good of the
Church, but for the preservation of mankind. So the Succession of the Four
great Empires, and the beginning of the Kingdom of Christ in the times of the
last Empire, these things were not revealed only to Nebuchadnezzar, that the
Jews might understand the truth, but that the whole habitable world under
Nebuchadnezzar's Dominion, might take notice of that which God did intend to do.

Secondly, This appears by the manner of the Revelation to Nebuchadnezzar,
which was to this end, That the whole world might observe it, First, If you
consider the Person, Nebuchadnezzar dreamed a Dream. Secondly, The way of God's
dealing with him; he forgot the Dream, and therefore a great trouble fell upon
his Spirit. Thirdly, His calling for the wisemen of Babylon, which City in
these times was the Eye of the world, and the seat of the Empire. Now, it is
not to be imagined, but all that lived within the Verge of so large a Dominion
would be apt to hearken after such a thing: Specially, when they should hear of
the trouble of the King, and of the Edict to kill all the wisemen of Babylon.
Here was a matter set out, in the view of all Asia as it were, to prove Three
Particulars. First, That the God of Israel was the true God. Secondly, That he
would set up Four great Changes of Empire in the world. Thirdly, That in the
last Succession of Empire he would set up a Kingdom that never should be
destroyed. These things were propounded not only for the Church, but for the
Observation of the whole habitable Earth under the Babylonian Empire that then
was, and for the Ages following.

Thirdly, If we look to the Story of the Evangelists, we do read that the
Evangelist S. Matthew does tell us, That when the Lord Christ was Born in
Bethleem, in the days of Herod the King, wisemen came to Jerusalem, Matthew. 2.
1, 2, 3, 4. Here Interpreters upon the place do raise many Questions. First,
Who these wisemen were? Secondly, Why was it Revealed to them by a Star?
Thirdly, Why did the Star guide them to Jerusalem, and then vanish out of (...)
These Questions are propounded by Interpreters; and they do give very learned
and solid Answers to them. Only there is a Question to which I do not yet find
a satisfactory Answer; and that is this: Why was this matter Revealed to
wisemen in the East, rather than to any other Nation, Profession, or Sect
among the Gentiles? Spanhemius does handle this Point in his Dubia Evangelica,
part. 2. dub. 31. page 326. and he does come to this issue in the close:
Concludimus itaque causum vocationis Magorum nequaquam in illis suisse, sed in
sola Dei vocantis bonitate, and illos ex mera ejus gratia vocatos, sive
absolute eorum vocatio consideretur, sive comparate: Quod enim and vocati, and
vocati prae aliis Dei miserentis fuit illorum potius quam aliorum. Et haec
causa causarum est, and summa ratio, page 329. Here I do agree, That the Call
of the wisemen does chiefly depend upon the Grace and Mercy of God. This is
the Cause of causes, and the chiefest Reason why they were called, and why they
were called before any other. But yet, with submission to a better judgment, I
think there lies a plain reason in the Scriptures, why the Birth of the King of
the Jews, was revealed to the wisemen of the East, rather than to any other
Gentiles. For when the Lord had a purpose to Reveal Four great Changes of time
to the world, and particularly the time of the setting up of the Kingdom of his
Son, he had appointed in his Providence that the wisemen of Babylon, whose
Profession it was to understand the changes of time, that they should come to
take notice of these things; but more specially of the time when the Kingdom of
Christ should be set up. But because they could not know this by their own
strength, the Lord did Reveal it to them by the Ministry of Daniel, That he
would set up Four Kingdoms over the Earth, whereof the Babylonian in Being was
the first; and then in the latter end he would set up a Kingdom that never
should be destroyed. In a word, This is the Cause wherefore these changes of
times were revealed to the wisemen of the East, because it did suit with their
Profession to take notice of such things. And the Lord having once revealed in
particular the time of the setting up of the Kingdom of his Son to the wisemen
of the East, when the Lord Christ was born at Bethleem in Judea, in the days of
Herod the King; he did Call that sort of men in special, to take notice of that
which was foretold. Because these things were revealed to them, they were
called in a special manner to take notice of the Birth of the Messiah, and of
the beginning of his Kingdom.

From all that has been said, we may conclude, That the Vision of the
Metal-Kingdoms does concern both Jews and Gentiles: Therefore there is no
necessity that Brightman, Grasserus, and other learned men, should take the
little Horn for Mahomet, because the Country of Judea is now under the Turks.
Many other Arguments might, be brought to prove, That neither Mahomet nor the
Turk can possibly be resembled by the Type of the little Horn. The scope of the
text, and the whole collection of Circumstances, do altogether pitch upon the
Papacy, which arose after the division of the Roman Empire into ten inferior
Kingdoms in the time of the Emperor Phocas, 666 years from the beginning of the
Roman as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom. This is the true Application of the times to
the Stories of the Church; and this is the natural sense of John in the Book of
the Revelation, That the Number of the Name of the Beast is 666.

Now for the truth of this Interpretation, we will prove it, First, From the
whole scope of the text, Rev. 13. Secondly, From the drift of the Spirit, Rev.
17. Thirdly, From the whole Harmony of the Prophecy in the chief and
remarkable Circumstances. Lastly, From the scope of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
And of these in their Order.

CHAP. VIII. The Truth of the Interpretation is proved, from the remarkable
Circumstances of the Text it self, Revel. 13. 16, 17, 18.
THere be many excellent and precious Truths in the general, which we cannot
always avouch, That the Spirit does intend them in such or such a particular
Scripture. Now that this may appear to be a right Interpretation, we will
compare it with every Circumstance in the Text. These are the words that
follow: And he causes all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond,
to Receive a Mark in their right hand, and in their forehead; and that no man
might buy or sell, save he that had the Mark, or the Name of the Beast, or the
Number of the Name. Here is Wisdom; Let him that has Understanding ^ount the
Number of the Beast, for it is the Number of a Man, and his Number is six
hundred threescore and six. In these words we are to Note Four Particulars. 1.
The matter of the Law which the Beast does impose; he causes all men to
receive a Mark in their right Hand, and in their Forehead; and that they have
the Name of the Beast, and the Number of it. 2. The maker of the Law: soil. The
Beast with Two Horns. He causes men to receive the Mark by his coercive power.
3. The Persons on whom he does impose the Law. He causes all both small and
great, bond and free, rich and poor, to receive a Mark. For though there is
great difference in civil Relations between poor-men and rich, bondmen and
free; yet in this matter none are exempted. All must receive the Mark, one as
well as the other: there is no difference of Condition. 4. The Penalty
inflicted on him that will not submit to the Law; He must have no civil
Commerce with men; he must not buy nor sell, that has not these Three Things:
First, The Mark; Secondly, The Name; Thirdly, The Number of the Name.

Now, that men might rightly conceive what is meant by these things, the same
Spirit does exhort them to Calculate the Number, the Point that we are now upon.

For the Calculation of the Number, these Four Particulars also ought to be
Observed: First, The Person exhorted, who it is that must make the Discovery.
And this is every such one as has a mind given him of God more accurately to
search into the meaning of the Prophecies. The matter is not easio to be
understood at the first sight; there must be some Wisdom used to the Discovery
thereof. Secondly, The manner: It must be by the way of Reckoning, or
Numbering. Let him that has Wisdom reckon the Number of the Beast. Thirdly,
The Rule and Method of Account. There is some way of Reckoning, called, The
Number of a Man; by and through which, the Calculation is to be made. Fourthly,
The particular Number it self: and in this Method or way of Account, it is 666.

These are the Natural distributions of the words of the text. Now according to
this Pattern or Platform, let us proceed to show the truth of our
Interpretation, and what apt coherence it has with the Circumstances, and with
the Natural scope of the text.

To begin therefore with the matter of the Law: It is expressly said, That the
Beast did cause all to receive a Mark, to have the Name, and the Number of the
Name. For the Mark, we are not to take it for a material Character, but it is
the public Profession of the Faith of a Roman Catholic, by and through which
he does publicly acknowledge his subjection and Allegiance to the Universal
Headship of the Bishop of Rome. For, as in the words immediately following,
when John saw the Lamb stand upon Mount Sion, and with him 144000, having their
Father's Name written in their Forehead, We do not take the Name of the Father
written in the Forehead for a literal Character, but for the visibility of
their Profession that yield subjection to the Commands of God the Father as
their Sovereign Lord: So on the other side, The followers of the Beast, the
Mark in their Forehead, and in their right hand, is not a visible brand or
print-mark consisting of Letters and syllables; but it shows the visibility
of their Profession that do own the Bishop of Rome's Universal Headship over
all Churches, and that they are in Conscience bound to be subject to his Laws,
as to another Christ. Paraeus upon the place speaks to the same effect: Unde
secundo liquet, cum Bestia Antichristiana sit Papa Romanus, exuviis Romani
Imperii and tunica Christi indutus, Characterem Bestiae esse Professionem
Papistici cultus, sicut supra Character Christi non fuit nota materialis, sed
professio Christiani cultus.

But that in this matter we may not altogether depend upon Authority, we will
prove by many Arguments that the public Profession of the Catholicism or
Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome is the Mark in the Forehead and in the
right Hand. First, This agrees omni, to every Subject in the Beast's Kingdom.
He causes all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive
a Mark. And such a Mark is the Profession of the Faith of a Roman Catholic.
And though all are not Cardinals, all are not Archbishops, all are not Bishops;
yet all are Roman Catholics: all agree in this, To profess the Universal
Headship of the Bishop of Rome. This is Nota maxim communis. Secondly, The
Mark agrees Soli, only to such a one as is a Subject of the Beast's Kingdom.
For as Princes have Marks and Cognizances to distinguish their Servants and
Subjects: So the Beast has a peculiar Character, to discern between those that
are his, and those that are none of his. Now, if you apply this to the
Profession of a Roman Catholic, all that whole Society and Body of men, as
they are one among themselves in their public Profession: So in this they are
distinguished from all other kinds of men in the whole world. Here is nota
maxim propria. Thirdly, The Mark agrees to the Subjects of the Beast's
Kingdom at all times. For not only at the first beginning of the spiritual
Monarchy, he caused every man to receive a Mark, but in all the times of his
Kingdom he did impose this Law upon his Subjects. And therefore we read in the
latter end of his Dominion, That the first Vial was poured out upon them that
had the Mark of the Beast, and worshipped his Image, chap. 16. verse. 2. And
those Souls that lived again to Reign with Christ 1000 years, were such as were
beheaded in all the times of the Beast's Kingdom, because they had not
worshipped the Image, nor received the Mark. The receiving of the Mark in the
Forehead it must be semper, in all the times of the Beast's Kingdom. Now, such
a Mark is the Profession of a Roman Catholic. This has been received in all
times. There are some things received by that Society of men, which are not
much more ancient than the Council of Trent, which were not established de
fide, till that time. And though in the days of Queen Mary, the Critical
Question was, What say you to the Sacrament of the Altar? Yet it is well known,
That Transubstantiation has been introduced in the latter times. But now it is
not so with the Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome: this has been in
hatching in all Ages almost down from the times of the Apostles, till in the
666th year from the beginning of the Roman as the Fourth Metal-Kingdom, it
began publicly to be established under the Emperor Phocas. And here was the
true beginning of the Name or Universal Headship of the Beast, and of the Mark
of the Name. Fourthly, The Mark in the Forehead and in the right Hand, is a
convertible and reciprocal Note, to distinguish the Subjects of the Beast's
Kingdom from other men; and such a convertible Note is the public Profession
of a Roman Catholic. And therefore many of their chief Writers do lay down
Three Notes to prove a true Church by: Verae fidei Professione; by the
Profession of the true Faith: Sacramentorum Communione; by participating of the
Sacraments: Pontifici Romano tanquam legitimo Pastori subjectione; by
subjection to the Bishop of Rome as to their lawful Pastor. Fifthly, The Mark
in the Forehead and the right Hand, must be such a thing as is in open view,
and in common use: for so do these figurative Expressions import. It is not
said, That he causes all to receive a Mark in their Arm, or Breast, or Foot,
or Leg, or any other Member of the Body: but in the Forehead, which is in open
view; and in the right Hand, as being that part of the Body which is of most
common use. Now, what is there among that Society of men, which is of more
common use and public view, than the Profession of a Roman Catholic?
Experience does plainly show, That none can buy, nor sell, nor hold Land and
Possessions, but such a one as does acknowledge this Universal Headship.
Sixthly, The Mark in the Forehead and in the right Hand is in express and
significant terms called (...), the Mark of his Name. They have no rest day nor
night that worship the Beast, and his Image, and receive the Mark of his Name,
chap. 14. verse. 11. Now, if you apply this to the Profession of a Roman
Catholic, all things will agree. For, what is a Roman Catholic, but such a
one as does make it the chief and main Article of his Faith, to acknowledge the
Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome, and to subject his Conscience to the
Laws made by that Authority? And this we have already proved, in the Third
Chapter of this Treatise, to be no other but the Name of the Beast. For if
there were no such thing as the Universal Headship, Sovereign Power, and
Supreme Dominion of the Bishop of Rome, what would become of the Faith and
Profession of a Roman Catholic? The Name or Universal Headship is that which
gives foundation to the Mark or Profession a priori: and the Mark or
Profession is that which declares the Name or Universal Headship a posteriori.
And therefore in significant terms it is called the Mark of the Name.
Seventhly, The Mark in the Forehead and in the right Hand is that which the
Subjects of the Beast's Kingdom do assume to themselves as a matter of the
greatest Honor and Dignity. It is not a brand or Nickname put upon them by
their Enemies, but that which themselves do voluntarily profess, as may be seen
in the whole Book of the Revelation. Now such a Name is the Profession of a
Roman Catholic. The Roman Church comprehends all those Nations, Languages,
and People, that agree in the same Unity of the Faith under the Pope the Head.
And every Member of this Church, of what sort soever, makes this as the
principal Badge of his Profession, to adhere to the Bishop of Rome, as to the
visible Head of the Church. Eighthly, The Mark in the right Hand and in the
Forehead must be so expounded, That in receiving of this, men must be guilty of
great sin against Christ, and so consequently liable to most grievous
Judgments, except they repent. And therefore it is expressed, That such shall
be tormented day and night that worship the Beast, and receive his Mark. Surely
then that act of receiving the Mark of the Beast must needs be a grievous sin,
because the Lord Christ does threaten it with so heavy a Judgment. Now if you
take the Profession of the Faith of a Roman Catholic as he professes his
subjection to the Bishop of Rome, this is the greatest derogation that can be
to Christ, to supplant him in his Universal Headship. For it is his peculiar
and incommunicable Privilege, to be the only Head of the Church, his Mystical
Body. Therefore, whosoever he is that does ascribe this to himself, or to any
other, does sin against the Kingly. Office of Christ, and does what in him
lies, to dethrone, and put Christ from his sovereign Dignity. A Wife may be
guilty of many Offenses against her Husband; but that is one of the most
capital, when she does take another in his room: for that is, in a sense, To
break the bond, and to cast him off from being her Husband, when she does give
her self to another man. A Roman Catholic then when he does profess his
Allegiance to the Bishop of Rome, as to the visible Head of the Church, this
public Profession of his is Rebellion, and high Treason against the Lord
Christ, the true Head of the Church; this does supplant him of his Kingly Power
and Dignity: and therefore he does threaten this sin with such grievous
Judgments. Those words therefore that are added as an Epiphonema in the end of
the Revelation, Whosoever shall add to the words of this Book, God will add
to him the Plagues that are written in this Book. And if any man shall take
away from the words of the Book of this Prophecy, God will take away his part
out of the Book of Life, and out of the Holy City, and from the things which
are written in this Book, chap. 22. verse. 18. 19. Interpreters do usually apply
this place to those that bring in Traditions; but I think that here is a more
special sense intended, suitable to the nature of the Book: for the principal
scope of the Book of the Revelation, is to speak of the Kingly Office of
Christ; and therefore they that set up another Head of the Church, they do add
to the words of the Prophecy of this Book, and God will add to them the
Plagues that are written in the Book. So they that take away from the Kingly
Office of Christ, they do in a more special sense take away from the words of
the Prophecy of this Book. And therefore God will take away their part out of
the New Jerusalem, and from the things that are contained in the Book. If these
things are so, I cannot but admire at Hugo Grotius, a man of great Learning in
these last times, who in his Tract de Antichristo, does speak very favorably
of the Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome. But, saving the great worth
and Learning of such an Author, here is the very formality of Antichristianism,
for which which men shall be liable to very great Judgments, unless they do
repent. And though they do distinguish betwixt Two kinds of Heads; that Head
which is Supreme, and that which is Ministerial: it is too too well known, if
we go to Practice, That the Bishop of Rome has not assumed a Ministerial
Headship to himself: nay, indeed and in truth, he has made the Headship of
Christ nothing at all. Ninthly, The Mark in the Forehead and in the right Hand,
ought to be so expounded, that therein must appear the principal Cause of the
sufferings of the Martyrs. For after that the Beast was destroyed, John saw in
the Vision the Souls of them that were beheaded for the Word God, and for the
Testimony of Jesus, that had not worshipped the Beast, nor received his Mark,
Chap. 20. 3, 4. The special Cause of the sufferings of the Martyrs, must be for
the refusal of these things. If we transfer this to Experience, we shall find,
That great Multitudes of Men and Women have been put to death in all the times
of the Beast's Kingdom, because they would not yield Obedience to the Laws,
Ceremonies, Traditions, and Superstitious Observations, imposed upon them by
the Authority of the Bishop of Rome, as Universal Head of the Church. They were
slain, because they held the Word of God, and the Testimony of Jesus Christ;
because they took the Lord Christ alone for the true Head of the Church, and
would live only in subjection to his Laws.

Now then, to gather up all the aforementioned particulars into one sum; it is
clear, That the Profession of a Roman Catholic, in the visibility thereof, is
the Mark of the Beast in the Forehead, and in the right Hand; and all
Circumstances do wonderfully agree.

But let us now come to give some special instance for this out of the Old
Testament. And here, if we go to the times of Antiochus Epiphanes, we shall
find a clear instance of the Character or Mark of the Beast in the times of
the Grecian Antichrist. For there is mention made of one Jason, when he had
bought the High Priesthood for Money, and did assign 150 Talents more, if he
might have license to set up a place for Exercise, and for the training up of
Youth in the Fashions of the Heathen; and to write them of Jerusalem, by the
Name of Antiochians. Which, when the King had granted, and he had gotten the
Rule into his hand, it is expressly said of this Jason, (...). Our English has
it, He forthwith brought his own Nation to the Greekish Fashion. Iunius, and
Montanus, and the Lexicographer Scapula, have it, Ad Graecum Ritum. But I think
the words may better be translated, He carried over his own Countrymen to the
Greek Character, 2 Macc. 4. 9, 10.

For the more close and perfect Application of this Truth, we will note these
four Particulars: 1. What is the Hellenick or Grecian Character. 2. Who are
the Persons that do receive it. 3. The Time when. 4. The Power and Authority
which did compel them to receive it.

For the first, A Character is nothing else but a Note of Distinction, by and
through which one sort of People are distinguished from another: as the
Ephraimites were distinguished from the Gileadites, by the Word Shiboleth; so
one Nation is distinguished from another by their Language, Attire, and other
Customs. But in this case we have not to do with the Marks of civil
distinction; and therefore when it is said, That Jason carried over his own
Countrymen to the Hellenick Character, this is meant of such a way of worship,
as was the public Profession among the profane Graecians in matters of
Religion. In respect whereof, that public Profession was, determinatus modus
vivendi, (as the Schoolmen speak) containing that manner and way of living
according to the Law of the Antiochians. The like may be said, That the Mark of
the Beast in the Revelation is that whereby they of the Romish Religion are
distinguished from others: for they have a peculiar manner of living according
to the Laws of that Church under the Pope the Head. There is then an exact
Agreement betwixt the Hellenick and the Romish Character; and in both Nations
Men are distinguished by this, as by the Badge of their Profession.

Secondly, For the Persons; who were they that Jason carried over to receive
the Mark of the Beast in the Grecian Tyranny? It is plainly said, That he
carried over (...) his own Countrymen, of the Stock and Lineage of Abraham.
And these things were foretold by Daniel the Prophet many years before, That in
the days of Antiochus Epiphanes, many of his own Countrymen should forsake
the Holy Covenant, Dan. 11. 31, 32. and as he foretold, it came to pass indeed,
as appears in the Book of the Macchabees, and in the Stories of Josephus and
others. Now if we apyly this to the Beast in the Revelation, there is a more
general Defection and Apostacy of the whole Christian world: He causes all to
receive a Mark in their forehead, and in their right hand.

Thirdly, For the time; When was it that Jason carried over his own Countrymen
to the Hellenick Character, to the public Profession of Religion used by the
Grecians in the Sele^cian State? It was in the times of Antiochus the Grecian
Antichrist. If therefore we read in the Book of the Revelation, That the Beast
did cause all to receive a Mark in their forehead and in their right hand; this
was no other but that which was done before, in the times of Antiochus the
Grecian Antichrist; who is set forth as a Type and a Figure of that great
Antichrist who should come in the last times.

Fourthly, For the power by and through which Jason should carry over his own
Countrymen to the Hellenick Character, or to that way of Profession: It was
then, when he had gotten the Rule into his hands. Some sins do increase by
Propagation, as Original sin; some, by Ensample, as many evil Customs amongst
us: But here is mention made of the increase and prevailing of a sin by
Imperial Edict, by the Countenance, Power and Authority of them that have the
Sovereignty in their hands. The like may be said of the Beast in the
Revelation; all did receive the Mark in their forehead and in their right hand:
and if you look to the reason, it was a sin of Monarchy or Imperial power. The
Beast, as a Potentate, did cause all to receive a Mark in their forehead and in
their right hand.

By the Hellenick Character used in the times of the Grecian Tyranny, we may
know what is the Mark of the Beast so often mentioned in the Revelation; and by
the one, we may find out the meaning of the other.

I have stayed the longer on this Point, because it is the principal matter in
the Text; and the right discovery of this, will guide us in the clearing of
other things. For if we do rightly conceive what is meant by the Mark of the
Name, we may come to demonstrate the Name it self what it is. And when the Name
it self is truly and Apocalyptically defined, we may be the better prepared for
the discovery of the Number. All these do mutually depend each upon other. And
therefore for the subject matter of the Law of the Beast, in the several
branches thereof, we do thus determine, in these three Particulars. First, The
Mark that he causes all to receive in their forehead and in their right hand,
is nothing else but the visibility of their Profession, that do acknowledge him
as Head of the Church: And this he compels men of all sorts to submit and to
yield obedience unto. Secondly, For the Name of the Beast, which is also a part
of that Law which he did impose upon his Subjects, That none might buy nor
sell, but they that have the Name of the Beast. This Name, I have formerly
proved, in the third Chapter of this Treatise, That it is not the word
Lateinos, nor any other Grammatical Name; but the Name is the Universal
Headship it self. The matter comes to this Issue, That none must buy nor sell,
nor have civil commerce within the Dominions of the Beast, but those only who
will acknowledge his Name or Headship. Thirdly, For the Number of the Name, the
third part or branch of the Law imposed upon the Subjects of that Kingdom, that
none must buy nor sell but they that had the Number of the Name; I have showed
in part, and I shall more fully declare afterward, That the Number is not made
out of the Numeral letters of the name Lateinos, or out of any other
Grammatical Name whatsoever: but it is the Number of time when that Name or
Headship had its first visible and remarkable Institution: and therefore it is
called, The Number of the Name. The matter then must come to this Issue, That
none must buy nor sell, but he that does own the Universal Headship as it was
established and set up in the first Foundation and Institution of that
spiritual Monarchy.

Object. You perhaps will allege, That the words are plain, That none must
buy nor sell, but he that has the Number of the Name: Therefore if the Number
of the Name be the Number of time when this Name or Universal Headship began,
according to this Exposition, he must not buy nor sell, who has not the Number
of time when this Universal Headship began.

Sol. We must not take the words further then they naturally intend: And
therefore this is the meaning of the Text, That he must not buy nor sell, who
does not receive the Catholicism, or Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome,
as it was Enacted in the first Institution of that Spiritual Monarchy. And if
we look attentively to the words, we shall find, that there is some difference
to be made betwixt the Mark of the Name, and the Number. For when the Spirit
speaks of the Mark in the forehead and in the right hand, and of the Name in
relation to the Mark, he speaks of such a thing as is apparent to the sight
of every man. The Beast's Subjects, in their usual buying and selling, may
discern who have the Mark in the forehead, and who have not. But now for the
Number of the Name, and for the Name in reference to the Number, it is nowhere
said, that this is in the forehead or in the right hand: for it is of a more
secret and occult nature. Let him that has wisdom count the Number of the
Beast. This shows plainly, that the Number is to be found out by some
subtilty of observation; and, it is not to be discerned in the ordinary use of
buying and selling.

Object. You will say, Why are all these joined together, that none must buy
nor sell, but he that has the Mark of the Beast, the Name, and the Number of
the N^me?

Sol. They are all joined together, by reason of their affinity or relation
that the one has to the other: and therefore a man cannot well take upon him
the Profession of a Roman Catholic, which is the Mark of the Name; but he
must also profess the Name or Sovereign power it self: And he cannot profess
the Name or Universal Headship, but he must relate also to the first Foundation
and Institution thereof, in the time when it first began visibly to appear. And
therefore when the Roman Catholics do at this day own the Universal Headship
of the Bishop of Rome, they do not mean it only personally of the Pope now
living, but of the Succession that has continued many hundred years. There
must then be some particular instant of time, where this Institution did begin.
In many great Kingdoms at this day, it is not safe for a man to live among
them, unless he will acknowledge the Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome.
Now I say then, there must be some particular term and instant of time, where
this Universal Headship had its first institution, where we must set the date
thereof. And here I say, it must be in the time of the Emperor Phocas, 666
years from the beginning of the Roman, as the fourth Metal-Kingdom. Thus I have
distinctly showed the matter of the Law which the Beast imposes upon his
Subjects, in the three branches thereof: And though I have departed in some
particulars from the ordinary stream of Interpreters, yet I do agree with many
Protestant Writers in the main sense and substance of the Interpretation. Since
the preaching of Luther, Bullinger was one of the first that did historically
and with Principles expound the Book of Revelation: And so Paraeus speaking of
Expositors of the last times, has these words, Quibus omnibus meo judicio
facem praetulit Henricus Bullingerus, quam fere secuti sunt alii. Prooe^. in
Apocal. Cap. 4. Now this Interpreter does pitch upon the same sense as we do,
as it is manifest in his Commentary upon the Revelation. And so do some other
Interpreters, as Danaeus de Antichristo, etc.

If therefore a Reason be demanded, Why the latter Interpreters have not gone
on in this ancient and true way of Exposition: There are two Reasons, which are
usually given, as we may see in the Commentary of Paraeus upon the Revelation,
and of Downham in his Tract de Antichristo, and of Dr. Mayer in his Expositions
upon the Revelation.

First, they allege, That the Number of the Beast is numerus nominis, the
Number of his Name, and not the Number of the time of his rising.

Sol. If these Interpreters will consider the truth of that which we have
largely disputed; to wit, that the Name of the Beast is no other but his
Universal Headship and Power; by the discovery of this, they will find that
there is no difference between the Number of the Name, and the Number of the
time of the rising of the Beast, when that Name or Universal Headship began. We
read when our Savior was born at Bethleem, that certain wisemen came from
the East to Jerusalem, saying, Where is born the King of the Jews? (...), for
we have seen his Star in the East, Matthew. 2. 1, 2, 3. Here I demand, Why is
this Star called (...), his Star? The reason is plain, Because it did denote
and set forth the time of his birth. So in the like case, the Number of the
Beast may be called (...), the Number of his Name, because it does
characterize, decypher and set forth the time when that Name or Universal
Headship began.

Secondly, whereas they allege, That there are only 606 years to the setting
up of the Name or Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome, under the Emperor
Phocas: I confess this is true, if we make our account by the years of our
Lord. But what warrant have we to proceed in this method? For though the
Christians do generally use this way of computation, yet the general use has
not been so to reckon: For as Martinius an acu^e Grammarian, speaks of the
reading of the Hebrew, so we also may say the same concerning the computation
of the times in the Book of the Revelation; We are not in this to follow the
modern, but the ancient use. These are his words: We ought not to think the
custom of our age to be the rule and direction of speaking Hebrew, but so far
only as it does agree with the custom of the ancient people. Further he
adds, In every Nation there are skilful and learned men in that language, yet
they do not all read after the same manner* The Germans pronounce their words
one way, the French another, the Spaniards and Italians another; and each of
them say they have their proper and peculiar custom. But such a custom is not
to be accounted a lawful argument. Let us hold this therefore for a sound
foundation, both in reading, writing and ^ronouncing Hebrew, Veterem
Haebraeorum usum sequendum esse, The ancient use of the Hebrews is to be
followed. Technol. p. 45. So I may say in the present case, They that take the
Name of the Beast for the Universal Headship, and they that stand upon the
beginning of the Universal Headship (for so Paraeus, Downham, and our best
Interpreters do) at the Emperor Phocas, they must not count the Number of time
by the year of the Lord, or by any such like modern style; but they must have
recourse ad veterem Prophetarum and Apostolorum usum, to the ancient use of the
Prophets and the Apostles in the days of John. And here they may find, that
the Name of the Beast, which is only 606 in the years of the Lord, will be 666
in Daniels Chronology. And that which may be for a confirmation of this truth,
let us but remember what has been formerly proved, to wit, that John in the
Revolation does largely repeat shat which has been more briefly mentioned by
Daniel concerning the Roman or the fourth Metal-Kingdom. Further, we read,
That when the seventh Angel began to sound, it is expressly said, That time
shall be no more, but the mystery of God shall be finished, as he has spoke to
his servants the Prophots, Rev. 10. 6, 7. Here two questions are to be
demanded, First, what did he mean when he says, That time shall be no more?
Secondly, To what Prophets does he refer us, when he says, As he has spoken
to his servants the Prophets? By Time, we are to take it only, with a
restriction, for the time of the sufferings of the Church, under the Tyrannical
Governments of this world, as it is set forth in the type of the four
Metal-Kingdoms: But more specially, in the last and Antichristian state of the
fourth Kingdom. Secondly, for the servants the Prophets, Mr. Mede, Grasserus,
and others, do understand this of the times in the Prophecy of Daniel, which do
reach to the dissolution and destruction of the Antichristian Kingdom. If we
put all this together, we shall find, that the times of the Beasts Kingdom
ought not to be computed by the years of the Lord, but by the ancient and
Prophetical Chronology in the Visions of Daniel. These two Arguments being
answered, Paraeus, Downham, and other Protestant Writers are wholly ours: For
they altogether in a manner in their Treatises and Commentaries do teach, that
the formality of Antichristianism does lie in the Universal Headship; and that
a thing is Antichristian, so far as it does contribute to the Universal
Headship of the Bishop of Rome, to put him in the place of Christ, who is the
only, undoubted, unquestionable Head of the Church, and there is none besides.
And so much concerning the matter of the Law, that the Beast causes these
three things to be received, The Mark, the Name, and the Number of the Name.

Only here is one hard question to be dissolved, in which I find, that
Interpreters are greatly divided, and that is this; Whether the Mark, Name and
Number are so many expressions of one and the same matter, or whether are they
three distinct several matters? Some are of opinion, as Alcasar, that all these
three ought to be coupled together exegetice, by way of explanation: Seeing
that which in this and the former verse is absolutely called the Mark, is
afterward expressly called the Mark of the Beast, Chap. 15. ver. 2. and the Mark
of the Name of the Beast, Chap. 14. ver. 11. Others are of a different
judgment, as Ribera; for they hold, that these things ought to be
distinguished: for they that stand on the glassie Sea, are said in express
terms to overcome the Beast, his Image, Mark, Name, and the Number of his Name,
Chap. 15. ver. 1, 2. Now our answer to this question is this: First, we say,
That the Mark, Name, and the Number of the Name, cannot be affirmed to signify
one and the same thing, seeing they are in many places of the Prophecy
delivered with distinction; and the reason of the distinction is laid down in
sundry Texts. To the second also we answer, That these are not three several
matters, as Ribera, Paraeus, Abbot, and others will have it; as though some of
the Beasts Subjects should have the Mark, others the Name, and a third sort the
Number of the Name. There is no reason that we should put those things asunder,
which in the Prophecy are always joined together.

Therefore to determine the question, we will take a middle way between these
two extremes: We affirm then, That in the general these three do agree in one
matter for the substance, though it be distinguished by three Apocalyptical
considerations. Let us come to that particular place where John saw the Number
of them that stood upon the glassie Sea mingled with fire, who had overcome the
Beast, his Image, Mark, Name, and the Number of his Name, Chap. 15. ver. 2. All
these several expressions set forth one sort of men, that had persevered and
held out for Christ against the Power and Headship of Antichrist in all the
time of that Tribulation. And yet as this matter is one, it is branched into
several Considerations.

First, If you speak of the Papacy as a State or Government afflicting the
Saints, so it is called a Beast, like to one of the Beasts in Daniel. Secondly,
If you speak of the Universal Headship, wherein the form and essence of the
Kingdom does consist, this is the Name of the Beast. Thirdly, If you speak of
that Universal Headship, as a Representative of that Sovereign Majesty that was
formerly lost in Rome Imperial, and now repaired in Rome Papal, this is the
Image of the Beast. Fourthly, If you speak of the public profession of this
Universal Headship in the society of men, this is the Mark of the Beast.
Fifthly, If you speak of the time when this Universal Headship began visibly
and remarkably to appear, this is the Number of the Beast, and more specially
of his Name and Headship. All these are so many distinct Apocalyptical
Considerations, which agree in one main Truth in the general. And thus having
spoken of the Law of the Beast, in the three branches thereof, we will now come
to speak more briefly of the other particulars, because they are more easy to
be understood.

Secondly, For the Lawmakers, the Power by and through which he caused all to
receive the Mark; this is a Spiritual Christ-like efficacy prevailing in the
Consciences of men, to make them subject to his Laws. It is said of the
Monarchy of Nebuchadnezzar, that the most High God did give to him a Kingdom;
And for the Majesty that he gave him, all People, Nations and Languages
trembled, and feared before him: whom he would, he slew; and whom he would, he
kept alive, Chap. 5. ver. 18, 19. So the Beast in the Revelation has the same
transcendent power; he causes all to receive a Mark, whether rich or poor,
bond or free, male or female; he compels all to yield obedience, as they
sometimes did, that were under the power of Nebuchadnezzar. But here is the
difference: The power of Nebuchadnezzar was more external, over the bodies of
men; this is more internal, over their Minds and Consciences, and by
consequence over their bodies also. Secondly, They tha^ were under the
Jurisdiction of Nebuchadnezzar, had they been left to their free choice, they
would have been glad to have enjoyed their liberty: but now for those that
lived in subjection to the Sea of Rome, for the most part, the matter was far
otherwise with them* they would not be free if they might. The Kings of the
Earth divided in Interests, and in many Civil respects, all of them could agree
in this one thing, To give their Power to the Beast, Rev. Chapter 17. They thought
they could not be saved, unless in all Realms there was a Universal subjection
to this Headship, given by Christ himself, as they thought, to Peter and his
Successors. And for the time of the public Institution of this Universal
Headship, there were some preparations and previous workings toward the
setting up of this Power; but there was no public Establishment thereof, till
the time of the Emperor Phocas. Let us hear what Mr. Fox in his Acts and
Monuments speaks concerning this matter, Page 108. Col. 2. But Rome (says
he) would not so soon lose the Supremacy once given, as the giver lost his
life: For ever since from that day, she has holden, defended and maintained
the same still, and yet does to this present day, by all force and policy
possible. And thus much concerning Boniface, whom by the words of Gregory we
may call the Forerunner of Antichrist. For as Gregory brought in the style
Servus Servorum: So this Boniface brought into their heads first, Volumus and
Mandamus, Statuimus and Praecipimus; that is, We Will and Command, We Enjoin
and Charge you. The same is mentioned by Paraens, in his Commentary upon the
Revelation, Chap. 6. ver. 12. From whence I gather, As the Bishops of Rome have
had a Mandatory Power in and over the Church; so this first began in the time
of the Emperor Phocas, in the Decree of the Universal Headship.

Thirdly, Let us consider the persons, who they are that are subject to his
Power. He commands all, both small and great, rich and poor, to receive a
Mark. The greatness of rich men cannot procure a toleration; neither can the
meanness of poor men exempt them by their poverty. Bullinger upon the place
speaks very pithily: We see (says he) that Emperors, Kings, Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Barons, Realms, Countries, Cities, Patriarchs, Archbishops,
Bishops, Prelates, Doctors, Clerks and Lay men, obey him. And also men of the
greatest Power, Riches, Wisdom, together with the poor people. There is no
such Kingdom, and so diversely compact, in the whole world, no not among the
Mahometans: And all these are willingly subject to the Seat; yea, they have
persuaded themselves, that they cannot well live, and that they cannot be
saved, unless they be subject to the Sea of Rome. So far Bullinger. From hence
we gather, that the event does fully answer the Prophecy; for we see by
experience, how all the world has worshipped the Beast, and received his Mark.
And whereas some, to illude this truth, have pleaded, that the Popish Churches
in France do not own the Pope for Head of the Church: We will easily grant,
that they may not be so strictly obliged to the Popes Chair in some temporal
respects; yet it is too plain, that his Authority is set up in their
Consciences, and that they are subject to his Laws.

Fourthly, Let us consider the punishment to be inflicted upon those that have
not the Mark in the Forehead, and in the right hand; they are forbidden to buy
or sell. Mr. Mede does take this for Excommunication, or casting out of
Church Fellowship. But rather the words signify, a cutting off from all civil
commerce among men. Yea, if we compare the Scriptures, we shall find that it
was present death for any man to refuse to have the Mark in the forehead, and
in the right hand. Therefore when John saw the Souls of those that were
beheaded for the Word of God, and the testimony of Jesus, that had not
worshipped the Image, nor received the Mark, Chap. 20. ver. 4. he does plainly
show, that the beheading was for the Non-worship of the Beast, and for the not
receiving of the Mark. We may conclude then, when men are exempted from bu^ing
and selling, this is a Synecdoche: By this one, all other kinds of punishment
whatsoever are understood. And thus we have seen the matter of the Law, the
Lawmakers, the persons subject to the Law, and the penalty upon all such as
shall refuse subjection. Let us now come to the several particulars which
concern the right calculation of the Number.

First, For the Person, who it is that must make the discovery: It is such a
one as has wisdom, (...) etc. Here is wisdom, let him that has
understanding count the Number of the Beast, etc. The discovery then must be by
understanding. But here we are not to conceive such a kind of wisdom as lies
merely in Mathematical subtilties: For how can it be imagined, that the holy
Spirit (and that under the highest penalties) should give such serious warning
to the Church, to beware of receiving the Mark of the Beast, the Name, and the
Number of the Name, and these things be only discoverable to them that have
skill in the Mathematics? You will say, What wisdom is here intended? I
answer, such a skill and dexterity only, by which men are able to render the
mystical and figurative expressions of the Prophecy in their true natural sense
and construction. The like expression is used, Rev. 17. 9. Here is the mind
that has wisdom: the seven Heads are seven Mountains where the woman sits.
By wisdom, he does here mean a sagacity and skill to expound the Parables,
and mystical expressions of the Prophecy in their bare sense and signification.
And so in the present case, when he speaks of the Name and Universal Headship
of the Beast, and the Number of the Name, it is not to be doubted, but that he
points to some method of Account famously known in the days of John. And
whereas he does not openly and plainly, but under dark terms, express the
matter, to wit, that it is the Number of a Man, and the Number 666: By this he
does imply, that some kind of wisdom is to be used in the true calculation
and discovery of the Number.

You will say, If there be 666 years to the setting up of the Name, or
Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome, why is not this expressed in plain
and significant terms?

By the like manner of reasoning, you may argue, Why does the Spirit, through
the whole body of the Prophecy, carry on the description of the state of the
Church in a figurative, mystical, and typical way of expression? He might (if
he had so pleased) have said in so many syllables, that the seven Heads of the
Beast, are so many Mountains of the City of Rome, and so many Heads of Roman
Government: But he does rather use a dark circumlocution, of a woman sitting
upon a Beast with seven Heads. He does use such an hidden way of expressing
these things in Emblems and Figures, that pious men might bestow the more
diligence in searching the Stories of the Church. Paraeus in his Commentary
upon the R^velatun, Chap. 17. v. 7. speaks to the same purpose: Piis vero
interpretatione aenigmatic a aurem ve^icare voluit spiritus, ut subinde in
suorum temporum eventus atque Historias invigilar^nt. And if we come to
example, we shall find, That the ^even Trumpets are delivered in a very dark
and mystical manner: For after that the Angel had offered much incense, with
the Prayers of all Saints, upon the Golden Altar before the Throne, then the
seven Angels began to sound. When the first Angel sounded, there followed Hail,
and Fire mingled with Blood, Chap. 8. ver. 7. When the second Angel sounded, a
Mountain burning with fire was cast into the Sea, ver. 8. And when the third
Angel sounded, a great Star fell from Heaven into the Rivers, and Fountains;
and the Name of the Star is Wormwood, ver. 10, 11. Here it is plain, That by
these Emblems and Figures, so many Judgments of God, in a succession, are said
to fall upon the world, for their persecuting of the Saints. For after the
Prayers of all Saints were offered up on the Golden Altar upon the Throne, then
the seventh Angel began to sound. As in the like case, when Eliah fled to
Horeb, he made intercession against Israel, saying, I have been very jealous
for the Lord God of Hosts: for the children of Israel have forsaken thy
Covenant, thrown down thine Altars, and killed thy Prophets; and I am left
alone, and they seek my life, to take it away. In answer to this Prayer, the
Lord bade him go out, and stand upon the Mount, 1 Kings 19. 11, 12, 13. And as
he stood, first the Lord passed by, and a great and a strong Wind rent the
Mountain; and after the Wind, there was an Earthquake* and after the
Earthquake, a Fire. Here if we would inquire after the signification of these
three Emblems (for we cannot otherwise think, but that something is specially
intended in Visions of this nature) the Lords own interpretation will show the
meaning of this, in the words that follow: He that escapes the sword of
Hazael, shall Ie^u s^ay; and he that escapes the sword of Ie^u, shall El^shah
s^ay. Here then are three Judgments in a succession, the Wind, the Earthquake,
and the Fire. And for the still small voice that is expressed in these words, I
have reserved to my self seven thousand men that have not bowed the knee to
Baal, ver. 18. Now if you go to the seven Trumpets, it is clear, That they are
so many Judgments of God, that come one after another upon the world, for
their Idolatry, and for their killing of the Saints. But who shall assure us,
what is certainly meant by each Trumpet? What is meant by the Hail mingled with
fire; by the Mountain burning with fire? Who shall assure us, what is meant by
these Types, seeing the Spirit does not set down his meaning, as he does in the
Vision represented to Elias? We should in this case have recourse to the Body
of the Stories of the Church: For I am persuaded, That the Lord does on set
purpose deliver these things more Aenigmatically and Figuratively, that we
should attentively consider the way of his dealing, in judging the World, and
in delivering his Church. O how far then do they go out of the true way, who
are Enemies against all secular Learning, in the profitable and sober use
thereof! God does of set purpose carry on the whole Prophecy so darkly, because
we should turn every way for the discovery of the truth. And this is the
reason, wherefore he does speak so mystically concerning the Name of the Beast,
the Number of a Man, and the Number 666. Further also, we are to consider, That
seeing the Kingdom of the Beast was to be set up by deceiving of the Nations,
it was not needful to speak every Circumstance plainly, to the understanding of
men. How should the Beast have deceived the world, if his deceits and pious
frauds, if the time of his Kingdom, and every particular should have been
fully discovered? There is then a peculiar sort of people, to whom the Lord
has given a special desire to look into the things contained in this Book of
the Revelation; and they have in some measure an ability (though others are
dark) to understand the meaning of the Spirit in his deep and mystical
expressions. In the several Epistles to the seven Churches in Asia, this is
added in the close of all, He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit
says to the Churches. There are many excellent things that he speaks to the
Churches, in the way of Reproof, in the way of Advice, and in the way of
Comfort; yet only he that has an ear to hear, will understand the meaning of
his words. And so in the present case, when it is said, Here is wisdom: let
him that has understanding count the Number of the Beast. This implies, That
this matter must be found out by some subtilty of observation. The person that
does inquire, must be such a one as has wisdom.

Secondly, For the manner of discovery, it must be by calculation of the
Number; and therefore it is said, (...), Let him count the Number of the Beast.
The word (...), signifies such a kind of Numbering as is by Counters or
Stones, of (...), Lapillus, Calculus. But in the ordinary and common use, it
does promiscuously note any kind of reckoning. And therefore it is said
concerning the man that went about to build a Tower, (...), he counts or
reckons the cost, Luke 14. 28. And so in the present case, there is a
computation or way of account to find out the mystery of the Number: But here
is the difference betwixt Interpreters; some go to the extraction of the root,
some to the numeral Letters of the name Lateinos: But of these we have spoken
in part already, and we shall further show the vanity of this way in the
process of the Discourse. We will therefore come positively and plainly to set
down the meaning of the Spirit: And we shall find, That there is nothing more
familiar in the Predictions of Prophetical Scriptures, then for the Spirit to
foretell remarkable occurrences, by a definite number of years to every such
occurrence. Of many Examples that may be given, take these few. When the Lord
would give Noah warning concerning the Flood, he told him, That such a Number
of years should fulfill their course, and then the Flood should come: My Spirit
shall not always str^ve with man; yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty
years, Genesis 6. 3. So when he made a Promise to Abraham, that he would give to
his Posterity the Land of Canaan for an Inheritance, he told him, That 400
years should run complete, to the performance of the Promise: Thy seed shall be
a stranger in a land that is not theirs; and shall serve them, and they shall
afflict them four hundred years, and afterward they shall come out with great
substance, Genesis 15. 13, 14 15. Further, when the people of the Jews were
carried captive into Babylon, in the times of Ie^kims Captivity; to these the
Prophet Jeremy did send a Consolatory Letter, in which he did declare two
things of eminent note; Their remarkable deliverance, and the overthrow of the
Babylonian Empire: Yet withal ^e did declare, That seventy years must first be
fulfilled and accomplished at Babylon, before their deliverance wi^ come: And
these Nations shall serve the King of Babylon seventy years; and when seventy
years are accomplished, then will I visit the King of Babylon, Jer. 25. ver.
11, 12. And again, Thus says the Lord, After seventy years be accomplished at
Babylon, I will visit you, and perform my good word toward you, in causing you
to return unto this place, Jer. 29. 10, 11. Last of all, when Daniel himself
was m^sing on the truth of the Promise of God, and gave himself to understand
the Times, and to pray in faith for the accomplishment of the Promises, he had
a further discovery of the seventy weeks, that should lead him to the times of
the Messiah, to his Passion, to the Preaching of the Gospel among all Nations,
and to the destruction of Jerusalem. Now to the performance of these things, it
was showed to him, That there must be seventy Sevens, or seventy weeks of
years, or 490 years in all, to begin and commence from the building of the
second Temple: which line of years if he followed, it would bring him to that
time when all these things should be fulfilled. By these Examples it is
manifest, That it is a frequent thing in Prophetical Scriptures, to foretell
future occurrences, and to show the Number of years that shall pass before the
event. If this be so, we have a rational ground to build upon, when we make 666
the Number of years, to the setting up of the Name or Universal Headship of the
Bishop of Rome.

But for the further clearing of the truth, That the study and the calculation
of the Prophetical years is said to be wisdom, we can make this appear by some
special Examples out of Scripture.

We read in the the Prophecy of Daniel, In the first year of Darius the son of
Ahashuerosh, of the seed of the Medes, which was made King over the Realm of
the Caldeans, in the first year of his reign, I Daniel understood by books, the
Number of the years, whereof the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the Prophet,
that he would accomplish seventy years in the desolations of Jerusalem, Dan. 9.
1, 2, 3. Concerning Darius the Mede, there is a great Controversy among
Chronologers, whether he came to the Kingdom of the Caldeans by Conquest, or
by free Election. But let that point be what it will be, all do agree in it,
That Darius the Mede reigned immediately before Cyrus the Persian. And it is as
clear also by the stories of the times, That the first year of Darius the Mede,
was upon the very dawning of the Churches deliverance. In this year then Daniel
gave himself to study by books, the Number of years that the Lord would
accomplish in the Churches desolations. In him then, by the way, let us note,
That they who have the greatest fullness of Spirit, are chiefly employed in the
meditation of the Scriptures: And they who are conversant in the Prophetical
Scriptures, are many times helped out in the knowledge of these things, by the
Sacred and the Civil Stories. But now let us take notice of the process and
order of his meditations. First, he did lay it as a general ground, That
seventy years must be expired, before deliverance will come: But now, says he,
the seventy years of the desolations of Jerusalem begin almost to be fulfilled;
Therefore in these times we are almost come to the promised deliverance. And
thereupon he did pray with great faith in the Promises of God, as appears by
the scope of the Chapter. Here now in this Syllogism Daniel did (...), by two
known Numbers he did find out a third unknown: His major Proposition was the
Prophecy of Jeremy; his Assumption was his own experience, and the Chaldee
Registers of the Time: and his Conclusion was the approach of the delivery of
the Church: And the whole operation in computing the times was by wisdom. For
these are the words of the Text, I Daniel (...) understood by books. Piscator
has it, Consideravi in libris: Iunius, Fui considerans ex libris. All comes
to one sense, That whether he did consider these times in books, or by books,
or out of books, he laid the times together, to wit, the times in the Prophecy
of Jeremy, and the times that had past in the Churches experience, and
accordingly did argue the approach of the deliverance that should come. This
act of his was by wisdom or understanding, for so the word does signify; the
inward contriving or plotting of any thing in the mind, as Artificers do cast
the frame of a building: Thus Kirkerus does render the meaning of the word in
his Concordance. Iunius upon the place does very significantly express the
meaning of the word, Fuit intelligens ex libris Prophetiarum Hieromiae quibus
annorum numerus fuit praefinitus, tum Historiis temporum quae a deportationis
initio effluxerant. In Daniel ^hen we have an example of computing the times,
and of his wisdom in numbering the seventy years of Jeremy before the event.
And this Daniel did do, not by extraordinary revelation, but as an ordinary
believer might do by search.

Let us now go to another Instance. When the Disciples came privately to our
Savior upon Mount Olivet, they asked him concerning the time of the
destruction of Jerusalem: and in order to their question, he made them this
answer, When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation stand in the
holy place: let him that reads, understand, Mat. 24. 15. Here I demand, What
is meant by him that reads? Secondly, what is meant by the book that he must
read? By him that reads, is meant, any one to whom God has given a mind to
search and to look into the meaning of the Scripture: And for the Book, that
must needs be the Prophecy of Daniel, concerning the seventy weeks, Dan. 9. And
whereas it is said, Let him that reads, understand; the words must go in this
tenor, Let him that reads, know and understand how many years the 70 weeks of
Daniel must contain, and where they must begin: And from the knowledge of these
two, if he reckon well, he shall come to that time where they shall make an
end, and that will be the time of the destruction of Jerusalem. And so we have
an answer to the Disciples question. But yet further, concerning the time when
the period of the seventy weeks are to be studied, and that is, when you see
the abomination of desolation standing in the holy place. In that particular
instant it is said, Then let him that reads, understand. As for the standing
of the abomination of desolation in the most holy place, our Savior does
expound his meaning more plainly in another Evangelist: When ye shall see
Jerusalem compassed about with Armies, then know that the desolation thereof is
nigh, Luke 21. 20. Here some man may object, It is not always a necessary
truth, that when a City is compassed with Armies, therefore it shall be taken;
and when it is taken, it is not infallible that it shall be brought to utter
desolation: What does our Savior then mean by this speech? His meaning is not,
that from such weak principles men should draw a Conclusion of that weight; but
this is the drift of his speech, When ye shall see Jerusalem compassed about
with Armies, then let him that reads, fall upon the calculation of the times
in the Prophecy of Daniel: Let him consider where they begin, how long they
shall continue, and where they make an end: and then by the joint consideration
of all these together, they shall find they be not far from the destruction of
Jerusalem, and that the years of the patience of God are run out. And yet
further, our Savior would not have men calculate the times to satisfy their
curiosity, but merely for use and practice, and better information. He says,
Let him that reads, understand. But to what end? These words are immediately
added, ver. 16. Then let them which are in Judea, flee to the Mountains, etc.
Now the understanding of the Prophetical times is no common matter, but there
must be much study and meditation used, to find out the meaning of the Spirit.
The words of the Text are most emphatical, (...), Let him that reads, ponder
and consider the times, by some subtilty of observation.

Now then to apply all this to the present Text, and so we have many examples
out of Scripture, to warrant us. That the Number 666 may be such a Number of
years to the setting up of the Name or Universal Headship of the Bishop of
Rome. And for the computation of these years before the event, this in the
Scripture Language is called by the name of Wisdom. Having then such a
multitude of Examples out of the Old Testament, where pious men have calculated
the Prophetical years before the accomplishment; why by the like reason may we
not conceive, That John spoke to the people in his own times, to the ages
immediately following, but most specially to those who should live upon the
borders of Antichrists rising, that they should calculate 666 years to the
beginning of his Kingdom? The coming of Christ in the flesh, and the glory that
should follow, was revealed to the ancient Prophets, though under dark and
figurative expressions. Now mark what the Apostle S. Peter speaks of the
practice of those wonderful men: Of which salvation the Prophets have inquired,
and searched diligently; searching into what manner of time the Spirit did
point to, when he spoke of the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should
follow, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12. The times of the ancient Church were divided into
many periods. Now it was showed them (though darkly) in what period of time
Christ should come: And accordingly they who had his Spirit in them, made no
spare to search when that time should be. In like manner, the times of the New
Testament are divided into many regions or parts; and it was revealed to the
Apostles in mystical terms, how Antichrist should come, in what particular
period of time he should come, and what should be the signs of his coming. Now
seeing these things are revealed in the Prophecies of the New Testament (as I
think none can well deny) was it not the duty of men immediately after the
Apostles time, and so downward, to calculate the Times. And for the actual
rising of the Kingdom of Antichrist, there is no one place does speak more of
his pedigree and genealogy, then the Text we now are upon. If this be so, it
will quickly appear, of what nature the Number 666 is, seeing it is put in the
close of the Chapter. There is then the greatest probability as can be
supposed, that this must be the Number of years to the first Institution and
Foundation of that Spiritual Monarchy, and the person who has wisdom is to
make up the account. Further, if we take 666 for the Number of time, and
particularly for the Number of years, this will agree with the word (...)* for
in the known and most familiar use, that art which teaches us to number
Periods, Cycles, and greater Revolutions of years, is called (...), the art of
Computation. But if all this will not give satisfaction, if any shall still
say, That this may be the sense, yet it does not prove that it must be so. For
the further clearing of the matter, we will go to the third Circumstance, to
the Method or the Rule which we must number by. And here we shall find, That
we have not only typical proof, but true Apocalyptical and demonstrative
grounds to build upon, if we compare the words of Scripture with our own
experience.

Thirdly, the method by which we are to account, is, by the Numbers of the four
Metal-Kingdoms in Daniels Image. So then, if we account from the beginning of
the Roman as the fourth Metal-Kingdom, there will be an exact line of 666
years, to the setting up of the Name or Universal Headship of the Bishop of
Rome under the Emperor Phocas. And here the best Expositors do set the rising
of the two-horned Beast out of the earth. And this is the reason that 666 is
called the Number of the Name of the Beast: and experience also shows, That
the account is to be made by the periods of time in Daniels Image. And so we
have not only probabili^y, but also apodeictical proof for the Exposition of
the Number. But now to come to clear the point, we will show the Reasons why
the account by Daniels method is called (...), the Number of a Man, and that
this is the meaning of the Spirit.

First, it may fitly be called a Number, because (as Mr. Mede rightly says) It
is the Sacred Calendar, or Prophetical Chronology, appointed by God himself to
measure the times. We may therefore fitly call it a Number, or (as they speak
in the Schools) numerus numerans, because it comprehends the four Periods of
time appointed by God himself, to number the special occurrences of the Church.

Secondly, in a more special sense it is called the Number of a Man, because it
pleases the Holy Ghost by the four Regions, Parts and Divisions of the Body of
Man, to number the four great Empires of the world, and the four notable and
remarkable Revolutions of Time. The Image in the parts and in the divisions of
it, does not (as Interpreters well observe) naturally signify these things,
but merely by positive and divine Institution. It pleases the Lord by the four
parts of the Humane Image, to decypher so many periods of time. And this is the
true reason, wherefore the Spirit in the figure calls this form, method, and
way of account, (...), the Number of a Man, because it is the Number of the
Humane Image.

Thirdly, this way of expression does agree with the manner of the Spirit in
other places: As for example; Thou art this Head of Gold; that is, Thou art
signified by this Head of Gold. The seven kine are seven years; that is, the
seven kine do represent seven years. And, The seven Heads are seven Mountains;
that is, the seven Heads do type and set forth seven Mountains. And so in the
present case, The Number of the Beast is the Number of a Man, and that Number
is 666. The plain meaning whereof is this, That 666 signifies so many years
specified and declared in the accounts of Daniels Image, called, The Number of
a Man. It is so styled, because the Number is such in that Calculation; and it
is so to be made out in that method and way of account.

Fourthly, this method of account will agree with the word (...). Here will be
an excellent subject for a man that has dexterity in the Calculations of the
Times, to employ the art and skill of a good Accomptant. For to what end did
the Lord reveal this Prophetical Chronology, under the figure and similitude
of the four Regions and Parts of the Body of Man, but that it might be a
certain and a standing rule to all Posterities, to number those times and
changes of times, that should befall in and about the affairs of the Church?

Fifthly, the Number of time by the account of Daniels Image, is the most fit
to decypher the rising of a Tyrannical State, such as the Kingdom of the Beast
is, whereof we speak. Now what is the Image of Daniel? It is no other but a
Systeme or body of the four great persecuting Empires, which should rise up one
after another in the same succession, notably to afflict the Church of God. Now
fith the Beast with two Horns in the Revelation, is such a Dominion or State
that shall notably afflict the Saints in the latter days; where can it be more
properly or fitly placed, then in the Image of Tyrannical Empires? All these
are of the same lineage and kindred. And therefore seeing it is the plot of the
Spirit to delineate these four Successions by so many Parts of the Body of Man,
we may well conclude, That this way of Computation is the Number of a Man meant
in the Text, seeing it does so notably agree with the event.

Sixthly, the Number of Time by the account of Daniels Image, in the days of
John, and in the times immediately following, was most apt to find out the
events that should befall the Church. For this is to be observed, That though
the Beast, his Name, Mark, and Image were not extant in the times of John, yet
the number by and through which these were to be computed, must then be not
only extant, but it must be also of remarkable use. As for example: The
Antichristian Church had no being in the days of John, nor in the ages
immediately following; yet nevertheless the Spirit in the Revelation does
decypher the place of this Church by such a Character, as was famously known in
the days of John. The seven Heads are seven Mountains, where the woman sits.
Now this did more properly appertain to those first times in which S. John
lived, That Rome was seated upon seven Mountains: For the people then living,
though they should never see the Antichristian times, yet John did foreshew the
place where that Church should have her being in the time appointed and
limited by the Lord. In like manner, though the Name, Image, and Mark of the
Name, had none of them existence in the days of John; yet the Number by which
all these must be accounted, must needs then be in some tolerable use. For how
shall a man that has wisdom, by the Number find out the Name, if the Number
were no way discoverable in those times? Mr. Brightman upon the place, does
fully agree with us: His words are these: Though the Mark and the Name were not
extant, the Beast being not as yet; Nevertheless, the Number of the Name might
be manifest to that age wherein John lived; and not only to himself by
Revelation, but to some others also by search. For how could it be possible,
that a Government to come might be discoverable by a Number, and that Number
not extant? How great a torment would it be for a man to assay to do that thing
that were altogether impossible? From which words of his, I do conclude, That
the Number which must discover the Name of the Beast, must be some way extant
in the days of John. If this be so, what Number was then more familiarly known,
then the Number by the four divisions and parts of the Body of Man, by and
through which Daniel does number the four persecuting Empires of the world?
Therefore we may well conclude, That this Prophetical Chronology was the
(...), the Number of a Man meant in the Text.

Object. You will say, That the four great Empires in Daniels Image, were all
destroyed before the coming of Christ in the flesh, and therefore no way
suitable or apt to number the times of the new Prophecy.

Sol. By the same reason you may say, That five forms of Government were fallen
in the City of Rome; Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Decemvirs, Tribunes: Therefore
these several forms of account are not fit to decypher the Beast in the last
and Antichristian edition of Roman Government. And this were plainly to (...)
against the scope of the Text, Rev. 17. But in the present case we answer, It
is true, that the Babylonian, the Mede-Persian, and the Grecian Empires were
fully destroyed before the coming of Christ; but this is not true of the Roman,
for that stood in fullness of power, when John wrote the Revelation. If
therefore the people living in his times, had made their account from the
beginning of the Roman (as the only remaining Empire of the four) by a line of
666 years, they would have come to that particular instant where the Name and
Universal Headship of the Beast should begin. And so by the Number of a Man, by
that Prophetical Chronology they might have discovered the times of the rising
of the second Beast a priori. Now whereas many learned men in these times are
of opinion, That all the old Prophets do end at Christ, and that none of their
Predictions are repeated in the new Prophecy: I yield, that this is true in
part, but it is not universally true; for there are some things declared in the
old Prophets, which are more distinctly and fully set down in the Revelation.
Beza in his Preface speaks to excellent purpose: Spiritum Sanctum in hunc
pretiosum librum congerere volu^sse quae ex superiorum Prophetarum
praedictionibus implenda supererant, and nonnulla addidisse quae nos interesse
cognovit. And this is true in the four Metal-Kingdoms in Daniels Image. For
what is more briefly and more darkly delivered in that Prophecy, concerning the
Roman as the fourth Metal-Kingdom, is more fully and clearly revealed by the
Spirit in the Revelation. And therefore had the people that lived in the days
of John, computed the times from the beginning of the Roman Kingdom (for this
was the only surviving and remaining Kingdom of the four) by a line of 666
years, they had been carried upon the year of the Universal Headship of the
Bishop of Rome, upon that time when the Name, and the Mark of the Name of the
Beast did begin.

Lastly, the Number of a Man, in the Text, must be so expounded, that it may
also be the Number of the Beast: for though ordinarily a Man has nothing to do
with a Beast, there being so great a difference in their kinds; yet the words
of the Text are plain, Let him that has wisdom, count (...), the Number of
the Beast, (...), ^r it is the Number of a Man. In this sense of the Text th^n,
the Number of the Beast and the Number of a Man be all one, and here is no
(...), though it may (...) ^ to be. For a^ Daniel describes the four great
Em^es by so many parts of the Body of Man, Chap. 2. So he ^escribeth the same
Empires under the type and similitude of ^our Beasts, Chap. 7. In the present
case then, the Number of the Beast and the Number of a Man are all one. And
that which may make for the more abundant confirmation of the truth, all
Interpreters (some few excepted) do agree, That the Little Horn in the 7 of
Daniel, is the Emblem and Type of the Papacy, and that it is all one with the
two-horned Beast mentioned in the Revelation. And therefore when the Spirit
says, Let him that has wisdom, count the Number of the Beast, for it is
(...), the Number of a Man; he does but refer us to that ancient Prophetical
way of account, by the members and parts of the Body of a Man in Daniels Image.
Therefore seeing all Circumstances do agree, and we find it true in the event,
we may conclude, that the calculation by the times of Daniels Image, is the
(...), the Number of a Man meant in the Text.

But that this may better take with the Reader, we will make a brief Narrative
in what order, and by what degrees we came to be of this judgment. It may be
when he shall find the process of this discovery to be upon probative grounds,
this will give him the fuller and the surer satisfaction.

The first thing I builded upon, was, The subject of the Number. For I found by
the whole scope of the Prophecy, (as I have formerly proved) that the name of
the beast is no other, but his Universal Headship and Power. And therefore for
the discovery of the Number, the true work was to find out the Number of the
Universal Headship: and here was the first degree of discovery. Therefore they
who have spent their time about the word Lateinos, and the numeral Letters of
that or such like Grammatical names, have but wasted their time, and have erred
in the very beginning of the work. Therefore I did conclude, That the Name was
the Universal Headship, and that the ^umber was the Number of the Unini^ersal
Headship, and no other. And this was the first step.

Secondly, for the discovery of the Number, I did observe, That in every
Mathematica Proposition that is dubious, three things are specially observable:
First, the (...), where both the subject and the predicate are propounded; and
so here the datum or the subject, is the Name or Universal Headship of the
Beast: The quaesitum, or the praed^cate, is 666. The second is (...), the
Exposition of the Antecedent that is given, or of the subject of the
Demonstration: and so, as I have formerly spoken, the Name of the B^ast I found
to be no other, then his Universal Power and Headship.

The third is, (...), the definition and explanation of the Predicate or of the
Consequent. And so the great question was to me, how the Name or Universal
Headship of the Beast should be 666?

Here I mused, and often pondered in my mind what is the manner and use of the
Spirit in the Scriptures, when he speaks of the ri^ng of Governments, and
their Calculations by Number, to discover their beginning. And here I found (as
I believe every man shall do the like, who will give himself to observation)
that the Prophetical Scriptures do very often reckon Governments, either by the
Number of years to the time of their rising, or by the Number of years how long
they shall continue. Now I was sure, that 666 could not be the time of the
continuance of the Antichristian Kingdom, seeing in the whole body of the
Prophecy, it is largely showed, That the Kingdom of the Beast must continue
1260 Prophetical days, or years; and that this time must commence from the
rising of the ten-horned Beast out of the Sea, or the ten Kings out of the
ruins of the Empire. Therefore Mr. Archer in his book of the Personal Reign,
is a very fabulous Writer in this, as in many other particulars, when he will
needs have 666 to be the time of the continuance of the Beasts Kingdom. All
the circumstances of the Text plainly laid together, do decypher this Kingdom
a priori; and therefore the Number must refer to the time of the beginning, or
the standing up of the Name or Headship.

But then the great (...) was, (...) what time I should (...) to Number? In
this ca^e I was helped by the practice of Chronologers. For the^, when they
have a Prophetical Number, and do not know from what beginning to compute i^,
a^k how long it continues, and where it makes an eno? And if they be certain
of these two, they will find out the third* where it ought to begin. It is a
sure rule in this, as in other kinds of learning, By two known things, you may
come to discover a third unknown. And sometimes it so comes to pass, that some
diligence must be used, before we can come to the knowledge of the two, by and
through which we may prove the third. As for example, We read, That the
Prophet Ezekiel was to lie upon his left side 390 days, which signify so many
years of the patience of God in bearing the iniquity of the house of Israel.
Again, he was to turn, and to lie upon his right side 40 days; which signify
so many years, of the patience of God in bearing the iniquity of the house of
Judah, Ezekiel. 4. 4, 5. Now for the application of the times, the great Que^ion
is, Where the 390 years begin, and where they make an end, and how long they do
continue. For the continuation, there is no doubt to be made; and for the time
of the ending, this must be at the destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldaeans:
For the time of the end, though it is not set down in express terms, yet it may
be collected from the whole scope of the Text. For five years before the
destruction of Jerusalem, Ezekiel was to take a Tile, and pourtray upon it the
city Jerusalem, and la^ s^ge against it, and build a fort against it. So then,
the scope of the whole Vision is to show, That after the 390 years of the
patience of God are run out, the time should come, that the Chaldaeans should
destroy both City and Temple. In this Ezekiel was a sign to the home of Israel,
to foretell the destruction of the City and Temple, five years before it came to
pass, Ezekiel. 1. 2. Upon these grounds Chronologers do reason in this manner: If
the 390 years do end at the destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldaeans, they
must necessarily begin at the Apostasy of Jeroboam. For, if you take the right
vein of Chronology in the Book of the Kings, and number the times
interchangably, as each King of Judah, and each King of Israel began to reign,
and to carry on the whole series and order of years, you shall find by
induction of singulars, That there will be an exact line of 390 years from the
defection of Jeroboam, to the destruction of Jerusalem aforesaid. He that
desires the particular account of the years, and how it is exactly computed,
let him go to the Isagoge of Calvisius. And of the certainty of the account,
the Chronologer thus speaks, Hunc igitur numerum annorum 390 ex annotatione
Historiarum hujus temporis ab initio Ieroboami usque ad excidium Hierosolymae
nos colligemus. It a quidem, ne conjecturas nos Lectori ob^rudamus, neque etiam
sacrae Scripturae vim faciamus. Isag. Cap. 40. And in very deed, his
performance is answerable to the Promise: for he does exactly prove by
induction of singulars, and that from the words of Scripture, That there are
390 years from the Apostasy of Jeroboam to the destruction of Jerusalem.

But now for the 40 years of the iniquity of the house of Judah, this matter is
somewhat more dark: But yet nevertheless Chronologers do reason in this wise:
If 40 years be the time of the patience of God in bearing the iniquities of the
house of Judah, and those years must run complete at the destruction of
Jerusalem by the Chaldees; then it will follow, according to the
Scripture-Chronologie, and the series of the times, that they must necessarily
commence from the 13 year of Josiah. Now if a question be made, Why these years
should begin from the 13 of Josiah, who was a reformer of the Church? Though he
was, these times are to begin there, because the Lord did then begin to strive
with that people, to bring them to Repentance by the Ministry of Jeremy. These
are the words of the Text: From the thirteenth year of Josiah the son of Ammon
King of Judah, even unto this day (that is, the three and twentieth year) the
word of the Lord has come unto me, and I have spoken unto you, rising early
and speaking, but ye have not hearkened. And the Lord has sent unto you all his
servants the Prophets, rising early and sending them, but ye have not
hearkened, nor inclined your ear to hear, Jer. 25. 3, 4. From these words it is
plain, That the 40 years patience of God in bearing the iniquity of the house
of Judah, did begin from the Ministry of Jeremy: and when these should run
complete, then the Prophet ^zekiel does signify, That there shall be the
destruction of Jerusalem. From this, and from some such like passages, I was
moved to take the like course. I argued in this manner: If 666 be such a Number
of years, and if this period of time also must end at the setting up of the
Universal Headship under the Emperor Phocas, by necessary consequence I did
conclude, That this time must begin 60 years before the birth of the Lord.
Consulting with Chronologers, I found, that this was much about that time when
Cicero and Antonius were Consuls at Rome. But here to me was the great
difficulty, Why I should begin the times from the Consulships aforesaid, there
being neither ground in History nor Chronology for such a way of account. And
further, to increase the difficulty, in my first thoughts of the matter, I was
persuaded that (...), was no other but a Number commonly and frequently used
amongst men. Besides the judgment of Interpreters, I did ground much upon that
Scripture where the Angel measured the wall of the New Jerusalem 144 Cubits,
(...), according to the measure of a man, Chap. 21. v. 17. Here I thought that
(...) the Number of a Man, in discrete quantity, was the same with (...) in
quantity continued. Now it is clear, that (...), the measure of a Man, is no
other but that by and through which men do familiarly Number Furlongs withal.
I could not say this touching the Consulship of Cicero and Antonius. The usual
Computation of the times in that age, was from the building of the City of
Rome, from the beginning of Julius Caesar, from the Spanish Era, from the
Battle of Actium; and not from the time of the two Consuls aforesaid, With
these difficulties I was entangled, in my first thoughts upon this argument.
But there was one thing that chiefly kept me on in this way of account: I found
in our Modern Chronologers, that the year in which Cicero and Antonius were
Consuls, the Jewish Church came first under the Dominion of the State of Rome.
For if you look before this time, you shall find, That the same people of the
Jews that were formerly under the Dominion of the people of Babel, Persia and
Greece, in this year they came first of all under the Dominion of the people of
Rome. Further, if you look to the times following, you shall find everywhere,
that the Church was under the Tyranny of the Romans. The whole order of the
Book of the Revelation, is concerning the times of the Roman Tyranny, and of
the susterings of the Church under that people. Now if you ask, at what instant
of time the Church came under the Roman obedience, it was in that year when
Antonius and Cicero were Consuls, or much thereabouts. Which way soever
therefore ye go, the forementioned year must be famous for the accounts of the
Church. Here also upon further search I found, that the Roman did begin as the
fourth Metal-Kingdom, as I have formerly proved. So far I proceeded in the
discovery: Only I could not solve the Point, how this could be (...), the
Number that men did familiarly count withal. When I proceeded this way, I
found, that one thing would not hang with another: Therefore being cast upon a
more deep consideration of the matter, I did finally pitch upon this sense. The
account of the times in Daniels Image, is called (...), the Number of a Man;
not because men do familiarly use this way of Calculation, but because it
pleased the Lord to Number the times of the Church by so many Regions and Parts
of the Body of Man in the Humane Image. And thus, Reader, thou have a true
Narrative by what degrees I came to rest in this Interpretation: And truly,
when we look to the whole Coherence of the Text, the very words will
excellently agree with such a sense. For, when one that has wisdom, is
exhorted to calculate the Number of the Beast, may be not be apt to say, What
Rule must I observe in the Calculation? Or who shall assure me, whether 666 be
the Number of Time, the Number of Place, the Number of Degrees, the Number of
Longitude, or the Number of Latitude, or what is it the Number of? But if you
will say to him, (...), it is the Number of Time in Daniels Humane Image, then
you do ^ive him a certain, (...), and determinate Rule to Number by: You show
him where he must begin, and where he must end; and how all being laid
together, will discover the Name or the Universal Headship of the Beast. On the
contrary, they who take (...), for such a number as is ordinarily and (...)
used amongst men, the words may seem to run fair in this sense, and to go
smoothly with the Context. But yet nevertheless, they who are of this
judgment, I do desire to propound these things to their deliberate
consideration. First, seeing the methods of Numbering used amongst men, are
infinite and uncertain; let them positively and determinately show, what that
Number is, by and through which they will count the Name of the Beast. The
familiar ways of numbering among men, whether you respect the Number of Time,
the Number of Place, or the Number of Persons, is infinite almost. The Number
of Time familiarly used, is very various; if you look either to the ancient or
the latter Ages of the Church, to the Civil or Ecclesiastical, to the
Astronomical or the Vulgar (...). If the Number of a Man, be a Number
familiarly used amongst men, who shall assign, limit or specify the particular
way, amongst so many several kinds? Secondly, now can it be imagined, that the
holy Spirit should deliver to the Church a Number, which is the
Characteristical Note of the Name or Sovereignty of the Beast, and never
circumscribe or define what that Number is, but leave the matter at random? I
cannot find that he does so in any (...) of the Old or New Testament. When he
speaks of the Beast with seven Heads and ten Horns, how does he particularize
and individuate the matter? The seven Heads are seven Mountains, where the
woman sits; The ten Horns are ten Kings that shall arise at the fall of the
Empire of the Romans; and many such like instances may be found. Thirdly, they
who expound the Number of a Man, for a Number frequently used amongst men, do
not practice according to this Rule. For let them show how it is the familiar
use of men to decypher the rising of States and Governments, by the Anagram and
Numeral Letters of a Grammatical Name. I think scarcely an instance can be
given for this, in any solid and serious learning; to which I think the holy
Spirit would rather refer us, then to the dotages and trifles of the Cabalists.
All these Reasons laid together, do plainly teach, that (...) is not to be
construed for a Number familiarly used amongst men: but the circumstances of
the Text, and the event of things, do fully pitch upon the Number of time in
Daniels Image. And so there is an excellent coherence of one thing with
another, the Visions and the Stories do fully agree. Fourthly, concerning the
Number it self, it is expressly said to be 666. The Spanish Bibles have it in
words at leng^h, and not in figures: For so the Text (...). But the other Greek
Copies only in figures: Though some Interpreters, as Irenaeus, Paraeus, Dr.
Mayer, do put some distinction between this way of writing, to the
understanding, both ways do come but to one sense, if you go to the sum of the
matter. For if you would speak of a thing to be done in one of the years of the
Lord, as in thi^ present year for instance: Is not 1654 in figures, all one
with One thousand, (...) hundred, fifty and four, in letters written at length?
Do not we decypher the years of the Lord in our common way of writing by
figures in brief, as well as by words in their full delinearion? If none can
deny this, we may conceive the like of the meaning of the Spirit, when he
says, that the Number of the (...) (...) that is as much as to say, the 666th
year is the Number of time when this Government shall begin to be (...) up. But
^eeing there have been in former Ages, and now there are that are do^ing ripe
upon the Numeral Letters; I do here seriously put it to them, to (...) me their
opinion concerning the two Letters of the Greek Alphabet, a and o. The question
is proper to the purpose in hand: for they may well observe, as the Lamb
stands in direct opposition to the Beast, the Name and Sovereignty of the
Lamb, to the Sovereignty of the Beast; so the Number of the Name, or Dominion
of the Lamb (if oppositio be in eodem) must necessarily be opposed to the
Number of the Name, or Dominion of the Beast. But for the Letters (...) and
(...), there is none that ever went about to find out the Anagram of the Name
of the Lamb in the Elements of the Greek Alphabet. These Characters do not set
forth any literal Name, nor the Numeral Letters of any Grammatical word* but
they do denote and set forth the infinity and eternity of his Kingdom. For when
he is called (...) and (...), this is all one with that expression, (...), The
first and the last, which is, which was, and which is to come, the Almighty,
Chap. 1. v. 8, 11. So in immediate opposition to those Characters of the
Kingdom of the Lamb, the Number of the Name or Headship of the Beast, is (...)
666, according to the Calculation of the times in Daniels Image. For as the
Characters (...) and (...), if we take them severally in themselves, they may
be ascribed to any kind of Infinity in the Lambs Kingdom; he may be said to be
(...) and (...), in reference to Place, Power, and time: But in the Book of the
Revelation, it is necessary that these Characters should be restrained only to
the Number of time. So in the like case, the Number (...) may many ways be
applied to the Beasts Kingdom; but in the natural and genuine sense of the
Prophecy, this does only denote such a Number of time to the setting up of his
Kingdom. Now for the further confirmation of this truth, let us call to mind
what is written in the Prophecy of Daniel, concerning the Ancient of Days: I
beheld till the Thrones were cast down; or more properly, I beheld till the
Thrones were set, and the Ancient of Days did sit, whose garment is as white as
snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool, Chapter 7. v. 5. In these
words, why is God the Father called, The Ancient of days? why is the hair of
his head compared to the pure wool? This does note the eternity of his
Kingdom, in immediate opposition to the four great Periods of time, set forth
by the Tyranny of the four great Empires of the World. So the same is said
concerning the Dominion of the Son of Man, that his Dominion is an everlasting
Dominion, that shall not pass away, and his Kingdom that which shall not be
destroyed, ver. 14* Here then if we demand, Why the Kingdom of the Son of Man
is called An everlasting Kingdom? This is in immediate opposition to the
several and respective times of the four Beasts: their Kingdoms had an end, and
they were destroyed; but the Kingdom of the Son of Man is an everlasting
Kingdom, that never shall be destroyed. According to this Analogy do we
conform the Exposition of the Number (...) and (...), the Number of the
Kingdom of the Lamb: we do oppose it to (...), the Number of the Name of the
Beast. And so John in the Revelation, and Daniel in his Prophecy, do agree in
the Numbers, and in the same method and way of account. For when the Son is
said to be (...) and (...), the First and the Last, in the order of time; is
not this all one with that passage in Daniel, His Dominion is an everlasting
Dominion?

But because many stand upon the Letters, we will cite the famous Canon of
Ptolomy, where the Kings of Babylon, of Persia, of Greece, and Rome, are set
forth by the Characters of the Greek Alphabet. It is useful to illustrate many
passages in this Book, and therefore it follows as hereunder written.

De Epoch Nabonassarea.
Ex Manuscripto libro Graeco Claudii Ptolomaei continente Hypothes^s (...).

(...).

(...).
(...). (...) (...) (...) (...) 14 (...) (...) (...) 16 (...) (...) (...) 21
(...) (...) (...) 26 (...) (...) (...) 38 (...) (...) (...) 43 (...) (...)
(...) 45 (...) (...) (...) 48 (...) (...) (...) 54 (...) (...) (...) 55 (...)
(...) (...) 59 (...) (...) (...) 67 (...) (...) (...) 80 (...) (...) (...) 100
(...) (...) (...) 122 (...) (...) (...) 143 (...) (...) (...) 186 (...) (...)
(...) 188 (...) (...) (...) 192 (...) (...) (...) 109 (...).
(...) (...) (...) 218 (...) (...) (...) 226 (...) (...) (...) 262 (...) (...)
(...) 283 (...) (...) (...) 324 (...) (...) (...) 343 (...) (...) (...) 389
(...) (...) (...) 410 (...) (...) (...) 412 (...) (...) (...) 416 (...).
(...) (...). Anni Phil. and Al^x. Nabonass. (...). (...) 424 (...) (...) 7 431
(...) (...) 19 443 (...).
(...) (...) (...) 39 463 (...) (...) (...) 77 501 (...) (...) (...) 102 526
(...) (...) (...) 119 543 (...) (...) (...) 143 567 (...) (...) (...) 178 602
(...) (...) (...) 207 631 (...) (...) (...) 243 667 (...) (...) (...) 272 696
(...) (...) (...) 294 718 (...).
(...) (...) (...) 337 761 (...) (...) 359 783 (...) (...) (...) 363 789 (...)
(...) (...) 377 801 (...) (...) (...) 391 815 (...) (...) (...) 401 825 (...)
(...) (...) 404 828 (...) (...) (...) 419 843 (...) (...) (...) 420 844 (...)
(...) (...) 439 863 (...) (...) (...) 460 864 (...) (...) (...) 483 907

Here it is clear, That Ptolomy does set down particularly how long each King
did Reign in the four great Empires; and he does also Collect the whole Number
of years, the (...), from the beginning of Nabonassar. Some Ecclesiastical
Writers, as Panadorus and others, do frequently mention this Canon, with whom
Joseph Scaliger did find it, but very corrupt; who also did insert it in the
third Book of his Isagogicall Canons. But Calvisius does represent it more pure
and incorrupt, out of the Greek Manuscript. And for the testimony which he does
give, he does not shun to call it more precious then any Gold; and that had it
been sooner published, the matters of Chronology would have been in a far
better condition, Calv. Isag. page 102. And for my part, if I might cast in my
Mi^e, I may say also, That I have been greatly delighted with this excellent
Monument of Antiquity; but for this reason more especially: From the Creation
of the world, to the times of the Persian Monarchy, we have a plain
Scripture-Chronologie: but from the times of the Persians, to the coming of
Christ, for the space of 500 years, or thereabouts, for this whole interval of
time (set the Prophecy of Daniel aside) we have no continued History in the
Canonical Scriptures. Many things have been foretold by Isaiah, ^eremiah, and
other Prophets; and we find also all along in the Stories of the Scripture,
how the Prophecies have been fulfilled. Now it is not so with those things that
are foretold in the Prophecy of Daniel: there is no Story in the Old Testament
that does show the truth of his Predictions. Now I say, What must be done in
this case? It is the mind of God that we should go to the Civil Stories, to
Herodotus, Xenophon, Diodorus Siculus, Appianus, Josephus, and others: For
these have left upon record, the truth of that which Daniel long before did
foretell, concerning the Persian and the Grecian Empires. And for his
Prophetical Chronology of the 70 weeks, this Number of time may fitly be
expounded by the (...), or the Collection of years in the Canon aforementioned.
And for the certainty of the Computation, we may believe, That Ptolomy, so
exact an Artist, could not easily be mistaken* seeing he lived near the times
of the Apostles, at Alexandria in Egypt, the chiefest School of Learning in all
the East. The like may be said of the whole Book of the Revelation: for though
many things are recorded in the Evangelists, and the Acts of the Apostles,
concerning the fulfilling of the old Prophecies; yet the Predictions in the
Book of the Revelation, which contain many an hundred years from the first to
the second coming of Christ, are declared in no Story of the New or Old
Testament. What must then be done in such a case as this? It is the mind of
God, that we should read the Stories of the Church, and so accordingly by the
order of the Story, expound the Prophecy. These things I thought good to note,
for their sakes who are the Enemies of Huma^e Learning in these times. Now let
us return again to that Point, from which we have made so necessary a
Digression. I say then, if we peruse the aforementioned Canon, we may see how
Governments, and the Changes of Government, may be numbered by the Characters of
the Greek Alphabet. Let us take Nebuchadnezzar for instance, the Root of the
Babylonian Monarchy; he is called in the Canon by the Name of (...); and the
Number of his Government from the beginning of Nabonassar, is (...) 144, for in
that year of Nabonassar he began to Reign. So Darius the Mede, who is called in
the Canon by the Title of (...), the Number of his Government is (...) 193; for
in that year he did begin to Reign, from the beginning of Nabonassar: And so of
the rest. The like may be said in the present case of the Universal Headship of
the Bishop of Rome, that from the beginning of the Roman, as the fourth Metal
Kingdom, the Number of his Name or Government is (...) 666: Only the
difference is in the manner of the Computation. For when we account the times
of Darius, Nebuchadnezzar, and others, (...), it is the Number of Nabonassar:
But when we account the Name or Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome, and
the beginning thereof, (...), it is the Number in Daniels Image, in the way of
the Prophetical Chronology, figuratively called the Number of a Man.

Let us carry the matter to Antiochus Epiphanes, the Grecian Antichrist. Of
the beginning of his Reign and Government it is said, (...), he reigned in the
137 year of the Kingdom of the Greeks, 1 Mac 1. 11. If we will draw this
matter into figures, the Number of his Name or Government is (...) 137. And for
the way and method of account, (...), it is the Number of the Kingdom of the
Greeks; for in such a year of their Kingdom he began to Reign. If we apply
this to the Roman Antichrist, to the beginning of the Universal Headship under
the Emperor Phocas, we may say that he began that Dominion in the year (...)
666, (...). For from that time, as the Church of God came under the Dominion of
the Romans, there is such an exact Number of years. Many more instances might
be brought out of Antiquity, to show how it has been the manner of the
Ancients to reckon the Times and the Changes of Government, by the Characters
of the Greek Alphabet. But these shall suffice.

Now to gather all into one sum, I have compared the Interpretation with all
the particulars of the Text. I have showed, what is meant by the Law, what by
the Beast that made the Law, what by the Persons that did receive the Mark in
their Forehead, and in their Right Hand. I have largely discoursed also
concerning the Calculation of the Number; who the Person is that is to make the
discovery; what the Calculation is; what is meant by the Number of a Man; and
what by 666 years, to the setting up of the Name or Universal Hea^ship of the
Bishop of Rome. And seeing I find all things to agree, therefore I conclude,
That this is a true Interpretation. For the confirmation of this, let us go to
the next Chapter.

CHAP. IX. The Truth of the Interpretation is further confirmed, from the scope
of the Seventeenth Chapter of the Revelation.
HEre all solid Expositors do agree, That the same matter is handled again,
which was formerly discoursed of in the 13th Chapter. The thing is not aliud
and aliud, another and another; though it be delivered aliter and aliter, in
another and another manner. That which is there spoken concerning the Beast, as
a King or Potentate, is here applied to an Idolatrous or Whorish Church. But
let us hear the words of the Text: So he carried me away in the Spirit into the
Wilderness, and I saw a woman sit upon a Scarlet-colored Beast, full of the
Names of Blasphemy, having seven Heads, and ten Horns, v. 3. This Woman is an
Idolatrous Church; and, if we look to the whole scope of the description, she
can be no other, but the Roman Idolatrous Church. That this is meant of the
City of Rome, is clear, from the 9th Verse. The seven Heads are seven Mountains,
where the Woman sits. Now all Stories do agree, That Rome was seated upon
seven Hills, and was famous through all the world by the title of Septi-collis,
or The Seven-hilled City. And to put all out of question, the Angel says, The
Woman which thou saw, is the great City that reigns over the Kings of the
Earth, ver. 18. Now what was the Great City, which in the days of John reigned
over all earthly Kings, but the City of Rome? There are such clear Characters
in the Text, that the Ancients who lived before the fall of the Empire, did all
agree in it, That Rome was the City Babylon. And the Jesuits in these days, who
of all men living are the most active to hide the meaning of this Scripture, do
yield that Rome is here intended: But how? Not Rome Christian, but Rome Pagan.
To this we reply, Though the Apostle does make mention of Rome Pagan; yet he
does primarily intend Rome Christian, or rather Rome Antichristian. Let it be
considered what Title is given to her; and so, not only in this Chapter, but
in other places, she is called The Whore of Babylon. In Scripture Language,
this Name is only given to Idolatrous Churches. We never, or at least seldom,
read in the Writings of the Prophets, of the Whore of Egypt, of the Whore of
Edom, of the Whore of Tyrus, or of the Whore of Damascus: this Title is usually
given to Samaria and Jerusalem, to the Churches of Israel and Judah, as they
did fall away from the Worship of the true God, to serve other gods. And
therefore Hosea in the Vision was to take a wife of fornications, because the
land had committed great whoredom, in departing from the Lord, Hos. 1. 2. So
the Prophet Ezekiel being to speak of the spiritual fornications of Samaria and
Jerusalem, calls the one Aholah, and the other Aholibamah, Ezekiel. 23. 4. From
these and many other Scriptures, it is evident, That the Title is usually given
to Idolatrous Churches, which have departed away from Christ their lawful
Husband. So then, if the Whore of Babylon does signify Rome; this must needs
be applied to Rome Christian, as she did break her Marriage-Covenant with
Christ, and yield her self up to another Husband. For Rome Pagan was never
married to Christ; and therefore though she might be called Babylon in the
figure, yet she is not the Whore of Babylon.

Secondly, she is described in the Text, having a Golden Cup in her hand: By
which amorous po^ion, she did entice the Kings of the Earth to commit
fornication with her. Now this does not appertain to Rome Pagan, but to the
Romish Church, which has greatly deceived the Kings of the Earth by her
Idolatries and Superditions.

Thirdly, it is clear from the scope of the Text, That the Woman does ride the
Beast in its last and renewed State, in the times of the ten Kings; for these
shall carry the Whore, and shall be wholly at her devotion, till the words of
God be fulfilled; and after that, they shall hate her as much, and burn her
flesh with fire. If we apply this to Rome Pagan, there is nothing will agree:
for she had no being in the times of the Ten Kings. But all things may be
fitly applied to Rome Antichristian, which is truly and properly called the
Whore of Babylon in the figure.

But now a little to draw nearer to the Point: When was it that the Whore did
begin to ride the Beast, and where shall we set the date of her Dominion? For
so the Angel does expound the words; The Waters where the Whore sits, are
Kindreds, and People, and Multitudes, and Nations, and Languages, ver. 17. Her
sitting upon the Beast, and upon many Waters, does not only imply an ordinary
sitting, but a sitting in the way of Lordship, Dominion, and Supreme Command.
Such a kind of sitting we must look after, if we will truly know the time when
the Whore began to ride the Beast. And here, I say, at that time when the
Bishop of Rome did begin to be the second Beast, or Universal Head under the
Emperor Phocas; then at the same time did the Roman Church begin to be the
Mother of all Churches; or rather, the Great Whore that rides the Beast; the
Mother of all the Fornications, and the Idolatries of the Earth.

Let us therefore more distinctly consider the times, as the Angel does give
the true delineation of them: And therefore speaking of the Ten Kings that
should carry the Whore, that should be wholly at her devotion, he does expressly
speak of them, They have no Kingdom as yet, but receive a Kingdom as Kings,
one hour with the Beast, ver. 12. Therefore the fall of the Empire, and the
rising of the Kings, must needs anticipate or go before the Jurisdiction and
Dominion of the Great Whore. And lest there should be any mistake in the time,
the Angel does plainly show, That there must be eight Revolutions of State in
the City of Rome; and that seven of them must fall, before the time comes that
the Whore shall ride the Beast. These are his words: There are seven Kings;
five are fallen, one is, and the other is not yet come; and when he comes, he
must continue a short space: And the Beast that was, and is not, he is the
eighth, and is of the seventh, and goes into Perdition, ver. 10, 11. From
whence it is manifest, That the Ten Kings must arise, and seven Forms of
Government must fall in the City of Rome, before the times of the Great Whore
can begin. But here is a hard question to be decided by the way: How can the
Beast be said to be the eighth King, and yet one of the seven Heads? I will the
more willingly take it into Consideration, because I have been heretofore much
puzzled with the question. And I find also, that the very best and most
approved Interpreters do not give a certain sound. To let pass how far
Brightman and Paraeus have gone aside in the matter; Mr. Forbes makes the
Kings, and Heads of the Beast, to be co incident terms: but in this he is
greatly mistaken. For the Beast, in the order of Kings, is expresl^ said to be
the eighth King; and in the order of Heads, he is only one of the seventh.
Therefore we may certainly conclude, That these are not equivalent terms, but
that necessarily some distinction must be made betwixt the Heads and the Kings.
Mr. Mede therefore keeps himself in doubtful terms: for speaking of the seventh
Change of State; to wit, The Christian Caesar's; he says, That this Potentate,
because he should be of short continuance, shall seem to be Dynastes alius,
another Ruler; sed revera non alius, in deed and in truth not another. So
likewise concerning the Beast, in which State he should carry the Whore, This
Beast (says he) in respect of the Change of the Caesar's, seems to be the
eighth; but revera non nisi septimus, in deed and in truth no other but the
seventh. In which words of his, so far as I apprehend, there are two passages
which seem to me to differ from the scope of the Text: For when he speaks of
the Change of the Caesareate, from the Pagan to the Christian Caesar's, how can
he call that of the Christian Caesar's, Dynasten quasi alium, revera tamen non
alium? The words of the Text are plain, Five are fallen; one is, to wit, that
of the Pagan Caesar's, when John wrote the Revelation; and the other, (...),
that of the Christian Caesar's is not yet come. It is clear then, that the
Governments of the City of Rome are eight in all, and not eight in appearance
only; and the Dynasty of the Christian Caesar's is (...), another in reality
and truth, and not another in show only, as Mr. Mede will have it. So likewise
for the Beast, it is strange, that he should affirm him to be quasi octavum
Dynasten, as it were the eighth Potentate, sed revera non nisi septimum, but in
deed and in truth no other but the seventh. The words of the Text are express:
The Beast that was, and is not, he is octavus, the eighth in reality and in
truth, and not the eighth in appearance only. Therefore the Exposition of Mr.
Mede does contradict the words of the Text, and the knot remains. Upon much
debate, I find, that we must go another way to work; and here we must
distinguish the Roman Governments, as they are simply so called, from the Roman
Governments, as they are Heads of the Beast. If you look upon the Roman
Governments, as so many Policies and Forms of Dominion, then it is clear, That
there are eight Forms of Regency; to wit, The Kings, the Consuls, the
Decemvirs, the Dictators, the Tribunes, the Pagan Caesar's, the Christian
Caesar's; and after all these seven, comes the Beast, as octavus Dynastes, the
eighth Potentate. Now on the other side, if you reckon the Heads of the Beast,
there can be but seven Heads; and therefore the Beast must needs be the
particular seventh, seeing the Christian Caesar's, from Constantine to Augustus,
cannot be called an Head of the Beast at all, unless we will go against the
scope of Scripture: For it is not the manner of the Scripture, to call
Christian Governments by the Title of a Beast, or the Head of a Beast: This
Character does properly appertain to the Kingdoms and States of this World,
that persecute the Church, and are contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom of
Christ. Upon this account the Christian Caesar's do indeed make a distinct
Dynasty or Policy, and yet are no part or Head of the Beast. The words of the
Text are clear: for when the Spirit speaks of the other that should come, to
wit, the Dynasty of the Christian Caesar's, he does not say, (...), another
Head; but (...), another King: which shows plainly, That the Christian Casars
are a distinct Form of Government, but no Head of the Beast. So likewise the
Beast of the last edition is not termed (...), the eighth Head; but he is
simply called (...), the eighth King. Touching the Kings, it is spoken of them,
Five are fallen, one is, and the other is not yet come: and the Beast that
comes out of the Bottomless Pit, he is the eighth. To satisfy the doubt, we
do pitch upon this sense, that the Beast is both the eighth Dynasty, and the
seventh Head. For if you reckon by the order of Kings, (the Dynasty of the
Christian Caesar's being included) he must needs be the eighth. But if you
reckon by the Heads of the Beast, which are Pagan and Idolatrous Forms of
Government; then that of the Christian Caesar's must be Status ex^resimus, or
exemptilis, a State exempted and put out of the Calendar. From whence it comes
to pass, That the Beast, if you reckon him among the Kings, his place is to be
the eighth; but yet among the Heads, he is but the seventh. And so these words,
The Beast that was, and is not, he is the eighth, and is one of the seventh,
are plain (as I take it) and the knot is untied. But leaving this scruple, I
find, That all solid Interpreters do agree in the general sense of the Text;
to wit, That the Antichristian times begin at the fall of the Empire, and the
rising of the Ten Kings. The words of the Angel are so clear; for speaking of
the Roman Dominion, and the Ten Horns of that Beast, he expressly says, These
have no Kingdom as yet, but shall receive a Kingdom one hour with the Beast:
which plainly shows, That their times shall be, when the Roman Dominion shall
come to the last and Antichristian edition of State. The fall of the old
Empire, and the rising of the Ten Kings, is an infallible Character of the
beginning of the Antichristian times. And this no man can rationally deny, that
does look upon the true scope of the Angels Interpretation.

But our question is, concerning the times of the Great Whore; when was it that
she did begin to ride the Beast? We cannot say, That it was at that time when
the Kings did rise out of the ruins of the Empire: For then the Kings of the
Earth did not dogmatically and conscientiously acknowledge the Church of Rome
the Mother of all Churches. To the resolution of the case, we will consider
what Expositors do say to this purpose. For in the 17th Chapter, though there
is mention made of the Beast with Ten Horns; yet there is not the least word of
the two-horned Beast. Now the reason ordinarily given, is very solid, and it
does agree with the scope of the Scripture: For it is plain, That the
description under the resemblance of a Beast with two Horns, Chap. 13. is again
repeated under the similitude and type of a Great Whore, Chap. 17. Both
Scriptures speak of one and the same matter in substance, though in a different
manner: And if need should require, we have many Arguments to prove the
Parallel.

Now then, in the present case, seeing John speaks of the City of Rome, that in
his days was the great City that ruled over the Kings of the Earth, it is to
our purpose to inquire, when the Church came within the verge of the Dominion
o^ that great City. And here I say, if we calculate the times aright, and
reckon 666 years, from that time when that great City came to have Dominion
over the Church, we shall precisely come to that point and instant of time,
when the Church of Rome was made the Catholic and the General Mother of all
other Churches. The Church first came under the Dominion of the City of Rome:
and then 666 years after, that Church her self was declared Universal Mother of
all Churches. And here then our Interpretation is one and the same in
substance, in both Scriptures. And whereas the Woman has this Inscription on
her Forehead, Mystery, Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, and the
Abominations of the Earth: The Name then on the Forehead of the Woman, is not a
Grammatical word, consisting of Letters and Syllables; but it signifies her
Universal Maternity or Motherhood, when she began to be declared Universal
Mother over all other Churches. Now if you apply this to the times, it came to
pass in the 666th year from that time, when the Church, and the Territories of
the Church, came under the obedience of the City of Rome. And this is the
Number of her Maternity or general Motherhood, or of the Name written in the
Forehead of the Woman. If we apply this to the twohorned Beast in the 13
Chapter, his Name is no other, but his Paternity or Universal Headship; and the
Number of his Name is no other, but the Number of his Universal Headship, from
the beginning of the Roman as the fourth Metal-Kingdome. And so the sense of
one Chapter is clear, by the scope and drift of the other. But we go on.

CHAP. X. A List of Fifteen Principles drawn from the main sense of the
Prophecy, concerning the Beast, his Name, Mark, and Number; by the Position of
which, the present Interpretation is established. Also, the several Expositions
of Mr. Potter and other Writers, are brought to Trial.
FOr the more full proof of the Point, we must take the same method to prove
the truth of our Interpretation, as Divines do when they would prove the Pope
to be Antichrist. They do infallibly determine him to be so, because all the
Properties of the Beast, do punctually pitch upon that Seat or Succession: So
in the present case, we may say, That 666 is such a Number of years, to the
setting up of the Name or Universal Headship of the Beast. And this we take to
be an infallible and undoubted Truth, because all the Principles of the
Prophecy do pitch, and mainly center upon such an Interpretation. We can prove
the truth thereof, by the accumulation of Notes. W^ may further take in the
words of the Jesuit Suarez; for he himself well observes, That it is not
sufficient to decypher Antichrist by one, two, or three Notes, but by the
Concurrence of all the Properties that do appertain to him: So I may say, for a
tight Exposition of the Name of the Beast, and the Number thereof, we must not
rest in a few Circumstances, for so many have been brought for the name
Lateinos. And M. P^tters Interpretation also seems to be very fair. But this
is that which I mainly stand upon, That their several Interpretations will not
agree with many Principles. The same course then that we take to prove the
Truth, shall be to disprove their Error. But now to the Principles in order.

Princ. 1. The Name of the Beast, his Mark and Number, do all agree to the
Papal Tyranny, by a special application. This is proved from the whole scope
of the Text. For the Beast is a Tyrannical Empire or Government; and not only
so, but also a Roman Tyrannical Empire, in the last edition thereof: Therefore
these Characters are specially applicable to that Government, and to the
Hierarchy thereof, and not to any other. They err therefore, that seek after
the Number in the Name of any one particular man, as Bellarmine does in the
Names of some Protestant Divines. Whereas, to speak properly, the Name of the
Beast is the Name of a Tyrannical State or Government. Secondly, they also do
depart far from the Truth, that will have the word (...) to be the Name of the
Beast. And though indeed the Name does make 666, according to the Numeral
Letters in the Greek Alphabet; this cannot be the sense: For though the Turks
make a Tyrannical Empire, and have greatly afflicted the Church; yet the scop^
of the Spirit is here mainly to speak of a Roman Tyrannical State in the last
edition; and this is clear from the scope of the whole Prophecy.

Princ. 2. The Name of the Beast, his Mark, Image, and the Number of his Name,
ought so to be expounded, that all these may have mutual relation each to
other. This is proved from the Text, Chap. 13. ver. 15, 16, 17, 18. Chap. 14.
ver. 9, 10, 11. For there the persons who did worship the Image of the Beast,
are also said to receive his Mark in their Forehead, and in their Right Hand.
Now how is it possible that they could receive the Mark, but they must also
receive the Name, since it is called The Mark of the Name? And how can they
receive the Name, but they must receive the Number, seeing it is styled, The
Number of the Name? All these are Homogeneal, and have near relation each to
other. And therefore when John did behold that company that stood upon the
glassie Sea mingled with fire, and did sing the triumphal Song in honor to the
Lamb; they are said to overcome the Beast, his Image, Mark, and the Number of
his Name. Therefore all these have a near affinity and correspondence each with
other. From whence we may convince those Interpreters of error, who do
distinguish the Subjects of the Beast into diverse kinds; into those that
worship the Image, into others that receive the Mark, into a third sort that
have the Number of the Name: Whereas, according to the Text, the same persons
that worship the Image, receive the Mark and the Number thereof. Secondly,
those Expositors are too blame, which do not ground their Demonstration upon
these things, but do immediately proceed to calculate the Number. Mr. Potter in
his Treatise, endeavoreth to find out the Number in six things in the
Hierarchy of the Church of Rome, as they stand opposite to six things in the
New Jerusalem. But in my apprehension, he does not lay a right foundation: for
the Number which he is to calculate, is the Number of the Name of the Beast;
and the Number is answerable to the Mark. Therefore the proper work which he
has to do, is, to handle these matters, and not six things in the Hierarchy of
the Church of Rome, immediately opposed to six things in the description of the
New Jerusalem.

Princ. 3. The Name of the Beast, his Mark and Number, must necessarily begin
at the first Visible Constitution of his Dominion; and continue in all times,
to the end thereof. For the first Visible Constitution, we read, That as soon
as the second Beast came up out of the Earth, he made an Image to the Beast,
and caused all to worship the Image, and to receive a Mark in their Forehead,
Chap. 13. ver. 14, 15, 16, 17. Now this was not done only at the time of the
beginning, but in all the times of that Kingdom, from the beginning to the
end. For, the Vials were poured out upon them that worshipped the Beast, and
received the Mark, Chap. 16. ver. 2. And at the ending of the Beasts Kingdom,
when the eternal Gospel is preached to every Kindred, Tongue and Nation; then
are the threatenings denounced against all those that worship the Beast, and
receive the Mark, Chap. 14. ver. 9, 10, 11. From whence we gather, That the
Name, Mark and Image, must be in all the times of the Kingdom of the Beast.
According to this Rule, how can Iunius apply the Number of the Beast to the
Canon Law? How can he make it appear, that this Law has been in force all the
times of that Kingdom? Mr. Potter also, when he does apply this Number to the
Cardinals, Gates, and other circumstances in the City of Rome; how can he
prove, that these have been in all the times of that Kingdom? He does mainly
stand upon it, That the Cardinals are the very Essence of the Papacy, so nearly
united to the Pope, that they make one Body, containing and representing all
Ecelesiastical Jurisdiction. Well, be it so; but how proves he this College
to have been in all the times of the Beasts Kingdom? I do willingly yield to
that solid determination of his: I conceive (says he) the second Beast,
mentioned Rev. 13. ver. 11. to be that unlawful Ecclesiastical Power, which
these latter times have settled upon the Pope. And I believe, that he is the
Great Antichrist, not as Bishop, or Archbishop, or Patriarch; but as he
pretends himself Pope, and Vicar of Christ; having such a transcendent
Ecclesiastical Power, as is incommunicable to any other upon Earth, page 55.
This Testimony I take to be a plain Scripturetruth; and for my part, I do
believe, Though the Mystery of Iniquity was long in working, the Bishop of Rome
did not begin to be the solemn Antichrist, and the two-horned Beast did not
rise up out of the earth, till the times of the Universal Headship. In this I
do fully agree with the Author aforenamed: But yet, with submission to a better
judgment, I cannot understand how the College of Cardinals, or the other five
particular Circumstances, applied to the Hierarchy of Rome, how these began at
the time of the declaration of the Universal Headship; or how they have
continued in all the times of the Beasts Kingdom, from the beginning to the
end thereof. Now it is apparently evident, That the Name and the Mark have been
applicable to the Kingdom of the Beast in all the times thereof.

Princ. 4. In submitting to, in worshipping the Image, and in receiving the
Mark, the Name, and the Number of the Name, has been the great sin of the
world in departing from Christ. This may be proved from the whole scope of the
Prophecy: the great deceiving of the Nations in all Antichristian times, has
been in the matter of the worship of the Image, and receiving the Mark, Chap.
20. ver. 1, 2, 3. Chap. 13. ver. 15, 16, 17, 18. From whence I further argue,
That the Number 25 cannot be proved to be the Number of the Name of the Beast;
neither has the Apostasy of the world consisted in the frequent and
superstitious use of this Number. For how does a State sin, when they use such
a particular Number as this? The Philistims were a people given to
superstitious observations; yet I cannot see how they did sin in the
observation of the Number 5, when they did send five Golden Emerods, and five
Golden Mice, 1 Samuel 6. 4. The Number 5, is the Number of so many parts of their
Jurisdiction; and thereupon they observed this Number in their
Trepass Offering: But we cannot say, that it was their sin to do it. Neither
can I see (if there should be the like National cause) that it is simply a sin
in any State, to be frequent in the use of the Number 25. For in it self, what
good or what evil is in that Number? You will then say, What is meant by the
Name, and the Number thereof? I answer, Take the Number 666 severally by it
self, it is nothing; but if you take it jointly, as the Character of the Name,
and the Mark of the Name, we may say, That in these things has consisted the
grand Apostasy of the latter Times. And for Mr. Potters Interpretation, I
cannot be satisfied in it, for these three Reasons: First, he undertaketh to
expound the Number, and to apply it to so many Cardinals, so many Churches, so
many Altars, etc. Whereas the Number is not the Number of these, but it is
(...), the Number of the Name of the Beast. Secondly, he undertaketh to show,
how the Beast is frequent in the use of such a particular Number: whereas the
Number is rather the specifi^al Note and Character of the Kingdom it self,
Thirdly, he shows how the Beast is frequent in the use of the Number 25, the
square-root of 666. But what sin is there in the frequent use of such a Number?
To speak properly, in these things there is neither good nor evil. These are
some of the Reasons, that move me to depart from the Interpretation of the
forementioned Author; whom I do otherwise acknowledge to be a man of solid and
excellent Learning, and much to be approved for his industry and diligence,
which he has bestowed toward the discovery of these Mysteries.

Princ. 5. For the Mark of the Beast, and for the worship of the Image, and for
suchlike things, the world is made liable to the most grievous Judgments of
God. This I have largely proved from Rev. 14. 9, 10, 11. Now if you apply this
to singulars, How can men rationally be tormented day and night? How can the
smoke of their burning ascend for ever and ever, for the superstitious use of
the Number 25, the square-root of 666? Surely, all these things ought so to be
stated, that the Justice of God may be cleared in the execution of Judgment. I
cannot then think, that so grievous a Judgment is denounced against the
superstitious use of the Number 25; but rather (as I have largely proved) for
the yielding subjection to the Name or Universal Headship of the Bishop of
Rome, as it began publicly to be established in the 666th year from the
beginning of the Roman, as the fourth Metal-Kingdome.

Princ. 6. In over coming the Name of the Beast, and the Number of the Name,
stands the special object of the Martyrs Victory. This I have largely proved,
from Chap. 15. ver. 2. The persons that stood on the glassie Sea, that overcame
the Beast, were the company and society of Martyrs, which suffered for Christ
in all Antichristian times; and their Victory is no other but a Victory of
Martyrdom. Now if you apply this to the ordinary Interpretation: If the Name
of the Beast be no other but the word Lateinos, and the Number no other but the
Numeral Letters of that Name; what a kind of Victory shall the Martyrs obtain
over Words, and Syllables, and Numeral Letters? We may be well assured, That
there is another kind of meaning in these words; that is, the Martyrs did
overcome that Power, Authority, and Universal Headship it self, which began
solemnly and publicly to be established in the 666th year, from the beginning
of the Roman as the fourth Metal-Kingdome.

Princ. 7. The glorious Resurrection of the Martyrs to reign with Christ 1000
years, is grounded in special upon this Reason, Because they did refuse to
worship the Image, and to receive the Mark. And therefore John in the Vision
says, I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the Word of God, and the
Testimony of Jesus, that these lived (to wit, out of their Antichristian death)
and reigned with Christ 1000 years, Chap. 20. v. 3. It is evident from hence
then, That the Name Lateinos, or any suchlike Grammatical word, cannot be the
Name of the Beast: For the Martyrs were never put to death, neither shall they
ever have their glorious Resurrection, for Names consisting of Letters and
Syllables. The slaughter has been mainly for the refusal of the Authority, and
the Laws made by the Authority or Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome.
Therefore their glorious Resurrection to reign with Christ, shall be for their
suffering in the behalf of Christ.

Princ. 8. The Image of the Beast ought so to be expounded, that it may express
to the life the repair of Roman Majesty, after the deadly wound. This is proved
from the scope of the Text. When the second Beast came out of the earth, he did
cure the deadly wound that the first Beast had in one of his Heads. He had
power also to give life to the Image of the Beast, that the Image should both
speak and live, Chap. 13. ver. 14, 15. Now for the curing of the wound of the
first Beast, and the giving life to the Image of the Beast; these typical
expressions do denote the only repair of Roman Majesty, after the fall of the
old Empire. This is clear from the scope of the Scripture, and it is abundantly
showed in many Commentaries. The Angel also in Rev. 17. has this expression,
The Beast thou saw, that was, is not, and yet is. Here he speaks of the
marvelous recovery of the Roman Majesty, after a former loss and destruction:
which is nothing else in sense and substance, but the making of an Image to the
Beast that was wounded in one of his Heads, and the causing of the Image both
to speak and live. For in a sense it is true, that there was a total
eradication of the Roman Sovereignty for a while; and when it was set up in the
Popes, there was a kind of reviving, and a rising of that Sovereignty from the
dead. The laying down of this one Position, did drive me from an
Interpretation, which seemed to be very plausible in my first meditations upon
this Argument. Now that particular Interpretation did concern the times of
Victor his Excommunicating the Churches of Asia, not long after the writing of
the Revelation. Now because the Roman Jurisdiction over all Churches, did begin
to make its first visible appearance in these times; I did therefore apply the
Number of the Beast to the forementioned Excommunication. And for the
particular time, Calvisius the Chronologer says, That those Churches were
Excommunicated in the year of the World 4145, and in the year of the Lord 196.
Now if you subduct 666 years out of 4145, there will remain the 3479th year of
the World, which was the first year of the Twentieth Jubilee, according to the
Authority of the Chronologer aforementioned. Being furnished with these
Principles, as also being firmly persuaded by other Reasons, That the Beast was
the Bishop of Rome, and that the Number did signify the first visible
declaration of the Authority of that See: Finding also the account by Jubilees
to be (...)* a Number frequently used amongst men in those ancient times: Upon
these Considerations, I was at length induced (probably at least) to take this
as the meaning of the Text: As who would say in plainer terms, Let him that
has wisdom, count by the Jubilees, a Number frequently used amongst men, and
he shall find, that this Beast shall begin to erect and put forth his Power in
the 666th year, from the beginning of the Twentieth Jubilee; and so he shall
come to the particular year when Victor Excommunicated the Churches of Asia.
This Interpretation, though it seemed very specious and plausible at the first;
yet afterward, when I came to dive into the Prophecy, and to compare the
Commentaries, and to look into the natural sense of the Visions; I did find
from the collation of all, that there must be first a death, and a wound of the
Roman Majesty in the Caesar's, before it could be revived in the Popes; the
Caesareate must fall, before the Papacy could begin. This I gathered from the
whole scope of the Apocalyptical learning: And I do admire, how any can begin
the 42 Months from Constantine the Great, or from Julian the Apostata, or from
any other time before the fall of the old Empire. They who do this, to my
understanding, go against the scope and drift of this kind of learning.
Another Interpretation I had, which I did favor in the beginning; and that is
the Interpretation of Moulin, in his Treatise concerning the Complement of
Prophecies: He in that Treatise does set the beginning of the Beasts Kingdom,
at the fall of the Exarchs of Ravenna; and so concludes, That where the Empire
made an end, there the Papacy was to begin: But the Empire ended at the
Exarchate; Ergo. In this Exposition of his, he does well to set the beginning
of Rome Papal, after the destruction of Rome Imperial; for this is but the
sense of the Prophecy. But yet withal this must be remembered, that we must not
set the beginning of the Beasts Kingdom where we will, and how we will our
selves; but we must set it there where it ought to be set. Now for the place
where it ought to be set, it must be at the beginning of the Universal Headship
of the Beast, which is the Name of the Beast, when he did make an Image to the
Beast that had a wound in one of his Heads. If these things be applied to the
times, they do not agree to the ruin of the Exarchate, but to the setting up
of the Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome, under the Emperor Phocas. Then
there was an Image made to the Beast; then the Name or Universal Headship
began; then the Roman Potency did revive in the Popes, which was formerly lost
in the Caesar's; then the second Beast caused the Image both to speak and live.

Princ. 9. The Name of the Beast ought so in special to be exp^unded, that it
may be the subject matter of the Mark. This is proved from Chap. 14. ver. 11.
where the Mark is expressly called, (...), The Mark of his Name. Now it would
not be so called, if there were not something in the Name, that gives being
to the Mark. And therefore when Mr. Potter endevoreth to show, That 25 is the
Number of the Beast; and that the Government may be known by the frequent use
of the Number 25, the square-root of 666: In my apprehension, he should not
have employed himself in the variety of those things in the Beasts Kingdom, to
which this Number might be applied: His prime work had been, first to have
found out the Name of the Beast; and then he should have proceeded to the Mark,
and the Number of the Name. For there is no other Mark, but that which relates
to the Name; and there is no other Number, but that which is the Number of the
Name. I cannot conceive any other: but his mistake is in the subjecta materia,
in the subject matter of the Number. He that erreth in the beginning, must
needs go far out of the way.

Princ. 10. The Name of the Beast ought so in special to be expounded, that it
may appear to be the matter about which the Number is conversant. This is
proved from Chapter 13 v. 17. There it is expressly called (...) The Name then only
must be the immediate Object of the Number, or the thing Numbered: Why is it
else called, The Number of the Name? By this Reason then, I cannot see how Mr.
Potter can apply the Number indefinitely to all such kind of things as are
essential and constituent in the Kingdom of the Beast, seeing the Number is
only restrained to the Name, and is the Number of the Name or Universal
Headship. But let us look to the grounds of the Interpretation laid down by
that learned man. He supposes this Number 666 to be an Image or typical
Representation of the whole Body of Antichrist; that is, of the whole Body of
his Kingdom, State, or Hierarchy. And thus much, says he, is acknowledged by
many Writers, but especially by Cotterius. Further, he adds, If this Number
be an Image or a Type of the whole Body of Antichrist; then no man ought to
imagine, that the whole Image of Antichrist is like to one prrticular Member,
or part of the Body of Antichrist. For as the whole Image of Caesar is not like
unto the Hand of Caesar, or* the Head of Caesar: so neither is the Number
considered wholly applicable to any particular Times, Names, Persons, Places,
or other Individual things, or Circumstances belonging unto Antichrist, as
diverse Interpreters have labored to apply it. But (says he) if any man desire
to know Caesar by his Image, he must compare Head to Head, Face to Face, Eye to
Eye, Foot to Foot; and so conclude a likeness in general, from an induction of
particulars. In like manner, he that desires to know Antichrist by his Number,
he must first find in this Number, such things as are essential and remarkable
to that Government. So far Mr. Potter. In which words of his, though I do
acknowledge there is greater solidity, then I have ordinarily met withal in
Interpretations of this kind; yet under favor, I conceive when all is done,
the Number must be the Number of the Name, or Universal Headship, and that by
right ought to be the thing Numbered. And whereas he says, That the Number is
not applicable to any particular Times, Persons, Places, or other petty
Circumstances of the Kingdom of Antichrist; I do acknowledge, That there has
been vanity more then too much among Interpreters, about the explication of
these things. And whereas the Author aforenam^d, following Cotterius and other
learned men, does tell us, That the Number must be applied to that which is
essential in the Kingdom of the Beast: In this we do fully agree with him; and
therefore we have stated the Name, Mark, and Image of the Beast, and have so
explained these things, that they do contain the very essence, form and being
of that Kingdom. For what is the Name, but the Power and Universal Headship?
And what is the Mark of the Name, but the profession of Subjection to that
Power or Headship? Thus we come to the sense of Cotterius and others in the
main. Now whereas Mr. Potter does stand upon 25 Cardinals, 25 Churches, 25
Articles, in the compilation of Pius Quartus; How does he make all these the
Name of the Beast? In all true Mathematical Demonstration, we should begin with
expositio Dati, the Exposition of the Subject or Antecedent. If therefore the
Name of the Beast be Datum, or the subject of the Demonstration; this must be
first expounded, before the Number can be rightly applied, seeing it is called
the Number of the Name. Secondly, if 25 be the Characteristical Number of the
State or Hierarchy of the Beast; why does not the Holy Spirit, in so large a
description of that Kingdom, once make mention of the Number 25? Shall we
imagine, that he will not once mention that which is individually necessary,
but altogether stand upon remoter points? Thirdly, if the Number 25 is to be
applied to the Hierarchy of the Beast, as the Number 12 is to the New
Jerusalem; why is not the like reason given for the one as for the other? The
Number 12 is therefore so frequently used in sacred Numbers, in reference to
the first Original of the Church, and to the division into Twelve Tribes. And
therefore we read of Twelve Cakes of Shewbread, Exodus 24. 5; of Twelve Pillars
of Moses his Altar, Exodus 24. 4; of Twelve Stones in the Breast Plate of Aaron,
Exodus 28. 21; of Twelve Oxen brought to the Dedication of the Tabernacle, Numb.
7. 23; of Twelve Rods laid up before the Ark of the Testimony, Numb. 17. 1; of
Twelve Spies sent to search the Land of Canaan, Numb. 13. 1; of Twelve Stones
in Jordan, Josh. 4. 9; of the Garment of Jeroboam rent into Twelve pieces, 1
Kings 11. 30; of Twelve Stones on which the Altar of Eliah was built: and many
suchlike instances. Now it is apparent in these Scriptures, That the Spirit
stands upon the exact Number 12: and all this in reference to that ancient
distribution of the Church into 12 Tribes. Therefore in imitation of the Jewish
Church, the Holy Spirit in the new Prophecy, is very frequent in the use of the
same Number, when he sets forth the state of the Gospel Church in these
latter days. But can there be the like Reason given, why the Antichristian
Church is so frequent in the Number 25? Fourthly, if it can be proved in some
places, that 12 is the square-root of 144; and that the Spirit does stand upon
this way of Calculation: yet I am sure he does not universally do this in the
description of the New Jerusalem: For there is a remarkable passage, touching
the measures of that City, in these words: And the City lies foursquare, and
the length is as large as the Breadth; and he measured the City with a reed
12000 furlongs; the length, breadth and height of it are all equal, Rev. 21.
16. If there be any one Text that does show a Characteristical Number to
decypher the Holy City, this is that Scripture. Now if it be the manner of the
Spirit, in all Apocalyptical Computations, to count the square-root of any
figurate Number; why does he not use that method here? In this particular
Number then, 109 is the square-root; and if you will multiply it into it self,
it will make 11881, and the remainder will be 119. Therefore in the Dimensions
of the Holy City, the Spirit does not perpetually look to the Number 12, as to
the square-root of those Holy Numbers. Fifthly, if it could be proved, That 12
is the Root of all the Numbers in the New Jerusalem; yet it cannot be made
manifest, That 25 is the square-root of 666, in so special a manner at least.
For all the Numbers from 625 to 676, have 25 for their square-root: and
therefore all the Numbers aforementioned, may be the Number of the Name, as
well as the Number 666. According to this ground, what certainty of
Interpretation is here to be had? More properly then, if 25 were the
square-root, 625 would rather be the Number of the Name of the Beast. For if
you Multiply 25 into it self, it will make exactly 625, and no fractions
remaining: Whereas 666 (as skilful Artists do use to speak) is numerus surdus,
a deaf Number; it has 25 for the square-root, and 41 fractions remaining. All
these Reasons put together, do plainly show, That 25 is not the only
Characteristical Number; and if it could be proved to be so, yet is not (...),
The Number of the Name of the Beast.

Princ. 11. The Mark of the Beast ought so in special to be expounded, that it
may agree to all those, and only to those that are the Beasts Subjects, and
that it may be the Badge and Livery of their Profession. This is proved from
Chap. 13. ver. 16, 17. He causes all, both small and great, to receive a Mark
in their Forehead, and in their Right Hand. The Mark then agrees to all the
Subjects of the Beasts Kingdom, and to those only that are his: And this also
is the badge of the distinction, in the matter of buying and selling. If this
be so, how does Mr. Potter give a true Exposition of the Number? For admit the
Number 25 be rightly applied to the Cardinals, Gates, Churches, and other
remarkable Circumstances of the City of Rome; yet how does he distinguish the
Beasts Subjects in the matter of buying and selling? The Text says plainly,
That none might buy nor sell, but he that had the Mark, the Name, and the
Number of the Name. The right understanding of these things, lies nor in the
subtilties of Arithmetic, nor in the extraction of the square-root of any
figurate Number, or in any occu't Circumstance of the Kingdom of the Beast:
for these things are discernible unto all, and are obvious in the matter of
buying and selling. Secondly, how do they also rightly expound the Number, who
apply these things to more then the Subjects of the Beasts Kingdom; seeing
these are the peculiar Characters of them only, who are of his flock?
Therefore they who will have Lateinos to be the Name of the Beast, how do they
make this the individual Character of the Beasts Subjects? Our Savior
himself, his Apostles, and many holy Martyrs for sundry ages, have been under
the Dominion of the Latins or Romans: Therefore we cannot be of so flinty a
Philosophy, to believe, That all sinned who lived under the Roman Obedience; or
that all had the Mark of the Beast, who were Subjects under that Jurisdiction.
To speak properly, they sin only against the Kingly Power of Christ, and his
Regal Office as Mediator, that submit to the Roman, or rather to the
Antichristian Dominion in these last times.

Princ. 12. The Mark of the Beast ought so in special to be expounded, that the
whole Company which c^rrieth the Mark, may be set in direct opposition to the
144000, who had their Fathers Name written in their Forehead. This is clearly
proved, from the collation of two Scriptures, Chap. 13. ver. 16, 17, 18. with
Chap. 14. ver. 2, 3, 4, 5. In the former Scripture, we have a description of
those that worshipped the Image, and received the Mark: and immediaiely after
them, there is the description of those that were with the Lamb upon Mount
Sion, and had their Fathers Name written in their Forehead. It is plain then,
That there is an immediate Antithesis or Contraposition betwixt the Lamb and
the Beast; the Name of the Lamb, and the Name of the Beast; the Followers of
the Lamb, and the Followers of the Beast. There is then a perfect contrariety
betwixt these two, as may be seen in the whole Body of the Prophecy. They
therefore who will rightly expound the Book of the Revelation, must diligently
observe the Contraposition; and by the one, expound the meaning of the other
contrary. But withal, this Rule ought to be remembered, That oppositio, must be
in eodem, and circa idem; the opposition must be in the same, and about the
same matter. And therefore, to apply the matter to particulars, I cannot see
how Mr. Potter does proceed by this Rule, in that Contraposition of his,
between the Number of the Beast, and the Numbers of the New Jerusalem. First,
whereas he opposes the Number 144, to the Number 666, he should have proceeded
in eodem, and made the opposition in the same matter. If therefore 144000 be
the Characteristical Number of the Subjects of the Lambs Kingdom; then 666000
should be the Number of the Subjects of the Beast: and so Subject will be
opposed to Subject, and Number to Number. Secondly, Mr. Potter opposes the
Number of the Beast, to the Numbers of the New Jerusalem; which cannot properly
be said to be oppositio in eodem, an opposition in and about the same matter.
For in the true Apocalyptical method, the Beast is not so much opposed to the
New Jerusalem, as to the Lamb, his Ri^al in Kingly Power. If we will speak
plainly, the New Jerusalem is opposed to the Whore of Babylon; the
Gospel Church, to the Roman Idolatrous Church. For after that the Saints had
sung their Halelujahs at the destruction of the Great Whore, these words are
immediately added: Let us be glad and rejoice, for the Marriage of the Lamb is
come, and his wife has made her self ready, Chap. 19. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
Therefore the contrariety stands more immediately betwixt the Lamb and the
Beast; the New Jerusalem, and the Whore of Babylon. Therefore the Number of the
Beast, is not so immediately opposed to the Dimensions of the New Jerusalem.
And yet further, in the opposition between the Lamb and the Beast; between the
Whore of Babylon, and the New Jerusalem, we must go so far only, as may be
well warranted by Scripture, or by necessary deduction from Scripture. And
therefore whereas Mr. Potter lays down this Maxim, The description of the
New Jerusalem, is not for this reason only set down in Scripture, that by it
the knowledge of the true Church of Christ might be described; but that the
false Church of Antichrist, by way of Antithesis, might by the same description
(mutatis mutandis) be also manifestly revealed, page 122. This Position of that
learned Author, I do in part receive; but yet I do not think, that we are to
extend it to every particular, without any restriction. We read in the
description of the New Jerusalem, of 12 Gates, 12 Apostles, 12 Angels, 12
Foundations; and yet I do not think, that we have warrant to look after such a
set Number of Gates, of Angels, of Apostles, of Foundations, in the City of
Rome. And yet further, if we could find such certain Numbers in the City
aforesaid, it were not to the purpose in hand: For in the true sense of the
Prophecy, not Rome within such Walls or Gates, but the Romish Church in such a
largeness and compass of Territories, is immediately opposed to the New
Jerusalem, or the Gospel Church that shall be in the latter times, at the end
and destruction of the Beasts Kingdom. We read in the slaughter of the
Witnesses, that they did lie slain in the streets of the great City,
spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, and where our Lord was Crucified, Chap. 11.
ver. 8. Now there is none that will say, that they did lie slain in the streets
of Rome, literally so called, but within the verge and precincts of the Romish
Church. This properly is the Great City, that is opposed to the New Jerusalem,
to the Holy City, to the Lambs Wife that comes from God out of Heaven.

Princ. 13. The Number ought so in special to be expounded, that it may appear
to be 666, in that method and way of account, which is called the Number of a
Man. For so it is expressly said, Let him that has wisdom, count the Number of
the Beast; for it is (...), the Number of a Man. They therefore who will have
Lateinos, or some such Grammatical word, to be the Number of the Name; how do
they make it appear, That this is the Number of a Man, or that it is the manner
of men to calculate States and Governments by Anagams or Numeral Letters of any
Grammatical Name whatsoever?

Princ. 14. The Number ought so in special to be counted, not according to the
subtilties of humane invention, but according to the nature of the subject
matter, and the manner of the Holy Spirit in suchlike descriptions. For the
nature of the subject matter, the great sin of the world, is, in receiving the
Name, and the Mark of the Name. And shall we think, when the Lord Christ
speaks to his Churches concerning these things, that only they who have skill
in the subtilties and mysteries of Art, shall have ability to understand his
meaning? Surely, though the Number it self may be more mysterious, yet the
Matter Numbered must be in more open view. Secondly, for the manner and use of
the Spirit in suchlike descriptions, his use is to speak Parabolically and
Typically; and yet we find no one instance of the discovery of a Government,
by the extraction of the square-root. Very often we find, when he speaks of
the rising of a Government, or the destruction of a State, he does usually
Number such a Chain or Line of years to each such remarkable occurrence; and he
does refer us either to the Chronology of the Bible, or to the Stories of the
Church. These things are most necessary, for the Calculation of the Times, and
for the Exposition of the Prophecies. But whereas Mr. Potter does wholly build
upon the extraction of the square-root in a figurate Number, I cannot see how
this does agree with the practice of the Spirit in other Scriptures. I must
needs confess, that he speaks very rationally in these words, as they follow:
I have (says he) but beaten and made plain the same path which Mr. Forbes, and
other Commentators have trodden out before. But I am now come to the place,
where they either stood still, or turned out of the way. They say, that the
Number 12 is the square root of 144: why then do they not proceed in the same
Method, to find out the root of the Number of the Beast, seeing they say it is
opposed to the Number 144? These learned men cannot be supposed to be guilty of
so much nescience, as to be ignorant of the square-root of a Number. Rather,
they thought it unbeseeming the Wisdom of God, and the Majesty of the
Scripture, to wrap up such Divine Mysteries in Humane Inventions. But be it
what it will be, it is the foundation of Geometry and Arithmetic; it is that
also, in and through which many famous inventions have been brought to light:
And the words themselves also do insinuate, that the discovery is to be made by
wisdom. So far Mr. Potter, page 47. In this I do agree with him, That it is
the foundation of Geometry and Arithmetic in some good measure, to extract the
square-root of any figurate Number: yet for all that, I cannot see when the
Spirit, either in Daniel or in the Revelation, does speak of Tyrannical States
or Empires, under diverse Emblems and Figures, that we should discover and find
out these Governments, by calculating the square-root of any Number; but
rather, we should go to the Chronology of the Times, and the Stories of the
Church. And in this sense we hold, That Humane Learning is exceeding necessary.
And for the invention of the square-root, it is very necessary in its kind.

Princ. 15. The Number ought so in special to be expounded, that it may be in
some sort discoverable to the people that lived in the days of John, and in the
ages immediately following, though they lived before the beginning of the
Beasts Kingdom. Therefore when it is said, Let him that has wisdom, count
the Number of the Beast; S. John in these words speaks to the people that
lived in his days, and in the ages immediately following, that by this they
should understand the signs of the coming of the Man of Sin. And he does yet
further show, in what Revolution of Time he shall appear: There are seven
Kings; five are fallen, one is, and the other is not yet come: and the Beast
that comes out of the Bottomless Pit, he is the eighth. In which words of his,
he does plainly show, That when seven Forms of Government are fallen in the
City of Rome, then the Beast shall begin as the eighth Potentate. At the same
time also he says, That the Roman Empire shall be divided into ten inferior
Kingdoms; that these have no being as yet, but receive a Kingdom one hour
with the Beast. By the collation of both these Scriptures, it is clear, That
the Number was discoverable in the times of John; and not only to John by
Revelation, but to others also, that would employ themselves by search. From
hence then we may clearly discern, That they are in an error, who would have
the Number 666, to be the Number of the time of the rising of the Beast, and
yet make their account by the years of the Lord. So Danaeus in his Treatise de
Antichristo: The Spirit of God in that place (says he) medleth not with
Arithmetical signification of Letters, but with the Time and Number of years,
wherein those things shall be accomplished that are there spoken of: and for
the particular time, he refers us to the year 666, page 13, 14. Alstedius
says, Denotatur tempus quo Antichristus inchoaturus regnum suum, scil. anno
666, quo tempore coepit Papa maxim dominari, Theol. Polem. Part. 4. Controv.
5. page 388. The like is said By Eckard the Lutheran, and others. Though in
this matter we do agree with the forenamed Expositors, That about the 666th
year from the birth of the Lord, the Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome
was set up; though this be true in some latitude of speech, yet it cannot be
the meaning of the Text. For what knowledge had the people that lived in the
days of John, and in the ages immediately following, of the account by the year
of the Lord? Why should not the Christians that lived in Spain, find out the
Number by the Spanish Era? The Christians in Aegy^t and Africa, by the Era of
Dioclesian? And the Christians under the Emperors of Constantinople, by the
Indictions? These, and many other ways of account, were anciently used.
Dyonisius the Less, about the year 532, did begin to compute by the years of
the Lord; and that way of Computation came not into vulgar use many years
after. It is therefore very strange, That men should Number the times of the
beginning of the Beasts Kingdom, after the account by the years of the Lord,
and yet certain hundred years after, the Church should be wholly ignorant of
that way of Computation.

And thus laying all things together, we have proved by the concatenation and
connection of all particulars, That ours is the true Interpretation; because it
does agree with all the Body of the Circumstances fore-alledged. And for other
Expositions, we have showed the Reason why we cannot rest in them, because in
several Principles, more or less, they do cross the meaning of the Spirit. Now
it remains, that we compare the substance of our Interpretation, with the
scope of the Apostle S. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.

CHAP. XI. A brief Description of the Doctrine of S. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. And how
he does fully agree with the present Interpretation.
ALl Interpreters and Writers, in a manner, do agree in this, That the Beast,
his Name, and Image, spoken of Rev. 13. are all one and the same in substance
with the description of the Great Antichrist in the Thessalonians. Let us come
to the words of the Text.

Verse. 1. and 2. Now we beseech you, Brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and by our gathering together to him, that ye be not soon shaken in
mind, nor be troubled, neither by Spirit* nor by word, nor by letter, as from
us, as though the day of Christ were at hand. In these words, there is some
darkness in our English Translation: for whereas the Translation has it, We
beseech you, Brethren, by the coming of the Lord; the word in the Original is,
(...), for the cause of the coming of the Lord. The Apostle in the former
Epistle, having spoken of the coming of Christ to Judgment; of the
Resurrection from the Dead; and the taking up of those that should remain, to
meet the Lord in the air: Hereupon, certain among the Thessalonians mistaking
the meaning of the Apostle, did conclude, That the Day of Judgment, and the
general Assembly of the Saints, was then at hand. Now to diminish this opinion,
the Apostle does exhort them in these words, I beseech you, Brethren, (...),
for the cause of the coming of Christ to Judgment, (...), for the matter or
cause of our gathering together unto him, that ye be not soon shaken in mind,
nor be troubled, either by Spirit, by word, or by letter, as from us, as that
the day of Christ is at hand. This shows plainly, That they did mistake the
Apostle in his former Epistle, and did understand his words, as though Christ
should come presently to Judgment. Now for their better information, he
proceeds.

Verse. 3. Let no man deceive you by any means; for that day shall not come,
except there come a falling away first, and the Man of Sin be revealed, the Son
of Perdition. He plainly shows, what things should precede the coming of
Christ; to wit, A general defection from the Faith, and the revelation of the
Man of Sin. And this, I take it, does fully open the meaning of our Saviors
words in the Gospel, concerning the woeful state of the Church in the latter
times. He speaks plainly, that many false Christ's shall arise, and shall
deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect, Matthew. 24. 5, 23, 24. Now to what
times can we better refer this, then to the times of Antichrist, to the times
of the Apostasy, in which men shall depart from the Faith, and shall give heed
to the Doctrine of Devils? 1 Timothy 4. 1.

Now whereas the Apostle says, That there shall come a falling away first:
Some of the Ancients, as Hierom, did understand this, of the defection from the
Roman Empire. Though this be a truth, yet it is not the meaning of the Text:
For, the falling away here meant, is, (...), a falling away from the true
Faith, or from the pure Worship of God. So the word is used commonly in the New
Testament: and the sense of the Text does plainly show, That God gave men up to
delusions, to believe lies, because they did not receive the love of the truth,
that they might be saved. The words then do not intend a Civil, but a Spiritual
apostasy or falling away. Further, whereas it is said, And the Man of Sin shall
be revealed, the Son of Perdition: Here is a great question, Whether the times
of the Apostasy, and the Revelation of the Man of Sin, do begin all at one
instant? Some will have this to be a Figure, which the Rhetoricians call
Hendyadys: But they are deceived; for the words are plain, that a falling away
from the Faith, should be by degrees: and when this Apostasy should come to
some ripeness and maturity, then the Man of Sin should be revealed. For how is
it possible, that the Christian Church should degenerate so far from Christ, to
take Antichrist for her Head; but she must be molded, prepared and wrought by
degrees for such a rebellion? And for that expression, The Man of Sin; whereas
the Romish Interpreters, and Hugo Grotius in his Tract de Antichristo, do take
this for one individual Man, herein they are monstrous absurd. For if he be one
Man, as they suppose, then the Apostle tells us, That he was secretly conceived
in those first times, the Mystery of Iniquity did then begin to work. And he
further adds, that he shall continue till the last times, whom the Lord shall
consume with the word of his mouth, and shall abolish with the brightness of
his coming. Upon these grounds, if the Man of Sin be one individual Man, he
must needs be very longlived, he must live in a manner from the first to the
second coming of Christ. But leaving them to make good their own conceits, to
speak positively, The Man of Sin meant in the Text, is, A State, or a
Succession of Men in a State or Government: for John in the Revlation does call
this Tyrannical Empire, by the Title of a Beast; which all do know, in the
sense of the Prophets, does intend an Idolatrous or a persecuting Empire. He is
called, The Man of Sin, by a singular Emphasis, as being exceeding sinful, and
the cause of sin to others: for so it is said in the Scriptures, Jeroboam the
son of Nebat, that made Israel to sin. And if he be the Man of Sin, it is no
hard matter to render a reason why he should be called, The child of
Perdition. This Title was sometimes given to Judas: While I was with them in
the world, I kept them in thy Name; those that thou gave me, have I kept, and
none of them is lost, save the Son of Perdition, Joh. 17. 12. In the next
words, the Apostle does describe him according to his nature.

Ver. 4. Who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or is
worshipped: So that he as God sits in the Temple of God, showing himself
that he is God. For his opposing himself, this is spoken in relation to Christ,
as he is King, Priest and Prophet. So the Beast in the Revelat. is set in
immediate opposition against the Lamb, as if he were another Christ, the Rival
of his Kingly Power and Dignity. And whereas he does exalt himself above all
that is called God; Interpreters do ordinarily take this for Magistrates,
whether Inferior or Superior; above all which, Antichrist must advance himself.
The expression above all that is called God, is a style too diminuent to
express the true God by: There be ma^y that be called Gods; yet to us there is
but one God, 1 Cor. 8. 5. This is spoken of Magistrates, that they are called
Gods; and above all these, Antichrist, as he does pretend himself Universal
Head of the Church, shall exalt himself. Further, whereas it is said, that he
sits in the Temple of God; this is meant of the Church of God, where God is
worshipped in the time of the New Testament, as he was in the Temple of
Jerusalem of old. Now that the Church is called, The Temple of God, is clear
from that of the Apostle, Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God? and, The
Temple of God is holy, which ye are, 1 Cor. 3. 16. The result of the whole
speech, is this, That Antichrist shall sit in the Universal Church, as in his
Episcopal See: for so the word in the Original does signify, Cathedratica
potestate praesidere. By these words it is plain, That the formality of
Antichristianism, lies in the Universal Headship. For when the Apostle does
describe the Great Antichrist by his nature, he says, That he sits in the
Church of God, as the supreme Lord and Ruler. Therefore if that be true which I
have so largely dispured in the Body of the Treatise, That the Name of the
Beast is no other, but his Universal Power and Headship over the Church of God;
then I will leave any man to consider, Whether one and the same thing is not
here spoken by S. Paul, in the Epistle to the Thessalonians: He as God, sits
in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God. And has not the Bishop
of Rome for 1000 years, put himself in the place of Christ, as the Head and
Lawgiver to the Church of Christ? But the Apostle goes on.

Verse. 5. Remember you ^ot when I was with you, I told you these things? We
read in Acts 20. when the (...) sent to Ephesus, he called for the E^ders of
the Church; he told them, that grievous Wolves should come, and that they
should not spare the stock. The same things in effect he spoke among the
Thessalonians, when he did foreshew the decay of the Christian faith, and the
revelation of the Man of Sin. Now for the time of his coming, and the knowledge
they had o^ that time, he has these words.

Verse. 6. And now ye know what with hol^eth, (...) he may be revealed in his
time. ^y the (...) the thing that does withhold, all Interpreters, for the most
part, (...) understand the Great Empire of the Romans. For as long as the
Majesty of that Empire did stand, it would keep (...) the dominion of
Antichrist, who should ari^e. What knowledge the (...) Thessalonians had of
this, is doubtful: yet there i^ nothing more ^ure, then that the Ancient
Writers, (...) as lived before the fall of the Empire, did believe, That when
this (...) (...) come, then the Man of Sin should be revealed* Among many
others, when Hierom heard of the taking of Rome by the R^me, he did make
application of this Scripture, that then the Man of Sin was at the doors. Now
whereas some Interpreters think, that we cannot show any precise time of the
coming of Antichrist, they divide themselves into sundry opinions: And
therefore some speak of his Conception, some of his Birth, some of his higher
advancement into the Throne, and some of the full Perfection of his Power.
Others there are, that take all these together, and tell us, That he was
conceived in the Primitive Times, born about the times of Constantane, set up
in the Throne under the Emperor Phocas, and raised to the high pitch, when he
did assume the Power of both Swords. But all these are but conceits of men's own
Commenting. For the time of the revelation of the Man of Sin, must not be as
every one will feign it at his own pleasure, but as it is positively and
plainly set down in the Word of Truth. Now if we go to the scope of the
Context, the Great Empire of the Roman, the impediment that hindered must be
taken away, and then after that, the Man of Sin must be revealed, (...), in his
definite and determinate time. There is then a precise. definite, and
determinate time, for the revelation of the Man of Sin; and this must be after
the fall of the old Empire. N^w according to these grounds, there can be no
other time intended, but when he was installed Ecumenical Bishop under the
Emperor Phocas. It is clear by the Stories of the Church, That the Empire fell,
and the Kings arose in the fifth Century. And after that, in the year 606 from
the birth of the Lord, and in the year 666 from the beginning of the Roman as
the fourth Metal-Kingdome, the Bishop of Rome was declared Universal Head over
all Churches in the times of the Emperor Phocas. In this year he was revealed,
and declared to the world, in such a manner, as the Apostle does describe him:
for in this year he did begin to sit in the Church, or in the Temple of God, as
in Cathedra, as Ecumenical and Universal Bishop and Head of the Church. And so
we have the particular time when Antichrist was revealed, (...), in his
definite time. This we take to be the natural sense of the Text: for if these
two things be supposed, First, that the being of the Man of Sin lies
essentially in his Headship over the Church and Temple of God. Secondly, that
he did appear in his proper time, after the fall of the old Empire: What other
thing can here be signified or decyphered, but that which we speak of, to wit,
that the Number 666 in the Revelation, does point out the time of the rising of
this Spiritual Monarchy? For as we have formerly showed, the year 606,
according to the calculation of the times in Daniel, is the Number 666, the
Number of the Name or Universal Headship of the Beast. And thus we see how the
scope of the Apostle in this Scripture, does fully answer our Interpretation,
concerning the Name of the Beast, and the Number of the Name. Now let us go to
the words of the Apostle, as they follow.

Verse. 7, 8. For the Mystery of Iniquity does already work: only he who now
lets, will let, till he be taken out of the way; and then shall that wicked
one be revealed. Here Interpreters do inquire, what is meant by the Mystery of
Iniquity. Some do think, that the Apostle does refer to those Heresies in the
first times, that were previous to the bringing in of the Man of Sin. But how
could those gross Heresies be so called? The Mystery of Iniquity did incroach
upon the Church, and upon godly men, under the appearance of the greatest
holiness. Secondly, suppose that in those first times there were some
beginnings of Free Will, Justification by the Merit of Man; yet these things
are not to our purpose: for we are here specially to look after such a working
of the Mystery of Iniquity, as makes way for the Papacy, or the Papal
Government, or the Universal Headship of Antichrist, that he shall sit as Lord,
or chief Ruler in and over the Church and Temple of God. The question is, What
previous workings were there in the Apostles days, and so downwards, toward
the setting up of the Universal Headship. For this is to the scope of the Text,
and this does answer the matter in hand. Let us therefore consult with other
Scriptures. S. John says, Ye have heard that Antichrist shall come: even so
the spirit of Antichrist is already in the world, 1 John 4. 3. What does he
mean by this, that the spirit of Antichrist was already in the world? He does
explain himself in his third Epistle, and the 9th verse, I would have wrote
unto the Church, but Diotrephes, who loves to have the pre-eminence, suffers
us not. It appears from hence then, that in those first times men did affect
that (...), that Primacy or Headship in and over the Church of God. Here then
the Mystery of Iniquity did begin to work in those first times. But lest any
man might allege, that these encroachments were too gross; and that the
Mystery of Iniquity must be carried on with greater shows of holiness, that
very godly men themselves might be deceived by it: For the clearing of this,
let us consider, That the Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome, is built
upon the Primacy of Peter over the rest of the Apostles: and for the Primacy of
Peter, there were some beginnings thereof in the very Apostles days. His
Authority was so great, that it seemed to be a Law. Paul charge him, that he
did compel the Gentiles to be circumcised, Gal. 2. 13, 14. I demand then, How
did he compel them? Not by Precept or Command; not by any coercive Power, but
by his Example. His Authority was so great in the Consciences of the People of
those times, that is seemed to be a Law: And Barnabas himself also was drawn
away with their dissimulation. S. Paul also, an eminent Apostle, seemed to be
nothing in comparison of Peter: for so he expresses himself; James, and John,
and Cephus, which seemed to be Pillars, Gal. 2. 9. Such credit had Peter with
the Faithful in those first times. And truly, after his death it was not
diminished: for the ancient Fathers of the Church, conceiving him to be Bishop
of Rome, did ascribe more then too much to his Successors, and to that
Succession for his sake: At least, the Bishops of Rome themselves did take too
much upon them, under that consideration. And this did go on, and increase so
by degrees, that it did never leave, till it came at that pitch at last, that
the Bishop of Rome was declared Universal Head of the Church. And this
Universal Headship, we call the Name of the Beast; and the time of the
Institution, and remarkable appearance thereof, the Number of the Name. And
look as the ancient Church, having a Promise of the coming of Christ, were held
in expectation about the time of his coming: So the Christian Church, being
forewarned of the coming of Antichrist, were also bu^ied about the times of his
coming. Now for the means to understand the time when it should be: First, they
were to look to the Revolution of Empires: Secondly, to the Number of years, to
the setting up of that State or Government. For the Revolution of Empires, the
Apostle says, He that lets, will let, till he be taken out of the way. All
the Ancients did understand this of the fall of the Empire; and when the Empire
should be removed, then they did believe that the Man of Sin should be revealed
in his time. Again, we have further proved, That the time of his coming is not
only discoverable by the Changes and Revolutions of Empire, but by the Number
of years. For if you reckon 666 years from the beginning of the Roman as the
fourth Metal-Kingdome, you will come punctually, prec^ely, and determinately,
to the Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome, under the Emperor Phocas. And
this is that which the Apostle d^ mainly treat of in this Chapter, That when A^
(...), ^e shall sit as God in the Temple of God; that is, he (...) sit in the
Church, as in his Ep^opal ^ee. From the ^ope of the whole, it is clear, That
the formality of (...), d^h lie in the Universal Headship. And for the time of
the revelation thereof, the Apostle says, It must be after the removal of the
old Empire, and then the Man of Sin shall be revealed in his time. Now this
time can be no other, but in the decree of the Universal Headship, under the
Emperor P^ocas, 666 years from the beginning of the Roman as the fourth
Metal-Kingdome. And so John in the Revelation, and Paul in the Thessalonians,
do agree in one and the same sense; and both Scriptures do facere paria.

Now then, to gather up all into one sum. Seeing the truth of our
Interpretation is verified in all the particulars of the Text, Rev. 13. Seeing
also it is confirmed by the whole sense of the Chapter, Rev. 17. Seeing also it
agrees with all the Principles and Grounds throughout the whole Prophecy. And
last of all, seeing it does fully con^ent with the scope of the Apostle in the
Epistle to the Th^ssalonians: We may safely conclude, That we have given a
right Exposition of the meaning of the Spirit; and have truly showed, what is
meant by the Beast, his Name, Image, Mark, and the Number of his Name. Now we
will come to the practical part, to the use of the Point.

CHAP. XII. The Application of the whole: (...) (...) is made first, of those
things that are (...) (...).
HEre if we apply our selves to the Times, we shall find, That the term
^ntichristian, is used by sundry sorts of men, for sundry kinds of Intere^.
^ome do use it aright, and others do dangerousl^ and schismatically traduce, by
the misapplication thereof. For, seeing the great sin of the world has
consisted in this, In subjecting themselves to an Antichristian Authority, and
to the Laws ma^e by that Power; And seeing i^ is the duty of all true
Christians, to separate and depart from such an Authority, as being so
diametrally contrar^ to the Crown and Dignity of Christ their Sovereign Lord:
In this point, it is not to be doubted, but the Protestant Churches have
rightly rejected the Beast, his Name, Mark, Image, and the Number of his Name,
as they have cast away the Authority of the Bishop of Rome, and the Laws, as
they stand by that Power and Headship. In all the passages of the ^atise
af^regoing, we have largely proved, That the Universal Headship of the Bishop
of Rome, is the Name direct^ opposed to the Name, Power and Headship of the
Lam^* And therefore the Protestant Churches, as formerly, so now, ^ave just
Reason to depart from the Church of Rome, as she ha^h departed from Christ.

Now the Friends and the Followers of the Separation, do endeavor in these
times, to go in the same method; for by this they think to free themselves from
Schism. When they are put upon it to give a Reason, Why they depart from the
Ministry, from the Ordinances, and the Public Worship; they tell us, The
Ministry is Antichristian; they have not renounced their Calling by the
Bishops. In a word, they call all that Antichristian, which has been used in
Antichristian times, and has a conveyance and transmission down to us, by the
means of Antichristian men. Which Position of theirs, as it is most erroneous
and false; so it does draw many dangerous consequences along with it. Therefore
to prevent such cunning Tricks of Legerdemain, we will lay down the truth
distinctly. First, we will show the things that are directly Antichristian.
Secondly the things that are Antichristian by Analogy and Reduction. Thirdly,
the things that are Antichristian by the Position of some Circumstances, as
they are truly Christian by the Position of others. Fourthly, the things that
are Antichristian falsely so called. For that which is ^ruly Antichristian, all
such are said to have the Mark of the Beast in their Forehead, and Right Hand.
For the Mark, in the Greek it is said, He caused all to give them a Mark; as if
the intent of the Beast were by this, that they should give testimony that they
are his. They are also said to receive a Mark, Chap. 14. To have the Mark,
Chap. 16. Now then we are sure, that to give, receive, or have the Mark of the
Beast, is no other, but that Act by which the Consciences of men are obliged to
the Authority of the Pope and his Church; When also they do prosess, That by
their Swords, Wits, Goods, Lives, and by all that they have, they will maintain
the Decrees and Laws made by that Authority. The Mark in the Forehead, is the
public Profession of the Universal Headship in the view of men: and the Mark
in the Right Hand, is the solemn Resolution and Obligation to defend and
maintain the Authority of the Beast, against all that do oppose it. And truly,
the event of things does notably answer the prediction. For we see by plain
experience, That the Papists (such is their zeal to the Catholic Cause) do
outstrip us by many degrees. The Jesui^es are never idle, they compass Sea and
Land, they ^urn themselves into all forms, and are still animating of Princes
and People against the Protestant Cause: Yea, they have so wrought, that almost
no man among them seems to spare either Labor, Wealth, Counsel, or Life it
self, to uphold the Name and Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome. God
grant, that one day they do not rise up in Judgment against us, for we do not
come near them in the least degree, in promoting the Kingdom of Christ, or in
setting up the Gospel as the Regent-Law among the Nations.

But the Papists will not hear that they are enemies, or that they go against
the Lord and his Word: They hold, That the Bishop of Rome is the Vicar of
Christ; and that he has all his Authority by delegation from him. These are
specious shows; But in deed and in truth, they are real enemies against Christ:
For, the Scriptures and the words of the Gospel, they can do nothing, but
merely as the Pope and the Church of Rome do give life, vigor and authority to
them, and as they do interpret them, which always they do to their own
advantage. There is no truth more clearly delivered in Scripture, then the
Doctrine of Justification by Faith in Christ; and yet the Pope says on the
contrary, That there is a Purgatory after this life; and that the souls there
detained, are freed by Masses, Indulgences, Pardons, and such like means. God
and his Word say, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. The Pope on the contrary says, Thou shall worship Saints, Images,
Crosses, Relics, and the like. God and Christ have commanded all men, to
search the Scriptures, and to try the Spirits, of what nature they be: Now the
Pope on the contrary commands, that men should forbear the doing of this, and
that they should depend upon him alone. God and Christ say, Marriage is
honorable amongst all men, and the bed undefiled: The Pope on the contrary,
forbids Marriage to the Ministry. By these, and sundry suchlike instances,
it is apparent, That the Name and Sovereignty of the Beast, is every way
contrary to the Name and Sovereignty of the Lamb. For what the Lamb does
command, the Beast does countermand for the most part. From hence it is clear
then (say the Papists what they will) when they leave Christ, to follow the
Laws of the Pope, in sense and substance they make him their Christ, their
Spiritual King, Head and Governor, and so in effect are no true Christians.
Now on the contrary, seeing the Lord Christ is given as a Leader and Commander
to his people, they who refuse the Laws of the Pope* to yield subjection to
Christ, in the times of the greatest persecution, are every where mentioned in
the Revelation, to have the Name of the Father written in their Forehead, Chap.
14. ver. 15. To be the remnant of the seed of the woman, that keep the
Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ, Chap. 12. ver. 17.
The Papists then in receiving the Doctrines and Decrees of the Bishop of Rome,
under that formality as they do believe him Universal Head of the Church, are
positively, directly and immediately Antichristian.

This Truth being laid down, a stream of excellent Uses do naturally flow from
it.

First, We may here contemplate and behold the truth and infinite Wisdom of
God, speaking in the Scriptures. It is now above 1500 years since, that John
wrote the Revelation, in which he spoke of the Beast, his Name, Mark, Image,
and the Number of his Name. Now if we go to experience, What have all ages for
this thousand years last past, but verified and fulfilled the truth of that
which he spoke of long before? He that shall diligently read the present
Treatise, will find it to be true as we have said.

Secondly, here is matter for our prayers and tears, yea for our bowels to yern
over those great Countries, Kingdoms and Commonweals, which do as yet own the
Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome. They do continue in a great sin
against the Kingly Office of Christ; their profession is no other, but Apostasy
from the true Head of the Church; and unless they repent, they will one day
feel the great Plagues contained in the words of the Prophecy.

Thirdly, here is cause for the Protestant Churches to be thankful to the Lord:
For did they rightly understand it, he has delivered them from a bondage and
slavery, which far surpasses the bondage of Egypt or Babylon. For in the
present case, if men under this Government refuse to Worship the Beast, and to
receive his Mark; the penalty is, that they shall have no liberty to buy nor
sell; they shall be killed with the Sword; they shall have their blood spilt;
they shall be subjected to sundry kinds of death: On the contrary, if they do
worship the Beast, and receive his Mark, the Lord Christ does threaten on the
other side, that they shall be tormented day and night, and the smoke of their
burning shall ascend for ever and ever, Rev. Chap. 14. ver. 7, 8, 9, 10. The
day of the deliverance of the Churches from Romish Tyranny, was a day of
deliverance from a Tyranny over their Souls, over their Consciences, over their
Bodies, over their Estates. But all Treatises are full of Uses of this kind.
We will proceed ^o that which is Antichristian by Analogy and Reduction; for
this is more immediate to our purpose.

CHAP. XIII. Concerning that which is Antichristian by Analogy and (...).
IN the progress of the Discourse, we have showed, That the formality of
Antichristianism, is in the Headship of the Beast. By this Standard of the
Market, we may prove all other things that do more remotely symbolize and agree
with the Great Antichrist.

First, the power of the Magistrate, when it has no bounds or limits, but he
does all by his Will and Prerogative in the Church of God, does come too near
to the formality of Anti-Christianism. Antiochus Epiphanes, in the Prophecy of
Daniel, is described as a mighty King or Potentate in the Seleucian Line; but
when he was not contented with his Power, which was great enough, but would
exalt himself against the Prince of the Host, and tread down the Sanctuary, and
do all things after his own will; in this he was a figure of the Antichrist to
come, Dan. 8. 12. But that we may speak more distinctly in a matter of so great
moment, we do desire to lay down this necessary caution in the beginning. Let
us then distinguish betwixt the Essence, and the Exercise of the power. For the
Essence, we do willingly acknowledge, that the Lord has ordained Magistrates to
be over the people, for his own glory, and the public good; and that
Magistracy is the Ordinance of God, Romans 13. v. 1, 2, 3. And though he has not
tied any Nation or People, so strictly and precisely, to this or that
particular Form of Government; yet his pleasure is, That the People should obey
the Government that is set over them. In this case, If they resist the Power,
they resist the Ordinance of God, and draw great guilt upon their Souls for
their resisting. If we look to the Nation and People of the Jews, they did meet
with the greatest Changes and Alterations of State; yet in each Alteration the
will of the Lord was, that they should obey the Civil Authority, set over them,
for the preservation of the Public Peace. The hardest Change that they ever
met withal, was the translation of their State from the house of David; yet
they were to pray for the peace of the King of Babylon, and seek the good of
the City, whither they were carried Captive. All this plainly shows, That
Magistracy is the Ordinance of God; and the Lord would have his own Command to
be observed by his People, though they did live under Heathen Kings. Secondly,
we are to consider the Exercise of the Power. And here, First, is the lawful
execution; and, Secondly, the exorbitancy and excess of the Power above Law.
For the lawful use of the Power, we do willingly yield, That the Supreme
Magistrate has not only Authority in the Commonwealth, but he has also
great Power, in and about the affairs of the Church. And this thing we have
often incu^cated in the Body of the Treatise; to wit, That the Reign of Christ
does begin upon the Earth, when the Kingdoms, States and Governments of this
World, become Nursing Fathers to the Church. And so we do affirm, That it does
appertain to the Higher Powers, to take order, that Unity and Peace be
preserved in the Church; that the Truth be kept pure and entire; that horrid
Blasphemies be suppressed; that the Ordinances of God be duly settled; that the
profane, the ignorant, and rude body of the People (who of themselves would
never call upon the Name of the Lord) be brought by their Power and Authority
to the public places of Worship. For the better effecting of which, they have
Power to call Synods, to be present at them, and to provide, That whatsoever is
transacted in them, be according to the mind of God. In this sense we may not
doubt to say, That the Chief Magistrate in every Commonwealth, is the Supreme
Head in Causes Ecclesiastical; that is to say, The Supreme Head in Causes
Ecclesiastical that do of right appertain to him, and do fall under his
cognizance by the Law-Divine. In the forementioned cases, he is the Delegate
and Vicegerent of Christ upon the Earth. And this we take to be the lawful
Exercise of the Power. Thirdly, there is the Hyperbole or Excess of the Power,
when the Magistrate is not contented with his own limits or bounds, but shall
further endeavor to carry all by Will and Prerogative in the Church of Christ.
This is that which comes nearest to the formality of Antichristianism: for,
Antichrist is said to sit in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God.
If therefore the Supreme Magistrate shall do the same in the Church of Christ;
if he shall control and do all things after his own Will in the house of
Christ; this is to resemble the Great Antichrist, and to do the same in effect
which he does. But for this we have a clear example in Steven Gardener Bishop
of Winchester, who of all others is noted by Foreign Divines to cry up such an
excessive Prerogative of the Kings of England in Causes Ecclesiastical. For he
did not shun to maintain, That it was at the pleasure of the King to abrogate
Statutes, and institute new Rites in the worship of God: yea, he further said,
That it was lawful for the King to forbid the people the use of the Cup in the
Lords Supper, and the use of Marriage to the Ministers. And the ^round of all
this was, Because the King was Supreme Head in Causes Ecclesiastical. Now in
way of opposition to this, the Foreign Divines have risen with great
indignation. These are the words of Dr. Rivet, in his Explication of the
Decalogue, Edit. 2. page 203. Qui enim Papatus doctrinam adhuc fovebat, ut
postea apparuit, novum Papatum in persona Regis erigebat. For he (meaning
Steven Gardener aforesaid) who did as yet nourish the Doctrine of the Papacy
(as after it appeared) did erect a new Papacy in the Person of the King. And
Calvin in his Commentary upon Amos, Chap. 7* ver. 13. speaking of them who did
ascribe the Title of Supreme Head in Causes Ecclesiastical to Hen. 8. King of
England, has these words; Hoc me semper graviter vulneravit, quum vocarent
ipsum summum Ecclesiae Caput sub Christo. This has grievously wounded me
always, when they called him the Supreme Head of the Church under Christ. He
did take this for no other, then an incroachment upon the Prerogative of
Christ. And he might well do so, if we look to the Interpretation of Steven
Gardener aforementioned, with whom he had to do. But the learned man does
proceed in these words: It is certain, if Kings do their duty, they are both
Patrons of Religion, and Nursing Fathers of the Church, as Isaiah calls them,
Chap. 49. ver. 23. This therefore is principally required of Kings, That they
use the Sword wherewith they are furnished, for the maintaining of Gods
Worship. But in the mean time, there are inconsiderate men, who make them too
Spiritual; and this fault reigns up and down Germany, yea spreads too much in
these Countries. And now we perceive what fruit springs from this root, viz.
That Princes, and all that are in the place of Government, think themselves to
be so Spiritual, that there is no other Ecclesiastical Government. And this
Sacrilege creeps amongst us; because they cannot measure their Office with
certain and lawful bounds, but are of opinion, they cannot reign, unless they
abol^sh all the Authority of the Church, and become the Chief Judges both in
Doctrine, and in the whole Spiritual Government. Therefore there ought to be a
temper kept: for this disease has always reigned in Princes, to desire to bend
Religion according to their own pleasure and lust, and for their own profits in
the mean time. So far he. In which words, two Points are observable: First, the
lawful exercise of the Power of the Supreme Magistrate, as it does keep its due
limits in Causes Ecclesiastical. Secondly, the redundancy and the excess of the
Power, when it does tread under foot the Laws of the Church. That which these
learned men did speak concerning the Supremacy of the Kings of England in
Causes Ecclesiastical, and the danger of the excess of the Civil Power, has
been too truly verified by some in our days; not only to the total ruin of
themselves, but also to the destruction of that Sovereignty it self, which they
did so immeasurably exalt. And whereas Calvin in the place aforementioned has
these words; Et hodie quam multi sunt in Papatu, qui regibus accumulant
quicquid possunt juris and potestatis. And at this day (says he) how many are
there in the Papacy, that heap upon Kings whatsoever Right or Power they can
possible? So that there may not be any Dispute of Religion, but this Power
shall be in one King, to Decree according to his own pleasure, whatsoever he
list; and that should remain fixed without Controversy. So far he. But we for
our parts may not only say, Quam multi in Papatu? How many in the Papacy? but
how many in the Profession of the Protestant Religion, have accumulated this
great Power upon Princes, that they might do what they list in the Church of
God, and in the determination of matters of Faith? In Daniel and the
Revelation, these things are set down as the true causes of the destruction of
Kingdoms. That is a most Divine expression of Daniel and the three Children,
Chap. 2. ver. 20, 21. Wisdom and might are his, and he changes the times and
seasons; he removes Kings, and sets up Kings. And for the cause of these
Changes, it is more particularly expressed Chap. 7. v. 11. I beheld then,
because of the voice of the great words which the Horn spoke; I beheld even
till the Beast was slain, and his body destroyed, and given to the burning
fire. All solid Interpreters do understand some State or Government to be typed
by the Little Horn. Now the destruction of such a State or Government, does
arise immediately from hence, because of great words which the Horn did speak
against the most High. Therefore the exorbitancy of the Power against Religion,
Christ, and his Saints, is oftentimes the cause of the eversion of States and
Kingdoms. But that we may more fully understand how far the Power may go, and
whither it must not go, let us consider the examples of the Kings of Judah. And
here it is clear, That Asa, Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, did great things
about the affairs of the Church, and had a very large testimony for their zeal
in the Worship of God: yet I am sure none can say that their Power was so
transcendent, as to abrogate any thing that was appointed or immediately
commanded by God in his Word. For when Uzziah the King would offer Incense,
that appertained not to him, but to the Sons of Aaron, he was imitten with
leprosy, and compelled to dwell alone, as one that should have no commerce nor
society with men. So Belshazzar the King, when he made a Feast to a thousand of
his Lords, we read, That in the time of the Feast, the fingers of a man's hand
did appear, and write upon the wall the destruction of the King and the
Kingdom. And the cause of this Judgment is expounded by Daniel himself, in
these words, Chap. 5. ver. 25. Thou have lifted up thy self against the Lord of
Heaven, and they have brought the vessels of his House before thee: and thou
and thy Lords, thy Wives and thy Concubines, have drunk wine in them.
Belshazzar and Nebuchadnezzar both, by strong convictions and demonstrations,
were brought to understand, That the God of Israel was the only true God, and
that they had their Dominion from him. Now when they were not contented with
this which the Lord had given them, but would insult over the Giver, and drink
wine in the Bowls of the Temple, which they had taken with sacrilegious hands;
this was the cause of the ruin of the King and Kingdom at last. There is a
remarkable passage of Herodotus in his second Book, where he makes mention of
a Statue that was set up to Sennacherib in one of the Temples of Egypt, with
this Inscription and Title upon it, (...), Whosoever looks upon me, let him
learn to be pious. This Testimony, as it has the greatest probability of
truth; so does it singularly well agree with the Story of the Scripture. We
read, that 185000 were slain in one night in the Camp of the Assyrians, by an
Angel sent from Heaven; Sennacherib himself was killed by his own two sons; and
that great Empire did decline and lose its vigor by degrees. Now if we look
into the cause of all this, we shall find, That the insolency of that King
against God and his Church, was that which broke him all to pieces. This was
done in the sight of all Asia, that the world might know that the insolency of
the greatest Powers of the Earth against God, will prove the certain cause of
their destruction. But we will conclude this matter with that Exhortation of
the Psalmist, for so he speaks to all Princes and Potentates who do entrench
upon the Prerogative of Christ, Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, and be
instructed, ye Judges of the Earth: serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with
trembling: Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, Psa. 2.
ver. 10, 11, 12. Now why does he exhort the Kings and Judges of the Earth to be
wise, rather then other men? They are Gods Vicegerents, and there is none
greater in Power then they; and through the greatness of their place, none are
more apt to bend Religion according to their own pleasures and lusts, then they
are. Because this is more immediately against the Kingdom of Christ, and
comes nearest to Antichristian pride, the Psalmist does advise them to take
heed what they do, to serve the Lord with fear, and to rejoice with trembling:
If not, he tells them plainly, their insolency against Christ and his Church,
will be a certain cause of their destruction. This is made manifest from the
beginning of the Psalm: The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers
take counsel together, against the Lord, and against his anointed, saying, Let
us break their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us, ver. 2. Now he
does direct his speech to such as these, and tells them plainly, That the Lord
Christ will break them with a Rod of Iron, and dash them in pieces like a
Potters vessel. The scope of the Text, is chiefly concerning the exorbitancy
and exaltation of Earthly Powers against Christ. And these, we say, do more
nearly and immediately symbolize with the Great Antichrist.

Secondly, they come also in the nearest resemblance to Antichrist, and to that
which is truly Antichristian, who forsake the Scriptures, to hang merely upon
Dreams and Revelations. For as the true Believers, who take Christ for the Head
of the Church, have the Word of the Gospel applied to their hearts, and sealed
to their Consciences by the inward working of the Spirit: So on the contrary,
they who mis-believe, and take Antichrist for the Head of the Church, have his
Superstitions, Laws, and Decrees, rooted and grounded in them, by Visions,
Dreams, and Apocryphal Revelations. This is clear from the scope of the
Scripture. And here is the es^igies and lively pourtraicture of Antichrists
Kingdom. But before I come to the point, it is necessary that I should premise
one Caution in the beginning. And here let it be noted, That I do not speak of
Revelations absolutely and in their full extent, but of Revelations
restrictively, and in a sense only. If we take Revelations in the first sense,
I do easily agree, That not only in the first 2000 years from Adam to Abraham,
but also in the last dispensation, since the coming of Christ, God has
wonderfully revealed himself to his People, as it is clear by the Scriptures,
and by the Stories of the Church. And in my own experience I can avouch it to
be true, as I have had occasion to converse in several places, so I have met
with some good Christian^, whom it has pleased the Lord to bring home, by an
admirable way of Conversion. And some select persons also I know, whom it has
pleased the Lord to choose out for himself, to bear witness to his Truth, both
in dark and troublesome times: I have found, that they have spoken great
things, concerning the last troubles, and diverse events thereof, which
experience has confirmed to be true. But concerning this kind of people (that
a distinction may be made between true and Apocryphal Revelations) I have ever
noted three things in them. First, they have diligently waited upon the public
Ordinances of God, and have broke through all difficulties; through persuasions
of Friends, through oppositions of Enemies, through threatenings of Tyrannical
Courts, that they might enjoy the means of their Salvation. Secondly, I have
observed, that they have always adhered to the written Word, and have spent
very much time in the meditation of the Promises, Commands, and other Passages;
desiring nothing more in all the world, then that they might know the mind of
God, that they might save their own, and the Souls of other people. Thirdly, I
have observed this in them, That though they have been under extraordinary
teachings, yet they have had great darknesses, in which they have always begged
of the Lord, that he would not leave them so, and that he would carry them on
further. Now in praying, waiting, and using the means, they have first or last
had assured help from the Lord, by the immediate supply of his Spirit. There is
much spoken by the Schoolmen, concerning the harmony betwixt the Grace of God
and Endeavor of Man: Suarez has his way, Alvarez bath his; Penottus seems to
draw a thread betwixt both: and Cajetan says, In hoc ego non possum quietare
intellectum meum: In this I cannot satisfy my understanding. But for my part,
I never found better grounds of resolution any-where, then from the experiences
of some Christians, whom it has pleased the Lord a long time to exercise in
the School of Temptation. As they have had sundry changes of trouble and fear;
so they have had interchangable supply of Spirit, and of auxiliary Grace, to
direct, help, and comfort them in all their fears. There has been a sweet
parallel betwixt Gods grace and their endeavor; as they did work under the
grace, and by the help of grace, received. By their experiences, I do find,
That it is the manner of God in dealing with a Soul, to break it all to pieces,
and then wholly to make it up, by the continual help of his Spirit. Now this
does not any way drown the endeavor of man, but does only put him upon the
work of his Salvation with fear and trembling, and upon an humble dependence
upon the Lord, for the supply of his grace. This I have found from the
experiences of such as have lived by Faith in the Promises, and have prayed
much by Faith in the Promises. With some of these the Lord has dealt by
peculiar Revelations. But these are particular privileges, which he does
vouchsafe to certain persons extraordinarily, whom he does set apart for
special services, either to himself, or to his Church. I do acknowledge, That
some Believers in this last dispensation, may be partakers of such
extraordinary workings of the Spirit; therefore I will not absolutely and
peremptorily conclude against all Dreams, Visions, and Revelations in these
last Times. And I think it very expedient, that men should be moderate in their
censure.

But yet for the ordinary course of Visions and Revelations, which men do make
boast of in these days, it is very much to be suspected, that they do proceed
from no good Spirit: Especially when they are carried so high, as to live above
Ordinances, and to slight the Scriptures, which God has appointed as the way
and means to Salvation. Nay, when they shall go further, and maintain things
apparently contrary to Scripture, and the analogy of Faith, and rest wholly
upon the proof of extraordinary Revelation; there is great cause why we should
have this way in deep suspicion, that the power and working of Satan is here.
And they who call every thing Antichristian in the Ministry, in the
Ordinances, in the Worship, in the literal expressions of Scripture; if they
would be pleased to examine themselves, and lay their hands upon their own
hearts, they would find, That by their slighting of the Scripture, and by
their hanging upon extraordinary Revelations in matters contrary to Scripture,
they themselves are the most Antichristian men, and do come in the nearest
resemblance to the Great Antichrist, as he is described by the Apostle, in the
Epistle to the Thessalonians, and by John in the Book of the Revelation. But
let us come to particulars; these are the words of the Apostle, Even him whose
coming is after the working of Satan, with miracles, signs, and lying wonders,
and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish, because
they did not receive the truth in the love of it, that they might be saved,
Chap. 2. ver. 9, 10. In which words the Apostle does plainly show, and
foretell, That not only at the coming of Antichrist, but also in all the time
of his Kingdom, the Devil shall have power given him to do great things; to
deceive the world, that they may believe the lies of Antichrist. It is expressly
said, That his coming is after the power of Satan: for as God did work by the
Apostles, to bring men to Salvation; so shall the Devil put forth all his power
in Antichrist, and his followers, to seduce the world to destruction.
Oecumenius has a very proper expression, (...), The Devil shall do all in the
midst of him, or by him as the mean or instrument. The friends and followers
of the Church of Rome do strongly plead the glory of Miracles, as a note of
their Church: and so they do truly fulfill the Scripture; for it is expressly
said, that the coming of Antichrist is with all power, and signs, and lying
wonders, and that he does seduce the world with all deceivableness of
unrighteousness. And we see by experience, where he has wanted the Scripture,
and the color of Divine Revelation, there he has usually confirmed his
Doctrines by lying wonders; that is, by such wonders as the Lord does permit
him to work, to establish lies and errors in the Consciences of men. The
Stories of the Church are full of examples of this kind, and innumerable
instances may be given. And although many of our Writers do take all those
things in a manner for lies, which are written in the Legend; for it is the
punishment of a liar, that he shall not be believed when he speaks true: yet
for all this, I do incline to their opinion, who do distinguish the several
pieces contained in that Rhapsodie. Some things there mentioned were merely
invented, and others there are which we may probably judge to be real
operations of Satan to deceive the world. The words of the Scripture come to
this Emphasis and height of expression; For this cause God shall give men
strong delusions to believe lies: Therefore the Devil must have very great
power in the times of Antichrist, to deceive the world, how else should the
Scriptures be fulfilled? But passing by the multitude of examples that might be
given, for their sakes who in these times do slight the Scriptures, and hang
upon Revelations, we will come to a pregnant instance in the Tenth Century.
This for the most part is called by Writers The dark age. Bellarmine and
Baronius themselves do mourn over it, for the want of learning. But for my
part, I do believe, it was not so much defective in these things, as it did
abound in Revelations, Visions, Dreams, and suchlike, by and through which
Satan had a very great power in the Consciences of people. In that Century, in
the times of the Saxon Monarchs, in the year 977, well near 700 years ago,
there was (as Speed does relate in his Chronicle) a very hot contention about
the Marriage of Ministers. Dunstan and the Monks stood strongly on the one
part, that Ministers should put away their wives; and the Ministers strongly
pleaded on the other side, that Marriage was the Ordinance of God. Concerning
this matter, a Council was held at Winchester, where after long dispute, and
much against the Monks, it was greatly suspected that side had gone down, had
they not referred themselves to the Rood or Crucifix placed upon the w^ll of
the Church, where the Council sat. To this great Oracle S. Dunstan desired
them devoutly to pray, and to give diligent ear for an answer: who in as great
bounty, as they in devotion, gave them this advice: God forbid it should be so
(said he) you judged well once, and to change that again, is not good. This,
says our Historian, was Authority sufficient to suppress the Priests, who now
with their wives went down the wind. And indeed (says he) to blame they were,
to suspect this their Judge, who never was heard to give wrong sentence before.
Speed. Chron. page 355. Saving the great worth and learning of the Historian, I
believe, That this was not the first false judgment given by this Judge; and I
believe it will not be the last, as afterward shall be declared. Spondanus in
his Epitome of the Annals of Baronius, in the year 975, does differ somewhat
from this relation. These are his words: Qua de re cum a Sancto Dunstano
Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo Synodus Wintoniae congregata esset, deprecante ipso
rege ac plerisque Episcopis, ut iidem Clerici restituerentur, mirandum illud
contigit ut Imago Cruc^fixi in edito Ecclesiae affixa, audientibus cunctis
dixerit, Non fiet, non fiet; judicastis been mutaretis non been. Quod omnes
Clericos eorumque fautores confusos reddidit and lingues. It appears by this
passage, That King Edward surnamed the Martyr, and many Bishops with him, did
intercede very much, that the Ministers might have their wives restored unto
them; and when all were in a suspense what answer should be made, this wonder
happened, that the Crucifix determined the contrary: and so the Priests were
confounded, and made speechless. After these things were done, the Ministers
were not yet satisfied; therefore the matter was brought again to Council, and
a great Assembly congregated at Cleve in Wilishire, whither repaired the
Prelates, and most of the Estates of the Land, besides Gentlemen, and of the
Commons an innumerable sort. This Synod being set, and the Controversy
propounded, a hot and a sharp Disputation insued, and was maintained for a
while with many bitter invectives. But whether through the weakness of the
foundation, or the overpress of weight, or both; the Joysts of the upper-Loft,
wherein the Council was held, suddenly brake, and down fell the floor, with all
the people thereon; whereof many were hurt, and some slain outright. Only
Archbishop Dunstan, then President and Mouth for the Monks, remained unhurt:
For the Post whereon his Chair was set, stood (and not without miracle) wholly
untouched. And hereupon the Historian concludes in these words: Thus by this
fall, fell the Cause of the Secular Priests, and the Peoples affections were
drawn to the Monks: and the liberty of the Ministers to accompany their wives,
was now taken away. Spondanus says, that this Council was held at Calne; but
there is no great difference: Calne the Market Town, and Cleve a small Village
are so near together. In that Council, says he, Mirandum illud accidit cunctis
adversariis vel extinctis vel contritis, solus Dunstanus qui Synodo praesidebat
illaesus evaserit: That is, All of the adverse party who were for the Marriage
of Ministers, being either killed outright, or sorely bruised; only Dunstan,
the President of the Synod, remained without hurt.

This is a true relation of the fact, and most Historians do agree. Now let us
come to inquire, by what power and by what efficacy these things were done. And
for my part, I think it was very just with God, to forsake the Christian world,
and to deliver them unto strong delusions to believe lies, because they had
forsaken his truth; and because the Ministers were so base, as to suffer their
Cause to be tried by the Rood or Crucifix, it was very just that they should
further be deluded by the power of Satan. What shall we think of the Oracles
among the Heathen; of the answer of the Gentile gods; of the power which the
Devil has in those Countries that lie wholly under gross Idolatries? There is
no doubt to be made, but that Satan had great power to deceive the world by
wonders. See August. in his Book Of the City of God, Lib. 10. Cap. 16. The
Scripture also is very plain to the same purpose* If there arise among you a
Prophet, or a Dreamer of Dreams, and gives thee a sign or a wonder; and the
sign or the wonder comes to pass, whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, Let us
go after other gods, which thou have not known, and let us serve them: Thou
shall not hearken to the words of that Prophet, or Dreamer of Dreams; for the
Lord your God proves you, to know whether you will love the Lord your God with
all your heart, and with all your soul, Deuteronomy. 13. ver. 1, 2, 3. In which words
it is plain, That the Truth may be set up in the Church of God, according to
the written Word; and yet for the trial of the sincerity of men, God may suffer
seducers to arise to do great things. We have a large experience of this in all
the times of the Beasts Kingdom: For when our Savior says, There shall arise
false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders;
insomuch that if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect, Mat. 24.
24. these things are specially spoken of the times of the Kingdom of
Antichrist, when the Devil by the permission of God, had great power given to
him to deceive the world by wonders and signs, and great variety of
Revelations. From hence I am induced to believe, That the answer given by the
Crucifix at Winchester was real, and it was done by more then an ordinary
power. Let us consider the meaning of that place in the Prophecy of Zachary:
Ask ye of the Lord rain in the time of the latter rain; so the Lord shall make
bright clouds, and give showers of rain, to every one grass in the field: For
the Idols have spoken vanity, and the Diviners have seen a lie, and have told
false dreams, Chap. 10. ver. 1, 2. Here I demand, How could the Idols speak
vanity? The word in the Original is Teraphim, Idols made after the similitude
of a Man. With these Idolaters did usually consult in matters of great
difficulty: And Mr. Pemble upon the place, says, It is very probable, that the
Devil used the like feats to cozen the Jews, as he did to the Greeks and other
simple Gentiles. And we may say the same touching the answer of the Rood: God
in his just judgment might suffer apostatizing Christians to be deceived by
the immediate delusions of Satan, because they did not receive the truth in the
love of it, that they might be saved. But of all others, that place of the
Apostle is most proper to the purpose, The Spirit speaks expressly, that in
the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing
spirits, and doctrines of Devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their
Consciences seared with a hot iron; forbidding to marry, and commanding to
abstain from meats, which God has created to be received with thanksgiving, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. Seeing the Apostle does here so plainly speak of the Apostasy
of the latter times, and of the Prohibition of Marriage, Meats, and other
lawful things; all do agree in it, That he points to the times of Antichrists
Kingdom. Only the great Question lies here, Why the Prohibition of Marriage
is called (...), A Doctrine of Devils. Mr. Mede in his learned Treatise
concerning the Apostasy of the later times, thinks that this is Genitivus
materiae, a Genitive case of the matter; because Demons and the Souls
departed, are so much worshipped in the Papal Kingdom. Though it is true in
the general, That Daemon-worship (as he says) is used in that Kingdom; yet it
is not the meaning of this Text: For here is plainly Genitivus efficientis, a
Genitive case of the efficient cause; for the Doctrine of the Prohibition of
Marriage is, (...) A Doctrine of Devils, because it was brought into the Church
by the suggestions of those impure Spirits, to cast miserable mortals upon all
occasions of sin. If therefore we do determine the case, that the Devil in the
Rood did utter this voice touching the Marriage of Ministers, God forbid it
should be so; it does singularly agree with the words of the Apostle, when he
speaks of the Prohibition of Marriage in Antichristian times, that it is
(...)* A Doctrine of Devils. For to say truly, The Prohibition of Marriage, as
it did continue for many hundred years together, so it had its immediate
original from the delusion of Satan. Now for the fall of the house at Cleve or
Calne, we may probably believe* That God might suffer the Devil to do great
wonders (for so Spondanus calls it, mirandum) to deceive the world: What else
should be the meaning of that place, Rev. 20? He laid hold on the Dragon that
old Serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, and bound him a thousand years, and
cast him into the Bottomless Pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him,
that he should deceive the Nations no more, ver. 2, 3. By this he does tacitly
imply, That the whole time of the Beasts Kingdom, was a time of the loosing of
Satan, in which God was preased to give him leave to do great wonders to
deceive the world; and therefore in the two last Verses of the former Chapter,
these words are expressed: And the Beast was taken, and with him the false
Prophet, that wrought Miracles before him, with which he deceived them who had
received the Mark of the Beast, and them that worshipped his Image: These both
were cast alive into a Lake of fire burning with brimstone, ver. 20. When this
was done, an Angel came down from Heaven with a great Chain in his hand, and
bound the Dragon, the old Serpent, that he should deceive the Nations no more.
All this plainly declares, That in Antichristian times, the Devil had freedom
to do great wonders to deceive the Nations. If therefore at the fall of the
house, they who stood against the Marriage of Ministers were marvellously
delivered, and those that stood for it were slain outright, or sorely bruised,
we must not wonder at these things: The Devil can do great things to deceive
them who forsake the Scriptures, and the known Will of God, to hang upon
Visions, Dreams and Revelations. There was a time when the Devil could not
touch a hair of Jobs head: Thou have made an hedge about him, and his substance
is increased in the Land: yet we see when God did give leave, the Devil could
cause fire to come down from heaven to devour his sheep; he could blow down the
house upon his Children by a violent wind; he could do any thing when he was
let loose And so truly the times of Antichrist were the times of the loosing of
Satan: God did permit him to do great things to deceive that kind of people,
who had forsaken the plain way to Salvation written in the Word, to look after
dispensations of a higher light, by Visions, Dreams and Revelations.

Now then, to make Application of all these things to our times; my speech and
exhortation is to them who amongst us have departed from Ordinances, and from
Scriptures, and are now for extraordinary Revelations: my earnest desire is to
them, That they would lay these things to heart. If they go on, if they build
upon such uncertain grounds, let them seriously consider, whether they may not
be deluded by the power of Satan; and whether God in his just Judgment may not
deliver them over to believe lies. I will not make mention of that Sect which
goes under the Name of the Quakers; what they are, and who they are, God
knows: I do desire to contain my self in such things as I have some experience
of. There have been some friends of my familiarity heretofore, whom I did
conceive to be people of good hope; these, as I have observed, have departed
first from the Ministry, and then have come to slight the Written Word; and
then last of all, to hang upon Revelations, and extraordinary Enthusiasms of
the Spirit. I have seen a Book scattered abroad by these men, it bears the
Title of Gerard Winstanley his new Law of Righteousness. The argument of the
Treatise, is, That the Propriety of Goods is the Curse laid upon the Creature;
That all things should lie in common; and that the whole earth should be
brought to a Public Treasury. For probation of this, as he does make some
mention of the practice of the Apostles in the Primitive times, and that which
shall be in the future glorious estate of the Church: so for the more special
confirmation of this, he does depend upon an extraordinary Revelation, as it is
expressed, page 57. In the beginning of the Treatise, he does distinguish three
Ministrations; the Ministration of Moses, of Christ, and of the Spirit: And,
says he, as the worshippers in Moses Ministration envied those that worshipped
the Son of Man: So those who now worship Christ at a distance in their several
Congregations and Forms, and are most zealous, these are the bitterest enemies
to the Ministration of Christ in the Spirit, page 14. But further, when he
comes to expound himself concerning the Ministration of the Spirit, he slights
all outward Forms, and does look only to inward Teachings. Now I will speak a
word or two to the followers of this way: I will not say in positive terms,
that they are led by the delusions of Satan; neither will I judge of their
final estate; they stand or fall to their own Master: yet nevertheless, I may
be so bold (seeing they have so often in their mouths the Whore of Babylon,
and, Come out of Babylon my people; and that every thing is Antichristian, not
only in M^nistery, Magistracy, but also in the propriety of goods) to desire
them to look home to their own hearts, whether they are not most Antichristian
themselves, or whether that Spirit which did so strongly deceive the
Antichristian world, does not deceive them also, when they do believe and
profess such things as are directly and diametrally contrary to Scripture. For
these men, though I do desire to speak moderately of them; yet in some
particulars they are delivered over to deep delusions, when they go so palpably
against the written Word, and pretend extraordinary Revelation. It were good in
this case, that they would judge themselves, that they do not prove in the
event the greatest promoters of the Kingdom of the Beast. I am persuaded, that
Gregory the Great was in the main a godly and zealous man; yet it appears by
his Dialogues, that he did run into foul errors, into Idolatry, into
will worship, and the like, when he left the Scriptures to follow Revelations.
This is the only word which I do desire to speak to them.

Secondly, here is also a word of Admonition, for all those who endeavor in
these times to extinguish Book-learning. For though it is a most certain truth,
and much to be lamented, that men have looked too much to Scholarship, and have
made an Idol of it; for they have not regarded the inward teachings of the
Spirit in the heart, nor the Spiritual understanding of the Mystery of
Salvation, which are the principal qualifications to prepare and fit men for
the Ministry. These things, I confess, have been too much slighted, and the
slighting and neglect of them has been a great cause of hurt to the Church of
God, and damage to the Souls of men. This shall never be denied by me. For how
may we probably conceive, that a Minister will come home with the Demonstration
and Evidence of the Spirit (so powerfully at least) to the Conscience of the
Hearer, when he himself is altogether a stranger to these inward workings? How
can he so effectually bring home the lost Sons of men to Christ, when he
himself never had a true feeling of his lost condition? They must needs then
run into a great extreme, who dote so much upon Secular Learning, and do
neglect the chiefest thing. But yet on the other side, they go as far out of
the way, who would have this kind of learning to be extinguished in the Church
of God. This I much fear may be one mean to throw the world back again upon
Visions, Dreams, and Revelations, to set up the Kingdom of Antichrist once
more. Now whereas it is alleged, That there were excellent Preachers in the
Apostles times, when there were no Universities, nor was there any Humane
Learning acquired by study. Though this should be granted, those extraordinary
Revelations are now ceased. Therefore we must be contented, to go in the
ordinary way, and not to look for those extraordinary distributions, which were
in the first times. They who are for the dissolving of Universities, and for
the total cashiering of Humane Learning, let them stay until there be a
renovation and a return of these extraordinary gifts unto the Churches. Some
are of opinion, that such times shall come: if that be true, let them be
patient till they do come. However, as the case does stand for the present, I
believe they who take away Humane Learning, do what in them lies to reduce the
Antichristian times. All do agree, that in these times the Church was in an
eclipse or great darkness. Now let us inquire after the time of the emersion,
how the Church came out; and the time of the immersion, how she was brought
into this darkness? For the time of the emersion, most do pitch upon it, that
she waded out of obscurity at the time of Luther, when the eternal Gospel began
to be preached to every Kindred, Tongue, and Nation. Yet if we seriously
consider the times, we shall find, That the light began to break out, and the
day began to dawn, at the taking of Constantinople, in the year 1453. For the
Greek Empire being destroyed, and that Eye of the Christian world being put
out, it pleased the Lord by this means to cast many learned Grecians into this
Western World. This gave occasion to the reviving of the Languages; and the
reviving of the Languages brought in the study of the Scriptures, and other
ancient Authors; and things began to be cast into another mould. By this means
the more learned sort were brought off from the Doctrine of the Schoolmen, and
the more zealous ones from Visions, Dreams, and Revelations; and so the world
was prepared to receive another kind of light. Not to mention the troubles
which Reuchlin, Pagnin, and Arias Montanus did meet withal, it is manifest by
the Epistles of Erasmus, how much the Monks and Friars were enraged at him: He
tells us how in England, France, Spain, Italy, and everywhere in a manner,
they did both publicly and privately inveigh against him. And it went for a
received Maxim among many, That Erasmus did more hurt then Luther. How could
that be? He revived the Tongues, he was an instrument to bring men to the study
of the Scriptures, and ancient Authors: and by those amoeniores literae (which
he so often speaks of) he did bring the world from Monkish darkness, and
foolish Revelations. Campanella therefore calls the War betwixt the Protestants
and the Papists, Grammaticale Bellum, a Grammarian War; because by the study of
the Languages, by the Greek and the Hebrew Tongues, the Reformation of the
Church was introduced. And it is the sentence of Melancthon, Non aliam ad
veterem barbariem reducendam magis compendiariam esse viam, quam si studia
linguarum interirent. There is no more compendious way to reduce the ancient
barbarism, then if the studies of Languages should peresh, Orat. tom. 4. page
465. As light then as men make of Humane Learning in these times, it was one
chief mean, under God, to bring the world out of Antichristian darkness. And it
is the judgment of so id men, that if it should be totally abolished, it would
occasion the return of that darkness once again.

Now let us come to consider the Stories and the time of the immersion, how the
Church came first under this darkness. It is clear from the process of the
aforementioned Discourse, that about the time of the Emperor Phocas, the
Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome was publicly proclaimed, the
Scriptures began to be slighted; and the Traditions of the Church immoderately
extolled. Now here is a great demand, How is it possible that the Church could
apostatize and degenerate so far in one or two Centuries, seeing in the age of
the Christian Caesar's, when Chrysostom, Hierom, Augustine, and others lived,
there was so much light? The answer is clear, The Goths, Hunnes and Vandals,
and other barbarous Nations, came out of the North, overturned Churches, burned
Libraries, overthrew Schools of Learning; and by this means the world was
organized and fashioned to receive the Kingdom of Antichrist, and all that
whole body of false Doctrine, that should be set up in the Consciences of
ignorant people, by Visions, Dreams and Revelations. From all which I do
conclude, If there should be a total abrogation of Book-learning, it would be a
compendious way and means to bring the Church into its former darkness: For as
experience shows, That the taking away of that Learning, was one chief me^n
to introduce Antichristian darkness: So the restoring and renewing of it again,
was one principal mean of the recovery of the former light.

Thirdly, they do symbolize and come in the nearest similitude to the true
formality of Antichristianism, who do build their Corsciences upon men, and do
make men the Lords of their Faith. In this sense we are to take the words of
our Savior, when he says, Mat. 23. 9. Call no man your Father upon the earth;
for one is your Father, which is in heaven: Neither be ye called Masters; for
one is your Master, even Christ. Some are so void of understanding, as to take
these words according to the letter; as though the practice of Christianity
should extinguish civil relations and distinctions betwixt man and man. But
these are idle conceits, we are to look to the scope of our Saviors meaning:
The Jews in his time were divided into diverse Factions, into the Sects of the
Pharisees, Sadduces, Herodians, Gaulonites, and the like. Now it was the
ambition of those times, for every man to have his Rabbi, and each Rabbi to
have his Scholars depend upon him, as the Lord of their Faith. In this sense
our Savior speaks, that they should call no man Rabbi, Rabbi; and gives this
reason, One is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are Brethren. In these
words he does especially point at the formality of Antichristianism, that
should be in the Popes Kingdom. For though there is much ado made betwixt the
Critics in the Greek, Hebrew, and Syriack Tongues, about the true Origination
of the word Papa; yet I find, That all do agree in the signification, that it
is as much in sense as Spiritual Father. Now then, if we look to the practice
of the Romish Church, we shall find it apparent, That the Body of the People
do depend upon their Teachers, as their Spiritual Fathers; and all the
Spiritual Fathers of the lower degree, do depend upon the Bishop of Rome as the
Father of all. And herein that Hierarchy does directly oppose the true Church
of Christ, as it is described, Ephesians. 4. ver. 4. 5, 6. There is one Body, and one
Spirit, even as you are called into one hope of your calling: one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all. The Apostle further speaks,
how the Mystery of Iniquity did begin to work in the Church of Corinth: Every
one of you says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of
Christ: Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized in
the Name of Paul? 1 Cor. 1. 12, 13. It appears by this, That the Unity of that
Church was broken by many divisions; several Believers had their several
Rabbis, on whom they did depend: and though Paul and Cephas would not take so
much upon them, to be the Lords of peoples Faith, and the Heads of Parties; yet
the false Apostles did wonderfully affect such a kind of Title, and too many
carnal Christians in those days were too forward to pin their Faith upon other
men's sleeves, and to come in the nearest formasity to the Antichristian
practice in these last times. The world is too apt to fall into Divisions, and
to say, I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, and I am of Cephas. And in this, men must
needs symbolize with them, who make the Bishop of Rome the Lord of their Faith,
and do profess themselves to be Members of his Church. The building upon men
then, is that which does bring any people in the nearest resemblance to
Antichristianisme; and the more they do this, the more or less are they
Antichristian. And this I conceive to be one chief reason in Scripture, why the
falls of the most eminent Saints are left upon record, Because others should
not dote too much upon them. Moses did anger the Lord at the Waters of Meribah
and Massah; he died before he entered into the Land of Canaan, and the Angel of
the Lord did bury him in obscurity: No man knew of his Sepulcher, because the
Children of Israel should not go a-whoring after it, Deuteronomy. 34. 6. And in the
New Testament, among all the Apostles, the faults of none are left so upon
public record, as those of Peter: And what is the reason of all this?
Doubtless the Lord did foresee, what Idolatry the Church of Rome would commit,
in owning his Universal Headship over the Church, as that the Power of the
Keys was given into his hand alone. For these causes I believe the great falls
of Peter are left upon record, that the Papists should not say, I am of Peter,
I am of the Bishop of Rome the Head of the Church, by succession from Peter.
Cyprian and some of the Churches of Africa, fell into another extreme: They
thought, if a man had denied the truth in time of persecution, he should never
be received into the Ministry again, but should stand in the Body of the
People, as one of them only. I cannot but in the general approve the
strictness of the Discipline, especially against the faults and corruptions of
Ministers, who should be Lights and Examples to others: But that they should be
so strictly dealt with all, never to be received, no not upon terms of the
greatest Repentance, Humiliation, and godly Sorrow; I may say in this case,
That Cyprian, and the rest of the African Fathers, were too Canonical. And it
was well for S. Peter, that he was no Minister in Africa, when he denied his
Master in the Highpriests Hall: Surely, by the rigor of such Principles, they
would never have received him into Office again. But the Lord Christ had a
better end in the permission of his fall: Simon (says he) Satan has desired
to winnow thee as wheat: but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith should not
fail, Luke 22. 31. Here then the reason is clearly showed, why Satan did
prevail so against Peter, why he was upheld merely by the Prayer of Christ; the
reason is this, When thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren God in great
wisdom does suffer the most eminent Ministers to fall greatly, to pluck down
their pride, that they may be more humble, and that their bowels of affection
and tenderness, may be greater toward the lost Sons of men; and that they
should preach the Grace of God more tenderly and more feelingly, to the winning
and saving of miserable Souls. These were the causes of the fall of Peter: and
one special reason is also here to be remembered, God did permit him to fall so
foully, to prevent that sin of Antichristianity (as I may so speak) which
should be so general in the last times. Now the sin of Antichristianity, is to
make men the Lords of our Faith, to build upon Peter, or the Pope, the
pretended Successor of Peter, in matters of Faith and Salvation.

Fourthly, they do symbolize with the Great Antichrist, who use a lawful
Authority, Antichrist-like, to serve their own pride, ambition, and external
glory. The Apostle says, I would have written unto the Churches; but
Diotrephes, who loves to have the pre-eminence, suffered us not, 3 John ver.
9. Here then, seeing he did love to have the pre-eminence, we may probably
conceive, That it was in the lawful Government of the Church; there was an
affectation of precedence even in those days. And in what times may not the
like spirit of pride be in some men, when they are put into place of Rule? We
read also in the Directions of Paul concerning the choice of a Bishop, that he
must not be a Novice, lest being swollen up with pride, he fall into the
condemnation of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3. 6. It is clear from these words, as also
from the whole Epistle, that there must be a Government in the Church of God:
and whosoever S. Paul's Bishop is, he must have the principal stroke in the
Government. For these words are immediately added: If a man know not how to
rule his own house, how shall he take care for the Church of God? The Church of
God is Christ's house; and the Bishops, Elders, and Ministers of the Church,
have their Office by delegation from him, and not from any other Authority. Now
such a lawful power as this is, men may sinfully abuse and pervert, to the
setting up of their own greatness; and therefore the Apostle does give this
caveat, Not a Novice, lest being swollen up with pride, he fall into the
condemnation of the Devil. By a Novice, he does not intend a man young in years,
for Timothy himself was but young; but he means a beginner in the School of
Christ, a Novice in manners: such a one he would not have set over the House of
God, lest being swollen up with pride, he fall into the same sin, and the same
condemnation as the Devil did, being sometimes an Angel of light. From this
instance then it is clear, That a lawful Power may be used in an Antichristian
manner. Such beginnings of pride, the Apostle probably might see in those
days: and these might occasion him to say, The Mystery of Iniquity does
already work. Now whereas some do impute it to this or that Government, that it
would be as Tyrannical and Antichristian, as any that went before: Let them not
deceive themselves: The Government may be Christ's; yet if any do use it to
serve their own Pride, Tyranny, or Lordliness, the fault is their own: It lies
in the corruption of the Person, but not in the nature of the Office. The
superiority of Parents over their Children, of Husbands over their Wives, of
Magistrates over the People, are all by Divine Institution; yet the persons may
so demean themselves, that they may tyrannize, and if we may so speak it, may
Antichristianize. That is a remarkable passage which the Lord has, concerning
Stewards in a lawful power; If that evil servant shall say, My Lord deferreth
his coming; and shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and shall eat and
drink with the drunken: the Lord of that servant will come in a day when he
looks not for him, and will cut him in sunder, and appoint him his portion
with hypocrites, Mat. 24. 48, 49. By a Servant or Steward, we may understand
Magistrate, Minister, or any other whom the Lord has entrusted with a lawful
Power in Church or Commonwealth. Now if they use this Power illegally and
tyrannically; if Ministers cast those out of the Church, who should be kept in;
if they keep in those who should be cast out; if they abuse the Power of the
Keys which Christ has committed to their custody; if they use the Discipline
of the Church, merely as a Rod to smite their fellow servants: In such a case
as this is, we may say, That in respect of their persons, the Elders of the
Church may resemble the Great Antichrist, and may symbolize with him in his
Pride and Tyranny; yet for all this, the Office is Christ's, and it is from God
by divine Institution. It were then a very profitable point, that the Friends
and Followers of the Separation, who to justify their practice, do call this
Antichristian, and that Antichristian, would distinguish betwixt the several
forms and kinds of Antichristianity. For as I have made it appear by the
course of this Chapter, some things are directly Antichristian, and other
things are only Antichristian by consequence and reduction: So also some
things are Antichristian in respect of the Office it self, and other things
only have the form of Antichristianity, merely because of the evil carriage of
the person in a lawful Office. These things are specially to be noted. And so
much concerning the several particulars which are truly Antichristian by
Analogy and Reduction. Let us now go to the third point,

CHAP. XIV. What those things are which are (...) only by the position of some
Circumstances, as they are truly Christian by the position of others. The
Conclusion of the whole.
THere be two things especially, that here need to be inquired into. The first
is concerning the Compulsive Power of the Supreme Magistrate in matters of
Religion, whether that be Antichristian yea or no? The second is, Whether it be
Antichristian, to maintain the future glory and splendour of the Church of
Christ upon the Earth? For some do think, that this position will bring us back
again to the Riches and Magnificence of the Popish Church. In these two cases
we are carefully to distinguish: for such may be the Circumstances, that these
things may symbolize with the Antichristian Pattern; and such they may be, that
they may set forth, decypher and express that future glory of the Church as it
shall be.

First, concerning the Coercive power of the Magistrate, we do then acknowledge
his Coercion to be Antichristian, when he shall constrain men to subject their
Consciences to those things which are directly contrary to the Laws of Christ.
And of this we have largely spoken in this Treatise, when we had occasion to
make mention of the two-horned Beast, and of his compelling all men to receive
a Mark in their Forehead, and in their Right Hand. There is no doubt to be
made, but Compulsion in this case is directly Antichristian. Secondly, Rites
and Institutions of Humane Invention, though perhaps they may seem to be more
innocent, yet it does coast too near upon Antichristian Tyranny, to compel the
Consciences of men to these things. For the Ceremonies of the Church of
England, when they stood in their vigor, men did judge diversely of them. Some
did esteem them to be Antichristian; others did beat them as burdens; and a
third sort judged them harmless and inoffensive. But yet among those who did
give the fairest Interpretation, there were some who did think it very hard,
that men should be compelled, that the godly Ministers should be deprived, and
that so many sincere Christians should be subjected to persecution in the
Ecclesiastical Courts; that no tears or prayers would prevail, but that they
must either yield, or suffer the greatest extremity. The instance of the
curious Glasses of Pollio the famous Roman, is well known: It had been better
they had been broken, then that the Servant should have been so cruelly beaten.
But now that power is laid aside. Thirdly, in points more remote from the
foundation, where the Scriptures seem to run as clear for one opinion, as for
the other; it is very hard in these lesser scruples, that they who have the
power in their hands, should hang the Consciences of other men at their
girdles. Oftentimes it may come to pass, that they who have the Authority, have
not the Truth on their side; and they who have the Truth in the main, may be
dark in some particulars, and may need a better light. In this case then, must
they who dissent be compelled to yield, or be censured as Rebels against the
Laws of the State? This would be an hard Censure; yet I will not call it
directly Antichristian, though the practice may come somewhat too near that
method, and may resemble it very much.

But here an Objection may be made concerning the present Heresies which are
now in the Land, What should be done to the suppression of these?

I will not enter into the bowels of this Question, it being so largely and
learnedly handled by others in several Treatises which are now in the hands of
all men. My desire is, only to keep close to the point of Compulsion, so far
forth only as it has the formality of Antichristianism. Therefore as to the
present Sects, I think it necessary to distinguish between the persons who are
Leaders merely upon Principles of Conscience, and those who are led by them.
For the persons who are Leaders, it is expedient also to distinguish betwixt
their first Principles, and the absurd Deductions and Consequences drawn from
those Principles. Now for those persons who are Leaders of others merely upon
Principles of Conscience, I think it necessary, that Compulsion should be more
sparingly used, and greater care should be to give satisfaction. For some
Doctrines I believe are now on foo^, which have tolerable Principles, though
they have ill Consequences. I will give one instance: The Doctrine of the
Millenaries for many hundred years, from the times of Hierom and Augustine,
has gone for an error in the Church of God. But to speak truly, the error lies
in the Consequences, and in the ill deductions of falsehoods from true
Principles: For in it self it is true, that Christ shall reign upon the Earth a
thousand years, and this reign shall begin at the dissolution of the
Antichristian Kingdom. This is the scope of Rev. 20. and it is a hard thing to
compel a man to deny such a truth, so plainly delivered in the Scriptures. Yet
I must needs confess, as heretofore, so now, men have mixed this truth, with
many falsities of their own invention. Yea, there is scarce an opinion which
conscientious men do follow, but there is some one Principle or other, which
does chiefly incline them to be of that belief. It were good then, that the
conscientious at all seasons were cited to make Confession of their Faith, and
to render a Reason of the hope that is in them; and that there should be a more
moderate use of Compulsion. But this Question I leave to the large Disputes of
others, who have copiously handled the subject. Now we will come to the other
Point, where Coercive Power is necessarily to be used.

Secondly, the use of the Coercive Power is so far from being Tyrannical or
Antichristian, that it is most necessary for the suppression of Blasphemies and
Reproaches against the known Truth of God: For some fall into a contrary
extreme, they think all Compulsion to be illegal. And hereupon they are for an
absolute, boundless, and universal Toleration of all Opinions; never
considering the Circumstances, but desperately passing from one extreme to
another. If they did well consider the matter, there is no ground for
Toleration of Blaspemous Opinions, rightly so called: For perhaps some, either
through passion, or ignorance, or both, may bestow such an opprobious Title
upon the Truth. We have a clear instance for this, in the glorious state of the
Church mentioned by Zachary: And it shall come to pass, when any shall yet
Prophecy, then his father and his mother that begat him, shall say unto him,
Thou shall not live, for thou speak lies in the Name of the Lord. And his
father and his mother that begat him, shall thrust him through when he
prophesies, Za^h. 13. 3. It is clear, that these things are spoken concerning
the glorious times of the Church at the call of the Jews; when the Lord shall
pour upon that Nation the Spirit of Grace and supplication; when they shall
look to the Messiah whom they have crucified; when there shall be a Fountain
opened to the House of David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and
for uncleanness. Their chief sin, is their enmity against the Gospel, and the
justification of their Ancestors for the Crucifying of Christ. When this sin
shall be mourned over and pardoned, then the Lord does promise, That all Idols
shall be taken out of the land, and such zeal shall be to the Truth, that the
Parents themselves, rather then fail, should concur to the coercion of such a
Son, who should prophecy lies in the Name of the Lord. But there is a great
question touching this expression, His father and mother that begat him, shall
thrust him through. This cannot be taken according to the letter, for it
belongs only to the Magistrate to have the power of life and death. We are to
expound this phrase, according to the analogy of the Old Testament, where the
Parents were to bring their Son to the Elders of the Gate. And so
proportionably in the times of the New Testament, when all other means should
be tried in vain, the Parents themselves shall bring their Son to the Civil
Magistrate, to suffer, rather then the truth it self should suffer. Many have
endeavored to avoid the force of this Scripture, and to illude it by
distinctions; but for my part, I cannot see but it is of great force against
fundamental errors, rightly and truly so called, which tend to the apparent and
manifest ruin of the Doctrine of Salvation, and to the great hurt of the Souls
of men. Though the affections of Parents are tender toward their Children, yet
in those wonderful times, the Prophet does insinuate, that they shall be more
tender to the truth, and to the welfare of the Church of God. In a comparative
sense then, it is said, That his father and mother that begat him, shall thrust
him through. Further, though a Toleration may be granted to tender Consciences,
yet the profane, the careless, and those that never mind the Salvation of
their Souls, ought not to be left to their free indifferency; the Magistrate
should use Com^ulsion to them, to bring them to the Public Worship. For if we
travel through the Land in the length and breadth thereof, we cannot probably
presume any other, but that the greater part would desire rather to live like
Heathens, without God, and without Christ in the world. If that be true which
is spoken of some places, it is much to be lamented, That the people are left
destitute of the means of their Salvation. Let the richer sort pay no Tithes,
or, that which is equivalent, have them at an easy rate: Let the Youth have
their pleasures and pastimes upon the Lord's Day; I believe it matters not much
with these, whether there be any public Worship or no. If it be wholly at
their choice, the Church, or the Publick-place of Meeting, may well be left for
Jack-Daws, or such like Birds, to build in: So little do they mind the means
of their Salvation. In such a case, I conceive, the Supreme Magistrate, the
Keeper of both the Tables, the Vicegerent of Christ upon the Earth, is to
compel men to come to the Publick-places of Worship. So did the godly Kings of
Judah; and so have the Christian States and Governments ever done; they have
demolished the Monuments of Idolatry, established the Public Ordinances, and
have compelled the more ignorant and rude sort to wait upon the means of their
Salvation. And this I take to be the meaning of the Parable, When the Lord sent
forth his servants to invite guests to the Wedding; go out into the highways
and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled, Luke 14.
ver. 23. Here two Questions are to be demanded: The first is, What is meant by
the guests that did lie in the highways and the hedges? Secondly, Why should
compulsion be used rather toward them, then to the two former kinds? For the
guests that did lie in the hedges, we must necessarily understand the ruder and
more ignorant sort of people, as the wanderers and beggars from door to door.
Of these we cannot give a reason, what rule of Marriage they do observe, what
difference there is betwixt father and child: we may probably presume, that
the greater part of them live without God, and without Christ, without the
consideration of Heaven or Hell, or the future state of the Soul hereafter.
These are the guests that lie in the highways and in the hedges. Now why is it
that Compulsion should be used toward these, rather then the other two kind
of guests? The reason I take it is this, That they have not a tolerable
discretion to judge of that which is good for their Salvation; and therefore
compulsion should be used toward such brutish kind of men. And though they
would lose their own Souls by what lies in them, yet the Magistrate or the
Minister should not lose them. For the two former kind of guests, the one was
of a more civil education: for being invited to the Marriage, they did all
plead their necessary employments; one had married a wife, another had bought
five yoke of Oxen, and a third had bought a parcel of Land. The inordinate
affection to some one worldly thing or other, is the true cause why men do not
come to Christ, to take him as their Lord and Husband. Though they have a mind
to come, yet they are loath to deny such a particular profit or pleasure that is
dear to them. Now concerning these, we read, That the servant was not to
compel them to come to the Wedding; only the Lord said, None of these shall
taste of my Supper. They who refuse the offer of Christ, for the enjoyment of
any worldly thing, it is just with Christ to refuse them. The second kind of
guests were the blind, the lame, the poor, the maimed, who did lie in the
streets and lanes of the City: These, out of the sense of their own misery, did
come to the feast, and there needed no compulsion. So then, the force of the
whole Parable is this, That the ruder sort of people, which are under the care
and custody of the Magistrate, are in a special manner to be compelsed to
Worship God, and to wait upon the means of their Salvation. But lest any should
think that this Parabolical Divinity is not of such force, as to conclude the
Point, we have many other places to prove, That those that are in Authority
have a power to compel those that are under them to worship God, and to call
upon the Name of the Lord. What else should be the meaning of those words in
the fourth Commandment, In it thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son,
nor thy daughter; thy man servant, nor thy maid servant, thy cattle, nor thy
stranger which is within thy gates? Exodus 20. 10. Here we may demand the
reason, why these words are extended to Children and Servants? What have
Parents and Masters to do with their sanctifying of the Sabbath? All Expositors
upon the place do give this reason, That the Parent or the Master do not
rightly worship God themselves, unless they take care that they also do worship
him, who are under their Authority and Jurisdiction. The command that concerns
the duty of Servants, is given to Masters. That is therefore a most excellent
speech of Augustine, Tom. 2. Ep. 50. where speaking of the duty of Kings, out
of the second Psalm, he has these words: Therefore (says he) how do Kings
serve the Lord in fear and trembling? No other way, but by prohibiting and
punishing those things which are done against the commands of God. He does
serve God after one manner as he is a man, and after another manner as he is a
King. As he is a man, he serves him by living religiously; as he is a King, he
serves him by establ^shing such kind of Laws with convenient rigor, as do
command things that are just, and forbid things unjust. Even as Hezekias served
the Lord, by destroying the Groves, and the Temples of Idols, and the
High Places, which were built against the Commandments of God: As Josiah served
the Lord, by doing the same things which Hezekiah did: As the King of the
Ninevites served the Lord, by compelling the whole City to humble themselves,
and entreat the face of God. And going on in passages of the like nature, he
concludes with this Epiphonema, In hoc ergo serviunt domino Reges in quantum
sunt reges, cum ea faciunt ad serviendum illi quae non possunt facere nisi
Reges. In this therefore Kings do serve the Lord, so far forth as they are
Kings, when they do those things for his service, which otherwise they cannot
do but in relation as they are Kings. This passage, worthy to be written in
letters of Gold, is cited by Zanchy in his Work concerning the Attributes of
God, in the Preface to Casimire, Palatine of the Rhyne. There he shows, That
it is the duty of a Christian Prince, principally to take care in his Dominion,
that Religion be taught out of the pure Word of God, according to the first
Principles of the Faith, which others call, The Analogy of Faith. And the pure
Word of God being established, he says also, That it concerns the Prince or
the Ruler, to take care that the people wait upon the means of their Salvation.
And this is that which we have so largely stood upon, when we have spoken of
the Reign of Christ upon the Earth, in sundry parts of this Treatise; we have
not followed the Conceit of them who are for a personal Reign. This notes
only the coming in of the States, Governments, and Dominions of the Earth to
own the Gospel, and to set it up as a Regent-Law. To my understanding then,
this matter is plainly expressed, Ier. 3. 17. At that time shall they call
Jerusalem the Throne of the Lord; and all the Nations shall be gathered unto it
to the Name of the Lord to Jerusalem: Neither shall they walk any more after
the imagination of their evil heart. In these words he does speak of the
glorious state of the Church in the latter times: It cannot be meant of the
Jewish Church, before the coming of Christ; nor of that literal kind of
worship, as it appears ver. 16. They shall say no more, The Ark of the
Covenant of the Lord; neither shall it come to mind, neither shall they
remember it, neither shall they visit it, neither shall that be done any more.
It is manifest then, that these things are spoken concerning the happy estate
of the Church in the times of the New Testament. But in what part of the times
of the New Testament, must these things be fulfilled? It is clear from the
Context, That he speaks of the call of the Jews: In those days the house of
Judah shall walk with the house of Israel, ver. 18. This is meant of the glory
of the Church in the latter days. But what are the means that the Lord has
sanctified, to the introducing of this glory? They are expressed in these
words, I will give them Pastors after mine own heart. He does speak of the
Civil Pastor in the Commonwealth, as well as the Spiritual Pastor in the
Church. David was a Pastor after the heart of Christ himself, when he chose him
to feed and govern the People of Israel. Such Pastors there shall be in the
latter times; and by such the Lord will bring in the glory of the Church. The
like passage is in the Prophecy of Isaiah, when he speaks of the Churches
glory that shall be: I will make all thy officers peace, and thy exactors
righteousness, Isa. 60. 17. The word in the Original is, (...) all thy
visitation peace: It notes the visitation of the Prince, as a Nursing Father,
that has care of the Church. And further it is added, Thine exactors
righteousness; the word in the Original is, (...) a Taskmaster, one that
drives on the work; which implies, as there shall be Magistrates, so there
shall be use of a Coercive Power in those glorious times. And therefore this
passage is immediately added, Violence shall be no more heard in thee: The
Magistrates shall themselves be so holy and righteous, that they shall not
oppress, and tyrannize; and they shall also be so impartial and sincere, in the
use of the Sword, that they shall keep down and suppress all exorbitant and
lawless courses. I have the more carefully noted this Point, because many in
the times that we now live, are of opinion, That all Coercion and Compulsion in
matters of Religion, is absolutely to be laid aside. And because they read,
when the Beast did bear rule, that he did compel all the world to receive a
Mark; and that none might buy nor sell, but they that had the Mark in their
Forehead, and in their Right Hand: thereupon they gather, That all Coercion in
matters of Religion, is after the Antichristian form. And because they would
stand far enough from that Pattern, they think it best, and most comporting with
the future glory of the Church, to leave all to a boundless Toleration, Nay,
some learned men of good note have gone so far, that they look upon the Edicts
of Constantine, and the succeeding Princes, as upon the Bottom-stones of the
Tower of Babel. And their ground is this, Because the Laws which the
aforementioned Princes did make, for the suppressing of Blasphemies and
Idolatries, were afterward perverted, and turned against the true Members of
Christ, in all Antichristian times. We willingly yield, That great care is to
be used in this matter; yet withal we are to consider, That the use of the
Coercive Power, as it is truly Christian by the Position of some Circumstances,
may be Antichristian by the Position of others: the Circumstances do vary the
case. The Papists are not Antichristian in this, as they compel men to come to
the Public Worship of God; for some godless and wretched men would never
worship God, nor call upon his Name: but their Antichristianity lies in this,
as they compel men to an Idolatrous Will Worship of their own devising. They
are not Antichristian in that, as they hold the Government of the Church to be
Monarchical, or that there is one Ecumenical Bishop of all: so Christ is the
true Head of the Church, and the great Bishop of our Souls, 1 Pet. 2. 25. and
Chap. 5. v. 3. But their Antichristianism lies in this, as they make the
Bishop of Rome Universal Bishop, and do compel all men to be subject to his
Laws, as to the Laws of Christ. We must distinguish the Coercive Power; for it
may be either Christian or Antichristian, as the Circumstances do stand.
Nebuchadnezzar did set up an Image, and commanded all the States of his Empire,
under pair of death, to fall down and worship it. In this act of Compulsion, he
did come in the nearest resemblance to the Beast in the Revelation, and was no
doubt a Type and Figure of the Antichrist that was to come. But this does not
hold in every kind; for afterward we read, that the same Nebuchadnezzar did
make a Decree, That every Nation and Language that should speak any thing
against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, should be cut in pieces. In
this case we cannot say, That the exercise of the Compulsory Power is
Antichristian; unless we will make it Antichristianism, to restrain Idolaters,
that they should not blaspheme the Name of the true God. I might here take
occasion to make mention of the Law made by the King of Nineveh, and his
Nobles, That all under that Government should fast, and pray; and that they
should turn every one from the evil of his ways. Though here was the use of the
Compulsory Power, yet none can say, that they did symbolize with Antichrist, in
his Tyranny over the Consciences of men. The Lord did turn from the greatness
of his wrath; and the commendation of their Repentance is upon record, in the
story of the Gospel. From all that has been said, we may conclude, As the
exercise of the Coercive Power about matters of Religion, may in some cases be
Tyrannical and Antichristian; so the practice of it in others, may be holy, and
truly Christian: and men do unadvisedly jumble and confound those things
together, which should be distinctly laid down.

Secondly, many in these times, think the Doctrine of the Reign of Christ for
1000 years, and the glory of the Church, too nearly to resemble the
Antichristian Pomp and Magnificence. Now, say they, these things cannot be
applied to the Christian Church; for as long as she is in this vale of tears,
she is liable to continual sufferings. And indeed, the practice of men has
been some way suitable to this opinion: for seeing the great riches, splendour,
magnificence, and state of the Church of Rome; that her Merchants are the great
men of the earth: they have set upon such a way of Reformation, in casting out
Romish Idolatries and Superstitions, that they have left the true Church of
Christ poor enough. In many places the Maintenance is so bare, that the
Ministers have scarcely wherewithal to keep them upon the work. In their
Conscience, the glory of the Gospel Church must stand in penury and want of
outward things, because the Romish Antichristian Church has enjoyed these
things in so great plenty. But in this point, to my understanding, they are
greatly deceived: for the Prophets, and John in the Revelation, do everywhere
speak of the glory of the Church that shall be; that the Kings shall come to
the beauty of her rising; that they shall be Nursing-Fathers; that they shall
bring their glory to her. Mr. Buroughs in his Lectures upon Hosea, is very
solid and copious upon the point. And if these things be truly explained, we
may find great comfort in the predictions of the Prophets. But let us come to
the Book of the Revelation, and we shall there see things more clearly made
cut. It was the speech of the Saints at the destruction of the Whore of
Babylon, Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him: for the Marriage
of the Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self ready, Rev. 19. 7. Now in
the next Chapter it is explained, what is meant by the Lambs Wife: These are
the words of the Angel to John, v. 9. Come hither, and I will show thee the
Bride, the Lambs Wife. And he carried me away in the Spirit to a great high
Mountain, and showed me that great City, the Holy Jerusalem, descending out of
Heaven from God. Here then it is clear, that the New Jerusalem, or the
Gospel Church, in relation to her felicity in the latter days, is termed,
(...), that Great City, in opposition to the greatness and magnificence of the
Church of Rome, or the Whore of Babylon, which has everywhere in the Prophecy
such a transcendent Title ascribed to her. The scope of the Text does plainly
show, that the Church upon the Earth shall enjoy times of great glory.

But the great Question is, concerning the New Jerusalem, Whether this be meant
of the state of the Church upon the Earth. To the clearing of this, let us look
to the scope of the whole Prophecy. In the Twelfth Chapter of the Revelation,
we read, and the first Verse, That a Woman was clothed with the Sun, and the
Moon was under her feet, and upon her head a Crown of twelve stars: And she
being with child, cried, traveling in birth, and pained to be delivered. By
the woman, is meant the Primitive Church, as she was in travel with all
Nations, to bring forth her Christ-like issue; and by the Dragon with seven
Heads and ten Horns, we must necessarily understand the great persecuting
Empire of the Romans, which for 300 years did endeavor to devour her Child.
When she was delivered, the next attempt was, to drown her with a stood of
Barbarous Nations that came out of the North. After this, she fled into the
Wilderness, and was there fed 1260 days: So many years the Church was under
Antichristian persecution. When these times were ended, and the Whore of
Babylon burned, then began the marriage of the Lamb, and the New Jerusalem came
from God out of Heaven, as a Bride adorned for her Husband. All these are but
Emblems and Figures of so many several changes and varieties, that the outward
Visible Church should meet withal upon the earth. She does very much resemble
the Moon, in her several forms and appearances. The outward Visible Church is
one and the same in substance, but she is distinguished according to different
relations, in sundry changes of time. These things are so clearly delivered in
the whole body of the Prophecy, that no further question may be made. But to
the Point in hand, concerning the future glory that the Church shall enjoy in
the later days, let us compare it with a passage in the Prophecy of Zachary.
The Prophet in the Vision looked, and beheld a man with a measuring line in his
hand, Chap. 2. ver. 1. Men go to measure when they build Cities and Towns: and
this is spoken in relation to the waste of Jerusalem, mentioned in the former
Chapter, ver. 12. How long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and the
Cities of Judah, against which thou have indignation this three score and ten
years? In opposition to this waste of the Church in all the times of the
Babylonian captivity, the Prophet in the Vision did see a man with a measuring
line in his hand, to measure Jerusalem, to see what is the breadth thereof, and
what is the length thereof. The same things are spoken in effect, Rev. 21. 15.
The Angel had a golden Reed, to measure the City, and the gates thereof, and
the wall thereof; and the City lies apiece, and the length is as large as
the breadth. And he measured the City with a Reod, twelve thousand furlongs.
All these figurative expressions, do set forth the repair of the Church, in
opposition to her waste, in all Antichristian times. For in the beginning of
these times, the Angel was commanded to rise, and to measure the Temple of God,
and the Altar, and them that worship therein: but to leave out the Court that
was without the Temple, and not to measure it: for it was given to the
Gentiles, and the holy City should they tread under foot forty and two months,
Chap. 11. ver. 1, 2. The whole time of the Beasts Kingdom, was the space of
treading down the Holy City, by Antichristian Gentiles. In opposition to the
waste, and conculcation, the Angel does measure the walls of the New Jerusalem,
and does foretell the repair of the Church, and the restitution of that glorious
state, which she shall have in the latter times. Much more might be spoken to
the same purpose; but this shall suffice to show, that the Tenet of the
external glory of the Church, will not bring us back again to Popery: neither
is it absolutely so in all, although it may be Antichristian in the position of
some Circumstances only. What if Rome Antichristian be called, The Great City,
that rules over the Kings of the Earth; Is not the New Jerusalem the Great
City, that comes down from God out of Heaven? What if Rome Antichristian be
the Woman that is adorned with gold, and silver, and precious stones, Chap. 17.
Is the Bride the Lambs Wife altogether destitute of these Ornaments? Are not
the streets of the City all of gold, like to transparent glass, Rev. Chap. 21?
What if Rome Antichristian be the City, whose Merchants be the great men of the
earth, Rev. Chap. 18. Is not the New Jerusalem that City, of whom also it is
foretold, that the Kings of the earth shall bring their glory to her? Do not
all the Prophets (specially the Prophet Isaiah) speak of the call of the Jews,
and of the glory of that Church that shall be in the latter days? From all that
has been said, we may conclude, though the outward splendour of the Church may
be Antichristian in some cases, it may be truly Christian in others.

CHAP. XV. Concerning th^se things that are not Antichristian, ^ut are only
falsely so called by the Separation.
WE will not go over all the Points, but insist only upon those that are of
greatest moment; to wit, Magistracy and Ministry. By these we may judge of the
rest.

For the standing of the Magistracy, they take it to be Antichristian, because
they have a power over other men; and the Beast, his Heads, and Horns, in the
Revelation and Daniel, they find by reading, That these do signify Empires,
Dominions, and the Kingdoms of the world. But herein they are greatly
deceived; For in the Prophecies aforesaid, the Beasts, and their Horns, do not
absolutely signify Empires and Dominions, but Idolatrous Empires and
Dominions; and not absolutely Idolatrous Empires, but such Empires and
Dominions which do Lord and Tyrannize it over the Church of God, and do try the
faith and patience of the Saints. By many passages of the present Discourse, we
have sufficiently cleared the Point, That when Christ shall begin his Reign
upon Earth, this will not be with the abrogation of all Magistracy, Power and
Authority; only the Authorities and Governments shall acknowledge him (as
indeed he is) the only Lord and Head of the Church. The Reign of the Lamb is
immediately opposed to the Reign of the Beast: as therefore the Beast, in the
times of his Empire, did not disannul the Being of Governments, though they
were under his Power and Headship; no more will the Reign of the Lamb abrogate,
and take away the Governments of this world, though they are made subject to
his Laws. Magistracy is the Ordinance of God: they are guilty of a foul error
then, whosoever they be, that shall go about to pluck up Magistracy, under the
color and pretense of an Antichristian Encroachment.

But this engine now adays is more principally used against the Ministry; the
great designs to throw the Ministry out of the consciences of the people: and
therefore they are told again and again, That the Ministers are Antichristian
in their Titles, in their Ordination by Bishops, in their Maintenance by
Tithes, etc. For Antichristianism in Title, to make this good, they reckon up a
defamed Catalogue of Names; the Pope, Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, Parsons,
Vicars, Curats. But to this, abundant satisfaction is given, as by others, so
by the old Non-conformists themselves, and specially by Mr. Ball, in his Answer
to Can. Among many other passages, these are his own words, page 45. To
contend about the Name of Parson, is vain and fr^valous: but if we speak of the
Office and Ministry, as it is exercised by the godly, learned, and painful
Ministers of the Church of England: for the substance thereof, it is instituted
of Christ, acknowledged by all true Churches in the world, ever since the first
Plantation of the Christian Church; known by all Reformed Churches at this day,
and so maintained by the Nonconformists. Against the Name, some it may be have
taken exception; and against the pride, idleness, and covetousness of others,
much has been written: but that the Office it self of Parson or Vicar, as they
preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and administer the Sacraments, according to
the institution of Christ, and w^tch over the flock committed to their charge;
that this Office, I say, should be condemned as Antichristian by the
Non-conformists, is notoriously f^lse, and the contrary is apparently known to
your self. In many passages of that learned Treatise, this point is solidly
disputed, and the Reader may there find, That many things are termed
Antichristian, which are not, but are falsely so called by the Separation. But
touching the Ordination by the Bishop, there is a greater accusation: The
Pulpit-guard Routed has these words: You your selves have concluded the
Bishops Antichristian in their Calling, and is yours Christian? You had your
outward Calling from them, and can they give you that they never had
themselves? If the Bishops were true Ministers, and did rightly ordain, why
then did you preach them down as Antichristian? This being the principal
Objection, it has an Answer already in sundry Treatises; so that my pains may
be spared in the point. Only because the present Discourse is concerning this
subject, what is Antichristian, and what is not: we will propound these Quaeres
to them that differ. First, in case the Ministers as ordained by Bishops, are
Antichristian; yet a great part of the Ministry in being, did never partake of
such an Ordination: they were made Ministers when the Bishops were not.
Secondly, though the Diocesan Bishop was not put down as Antichristian; yet
none can say, That the formality of Antichristianism, was or is primarily and
immediately seated in him. For, as I have showed in all the passages of the
Treatise aforegoing, the formality of Antichristianism does stand in the
Universal Headship; and this began to be set up many hundred years after the
times of the Diocesan Bishop. All that can be said, he is Antichristian, so far
as he does symbolize with the Great Antichrist, in Lordliness and Tyranny over
the Church and People of God: and how much better are they, that drive the
trade of I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, I am of Cephas? Surely in respect of
their pride, singularity, and affectation to make rents and schisms in the
Church, they also may be termed Antichristian by Analogy and Reduction.
Thirdly, it is absolutely false, that the Ordination of Ministers did formerly
depend only upon the Bishop: For by the Laws and Usages of this Church, he
could not Ordain without the assistance of other Ministers; and the execution
of his Office, as to this point, was not so much as Lord Bishop, but as
Minister and Elder in the Church. Fourthly, let it be supposed, that the power
to Ordain had been wholly seated in the Diocesan; the error and corruption in
the instrument, does not disannul the institution of Christ. Ordination of
Ministers is from Christ alone, though the mean to transmit and convey it, is
from Men. Fifthly, if any should go so far, to cast away their Ordination,
because they have received it by the means of the Bishop; must not they by the
analogy and force of the same rule, be driven upon this rock, To renounce the
Sacraments, and all other Ordinances of Christ, when they conceive that they
are applied by the hand of evil Ministers? And what is this but plain Popery,
to make the Ordinance of Christ wholly ^o depend upon the personal worthiness
or unworthiness of the administrator. For the maintenance of the Ministers by
the Tithes, they are most frivolous to affirm, That this is an Antichristian
provision. For what if this way of allowance has been used in Antichristian
times, and has been conveyed to us by the means of Antichristian men; shall we
therefore abdicate and cast it away as Antichristian? By the same rule, we must
renounce the Articles of our Creed, the Ten Commandments, the Lords Prayer, our
Privileges that we hold by Magna Charta, our Lands that we possess in Capite,
and Socage; and what not? for these have been used in the times of Antichrist,
and have passed down to us by the means of Antichristian men. By all that has
been said, it is clear, That many things are called Antichristian, which are
not so, but are falsely so termed by the Separation. Yet nevertheless, if
Ministers or others have in any kind acknowledged an Authority, which is
directly or indirectly, mediately or immediately Antichristian; so far as they
have more or less acknowledged it, so far they ought to mourn or repent.
Antichristianism is a sin more directly and immediately against the Kingly
Office of Christ: for which cause he has denounced such heavy Judgments
against it, as we have formerly showed. So far forth then as a man does submit
to an Authority, and to the Laws made by an Authority that is contrary to
Christ; so far forth he does sin against Christ: for this in effect, is to put
him out of place, and to entertain his enemy in his room. Now this no pious man
can or will do, but he will easily apprehend it to be a piercing and wounding
of Christ; and for this he will go forth into the porch, and weep bitterly.
Thus I have divided the matter between two Extremes: Though Ministers and
others are not to leave their stations; yet as they have in any kind sinned
against the Authority of the true Head and King of the Church, they have so far
forth cause to judge themselves, that they may not be judged.

FINIS
POSTSCRIPT.
Courteous READER,
ALthough about two years since, at the request of a Friend I lately reviewed
it; yet this Treatise of mine was finished certain years ago: Since that, it
has met with many hindrances; and now I believe (had not another occasion
brought me up to the City) it had neither at this time come into public view.

All things considered, the whole series and continual succession of
impediments of years past, and now only the opportunity offered: By this I am
induced to believe, the publishing of these things, is not so much by Humane
Counsel, as by Divine Providence.

Perhaps, Gods Work is now set on foot, for the deliverance of his poor
afflicted People: and it may be, in this juncture of time, some passages in
this Treatise may be subservient to such ends. The Wiseman says, Words spoken
in due season, are like Apples of Gold in pictures of Silver. By the things
that I have written, thou may understand how, and in what manner, those
Princes and Potentates of the Earth do sin, Whosoever they be, that hold up the
Name and Headship of the Beast, in direct opposition to the Name and Headship
of the Lamb. Thou may further understand, how greatly they do aggravate
their sin, that compass Sea and Land, that make search and inquisition into
every corner, and persecute unto the death, all that will not live in
subjection to this Name or Headship. Hereby also thou may be informed, what
sympathy, what bowels of affection thou should show to those that live under
the Tyranny of the Beasts Kingdom. For i^ on the one side, poor Souls do
Worship the Beast, receive his Mark and Name; Christ (as he has cause enough)
does denounce the most grievous Judgments against them; On the other side, if
they refuse to subject their Consciences to his Papal determinations; such is
the hard condition of many Countries, that it is the loss of all, yea of life
it self. This is the Glassie Sea mingled with fire, through which the Saints
have passed; which also they are yet in passing. But how few of us are sensible
of their hard condition? How few do mourn for the affliction of Joseph? If that
be true, that the Members of the Protestant Churches abroad are in imminent
danger; If they have been lately Massacred in Piedmont, without sparing Age or
Sex; If they are bleeding in Switzerland, diverse there having been put to death
for no fault, but being Protestants; If the designs be upon the whole Interest
by the Popish Party, almost in all places of Europe: Then we have reason to
condole with our Brethren in their Sufferings. And the reading of the present
Treatise, will help us more clearly to see, and judge of that which is the
cause of the Quarrel. We shall see also, what is the Mind of Christ concerning
these things, and to what issue they will be brought at the end of all.

Hereby also thou may be advertised, to beware of the Opinion of such, that
make the Christian Magistrate the Fountain of all Church Power: This is to set
up a Civil Antichrist, in the stead of a Spiritual. Christ is the Head of his
own Church; and therefore he has appointed Laws, by which his Kingdom is to
be governed; Censures, by which his rebellious Subjects are to be punished; and
Officers, to dispense those Censures. If there be no such Name or Headship,
What should be the meaning of the Apostle, when he speaks of the Incestuous
Corinthian? Concerning him that has done this deed; in the Name of the Lord
Jesus Christ, when you are gathered together, and my Spirit, with the power of
the Lord Jesus, to deliver such a one to Satan, 1 Cor. 5. 4. And in that other
place, Now we command you, Brethren, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, that you
withdraw your selves from every Brother that walks disorderly, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6.
And in that Scripture, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven: for where two or three are gathered together in my Name, I will be in
the midst of them, Matthew. 18. ver. 18, 19, 20. In these several places, the
Name of Christ is his Power and Headship in and over the Church his own House:
which is not only opposite to the Name of the Beast, but in an inferior
degree, to that Spiritual Power and Supremacy which some would give to Princes
and Potentates of the Earth. The London-Ministers in their Vindication, do
speak to good purpose, when they say, Christ Jesus is the only Head of the
Church, governing it not only inwardly and invisibly, by the working of his
Spirit, but outwardly also and visibly, as a Political Ministerial Body. In
which he has appointed his own proper Ambassadors, Assemblies, Laws,
Ordinances, and Censures, to be administered in his Name, and according to his
own way, page 4. By this account then, they must be judged to come near a very
dangerous Error, whosoever they be, that take this Name and Headship from him,
and give it to Temporal Princes. Calvin and other friends of ours, have been
much offended at the Title that was given to Henry the Eighth and his
Successors: And our Adversaries also have hereby taken occasion to insult over
us. For these are the words of Wadesworth, in a Letter of his to Mr. Bedell:
N^r will I (says he) insist upon the passions that moved King Henry violently
to Divorce himself from his lawful Wife; to fall out with the Pope his Friend;
^o Marry Lady Anne Bullen, and soon after to Behead her; to disinherit Queen
Mary, and to enable Queen Elizabeth; and presently to disinherit Queen
Elizabeth, and to restore Queen Mary; to hang Catholics for Traitors, and to
burn Protestants for Heretics; to destroy Monasteries; to pill Churches: Were
these fit beginnings for the Gospel of Christ? I pray was this man a good Head
of Gods Church? For my part, I pray our Lord to bless me from being a Member of
such a Head, or such a Church, page 11. Now what says Mr. Bedel to all this?
You demand, says he, if this man King Henry were a good Head of Gods Church?
What if I should demand the same touching Alexander the sixth, Julius the
second, Leo the tenth, or twenty more of the Catalogue of Popes, in respect of
whom King Henry might be Canonized for a Saint? But there is a story in Tullies
Offices, of one Lutatius, that laid a Wager, That he was (bonus vir) a good
man, and would be judged by one Fimbria, a man of Consular Dignity. He, when he
understood the case, said, He would never judge that matter, lest either he
should diminish the reputation of a man well esteemed of; or set down that any
man was a good man, which he accounted to consist in an innumerable sort of
excellencies and praises. That which he said of a good man, with much more
reason may I say of a good King; one of whose highest excellencies, is to be a
good Head of the Church. And therefore it is a question which I will never take
upon me to answer, Whether King Henry was such or no, unless you will
beforehand interpret, etc. page 131. He has some other passages concerning
the use of the Authority of the said King, in doing things that were good, and
in removing the Popes Tyranny: Which Acts of his (says he) whosoever shall
impartially consider of, may well esteem him a better Head to the Church of
England, then any Pope these thousand years, page 132. But for my part, I
conceive here are two Questions to be answered; Whether that King were rightly
and truly a Head of the Church at all? That being granted; the second, Whether
he were a good one, yea or no? To determine these Questions, I am clearly of
Fimbria's judgment in that other case. As on the one part, I am loath to
diminish the lawful Power of Princes, which they have, they ought to have, and
ever had, in disposing the affairs of the Church: so on the other side, I
conceive, That it is too high to call Hen. 8. or any other Supreme Magistrate,
an Head, much more a good Head of the Church; the eminency, transcendency and
sublimity of that Prerogative belonging to Christ alone. Our Princes have used
such a Title; and in the sense of the Statute, in a moderate way, the people
have ascribed it to them, to wit, a Spiritual Power, Authority and
Jurisdiction, that ever have belonged to Kings and Princes, which David,
Solomon, the Kings of Judah, and Christian Emperors have ever exercised in
their respective Dominions. This, no doubt, has been the sense of wellmeaning
men; and so Mr. Bedel does expound it in the forementioned place, and page 56.
But for my part, being enlightened and better informed, I pray God such Titles
be no more used; and let that passage, Next under thee and thy Christ, in all
Causes Ecclesiastical, in these His Majesty's Dominions, Supreme Head and
Governor; Let the exuberancy of such a Title, pass among the iniquity of our
holy things. Our godly Friends have been offended at it; our Enemies have
insulted; Experience has showed much danger in the use of it; and the present
Treatise, I doubt not, will show what an evil thing it is, to take away the
Prerogative of Christ, and to make other Heads of the Church in his room. Of
all men living, the Erastians have greatest cause to look to this: For let
Princes be once told, That there is no Church Government in the Word of God,
and that they themselves are the sole Fountains of Church Power; By this means
it will be effected, That the Name and Power of Christ over his own Church will
be plucked down, and the Name and Headship of Princes will be only set up. In
matters of this nature, if you give an Inch, men will take an Ell. Rather for
acts past, we should often think upon that expression of the Prophet, I will
pour upon the House of David, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of
grace and supplication; and they shall look to him whom they have pierced,
Zach. 12. 10. Christ is not only pierced in a literal sense, when his body is
run through with a Spear; but he is pierced also, when his Name and Headship is
taken away from him, and given to another. So far as a whole Nation have been
mediately or immediately, directly or indirectly implicated and involved in
such a sin; so far I believe they ought to mourn. If this be not done, God
perhaps may rebuke us, when our Armies go forth against those that Worship the
Beast, and uphold his Name and Headship, in enmity to the Government of Christ.
Though not in the favor of the enemy, yet we may be chastised for our own
faults, and the Lord may be provoked to appear against us. When the Lamb went
forth on his white Horse against the Beast and his Armies, the Armies that
followed, were upon white Horses clothed in fine linen, white and clean, Rev.
19. 14.

Further also, by the process of this Discourse, information may be given to
certain in these Times, who being led by the mere show and color of some
passages in the Prophesies, do think it a part of their duty, to level
Magistracy, abolish Laws, and to turn all things up-side down, in Church and
Commonwealth. Of such I may say, That they mingle the precious Truths of God,
with Fables of their own commenting. In the Metamorphosis of Ovid, we read of
the Beginning of the World, of the Chaos, of the Giants heaping of Pelion upon
Ossa, of Deucalions Flood, of the Four Ages, of the Golden, the Silver, the
Brazen, and the Iron Age. These things are not all Fictions, because they have
some ground of truth in the Scripture; neither are they all truths, because
they are mingled with Fictions of the invention of man. Of the same kind are
some Authors, who are for the Fifth Monarchy; they think, that the setting up
of the Kingdom of Christ, will be the Dissolution of all Earthly Kingdoms.
But by the purport and whole drift of the present Discourse, they may
understand, That the Kingdom of Christ is not contrary to Governments, Powers
and Authorities, purely as such; but only to Governments as Idolatrous, as
Tyrannical, as contrary to the Laws of Christ, and of his Church. In the
Prophecy of Daniel, the Empire of Babel is resembled to a Lion; of Persia, to a
Bear; of Greece, to a Leopard; of Rome, to a Beast of diverse shapes. All these
Monarchies erected and set up on the ruins of the Davidical Kingdom, are
paralleled to so many Beasts. Bu^ to what Beast shall we resemble (in its
right constitution) the Davidical Kingdom it self? In the Book of the
Revelation, the Angel does expressly say, That there were eight Kings; and yet
the Beast had but seven Heads, Chap. 17. How can this be? I have fully proved,
That the Dynasty, Race and Succession of the Christian Caesar's, do make the
seventh Roman King, but no Head of the Beast. Therefore the Mediatori^n Kingdom
of Christ is not contrary to Governments, as such; neither is nor ever shall be
built upon the ruins of Governments, as Governments, but upon the ruins of
Governments only as Tyrannical, and opposite to the Laws of the Gospel. There
is no such cause then, why solid and judicious men in these days, should set
aside this kind of Learning, which is so much for the Credit and Authority of
the Christian Magistrate. And for the Government of the Church in some Points
(if I am not mistaken) there is in this Prophecy as strong, if not stronger
proof then in any other Book of the New Testament. As for Example: Though
Bishops are put down, the Service Book taken away, the Ordination of Ministers
brought nearer the Rule; all this being done, men are not pleased. What is the
cause of the Difference? The difficulty lies in the Church State. Robinson and
others of that way, do plead, That we have no Example for a National Church in
the New Testament; and the bringing in of whole Nations by the power of the
Magistrate, this is the principal Rock of Offense. I confess it is true, that
we have no Example of a National Church in the Apostles time. For how could all
Nations come in at that particular instant, when the greater part of them did
still remain in their Idolatries, and the Emperors themselves were the greatest
Enemies of the Church? Now if we apply our selves to the Book of the
Revelation, we shall plainly see, how the Spirit does foretell, That after the
Preaching of the Gospel, the Church should fall under grievous Persecutions, in
all the times of the Pagan Caesar's: when that time is ended, the Empire it self
shall become Christian. What else should be the meaning of that expression? Now
is come Salvation and Strength, and the Kingdom of our God, and the Power of
his Christ, Rev. 12. 10. This does note no other, but the setting up of the
Gospel in the Throne, in the times of Constantine the Great. After these
things, he shows the fall of the Empire, and the rising of the Ten Kings, by
the Emblem of a Beast with ten Horns, that came up out of the Sea, Chap. 13.
ver. 1. This Beast does signify the Roman Tyranny in the last and the
Antichristian Edition. And he further adds, in the latter times of this
Kingdom, that the Eternal Gospel shall be preached to every Kindred, Tongue
and Nation, Chap. 14. ver. 6. and 7. Then also, the deceived Kings shall be
undeceived; and, The Kingdoms of this world, shall become the Kingdoms of our
Lord, and of his Christ, Chap. 11. 15. That is, those Kingdoms which formerly
were the Kingdoms of the Beast, shall become subject to the Laws of Christ,
and of his Gospel. Here is a plain Example (though not in the Age of the
Apostles) of whole Christian Nations in the times of the Gospel. I willingly
yield, That the preaching of the Gospel is that by and through which,
primarily, and immediately, Churches are gathered: yet by the Authority of the
Magistrate, the same Gospel also is countenanced, Laws are made, Parishes are
divided, Ministers maintained, and the Body of the Nation brought to attend to
that which is, or at least may be, the mean of their Salvation. I cannot think,
but with great horror, what would ensue, if the Designs of some men should
take place: It would be the very Abaddon and Apollyon to the Church of God. But
let us look what is spoken of the Kings of Europe, They shall hate the Whore,
and make her desolate and naked, and shall burn her flesh with fire, Chap. 17.
If they shall hate the Whore, then they shall destroy the Idolatries and
Superstitions of that Church, which they did formerly so love and admire: and
on the contrary part, they shall countenance the Gospel, bring in their People,
and do as much for the Church of Christ, which they did formerly persecute and
hate. Of the New Jerusalem it is said, The Kings of the Earth shall bring their
glory to her, Chap 21. But lest any should think, That this is meant only of
the Glory of the Church in Heaven; Let sundry passages of the Prophet Esaias be
considered: The scope of all which is to show, That the Kings of the Earth
shall bring their Glory unto the Church. There is much spoken also of the
coming in of whole Nations, of the Conversion of Kings, and the adorning of the
Church by the bounty of Kings: Read Chap. 60. per totum, with many other
places.

If these things were rightly considered, men would not have such prejudices
against a National Constitution, and setting up of the Gospel, by the
Authority, Power and Command of Kings and Princes. What shall we make of the
Reign of Christ upon the Earth? Is it not directly and diametrally opposite to
the Reign of the Beast? And the Reign of the Beast, let the Angel himself,
together with our own experience, show, wherein the formality and the being
thereof does consist. So he speaks: The Horns which thou saw are ten
Kings, which have received no Kingdom as yet; but receive power as Kings one
hour with the Beast: These have one mind, and shall give their power and
strength unto the Beast: These shall make war with the Lamb, but the Lamb shall
overcome them; for he is the Lord of lords, and King of kings, Rev. 17. ver.
12, 13, 14. The effence of the Kingdom of the Beast lies in the Confederacy
of Kings, and in their yielding themselves to the Name and Headship of the
Bishop of Rome. This is the Reign of the Beast upon the Earth. So by the Rule
of Proportion, the Reign of Christ and of the Lamb shall be in the holy
association and concurrence of Christian Princes, to set up the Gospel of
Christ, his Name and Headship, as the Regent-Law among the Nations. From all
that has been said, it is clear, That this Doctrine is not contrary to the
Authority of Magistrates; nay, it is most forcible and effectual to establish
the Laws and Government of the Church.

Upon the same grounds I do here desire to speak a word or two; and Oh that I
could speak it with tears! The Reformation in Germany, and now lately in
England, has been, and yet is much deformed, by abalienation of the Churches
Revenue, and in passing away that which former Ages have bestowed (I may speak
of a great part at least) upon the preaching of the Gospel. These are Scandals
to the Enemy. Let our Consciences in the mean while judge, Whether this be not
a Scandal given, rather then a Scandal taken: Whether we do not open the
mouths of the Enemies of the Lord to speak evil of the Reformation: And
whether we are not faulty in this Point. Moses went in Gods way, and by his
Command, and it was a glorious work to deliver Israel from the Bondage of
Egypt: yet withal, when he was in the discharge of so excellent a work, then
the Lord stood in the Way to kill him, Exodus 4. 24. Our Armies are going forth
against the Enemies, and the Prote^ant Armies are like to go forth more and
more: These are the times, or at least do border upon the times of the Su^per
of the Fowls, of the great Vintage, of the Bat^el of Armageddon. There are like
to be great Commotions of State, Army against Army, in the times of the end of
the Beasts Kingdom. And therefore by collation of all Circumstances, we cannot
be fat off from the performance of all that has been foretold. It is meet for
us to see our own sins, and specially that which I have hinted, before we go on
in the Lords work.

These things I have thought good to annex by way of Appendi^. My purpose is
not to speak any thing to please, or di^please any Party: Neither can I tell,
how any Party will be pleased with me: it may be I may displease all. However,
I do desire to please mine own Conscience, in delivering that which I conceive
to be a Truth of God.

There is one thing which I think meet more ^ully to explain my self in. I
have, in the preceding Treatise, made it a good part of my work, to prove the
Roman to be the Fourth, and the last Metal Kingdom; and that the Roman does
begin in the consideration and notion of such a Kingdom, when the Church, and
the Con^inent of the Church, came under the Dominion and Sovereignty of the
People of Rome. This I know the followers of Iunius will not away with; and
many learned men in these times do follow this way of Interpretation. But
because we will not unnecessarily controvert, and make our selves more enemies
then needs; we will be content to say, That the Roman does begin at the end or
ending of all four Metal-Kingdomes; and where they end, in the method, order,
and way of account, the Roman does begin. And whereas we have endeavored, Chap.
6. page 116. to prove the beginning of the Roman as The fourth Metal-Kingdome,
to be at that instant of time, when the Church came under the Dominion of that
People; the same Arguments ( mutatis mutandis) will prove the beginning of the
Roman, at the end of all four Metal-Kingdomes. And so the followers of Iunius
and we shall agree in the substance of the Interpretation. Let us compute the
Name or Universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome, (as Decreed and Enacted under
the Emperor Phocas) and in that series and way of account, it will be 666 years
from the beginning of the Roman, as that great Empire does succeed, at the end
of the four Metal-Kingdomes. Here is the Name of the Beast, and the Calculation
according to the Number of a Man, according to the Divisions and Parts of the
Body of Man in Daniels Image. If we go either way, the Account will be made
good.

FINIS.

