THE LITURGY OF THE ANCIENTS REPRESENTED, As near as well may be, IN English
Forms. WITH A PREFACE Concerning the RESTITUTION of the most Solemn Part of the
Christian Worship in the Holy Eucharist, to its Integrity, and just Frequency
of Celebration.

LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, 1696.

Bp. Andrews's Sermon on Gal. 3.4. p. 32. No Fullness there is of our Liturgy,
or Public Solemn Service, without the Sacrament. Some part, yea, the chief
part is wanting, if that be wanting.

Dr. S. Patrick, the present Bp. of Ely. Our Worship must be confessed to be
but imperfect, when the Holy Communion is wanting. Discourse of Frequency of
Holy Communion, p. 68.

Id. ibid. p. 61. The Church in the best Times, and the best Men in the Church,
in after-Ages, looked upon this as an Ordinary part of Christian Worship; which
Christ intended should be performed in his Church, as often as they assembled for
Divine Service.

QUESTIONS Concerning the Proper and Peculiar Christian Worship.
1. WHether the Divine Service, or Liturgy, (as from Act. 13.2. we may conceive
it to have been anciently termed as it has been in all Ages since) of the
Christians, has not, from all Antiquity, been distinguished into two Parts:
The first, consisting of Reading of the Scriptures, and Explication thereof; or
Exhortation to the People, with some few short Prayers, called, The Service of
the Catechumens; The other consisting principally of a Solemn Memorial of the
Passion of our Savior, represented before the Father, as the great
Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, with Thanksgivings, and Prayers
for the Catholic Church, and all Mankind, for the particular Church, and
People of all Orders and Degrees, where it was celebrated, and for all the
Necessaries of humane Life, called, The Service of the Faithful; to which the
Catechumens and Penitents were not admitted, but were excluded?

2. Whether this latter Part, called, The Service of the Faithful, has not
been retained and celebrated in all Churches of the World from the Apostles
Times to this Day (except those called Reformed) as the Peculiar and most
solemn Part of the Christian Worship, daily where they had any daily Worship,
(as in most great Churches they had) from whence it had the name of Sacrificium
quotidianum; in others, three or four times in the Week; and in all, every
Lords Day? and the rest without it be any more than the Service of Catechumens
and Penitents?

3. Whether there be any plain Evidence or Appearance in the Holy-Scripture, of
any solemn Assembly of Christians in the Apostles times where this sacred Rite
was not used; or that any present at any such Assembly, where it was used, did
ever depart without Communion or Participation? And whether the Sacred History,
Act. 20.7. relating that the Disciples came together to break Bread, as the End
and Occasion of that famous Assembly of the Christians at Troas, though Paul,
so eminent an Apostle, was then to Preach there, and to Preach his Farewell
Sermon, does not thereby signify or imply, that, that was notwithstanding the
principal Business of that, and such settled Assembles? And St. Paul himself, 1
Cor. 11.20. speak of their coming together to eat the Lords Supper, as the
constant and Principal Business of such Assemblies? and the same also be not
strongly implied in those other Expressions, Act. 2.42, 46. and 1 Cor. 10.16.

4. Whether by ancient Canons all the Faithful, who came to Church and heard
the Scriptures, were not obliged to stay this Solemn Service of the Faithful
and Communicate, under the Penalty of Excommunication?

5. Whether there was ever any Doubt or Question, whether all the Faithful
ought to Communicate every Day, (that is, if where there was a daily
Celebration) till the time of St. Augustine? And whether many did not continue
to do so then?

6. Whether this most Holy, Solemn, and Peculiar Worship of the Faithful
Christians be not, being duly performed, most highly Honorable to the Father,
by Solemn Worship and Recognition of him, as the Sovereign Lord of the
Universe; and also to the Son, by like Solemn Worship and Recognition of him,
as our Lord and Redeemer, and that we are all his Purchased Servants; and to
the Holy Ghost, by whose Presence and Virtue all Sacred Operations are
perfected? And moreover of very great Benefit to the Souls of the Faithful duly
disposed, by a Communication of Divine Virtue to them?

7. Whether what some Learned Men have rightly observed a posteriori, from
matter of Fact, That the Devil has exercised and vented more Malice against
this Holy Rite, than against any other part of the Christian Religion, except
the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, be not also credible upon Considerations a
priori; from the Nature of the thing; from the Honor and Worship therein
performed to the Father, and to our Savior, and to the Holy Ghost; and the
Benefits communicated to Humane Souls; but more especially, because therein
that Passion of our Savior, which the Devil had maliciously procured, is
solemnly Honored and represented before the Father, as the great Propitiation
for the Sins of the whole World, to the Confusion of that Proud, Malicious, and
Envious Spirit?

8. Whether great Elevation of Soul and Devotion to God, and Enlargement of
Souls in mutual Charity of one to another, being principal Benefits ordinarily
communicated to Souls duly disposed in the frequent and Reverend Use of this
Holy Sacrament, Deprivation of these Benefits, and instead thereof,
Dissentions, Contentions, and Animosities, and Decay of Piety, and
over-spreading of Wickedness may not be just and deserved Punishments of the
Neglect of so great a Duty and Solemn Worship, and of so Holy Means for the
obtaining of those Benefits? and may not therefore reasonably be believed, to
be Special Judgments of God for the same, when we see them follow Notorious
Neglect thereof at no great Distance?

9. Whether therefore Neglect of Communion by the People in the Greek Churches,
where Chrysostom preached vehemently against it, both at Antioch and
Constantinople, may not reasonably be believed to have been severely Punished
by the Special Judgment of God and Malice of the Devil getting Advantage
thereupon, by the Divisions and Confusions which arose there not long after his
Death, and continued till almost all the Eastern Churches were first
overspread with them, and at last overrun and enslaved by the Turks and
Mohemetans? And in the Latin-Churches, by the abominable Corruptions, Abuses,
Impostures, and Usurpations of the Papacy?

10. Whether the Neglect, not only of Communion by the People, but even of
Celebration by the Clergy, so that such of the People, as would have
Communicated, could not, and in a manner taking away of the daily Sacrifice, in
the Churches, called Reformed, may not also reasonably be believed to have been
punished by the special Judgment of God, and Malice of the Devil, by their
Divisions amongst themselves from the Beginning of their Reformation, and by
the great Decays of Piety and Over-spreading of Wickedness, which has by
degrees increased amongst them ever since?

11. Whether in these Divisions in the Churches, called Reformed, the Socinian
Heresy has not had great Advantage, by their Neglect of so Pregnant a
Testimony of the Catholic Church against it, as this of the Solemn Memorial of
the Passion of our Savior before the Father, as the great Propitiation for the
Sins of the whole World?

12. Whether all these Churches, called Reformed, Note, The like Judgments of
God are observeable upon diverse particular Persons, who neglect the
Opportunities, or refuse the Invitations they have for this great Duty, and
necessary Means: For there is as much Unworthiness and Dis-respect done to this
Holy Sacrament, by Neglect or Refusal of Communion, as by Unworthy coming to
it, or Irreverence at it: And most of the Pretenses, which People make, to
excuse their Omission, will be found but Hypocrisy at last. But many have not
Opportunities, or discerning to observe this in particular Examples.
have not great Reason to fear and expect a further Judgment upon them for
this Neglect, if they be not moved by those before mentioned speedily to reform
the same; that is, to be delivered into the Hands of their Enemies, as it
happened to the Greek Churches, and has happened to some of these already, and
particularly to one of the most Ancient and best Reformed of them all, in all
other Respects, the Bohemian; besides others since?

13. Whether there can be any Objection or Exception against the constant use
of this Holy-Worship, which does not reflect upon, and imply either great
Ignorance, or something more shameful, in such as make it?

14. Whether all such as Oppose or Discourage the frequent Rever and Use of
this Holy-Worship, do not therein greatly gratify the Devil, and do him a very
pleasing Service.

15. Whether as well from the Nature of the Thing, as from the Authority and
Practice of the Catholic Church, this Holy-Worship ought not to be restored to
a daily Frequency in all Cathedrals, with Prayers there to be offered up with
this Solemn Memorial for the whole Diocese more particularly, besides those for
the whole Catholic Church, and the Nation; as also, in all great Towns, and
populous Places, where there are a competent number of People to frequent it
daily; but especially in the Universities; and to a Weekly Use; that is, every
Lord's Day, at least, in all other Churches?

16. Whether all the Clergy belonging to such Churches, or in such Places ought
not Constantly and Reverently to attend this Solemn Worship, except when
hindered by sufficient, special, and extraordinary Occasions?

17. Whether our Offering up to God, a defective, or imperfect Service in a
superficial formal Manner, has not been a great Offense and Provocation to
many, to forsake the Church and go over to the Dissenters? and the Restitution
of the complete Christian Worship reverently and devoutly performed, would not
be as like^y to reduce them?

18. Whether our Neglect of the daily Sacrifice, so manifestly contrary to the
Practice of the Catholic Church, has not been a great Scandal and Offense ^o
many of the Papists, and hindered their Communion with us? and the Restitution
of it with all Decency and Reverence be not a likely Means to invite them to
come in, especially if we did but therewithal restore some more of the
undeniable Practices of the Catholic Church, and particularly that Solemn
Manner of Treating of Penitents, so Honorable to God, and Beneficial and
Necessary to Men?

19. Whether, though of all the ancient Liturgies that of the Greeks, (the Form
of which may be seen in Cyril of Jerusalem, and much of the Matter in the
Ancient Book called Clements Constitutions, not much different from that which
bears the Name of St. James) be both more Ancient and more complete than any
now extant of any of the Latin-Churches; there be not notwithstanding a great
Agreement among them all, in all the Principal and Essential Parts of this
Holy-Worship? and between them and the most Ancient Forms of the Jews, in such
things as are common to both, as many are, and not peculiar to the Christians?
and therefore, Whether all Persons ought not to be very cautious how they use
either their own extempore Conceptions, or Forms composed according to their
own private Phansies or Opinions, in so Solemn Worship of God?

20. Whether it be not the Duty and the Wisdom of any Church or People as well
as of particular Persons, to give Glory to God, by an humble Acknowledgment of
their Sin, and a speedy, Resolute, and effectual Reformation? but a foolish and
dangerous thing, either to palliate or cover the same, for fear of Weakening
their Authority, or to delay or procrastinate the Reformation; or do it
insufficiently or imperfectly, upon any other prudential Considerations?

FINIS.
THE PREFACE.
THE Method which our Blessed Savior prescribed for the Reformation of what is
amiss in individual and private Persons and Matters; viz. That it be gradual,
and, first, as gentle as may be, by tacit Admonition, or private Reproof: and
if that will not do, then to proceed only to the Audience of one or two, but
still in private, that there may be Witnesses to attest the orderly Proceeding,
as well as the Obstinacy of the Offender: and then, indeed, if that will not
do, to report it to the Church, or Holy Assembly of the Faithful: but never to
expose the Person till all other Means have been used, and found ineffectual
and unsuccessful: the same is, doubtless, according to his Will, ordinarily
much more to be observed in public Persons and Matters. And this I have
endeavored, and do desire to observe in the Matter in hand, which is of no
mean Moment, but concerning a Principal Matter of the Christian Religion, the
most Solemn and Peculiar Part of the Christian Worship. For, upon diligent
Search, under the Conduct of the Hand of God, into Miscarriages, and Matters
amiss therein, having plainly discovered and detected the same, to my own
Satisfaction, I have given Notice thereof to such as were concerned to promote
a Reformation, and expected a just time for something to be done, or, at least,
be begun for that Purpose: And having done all that could be done in Secret, I
am now, by a regular Course of Proceeding, to make my Report to the Church:
and, for that, since there is no appearance of any opportunity to do it in a
Synod, there is no other way left but this of the Press; And this I have been
careful to use, with all the Gentleness and Deliberation that is fit in this
Case to be used, if we consider who is concerned in it, and how far. I have
already, out of respect to those in Authority, for no inconsiderable time, in a
manner suppressed, communicating but to a few, and some of the principal men,
what I had Printed, though it did but in part open the Faults: and now I do but
propose a Specimen of a Remedy to Consideration, without expressly noting what
is amiss, desiring only Leave to use it with my own Company, till something
more complete be established; that I may neither offend Authority, by acting
without Leave; nor my own Mind, by too much varying in a marter of this moment,
from the good Order and Practice of the Catholic Church; nor yet be forced to
make use of that Indulgence, which is now allowed to such, as I would not
willingly be. And, possibly, from such a Beginning, by the Favor and Blessing
of God, may a good Reformation insensibly ensue, without Trouble or Difficulty;
for in what is here proposed, is very little but what has the Authority of
Law, and the Declaration of the whole State, that it was composed by the Aid of
the Holy Ghost; and that Little such, as is not like to offend any Man of
Judgment, and truly Religious. And I should be glad to have no Occasion to
proceed any further to the opening such Sores, as I had rather see insensibly
healed and covered, than exposed to public View. But I have such Assurance,
and Divine Attestations, that the Work I am employed in, for the Restitution of
this most Holy, Solemn, and peculiar Part of the Christian Worship, to its
Integrity, as well as just Frequency of a Daily Celebration in places proper
for it, and Weekly in all Churches, is the Special Work of God, not only for
his Service, but ordered by Himself, by his own Hand of Providence, and under
his Divine Conduct, that as it is no little Comfort and Encouragement to me, so
it is a special and great Obligation to be Faithful in it. I am very sensible
of the Obligation upon me, and very much desire to pay all due Respect and
Observance to all Humane Authority, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, as the
Ordinance of God: but if they in Authority will give unnecessarily Occasion for
a Contest, we must obey God rather than Man, and prefer the Authority of the
Catholic Church before that of any particular Church whatever: and especially
the Honor of God and of our Savior, before that of Man, or any Society of
Men, be it what it will: and if nothing else will do, I must proceed, and open
the whole Matter, in the Cause of God, to the whole Church, in the best manner
that I can. And this is what I have to say here, at present, in Order to the
Restitution of this Holy Service to its Integrity: For, for the Reasons of what
is here done, they may be more proper to have their place in the Notes, which
are intended for that purpose.

But as for that of its just Frequency of Celebration, there needs not that
Caution, though what I have to say do reflect Shame upon our Clergy: For, 1.
that may be without Disparagement to the Constitution of this Church in this
Matter; because there be Learned Men, who have asserted in Public, and are
ready to prove, That by the Constitution of this Church, there ought to be a
Daily Celebration in all Places, where there are but a competent Number of
Devout Persons to attend and commenicate. And, 2. it is but just and reasonable
to do it, notwithstanding, for their Humiliation before God, and Reformation,
to prevent what might be worse for them. Our Wise and Gracious God has given
them a gentle tacit Admonition, by a small Company of Daily Communicants,
excited, and conducted by his Hand, from a private Room, to a public Church;
and, by degrees, from one without the Walls, at last, to one in the very Heart
of this City, where they have constantly assembled for this Holy Service,
without Intermission of a Day, for a Twelvemonth together, and thereby born a
Testimony for Him, and been a tacit Admonition to all others, but especially
the Clergy. And I have formerly proposed the Case by Way of Questions, in
Print, which have come to the Hands of some of the Principal of those
concerned, and been under their Consideration, besides many others: And since
those have had no more Effect, I know nothing more proper for this Purpose than
these Theses and Conclusions, concerning the Frequent Celebration and
Participation of the Holy Eucharist, which I lately drew up upon a private
Occasion, little thinking then of this, for which they serve much better, and
possibly might be so designed then, by that overruling Wisdom, whose Thoughts
are as far above ours, as the Heaven above the Earth.

These. 1. That this One Unbloody Sacrifice, or Holy Rite of the Blessed
Eucharist, does succeed as an Antitype and Memorial in the Christian Church, in
the Place of all those Bloody Typical Sacrifices of the Jews; as is taught both
by Ancient Christians, and by Learned Men of our own Church and Times.

Concl. 1. That it is very Unworthy of a Christian, to imagine our Memorial of
what is actually done and consummate, to be less effectual for Christians, than
were their Types of what was then yet to be done, for the Jews, for any Intent
or Purpose whatever.

2. That this, being of as great Use to us, as were theirs to them, ought as
frequently to be used among us, as were theirs among them, upon all just
Occasions.

These. 2. That this Holy Rite, was a Rite in Use among the Jews, for Solemn
Thanksgiving to God for any great Mercy or Blessing, as often as they met
together to celebrate any such; and was appropriate by our Savior for a
Eucharistical Commemoration of His Passion before God, as often as Christians
should have any Solemn Assembly for the Worship of God.

Concl. That this, being instituted by our Savior, as the Peculiar Solemnity
of that Memorial, ought to be used as often as we assemble to give Solemn
Thanks for that great Blessing, or to offer up Solemn Prayers for the Obtaining
of the Benefits thereof.

These. 3. That it is a Rite of the Greatest Honor to God, and to our Savior,
and of the Greatest Benefit to Men, of any in the Christian Church.

Concl. 1. Both these Considerations are both Great Motives, and Great
Obligations, to a frequent Celebration and Participation of it.

2. The Neglect thereof, in Respect of the Honor of God, and of our Savior,
is Ingratitude and Impiety; and in Respect of the Benefit to Man, as to others
Incharitableness; and as to themselves, Profaneness and Folly; like that of
Esau. Heb. 12.16.

These. 4. It is the Principal and most Solemn Part of the Christian Worship;
and so Essential a Part, that, in the Judgment of most Eminent Men of our own
Church, our Service is not complete without it, but defective, and defective in
the Principal Part wanting.

Concl. 1. Concerning Reading of a part of the Communion Service at the Altar,
where no Communion is prepared for, intended or expected, what Conclusion is to
be made, in Respect of God, to whom it is offered; in Respect of the Minister,
who does offer it; and in Respect of the People, who should attend and
communicate, is not hard to be understood.

These. 5. Not any One Solemn Assembly of Christians, for the Worship of God, in
the Times of the Apostles, or among the Ancient Christians of the first Ages,
is known ever to have been held without it.

These. 6. No Church upon the Face of the Earth, from the Time of the Apostles,
to the Time of the Reformation, nor to this Day, except among Protestants, is
known to have kept the Lord's Day, or had any ordinary Assemblies for the (...)

And as to the Communion, or Participation.
These. 1. By most Ancient Order in the Church, who-ever departed after the
Reading of the Scriptures, or Sermon, and stayed not at the Communion, and
received, were to be excommunicated.

These. 2. In the first Ages, till about the Time of St. Augustine, we find not
any Doubt or Question concerning the Obligation of all to Communicate daily, if
they were where it was Celebrated, and had no just Impediment. But then, when
many, especially among the Greeks, began to neglect that Holy Duty, that
Question arose among the Latins, and the more Devout continued to receive
every Day, (an Argument of Daily Celebration then) and others intermitted
certain Days.

These. 3. By Ancient Canons, if any neglected to Communicate for Three Sundays
together, they were to be excommunicated.

These. 4. It was Anciently commonly reputed a grievous thing, to be hindered
from Receiving the Blessed Sacrament; but to be denied it, a grievous
Punishment: and such was the Judgment of the Church concerning the Importance
of it, that to such as were hindered from coming to the Church, it was sent
home to their Houses by the Deacons.

These. 5. It was, Anciently, not only Scandalous, but Punishable in a
Clergyman, to be in a City, or other Place, where it was celebrated, and not
to attend, and communicate.

These. 6. These Orders of later Ages, concerning Receiving at least Three times
in a Year, and so indulging a Neglect for all the rest, are most justly, by
Calvin, said to be Certissimum Diaboli Inventum.

These. 7. It has been always the Practice, and Advice of all Devout People, to
be very frequent at it; and of most, to neglect no Opportunity. Dr. Taylor's
Conclusion concerning it, in his Holy Living, is very agreeable to the
Sentiments of the Ancients, and deserves to be Read by all.

Concl. 1. From all this it appears, how far different the Devotion of this Age
is from that of the ancient genuine Christianity, and short of it.

2. This Holy Service having been constantly performed in this City, in Public
Churches, ever since the Sixth of Janunry, 1694. and in the Heart of the City
for a Twelvemonth together, and frequented by so few, is a Notorious Argument
of the miserable Ignorance and Indevotion, for all our Pretenses, both of
Priests and People amongst us.

3. It has been the Opinion of several Learned, Judicious, and Observent Men,
that a great part of the Mischief, which has been in the World in these latter
Ages, is to be imputed to so woeful a Neglect of this Holy Ordinance.

Now, for Proofs of these things, They who pretend to any kind of Learning, I
suppose, will be cautious how they require it, lest they betray their own
Ignorance in Antiquity: and for others, they are not so much to be regarded, as
to insist upon them merely for them: but if there be Occasion, abundant Proofs,
both Old and New, may soon be produced: And, in the mean time, for the
Satisfaction of such wellmeaning People as doubt, they may be referred to Mr.
Joseph Mede, Dr. Sherlock, the present Dean of St. Paul's, in the last chap. of
his Book of Religious Assemblies, Dr. S. Patrick, the present Bp. of Ely, in
his Discourse of Frequency of Holy Communion, Mr. Thorndike, Bp. Andrews, Dr.
Jeremy Tailor, and others, who have several considerable Passages to the
Purpose in several Parts of their Works, very consonant to the Sentiments and
Practices of the Ancient Christians, and the whole Catholic Church.

And, certainly, it is a wonderful thing, that Almighty God should ever permit
the Enemy of Mankind so to impose upon such, as may well be supposed did really
intend his Service, and had a great Zeal for it, as some leading Men in the
Beginning of the Reformation; and that such Men of Learning and Parts should be
so imposed upon, as by a mistaken Zeal against Superstition, to abolish and
deface so considerable a Part of the most Holy and Solemn Worship of God, and
even of the true Notion, and proper Use thereof. But our most Wise and Gracious
God, for most Excellent Ends, no doubt, though we cannot comprehend them all,
has again concluded all under Sin, that he might have Mercy upon all, abolish
that Enmity and Uncharitableness which the Enemy has fomented amongst us, and
teach us, henceforward, by a very remarkable Example, in the Work of God to
attend with more Reverence and Circumspection to his Conduct, and not presume
too much upon our own Conceits and Opinions. These Men, who so much over-shot
themselves, had the Honor and Service of God, for their End; and the Word of
God, for their Rule; and yet, How have they erred from both! done Dis-honour
and Dis-service to God, for the Honor and Service they intended; and instead
of the Pure Word of God, followed their own, or their Leaders, mere Fancies and
Imaginations! The Great Business of Man upon Earth, is the Entire Subjection of
the Creature to the Creator, in the Subjection of the Intellect, as well as the
Will: and, therefore, it is absolutely necessary that we should have great
Experiments of the Danger of Presuming too much upon our own Opinions, as well
as of adhering too much to our own Wills: And such is this we are now
considering.

And if we inquire into the Causes of it, they are such as I have just now
touched. 1. Not sufficient Attendance to the Conduct of God over us; for he is
always present in a special manner with all those, who are employed in any
special Service for Him; to direct them; if they be careful to follow Him
fully; and not unadvisedly conclude upon their own Opinions, like them, Jos. 9.
when they should ask Counsel of the Lord. 2. Conceitedness, and Presumption
upon our own Judgments, which makes us apt to neglect that Attendance. 3. Want
of Charity to such as are otherwise minded, and a Spirit of Opposition, apt to
run without due Consideration, and be insensibly transported, from one Extreme
or Error into another, beyond either the Conduct of God, or Mature
Deliberation of our own Minds. 4. Want of due regard to Humane Authority. For
though we must obey God rather than Man, yet we must be subject to Humane
Ordinances too, so far as they are not inconsistent with the Orders of God: and
even in those things, wherein we cannot obey, yet have due regard to the
Authority. 5. Having Men's Persons in Admiration, and receiving their Opinions
as the Oracles of God; a secret Principle of all Sectaries. 6. Indiscreet Zeal
without Knowledge, for the Honor and Service of God; another Occasion of
running out of one Extreme or Error into another. 7. Mixture of Temporal
Interest or Concern, of Applause, Reputation, Power, or Gain: This is often
very subtle and prevalent, where and when it is little suspected. 8. Lastly,
though it be not last in the Order of Causes, Abuse or Misuse of the Sacred
Scriptures; a thing subtilely practiced by the Devil, and simply many times,
though not always so, but too often, craftily, dis-ingeniously, and
dis-honestly, by Men. There is in the Scriptures a Divine Perfection, such as
is in all the Works of God, but as much different from that Perfection, which
Men are apt to imagine, as the Wisdom of God exceeds Man's Wisdom. And they who
endeavor to set up a Humane Conceit of Perfection, though they may mean well,
yet pretending that for Perfection which they can neither prove, nor others
find there, they do great Injury to the Scriptures, by raising Prejudices and
Scandals in the Minds of many ingenious People against them, and against
themselves too, as either silly, weak People, or Cheats, who impose upon
others. The Scriptures are of no Use to such as understand not the Language
wherein they were Written, unless they have them faithfully Translated; and,
How shall they know which is so amongst so many Translations? Yet is there
enough for the Unlearned, in what all or most do agree. Nor is the bare
Knowledge of the Language sufficient for a complete Understanding of the
Scriptures, without the Knowledge of diverse Orders, Usages, Customs,
Observations, etc. of the Jews, before our Saviors Time, for the Old
Testament: and of both Jews and Christians, for the New. This is so certain,
that they who have presumed to set up their own Imaginations without due regard
to those Means, have left to Posterity so many Monuments of their
Selfconceitedness, Presumption, and either Ignorance and Folly, or Disingenuity
and Dishonesty in handling the Word of God deceitfully. And though we cannot
comprehend the Wisdom of God in many such things, yet may we perceive
sufficient Reasons why he was pleased to order it so in this; (but this is no
place to insist upon that.) And therefore it is an Argument of Ignorance and
Error, or something worse, in any one, who shall require Scripture for such
Particularities as it pleased God should not be recorded there, but be
transmitted to after-Ages by other Means. It is found, by Experience, that
some, who have mightily cried up the Pure Word of God, have, under that
Pretense, set up, and imposed upon the World, their own mere Fancies.

Under this Pretense has the Spirit of Antichrist as mischievously prevailed,
and imposed upon People in some Places, as in others under Pretense of
Apostolical Traditions: They who would confine Antichrist to Rome, are as much
mistaken as they who deny him to be there. He has no less prevailed to
suppress or oppress some important Truths under the odious Name of Popery
elsewhere, than he has done at Rome to oppose others under the like odious
Name of Heresy. It is a Question, which may bear some dispute, and deserve
Consideration, Whether the Superstition of the Papists, leading them to
Idolatry, and Subjection to one of the greatest Impostures in the World; or
that of some Protestants, who have pretended highly to Reformation,
precipitating them into Sacrilege, Profaneness, Selfconceitedness, and
Contempt of Lawful Humane Authority, has done most Mischief? But certain it
is, that the taking away of the Daily Sacrifice is as notorious a Mark of the
Spirit of Antichrist, according to the Apprehensions of the Ancient Christians,
as any: and the Operations of Satan must have been very subtle, and his
Delusions very strong upon Men's Minds, to prevail with them so in^ustriously to
abolish so considerable a Part of the most Solemn Worship of God for Popish
Superstition, and so to expunge the genuine Notion of it out of Peoples Minds,
that they know not what it means, and therefore neglect it as a needless thing.

By Men of these Principles was this Church abused and imposed upon, and the
True English Reformed Liturgy disordered, dismembered, and defaced, to gratify
their Humor, in the Reign of K. Ed. 6. But God did not connive at it, but took
off the Contriver of those Disorders within a Month; the King himself, who
imposed upon the Parliament in it, within a Twelvemonth; and him who misled the
King, by a violent and blemished Death, not long after; and has made that
Generation of Men to them of the Church of England, Pricks in their Eyes, and
Thorns in their Sides, ever since; just Corrections for so pernicious a League,
and continued Compliance therein.

And though he has not hitherto connived at it, yet does he now, in a special
manner, call to Repentance, by new Admonitions. First, By setting up an Example
of Reformation; and, next, By discovering the Shame of the Miscarriage: a
manifest Call to take Shame to our selves, and give Glory to God, by humble
public Confession, and speedy Reformation. I may add, and, 3. By this late
great Mercy, and so manifest Declaration of the continuance of his Favor yet
toward us, notwithstanding all our Ingratitude and Unworthiness. The
Concurrence of all these together are obliging Calls, both of Encouragement, if
we answer as we should; and of Danger, by Provocation, if we neglect. It is a
New Declaration of His Gracious Condescension, and Readiness still to receive
us into Favor, if we will wisely embrace it, consider our Ways, and set to our
Duty in good earnest, and not think to satisfy Him with the Formality of a Day
of Thanksgiving, without any just Act of a real hearty Gratitude. Who can, or
dare say, that this Divine Favor has not been obtained of Almighty God by
this Beginning of a Restitution of the Daily Christian Sacrifice, under the
Conduct of His special Providence, as a principal means, for a Manifestation of
his Approbation thereof to the whole Nation. If we well consider the Judgments
both of Ancient Christians, and of Learned and Judicious Divines of our own
Church, in this Age, concerning the Prevalence of this Holy ^eans; together
with the Circumstances we are under, it will appear no unreasonable thing to
think so. The Celebration of the Holy Sacrament (says a late Bishop, Dr.
Jeremy Tailor) is in its self, and in its own Formality, a Sacred, Solemn, and
Ritual Prayer, in which we invocate God by the Merits of Christ, expressing
that Adjuration, not only in Words, but in Actual Representment and
Commemoration of his Passion. And if the Necessities of the Church were well
considered, we should find that a Daily Sacrifice of Prayer, and a Daily Prayer
of Sacrifice, were no more but what her Condition requires. And I would to God
the Governors of Churches would take Care that the Necessities of Kings and
Kingdoms, of Churches and States, were represented to God by the most Solemn
and Efficacious Intercessions: and Christ has taught us none greater than the
Praying in the Virtue and Celebration of his Sacrifice. And this is the Counsel
that the Church received from St. Ignatius: Hasten frequently to approach to
the Eucharist, the Glory of God: For when this is Daily Celebrated, we break
the Powers of Satan. If all our Bishops, Deans and Prebends did constantly and
devoutly attend this Solemn Worship at their several Cathedrals, and there
perform this Holy Service as it ought to be, we should soon find that to be of
greater Importance, both to Church and State, and the whole Nation, than all
the Service our Bishops ever did, or ever will do in Parliament, or the rest at
their particular Cures, Attendances, and I know not what occasions to withdraw
them from their proper and principal Business. These are such Relics of Popery
as ought to be reformed, if ever we expect to receive the Favor and Blessing
of God in any great degree. How others can satisfy their Consciences, I know
not, but I am clear of Opinion, that they who take such Preferments for Lucre
sake, and attend the Duty of them no farther than our Laws do require, are
guilty of the greatest Sacrilege: And that those Princes and States, who
presume ordinarily to withdraw such Persons from the Service of God in their
proper Places, to serve them in Matters of State, are likewise Guilty of
Sacrilege, Impiety, and great Imprudence, to make so bold with Sacred Matters.
The Reformation of these things would be a greater Demonstration of real
Gratitude to God, than any thing this Nation has produced of a long time.

THE LITURGY Of the ANCIENTS REPRESENTED, As near as well may be, In ENGLISH
Forms.
PART I.
The Priest turning toward the People. Note. According to Ancient Usage,
whatever is spoken to God, is spoken toward the Altar; whatever to the People,
toward them. v. Mede. Ep. 56.


Pr. * The Lord he with you.

Pe. And with thy Spirit.

* O Come, let us sing unto the Lord: let us heartily rejoice in the Strength
of our Salvation.

Let us come before his Presence with Thanksgiving: and show our selves glad in
him with Psalms.

For the Lord is a great God: and a great King above all Gods.

In his hand are all the corners of the Earth: and the strength of the Hills is
his also.

The Sea is his, and he made it: and his hands prepared the dry Land.

O come let us Worship, and Fall down: and Kneel before the Lord our Maker.

For he is the Lord our God: and we are the people of his pasture, and sheep of
his hand. O come, etc.

Then toward the Altar.

* Glory be to God on high, and on Earth peace Good Will toward Men.

* BLessed be the Lord God of Israel: for he has visited and redeemed his
people;

And has raised up a mighty Salvation for us: in the house of his servant
David;

As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets: which have been since the world
began;

That we should be saved from our Enemies and from the hands of all that hate
us;

To perform the Mercy promised to our forefathers: and to remember his holy
Covenant.

To perform the Oath which he swear to our forefather Abraham: that he would
give us;

That we being delivered out of the hand of our enemies: might serve him
without fear;

In Holiness and Righteousness before him: all the days of our life.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

*GOD be merciful unto us, and bless us: and show us the Light of his
Countenance, and be merciful unto us.

* PRevent us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most gracious Favor, and
further us with thy continual Help, that [as by thy special Grace preventing us
thou do put into our minds good Desires, so by thy continual Help we may
bring the same to good Effect; and in all our works begun, continued, and ended
in thee,] we may glorify thy holy Name, and finally by thy mercy [may] obtain
everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

OUR Father who art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy Will
be done on Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our Daily Bread. And
forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into Temptation; But deliver us from Evil. Amen.

ALmighty God, unto whom all Hearts be open, all Desires known, and from whom
no Secrets are hid; Cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the Inspiration of
thy holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy
holy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then turning toward the People.

Pr. GOD spoke these words, and said, I am the Lord thy God: Thou shall have
none other Gods but me.

Pe. Lord, have Mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

Pr. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the Likeness of any
thing that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Water under
the Earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them: for I the Lord
thy God am a jealous God, and visit the Sins of the Fathers upon the Children,
unto the third and fourth Generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands in them that love me, and keep my commandments.

Pe. Lord, have Mercy upon us, etc.

Pr. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

Pe. Lord, have Mercy upon us, etc.

Pr. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath Day. Six days shall thou labor,
and do all that thou have to do; but the Seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of Work, thou, nor thy Son, nor thy
Daughter, thy Manservant, nor thy Maidservant, thy Cattle, nor the Stranger
that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the
Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the Seventh day: wherefore the Lord
blessed the Seventh day, and hallowed it.

Pe. Lord, have Mercy upon us, etc.

Pr. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Pe. Lord, have Mercy upon us, etc.

Pr. Thou shall do no Murder.

Pe. Lord, have Mercy upon us, etc.

Pr. Thou shall not commit Adultery.

Pe. Lord, have Mercy upon us, etc.

Pr. Thou shall not Steal.

Pe. Lord, have Mercy upon us, etc.

Pr. Thou shall not bear false Witness against thy Neighbor.

Pe. Lord, have Mercy upon us, etc.

Pr. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors Wife, nor his Servant, nor his Maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor
any thing that is his.

Pe. Lord, have Mercy upon us, and write these and all thy Laws in our Hearts,
we beseech thee.

Let us Pray.

And turning toward the Altar.

* O God, the Strength of all them that put their Trust in thee, Mercifully
accept our Prayers; and because through the Weakness of our mortal Nature we
can do no Good thing without thee, grant us the Help of thy Grace, that in
keeping thy Commandments we may please thee, both in will and deed, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

* ALmighty and everliving God, by whose Spirit the whole Body of the Church is
sanctified and governed; Receive our Supplications and Prayers which we offer
unto thee for all Estates of Men in thy holy Church, that every Member of the
same in his Vocation and Ministry, may truly and godly serve thee, through our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Then the Collect of the Day, with one of these Two for the King.

ALmighty God, whose Kingdom is everlasting, and Power infinite; Have Mercy
upon the whole Church, and so rule the Heart of thy chosen Servant N. our King
and Governor, that he (knowing whose Minister he is) may above all things seek
thy Honor and Glory; and that we and all his subjects (duly considering whose
Authority he has) may faithfully serve, honor, and humbly obey him, in thee,
and for thee, according to thy blessed Word and Ordinance, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, who with thee, and the holy Ghost, lives and reigns ever One God,
World without end. Amen.

Or.

ALmighty and everliving God, we are taught by thy holy Word, that the Hearts
of Kings are in thy Rule and Governance, and that thou do dispose and turn
them as in thy most excellent Wisdom thou see best; We humbly beseech thee so
to dispose and govern the Heart of N. thy Servant, our King and Governor, that
in all his Thoughts, Words, and Works, he may ever seek thy Honor and Glory,
and study to preserve thy People committed to his charge, in Wealth, Peace, and
Godliness. Grant this, O merciful Father, for thy dear Sons sake, Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

Then turning toward the People.

The Epistle written in the -- Chapter of -- at the -- Verse.

And when he has done.

Here ends the Epistle: The Holy Gospel, etc. People. Glory be to thee, O
Lord.

And at the end of the Gospel.

Pr. So ends the Holy Gospel.

Pe. Thanks be to thee, O Lord.

Then turning toward the Altar.

I Believe in one God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and of
all things visible and invisible:

And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, Begotten of his
Father before all Worlds, God of God, Light of Light, Very God of very God,
Begotten, not made, Being of one substance with the Father, By whom all things
were made: Who for us Men, and for our Salvation, came down from Heaven, And
was incarnate by the holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, And was made Man, And was
Crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate. He suffered and was buried, And the
third day he rose again according to the Scriptures, And ascended into Heaven,
And sits on the right hand of the Father. And he shall come again with Glory
to judge both the quick and the dead: Whose Kingdom shall have no end

And I believe in the holy Ghost, The Lord and giver of Life, Who proceeds
from the Father and the Son, Who with the Father and the Son together is
worshipped and glorified, Who spoke by the Prophets.

And I believe one Catholic and Apostolic Church.

I acknowledge one Baptism for the Remission of Sins.

And I look for the Resurrection of the Dead, And the Life of the World to
come. Amen.

* WE praise thee, O God: we acknowledge thee to be the Lord.

All the Earth does worship thee: the Father everlasting.

To thee all Angels cry aloud: the Heavens, and all the Powers therein.

To the Cherubin, and Seraphin: continually do cry,

Holy, Holy, Holy: Lord God of Sabbath.

Heaven and Earth are full of the Majesty: of thy Glory.

The glorious Company of the Apostles: praise thee.

The goodly Fellowship of the Prophets: praise thee.

The noble Army of Martyrs: praise thee.

The Holy Church throughout all the World: does acknowledge thee:

The Father: of an infinite Majesty;

Thine honorable, true: and only Son;

Also the Holy Ghost: the Comforter.

Thou art the King of Glory: O Christ:

Thou art the everlasting Son: of the Father.

When thou tookest upon thee to deliver Man: thou did not abhor the Virgins
Womb.

When thou had overcome the sharpness of Death: thou did open the Kingdom
of Heaven to all Believers.

Thou sit at the right hand of God: in the Glory of the Father.

We believe that thou shall come: to be our Judge.

We therefore pray thee, help thy Servants: whom thou have redeemed with thy
precious Blood.

Make them to be numbered with thy Saints: in Glory everlasting.

O Lord, save thy people: and bless thine heritage.

Govern them: and lift them up for ever.

Day by day: we magnify thee;

And we Worship, thy Name: ever World without end.

Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this day without sin.

O Lord, have Mercy upon us: have Mercy upon us.

O Lord, let thy Mercy lighten upon us: as our trust is in thee.

O Lord, in thee have I trusted: let me never be confounded.

* ALmighty and everliving God, who have given unto us thy servants Grace, by
the Confession of a true Faith, to acknowledge the Glory of the eternal
Trinity, and in the Power of the Divine Majesty, to worship the Unity; We
beseech thee to keep us steadfast in this Faith, and evermore defend us from all
Adversities, who live and reignest One God World without end. Amen.

ALmighty, Everliving, most Merciful and most Gracious God, who hate nothing
which thou have made, and do forgive the Sins of all them, who are Penitent,
create and make in us New and Contrite Hearts, that we worthily lamenting our
Sins, and acknowledging our Wretchedness, may obtain of thee, the God of all
Mercy, perfect Remission and Forgiveness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE Liturgy of the Ancients Represented, etc. PART II.
The Office of the Faithful.
The Priest turning toward the People.

Pr. * The Lord be with you.

Pe. And with thy Spirit.

Pr. Christ our Pascal Lamb is offered for us once for all; when he bare our
Sins on his Body upon the Cross: For he is the very Lamb of God, that takes
away the Sins of the World: Wherefore let us keep a Joyful and Holy Feast with
the Lord.

YE who do truly and sincerely Repent you of your Sins, and are in Love and
Charity with your Neighbors, and intend to lead a new Life, and heartily to
follow the Commandments of God, and to walk from henceforth in his Holy Ways;
Draw near The Men on the one side, and the Women on the other, says the
Rubric, in the first Book of E. 6. after the Offertory; and such was the
Ancient Usage.
with Faith, and take this Holy Sacrament to your Comfort; and make your humble
Confession to Almighty God, meekly kneeling upon your Knees.

Then Kneeling

ALmighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Maker of all things, Judge of
all Men; We acknowledge and repent us of our manifold Sins and Wickednesses,
which we from time to time most grievously have committed, by Thought, Word,
and Deed, against thy Divine Majesty, provoking thy most just Wrath and
Indignation against us. We do sincerely Repent, and are heartily sorry for
these our Misdoings, the Remembrance of them is grievous to us; the Burden of
them is intolerable. Have Mercy upon us, have Mercy upon us, most merciful
Father; for thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, forgive us all that is past,
and grant that we may ever hereafter serve and please thee in Newness of Life,
to the Honor and Glory of thy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, we beseech thee mercifully hear our Prayers, and spare all those who
confess their Sins unto thee, that they who by Conscience of Sin are accused,
by thy merciful Favor may be absolved, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then rising up, and turning toward the People.

ALmighty God our Heavenly Father, who of his great Mercy has promised
Forgiveness of Sins to all them that with hearty Repentance and true Faith turn
unto him; Have Mercy upon you, Pardon and Deliver you from all your Sins,
Confirm and Strengthen you in all Grace and Goodness, and bring you to
Everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Hear what Comfortable Words our Savior Christ faith unto all that truly turn
unto him.

COme unto Me, all that travel and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. S.
Matthew. 11.28.

So God loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, to the end that
all that believe in him should not Perish, but have everlasting Life. S. John
3.16.

Hear also what S. Paul faith.

This is a true Saying, and worthy of all Men to be received, that Jesus Christ
came into the World to save Sinners. 1 Timothy 1.15.

Hear also what S. John says.

If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous: and he is the Propitiation for our Sins. 1 S. John 2.1.

The OFFERTORY.
Note, It being an Ancient Holy Rite, among all Mankind, to pay Honor to God,
by making their Address to Him with Presents and Offerings, in Recognition of
his absolute Dominion, and their Dependence upon and Subjection to Him, (as
with us Freeholders, pay their chief Rents to the Lord of whom they hold) and a
Rite observed in the Christian Church all over the World, so Anciently, that it
is not to be doubted but it was retained by the Apostles, according to their
Instructions received from our Savior, as other such Rites were; the People
are to be instructed and admonished to present their Offerings with Reverence,
as the Offerings of God, and to God, for the Purpose aforesaid, and as
Symbolical Oblations of themselves, and all they are and have, unto Him, v.
Sparrow's Rationale. And, anciently, those who could not come, and yet desired
to be remembered in the Solemn Prayer at the Altar, did use to send their
Offerings by some other, and were remembered accordingly, if their Offerings
were accepted.

LET your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your good Works, and
glorify your Father who is in Heaven. S. Matthew. 5.16.

Lay not up for your selves Creasure upon Earth, where the Rust and Moth does
corrupt, and where Chieves break through and steal: but lay up for your sewes
Creasures in Heaven, where neither Rust nor Moth does corrupt, and where
Chieves do not break through nor steal. S. Matthew. 6.19, 20.

Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; but he that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven. S. Matthew.
7.21.

Godliness is great Riches, if a Man be content with that he has: for we
brought nothing into the World, neither may we carry any thing out. 1 Timothy 6.6,
7.

Honor the Lord with thy Substance, and with the Principal of all thine
Increase. Prove. 3.9.

Give unto the Lord the Glory due unto his Name: bring an Offering, and come
into his Courts. Psalm. 96.8. 1 Chrom. 16.29.

Let all that be round about him bring Presents unto Him that ought to be
feared. Psalm. 76.11.

None shall appear before me empty. Exodus 23.15.

Every Man shall give as he is able, according to the Blessing of the Lord thy
God, which he has given thee. Deuteronomy. 16.17.

If there be a willing Mind, it is accepted according to that a Man has? 2
Cor. 8.12.

WHO goes to Warfare at any time at his own Cost?

Who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of the Fruit thereof? or, Who feeds
a Flock, and eats nor of the Milk of the Flock. 1 Cor. 7.9.

If we have sown unto you Spiritual things, is it a great matter if we shall
reap your Wordly things? 1 Cor. 9.11.

Do ye not know that they who minister about holy things, live of the
Sacrifice? and they who wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar? Even
so has the Lord also ordained, that they who preach the Gospel, should live of
the Gospel. 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.

TO do good, and to distribute, forget not; for with such Sacrifices God is
well pleased. Heb. 13.16.

The Administration of this Service not only supplyeth the want of the Saints,
but is abundant also by many Thanksgivings unto God. 2 Cor. 9.12.

An Odor of a sweet Smelt, a Sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing unto God.
Phil. 4.18.

He that sows little, shall reap little: and he that sows plenteously,
shall reap plentenously. Let every Man do according as he is disposed in his
Heart, not grudgingly, or of necessity; for God loves a cheerful Giver. 2 Cor.
9.6, 7.

God is not Unrighteous, that he should forget your Works, and Labor of Love,
which ye have showed for his Names sake, who have ministered unto the Saints,
and do minister. Heb. 6.10.

When the People have all presented their Offerings, the Priest is to take
them, and present them reverently upon the Altar; then take the Bread and Wine,
v. Mede Chr. Sacr. c. 8.
present them, and place them decently in the middle of the Altar: And then
turning toward the People, say,

THE Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God the Father, and the
Communication of the Holy Spirit, be with you all evermore. Amen.

Lift up your Hearts.

Ans. We lift them up unto the Lord.

Pri. Let us give Thanks unto our Lord God.

Ans. It is Meet and Right so to do.

IT is very Meet, Right, and our Bounden Duty, that we should [Adore, Worship,
and Glorify thee, and] at all Times, and in all Places, give [Praise and]
Thanks unto thee, O Lord, Holy Father, Almighty, Everlasting God, [for all thy
Goodness and Loving Kindness to us, and to all Men: We bless thee for our
Creation, Preservation, and all the Blessings of this Life; but above All, for
thine inestimable Love in the Redemption of the World by our Lord Jesus Christ;
for the means of Grace, and for the hope of Glory. And] therefore with Angels
and Archangels, and with all the Company of Heaven, we laud and magnify thy
glorious Name, evermore praising thee, and saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God
of Hosts; Heaven and Earth are full of thy Glory. Glory be to thee, O Lord most
high. Amen.

THou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power; for thou
have created all things; and for thy Pleasure they are and were created.

Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom,
and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing.

For thou wast slain, and have redeemed us unto God, by thy Blood, out of every
Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation.

Blessing, Honor, Glory, and Power, be unto Him that sits upon the Throne;
and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever.

Then turning toward the People.

Let us pray for the whole State of Christ's Church Militant here on Earth.

And turning again toward the Altar.

ALmighty and Everliving God, who by thy holy Apostle have taught us to make
Prayers and Supplications, and to give Thanks unto thee for all Men; We humbly
beseech thee most mercifully (to accept these our Oblations, and) to receive
these our Prayers, which we offer unto thy Divine Majesty, beseeching thee to
inspire continually the universal Church with the Spirit of Truth, Unity, and
Concord: and grant that all they who do confess thy Holy Name, may agree in the
Truth of thy Holy Word, and live in Unity and Godly Love.

We beseech thee also to save and defend all Christian Kings, Princes, and
Governors; and especially thy Servant N. our King, that under him we may be
godly and quietly governed: and to grant unto his whole Council, and to all
that are put in Authority under him, that they may truly and indifferently
minister Justice, to the punishment of Wickedness and Vice, and to the
maintenance of thy true Religion and Virtue.

Give Grace, O Heavenly Father, to all Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, and more
particularly of this Church and Diocese, that they may both by their Life and
Doctrine set forth thy true and lively Word, and rightly and duly administer
thy Holy Sacraments.

And to all thy People give thy Heavenly Grace; that with meek Heart and due
Reverence they may hear and receive thy holy Word, truly serving thee in
Holiness and Righteousness all the Days of their Life.

And we commend especially unto thy merciful Goodness the Congregation, which
is here assembled in thy Name to celebrate the Commemoration of the most
precious Death and Sacrifice of thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ.

And we most humbly beseech thee, of thy Goodness, O Lord, to comfort and
succor all them, who in this transitory Life are in Trouble, Sorrow, Need,
Sickness, or any other Adversity.

And we also bless thy holy Name, for all thy Servants, C. departed this Life
in thy Faith and Fear; beseeching thee to give us Grace so to follow their good
Examples, that with them we may be Partakers of thy Heavenly Kingdom.
who having finished their Course in Faith, do now rest from their Labors.

And we render unto thee most hearty Thanks and Praise for thy wonderful Grace
and Virtue declared in all thy Saints, who have been the choice Vessels of thy
Grace, and the Lights of the World in their several Generations: And chiefly in
the glorious and most blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of thy Son Jesus Christ our
Lord and God; and in thy Holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs. Ed.
6.
most humbly beseeching thee, that we may have Grace to follow the Example of
their Stedfastness in thy Faith, and Obedience to thy Holy Commandments; We
commend unto thy Mercy, O Lord, all other thy Servants, which are departed
hence from us with the Sign of Faith, and now rest in the Sleep of Peace; Grant
unto them, we beseech thee, thy Mercy, and Everlasting Peace; and that at the
Day, etc. Ed. 6. v. H. Lestr. c. 6. T. V.
that at the Day of the General Resurrection, we, and all they who are of the
Mystical Body of thy Son, may be set on his Right Hand, and hear his most
joyful Voice, Come, ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you from the Foundation of the World. Grant this, O Father, for Jesus Christ's
Sake our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

Then the Prayer of Consecration.

ALmighty God, our Heavenly Father, who of thy tender Mercy did give thine
only Son Jesus Christ to suffer Death upon the Cross for our Redemption, who
made there (by his own Oblation of himself once offered) a full, perfect, and
sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation and Satisfaction for the Sins of the whole
World, and did institute, and in his Holy Gospel command us to continue and
celebrate a Perppetual Memory of that his precious Death and Sacrifice, until
his Coming again; Hear us, O merciful Father, we most humbly beseech thee, and
of thy abundant Goodness vouchsafe to bless and sanctify with thy Word and
holy Spirit these thy Gifts and Creatures of Breat and Wine, that they may be
unto us the Body and Blood of thy most dearly beloved Son, our Savior Jesus
Christ; so that we receiving them, according to His Holy Institution, in
Remembrance of his Death and Passion, [and Recognition of our Redemption
thereby] may be Partakers of his most blessed Body and Blood: who in the same
Night that he was betrayed Here the Priest is to take the Paten into his Hands.
took Bread, and when he had given Thanks And here to break the Bread
he brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, saying, Take, eat, And here to l^y
his Hand upon all the bread:
This is my Body which is given for you, do this in Remembrance of me. Likewise
after Supper Here he is to take the Cup into his Hand.
he took the Cup, and when he had given Thanks, he gave it to them, saying,
Drink ye All of this, for This And here to lay his Hand upon every Vessel, be
it Chalice or Flaren in which there is any Wine to be Consecrated.
is my Blood of the Now Testament, which is shed for you, and for many, for the
Remission of Sins: Do this as often as ye shall drink it, in Remembrance of me.
Amen.

The Memorial: or Prayer of Oblation.

WHerefore, O Lord, and Heavenly Father, according to the Institution of thy
dearly beloved Son, our Savior Jesus Christ, we thy humble Servants do
celebrate, and make here before thy Divine Majesty, with These thy Holy Gifts,
the Memorial which He has willed us to make, having in Remembrance his Blessed
Passion, Mighty Resurrection, and Glorious Ascension; rendering unto thee most
humble and hearty Thanks for the innumerable Benefits procured unto us by the
same. And we humbly beseech thee, of thy Fatherly Goodness, mercifully to
accept this our Sacrifice of Praise and Chansgiving, and graciously to grant,
that by His Death, Merits, and Intercession, and through Faith in his Blood,
we, and all thy whole Church, may obtain Remission of our Sins, and all other
Benefits of his Passion.

And here we offer and present unto thee, O Lord, our Selves, our Souls and
Bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and lively Sacrifice unto thee; humbly
beseeching thee, that whosoever shall be Partakers of this Holy Communion, may
worthily receive the most precious Body and Blood of thy Son Jesus Christ, be
fulfilled with thy Grace and Heavenly Benediction, and made one Body with him,
that he may dwell in them, and they in him. And although we be Unworthy,
through our manifold Sins, to offer unto thee any Sacrifice; yet we beseech
thee to accept this our Bounden Duty and Service; And command these our
Supplications and Prayers to be, by the Ministry of thy Holy Angels, brought up
into thy Holy Tabernacle, before the Sight of thy Divine Majesty. In the First
Book of Ed. 6. but lose out afterward.
not weighing our Merits, but pardoning our Offenses, through Jesus Christ our
Lord; by whom, and with whom, in the Unity of the Holy Ghost, all Honor and
Glory be unto thee, O Father Almighty, World without end. Amen.

AND we humbly beseech thee, O Lord, our God, That it may please thee to give
us Hearts to love, dread, and adhere unto thee, and diligently to live after
thy Commandments.

That it may please thee to preserve, rule, and govern thy Holy Church
Universal in the Right Way.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, [and
particularly of this Church and Diocess] with true Knowledge and Understanding
of thy Word, and that both by their Preaching and Living they may set it forth,
and show it accordingly.

That it may please thee to direct, keep and strengthen in the true Faith and
Worship of thee, and in Righteousness and Holiness of Life thy Servant N. our
King and Governor.

That it may please thee that he may ever have Affiance in thee, ever seek thy
Honor and Glory, and have Victory over all his Enemies.

That it may please thee to bless and preserve all the Royal Family.

That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the Council, and all the
Nobility, with Grace, Wisdom, and Understanding.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them Grace
to execute Justice, and to maintain Truth.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy People, to give them
increase of Grace, to hear meekly thy Word, and to receive it with pure
Affection, and to bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit.

That it may please thee to give to all Nations Unity, Peace, and Concord.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of Truth all such as have erred,
and are deceived.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the Weak-hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat down
Satan under our feet.

That it may please thee to succor, help, and comfort all that are in Danger,
Necessity, and Tribulation.

That it may please thee to preserve all that Travel by Land, or by Water, all
Women laboring of Child, all Sick persons and young Children, and to show thy
Pity upon all Prisoners and Captives.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for the Fatherless Children and
Widows, and all that are Desolate and Oppressed.

That it may please thee to have Mercy upon all Men.

That it may please thee to forgive our Enemies, Persecutors, and Slanderers,
and to turn their Hearts.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our Use the kindly Fruits of
the Earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them.

We humbly beseech thee to hear us, O Lord our God, through the Merits and
Intercession of thy dearly beloved Son our blessed Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus; and as he has taught and commanded us, we are bold to say,

OUR Father who art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy Will
be done on Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our Daily Bread. And
forgive us our Crespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into Temptation; But deliver us from Evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, And the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

Then, after a little Pause for all to offer up their own private Prayers, this
Collect of humble Access to the Holy Communion, Kneeling.

WE do not presume to come to this thy Table, O merciful Lord, trusting in our
own Righteousness, but in thy manifold and great Mercies. We are not worthy so
much as to gather up the Crumbs inder thy Table. But thou art the same Lord,
whose Property is always to have Mercy; grant us therefore, Gracious Lord, so
to eat the Flesh of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, and to drink his Blood, that our
Bodies and Souls being cleansed, and our Sins part oned, through his most
precious Blood, we may enjoy thy Favor, be filled with thy Spirit, and
evermore dwell in Him, and He in Us. Amen.

Note. Concerning the Behavior of the Communicants, these things are to be
observed, that Anciently: 1. They came Fasting to it. v. Sparrow. 2. They came
in Purity from all, not only Unlawful, but Carnal Embraces whatsoever, for some
time before. v. S. Hier. Apol. pro Lib. contra Jovin. 3. They came up to the
Rails; (v. Spar.) to which they are called by these Words, Draw near, in the
Invitation before the Confession. 4. They answered, Amen, to the Words of the
Priest at the Delivery of the Sacrament. v. Spar. 5. They received the
Consecrated Bread in their Hands. v. Spar. 6. They were careful that none of it
should fall to the Cround. v. Tertul. de Cor. Mil -- Origin. Hom. 13. in Exodus
circa Med. Cyril. Hierosol. Cat. Mist. 5. sub fi. Aug. Hom. 26. l. 50 Hom. 7.
They did but sip or taste of the Cup. So did the Jews before: for it was a Rite
of Thanksgiving to God in Use amongst them; and so did the christians; both
using it as a Sacred Cup, and not to be profaned by pleasing the Palate, which
was the Fault of some of the Corinthians, punished by the Judgments of God. 1
Cor. 11.30. and savouring of the Temper and Disposition of those Jews, whom our
Savior repremands. Jo. 6.26.


At the Communion, this Benediction and Recognition.

THe Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for thee,] preserve thy
Body and Soul unto Everlasting Life. Ans. Amen.

Take and eat this in Remembrance that Christ Died for thee.

And at the delivering of the Cup, this:

THe Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was shed for thee,] preserve thy
Body and Soul unto Everlasting Life. Ans. Amen.

Drink this in Remembrance that Christ's Blood was shed for thee, and be
thankful.

Then, having decently covered what remains of the Consecrated Elements, this
Thanksgiving.

ALmighty and Everliving God, we most heartily thank thee, for that thou do
vouchsafe, of thy Favor and Goodness toward us, to feed us, who have duly
received these Holy Mysteries, with the Spiritual Food of the most precious
Body and Blood of thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ, as Members incorporate in
His Mystical Body, and Heirs through Hope of thy Everlasting Kingdom, by the
Merits of His most Precious Death and Passion. And we most humbly beseech thee,
O Heavenly Father, so to assist us with thy Grace, that we may continue in that
Holy Fellowship, and do all such Good Works as thou have prepared for us to
walk in; through Jesus Christ our Lord; to whom with thee, and the Holy Ghost,
be all Honor and Glory, World without end. Amen.

Then this Hymn.

GLory be to God on high, and on Earth Peace, Good Will toward Men. We Praise
thee, we Bless thee, we Worship thee, we Glorify thee, we give Thanks unto
thee for thy great Glory, O Lord God, Heavenly King, God the Father Almighty.

O Lord, the only begotten Son Jesus Christ; O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of
the Father, that take away the Sins of the World, have Mercy upon us. Thou
that take away the Sins of the World, have Mercy upon us. Thou that take
away the Sins of the World, receive our Prayer. Thou that sit at the Right
Hand of God the Father, have Mercy upon us.

For thou only art Holy, thou only art the Lord, thou only, O Christ, with
the Holy Ghost, art most high in the Glory of God the Father. Amen.

Then the Priest (or Bishop, if he be present) may let them depart with this
Blessing.

THe Peace of God which passes all Understanding, keep your Hearts and Minds
in the knowledge and Love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: And the
Blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be amongst
you, and remain with you always. Amen.

COLLECTS To be said, as occasion may serve, at the Discretion of the Minister.
ACcept us graciously, O Lord, in these our Supplications, Prayers, and
Thanksgivings, and dispose the Way of Servants toward the Attainment of
Everlasting Salvation; that among all the Changes and Chances of this Mortal
Life, they may ever be defended by thy most gracious and ready Help, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Almighty Lord, and everlasting God, vouchsafe, we beseech thee, to
sanctify, direct, and govern both our Hearts and Bodies in the Ways of thy
Laws, and in the Works of thy Commandments, that through thy most mighty
Protection, both here and ever, we may be preserved in Body and Soul, through
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

GRant, we beseech thee, Almighty God, that the Words which we have heard this
Day with our outward Ears, may, through thy Grace, he so grafred inwardly in
our Hearts, that they may bring forth in us the Fruit of good Living, to the
Honor and Praise of thy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PRevent us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most gracious Favor, and
further us with thy continual Help, that in all our Works begun, continued, and
ended in thee, we may glorify thy Holy Name, and finally by thy Mercy obtain
Everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ALmighty God, the Fountain of all Wisdom, who know our Necessities before
we ask, and our Ignorance in Asking; We beseech thee to have Compassion upon
our Infirmities; and those things which for our Unworthiness we dare not, and
for our Blindness we cannot ask, vouchsafe to give us for the Worthiness of thy
Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ALmighty God, who have promised to hear the Petitions of them that ask in thy
Sons Name; We beseech thee mercifully to incline thy Favor to us, who have
made now our Prayers and Supplications unto Thee; and grant that those things
which we have faithfully asked, according to thy Will, may effectually be
obtained, to the Relief of our Necessity, and to the setting forth of thy
Glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

In these Forms thus disposed is so much both of the Substance, and of the
Order of the most ancient Liturgies, that a small matter more would make it One
of the Compleatest Liturgies in the World. In the First Part should be more of
the Scriptures, which may either be left to the Discretion of the Priest, or
some of the Lessons for the Day be used: And the Prayers, which are
preposterous before the Creed, or the Epistle and Gospel, (v. Heb. 11.6.)
should either be after the Creed and the Te Deum, or be reserved to the Second
Part, which is most agreeable to the most ancient Office for the Catechumens
and Penetents, who were not admitted to the Prayers of the Faithful. And, in
the Second Part, the Eucharist, or Thanksgiving, is much shorter than they
anciently used: and the Commemorations for the Communion of Saints of the whole
Mystical Body of Christ, are not so express as anciently they were in all the
Liturgies now extant. I shall conclude with these Observations concerning
Liturgies.

1. That Prescribed Forms in the Public Worship of God, and also for Private
Use, are of Divine Original and Institution.

2. That there is not any good and clear Evidence of the Ordinary Solemn
Worship of God, ever performed in any Christian Church, or other Religious
Society, in any part of the World, without them.

3. That therefore it is great Ignorance and Inconsiderateness at the best, but
usually great Presumption and Impiety in those, who dare to speak against them
in general.

4. That the Jews did use Forms before our Saviors Time, and the most ancient
Christian Liturgies are so conform to them, that it is highly probable they
were of Apostolical Original, as to the Substance and Order; or rather, that
our Savior himself, who certainly retained the Rite, retained also the Forms,
with such Variations as were proper for the Christians Use.

5. That these things considered, and the Use of the Word Liturgy in the
Christian Church so ancient, universal, and appropriate to this Purpose, it is
very disingenuous to deny that St. Luke ( Act. 13.2.) did use that Word, which
we translate Ministering, being joined with Fasting, for Solemn Prayer by
Liturgy, after the manner aforesaid, comprising more in that Word than ordinary
Praying, by reason of the Solemnity of the Eucharist, and Christian Sacrifice.

In the Preface, p. 9. l. 6. for January r. June.

A PREPARATIVE For the Reception of Truth, for a Prologue to certain
Discourses, designed for a True Reformation, and Restitution of Primitive
Christianity.
TRUTH is what in its own Nature is very Excellent and Powerful, is of Divine
Original, of great Importance to Mankind, and greatly opposed by the Powers of
Darkness and all Evil Spirits: And therefore it is the Duty, Interest and
Wisdom of Man, to have a great Esteem, Veneration and Reverence for it in all
things, but more especially in things of greatest Importance, Matters of
Religion. And because it is certain and manifest to all Men, who will but
consider it, that there is not any more common visible Obstacle to it, than
Prejudice of Education, Temporal Interests and Respects, and Pre-ingagement of
Reputation for maintenance of Opinions received, especially when intermixed
with something of Truth to support them, it is absolutely necessary to the
Discharge of this Duty, Securing of this Interest, and Exercise of this Wisdom,
Esteem and Reverence, to consider well, and settle it in our Minds, that those
are no Principles of Truth, but commonly of Error, and Means, of which wicked
Spirits make great Advantage to harden Men's Hearts, and make them obstinate in
the Errors, which they have intermixed with the Truths of God; and therefore be
assured, that since we are all Fallible, there may be as much Truth on their
side with whom we contend, as on our own; and that it is more likely that both
Parties are in Error, than that either is entirely in the Right; and thereupon
to set generously and impartially to examine and distinguish, and retain what
is plain and clear, reject what is manifestly false, and leave what is doubtful
and obscure till God shall reveal that also, in the mean time as of less
Importance; and where there is occasion of consulting others, make choice, as
in consulting Lawyers or Physicians, of such as are not only well versed in
such matters, but also disinterested, unbyassed, and faithful. And because to
resist, reject or make light of any Truth but offered by the gracious
Providence of God, is a Sin of great Ingratitude, and very offensive to his
Divine Majesty, and usually provokes subtraction of his Grace and Spiritual
Judgments, it greatly concerns all, who have any true Devotion to God, and
considerate Care for their own Souls, to be very cautious that they do not
unadvisedly reject or neglect any such when proposed to them; but especially if
such as have been believed, professed and practiced, if of that nature, by the
most eminent Saints in all Ages, and in all Parts of the Church of Christ; and
more-especially if such as concern the Honor of God, and of our Savior, the
Interest of his Church, which is the Kingdom of Christ upon Earth, the
Communion of Saints, or the Salvation or Consolation of Souls, whether in the
Body, or out of the Body; and more yet, if there appear just cause of Suspicion
of the contrary Opinions; as when the first Teachers differ and fall out among
themselves, and principal Men of their Followers afterward confess that what
was greatly magnified by them before was greatly mistaken; when Charges or
Accusations are of themselves monstrous and unreasonable, as that Catalogue of
Errors of the Church of Rome, published by two several Persons, eminent in
their own Parties, which computed, amount to above Five Hundred, a great sign
of more Partiality than Prudence, more Heat than Truth, and of more Contention
and Calumny than of just cause of Accusation; and one of the same Persons
after-terward confessing that those of that Church are unjustly and untruly
charged in many things; and especially when that remarkable Note of the
Apostle, viz. Going out, 1 Jo. 2.19. according to his Masters Cautions before,
Luke 17.23. and 21.8. which by the Ancient Christians is so much insisted on as
a certain Note of Heresy and Schism, is manifest beyond all contradiction. In
all such cases a Godly Jealousy and Circumspection is highly necessary, that
we do not obstinately persist in Error, and resist the Truth.

So much is required of all Men, as Rational Creatures, that they be faithful
to their Creator, and their own Souls, in the due Use and Improvement of their
Talent of Natural Reason and Understanding: But Christians should farther
consider, that they have many subtle and powerful invisible Adversaries to
contend with, called Principalities and Powers, and the Rulers of the Darkness
of this World, and one chief, called the God of this World, who commonly puts
on the Appearance of an Angel of Light, blinding the Minds of Worldly and
Carnal Men, least the Light of Truth should shine unto them: and therefore be
very watchful against their Wiles, beware of their Snares, be not conformed to
this World, but transformed by the Renewing of their Mind, be mindful of their
Baptismal Covenant, their Renunciation not only of the Devil, but of the World,
and the Pomps and Vanities thereof, and of the Flesh with its Lusts and
Affections, which are two great Engines of the Adversaries, that they may
attain to true Purity in Heart, that the Light of Truth may shine into it, and
be kindly and effectually received. For this they have first the implicit
Document of the Great Example of their Redeemer, their Lord, and the Captain of
their Salvation; which they must follow if they do sincerely endeavor to
attain the End: and besides the Explication of it in manifold, express,
written, plain Declarations, affectionate Admonitions, obliging Exhortations,
and strict Injunctions, they must be Doers of his Will, if they will know the
Truth of his Doctrine; and be careful to avoid Pride, seeking Honor of Men, (
Jo. 5.44.) and Conceitedness, the common Levin of Heretics and Schismatics;
be mindful also of the other part of their Baptismal Covenant, their Profession
of Faith; observe and consider well the Order of the several Articles of their
Belief, and study to understand the Importance of each: (For there is nothing
in that Form of Sound Words, either in Matter, or Order, but is of Importance
to be noted and understood:) and consider well what special Means and Helps our
Lord has provided for them, for Evidences of his Word and Doctrine; and be
careful they neglect none of them, much less set them one against another, and
abuse what they pretend to receive, as is very usual.

I know not any Means whereby Men are more effectually imposed upon, than by
Misapplication of manifest Truths; nor any Matters, wherein, in this part of
the World, they are more commonly deceived, or deceive themselves, than in
false Notions concerning the Two great Evidences of the Christian Doctrine and
Institutions, the Catholic Church and the Sacred Scriptures, which, rightly
understood and used, do mutually confirm and corroborate one the other; but
misunderstood, separated, and abused, are the very Principles of all our
Differences and Confusions: The Catholic Church is the Kingdom of Christ upon
Earth, and to have great Regard to the Interests of it, is certainly the Duty
of all Christians: but to despise or slight the Testimony or Authority of it,
is a great Sin in it self, and the Inlet to many others, and a Fundamental
Error. To conclude, they who sincerely desire to understand and embrace the
Truth of Christianity, must consider what is required before their Engagement,
declared by our Savior in two Comparisons, Luke 14.28, 31. what is to be
performed after, declared likewise by two other Comparisons, Matt. 13.44, 45.
and what are the Terms upon which only Men may be Christ's Disciples indeed, in
express Terms inculcated upon diverse Occasions, Matt. 10.35, 37, 38. and again,
Matt. 16.24. Luke 9. and again to the Multitude, Luke 14.26, 33. and the Danger
of Denying or being ashamed of Christ or his Words, the Doctrines and
Institutions delivered by Him in Person, or by his Apostles to the Churches,
Matt. 10.28, 32. Mar. 8.34. and lastly the Danger of a fruitless and
ineffectual Profession, expressly declared in the conclusion of our Savior's
first Sermon upon the Mount, Matt. 7.21, etc. and in his Farewell Discourse,
when he went last out of the Temple, in the whole 25th chapter of St. Matthew,
all concerning Professors; whence it appears, how far People may go in a
Profession, and yet at last fail of their Expectation: upon the consideration
whereof it may be doubted, whether as many Souls do not miscarry by Security in
an ineffectual Profession, as by living in gross and scandalous Sins. To Souls
thus prepared Truth will undoubtedly find admittance, and the Good Spirit will
be ready to lead them into all necessary Truth.

The Discourses abovementioned are,
OF Prayers for the Dead: With a Preface showing the Necessity of a Retraction
of the mistaken Reformation for a more firm Settlement of the Peace of the
Nation.

A Profession of Faith comprizing the Ancient Forms of the Catholic Church,
with other Articles concerning the Roman Terms of Communion.

A Letter to a Young Man of one of the Religious Societies in London,
concerning Separation, and the Proceedings of the Reformation.

Common Principles of a just Vindication of the Rights of the Kingdom of God
upon Earth.

OF PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD: Whether the Practice and Tradition thereof in the
CHURCH be truly CATHOLIC, and a competent Evidence of Apostolic Original and
Authority? Humbly tendered to the Consideration of the Right Honorable the
JUDGES, and of the Gentlemen of the Honorable Profession of the LAW: With a
PREFACE concerning the Reasons thereof, and the Concern of the Nation, that the
Differences about Religion be better considered, in order to a more firm
Foundation of an Honorable and Lasting PEACE.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1699.

To the Right Honorable John Lord Summers, Baron of Evesham, Lord High
Chancellor of England; Sir John Holt, Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench;
Sir George Treby, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas; Sir Edward Ward, Lord
Chief Baron; and the rest of the Honorable Judges.
May it please Your Lordships.
THough at first to some it may seem strange and improper to offer a
Theological Controversy to the Consideration of Magistrates, and Judges of
Civil Causes; yet if the present Constitution of the Church of England, the
Nature of the Question, and the special Qualifications of the Persons for the
Consideration of such a Question, besides the Common Concern of all States and
Persons in Matters of Religion, be well considered, nothing can be more
reasonable: A Church professing, and glorying in the Profession, of a Religion
Established by Law; and so entirely subject to the Authority of the State, that
it cannot call a Synod, choose a Bishop, Dean or Prebend, make a Canon, or
alter any public Prayers of the Church without it; a Question of Prescription,
Usage, and Custom, than which none are more frequently examined, tried and
determined in our Civil Courts; and, by consequence, no Persons more proper to
give a Judgment upon such a Question, because none more versed and expert in
Cases of that nature than those of the Honorable Profession of the Law.
Besides, Your Lordships, and the rest of that Honorable Profession, have
another Qualification indispensably requisite to a just and true Judgment,
Indifferency and Freedom from any special Prejudice, more than what is common
to the whole Nation, and as much above that as any Persons in it; I mean that
of Education; by which, though the inconsiderate Vulgar, and People of little
Judgment, are very strangely affected and moved, either fondly affecting, or
childishly abhorring what has nothing of real Good or Evil, but what proceeds
from an abused or deceived Imagination; yet Men of Parts, Judgment, and
Experience can more easily extricate themselves out of the fetters and manacles
of such Impressions and Prejudice upon consideration of sufficient Grounds and
Reasons. But the Generality of the English Clergy, and Non-Conformists, are
under a double special Prejudice and Pre-ingagement: the Authority and Credit
of their Party; and their own in particular, having not only imbibed a Special
Opinion in the Case, but inconsiderately asserted, and so espoused it also,
besides the Prudential Caution of not disobliging or offending their Auditors:
though many Protestants in other Parts are of another Opinion, and the most
learned here have deserted the old Cause, both in their Disputes in the
University, and in their Controversial Writings. And therefore, as every honest
Man in any Difference would desire the Judgment of such as are most
indifferent, unbyassed, and impartial, so every wise Man will desire that they
may be Persons of most Ability, Skill, and expert in such Matters: And in both
these respects I know none more proper to judge of this Case than Your
Lordships, and the Gentlemen of Your Honorable Profession.

Nor is this all, that You are thus qualified to judge of this matter; but you
have also a Concern, a double Concern in it; but, that it may be fairly and
truly determined; a Concern which obliges you to Impartiality, that the Truth
may be cleared, and an End put to such Differences; both in regard to the
Places you hold, and the Interest you have in the Civil State of the Nation;
and in regard of your Personal Interest and particular Concerns both in this
Life and hereafter. For Matters of Religion are of no little Importance to the
Well-being of States, as well as of particular Persons; and to the Well-being
of particular Persons as well in this Life, as hereafter. And all this in a
double respect; in respect to the Providence of God, and in respect of their
Natural Efficacy and Tendency. It is very manifest, that almost all the
Unhappiness, Troubles and Disturbance which this Nation has suffered for more
than 150 Years last past, have proceeded from unhappy Differences about Matters
of Religion: And it would be as evident, if duly considered, that there is as
little Likelihood, if Possibility, of any long Continuance of Peace without
some proper Application to so fatal a Root of Mischief amongst us, for the
Extirpation or Suppression of it. Nor is this so vain, unreasonable, or
impracticable a thing to be thought on or attempted, as most Men are apt to
presume upon the Vnsuccessfulness of the Attempts which have been made, if
better considered. It is no unusual thing for Men to learn from the Errors of
former Attempts so to correct their Methods and Measures, as to accomplish with
ease what others with great Labor were not able to effect. Many things in
Practice are like Riddles in Speculation, which, after many have found
insoluble by their utmost Study, appear at last, when the Secret is once
revealed, very plain and easy to the meanest Capacity. But in such Differences
as these there is usually a double Secret; the one Supernatural, managed by
invisible Ministers of the Divine Providence; the other Natural and Humane,
proceeding from Error of the Understanding, or Corruption of the Will and
Affections in one or both of the Parties: And for the most part there are
Faults on both sides, if not from the beginning, at least in the Progress and
Continuance of the Difference. For it is no unfrequent thing for such as have a
Good Cause at first, to spoil it in the Management.

And such is the Case in these Differences in Religion, which have so long
infested this part of the World: Wherein the Supernatural Secret is the
Operation of those Invisible Powers by the Commission or Permission of God, for
Correction of what was and is amiss in the several Parties, among whom they
arose; the Consideration of which belonging more properly to Divines, I shall
say nothing of it here. But of those Differences, the first and most
considerable are those between the Roman Church, and those who pretend a
Reformation. And the Natural and Humane Secret in them lies in certain Faults
on both sides. The Faults and Scandals of the Papacy and Court of Rome were so
gross and notorious, that all good and intelligent People groaned for a
Reformation long before Luther was born. But the Faults of them, who pretended
to that Work, will appear, when well considered, no less, neither in Number,
nor Nature: There is none of them all that is not notoriously guilty of
Sacrilege, Schism and Heresy; besides diverse Unchristian Practices to promote
or maintain their Party. It is even natural to Men to run out of one Extreme
into the other: and the Evil Spirits, when they are permitted, cease not to
instigate the corrupt disposition of Men to the utmost they can. Hence have
proceeded those many endless Differences among themselves, who at first
differed only from the Church of Rome: And their Faults and Miscarriages are so
notorious, that they are many of them confessed, acknowledged, and disclaimed
by diverse of the most learned of all Parties. The English Reformation, which
was not faultless before, was farther corrupted by Cranmer, (who, tho by some
magnified as a Martyr, will appear in time to have been so mischievous an
Instrument both in Church and State, as makes him very unworthy of any
honorable Character or Memory in any part of the Catholic Church, but
especially that of England) and settled at last through the prevalence of a Party
of Calvinian Sectaries, with such Abuses and Corruptions in the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, as the most learned and eminent of the English Clergy
have long desired and endeavored what they could to rectify, but have never
been able to effect, or scarce dared to attempt it in any great Matters, being
abused and bug-beared with popular Outcries and Imputations of Popery, (with
which the People of this Nation have been very grossly abused) whenever they
dared to assert or own any thing of the Primitive Genuine Christianity contrary
to the Nations of that Faction; who have been pricks in their Eyes, and thorns
in their Sides, both to Church and State, ever since, by the just Judgment of
God, for their Politic Compliances with the Corruptions of that pretended
Reformation; which are in truth much greater than is believed or suspected by
many good People, as I may possibly, by the Grace of God, show more
particularly in due time.

But for the present, to calm the Minds and stop the Mouths of such as may be
offended at what I say, as briefly as may be, I shall only recommend to their
Consideration, if they be Dissenters, the Expostulation of a late leading Man
amongst them, Mr. Richard Baxter, to the zealous Anti-Papists, which, he says,
is written to try, if it may be, to promote our common Repentance, and to
reform the Dominal Distaken Reformation of those, who have sinned by Extremes;
which, by the assumed Name of Reformation have wronged God, and the Truth, and
Men's Souls, with the greater Advantage and Success. Thus of the Reformation in
general in his Book against Foreign Jurisdiction, printed but little before his
Death, Part 2. chapter 1. and chapter 7. he sets down together no less than seven
summary Heads of False Charges and Wrongs done to the Papists by the Sectarian
weakheaded part of Protestants, as he elsewhere calls them: 1. Some Men, says
he, do ignorantly charge some Errors on the Papists, which they are not guilty
of: 2. or lay the Errors of some few upon the most: 3. Some make Errors, which
are but de Nomine, to seem to be de Re: 4. and lesser Errors to seem Great: 5.
Some take diverse Truths to be Errors: 6. And some are ready to call some lawful
Customs of the Papists by the Name of Popery and Antichristian: 7. Some would
deny the Papists the common Civilities and Liberties which are their due, etc.
And elsewhere he gives us part of a Catalogue of such rash Charges with an etc.
to let us know that those are but part: How far Protestants mistake and rashly
Charge them in the Doctrines of Predestination, Free Will, Grace, Merits,
Justification, Redemption, Perseverance, etc. I, says he, have freely showed
in my Catholic Theology, and End of Doctrinal Controversies, and Ludovicus le
Blank, after Others, has excellently opened. Which is a plain Confession that
in all those Differences, besides that about Antichrist, (which he does not at
all approve) the Fault lies on the side of the Protestants and the Nominal
Mistaken Reformation. And herein I know no Conformists, except Calvinian
Sectaries, who do not agree with him, and those Others he mentions. And for
Conformists, they may there see, without looking further, that there are and
have been many amongst us of greatest Reverence and Name, (as he elsewhere
expresses it) who have thought the Differences as unjust and unreasonable on
the Protestant side in diverse other Particulars; such as Archbishop Laud,
Archbishop Bramhall, Bishop Guning, Bishop Sparrow, Bishop Parker, Dr.
Hammond, Dr. Heylyn, Dr. Pierce, Dr. Saywell, Dr. Beveridge, Dr. Sherlock, Mr.
Thorndike, Mr. Dodwell; all whom he particularly names, and endeavors to
answer: To whom might be added, for my purpose, Bishop Andrews, Bishop Cousens,
Bishop Tailor, Bishop Forbes, Dr. Field, and diverse other eminent learned Men
in and since the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, besides diverse now living. And a
worthy dignified Clergyman of the City, in a Book lately printed, has
asserted that the Reformation was, and was to be, but an imperfect Work. By all
which it is easy to be perceived, that the Cause of the Reformation is no such
clear Cause, or infallible Truth, as is generally believed, by those who are
educated in such a Presumption or Persuasion: Which might also justly be
suspected from the Differences, which arose presently, and have been continued
from the beginning with bitter Contentions between the Principal Actors in that
Work, and their several Parties to this day; which are things manifest to all
People in all Places, where any thing called the Reformation has prevailed.
But there are other Matters very observable in this Case, as several indirect
Ends and Motives, which probably might be, and certainly were the Inducements
to many of the Beginners and Promoters of it; the Irregular Manner in which it
was managed and settled; the subtle Accommodations of the principal parts of
the Work to recommend the Preachers, and gratify the People, but undermining
the Honor of Christ, and the Power of Godliness, and settling the People in
Presumption and Security upon a False Foundation; according to the Description
of the Apostle, Speaking perverse things to draw away Disciples after them; and
the Fruits and Effects agreeable thereunto; a plain Indication that it was not
of God, but in the Nature of a Judgment, and that they knew not what they did,
nor what Spirit they were of: which, though certain Truths, and very evident when
looked into, yet are not so obvious to common Observation. Nor indeed, was I my
self so sensible of much of them till after much Study and Endeavors to
promote the Service of God, and Good of my Country, it all seemed to me to be
under an Enchantment, so that no Good could be done: Whereupon considering the
Fruits, according to our Savior's Rule, upon a fair Invitation and Opportunity
I resolved upon a Retirement, and a Review of the Reformation, the Root which
produced no better Fruits: And coming to it with much Sincerity and
Impartiality, I soon perceived all this that I have here said, and more, very
clearly; and some things, which relate to the Civil State and present
Settlement of this Nation; of which I soon gave an account to such Persons as I
thought most proper, to acquaint His Majesty with it; to discharge my own
Conscience, whatever was farther done in it.

I do not deny but there was need of a Reformation of diverse things: but none
know better than your Lordships, and the Gentlemen of your Profession, how
common a thing it is for Men, who have really a good Cause, to make it ill
through Passion, Partiality, unreasonable Demands or Charges, and such ill
Management as, if it come to Trial, it must be found against them; or though it
be not Good, yet through Partiality or Prejudice to think it Good; and then,
when by degrees they have well fixed and rivetted that Opinion, and besides
engaged their Reputation in it, to persuade themselves that those things are
lawful for the Maintenance of it, which, in truth, are not; and those things
useful or necessary, which, in conclusion, will but expose and ruin it: how
much Mischief People thus affected frequently bring upon themselves and others,
and endless Vexations, when obstinate in their Opinion, resolute in their
Demands, and pertinacious in their Contentions, right or wrong: how undecent
and unbecoming, even in Civil Matters, this appears to all wise and good Men,
who have Opportunity to observe the Truth of the Case: On the other side, how
much more Prudent it is, as well as Just and Honest, if a Man have the
Misfortune to purchase an ill Title, or be unhappily concerned in an ill Cause,
to endeavor to make it Good by fair Agreement with Parties concerned, and
Tender of what is just and reasonable; and such honest Means as will at least
secure his Reputation, if not his Cause also, however much mend the matter.
This has been always my Practice, and this I am resolved to do in this Case, of
what I have discovered upon my Review aforesaid: I do utterly disclaim all the
Iniquity of the Case that I have already discovered, or can discover, all the
Sacrilege, Schism, and Heresy, and other Corruptions of the pretended
Reformation in general, and of that of England in particular. And though I do not
forsake the Corruptions of this Church to espouse those of another; yet I think
fit to make my own Cause good, and to stand only upon such Terms, as I can
comfortably refer to the Goodness and Mercy of God, and as I am satisfied will
make it their Faults, not mine, who shall refuse Agreement and Communion with
me. What I think prudent in my own Case, if it be so indeed, I could wish the
whole Nation did see it as well as I: For I believe it a more firm Foundation
for a lasting Peace and true Happiness than any other we can build upon. And if
I be not mistaken in the Matters in Difference, there is scarce any but such,
as many principal Men of the one side think ought to be yielded by them, or as
all on the other confess may, for just Cause, be granted by them; or may be
otherwise accommodated by only fit Explications and Expressions. To which,
since the most considerable on both sides have showed a very good Disposition,
and the Nature and Precepts of the Gospel, and the Peace, and Repose, and
Common Good of Mankind, especially in this part of the World, which may have a
great Influence upon the rest, do require it; I believe it would be for the
Honor and Interest of which side soever should do it, to make the Proposal,
provided it be very just and reasonable. Of those Matters, which are thought
ought to be yielded, this, which I propose to your Lordships Consideration,
concerning the ancient Practice of Prayers for the Dead, is one, and the most
proper Instance that can be in all respects. It is indeed a double Instance;
for it is a plain Evidence, that one of the principal Suppositions, with which
not only Multitudes of People in these last Ages, but ever since the first Ages
of Christianity, have been deceived and misled, with very plausible pretense,
is notwithstanding false in it self, besides fallacious misapplications of what
is true: as appears abundantly by Irenaeus, Tertullian, and the Common Practice
of the Ancient Christians in their Contests with Heretics and Schismatics.
And it is in its self one of the greatest Instances of the Power of Prejudice
to abuse weak Men out of their apparent Interest, without any other competent
ground or reason; of the Weakness of Men to be so abused; and of the
Inconsiderateness of those who presume to be positive, and direct others in
such Cases, that I know of.

My intention at first was to have published a Vindication of the True English
Liturgy, the first Book of Ed. 6. composed by known English Clergymen, and
afterward corrupted and disordered by Cranmer, and a Faction of Foreigners, and
other unknown Calvinian Sectaries in Secret, and so craftily imposed upon the
Church and Nation. But when I considered, in these unhappy Differences, how
partially Zealous the Generality of Clergymen (who have any Zeal at all) are
for their own Party, more than for the common Concerns of Religion, or of their
Country; and how unconcerned the chief of the Clergy of this Nation are, and
have been ever since the State assumed the Supreme Power of Ecclesiastical
Matters, as if either dispirited, or presuming that the Care also is incumbent
only upon them who have assumed the Power; and how little I have found, by
Experience, is to be expected from them; and, on the other side, how necessary
notwithstanding it is for the Peace and Repose of this Nation, that the
Occasions of such mischievous Dissentions should be better considered and
removed; I presently perceived I had a fair Opportunity in this to present a
proper instance of a Matter of such Importance to Persons as well qualified to
judge, and who were likely to be as sensible of the Importance of it, as any;
and thereupon concluded to present it alone to the Consideration of Your
Lordships, and the Gentlemen of Your Honorable Profession; having already, as
to the rest, made a considerable Experiment of what I have here said, of the
Hopes we may have of a good Success, if they, to whom it does belong, will but
do what is in their Power toward it: For having published a Liturgy,
Entitled, The Liturgy of the Ancients represented, as near as well may be, in
English Forms, not much different (only a little more complete) from that
Restitution of the True English Liturgy attempted by the Scotch, with the
Assistance of the Principal of the English Bishops, Anno 1637. I presented it
to some of the principal learned Men first of the English, who much approved
it, and wished it restored by Law; then of the Lutherans, who also approved it,
and declared their Satisfaction to communicate in that Form; and, at last, of
the Roman Catholics, who had no Exceptions to the Matter or Form of it. And,
in short, to say the Truth, the Abuse and Corruptions of the Public Liturgy in
these two particulars, Of Prayers for the Dead, and the Christian Sacrifice, to
mention nothing more, are so gross and notorious, that they alone are
sufficient to make the Church of England inexcusably Guilty of Schism, and
justly obnoxious to Excommunication, (which may be the Enchantment it seems to
lie under) and unsafe for any pious Person, after notice, to hold Communion
with it: so that it seems not only expedient and prudent for the State to
consider these Matters, (for otherwise nothing is to be expected from these
Bishops) but absolutely necessary: And so I leave it with Your Lordships.

Your Lordships most Humble Servant.

Of the Practice of Prayers for the DEAD In the Christian Church.
THE Performance of any good Offices for the Dead, even to their Bodies, their
Bones, their Memories, their Wills, etc. has always been reputed a very
commendable thing among all civilized Nations; and whatever has been acted to
the contrary, barbarous, and inhumane; and the only Neglect of such Offices by
such as were under any special Obligation, of evil consequence; as if Mankind
had some secret sense that Separate Souls were sensible of the Kindness or
Unkindness of those who survived them, and had some power to gratify or
revenge the Kindness or Injuries, especially of their Relations, and such as
they had any special Interest in in their Lifetime. And if such inferior
Offices to their Bodies and Memories have been so reputed, much more may such
good Offices, as Prayers for the Souls departed, deserve commendation. And
accordingly it has been always commonly practiced, by all Nations, Gentiles,
Jews, Mahometans, and Christians; and that without any known Beginning: but
very probably by Tradition from the common Concerning Matters transmitted from
them, and received and conserved by the Gentiles. See Mr. Dodwell's 2d Letter,
8.
Parents of Mankind, being very agreeable to Nature, and confirmed by
Apparitions.

And certainly this is a thing so innocent, so free from all appearance of
Evil, so desirable both for ones self and their Friends, that it is very
strange that any, especially good People, should be persuaded, nay frighted
from it; and much more that any should so presume, upon their own Opinion and
Conceit, as to offer to persuade them so contrary to the Practice of the whole
World in general, and of the whole Catholic Church, without clearer Evidence
in so obscure a Case, as is that of the middle State of Souls to us Mortals:
which is not to be believed could ever have been without some secret Energy of
those Powers of Darkness, which have effected greater Mischiefs than this by
the same Instruments.

It is the Practice of the Jews at this day, and has been so without any known
beginning: was so before our Savior's time, as appears by the Book of
Maccabees, and their ancient Form of Prayer, which, it is said, they used in the
Captivity, still extant in their Talmud; and never was reproved by our Savior,
or any of his Apostles, or of the Primitive Christians.

It is the Practice of the whole Catholic Church at this day, and of all
Christians, except such as according to the unanimous Sentiments of the
Ancients are gone, and are, out of it; and has been so without any known
beginning, in their most solemn Worship; so that no Church can be assigned
where they, who scruple at it now, could have had Communion without it: And
never was opposed, contradicted, or questioned by any one of any Reputation in
the Catholic Church; or by any one at all for near 400 years.

The first, who is known to have questioned it, was Aerius, in the time of
Epiphanius, a Presbyter, a frantic, proud, conceited Man, discontented because
he could not get a Bishopric, and thereupon, it is probable, quarrelled not
only at diverse Practices of the Church, but at Episcopacy it self: an ill Man
by the Judgment of all; and Epiphanius and St. Austin reckon him in their
Catalogues of Heretics for his Opposition of this Practice especially.

The next, whose Testimony is produced in this Cause, is one Stephanus Gobarus,
and obscure Scribler, and a confessed Heretic, even by Usher, who alleges
his Testimony, as well as by Photius, from whom he takes it, and who gives this
Character of his Book, that it seems a Work of much Labor, but little Profit;
and a Study rather of Applause and Vainglory, than any great Usefulness. It
was a Collection of the different Sentences of the Fathers in diverse points of
Doctrine, and alleged to prove such a Difference of Opinions in this Case,
and what was the true Sentence of the Church. A special Witness, and to much
purpose! an Heretic to prove the true Sentence of the Church! and a
vainglorious Person, who, out of Ostentation of Parts and Learning, seeks for
Differences in the Fathers, and sets himself up for a Judge! which he might, if
he had pleased, have done also in the Scripture it self. But after all he does
not so much as declare his Opinion in the principal Question in this Case, but
only in a by-point. A poor Cause that stands in need of such Supports!

If we set him aside, as well we may, who is neither a competent Witness of the
Sentence of the Church, nor does declare his own in this Case, we find not
another in near 700 years after Aerius, till Peter de Bruis, and one Henricus,
a runagate Monk, who took up a Trade of Preaching, and spent what he got in
Gaming, and on Harlots: They denied also the Baptism of Infants, the Christian
Sacrifice, Public Churches, etc. against them Petrus Cluniacensis, a Man
eminent for Learning and Sanctity, wrote, and St. Bernard preached, and
confirmed his Doctrine with so great a Miracle, as convinced Multitudes, who
had been seduced by them.

After these arose one Waldo, a Citizen of Lions, very rich, but unlearned, who
probably had a Zeal for God, but not according to Knowledge, and attributing
too much to his own Opinion, procured certain Books to be written in his own
Language, and distributing his Estate among the Poor, took upon him the
Apostolic Office of Preaching, and began the Sect, called after his own Name,
Waldenses; and from their Place and Quality, The Poor of Lions. Among other
Heterodox Opinions, (whereof some were peculiar to their own Sect, and
disallowed by all others) this of rejecting Prayers for the Dead was one.

The Apostolici of that time, I suppose, were not a distinct Sect, but the
same, who assumed that Name. And the Albigenses, who in the next Century
increased very much, till by the secular Power and force of Arms they were
suppressed, seem to have been a Branch of the same Root; however, in this
particular they agreed, as they did in most others.

Since those, I know not any Sect which has arisen, and which questioned or
contradicted Prayers for the Dead, till those which have sprung out of what is
called the Reformation: For I do not find that Wickelif, and his Followers
here, the Lollards, or John Huss, or Hierom of Prague, who carried his Books
and Doctrines into their own Country, and were all three Men of Parts and
Learning, ever opposed Prayers for the Dead, though among the Opinions attributed
to Huss, one is, that there is no Purgatory Fire; which is denied by others,
who yet are for Prayers for the Dead. But by all the several Sects of the later
Reformers, since Luther began, they have been questioned, opposed, and left out
of their Public Prayers.

Only here in England, in the first Liturgy, composed by English Clergy, in the
Reign of King Edward 6. which I therefore call The True English Liturgy, the
ancient Prayers for the Dead were retained, both in the most Solemn Office of
the Daily Sacrifice, and at Funerals: But these and other principal Parts of
the Liturgy were soon after new-modelled in a clandestine manner by Cranmer,
Bucer, and other Foreigners, and Calvinian Sectaries; and craftily imposed upon
the Church and Nation: And the Abuse is continued to this day.

This is the true Original and Succession of all the Opposition which has ever
been made to this Practice, of all Mankind in general, and of the whole
Catholic Church of Christ; by Heretics, Sectaries, and Schismatics, and the
meanest of all those; not a Man amongst them of any Eminence for Piety, or any
Virtue, or so much as Parts or Learning: much less any Man of Note in the
Church: much less any Church, Party, or Part of the Catholic Church, who were,
or who continued in Communion with The Catholic Church, or any Particular
Catholic Church, as they anciently distinguished them from the Assemblies and
Associations of Heretics, and Schismatics in the same City. It is very
observable, wonderful, and a great Evidence of unquestionable or undeniable
Truth, that in so many Ages, when there had been so many so considerable
Parties of Heretics and Schismatics, and so malicious, spiteful, and enraged,
as many of them were against the Church, that none of the most considerable of
them should ever seek to advantage their Cause by such a Question; which
doubtless they would not have failed to have done, had they apprehended any
color of Truth or Advantage in it: that none in all the Parts of the World
should ever oppose it but such an obscure, inconsiderate and inconsiderable
Generation of People, till the late Reformers sprung up, who thought they could
never reform enough, or pick quarrels too much, till they had brought that,
which might have been a considerable Cause, if well laid and managed, to an
indefensible brable. Amongst them indeed there have been many Men of sufficient
Learning; but, but few of that Ingenuity, Impartiality, freedom from Prejudice,
temporal Interest, or Fear of Displeasing, and of that Generosity, as to assert
the Truth plainly, without respect of Persons or Parties: and those few have
been very much born down (among us especially) by the Violence and Headiness of
Parties and Factions. Yet such is the Power and Evidence of Truth in this Case,
that it has found Advocates amongst the most learned of all Parties.

Of this I think it not improper to produce an instance or two in this Place:
The first shall be an eminent Person both for Learning and Virtue, Bishop
Forbes, the first Bishop of Edenburg, promoted by King Charles 1. who is
reported to have said of him, That he had found out a Bishop, who deserved that
a See should be made for him. In his Considerationes Modestae, Controversia de
Purgatorio, cap. 3.. 17. coming to speak of Prayers and Oblations for the Dead;
Sed hic primum, etc. But here first, says he, is to be reproved the Opinion of
some rigid Protestants, who do altogether censure and condemn Prayers for the
Dead; because they find no Precept or Example of such Prayers in the Old or New
Testament. Certainly even those, who are most against it, dare not deny that it
is a most ancient Custom, and most (universally) received in the whole Church
of Christ, that in the Public Prayers of the Church Commemoration should be
made for the Dead, and Rest be prayed for to God for those who died piously,
and in the Peace of the Church. And having cited diverse of the Ancients for it,
he adds: This most ancient Custom was full of Piety, and most truly did
Cassander say, This was always fixed in Note. Then this was agreed among All.
All Christian Minds, That the Spirits of those, who being initiated in the
Sacrament of Christ, departed this Life in the Confession of his Name, with
signification of Repentance, should be commended to the Mercy of God, that
Remission of Sin, Eternal Rest, and a Part with the Elect, might be entreated
for them. This second part is so cited in Usher, p. 246. as is apt to lead the
Reader into mistake, as if they were not agreed in more than the Author did
intend.
And although concerning that State of Souls, for which those things were
profitable, it was neither sufficiently manifest, nor agreed among all, yet all
judged this Office, as a Testimony of Charity toward the Deceased, and a
Profession of Faith concerning the Immortality of Souls, and Resurrection to
come, to be grateful to God, and profitable to the Church. Then he says, This
most Ancient and Universal Custom of the Church very many and most learned
Protestants do not disallow; and cites the Apology of the Augsburg Confess.
Chemnicius, Mentserus, Luther, Gerard, Vrbanus Regius, Vorstius, Vossius, Dr.
Field, Bishop Andrews, and passing over in silence very many others, as he
says, he recites the Words of the Liturgy of Edward 6. both in the Office for
the Communion, and that for Burials; laments that such most ancient and pious
Prayers should, by the Persuasion of Bucer, and others, be expunged; and
wishes that the Church of England, which has showed great Moderation in many
other things of less moment, had rather conformed her self in this business, as
also in some others, to the most ancient Custom of the Universal Church, than
for some Errors and Abuses, which had by degrees crept in, plainly rejected it,
and wholly taken it away, to the great Scandal of almost all other Christians.

I need add no more after this Learned and Apostolic Bishop, only, in short,
take notice of what Vrbanus Regius says, that None reject it but Epicureans
and Sadduces; and Vorstius, that No Good Man can dislike it; and Bishop
Andrews, that There is little that can be said against it; and conclude this
matter with the Words of the learned and famous Hugo Grotius; The use of
Praying for the Dead, received through all Churches of the East, no less than
of the West, ought not to be condemned. And after some reasons for it, and
something concerning the Jews, he adds, The Ancient Liturgies are not to be
condemned, since Christ himself did never reprehend the Prayers for the Dead,
commonly used among the Jews; of which there is a Form extant in the Talmud,
made, as is believed, in the Babylonian Captivity, and mentioned in the second
Book of the Maccabees.

It will be replied, That as great a Man, and of the Church of England, as any
of those, has written against it, the famous Usher, Archbishop of Armath. It
is very true he has, and employed and strained all his Learning, all his
Parts, and all his Skill, and a little too much, to oppose it; and all to very
little purpose for his own Cause, but to very good purpose against it: For it
is a great Evidence and Demonstration of what Bishop Andrews truly said, That
there is little that can be said against what this great Man takes such pains
to oppose. The sole Question between him and his Adversary was, Whether the
Fathers of the first 400 or 500 Years held that Prayer for the Dead is both
commendable and godly? as appears by the Challenge, which was in those very
Words, and no other. How, and where, does he answer this plain Question? His
Title of that part of his Answer is general, Of Prayer for the Dead. He saw
well enough how little he had to say to that plain Question; and therefore
resolved to take more Liberty, to say something of the matter of his Title, tho
little or nothing to the Question. He spends three score and ten pages upon the
general matter; but, if I mistake not, not ten lines directly and closely to
the special Question. To use his own words p. 170. He alleges indeed a
number of Authorities to blear Men's Eyes with all; which being narrowly looked
into will be found nothing at all to the purpose.
Which is to abuse, not so much his Adversary, as his Reader, with a specious
appearance of an Answer, which, in truth and reality, is nothing to the
purpose. That which comes nearest to the purpose is what he says, page 246.
These Two Questions, says he, must necessarily be distinguished: Whether
Prayers and Oblations were to be made for the Dead? and, Whether the Dead did
receive any peculiar Profit thereby? In the latter of these, he (the Reader)
shall find great Difference among the Doctors: in the former, very little, or
none at all. This is indeed to the purpose: but his Resolution of the former
Question, though very true, is a plain Confession against himself. For if they be
agreed that Prayers and Oblations were to be made for the Dead, then certainly
they held that that was commendable and godly; which is all that his Adversary
did affirm then, and that I do principally assert now: for what I have to
allege farther, is but a Consequence of that. And his Resolution of the
latter Question is manifestly false, and a disingenuous Assertion: for if among
so great a number of Doctors in so many Years he could have assigned five, or
six, or ten, who had really differed in that point from the rest, (which those
few he cites rightly understood did not) had that been a Great Difference? And
if some Authors do say, that some, or that many, in their time, were doubtful
in the point, is that a sufficient proof that it was still a Question in the
Church? when they name not one Person in particular, much less any Doctor, nor
tell us so much as of what quality they were, who had those Doubts. When a
Difference is Great, there must be some proportion between the Contenders: and
where a Question is continued, there must be some Disputes, Contention, or
Debates. But if Peoples secret Doubts must be taken for Questions in the
Church, that is the ready way to bring all Religion into question: and it is
not to be doubted but such dealings in Controversies has had its share in
producing this growth of Skepticism and Atheism of late. That such a Man as
this should put Colors upon Causes; should hold up Contentions; should be so
addicted to Parties, as in favor to them to confirm People in Opinions, which
if false are mischievous, and if true of little Advantage, and contrary to so
great Authority as is on the other side; and so expose his Judgment or
Integrity, is a great Unhappiness to himself, and a Scandal to others.

It is possible, what others may have observed in this great Man (for it is a
scurvy thing to be engaged in an ill Cause) may have taught them more Wisdom;
for, for ought I can find, as well in the Controversial Writings of late, as in
the Disputations at the University, the Old Cause, An Preces pro Defunctis sint
Licitae? is quite deserted, and that Question is turned into another, An Preces
pro Defunctis antiquitus usurpatae inferant Purgatorium Papisticum? It is well
Men have learned so much Wisdom for themselves, as to mend their Cause so far
as that; and it is to be wished, that they may also learn so much Honesty, as
to undeceive the People, and restore to them, for themselves and their Friends,
the Comfort and Benefit of that ancient Catholic Practice. Mr. Thorndike, one
of the learned Persons this Church has produced, and a late Bishop of St.
Asaph, have done well to do what they could, and restore it upon their own
Tomb-stones, though they could not do it in the Church: and if all who believe
well, would but do so well, as profess what they believe, which certainly they
ought to do, we should soon see the Truth revive and flourish beyond
Expectation; and so, much of our Contentions abated.

Thus concerning the Persons who have opposed this Practice, and set up
themselves against the Authority of the whole Catholic Church. I come now to
consider the Opposition it self, their Allegations and Reasons. Such is the Wit
of Man, and the Subtilty of Satan, that scarce any Truth is so evident, but
they can find out some specious Appearances to set up against it. But such is
the Mercy and Wisdom of God, that he has provided sufficient means for
Direction for all such as keep within the Bounds of Humility and Obedience;
that is, in Subjection not only of their Wills, but also of their Intellects
and Understandings, to his Orders, Ordinances and Prescriptions, the very
Business of their Lives in this World, for Preparation for another. And to
such, besides the Common Means, he will kindly vouchsafe a special Guidance
sufficient for their Circumstances. Of the Danger our Savior and his Apostles
have given to all fair Warning, and great Caution; acquainting us with the End,
why the most Wise and Gracious God permits it, for Trial and Exercise; the
Danger and Subtilty of the Ministers of Satan, such as should deceive, if it
were possible, the very Elect; the special Marks to know and avoid them, viz.
Their Fruits, specious Pretenses, (Sheeps Clothing,) and Distraction and
Disagreement among themselves, crying, Here is Christ, and There is Christ; and
special Directions, Believe them not, Go not out after them. All this Provision
has the Devil attempted to undermine, partly by raising real Scandals and
Offenses, and partly by strongly representing Imaginary ones. But against all
this Humility and Charity will fortify us; and the Grace, special Guidance and
Mercy of God will preserve us, if we be careful to continue in those Graces. It
was Pride, and Arrogance, and Discontent in Aerius, which gave the (...), etc.
Epiphan. p. 905. a.
Devil Advantage to instigate him to the first Opposition of such a Catholic
Practice. It was Pride, Vanity, and Ostentation of Parts, by which he set
Gobarus to work to show his Learning and Acuteness in finding out Differences
of Opinions among them, who perhaps in many of those things differed no more
than the Writers of the Sacred Scriptures seem to do. For I do not find that he
made any special Opposition against this Practice. But I doubt it was not
imaginary, but real Scandal and gross Abuses of a good Practice, by which Waldo
and his Followers, and the Albigenses, were moved to oppose all without
Distinction: though there seems to have been in him, with a Zeal for God, but
without Knowledge, a Mixture of Pride and Conceitedness. And it was real, and
not imaginary Scandal, by which Luther was at first moved to oppose
Indulgencies, and his Followers at first to oppose even this innocent and
commendable Practice. But in such Men as Usher and Bucer, it was the Reputation
of the Cause they had espoused in gross, and Compliances with the Times, and
their particular Interests, by which they were moved. But let us but carefully
follow our Savior's Admonitions and Directions, wisely distinguish the
Ingredients of the Composition of Truth and Falsehood, and honestly embrace,
hold fast, and own the Truth, when we have the Opportunity, and we shall not
want sufficient Light and Evidence to find it.

The specious Appearances set up against this Catholic Practice of the Church
of Christ are these: 1. That there is no Scripture Authority for it. 2. That
the Ancient Practice was to Pray for all, such as were at Rest. 3. That the
Ancients were not agreed in their Opinions concerning the State of Separate
Souls, or the general Intention of the Church in those Prayers.

To detect the Fallacy, Falsity, and Impertinence of these Allegations, as
briefly as may be: To the first, I say, it is a mere Fallacy, and grounded upon
a false Supposition, that nothing is to be admitted in Doctrine or Worship but
what there is Scripture Authority for, if it be understood of a special
Authority; and their usual Pretenses of not Adding, or Diminishing, are to be
understood of those particular Parts or Books of the Scripture, as is plain by
the Additional Writings and Practices of Holy Men afterward. 2. It is
inconsistent with the Tradition of the Doctrine, and Institutions of the
Gospel, and of the Ordinances of the Apostles, which were all by Word and Deed,
without Writing, as the Common Laws of this Nation were at first settled: and
much of what was written, was written upon special Occasions, and much with
that Brevity and Conciseness, by the special Providence of God, as was
sufficient for them for whom it was intended, and yet so as should need an
Authentic Explication to preserve the Authority of the Catholic Church. 3. It
is contrary to the express Directions of the Scripture, to contend for the
Doctrine once delivered to the Saints, in general, and to hold the Traditions
they had received, whether by Word, or Epistle, etc. And if it be understood of
a general Authority, the Allegation it self is false: For it is contrary to all
those Scriptures, which declare the Authority of the Church, and require
Obedience to Superiors: And either way it is contrary to the Sentiments,
Testimony, and Practice of the Ancient Christians, who, in Questions of
Difficulty and Contests with Heretics, always inquired, not only what was
written by the Apostles, but also, or principally, what was delivered by them
to the Churches, which they founded, in all Parts of the World, of which the
Catholic Church does consist, which the Scripture it self styles the Pillar
and Basis of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. v. Grot. not only for the Sense and Meaning of
the Scripture, as Lawyers, with good reason do, when in doubts about the
Construction of Writings they inquire how the Usage has gone; for in that case
the Writing is the Principal Evidence: but in this case, what was delivered to
the Churches, which were completely and plainly instructed and ordered by the
Apostles, was the principal Inquiry, and the Scriptures but an accessory
Evidence, as our Year-Books are of the Common Law, in Questions concerning the
Common Law. But I doubt not but there was a special Providence in it, that so
much was written, and no more, and that it was written in such a manner.
Lastly, This has been the Practice and Pretense of Heretics and Schismatics,
in all Ages, to the intent with the better color to set aside the Authority of
the Catholic Church, that they might so make way to set up their own private
Opinions and Conceits in the Place thereof; but never more grossly, nauciously,
and scandalously, than by some of the Principal of the late Reformers, Calvin
especially, on the one side, inculcating and crying up The Pure Word of God,
The Pure Word of God; and on the other, abusing it, by straining wresting it to
serve their own turns, and eluding and evading what is plainly contrary to
them; which is now past all doubt, not only by the Confessions of Mr. Baxter
and Le Blank, but the many of all Parties, who have deserted diverse of those
Assertions, which were so hotly contended for under that specious Pretense: a
plain Evidence and Demonstration that they were no better than their
Predecessors in that Pretense. But besides all this, what I am now doing, if I
be not much mistaken, will be a particular demonstration of the Truth of what I
say.

To the other two Allegations, I say, they are both impertinent to the Question
under consideration here; which is only concerning the Matter of Fact and
Practice; I do not say that they are impertinent to the Subject in general, to
be considered upon other Occasions; but to this special Question: and therefore
to insist upon them in this Case, instead of directly answering to the
Question, is fallacious, captious, and an abuse to the Reader, to impose upon
him, distract him, and withdraw him from the proper Question. There might be
Difference in Forms, and various Intendments, and all consistent. Certainly
there was no such Difference or Variety either of Forms or Intendment, as there
is this day amongst Protestants of both, in their greatest Solemnity of the
Sacrament. But if the matter of Fact be certain, it may be in the Power of the
Church to order the Form, and at Liberty for every one to construe the
Intention, or make his Inferences or Observations for his own Use, as well as
of the Scripture. And the Matter of Fact is granted by the very Allegation: Nor
indeed is it much denied by any Men of Learning. Scio esse pervetustam hanc
precandi pro pie defunctis consuetudinem, says Bucer in his Censure; and after
he had a little endeavored to put off Tertullian, S. Cyprian, and Dionysius,
he adds, Sed sit hic quantumvis vetustus Dionysius; Et sit hujus atque aliorum
S. Patrum authoritas quantumlibet magna: attamen nostrum est tanto anteferre
omni humanae authoritati divinam, quanto Deus omni homine major est, and
sapientia, and nostri charitate, docendique nos omnia propensione. Jam or are
pro Defunctis nullae docent Scripturae, sive verbo, sive exemplo. Et vetitum
est quicquid his adjicere vel detrahere, Deuteronomy. 4. and 12. Solet nobis objici,
says Peter Martyr, Ecclesiam semper pro Defunctis orasse; quod quidem non
inficior; sed assero illius facti, neque Verbi Dei, neque Exempli, quod
desumitur ex Sacris literis auctoritatem habere, in 1 Cor. 3. fol. 45. Ed. Tig.
1579. Verum est quod Papistae aiunt, says Bullinger, Dec. 4. Ser. 10. Veteres
orasse and sacrificasse pro Defunctis: Scio quid Doctor Ecclesiae Insignis
Augustinus, quid Eloquentissimus Chrysostomus, aliique viri vetusti ac clari
hac de re scriptum relinquerunt: Sed quaero number hi recte fecerunt? Scio
damnatum fuisse Aerium, quod hujusmodi Orationes and Oblationes improbaret.
Afferunt secundum Maccabaeorum librum: Sed is nihil probat, cum non sit
Canonicus: Adjiciunt and Traditionem Apostolicam: Sed mihi id non videtur; nec
illi unquam in scriptis ita praecipiunt. This is the Sum of the Case, and
honestly said; and therefore I shall conclude this part with it.

Such is the Folly, Passion, and Inconsiderateness of Men, that they many times
bring such Causes to Trial, as upon their own showing, and hearing their own
Evidence only, appears to all intelligent and indifferent Persons to be against
them. And such I believe will this Cause of these Men appear to be to all
competent Judges, without more a do. Notwithstanding, for the more plain and
full Conviction and Satisfaction of such as are less intelligent and more
scrupulous; and that those Honorable Persons, to whose Consideration I present
it, may themselves judge of the Evidences, which extort these Confessions from
such as would elude them if they could, I will produce so much as is sufficient
for the purpose: and that I be not tedious, I will forbear all that, which
would prove it to have been a true Catholic Practice of the whole Church for
above 1200 years last past, and confine my self to the time allowed and
approved by the Church and State of England, that is, the time of the first
four 1. Of Nice, Anno 325. 2. Constant. Anno 381. 3. Ephesus, Anno 431. 4.
Chalced, Anno 481.
general Councils, and that preceding to the time of the Apostles; that is,
from that to the Year of our Lord 451.

As for the succeeding Ages, to this day, that it was observed all along per
totum Orbem, and therefore believed to have been delivered by the Apostles, as
the most ancient Writers upon the Church Offices affirm, I presume no Man will
deny; and therefore I shall only mention one Observation concerning those Ages:
I have made all the Search that possibly I could, both by Manuscripts and
printed Books, to discover the most ancient Forms of celebrating the Holy
Eucharist in the Latin Church: and though I have met with diverse Variations in
other parts, yet I never could discover any Alteration in that that is the
principal part, and as Dr. Barlow, late Bishop of Lincoln, says, the most
innocent part of the public Office, called The Canon of the Mass, since
Gregory the Great, nor indeed by him (...) believe the whole Canon is not of
less Antiquity than Gelasius, or S. Ambrose, if not much ancienter, diverse
particulars of it being found in more ancient Authors. It is not long since a
very Reverend and Learned Bishop, since deceased, speaking to me of it, said,
it was a Noble piece of Antiquity; and Dr. Barlow has left under his hand a
just Censure of one who cut that part out of an ancient Missel at Oxford, for
an ignorant half learned Fellow. This alone is an ample Evidence of the
Practice of all the Latin Churches for these Ages; which, from thence, I shall
endeavor to trace back to its Original.

S. Austin and S Paulinus both lived within the time prescribed, and died 20
years before the last of the said four Councils, about An. 431. S. Augustine was
a Person of great Natural parts, acquired Learning, Piety, Holiness, and of
great Authority and Reputation in the whole Catholic Church, especially in the
Latin Church, of which he is reckoned one of the chiefest Doctors. He had in
his younger time taught Rhetoric at Rome, and afterward at Millan, so that he
was acquainted with the World, as well as with Books, and every way as well
qualified to bear his Testimony in the Case as possibly could be. S. Paulinus
was a Person of great Quality and Estate, in great Esteem with the Emperor, and
of so great Devotion, that, embracing our Savior's Counsel, he Sold all,
distributed it to the Poor, and pious Uses, and betook himself to a strict
Religious Life in Poverty, after he had been preferred to great public
Offices; he was a Man of Parts and Learning, and well acquainted with the
Western parts, especially Italy, France, and Spain; and for his great Virtues
and eminent Sanctity was, by the Importunity of the People, made Bishop of Nola
in Campania: so that he also was every way qualified for another Witness in
this Case: and these two I suppose sufficient for their time, especially for
the Latin Church.

S. Paulinus in an Epistle to St. Augustine says as much as need to be in few
Words; that Vacare non posse, quod universa pro Defunctis Ecclesia supplicare
consuevit, ap Aug. de Cura pro Mort. pr.
It cannot be in vain that the Universal Church is accustomed to pray for the
Dead. Not the Church, but the Universal Church; not only did at that time, but
was accustomed so to do; that is, time out of mind, without any known
beginning. And what was it accustomed to do? Not barely to commemorate, but to
pray and supplicate for them. Vniversa pro Defunctis Ecclesia supplicare
consuevit. As ample a Testimony, I think, as can be expressed in so few words.

S. Augustine in confirmation of this alleges the Book of Maccabees, and
adds, Sed etsi nusquam in Scriptu^ is veteribus omnino legeretur, non parva
tamen est Universae Ecclesiae, quae in h^c consuetudine claret, Authoritas; ubi
in pre^ibus sacerdotis, quae Domino Deo ad ejus altar funduntur, locum suum
habet etiam Commendatio Mortuorum, S. Aug. de Cura pro Mortuis, c. 1.
But although we did no where at all read this in the ancient Writings, yet is
not the Authority of the Universal Church, which is clear in this Custom, a
small matter, when in the Prayers of the Priest, which are poured out to the
Lord God at his Altar, the Commemoration of the Deceased has also its proper
place. In this Testimony are diverse things observable, and very considerable:
1. The Authority of the Universal Church, not of a Particular Church, of a
City, of a Province, of Hippo, or Africa, but of the Universal Church, which,
however manifested or declared, is no small matter. 2. But in this it is
declared, in the most Solemn Acts of the Church, her most Solemn Address to
Almighty God at his Altar. So that here is the greatest Authority that is among
Mankind, and that most solemnly declared. 3. It is no new Resolution, but a
Custom, Consuetudo Vniversae Ecclesiae, an ancient Custom, and a universal
Custom, which he elsewhere upon another occasion expresses in this manner: Hoc
a Patribus traditum Universa observat Ecclesia, ut pro eis, qui in Corporis and
Sanguinis Christi Communione Defuncti sunt, cum ad ipsum Sacrificium suo loco
commemorantur, oretur, and pro illis quoque id offerri commemoretur. S. Aug. de
verb. Apost. Ser. 32. c. 2.
This being delivered from the Fathers (a Patribus traditum) does the Universal
Church observe, that for them who are departed in the Communion of the Body and
Blood of Christ, when they are remembered at the Sacrifice it self in their
place, Prayer be made, and it be commemorated that that is offered for them
also. Not only for the Living, but for the Dead also, and in their proper
place. 4. This Custom and Tradition was not only for a general Commemoration,
but for a special Commendation.

And here, because this excellent Person has written much, and therefore
affords more observable matter than is ordinary in any one Author, I will
endeavor out of him alone to present the honest and ingenuous Reader with a
Scheme of the whole Custom and Practice of the Ancients, whereby he will the
better understand their Testimonies, and decern the Fallacies, Evasions,
Cavillings and Shufflings of the Adversaries of it. What was done by them on
behalf of the Deceased was either Public or Private: What was done in Private,
was Prayers, such as S. Augustine offered for his Mother in his Confessions,
lib. 9. cap. 13. Fasting, and Alms, etc. What was Public, was done either by
the Relations or Friends of the Persons deceased, and that was presenting their
Oblations, whether ordered by the Deceased, or freely offered by their Friends
on their behalf: Which, if they departed in Communion of the Church were
received, otherwise rejected, unless they were in the State of Penitents, and
were surprised in such case as the Priest should have absolved them, if he
could have been present: or what was done by the Bishop or Priest, with the
rest of the Clergy and People: And this was either a general Commemoration pro
omnibus in Christiana and Catholica Societate defunctis, as he speaks de Cura
pro Mat. c. 4. for all departed in the Christian and Catholic Society, (or
Communion) without any particular recitation of their Names, or a more
particular Memory of them by Name with others; or a more special Commendation
of a particular Person at his Death; and, besides certain other days, upon
their Anniversaries. And these were all performed at the Altar, and with the
Holy Sacrifice, except that at his Death, in case that happened after the
Priest had eaten, and then by some Canons it was to be performed solis
Orationibus, with Prayers only; but otherwise, and Orationibus and
Oblationibus; that is, with Prayers and Sacrifice both, for that is there to be
understood by Oblationibus. And as S. Augustine did intend all this in what he
says of the Universal Custom by Tradition from the Fathers, so did he believe
that the Souls departed were benefitted by them all. For his words immediately
preceding those before-recited out of his Sermon. de Verb. Apost. are,
Orationib. vero S. Ecclesiae, and Sacrificio salutari, and Eleemosynis, quae
pro eorum spiritibus erogantur, non est dubitandum mortuos adjurari, ut cum eis
misericordius agatur a Domino, quam eorum peccata meruerunt.
It is not to be doubted that the Dead are helped by the Prayers of the H.
Church, and the Salutary Sacrifice, and the Alms which are distributed for
their Spirits, that the Lord should deal more mercifully with them than their
Sins have deserved. This was one End and Benefit of those Commemorations and
Prayers; and therefore was not only comprehended in the general Intendment of
the general Commemorations, but was expressly prayed for both in the Common
Prayers and in the more special Commendations, as we shall see further
hereafter; but this does not exclude Others; of which, I think fit to take
notice of one in this place, which is mentioned by S. Austin and others, and
which concern two Articles of our Creed, but little understood or considered
amongst us. It is in his Book de Civ. Dei, lib. 20. cap. 9. in these words:
Neque enim piorum animae mortuorum separantur ab Ecclesia, quae etiam nunc est
regnum Christi. Alioquin nec ad altar Dei fieret little memoria: in communione
Corporis (...) Christi.
Nor are the Souls of the Pious deceased separated from the Church, which even
now is the Kingdom of Christ: Otherwise, neither at the Altar of God should
Memory be made of them in the Communion of the Body of Christ. In these words
is couched one general Intendment of the Church: For as the Holy Rite of the
Eucharist was intended not only for the Peculiar Solemnity of the Churches
Address to God here upon Earth, with the Memorials of our Savior's Passion,
the great Propitiation for the Sins of the World, but also for Communion
between our Head and the Members of his Mystical Body here upon Earth, and also
between the Members of his whole Mystical Body themselves; so the Church in
that Holy Solemnity has always performed Acts of Communion, not only with the
Head, but with all his Members, both present, in external Communion, and
Participation of the sanctified Creatures; and with all absent, whether in the
Body, or out of the Body, by Commemorations, Thanksgivings and Prayers. And
because they were in several States, they were accordingly remembered
distinctly, in order, which is what S. Augustine expresses suo loco. This
Communion was by the ancient Christians reputed a matter of very great
Importance, and accordingly they were equally careful, whose Oblations they did
receive, and whose Names they did remember, whether Living or Dead: and those
who were ejected, or rejected or refused, were looked upon as out of Communion,
and excluded from all the Privileges of the Church, both on Earth, and also in
the separate State, according to our Savior's Promise. It was then believed,
that the Souls departed, which should be saved, were all indeed with Christ,
but not at the Right Hand of his Father; but some before the Throne; some upon
Mount Sion; some in the Holy of Holies; some in the Temple, but not in that
place; some in Paradise, in Abraham's Bosom, in the Third Heaven, in very
different Mansions or Receptacles: as one may be said to be with the King, who
is with him in foreign Parts, though but in his Army, or at his Court, though never
admitted into his Presence Chamber; and that by some the Church here upon Earth
her self received much Benefit; but others received Benefit by her Communion
and Prayers, and stood in need of it. Nor ought we to think that these two
Articles of the Holy Catholic Church, and the Communion of Saints, were put
into the Summary of the Christian Faith and Profession, and in the Order they
are, but for special and weighty Reasons; and indeed such as are little taught,
or understood, or regarded amongst us in this Age.

S. Augustine has many Testimonies concerning this matter of Fact and known
Practice of the Church in these distinct Orders of Commemoration of the Dead,
so plain, that the Archbishop himself could not but confess that in the Church
Service there was made a several Commemoration; first, of the Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs, after one manner; and then of the other Dead,
after another, page 194. and one or two he cites in the Margin, but was so wise
as not to recite the words. It is Sermon. 17. de Verbis Apost. Ideoque habet
Ecclesiastica disciplina quod fideles noverunt, cum Martyrs eo loco recitantur
ad altar Dei, ubi non pro ipsis oretur, pro caeteris autem commemoralis
defunctis oretur. Injuria est enim pro Martyr orare, cujus nos debemus
orationibus com mendari. And Tr. 84. in Evang. Johan.
This has the Church Discipline, which the Faithful know, when the Martyrs are
recited at the Altar of God in that place, where Prayer is not made for them;
but Prayer is made for others, who are commemorated. For it is an Injury to
pray for a Martyr, to whose Prayers we (our selves) ought to be commended. And
Tr. 84. in Evang. Johan. Ad ipsam mensam non sic ^os commemoramus, quemadmocum
alior, qui in pace requiescunt, ^t et am pro eis or mus, s^d magis, ut cren^
ipsi pro nobis; ut eorum vestigiis adhae^eamus; quia impleverunt ipsi
charitatem, qua Dominus dixit non posse esse majorem.
At the Table it self we do not so commemorate them, as others who rest in
Peace, that we should also pray for them, but rather that they pray for us,
that we may tread in their Steps; because they themselves have fulfilled that
Charity, than which our Lord says there cannot be greater.

And here I cannot but take notice of the Partiality and Disingenuity of this
magnified Man in this place; for it is a Scandal and Offense to me. Having
cited the words of S. Augustine in Euchrid. ad Laurent. cap. 110. Cum sacrificia
sive altaris, five quarumcunque Eleemosynarum pro baptizitis defunctis omnibus
offeruntur; pro valde bonis gratiarum actiones sunt; p^o valde malis, etsi
nulla sunt adjumenta mortuorum, qua^^icunque vivorum consolationes ^u^t.
That the Oblations and Alms usually offered in the Church for all the Dead
that received Baptism, were Thanksgivings for such as were very Good;
Propitiations for such as were not very Bad: but for such as were very Evil,
although they were no Help for the Dead, yet were they some kind of Consolations
of the Living. He calls this a Private Exposition; not only (as he pretends)
because it is not to be found in the Writings of the former Fathers; but also
because it suiteth not well with the general Practice of the Church, which it
intends to interpret, p. 194. If it had not been in the Writings of any of
the former Fathers, had not the notorious Practice of the Church, which he
often mentions with special notes of the Notoriety of the matter of Fact, been
sufficient, and much more than any thing mentioned dogmatically by others, though
more ancient? But besides that is false: for we shall see it hereafter attested
by Cyril of Jerusalem; and not by the by, but in a professed Description, and
Explication of the Greek Liturgy; which shows the Agreement of all, both Greek
and Latin Churches. And therefore it is but reasonable that the honest Reader
be admonished to beware of this Author, how he trusts him: for he is a partial
and crafty Writer; of which other instances may be produced.

But perhaps it may not only do right to S. Augustine, but be a Satisfaction to
the Reader, to see him more fully declare his mind, which he does in the words
precedent, to this effect: Neque negandum est Desu ctorum animas pietate suorum
viventium relevari, cum pro illis sacrificium Media^oris offertur, vel
Eleemosynae in Ecclesia fiunt. Sed e^s haec pro unt qui cum viverent, ut haec
sibi postea prodesse possent, meruerunt. Est enim quidem vivendi modus, nec tam
bonus, ut non requirat ifta post mortem; nec tam malus, ut ei non prosint ista
post mortem. Est vero talis in bono, ut ista non requirat; and est rursus talis
in malo, ut nec his valeat, cum ex h^c vita transierit, adjuvari. Quo circa hic
omne meritum comparatur, quo possit post h^nc vitam releva^i, quisplam, vel
gravari. Nemo autem se speret quod hic neglexerit cum obierit, apud Deum
promoreri. Non igitur ista quae pro defunctis commendandis frequentat Ecclesia,
illi Apostolicae sunt adversa sententiae, qua dictum est; Omnes enim astabimus
ante Tribunal Christi, utreserat unusqu^sque secundum ea quae per corpus gessit
sivebonum, sive malum: quia etiam hoc meritum sibi quisque cum in corpore
vi^eret comparavit, ut ei possent ista prodesse. Non enim omnibus prosunt, and
quare non omnibus prosunt, nisipropter differentiam vitae, quam quisque gessit
in corpore? Cum ergo sacificia etc.
Nor is it to be denied, says he, that the Souls of the Deceased are relieved
by the Piety of their living Relations, when the Sacrifice of the Mediator is
offered, or Alms given in the Church for them. But to those are these things
profitable, who, when they lived, merited that these things might be profitable
for them afterward. For there is one sort of Life neither so Good, that it
might not need those things after Death; nor so Evil, that they cannot profit
after Death. But there is such in Good, that it may not require them: and there
is again such in Evil, that it cannot be helped by these things when this Life
is ended. Wherefore here is all Merit acquired, whereby any one can after this
Life be relieved, or grieved. But let none hope that he may obtain of God after
he is Dead what he has neglected here. Wherefore those things, which the
Church does frequently use for Recommending the Dead, are not contrary to the
Sentence of the Apostle, where it is said, We must all stand before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive according to those things
which he has done in the Body, whether it be Good, or Evil; because even this
Merit every one acquired for himself when he lived in the Body, that these
things might profit him. For they do not profit all. And why do they not profit
all, but by reason of the Difference of Life which each lived in the Body? When
therefore Sacrifices, whether of the Altar, or of whatever Alms, are offered
for all the Deceased, who were baptized, etc. as before recited by Usher. More
to like purpose may be seen in his Book de Cura pro Mortuis, cap. 4. and cap.
18. where he adds, Sed quia non discernimus qui sint, oportet ea pro
regeneratis omnibus facere, u^ nullus eorum praetermittatur, ad quos haec
beneficia possint and debeant pervenire. Melius enim supererunt ista eis,
quibus nec obsunt, nec prosunt, quam eis deerunt quibus prosunt. Diligentius
tamen facit haec quisque pro necessariis suis, quod pro illo fiat similiter a
suis, p. 294. b. 2. to 4.
But because we do not distinguish who they are, (who are profited by them) we
ought to do these things for all the Regenerate, that none of them be
pretermitted, to whom these Benefits may and ought to come. For it is better
that they should be superfluous as to them, who are neither helped nor hurt by
them, than be wanting to those whom they may benefit. Yet every one does these
things the more diligently for his (deceased) Relations, that the same may be
done by his Relations (surviving) for himself. The same he has qu. 2. ad
Dulcitium: and more to like purpose, Sermon. 32. de Verb. Apost.

To the Testimonies of these two Eminent, Holy, Learned Bishops of the Latin
Church, I will add the Testimonies of two or three Eminent Bishops of the same
Age in the Greck Church, concerning the Practice and Custom of the Church in
their time, and the Ages precedent, even to the Apostles, in this Case. The one
is S. John Chrysostom, Patriarch of Constantinople, a Man as eminent for his
own personal Worth, as for the Place he held. He has much concerning Prayers
and Oblations for the Dead; but much of it by way of Exhortation: and therefore
to be as brief as may be, I will select principally what concerns the Practice
and Original, which he refers expressly to the Ordination of the Apostles, and
Directions of the Holy Spirit. But first for the common Practice of the People:
Hom. 32. in Mat. (...).
Why after the Death of any of thy Family do thou call the Poor together? Why
do entreat the Presbyters to pray for him? Thou will say, That he may obtain
Rest. And do thou then weep and lament for these things? Secondly, S.
Chrysostom's Advice, Hom. 61. in Johan. (...).
But if a Sinner, and who has often offended God, dies, is he to be bewailed?
or rather, not at all, since that cannot do him any good. But these things are
to be performed for him, which may do him good; viz. Alms and Oblations. And
concerning Alms, he presses it much, Hom. 21. in Act. page 605. And, Thirdly,
for the common Office of the Priest, in his Sixth Book de Sacerdotio, cap. 4.
(...).
What manner of Man ought he to be, who interceeds for the whole City? What, do
I say for the City? for the whole World, and prays to God that he will be
propitious to the Sins of all, not only of the Living, but also of the Dead?
Then that these things are of Apostolical Authority, Hom. 3. in Phil in the
Moral. Exhorting People to pray themselves, and to entreat the Prayers of
others, and to give Alms continually for their deceased Friends: (...).
Will this, says he, give any Relief? and then answers: Hear God thus saying,
I will protect this City for my own and for my Servant David's sake. If the
Memory only of a righteous Man avails so much, where Works are also done for
the Dead, what cannot they do? and then goes on: These things were not in vain
constituted by the Apostles, that in the venerable and tremendous Mysteries
Memorial should be made of those who were departed. They knew much Benesit
would accure to them by it, and much Advantage. For at that time, when all the
People stand with their hands lifted up, and the Company of the Priests, and
that venerable and awful Sacrifice, present, how shall we not please or appease
God praying for them? And that indeed for those who departed in the Faith; But
the Catechumens are not deigned this Consolation, but are destitute of all
help, one only excepted. But what is that? Why, Alms may be given to the Poor
for them: and hence they receive some Refreshment. For it is God's Will that we
should mutually help one another. And to the same purpose, Hom. 69. ad Pop.
Antioch. Lastly, and that this was by the Direction of the Holy Spirit, he is
express, Hom. 21. in Act. (...)
Not in vain are Oblations for the Dead; Not in vain Prayers; Not in vain Alms:
For all these things did the Spirit Order, willing that we should mutually help
one another.... Doubt it not, the Fruit will be pleasant: It is not a light
thing that the Deacon calls out, (to pray) For those who are departed in
Christ; and, For those who offer for their Memories. And the same he says
also, Hom. 41. in 1 Cor. 15. and adds: (...)
For if Commemorations were not made for them, not so much as this would be
said: For our Matters are not Stage Plays. Far be that. For these are done by
the Ordination and Disposition of the Spirit. Let us therefore afford them
help, and perform their Commemorations, etc. The Propitiation proposed is
common to the World: therefore do we then confidently pray for all the Worthy,
and name them with Martyrs, with Confessors, with Priests: for we are all one
Body, though some Members more splendid than others.... Why do thou grieve and
lament so much? Favor may be obtained for the Deceased. And that he himself
formed a Liturgy, which is at this day in use in the Greek Churches, is
affirmed by the Greeks, and cannot with any good reason be denied; and though
it is likely there may be some Alterations or Additions in it, yet what relates
to this matter is so confirmed by this, and by more ancient Authority, that it
cannot reasonably be questioned.

The other is S. Epiphanius, Bishop of Salamis, the Metropolis of the Isle of
Cyprus, a Man of good Reputation for Ability and Piety, and particularly
studied in all the Doctrines and Practices of the Church, and the several
Heresies contrary thereunto. In him we have a double Testimony, that of Aerius,
and his own, in a Book of all the Heretics and Heresies. In that of Aerius, is
observable, 1. The Matter of Fact and common Practice, viz. commemorating the
Names of the Dead, and Praying for them. 2. (...)
The End for which it was done, viz. That they might be benefitted by the
Pardon of their Sins at the Prayers, etc. of their Surviving Friends and the
Church. Both these he opposes; and that is a Proof of both; and by the
Testimony of an Adversary; which is reputed the most convincing. 3. The
Opposition, without any denial or question of the Antiquity or Universality of
the Practice or Observation, or of the Tradition of either the Practice, or the
Intention and Doctrine: which, if he had had any color or pretense for it, he
would certainly never have omitted: but he is able to say nothing against
either the Practice, or Benefit of it; but, If it be so, it is in vain to be
pious; it would be sufficient to get People to pray for the Pardon of ones Sins
after his Death. In all these respects is the Opposition of Aerius a very
considerable Testimony of both the Practice and Intention, and consequently of
the Doctrine of the Church in this case. But because our great Man uses his
utmost Skill, and very grossly, to evade and elude these Testimonies, I will
here present them both entire, according to his own Translation, with Notes of
the Pages where most of the distracted Parcels may be found in his Book, that
the Reader who has a mind to entertain himself with a Prospect of his
Ingenuity, may the more plainly discern it.

The Objection of Aerius: For what reason do you commemorate after Death, the
Names of those that are departed? He that is alive prays, or makes
Dispensation (of the Mysteries) what shall the Dead be profited hereby? And if
the Prayer of those here do altogether ((...)) profit them that be there; then
let no body be Godly; (...)
let no Man do Good; but let him procure some Friends, by what means it
pleases him, either by persuading them by Money, or entreating Friends at his
Death; and let them pray for him, that he may suffer nothing there; and that
those inexpiable Sins, which he has committed, may not be required at his
hands. p. 238.

Epiphanius his Answer and Testimony: As for the reciting of the Names of those
that are deceased, what can be better than this? What more commodious, and more
admirable? that such as are present do believe that they who are departed do
live, and are not extinguished, but are still Being, and Living with the Lord:
and that this most pious Preaching might be declared, that they who pray for
their Brethren have hope of them, as being in a Peregrination, p. 240. But the
Prayer also which is made for them does profit, although it does not cut off All
their Sins. ((...) here answers to (...) in the Objection.) Yet, forasmuch as
whilst we are in the World, we oftentimes slip both unwillingly, and with our
Will; it serves to signify that which is more perfect: For we make a
Memorial, both of the Just, and for Sinners: For Sinners, entreating the Mercy
of God; of the Just, both the Fathers, and Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles,
and Evangelists, and Martyrs, and Confessors, Bishops, and Anchoretes, and the
whole Order; that we may sever our Lord Jesus from the Rank of all other Men,
by the Honor that we do unto him, and that we may yield Worship unto him,
[while we thus judge, p. 240. That] our Lord is not to be compared unto any
Man; though a Man live in Righteousness a thousand times and more: for how should
that be possible? considering that the one is God, the other Man; and the one
is in Heaven, the other in Earth, by reason of the Remains (or Relics) of the
Body yet resting in the Earth. [p. 242. Except those, who being raised from the
Dead, entered together into the Bride-chamber, as says the Holy Gospel, etc.
But forbearing these things, I return to what I was about.] The Church does
necessarily perform this, having received it by Tradition from the Fathers: And
who may dissolve the Ordinances of his Mother, or the Law of his Father? p.
237. [ as Solomon says, Hear, my Son, the Words of thy Father, and reject not
the Laws of thy Mother; declaring by this, that (our) Father; that is, God, the
Only begotten, and the Holy Spirit, has taught (us) both in Scriptures, and
without Scripture: But] our Mother, the Church, has Ordinances settled in her,
which are inviolable, and may not be broken. Seeing then there are Ordinances
established in the Church, and they are well, and all things are admirably
done; this Seducer is again refuted. p. 237. This is the Answer of Epiphanius:
the words enclosed in Crochets are not in Usher.

To this we may well apply what he says before concerning Easter, the
Observation of which was another thing, which Aerius quarrelled at: But who
knows these things best? This seduced Fellow, who is but newly sprung up, and
now living amongst us; or they who were Witnesses before us; and who held the
same Tradition in the Church before us, which they had received from their
Parents, and their Parents had learned from their Ancestors; as the Church to
this day observes the true and sincere Faith, which it received with the
Traditions from the Fathers.

In all this we may observe, 1. The Practice of the Church, both in the General
Commemorations, and in the Prayers, agreed on both Sides. 2. The End and
Intendment of the Church, that it was the Profit and Benefit of the Deceased,
also agreed. 3. The Question between them, Whether the Prayer of the Living
could profit or benefit the Dead, as the Church intended? 4. That this was what
Aerius did principally deny: and therefore, that the Practice was reasonable,
as a necessary consequence. 5. His only reason was, that it would make Piety
and good Life needless. 6. Epiphanius his Answer, 1. from Reason; 1. as it is a
seasonable and excellent Declaraction of the Faith and Hope of the Church; 2.
as an Act of Charity, for the Benefit of the Deceased; 2. from Authority, as
received in the Church by Tradition from our Savior, and the Holy Spirit.

And now, how does our great Man elude this? Epiphanius, says he, does not
Name this, ( viz. That Prayers and Sacrifice profits not the depa ted in
Christ,) an Heresy. 2. Nor does it appear that himself did hold that they
bring such Profit to the Dead as these Men Dream, page 236. 3. He does not at
all charge him with forsaking the Doctrine of the Scripture, or the Faith of
the Catholic Church, but with rejecting the Order, p. 237. 4. Aerius his
Argument would have been in force indeed, if the whole Church had held, as many
did; That the Judgment after Death was suspended until the General
Resurrection, and that in the mean time, the Sins of the Dead might be taken
away by the Suffrages of the Living: But he should have considered, as Gobarus
(as great an Heretic as himself) did that the Doctors were not agreed upon the
Point, p. 238.5. It was a foolish part in him to confound the Private Opinion
of some, with the Common Faith of the Universal Church. 6. That he reproved
this particular Error, he did well; but that thereupon he condemned the General
Practice of the Church, he did like himself, headily and perversely, ibidem. As
to the first of these, I must refer the Reader to Epiphanius himself, for the
Character he gives of the Person and Opinions of Aerius, a very Vile man, a
thorough-pac'd Arian, and who exceeded Arius himself in his new Opinions, which
he imputes to the operation of the Devil; though he does not particularly name
them Heresies, yet, it is plain, he and S Austin too accounted them such; and,
of the rest, the Reader may judge by what is here laid plainly before him.

S. Ephraem was not much before these; but because he was neither Greek nor
Latin, but a Syrian, and a Man of Parts and extraordinary Sanctity, greatly
esteemed by the most excellent Persons of that time, and of so great
Reputation, that his Writings were read publicly in diverse Churches after the
Holy Scriptures, I cannot pass him by without taking notice of his Testament,
his Discourse to his Disciples upon his Deathbed: wherein he tells them he is
Dying, and desires to be mentioned in the Commemoration of their Holy Prayers;
and bewailing his Sins, and declaring his Sense of the terrible Judgment of
God, he does admonish, exhort, and strictly enjoin them to remember him
constantly, after his exit and passage, in their Prayers: and after some
Admonitions to them, and account of himself, he again desires to be remembered
in their Prayers. Then he strictly forbids his being Buried under the Altar, or
in the House of God, all Solemn Pomp, and Funeral Orations and Encomiums; and
all cost of rich Vestments, of Grave Clothes, of Spices, of Odors, of Candles,
and the like; but desires that all that Cost may be bestowed upon the Poor; and
for himself; that in the place of all such Pomp and Funeral Orations, they will
accompany him with Psalms, and help and assist him with their Prayers, and Bury
him in the Churchyard, where the contrite in heart are Buried. Then he bids
them come near and embrace him, for his Spirit fails him, and again entreats
them diligently to make Oblations for him; and prettily represents the
Communion of Saints, by a Simile of the Sympathy of things in Nature, the Wine
which flowers in the Cellar, when the Vine Buds in the Vineyard, and the like:
And tells them, that the Oblations of Priests under the Law were effectual for
those who were slain in their Sins: and how much more the Priests of Christ
under the New Testament! And gives great caution, that when they come to his
Memory, (I suppose he means the Thirtieth Day, which he expressly mentioned
before and his Anniversaries) ne quisquam in Sancta peccet; that none commit
any thing unmeet for holy things, (by any Excess): but that the Vigil be kept
attentively, and reverently, and humbly, and holily, and purely: for it would
be a miserable thing for him, if by occasion of his Memory, he should be
accountable to his God for their inordinate Actions. Thus this Holy Man: an
Instance equal to a very ample Testimony of the Practice in those parts.

About the same time was S. Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem. He in his Mystagogick
Catechism concludes all with a Description and Scheme of the Liturgy then in
use; wherein, after mention of the Holy Trisagium Hymn, (...)
Therefore, says he, do we recite this Seraphick Theology delivered to us,
that in that Celestial Hymnody we may communicate with the supra-mundain
Militia, (the Heavenly Host:) and thus by such kind of Hymns sanctisying our
selves, we pray the most benign God that he will send out his Holy Spirit upon
the proposited (Elements) that it may make the Bread the Body of Christ, and
the Wine the Blood of Christ. For certainly, whatever the Holy Spirit does
touch, it is sanctified and transmuted. Then after that Spiritual Sacrifice,
that unbloody Worship is done, (that is, after the Consecration and Oblation in
Commemoration of the Passion of Christ) over that very Host of Propitiation do
we obsecrate God for the common Peace of the Churches; for the Tranquillity of
the World; for Kings; for their Armies and Confederates; for the Sick and
Afflicted; and, in sum, for all who need Help. We commemorate also those who
have fallen asleep before us: First, the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Martyrs, that God at their Prayers and Deprecations would accept ours: Then we
pray for the Holy Fathers and Bishops deceased; and, lastly, for all who are
deceased amongst us, believing it to be a very great Help to the Souls, for
whom the Obsecration of that tremendous Sacrifice, which is placed on the
Altar, is offered.

I will add but one instance more for the flourishing times of the Church, and
so comprize the whole time of the four first General Councils from first to
last. Eusebius in his 4th Book of the Life of Constantine describing the
Martyrium of the Apostles, built by him at Constantinople, adds, chap. 60. All
these did the Emperor dedicate, that he might consign to Posterity the Memory
of our Savior's Apostles. But he had another Design in his Mind when he built
this Church: which was at first concealed: but in the end it became known to
all. For he had designed this place for himself after his Death, foreseeing, by
a transcendent Alacrity of Faith, that his Body after Death should be made
Partaker of the Apostles Apellation, that even after Death, he might be
esteemed worthy of the Prayers, which should be performed there in Honor of
the Apostles, believing that their Memory would be useful and advantageous to
his Soul. And afterward describing the Solemnity of his Funeral, chap. 71. he
says, that a vast Number of People, together with those Persons, consecrated
to God, not without Tears and great Lamentation, poured forth Prayers to God
for the Emperor's Soul; thereby performing a most grateful Office to this pious
Prince. And herein also God demonstrated his singular Favor toward his
Servant, because after his Death, -- agreeable to his own most earnest Desire,
the Tabernacle of his thrice blessed Soul was vouchsafed a place with the
Monument of the Apostles; and that it might be joined with God's People in the
Church; and might be vouchsafed the Divine Rights, and Mystic Service; and
might enjoy a Communion of the Holy Prayers.

This was but 12 years after the Nicen Council, and a great and most
illustrious instance of the common received and settled Practice of that time.
And here, before I proceed further, it is fit to consider, how far the
continuance of that wicked and shameful Abuse by Cranmer, put upon the Church
of England in his clandestine Corruption of the True English Liturgy; I say,
the Continuance of it to this day, whether by supine Negligence, or base
Compliance with a Faction of Sectaries, be consistent with that Profession of
Reverence to Antiquity in general; and to those first four General Councils in
particular, which is made by all who pretend to be genuine Sons of the Church
of England? with their use of the Constantinopolitan Creed in the most solemn
Office, so foully deformed, contrary to the Public Office at that time used in
the Church, and attested by S. Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem, who was present at
that Council, and a principal Man there? How consistent with the Statutes of
most ancient Colleges in both the Universities, and the Oaths taken by so many
Scholars for the Observance of them? How consistent with the Belief of One Holy
Catholic Church; and of the Communion of Saints? with that Reverence and
Respect, which the Holy Scriptures require should be paid to the Body of
Christ, the Depository of Christian Verities, and the Pillar or Monument and
Basis of Truth? with that Reverence, and Honor, and Esteem, which all true and
genuine Christians cannot but have for so many glorious Saints as flourished in
the Church of Christ, and all agreed in this pious Practice for more than 1200
years from the time of Constantine, who himself was none of the least, being
converted in an extraordinary manner by special Vision from our Savior, and
the Truth thereof confirmed by very remarkable Victories, and afterward so
great a Promoter of Christian Piety, that he was, as Eusebius relates, partaker
of the Apostles appellation, being called (...), in the Offices of the Greek
Church, and deservedly: How it can be consistent therewith, and with Christian
Modesty, to set up a Calvin, a Bucer, a Cranmer, an Usher, like little Idols,
above all; and not rather an undeniable proof of the very Spirit of Heretics
and Schismatics.

Mr. Life Appendix, p. 55.
Baxter's Questions in another Case, not unlike this, may very properly be
proposed to our modern Opposers of this Catholic Practice: Would they have
held Communion with the Catholic Church for a Thousand Years together? Or
would they not, if they had lived in those times? If they would, then why not
with us, who are of the same Judgment? Was it a Duty then? And is it unlawful
now? If they would not in all those Ages have held Communion with the visible
Church, what would they have done but separated from the Body, and so from the
Head, and cast off Christ in all his Members, and taken him to be a Head
without a Body, which is no Head; and so no Christ? What would they have done,
but denied his Power, and Love, and Truth, and consequently his Redemption; and
his Office? Has he come at the end of 4000 years since the Creation, to redeem
the World, that lay so long in Darkness? And has he made such wonderful
Preparations for his Church, by his Life and Miracles, and Blood and Spirit?
etc. and promised, That the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; and
that his Kingdom shall be an Everlasting Kingdom, and his Dominion endures
from Generation to Generation; and yet, after all this, shall he have a Church,
(even as the Seekers say) but for an Age or two? Thus Mr. Baxter; and very
good: but if this be good in the Case of Baptism of Infants, why not as good in
the Case of Prayers and Oblations for the Dead? which, I think, has as good
Evidence of Apostolical Original as that, or the Lord's Day, or Episcopacy, or
a good part of the Scriptures of the New Testament: And if they stand all upon
the same Foundation, why should they not stand or fall together?

There is also an Assertion of St. Augustine 's, which deserves to be here
considered in this Case; That Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec in Consiliis
institutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi Authoritate Apostolica traditum
rectissime creditur. cont. Donat. l. 4 c. 24.
what the Universal Church does hold, and was not instituted in Councils, but
always retained, is most rightly believed to have been delivered by no other
than Apostolical Authority. For as this is a Practice which none did ever
pretend was instituted by any Council; so amongst all, who have written
concerning the Original, or first Invention, or Introduction of things, none
has ever assigned any Original of it in the Catholic Church later than the
Apostles; or in any part of the Catholic Church, later than of the rest of
Christianity it self. So that could we trace it no further back than the time
of Constantine, it would be unreasonable to believe, that the whole Christian
Church, so largely spread over the Face of the Earth, and planted by so many
several Persons at first, and in Places so divided and remote one from another,
should so unanimously agree in such a Practice, did it not proceed from some
Common Cause; which could be no other than the Mutual Agreement of all the
Apostles in it. Nostra quidem Scripta cur ignibus meruerunt dari? Cur immaniter
Conventicula dirui? in quibus Summus oratur Deus, Pax cunctis and venia
postulatur, Magistratibus, Exercitibus, Regibus, Familiaribus, Inimicis, adhuc
vitam degentibus, and resolutis corporum vi^ctione. lib. 4. suo. fi.


But though this might be sufficient, yet have we further Evidence to trace it,
even through the more troublesome times of the Churches, so near to the
Apostles, that no Man, without Disparagement to his Judgment, or his Honesty,
can question its Original to be indeed Apostolical. For though those troublesome
times have left us so few Monuments of the Primitive Christianity, in
comparison, that all will hardly equal the Writings of some one of the Writers
of after-Ages; yet among those few have we what is sufficient. Arnobius, an
eminent Professor of Rhetoric, who had been a bitter Enemy against the
Christians, even in the time of Persecution under Dioclesian turned Christian,
and wrote Seven Books against the Gentiles: in the fourth of which he
expostulates with them in this manner: Why have our Scriptures deserved to be
cast into the Fire? Why our Meeting-Places to be cruelly destroyed, in which
the Great God is prayed to, Peace and Pardon is besought for all; for
Magistrates, Armies, Kings, our Familiars and Enemies; for those yet living,
and those released from the Bond of their Bodies? Where he speaks of Prayers
for these last, as as common as for any of the rest. About 50 years before this
was S. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, a Person of great Worth, and most deserved
Reputation in the Church, and at last a Holy Martyr. He in his LXVI Epistle
(with his Colleagues in Council) tells the Clergy and People, to whom he wrote,
that their Predecessors, upon religious Consideration, as a necessary
Provision, had decreed, That no Christian Brother at his Departure should name
a Clergyman for Guardian, or Executor; and that if any one should do this,
there should be Si quis hoc fecisset, non offeretur pro ^o, nec sacrificium pro
Do^mitione ejas celebretur. Neque enim, etc.
no Offering for him, nor Sacrifice celebrated for his Departure; for he does
not deserve to be named at the Altar of God in the Prayer of the Priests, who
would call away the Priests and Ministers from the Altar: And therefore since
one Victor, Contra formam nuper in Concilio a sacerdotibus datam.
contrary to the Order lately made in Council by the Priests, had presumed to
constitute a certain Presbyter for a Guardian, Non est quod pro Dormitione ejas
apud vos fiat Oblatio, aut Deprecatio aliqua nomine ejus in Ecclesia
frequentetur.
there should no Oblation be made among them for his Departure, or any
Deprecation commonly used in the Church in his Name, that the Decree of the
Bishops religiously and necessarily made might be observed by them, and Example
given to others, etc. This Prohibition of those things to be done, by way of
Punishment, is a plain Evidence of what was accustomed, and should have been
done, if there had been no Prohibition: and an Evidence not of a single Person,
but of a Council: and not of Matter of Opinion, but of plain Matter of Fact;
and that so notorious, as was well known to all, and of such Importance in the
Opinion of all, as the Prohibition was adjudged a competent Punishment for such
a Crime, as they all thought no little one: It was a kind of Excommunication.

Another fifty years before this lived Tertullian, a Man of very great and
universal Learning, very acute Parts, and very strict for Discipline, and for
the Orders of the Church. He mentions this Practice in diverse of his Writings,
not only as common and usual, but also as delivered by Tradition, and so well
known, and unquestionable, as to be it self an undeniable Instance and Proof of
unwritten Traditions. This he does in his Book de Corona Militis, 3. where,
amongst the Instances which he alleges for proof of the Authority of
unwritten Traditions, this is one: Oblationes pro Defunctis, pro Natalitiis,
annua die facimus. We make Oblations for the Dead upon the Annual day of their
Departure; which the Ancient Christians called their Natalitiae, or Birth-Days.
And after all concludes, Harum and aliarum ejusmodi discipiinarum si Legem
expostules Scripturarum, nullam invenies: Traditio tibi praetenditue auctrix,
Consuetudo confirmatrix, and Fides observatrix.
If of these, and other Matters of Discipline, you seek for a Rule of
Scriptures, you shall find none: Tradition is alleged for the Author, Custom
for the Confirmer, and Faith for the Observer. But of Traditions in general he
has other Discourses elsewhere: and of this particular Tradition, which he
does but only mention here, as an instance of Fact not to be denied, we have
farther mention in other of his Writings; In his Book de Monogamia, against
second Marriages, speaking of the Custom of the Widow's praying for her
deceased Husband; he says, Et pro anima ejus orat, and Refrigerium interim
adpostulat ei, and in prima Resurrectione Consortium; and offert annuis diebus
dormitionis ejus. 10.
She prays for his Soul, and entreats for Refreshment for him in the interim,
and Consort in the first Resurrection, and offers (for him) on the Annual days
of his Departure. Again, in his Book de Exhortatione Castitatis, he thus
upbraids him who had had several Wives: Et jam repete apud Deum pro cujus
Spiritu postules, pro qua Oblationes Annuas reddas. Stabis ergo ad Deum cum tot
Uxoribus, quot illa oratione commemoras? and offeres pro duabus, and commemoras
illas duas per sacerdotem de Monogamia ob pristinum de virginitate sanctitum,
circumdatum virginibus and univiris? and ascendet sacrificium tuum iibera
front? and inter cete ras voluntates bonae mentis postulabis tibi, and uxori
castiatem^ 11
Say before God for whose Spirit thou do pray, for which thou do make thy
Annual Oblations. Will thou therefore stand before God with so many Wives, as
thou do in that Prayer remember; and offer for two, and commemorate those two
by a Priest once married, by reason of the ancient Sanction of Virginity,
encompassed with Virgins, and once married Women? And will thy Sacrifice ascend
with Confidence? and amongst other Habits of a good Soul, will thou pray for
Chastity for thy self, and thy Wife?

This, I think, is plain, and full for the common Practice, both in private,
and in public by the Priest at the Altar; and for the Tradition. But it is
objected, that Tertullian, when he wrote these Books, was a Montanist, and
wrote them against the Church. And it is as easily answered, that it is not
Matter of Opinion, but Matter of Fact, for which they are here alleged: and
it is certain he was no Fool; which he must have been, if this had been the
Practice of the Montanists, and not of the Church. But for the Readers better
Information, and more ample Satisfaction, that the Objection is a mere
Scarecrow, and serves only to discover the Disingenuity and Inconsiderateness
of the Objectors, he must know, That Montanus, (and his Companions) Alcibiades
and Theodotus, were at first looked upon, in the Opinion of most Men, as
Prophets: For very many Miracles of Divine Grace at that time wrought in many
Churches made most Men believe that they also were Prophets. Eusebius. 5. Hist. 3.
So that if Tertullian did believe this, it was no more than what most others
did. But what more specially inclined him to favor Montanus was this: He was a
Man of great Austerity and Strictness in Matters of Discipline, Penance,
Fasting, Chastity, Suffering, etc. which were things which Montanus asserted,
and highly pretended to: And that which fixed him in his Opinion of Montanus,
was some unhappy Contests which arose between him and the Roman Clergy, about
some of these things, which gave him that Offense, that he not only reflects
upon them in his de Corona Militis; Novi and Pastores eorum, etc. but
afterward in his other Writings frequently calls them Psychici, Animal or
Sensual Man. And this, which is observable in his Writings, is also affirmed by
S. Hierom. This was his For as to what relates to the Rule of Faith that is, to
the Principal Doctrines of Religion, Tertul. and the first Montanists were of
the same Opinion with the Church, etc. says Du Pin p. 82, 83.
Montanism. And what is this to the Prejudice of his Testimony concerning
Prayers for the Dead? It is so far from that, that it is the greatest
Confirmation and Amplification of it, that this Practice and Tradition was no
part of Montanism: for nothing could have been a greater Prejudice to the
Church of Rome against it, and it had certainly been condemned by them: nor
peculiar to the African Church; but the known Practice of the Catholic Church,
and of the Roman Church in particular: quite contrary to what the Objectors
would persuade us. But such Infatuations are the greatest of Men subject to,
when they will obstinately persist in the Maintenance of an ill Cause. We may
here therefore fix, upon as good ground as can reasonably be desired, this
Practice and Tradition of the Catholic Church.

And now it is time to consider how much we are short in our Evidence of the
Apostles Age; and from what Original this Practice did in truth proceed. It is
agreed that St. John wrote his Gospel about the beginning of the second
Century; and that Tertullian fell to the Sect of Montanus in the beginning of
the third. Vid. Du Pin, p. 44. and p. 70. And S. Hierom informs us, that he
lived to a great Age, usque ad decrepitam atatem; and that after he had
continued usque ad mediam aetatem a Presbyter of the Church, invidia postea and
contumeliis Clericor. Romanae Ecclesiae ad Montani dogma delapsus. After having
continued in the Church 40 or 45 Years, he separated from it in the beginning
of the 3d Centutury, etc. says Du Pin, p. 70.
So that he lived the greatest and best part of his Life in the same Age
wherein St. John wrote his Gospel, and did live some time. And here comes, as
seasonably as unexpectedly, to my hand, at the very instant that this is at the
Press, a Book of a learned Opponent; who seeing this too plain to be
dissembled, and supposing that he can otherwise evade the force of this
Evidence, presents us with a plain Confession of the Matter of Fact; Of the
Sibyls, l. 2. c 23.
David Blondell: I make no difficulty (says he) to affirm, that it might be
practiced some time before the Year 200, in as much as Tertullian, the most
ancient of all those that say any thing of it, numbered it even then among the
Customs received in his time, writing in the Year, 199. Oblationes pro
Defunctis, pro Natalitiis, annua die facimus, etc. and recites also the other
two Testimonies, only in that de Monogamia, mistakes the Husband for the Wife,
and then adds: From the things which this great Person, the most Ancient, and
most Learned of all the Latins, that we have remaining, does advance, as to
Matter of Fact, concerning the Oblations, which were publicly made, and the
Employment of the Priests, the only Ministers of the public Service, as a
thing Ordinary, and grown into Custom, it is manifest, that Praying for the
Dead was, in his Time, used, not only by particular Persons, but also in the
Body of the Church, and that the Liturgies thereof were full of it. Thus we
see, not only by plain Proof, but also by the The same is confessed by John
Dalle, since recommended to me, as one who has written learnedly on this
Subject: but I find not any thing in him added to Blendel, but such Pride,
Arrogance, Insolence, Contempt, and reproachful Expressimso^ the Anci^nt Holy
Christians and Martyrs, as cannot but be very offensive to any true Christian
Spirit being most apparently the common Spirit and Genius of all wicked and
obstsnate Heretics, leading to Atheism and Ap st^cy, and as contra ry to the
Pare Word of God, which they pretend, as to the true Spirit of Christianty.
Confession of a learned Adversary, that this was not only a Practice in the
Church when Tertullian wrote, but a Received Custom in his time, and therefore
of some standing before; and of such standing as he knew no other Original of
it but Apostolical Tradition: and for such does he allege it; and not only
so, but for an unquestionable Proof of such unwritten Traditions; as this
Author also confesses and asserts. cap. 24. p. 142. And what other Original
could it have in that little time, and such a Man as he have been ignorant of
it? And had any other been known, could He have been guilty of so great
Weakness, as to have alleged this for an unquestionable Proof in such a Case,
if he had had so little Honesty?

But we have here a learned Man, who under pretense of detecting an Imposture,
presumes, by his Learning, to impose upon the World. How well he has used his
Learning in other Matters, some Learned Men of the Church of England, I think,
besides others, have sufficiently showed; and how far his Judgment is to be
relied upon. In this I shall show the like in a word. He would persuade that
not only Tertullian, but the whole Church of Christ, has been imposed upon in
this Matter by a counterfeit Sibyl, written between the Years 138 and 151. and
of Tertullian says positively, That he relied upon no other Hypothesis than
those proposed by the Author of the pretended Sibylline Writings. But in these
few words there is no less than at least one notorious Fallacy, and two
Falsities: a Fallacy in the word Hypothesis: for he relied not upon any
Hypothesis, but upon the received Custom of the Church: And that he did rely
upon, as is confessed: But he did not in the least rely upon any thing at all
of the pretended Sibyl: Nor has this Champion produced, I think, any one Proof
that either Tertullian, or any other of the Ancient or Modern Christians, did
at all rely upon any such Authority for that Practice: but all unanimously
relied upon Tradition from the Apostles. His whole Book is full of Fallacy and
Deceit, and of the very Spirit and Genius of an Heretic, who makes no scruple
to abuse the whole Church of Christ, and the most Excellent Persons in it, to
maintain his own Principles. It is certain, that diverse of the great Truths of
Christianity were known to the Gentiles long before, and received by Tradition
from the Common Parents of Mankind; but received as Articles of Faith by
Christians upon the Authority of Christ and his Apostles: And such was this,
which he fathers upon an Impostor, and pretends the Church received it from
him; without any Proof of either, whereas, if he was a Christian, it is much
more likely that he received the Hypothesis from the Practice of the Church at
that time; and is therefore rather an Evidence of it. Other matters of this
Book have been considered by learned Men of our own Country; and I think I need
say no more of this with any regard to him.

But as to the Practice, besides all this positive and Affirmative Evidence, I
do deny that any competent Evidence can be produced, among all the Churches of
the World, of any where the Christian Religion was planted without it, or where
it was introduced by any particular Person, upon any special Occasion, at any
different time, after the first planting of Christianity there, in all those
Ages since the Apostles; being verily persuaded that no such thing can be
produced, but what will strongly confirm and illustate the contrary Evidence;
like Mr. Usher's Flourish with his most ancient Manuscript Missals, wherein the
Commemoration of the Dead does no where appear, which yet were but two in all,
if not all but one mentioned by two several Authors, and that no complete
Missal neither, but only Liber Sacramentorum, an Abstract, and it self at last
not to be found, as his expression, habebatur, seems to imply: a good Argument
of the Agreement of all, or most others in that particular, that so industrious
a Searcher into ancient Records and Monuments of Antiquity, of that kind
especially, could neither see nor hear of any other, either at home or abroad,
wherein it was not. Such another Exception may perhaps be met with, which may
serve to confirm the general Rule; but not any thing considerable, I believe,
to any other purpose. Certain it is, it must either have been settled in all
those several Places in the World, where Churches were planted, together with
the rest of the Christian Doctrines and Institutions; and then it must have
proceeded from the same Founders, who agreed as unanimously in this, as they
did in other necessary things; of which sort this may therefore be concluded to
be one: or it must have had a several distinct particular Introduction by it
self, in all or most of those several Places, and be derived from several
Authors, Originals, Occasions and Times: and then the Accounts of its special
and particular Introduction, in all probability, would have very much varied in
several places, at least have remained upon Record, or by Tradition in some.
But not a word of any such thing, can I find, that was ever heard of in any
part of the World; but a Unanimous Agreement in all, both in the Practice
continued by Custom, and Original by Tradition from the Apostles.

And thus much for Proof a posteriori, from Evidence of Matter of Fact; which I
think enough to satisfy any reasonable Man of competent Ability, and to
convince any Man of Modesty and Sincerity: yet because simple genuine Truth is
always consistent with all that is such, it may, ex abundanti, gratify an
honest ingenuous Reader to observe briefly the Universal Agreement of this
Catholic Practice of the Church of Christ, 1. With common Reason, and the
Nature of things: 2. With the common Sentiments of the Primitive Christians
concerning the middle State of Souls: 3. With diverse plain Texts of the Holy
Scriptures: And 4. with the common Practice of the Jews in and before our
Savior's time, never reprehended by him, or any of his Apostles, and therefore
allowed by all, and indeed practiced by them: and, on the contrary, the
Inconsistence of the obstinate Opposition with Truth and Justice in diverse
respects.

As for Common Reason: The Universe is of vast and unconceivable extent; in it
we see are many great Bodies, Orbs, and Regions; the Life of Man upon this of
the Earth is very short; the Time from the Resurrection of our Savior to this
is near 1700 years, and how much more it may be to the General Judgment no
Mortal knows; in the mean time the Souls of Mortals go out of their Bodies in
infinitely various States of Purity and Impurity: And certainly it is most
reasonable that there should be, not only one general Distinction of Souls, but
moreover many distinct Places, States, and Conditions, wherein the separate
Souls are disposed, according to their several Qualifications, when they go out
of the Body. And as that curious Observer of the Works of Nature, as well of
the Holy Scriptures, the late Lord Chief Justice Hale, speaking of towardly
Plants by Death transplanted into another Region, a Garden of Happiness and
Comfort, adds: And possibly by continuance of time, as they received
Improvement and Perfection here, so in that other Region they add to their
Degrees of Perfection, and are promoted to farther Accessions, and Degrees, and
Stations of Happiness and Glory, till they come to the State of Spirits of just
Men made perfect. Now in all these Varieties of States is there nothing capable
of receiving Benefit by the Prayers of the Living? Is there no Communion of
Saints between those in the Body, and those out of the Body? But if there be,
how can it better be exercised or expressed than in the solemn Offices of the
Church?

For the Common Sentiments of the Primitive Christians, because it would be too
long to recite so many Testimonies in this place, and they are collected
already to my hand by Sixtus Senensis and others, I need but refer the Reader
to them. But this also is confessed and asserted by Blondel and Dalle; but they
would have us believe that they received them from an Impostor, a Counterfeit
Sibyl, a groundless, impudent and impious Calumny.

The Agreement with plain Scriptures is observable in that expression of our
Savior concerning the Sin which shall not be forgiven, neither in this World,
neither in the World to come, Mat. 12.32. and that which agrees with this, of
being cast into Prison, and not coming out by any means, till Payment of the
last Farthing, Mat. 5.25. Prisoners of Hope, Zechar. 9.11, 12. Sins blotted out
when the times of Refreshing shall come, Act. 3.19. Such as show the
Incertainty of many Souls in their separate State, even such as were Professors
of a high Form in this World, of what their final Doom shall be at that Day, as
Mat. 7.22, 23. and 25.44, 45. etc. And the Recompense of Rewards at that day, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7. 1 Cor. 5.5. Luke 14.14.2 Tim. 4.8. etc. Which if our confident
Opposers had sufficiently considered, one would think they should not have
presumed to make so light of that middle State, as for the maintaining of
Parties to deprive so many Souls there of all Benefit they might receive by
their surviving Friends here; which many Apparitions, even among Protestants,
do frequently signify.

The Practice of the Jews I have noted already, and shall add only here, That
in Discourse lately with one of them, he assured me that the Form they now use
for that purpose is generally believed by all to have been composed by E^ra and
the Great Congregation. I there also remembered an instance of the Practice of
the Apostles themselves in St. Paul's Prayer for Onesiphorus, in such a Form as
is hardly to be met with for any Person living, however proves it not in vain
to Pray for any Person, of whom there is Hope, but not Certainty, till that
day. So that though our great Man, with more Considence, I doubt, than
Conscience, and without any Proof or Reason at all, does positively affirm him
then living, p. 210. he gets nothing at all by it.

Thus we see in this a Universal Agreement in all things: but, on the contrary,
if we examine the Obstinate Opposition of it throughout, we shall find nothing
solid and consistent in it; neither with Truth, nor Honesty, nor any good
Consequence: but a plausible Pretense of the Pure Word of God to cover an
impure Inclination and Desire to set aside the Authority which God instituted,
and set up themselves and their own Conceits in the place of it. 2.
Inconsistent with it self; first, denying or cavilling at the Antiquity or
Universality of the Practice; and then, when they thought they had found out an
Evasion, confessing that, which they could no longer for shame deny, and
betaking themselves to their new Invention: 3. Inconsistent with the Sincerity,
Simplicity, and Ingenuity of the Gospel, in their shameless Shuffles, Cavils
and Evasions; of which I have noted diverse, and many more might be observed;
but there is one not to be omitted here; their alleging the Writings of
Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Augustine, and others, against not only their own, but
the confessed ancient Practice of the Church in their time, in this Case:
Inconsistent with that Modesty, Respect and Decency which the Gospel requires
toward all, in their Censuring as delirous, not only some particular Persons,
but generally all the most Holy, Ancient Christians, in what was their common
Sentiments, and is believed by the most learned of the Church of England to be
plainly taught in the Holy Scriptures: 5. Inconsistent with that Reverence and
Regard that Christians should have for the Honor of the Church of Christ, his
Promises to it, and Care of it, in so foul and scandalous an Imputation, as
that they received their common Notions of the present State of separate Souls
in the other World from an Impostor; which, was not their Impudence therein as
notorious as it is groundless, and destitute of any proof at all, might prove a
Tentation to unsettled Souls, to suspect all to be no better: And for other
Consequences, it is plain they lead the way to all others to reject their own
usurped Authority with the same Ease and Impudence that they do that of the
Church of Christ; and to set up their own Conceits against theirs, and pretend
Scripture for it; and so to an endless Course of Separations, Schisms, Sects
and Confusions; and, in conclusion, set up that Authority over others, which
they themselves in the mean time reject; as by their Synod of Dort, and others
in France appears: And besides all this, it is much to be feared, that they
lead multitudes of Souls into that miserable Security and Presumption,
wherewith our Savior has acquainted us that many will find themselves
deceived at that day, Mat. 7.22. And therefore if these be not pertinacious
Schismatics and Heretics, speaking perverse things to draw away Disciples
after them, and therefore carefully to be avoided, I know not who are; or what
so many Cautions in the Scripture to that purpose do signify.

FINIS.
The Doctrine of the Scriptures concerning The Middle State of Souls: And the
Tradition of the Church for Prayers for the DEAD: Summed up by Dr. Jer. Tailor,
late Bishop of Down and Conner. With the Judgment of Mr. Herbert Thorndike, a
late most Learned Prebend of Westminster.
Although there has been lately Printed a Discourse of Prayers for the Dead,
proving the Practice and Tradition thereof in the Church to be truly Catholic,
and a competent Evidence of Apostolic Original and Authority; wherein diverse
Learned Protestants are alleged to have been of the same Opinion; yet for the
Readers farther Satisfaction in that respect, it has been thought fit to Print
the Discourse of these two other eminent Persons of the Church of England, more
at large than was thought proper for that place. And first, that of the late
Bishop Dr. Jer. Tailor.

1. Of the Middle State of Souls.
THE Holy Jesus promised to the blessed Thief, That he should that Day be with
Him in Paradise: which therefore was certainly a Place or State of Blessedness,
because it was a Promise; and in the Society of Jesus, whose penal and
afflictive part of his Work of Redemption was finished upon the Cross. Our
Blessed Lord did not promise he should that day be with him in his Kingdom; for
that day it was not opened, and the everlasting doors of those interior
Recesses were to be shut till after the Resurrection that himself was to ascend
thither, and make way for all his Servants to enter, in the same Method in
which he went before us. Our Blessed Lord descended into Hell, says the Creed
of the Apostles, from the Sermon of St. Peter, as he from the Words of David;
that is, into the State of Separation and common Receptacle of Spirits,
according to the Style of Scripture. But the Name of Hell is no where in
Scripture an appellative of the Kingdom of Christ, of the Place of final and
supreme Glory. But concerning the Verification of our Lord's Promise to the
beatified Thief, and his own State of Separation, we must take what Light we
can from Scripture, and what we can from the Doctrine of the Primitive Church.
St. Paul had two great Revelations: he was wrapped up into Paradise, and he was
wrapped up into the third Heaven: and and these he calls Visions, and
Revelations, not one, but diverse: for Paradise is distinguished from the Heaven
of the Blessed, being it self a Receptacle of Holy Souls made illustrious with
Visitations of Angels, and happy by being a Repository for such Spirits, who at
the day of Judgment shall go forth into Eternal Glory. In the interim Christ
has trod all the Paths before us, and this also we must pass through to arrive
at the Courts of Heaven. Justin Martyr said it was the Doctrine of Heretical
Persons, to say that the Souls of the Blessed instantly, upon the Separation
from their Bodies, enter into the highest Heaven. And Irenaeus makes Heaven and
the intermediate Receptacle of Souls to be distinct Places; both blessed, but
hugely differing in degrees. Tertullian is dogmatical in the Assertion, that
till the Voice of the great Archangel be heard, and as long as Christ sits at
the right hand of his Father, making Intercession for the Church, so long
blessed Souls must expect the Assembling of their Brethren, the great
Congregation of the Church, that they may all pass from their outward Courts
into the inward Tabernacle, the Holy of Holies, to the Throne of God. And as it
is certain that no Soul could enter into Glory before our Lord entered, by whom
we hope to have Access: So it is most agreeable to the proportion of the
Mysteries of our Redemption, that we believe the Entrance into Glory to have
been made by our Lord at his Glorious Ascension; and that his Soul went not
thither before then, to come back again, to be contracted into the Span of
Humanity, and dwell Forty days in his Body upon Earth. But that he should
return from Paradise, that is, from the common Receptacle of departed Spirits,
who died in the Love of God, to Earth again, had in it no lessening of his
Condition; since Himself in Mercy called back Lazarus from thence, and some
others also returned to live a Life of Grace, which in all Senses is less than
the least of Glories. Sufficient it is to us, that all Holy Souls departing go
into the hands, that is, into the Custody of our Lord; that they rest from
their Labors; that their Works shall follow them, and overtake them too, at
the day of Judgment; that they are Happy presently; that they are visited by
Angels; that God sends, as he pleases, excellent Irradiations and Types of
Glory to entertain them in their Mansions; that their Condition is secured: but
the Crown of Righteousness is laid up against the great Day of Judgment, and
then to be produced and given to St. Paul, and to all that love the Coming of
our Lord; that is, to all, who either here in Duty, or in their Receptacles,
with Joy and certain Hope long for the Revelation of that day. At the Day of
Judgment Christ will send the Angels, and they shall gather together the Elect
from the four Winds; and all the Refuse of Men, evil Persons, they shall throw
into Everlasting Burning. Then our Blessed Lord shall call to the Elect to
enter into the Kingdom, and reject the Cursed into the Portion of Devils; for
whom the Fire is but now prepared in the interval. For we must all appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, (says St. Paul) that every Man may receive
in his Body according as he has done, whether it be Good or Evil. Out of the
Body the Reward is not. And therefore St. Peter affirms, that God has
delivered the Evil Angels into Chains of Darkness, to be reserved unto
Judgment. And St. Jude says, that the Angels, which kept not their first
Estate, but left their first Habitation, he has reserved in everlasting
Chains, under Darkness, unto the Judgment of the Great Day. And therefore the
Devils expostulated with our Blessed Savior, Art Thou come to Torment us
before the Time? And the same also he does to Evil Men, Reserving the Unjust
unto the Day of Judgment to be punished. For since the Actions, which are to be
judged, are the Actions of the whole Man, so also must be the Judicature. And
our Blessed Savior intimated this to his Apostles; In my Father's House are
many Mansions: but I go to prepare a Place for you. And if I go away, I will
come again, and take you unto me; that where I am, there ye may be also. At
Christ's second Coming this is to be performed. Many outer Courts, many
different Places, or different States, there may be; and yet there is a Place,
whither holy Souls shall arrive at last, which was not then ready for us, and
was not to be entered into until the Entrance of our Lord had made the
Preparation: and that is, certainly, the Highest Heaven, called by St. Paul,
the third Heaven; because the other Receptacles were ready, and full of holy
Souls, Patriarchs and Prophets, and holy Men of God; concerning whom St. Paul
affirms expressly, that the Fathers received not the Promises: God having
provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made
Perfect. Therefore certain it is that their Condition was a State of
Imperfection, and yet they were placed in Paradise, in Abraham's Bosom: and
thither Christ went, and the blessed Thief attended Him. And then it was that
Christ made their Condition better. For though still it be a Place of Relation in
order to something beyond it, yet the Term and Object of their Hope is changed.
They sat in the Regions of Darkness, expecting that Great Promise made to Adam
and the Patriarchs, the Promise of the Messiah: but when He that was promised
came, He preached to the Spirits in Prison, He communicated to them the
Mysteries of the Gospel, the Secrets of the Kingdom, the things hiddea from
eternal Ages, and taught them to look up to the Glories purchased by his
Passion, and made the term of their Expectation be his second Coming, and the
Objects of their Hope, the Glories of the Beatifick Vision. And although the
State of Separation is sometimes in Scripture called Heaven, and sometimes
Hell; (for these Words in Scripture are of large Significations;) yet it is
never called the third Heaven, nor the Hell of the damned. For although
concerning it nothing is clearly revealed, or what is their Portion till the
Day of Judgment; yet it is intimated in a Parable, that between Good and Evil
Spirits, even in the State of Separation, there is a Distance of Place. Certain
it is there is a great Distance of Condition: and as the holy Souls in their
Regions of Light are full of Love, Joy, Hope, and Longing for the Coming of the
Great Day; so the Accursed do expect it with an insupportable Amazement, and
are presently tormented with Apprehensions of the Future. Happy are they that
through Paradise pass into the Kingdom, who from their highest Hope, pass to
the greatest Charity; from the State of a blessed Separation, to the Mercies
and gentle Sentence of the Day of Judgment, which St. Paul prayed to God to
grant Onesiphorus; and more explicitly for the Thessalonians, that their whole
Spirit, and Soul, and Body, be preserved blameless unto the Coming of our Lord
Jesus. And I pray God to grant the same to me, and all Faithful People
whatsoever. Life and Death of the Holy Jesus, Sect. 16.. 1.

2. Of Prayers for the Dead.
WE find in the History of the Maccabees, that the Jews did pray, and make
Offerings for the Dead: which also appears by other Testimonies, and by their
Forms of Prayer still extant, which they used in their Captivity. It is very
considerable, that since our blessed Savior did reprove all the evil Doctrines
and Traditions of the Scribes and Pharisees, and did argue concerning the Dead
and the Resurrection against the Sadducees, yet he spoke no word against this
public Practice, but left it as he found it: which He, who came to declare to
us all the Will of his Father, would not have done, if it had not been
Innocent, Pious, and full of Charity.

To which, by way of Consociation, if we add, That St. Paul did pray for
Onesiphorus, That God would give him Mercy at that Day; that is, according to
the Style of the New Testament, the Day of Judgment; the result will be, That
although it be probable that Onesiphorus was at that time dead; because in his
Salutations he salutes his Household, without naming him who was Major domo,
against his Custom of Salutations in other places: yet besides this, the Prayer
was for such a Blessing to him, whose Demonstration and Reception could not be
but after Death: which implies clearly that there is a Need of Mercy; and, by
consequence, the Dead People, even to the Day of Judgment, inclusively are the
Subject of a Misery, the Object of God's Mercy, and therefore fit to be
commemorated in the Duties of our Piety and Charity; and that we are to
recommend their Condition to God, not only to give them more Glory in the
Reunion, but to pity them to such purposes in which they need: Which, because
they are not revealed to us in particular, it hinders us not in recommending
the Persons in particular to God's Mercy, but should rather excite our Charity
and Devotion: For it being certain that they have a Need of Mercy, and it being
uncertain how great their Need is, it may concern the Prudence of Charity to be
more earnest, as not knowing the Greatness of their Necessity.

And if there should be any Uncertainty in these Arguments, yet its having been
the Universal Practice of the Church of God in all Places, and in all Ages,
till within these Hundred Years, it is a very great Inducement for any Member
of the Church to believe that in the first Traditions of Christianity, and the
Institutions Apostolical, there was nothing delivered a ainst this Practice,
but very much to insinuate or enjoin it; because the Practice of it was at the
first, and was Universal. And if any Man shall doubt of this, he shows nothing
but that he is ignorant of the Records of the Church, it being plain in
Tertullian and S. Cyprian, (who were the eldest Writers of the Latin Church)
that in their time it was, ab Antiquo, the Custom of the Church to pray for the
Souls of the Faithful departed in the dreadful Mysteries. And it was an
Institution Apostolical, (says one of them) and so transmitted to the following
Ages of the Church: And when once it began to be contested against by Aerius,
the Man was presently condemned for a Heretic, as appears in Epiphanius. Thus
far in the Person of a Romanist: to which he adds:

But I am not to consider the Arguments for the Doctrine it self, Note. This
was written in those times, when it was not safe too plainly to profess such an
Opinion.
although the Probability and fair Pretense of them may help to excuse such
Persons, who upon these or the like Grounds do heartily believe it. But I am to
consider that, whether it be true or false, there is no manner of Malice in it;
and, at the worst, it is out a wrong Error upon the Right side of Charity; and
concluded against by its Adversaries upon the Confidence of such Arguments,
which possibly are not so probable as the Grounds pretended for it.

And if the same Judgment might be made of any more of their Doctrines, I think
it were better Men were not so furious in the condemning such Questions, which
either they understood not upon the Grounds of their proper Arguments, or at
least consider not, as subjected in the Persons, and lessened by Circumstances,
by the Innocence of the Event, or other Prudential Considerations.

He had said before, No. 2. These Doctrines that have had long Continuance and
Possession in the Church, cannot easily be supposed, in the present Possessors,
to be a Design, since they have received it from so many Ages; and it is not
likely that all Ages should have the same Purposes; or that the same Doctrine
should serve the several Ends of diverse Ages. But however, long Prescription is
a Prejudice, oftentimes so insupportable, that it cannot with many Arguments be
retrenched, as relying upon these Grounds; That Truth is more ancient than
Falsehood. That God would not for so many Ages forsake his Church, and leave her
in an Error: That whatsoever is New, is not only suspicious, but false: which
are Suppositions pious and plausible enough. Liberty of Profesying,. 20.

The Judgment of Mr. Thorndike, in his Learned, Judicious, and Honest Book,
Entitled, Just Weights and Measures, c. 16. I Have showed out of the
Revelation, That the Souls of Martyrs, appearing before the Throne of God, in
the Court of the Tabernacle; (to wit, in the Jerusalem which is above) the
Throne appears to St. John indeed; but it is to be understood in the Holy of
Holies; and therefore is not seen in the Court of the Tabernacle. But those
144000 that were sealed, and preserved from the Destruction of Jerusalem,
appear not in the Court of the Tabernacle, but on Mount Sion, a Place of
inferior Holiness; and sing not the Martyrs Song, but are only able to learn
it, which no body else could do: Sufficient Arguments of Difference in the
State of Blessed Souls, though all beneath that which the Resurrection promises;
which all of them earnestly desire. Suppose the Place to be the third Heaven;
suppose that it is called Paradise, (because of necessity it answers the Figure
of the Earthly Paradise;) suppose that, in respect of the Saints that died
under the Law, it is called Abraham's Bosom; there may be inferior Mansions in
the mean time before the Resurrection for Souls of inferior Holiness, though they
depart in the State of Grace: For how often do the Apostles signify a solicitous
Expectation of the Day of Judgment, in those whom they suppose to die
Christians? a thing, which can by no means stand with the Estate of those that
are before the Throne of God, praising Him Day and Night in the Court of the
Tabernacle. And therefore S. Ambrose and S. Augustine had great Reason to follow
the Fourth Book of 2 Esd. 4.41, 42: 7.32.
Esdras, placing the generality of Souls departed in the State of Grace, in
certain secret Receptacles; signifying no more than the unknown Condition of
their Estate. For the Practice of the Church in interceeding for them at the
Celebration of the Eucharist, is so General, and so Ancient, that it cannot be
thought to have come in upon As Blondel and Dalle have no less impiously than
impudently asserted, without any Ground at all.
Imposture; but that the same Aspersion will seem to take hold of the Common
Christianity.

What hinders them to receive Comfort and Refreshment, Rest, and Peace, and
Light, by the Visitation of God, by the Consolation of his Spirit, by his good
Angels, to sustain them in the Expectation of their Trial, and the Anxieties
they are to pass through, during the time of it? And though there be Hope for
those that are most solicitous to live and die good Christians, that they are
in no such Suspense, but within the bounds of the Heavenly Jerusalem; yet
because their Condition is uncertain, and where there is Hope of the better,
there is Fear of the worse; therefore the Church has always assisted them with
the Prayers of the Living, etc. All Members of the Church Triumphant in Heaven,
according to the degree of their Favor with God, abound also with Love to his
Church Militant on Earth, etc. It is certain, both that they offer continual
Prayers to God for those Necessities (of the Church Militant on Earth) and that
their Prayers must needs be of great force and effect with God, for the
Assistance of the Church Militant in this Warfare. Which if it be true, the
Communion of Saints will necessarily require, that all who remain solicitous of
their Trial be assisted by the Prayers of the Living, for present Comfort, and
future F^est: (and) that the Living beg of God a Part and Interest in the
Benefit of those Prayers, which they who are so near to God in his Kingdom
tender Him without ceasing for the Church upon Earth, etc.

Again, Chap. 22. The Eloquence, whereby the Church hoped to prevail with God,
was the Devotion and Unity which it celebrateth the Sacrament with. But I must
by no means leave this place till I have paid the Debt, which I owe to the
Opinion, which I have premised and openly profess again and again, that we
weigh not by our own Weights, nor mete by our own Measures, (do not justly) if
believing one Catholic Church, and enjoying Episcopacy and the Church Lands
upon that account we recall not the Memorial of the Dead, as well as of the
Living, into this Service. There is the same Ground to believe the Communion of
Saints in the Prayers, which those that depart in the highest Favor with God
make for us; (and) in the Prayers which we make for those, that depart in the
lowest degree of Favor with God; that there is for the Common Christianity;
namely, the Scriptures interpreted by the perpetual Practice of God's Church.
Therefore there is ground enough, for the Faith of all Christians, that those
Prayers are accepted, which desire God to hear the Saints for us; to send the
Deceased in Christ Rest, and Peace, and Light, and Refreshment, and a good
Trial at the Day of Judgment, and Accomplishment of Happiness after the same.
And seeing the So he modestly calls the shameful Abuse put upon the Church and
Nation, in corrupting the True English Liturgy by Cranmer, etc.
abating of the first Form, under Edward 6. has wrought no Effect, but to give
them that desired it an Appetite to root up the whole; what Thanks can we
render to God, for escaping so great a danger, but by sticking firm to a RULE,
that will stick firm to us, and carry us through any dispute in Religion, and
land us in the Haven of a quiet Conscience; what Troubles soever we may pass
through, in maintaining, That the Reformation of the Church will never be
according to the Rule which it ought to follow, till it cleave to the Catholic
Church of Christ in this particular.

Sold by John Davies, at Mr. Thompson's in Dean's- Court overagainst the
Sessions House, in the Old-Bailey.


