RELIEF OF APPRENTICES Wronged by their MASTERS.

HOW By our Law it may effectually be given and obtained, without any special
New Act of Parliament for that purpose.

With Allowance.

LONDON: Printed by H. Clark, near St. Pauls-Wharf, in Thames Street, 1687.

TO THE Right Honorable George Lord Jeffries, Baron of Wem, Lord High
Chancellor of England, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
Sir Robert Wright, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, And the rest of the
Honorable Judges.
May it please your Lordships,
THE enclosed Paper is designed to detect the True, but Latent Causes and
Occasions of a great Abuse very common and notorious in this City of London,
and of very pernicious consequence throughout the whole Kingdom; to show the
Iniquity and Unreasonableness of certain false Principles and Opinions which
support it; and for a check to the Abuse and Encouragement to such as need
Relief to, show how by our Laws effectual Remedy may be given without any
special New Act of Parliament. For the Abuse is such, and so common and
notorious, that diverse Parliament Men have thought it worthy of a special Act
of Parliament to restrain it. But if effectual Remedy may be had without it, it
is presumed, that that will be more Honorable for our Laws, and therefore that
the tender of it to the consideration of your Lordships will be no ungrateful
Service. It is also hoped, that the Approbation of it by your Lordships
Authority, will not only give Life to the Remedy herein mentioned, but even of
it self, give great Check to such Abuses.

RELIEF OF APPRENTICES Wronged by their MASTERS. HOW By our Law it may
effectually be given and obtained, without any special new Act of Parliament
for that purpose.
IT is certain, and generally known to most men acquainted with the Occurrences
in this City of London, that of those Youths who are daily put Apprentices
here, a very great number do miscarry, and never come to exercise the Trades to
which they were put: And of those, though many miscarry through their own
fault, yet that very many do miscarry either through the Carelessness and
Negligence, or the Harshness and unreasonable Severity, or (which too often
happens) through the ill Designs and Practices of their Masters.

This is so common and notorious, that there is no part of the Nation which
has not many examples of such unhappy young men, who might have been very
useful in their Generation, but by these means are driven either into ill
Courses, or become altogether useless to the Public, and a burden to their
Relations.

And therefore, since the best and wisest even of Heathen States have been
usually very provident for the Education of their Youth, it might be thought a
very great defect in us if we should be destitute of sufficient Remedy, for so
notorious an Abuse, in a matter of so great moment.

But I Am of opinion, that, if the matter be well considered, neither are our
Legislators, nor our Laws already constituted, to be blamed in this respect.
Not our Legislators; For Abuses will, like evil Weeds, be always growing up
even in the best constituted States: And it will be some time ever they be
observed; And it will again, after they are observed, require some time to find
out and settle a proper Remedy for them. And for those Abuses whereof I speak,
they have not, certainly, been of any long time practiced, or however not so
notoriously and commonly, but have by degrees grown more frequent and
notorious, as the Rates which men have given with Apprentices, have been
raised; which are now (within these twenty years last past, or little more)
risen to that height, that may well prove a Temptation to men who are
continually employed in Business for Gain, and are not punctually and
resolutely Honest. And therefore, it is no wonder if now, more than heretofore,
in so great a City, there be many men noted to have had many Apprentices, but
never any that came to any thing in their Trade; and are reasonably enough
suspected to make a kind of Trade of it, to take great Sums of Money with
Apprentices, and in a year or two, or some short time, upon some pretense or
other, to turn them off with little, and take others again with great Sums in
their places: and that diverse ill arts and practices have been observed to have
been used by such persons to bring their Designs about, and worse to put some
color upon their dealings when they have been questioned for the same: For
Credit and Reputation is of so great importance to a Trader, that he who makes
light of the Ruin of a man, is not likely to make scruple of the use of any
means, though never so vile and wicked, to save that which is of so great
concern to him.

But these things, I am informed, have been some years since observed and taken
into consideration, in order to the providing of a Remedy, by diverse worthy
Members of Parliament, though nothing yet, by reason of various occurrences
intervening, has been offered to the House. But that which I am informed, was
thought by some the most effectual Remedy, was by a short Act of Parliament, to
make all Bonds void which should be given for the Fidelity of Apprentices.

This I confess, might seem an effectual means to make the Master more careful
of them. And it is an Argument, that those Gentlemen were very sensible of the
notoriousness of the Abuse, who could think so severe a Remedy necessary. But I
cannot approve it: For, 1. I think it not so effectual a means for the end
intended, as is presumed: For a Master who had a Design upon his Apprentice,
might notwithstanding leave him liberty enough to do those things, from which
he might take a pretense to turn him off and disappoint him of his Trade, and
yet be a sufficient Gainer out of the Money he had received. 2. it is a
restraint of a reasonable and necessary Security; and though it might be
reasonable, could it be applied only to ill Men; yet forasmuch as it would be
equally inconvenient and grievous to the most innocent and honest Masters, as
to the worst of all, I think it unreasonable. 3. It would be apt to put honest
and good Men upon almost the like Rigor and Severity, for their own Security,
which is supposed to be practiced by ill Men for their Advantage. 4. It seems
to me to be attended with no less Inconvenience to the Public, than that which
is designed to be remedied by it: For the Consequence would be, that, neither
would Masters know how to take Apprentices; nor would others be able to get
Places and Employments for their Children, without great difficulty and trouble.

And besides all this, I think it needless: For I am of opinion, (with
submission to better Judgments) that in this, as in diverse other Cases, our
Laws are not so defective, as some Men other wise of Wit and Parts enough, but
not sufficiently acquainted with them, do imagine; and that there is no great
need to increase the bulk of our Statues, (which is grown very large already)
by a new Law for this Purpose. For I take it that our Courts of Justice have
power and Authority already sufficient, (and we ought not to suspect them to be
unwilling to use it upon so just and necessary occasion) to give Remedy in this
case, if the Occasions and Encouragements to such Abuses be well considered.
And the principal Encouragements, I take to be from the great Discouragements
Men commonly meet with, in seeking Relief: And these again, if we trace them to
their Seat, will be found to proceed partly from certain false and mistaken
Principles or Opinions, which like many Customs, have insensibly crept in, and
are generally received among the Citizens; whereby Men, whose honesty and
sincerity otherwise I do not in the least question, are ordinarily imposed upon
and misled in their Judgments and Verdicts; and partly from the great
Disadvantage many Men are under for the prosecuting of any Suit in such case,
by reason of the distance of their Habitations from this City.

I. Of these mistaken Principles, one is, That the Master for an apparent Fault
in his Apprentice, especially if he be found to have wronged him in his Money
or Goods, though but to the value of twenty Shillings, or some such small sum,
may turn him away, and that there is no remedy. This I know to be a common
received Opinion, even with understanding and very honest and worthy Citizens,
and such as do neither, practice it themselves, nor approve it in others. Yet
they think if a Man will be so severe and merciless as to ruin a young man for
such a matter, he may do it without remedy.

It is certainly contrary to Natural Equity and Justice, not only to the Laws
of Christianity, but even of Humanity. For the consequence thereof to the
Young Man, is rarely less than his Ruin, at least the loss of his Trade; and
that such perhaps (as it often happens) for which he might have had those
Advantages, which he could not have for any other: But usually it is a
disappointment of all: For having served in one Trade till he be too old to be
put to another, and being turned away by his Master, it is rare that another of
the same Trade especially will take him, so that he becomes thereby
disappointed of all. Now should we look upon this under the Notion of
Punishment, it is very Unreasonable, for Punishments ought to bear some
proportion to the Fault, especially such as are not Public. But here is no
proportion between them. Besides the Circumstances of the Person ought, to be
considered: They are not men of Age and Experience in the World, but young raw
Youths, who are put Apprentices. There ought also to be considered the special
Obligations upon the Master, which aggravate the matter, of which more
presently. Or should we look upon it as necessary for the Masters Security;
that indeed might seem reasonable, had the master no Security. But when the
master has a special Security to Indemnifie him, that cannot be necessary, nor
excusable: And the very demand and acceptance by the master of that Security,
is an Evidence, that upon that Security, he ought to continue to train up his
Apprentice in his Trade. And to come to those special Obligations of the
Master. 1. In the very agreement there is a tacit Trust and Confidence of
kindness to and care of the Apprentice reposed in the Master by the Parent or
Relations; and undertaken by the Master in consideration of a good sum of
money, so that the Master does in many respects succeed in the Place and care
of the Parent or Relation who placed the Apprentice with him, whereby he is
under a special Obligation to them. 2. And with the Apprentice he enters into
express Covenants by Indenture, and those not Conditional, but Absolute, so
that a Breach by one Party, does not dissolve the Obligation of the other, not
in Natural Justice, no more than it does by our Positive Laws, as is well known
to such as understand them, that it does not, but only obliges to a
proportional Satisfaction. And though this does abundantly show the iniquity of
it, yet we may further add, that there is no Considerate man, but if he
percieve in the Master so great a Prejudice against the Apprentice whom he
placed with him, that he would otherwise Turn him away, or did but suspect he
would not show him that Kindness or Justice in respect of his Trade which he
ought to do, would of his own accord seek out for another Place for him, and
then upon any reasonable terms come to a fair conclusion with the ^aster to
take him away. Therefore when notwithstanding (...) this, the Master who has
good Security to Indemnifie him, ^^^ll proceed to that Severity, it is A strong
presumption of some ill design in him, either to get the money, or a good part
thereof, or to disappoint the Apprentice of his future Trade, lest it should
prove a detriment to his own. And for the most part in such Cases, other
circumstances in the manner of doing it occur, from which an observant man may
satisfy himself, though he may not have Proof enough of the circumstances to
satisfy a Jury.

And now, should we examine this by the excellent Laws of Christianity, which
does so highly confirm, improve and enforce all the Laws of natural Justice and
Equity; that plain law of Justice, Doing as we would be done to, that great Law
of Charity to all men, and that generous Law of Indulgence and remitting
Injuries, and Doing good even to Enemies; what can we really judge of such Men,
but that they who can so easily cast off the very Laws of natural Justice and
Humanity, cannot possibly retain any thing of Christianity in reality, but only
an external profession thereof in compliance and conformity to the Modes and
Customs of their Country?

II. Another of these mistaken Principles is, That upon an Action brought for
such a cause, greater Damages are not to be recovered than the Money paid with
the Apprentice. And this also I know to be a common received Opinion, and even
with very Honest and Worthy Citizens. I have known them who have been so far
from acting upon these Principles, that being wronged in considerable matters
by Apprentices, have not only been contented with a moderate Satisfaction for
the Wrong, but moreover have become Intercessors for them with their provoked,
angry and severe Parents, and in mere Commiseration for the Youths, who must
otherwise have been Undone, retained them in their Service; (Which Moderation
and Charity has been well requited by the Fidelity and Industry of the same
Apprentices afterward) yet were strongely possessed with these Opinions, not
as reasonable in themselves, but as what had so far prevailed in the City, that
they thought it in vain for any Man to expect better, or to attempt it. And of
all I have discoursed with, I have not yet met with one Citizen of another
Opinion. And that this also is as inconsistent with natural Justice and Equity,
as it is with our Laws, may appear by what has been said already: For as
Punishments ought to bear proportion to the Fault, so ought Reparations to the
Wrong. The Wrong done ^n this case is the disappointment of a man of his Trade
and ^^^^re Livelihood. And for the Reparation, it is to be considered, that
should the Master retain the money, that would so much the more increase the
Wrong, and therefore if he restore the money, he does thereby only forbear a
further Wrong, but makes no Reparation for that of which I spoke. Besides there
is no just proportion between the Money given with the Apprentice and the
Trade. And therefore did the Master instead of restoring what he had received,
give as much of his own, it might not be an equal Recompense for the Wrong,
which may be greater than five or ten times so much. The very disappointment of
his Trade might be such: But there might besides be some especial Circumstances
in it very considerable; on the part of the Apprentice, some especial
Advantages for that Trade, for that is a thing which men in choice of Trades
for Apprentices have often a respect to: On the Masters part an ill design to
disappoint him of it. For it has been a known Practice of ill Masters when
they have found that their Apprentices if they should set up, were likely to
carry away or intercept some part of that Trade, which they already had or
expected, to use diverse Stratagems and Policies to disappoint them thereof. And
the greater the Advantages the Apprentice might have for his Trade, the greater
the temptation to the Master to disappoint him of it. And though a young Lad
through inconsideration and imprudence by a small Fault, might give his Master
an advantage against him, yet it might be but what the Master did ly at Catch
for to compass what he designed. And in such cases, besides the private Wrong
to the Apprentice, ought also to be taken into Consideration, the public
mischief of Encouragement to such Abuses, by ill Example and Impunity.

III. And yet there is Another of these false Principles, which goes further,
and yet is generally received; which I should think very Strange and
Incredible, did I not find it so, and consider the great power and prevalance
of Opinions taken up and embraced without due Examination, and how common it is
for men to do so. For they think it very reasonable out of the money received,
and to be restored, to make an Allowance for Lodging and Diet. But how
unreasonable this is, to repeat nothing of what has been said before, may
appear upon these further Considerations: First, the Master has the use and
benefit of the money all the while, which in many Trades, where the maintenance
is usually the best, is very considerable, 80 or 100 l. and in some 200, 300,
400 and 500 l. (for to such Rates are some now come.) And though money may be
had for Six per cent and under, upon good Security, yet Tradesmen could not do
as they do, if they did not make at least 20 per cent in the way of Trade, or
by frequent returns in the Year; and to take it up at Interest, is not for
their Credit, which is a tender thing and of great Concernment to a Trader.
Again the Employment of the Apprentice for the first Years is usually but of
little Advantage to himself; and if it were more, is all lost by his
disappointment of his Trade; but from first to last of considerable use and
benefit, and every day more and more to the Master. There are few Understanding
Tradesmen but know how to employ one fit to be put Apprentice in such things
as would cost them more than the Maintenance of their Apprentice to hire
another to do. An ordinary Servant has usually his Maintenance and good Wages
besides, for less Business and Pains, than the Apprentice, (and he perhaps a
Gentleman's Son, and with whom the Master has a good sum of money) is employed
in. The very going to carry out and bring home Wares and Commodities, to
receive money and dispatch other business, the heaving and lifting of Goods and
diverse other things, are such as of necessity must be done, and could not
otherwise be done at so cheap a rate. And if it be well looked into, I believe
there will appear more reason for some remedy to correct the abuses of ill
Masters in the misemployment of their Apprentices in things not answering the
end of their being put Apprentice, than for any allowance for their Maintenance.

But it is farther, to be considered in this case, that the Masters ordinarily
contract two several Obligations: One with the Parent, Relation, or Friend of
the Apprentice, in-consideration of the Money by him given; the other, with the
Apprentice himself by Indenture; and both these absolute, after the Money paid,
and the Indentures executed; and in this case both are to be satisfied. And
certainly, if that to the Apprentice, who committed the first fault, then much
more that to the Friend, who is without fault. And if that must be
proportonable to the Obligation, as it ought to be, for Justice and Equity are
words taken from the mutual proportions of Material things, and applied to
Moral Actions, then can it not be less than the whole Money, and the Interest,
and the Expense the Party is put to for the recovery thereof. Besides, the
Public is to be considered in the case; For it is of great importance to the
Publickweal, that Justice be duly administered; but to allow the Master any part
of this Money, would be to let him take advantage of his own wrong; for his
advantage by the disappointment of his Apprentice, might be much more than all
the Money: And besides, it would be in effect to give Impunity, and thereby
great Encouragement to an Abuse, and to establish Iniquity by a Law.

IV. And as unreasonable as this is, yet some have the conscience to pretend
and allege The future benefit they might have by their Apprentices, as a
reasonable consideration why they should not make any return of the Money. And
it seems this is not only the opinion of Tradesmen, but also of some Attorneys
or Solicitors, and even of Council too about the City. I have seen an Answer in
Chancery upon Oath and with Counsels hands to it (as is usual) by a Citizen,
who received near 100 l. with an Apprentice and very obstinately put him away,
wherein is alleged to this purpose, That the Apprentice was capable of doing
him good Service, and he would not have taken 200 l. for his Time and future
Service. I have also known a Citizen who received no less than 400 l. with an
Apprentice, who as the Citizen himself confessed to me, did his Business
exceeding well, but by ill Company, (and some of the Citizens own Family) was
inveagled to run out a good part of a fair Portion, and after all Accounts
cleared, this Man had the Conscience upon such pretenses as these, to retain no
less than 200 l. of that money. Which the Young-mans Friends chose rather to
yield to, and accept of what they could get, than to hazard the Expense of much
of the rest in a troublesome Suit under such discouragements as these I have
mentioned. And upon this occasion I cannot but take notice of Another
unreasonable Practice, which the same Person to excuse himself, pretended to be
no more than Usual. He charges his Apprentice with the keeping of his Cash, and
yet orders him to leave his Keys when he goes abroad upon his business; and yet
again requires him to make a strict account, and to make up of his own, what is
wanting. How such Men can satisfy their Consciences in such things, I cannot
understand. But this by the by.

The same Opinion I have heard maintained by others, who had not any particular
concern in any such case, but only general, as Citizens and Tradesmen. So
strangely are many Men in this vicious and corrupt Age, blinded with prejudice,
in what is, or may be, their own concern, that one would think they had not
only extinguished all sense of Religion, but moreover put off, not only the
Moral, but even Rational part, as to these things, of Humanity also. Were it
not so, could such Men have such hard and inhumane hearts, as not to be
affected with the Ruin of a Man in their own Family, or to have no Charity or
Pity for the misfortune of one committed to their care, or to have no
Compassion for the trouble and affliction it must be to the Relations and
Friends, who had dealt with them, and that upon great trust and confidence; yet
it might be expected, that, if not out of a natural Generosity, at least out of
regard to their own Credit and Reputation, they should restore the whole Money
without trouble.

But instead of that, we often find the quite contrary in such Men, who being
better able to tell their story than the poor young Lad, make it their first
business to raise as great prejudice against him in his Parents and Friends as
may be, and having gotten the advantage of an apparent fault, think they must
needs be believed in whatever other fine probable stories they can contrive;
and with passionate or easy Men they often do their business by this means,
without more of do. Or if that will not so easily pass, they will be so very
fair, as to offer a Referrence to two Citizens, whereof one, who must be of
their own choosing, to be sure shall be such as will do nothing but according
to his private Instructions, or however according to the false Principles
before mentioned, and can with more confidence urge those things in another's
behalf, than perhaps he could in his own; and the other (if a Man who lives in
the Country, and has little to do with Traders, as it often happens, can,
among his small aquaintance, meet with one to act for him,) if he be not
strongly prepossessed with these false principles, yet his own experience can
satisfy both himself and his Friend, that it is much better to yield to
unreasonable terms, than make use of a Remedy worse than the Disease. So besure
the Master comes off with good advantage that way, and with Credit too, as he
thinks, for being so fair as to refer what he had already in his hands. But if
he chance to meet with one, who easily sees through these little tricks and
policies, and will not so be put off, then as the temptation becomes double
upon him, (for now his Reputation also is like to be concerned,) so nothing
will be stuck at, which may serve either to represent the Apprentice as ill as
may be, or to cause delay, and make the Proceedings tedious and tiresome to one
whose abode and business lies perhaps far remote from the City, or in the end
to baffle the Cause.

The other Encouragement which is taken for these Abuses, is from the great
Disadvantage Men who live remote from the City are under in the prosecution of
their Remedy; for their Expense in coming hither, and lying here for that
purpose, and their Loss by neglect of their business at home, and the Charges
of the Suit, besides their vexation and trouble, is usually as much or more
than they recover. Whereas a Citizen is at home all the while, is but little
hindered in his business, and at no Expense more than for the bare proceedings
at the Law, unless it be such as he will not be willing to own. And this ought
also to be taken into consideration in the giving Relief, that such Abuses may
have as little encouragement upon this occasion as may be.

Now the REMEDY which I conceive is already in the power of our Courts of
Justice to give, is, that an Action being brought by the Apprentice upon his
Indenture, and laid not in London, but in Middlesex, or some other convenient
County, if it come to Trial, that upon motion, a special Jury (if in Middlesex)
be granted, of such as are not Traders, or take no Apprentices; or if it come
to an Enquiry of damages, that that be done by such a Jury, and before a Judge,
in their Sittings upon Middlesex causes, or in the Circuit.

And this is a Remedy which has these Qualifications to recommend it. 1. It is
I conceive, already in the power of our Judges to grant it. 2. It is for the
Honor of our Laws, and a considerable Instance that they are not so defective
for the Administration of Justice as many Men imagine. 3. It is a just and
reasonable Remedy, restraining the Abuses of all men, without putting any
inconvenience upon good and honest Men. 4. It is very necessary, for the Abuses
of this kind, are grown very common and notorious. 5. It is very likely to be
Effectual, it is accommodate to take away the very occasion and encouragements
of them. 6. And yet is no more than necessary: For what Justice can be expected
from Men generally under such Prejudices, as these? And though the Jury be
properly Judges of the matter of Fact, yet for the Undersheriff, who returns
the Jury, and returns whom he pleases to exercise the part of a Judge in
summing up the Evidence and directing the same Jury which he himself has
returned, is more than the Judges themselves do, a thing subject to much
Corruption and Abuse, and does well deserve to be taken into consideration for
a Remedy. Besides, there does many times arise matter of Law upon the Evidence,
which could not be foreseen. And the great difference of the Counsel which may
be retained on the one side and on the other, whereby many times a good Cause
may be run down, does often require a more considerable Judge than an
Undersheriff, to direct the Jury, and prevent their being misled.

It remains now only to give a brief Relation of what has been done, in order
to the putting of this Remedy in practice, and with what Success. And this I
had done, and therewith given some further proof of some of the mattes before
mentioned: But upon further consideration, thought fit to leave it out at
present, and defer it to another time, intending to do it then more largely if
there be occasion, and if the success of this does not make that labor
needless.

Postscript to the Citizens.
SHould any one upon perusal of this Paper, suppose the Author no Friend to the
City, he would be so far^ mistaken, that from the same matter from whence he
supposes that, the contrary may be demonstrated, and that by several Reasons.
1. The wickedness of such an Abuse, considered with such Circumstances as
usually accompany it, is plainly of the most heinous degree next to Murder,
far more heinous than Picking of Pockets, Theft, or Robbery: For though it does
not destroy the Person immediately, it does often totally ruin his well-being,
and the Families that might have proceeded from him, and not seldom occasions
the ruin of his Person. And as such Crimes do usually provoke the Judgments of
God upon such particular Persons as are guilty of them; so when they become
public Sins, which may be by commonness, Connivance and Impunity, they involve
the whole Community in the Guilt, and provoke common Calamities. And it is no
small Kindness to endeavor to remove and avert such Mischiefs. 2. The Remedy
proposed is so moderate, reasonable, and favorable, that it has been thought
(...) some very considerable Persons more mild than such (...) do need and
deserve. And the very endeavor to (...) an one, is no small Kindness, in
regard ^^at, if it be not neglected, it may prevent others more severe. It is
therefore to be wished that it may be taken into due consideration, and that
all good Citizens in their several places use all endeavors to correct and
extirpate these Abuses, and thereby avert the Judgments of God, or however
extricate themselves out of the common Guilt, and make a more severe Remedy
needless.


