ASCETICKS: OR, The Heroic Piety and Virtue OF THE Ancient Christian ANCHORETS
AND COENOBITES PART I. Exemplary Asceticks.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1696.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
IT has been a usual, subtle and wicked Policy of the Devil and Evil Men,
first to render Names Odious; and then by affixing them to Persons and Things,
thereby to render them so too, with the vulgar; whom, by that means, they
impose upon, and make their Tools. By such means have not only the Christians
of Old, but also some of the chief Principles of Christianity been much injured
and abused: And few Parties there are, who have not one time or other smarted
by it. That the well-meaning Reader therefore may not be so abused and imposed
upon in his Judgment of the things here put together for the Benefit of all,
who can receive them, by the Odious Names of Monkery and Popery, it is to be
observed, that though POPERY, taken properly for the Abuses and Corruptions of
the Bishops and Church of Rome, may deserve all the Odium cast upon it, yet may
most vile and wicked Abuses be committed by Pretense and Imputation of that
Odious Name: And in some things it is hard to say, Whether the People have been
more abused by Popery it self, or by the Odium and Imputation of the Name? And
not only the People, but the Gospel it self: I may add, and the Reformation
too. For, while Christian Truths have been misrepresented, and exposed to
Contempt and Odium under the Name of Popery, the Cause on the side of Popery is
supported, strengthened, and made so much the more defensible by the
intermixture of so much Truth; and the Cause on the side of the Reformation so
much the more weakened and disparaged by the intermixture of so much
indefensible Error. Whereas, if they were only things inexcusable in them which
were questioned, as Charity does require, they must have sunk in the Cause long
before this; but an indiscreet Affectation of Reformation and uncharitable
seeking Occasions, have made a Reformation now as needful on the one side, as
the other. Instances of this might be showed in diverse particulars; but I need
not step out of my way for that, the other Name mentioned may serve for that
purpose here.

MONKERY is not only rendered Odious, as of it self, but also as a part of
Popery. And, indeed, if we imagine all that is believed or practiced by the
Church of Rome to be Popery, it may be so: but then we shall leave little of
true Christianity for the Reformation: But if what is true Christianity be not
Popery, than neither is Monkery, as some are pleased to call the Monastic
Life; And that it is not only true Christianity, but the Practice of it in the
greatest Perfection that Mortals are capable of, I am apt to think will be very
plain to any who will consider what here follows with an unprejudiced and
competent Judgment. And therefore I shall not need to say more here, but only
desire the Reader to suspend his Judgment till he has perused and considered
it well.

THE Beginning and Progress OF Contemplative Living, AND Religious Societies.
THAT there are in the very Nature of Man some Principles of Inclination to
Religion, which, if not corrupted by Evil Education, or other unhappy
Occurrences, do insensibly grow and increase in Strength and Vigor, and in due
time exert themselves in Action; though for some time they lie dormant as it
were, and do not appear; even as some others, which in all Animals are
manifestly most Natural, and yet appear not till after some growth toward
Maturity; has been observed, believed, and asserted, by Men of greatest
Reputation for Learning and Wisdom, both in Ancient times, and to this Day.

These Principles have among Mankind been, in many much corrupted and stifled
by Evil Education, or Conversation with Evil Persons, and by the Impressions,
Energy, and Instigations of Evil Spirits; but in others again much cherished
and improved, not only by Good Education and Conversation, and by Consideration
of the Works of Nature; but moreover, and especially, by the kind Influences of
the Divine Majesty, and of his Good Ministering Spirits.

From hence, in all Ages, and in all Parts of the World, have been produced and
raised up Philosophers, and Wise, and Holy Men and Women, who have been as
Lights and Examples to the rest, of several sorts, according to their different
Ways of Living; some living a Life of Civil Conversation with others, but
strictly conscientious, walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the
Lord, blameless, as is said of Zacharias and Elizabeth, Luke 6. or, to speak
more comprehensively, living in all Good Conscience before God, as St. Paul
says of himself, Act. 23.1. or according to the Character of Job, Perfect, and
Upright, fearing God, and eschewing Evil, Job 1.1. Others living a more
abstracted Life of Retirement and Contemplation; abstracted not only from
Business in the World, but also from ordinary Conversation with Men, that they
might without Distraction converse with God, and his blessed Ministering
Spirits: and others again living a kind of mixed or middle Life between these
two, avoiding unnecessary Business and Incumberances, and exercising
Recollections and Abstraction, as much as their Occasions would permit, and
even in, and amidst their Business.

Of those Three Ways of Living, that more strict and Contemplative Life is
believed, by diverse Learned Men, to have been begun by ENOS, or in his time;
and not without reason: For, as the Principles beforementioned were apt to
produce such an Effect, so there seems to be something singular noted
concerning Religion, or some Religious Institution or Practice in that Sacred
Record, Genesis 4. ult.

But of the more ancient Times, not only before the Flood, but also for some
Ages after the Flood, we know but very little: But in the Times of which, we
have some more Knowledge, besides PRIESTS, and professed PHILOSOPHERS, there
have always been both single Persons, and complete or formed Societies of
People, who, discerning the Vanity and Emptiness of Earthly things, and
Solidity and Perminence of Heavenly things, withdrew themselves from those of
the Earth, as much as their Mortal State could bear, and applied themselves
entirely to the Contemplation and Prosecution of those of a more excellent
Nature, living an Abstracted and Angelick Life in Mortal Flesh, in Holy
Conversation, and Favor with God and his blessed Ministering Spirits. And some
did actually and expressly consecrate themselves by Vow unto the special
Service of God.

Of which Sort were those among the Jews, called NAZARITES, because they did so
separate themselves from among Men, to attend upon God. The Sacred History,
Numb. 6. is a Record, not of the Original, but of the Divine Approbation of
Nazarites, which, though that be very ancient, yet were much more ancient, and
more ancient than any Man can tell: And God's Ordering of the Rites and
Circumstances of their Consecration and Observations for that People, is a
manifest Indication of his Divine Approbation of the thing it self, which had
been in use long before.

All do agree that they were of Two sorts; some, only for certain time; others,
perpetual for their whole Life; and those may again be distinguished into Three
sorts, viz. Such as were called or appointed by God, as Samson, a Nazarite unto
God from the Womb, Judge. 13.5, 7: 16.17. and as St. John the Baptist,
consecrated effectually, and filled with the Holy Spirit even from his Mother's
Womb, Luke 1.15. Such as were dedicated by their Parents, as Samuel by his
Mother, 1 Samuel 1.10, 28. And such as did freely offer themselves: And this
Free Will Offering of themselves, though but for a certain time, God did accept
no less than the Free Will Offerings of their Goods, or any thing they had, v.
Lev. 22.18, 21, 23: 27.2. and therefore ordered the Rites and Circumstances of
their Consecration and Observations, as was said before. And, on the contrary,
the Calamities of Nazarites is reckoned as a part of the Punishment of the
People, by Jeremiah the Prophet, Lam. 4.7. But it is reckoned by God among his
Divine Favors to that People, that he raised up Nazarites amongst them; and
reckoned with his bringing them up from the Land of Egypt, and raising them
Prophets amongst them. Amos 2.10, 11. I raised up of your Sons for Prophets,
and of your Young Men for Nazarites. Though they might freely offer themselves,
yet it was God that did secretly inspire and incline their Wills. And therefore
these were Holy, as Origin has well observed, Hom. 11. in Levit. If any one
devotes himself to God, if any one intangles himself in no secular Business,
that he may please Him, to whom he has approved himself; if any one is
separate from the rest of Men, who live Worldly Lives, and are obliged in
secular Business, not seeking the things which are upon Earth, but which are in
Heaven, he is deservedly called HOLY, or SAINT. And after much to this purpose,
he concludes in these Words: From all which it is clear, how every one of us,
who will be Holy, ought to be consecrated to God, and thenceforth be employed
in no Business or Acts which relate not to God.

So likewise the Colleges or Schools of the PROPHETS, though we meet with no
express mention of them till in 1 Samuel 10.5. yet certain it is, that they were
much more ancient, who, under the Name of Prophets, lived very abstracted
Lives. The very change of the Denomination, mentioned in the chap. next
foregoing, 1 Samuel 9.9. is an Evidence of that, viz. That he, who was then
called a Prophet, was afore-time called a SEER; and therefore when one went to
inquire of the Lord, they said, Come, and let us go to the Seer. And if to
inquire of the Lord, was to go to the Seer, than that leads us back to the time
of Rebecca, Genesis 25.22. for Seers; and how much farther back no Man knows: for
that certainly was no new thing then. Nor does it appear that the Schools of
the Prophets were first instituted by Samuel: But that they lived such
abstracted Contemplative Lives, is undeniable, both from the Nature of their
Profession, and from the Particulars of the Matter of Fact of their
Conversation mentioned in the Holy Scriptures.

Nor were there Men only, but WOMEN also, who did very anciently, leaving the
World, apply themselves to Matters of Devotion, though perhaps not with so
solemn Consecration; such as Anna, a Prophetess, who having lived seven years a
Wife, lived afterward a Widow till eighty four years of Age, and departed not
from the Temple, but served God with Fastings and Prayers Night and Day. For of
this sort of Religious Women were there many among the Israelites, as anciently
as the Tabernacle in the Wilderness, as we are informed by the Jews, and the
most learned Critics of this Age; as Munster, Fagius, Vatablus, and others,
upon Exodus 38.8. And this, it is very probable, was a great Aggravation of the
Sins of the Sons of Eli, 1 Samuel 2.22. that the Women, whom they abused, were
such as these, who assembled at the Door of the Tabarnacle, as learned Critics
inform us. And putting all these Notices together, it seems that such Religious
Devout Women there were among the Jews, at least from the time of their first
abode in the Wilderness, while they had the Temple standing amongst them.

And if so, Why not long before, even while in Egypt? Had they not received
Religious Instructions from their Ancestors? or, Did they retain none of them?
or, Did they see nothing of Religion practiced among the Egyptians? and, Had
they not the same Natural Propensation to Religion, which is common to all Men?
We see how ready and expert all the Women were at the Red Sea, Exodus 15.1, 20.
with Miriam, a Prophetess, to answer Moses and the Men; and, Can we imagine that
all Religion had been extinguished, or lain dormant in their Abode in Egypt? No
certainly; their hard Servitude, though it might hinder their more Solemn
Worship, yet it could not hinder, but did rather excite and provoke to more
retired and secret Devotion. And indeed, that Servitude with Rigor and hard
Bondage, was not till a little before their Deliverance; and even then do we
find that generous Magnanimity, even among the Hebrew Women, the Midwives, as
to obey God rather than Man, Exodus 1.17.

The Companies of the PROPHETS, mentioned 1 Samuel 10.10. and 19.20. such as
elsewhere are called the Sons of the Prophets, 1 King. 18.4: 20.35. 2 King.
2.3, 5, 7, 15: 4.38: 6.1, 2: 9.1. were a sort of Religious Persons, who lived
Abstracted Contemplative Lives; many of them plainly Coenobitical Lives, and
some Anachoretical or Hermete Lives, as St. Antony, and others among the
Christians did, as Elias, 1 King. 17.1. and Elisha, 1 King. 19.6. So that St.
Hierom said very truly, Every Order or Institution of Life has its Principals
or Leaders; and then after diverse Instances in others, he adds; Our Leaders are
such as Paul, as Antony, as Julian, as Hilarian, as the Macerius 's: And to
return to the Authority of the Scriptures, our Prince or Leader was Elias, was
Elisha; our Leaders were the Sons of the Prophets, who dwelt in Fields, and
Deserts, or Solitary Places, and made themselves Tabernacles or Cells by the
River of Jordan: Of this Company were also the Sons of Racab, etc. Ep. 13. ad
Paulin. p. 34. and elsewhere, The Sons of the Prophets, whom we read to have
been Monks in the Old Testament, did build themselves Cottages or Cells near
the River of Jordan, and leaving the Crowds of the Cities, lived on
Barley-Cakes and Field-Herbs, Ep. 4. ad Rusticum. pa. 11. And if some of them
lived in Cities, that does no more invalidate what St. Hierom says, than
Monasteries being brought into Cities by St. Basil, is an Argument against
their being Monks, who have dwelt in such ever since. Such Cavils do only prove
the Partiality and Disingenuity of the Authors, and signify no more to any
Person of Judgment and Candor; since they cannot deny, but are forced to
confess, That the Prophets, Samuel, Elias, and Elisha, did institute Colleges,
in which many Disciples did live together. So then they lived a Coenobitick
Life: and, What was their Food and Raiment? Was it costly and delicious, or
poor and mean? and, What was their Employment? Can we imagine it to have been
other, than Studying the Scriptures, after Moses his time, and the large Book
of Nature, the Works of God, of Creation, of Providence, Prayers, Psalms, and
Divine Contemplation, and Works and Labors about what was necessary for them,
and no more? And if we consider the admirable Graces of the Ancient Christian
Monks, it will be an hard matter for an honest Man to find any difference
between the Christian Monks and the Jewish Prophets, more than in Name. And for
the Antiquity of these, Is it any Argument that there were none before, if we
do not read of any before? How and by whom did they inquire of the Lord? Was
Israel only without Prophets? Was Balaam the first in his Nation, or any other?
or, Were there Prophets, who did not ordinarily live Prophetic Lives? or, if
they did, What was the Difference? But such Profane Spirits as have too long
contemned and insulted upon the most Heroic Professors of Christianity, and
abused the People with their Sophistry, must answer for their Presumption,
Rashness, Temporizing, and encouraging of Sacrilege before God, though the
Degeneracy of the Modern Monks had provoked his Judgments upon them; and among
Men their Names will be little regarded hereafter. But all are not alike, and
therefore I will here add a Note of Peter Martyr's, concerning this Matter,
upon 2 King. We will moreover observe, (says he) that the Disciples of the
Prophets did live together with their Preceptors; For so they say; The Place
where we dwell with thee, is too strait for us. It seems to have been a kind of
Monastic Life, but free without Vows or Superstitions. (But Vows we find
approved by God in the Nazarites, and practiced by St. Paul, and others; and
that they were not in use among these, is more than any one can prove: but he
goes on:) They exercised themselves in Divine Scriptures and Hymns; and also in
Holy Prayers: They were often sent to edify the People, and to confirm Holy
Men, who lived amongst Idolaters in sound and true Religion. They seem moreover
to have exercised some Arts, working with their Hands to get a Maintenance for
themselves, etc. And so much for this.

At the same time with Elisha lived Jonadab the Son of Rechab, 2 King. 10.15.
who instituted another Order of Religious Persons, called after his Father's
Name, RECHABITES. These were not of any of the Tribes of Israel; but Kenites
descended of Jethro, Moses his Father-in-Law. v. 1 Chronicles. 2.55. Jud. 1.16. who
was Priest of Midian, Exodus 2.16: 3.1: 18.1. and one who worshipped the true
God: for he blessed God, when he heard the Relation of what he had done for the
Israelites, Exodus 18.10. and in the usual Form in such Cases, just as
Melchizedeck did long before, upon the Victory of Abraham, Genesis 14.20. but they
are reckoned among them of the Tribe of Juda, 1 Chronicles. 2.55. because they came
up with them out of the Wilderness, Jud. 1.16. and for that reason, and because
they dwelt in Tents, are thought to be called the Tents of Juda, Zech. 12.7.
But they are called, the Families of the Scribes, 1 Chronicles. 2.55. And therefore
both from their Descent, and from their Quality of Scribes, and from their
Institution, and from the very Form of God's Promise to them, we may reasonably
conclude them to have been a Religious Order. And indeed, that alone is
sufficient to demonstrate it was some special Service to God, they were
employed in: for it is expressed in the same terms, which are used concerning
the Tribe of Levi, when the Lord separated them to his special Service, viz. to
stand before the Lord, Deuteronomy. 10.8. v. 2 Chronicles. 29.11. Ezekiel. 44.11, 15. And
though we have little more Account of them, than only in Jer. 35. yet there
have we a plain Account of these Three great things concerning them. 1. The
Institution of their Progenitor. 2. Their Religious Observance for Three
Hundred Years past. And, 3. the Approbation of both by Almighty God. The
Institution may be thought very severe; and the more, because without any
special manifest Reason: and, by consequence, their so punctual Observance
rather Superstitious than Reasonable; and yet both are greatly approved by God:
Whence it is very plain, that such Institutions, and the strict Observance of
them, are lawful, and well-pleasing to God; and therefore that it is great
Presumption and Inconsiderateness to censure them as Superstition. But the
Evidence of Truth has extorted this Confession from an Adversary, and as
Sinister an Interpreter of these things, as he could well tell how to be; viz.
That their Father gave them these Precepts for this very purpose, that thereby
he might set them free from the Cares and the Pleasures of the World, that so
they might, with the more leisure, employ themselves in the Study of the
Scriptures, and of Divine Matters: Which was the very Business of the Christian
Monks. And if they continued in Being at the Destruction of Jerusalem, as is
believed; (as well it may, if we believe the Promise of God to them;) and that
Simeon, who succeeded James, Bishop there, was one of them; there is no doubt
but many of them received the Christian Faith, and retained the Institutions of
their Progenitor, there being nothing inconsistent between them. Some of the
Jews understand that of Zechar. 12.7. The Lord shall save the Tents of Juda
first; of this People, because they lived in Tents, came up with that Tribe out
of the Wilderness, and are reckoned among them, 1 Chronicles. 2.55. and that the
Lord shall save them first, because to them the Messiah shall first be
discovered. And whether the Therapeuts, of whom Philo writes, and the first
Converts by St. Mark about Alexandria, might not be of those People, may be
considered.

It is true, we have no mention of them in the Gospel; nor have we of the
ESSEANS, who yet are known to have been a Religious Sect among the Jews, of
great Antiquity, though not once mentioned in all the Scriptures; a People, who
lived a Religious Abstracted Life: But of them I shall say no more in this
place, because I intend the full Relations both of Josephus, and of Philo,
concerning them hereafter.

Nor shall I here say any thing of the THERAPEUTS, another Religious Society of
the Jews, as Philo says, not only for that reason, because I intend Philo's
Relation of them hereafter; but because I conceive this no proper place for it:
For I am well satisfied that they were some of those who were first converted
to Christianity, probably of the Jews, and possibly of the Esseans,
notwithstanding all the Cavils which some disingenious and prejudiced Persons
have, in these last Ages, strained their Wits to raise against it; though they
might retain some Sentiments and Practices peculiar to themselves for some
time; as did they at Jerusalem, as may be understood from Act. 15.1, 5. Gal.
2.4, 12. etc. For, it is certain, they were never heard of before that time,
nor any such since, but Christians, who, from that time, inhabited the same
places; and from thence, after the Persecution ceased, were the Ascetick
Communities propagated to Palestin, and those parts first, and afterward into
Europe.

The Precursor to our Savior, St. JOHN BAPTIST, according to the Prediction of
the Angel, Luke 1.15. was filled with the Holy Ghost even from his Mother's
Womb, and drank neither Wine nor strong Drink; had his Raiment of Camels Hair,
and a Leathern Girdle about his Loins; and his Meat was Locusts and wild Honey,
Mat. 3.4. and was in the Desert till the day of his Showing unto Israel, Luke
1.80. but in the Fifteenth Year of the Reign of Tiberius Caesar, Annas and
Cajaphas being the High Priests, the Word of God came unto him in the
Wilderness, Luke 3.1, 2. and being sent of God, Joh. 1.6. he preached and
baptized in the Wilderness, Mat. 3.1. Mar. 1.3. and the People from Jerusalem
and all Judea went out to him, and were baptized of him, Mat. 3.5, 6. This was
a Life not only of Retirement and Abstraction from the World, such as was also
that of the Coenobites, who lived in Religious Communities, but plainly an
Eremetick, or Hermetick Life. And this being by one filled with the Holy Ghost
from his Mother's Womb, and therefore by one raised up by Him, who had raised
up the Nazarites before; with good cause do the ancient Christian Writers
repute Him a Prince of the Monks and Hermites raised up among the Christians;
and so good cause, that they who oppose it, may seem to oppose not only the
Sentiments and Opinions of Men, but, out of Prejudice and misguided Zeal, the
very Acts of God, very disingeniously and inconsiderately to serve a Party.

And for our SAVIOVR Himself, though we have no particular Account of his Life
till about the Thirtieth Year of his Age, yet we cannot question but he did
practice Himself what he did recommend to others; and that it was a Life of the
highest Perfection: The only particular of his Life before, that is left upon
Record, is, That when he was Twelve Years Old, he tarried behind at Jerusalem
at the Feast of the Passover, and Joseph and his Mother knew not of it; and
after Three Days was found in the Temple sitting in the midst of the Doctors,
both hearing them, and asking them Questions; and that all who heard him were
astonished at his Understanding and Answers: and when his Mother asked him, why
he had thus dealt with them; and told him, that they had sought him sorrowing;
he replied, How is it that ye sought me? Wist ye not that I must be about my
Father's Business? and that he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and
was subject to them. At his Baptism we see how careful he was to fulfill all
Righteousness. Afterward he declared to the Jews, That he sought not his own
Will, but the Will of the Father, who sent him; and to his Disciples, That it
was his Food to do the Will of him who sent him, and to finish his Work, ( Joh.
5.30: 4.34.) That he lived a Life of Poverty from his Birth, is very plain in
the Evangelical History; and that by his own choice, certainly no ingenuous
Person will deny; and therefore of voluntary Poverty. And that he lived also a
Life of Chastity, is not to be questioned. Much less that it was a Life of
Abstraction, Recollection, and continual Adherence to, and Communion with the
Father. And all this being put together, and well considered, what was it other
than a most perfect Ascetick Life; the Great Exemplar so generously and
heroickly Exemplified by those many and numerous Choires of Holy Christian
Nazarites, of whom the World, especially this Lazy, Tepid, Unprofitable,
Sensual Generation, which despises the Memory, and reproacheth the Common Name
heretofore with them, and others venerable, is not worthy.

And this Life which he lived Himself, he did recommend to others, as by his
own Illustrious Example, so also by his Doctrine: though he enjoined it to none,
especially in that high degree. For Chastity and Celebacie, he does not barely
approve it, but speaks of it as a special Gift of God, Mat. 19.11. which all
cannot receive, save they to whom it is given. And when he had said, There he
Eunuchs, who have made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heavens sake; he
adds, He that is able to receive it, let him receive it: in both speaking of
something more excellent than ordinary; and besides, in these Words, There be
Eunuchs, who have made themselves Eunuchs, etc. he plainly affirms, that it was
a thing in Use and Practice at that time, (as it had been long before) which he
so approved and recommended to all, who could receive it. And concerning
voluntary Poverty, to the Young Man, who desired to know what he should do that
he might have Eternal Life; and had kept the Commandments from his Youth up; he
replied, one thing thou lackest; if thou will be Perfect, go and sell
whatsoever thou have, and give to the Poor, and thou shall have Treasure in
Heaven; and come, take up the Cross, and follow me, Mat. 19.21. Mar. 10.21.
Luke 18.22. And Forsaking all, he makes an indispensible requisite to the
being his Disciple: Whosoever he be of you who forsakes not all that he has,
he cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14.33. As to Religious Obedience, and voluntary
Subjection to the Order and Determination of another well experienced in the
Ways of God, for an Exercise of an entire Subjection of the Creature to the
Creator, What else is it but a very proper and useful Mean and Expedient for
the acquiring the Habit, and a continual Exercise of that great Doctrine of our
Savior, of Self-denial, and taking up the Cross, Mat. 16.24. Mar. 8.34.
warranted and approved by God in the Recabites, and by our Savior in his
Subjection to Joseph and his Mother? Which, though Self-denial be a Precept, is
a voluntary Act of the nature of a Reasonable Free Will Offering; and a doing
it daily, as is expressed, Luke 9.23. a Living in it, and a continual
Reasonable Sacrifice of the prime Faculties of the Soul for the Service of God.
And the whole Business of an abstracted Ascetick Life, What is it but a
reasonable, religious and devout Exercise of our Savior's Doctrine, in his
Admonition to Martha, Luke 10.41, 42. against being careful and troubled about
many things, when it was only for a short Entertainment of Himself; and that
One thing is needful; and that Mary's Choice was of the better part? In his
Sermon upon the Mount, of taking no thought for our Life, Mat. 6.25. -- 34. In
his Parable of the Sower, concerning the Cares, and Riches, and Pleasures of
this Life; the Thorns which choke the Seed of the Word, that it brings no
Fruit to Perfection, Luke 8.14. and concerning Watching, that we be not
surprised, Mat. 24.42:25.13. Mar. 13.35. Luke 21.36.

And now, if any one please, as many have done, to make any question concerning
the meaning of our Savior, or the Interpretation of any part of this, what
more Authentic Evidence of that can be reasonably desired than what the wisest
of Men have always approved and had recourse to in such Cases, Usage and
Practice afterward; which daily Experience in the Construction of Laws, and
ancient Records and Deeds, does sufficiently confirm. The APOSTLES certainly
practiced all this, as far as was consistent with their Circumstances and
Business they were employed in; and Preached it, and recommended it by their
Doctrine too, as far as the Circumstances of the People and the Times would
bear. They forsook all; not one of them Married any Wife afterward, though they
might have done it; and were so far abstracted from all Diversions and
Distractions of the World, that they ordered Deacons for other necessary Works,
that they might give themselves continually to Prayer, and to the Ministry of
the Word, or to Preaching. And the effect of their Preaching, and of the
powerful Operation of the Holy Spirit upon the People, was, that they continued
steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, in Communion in breaking Bread, and in
Prayers. And all that believed were, together, and had all things Common; and
sold their Possessions and Goods, and parted them as every Man had need, etc.
Act. 2.42. And again, Act. 4.32. The Multitude of them that believed, were of
one Heart, and of one Soul; neither said any of them, that ought of the things
which he possessed, was his own, but they had all things Common: For as many as
were Possessors of Lands or Houses, sold them, and brought the Prices of the
things that were sold, and laid them down at the Apostles Feet.

What is here briefly said of the first Converts and Primitive Christians at
Jerusalem, agrees so well, all things considered with what Philo more largely
relates concerning those about Alexandria, whom he calls THERAPEUTS, who were
never heard of before, nor after, under any Denomination, unless of that of
Christians; which began early at Antioch, and was soon spread over the World
where any Disciples of Christ were, and took place of all others, that, as the
Ancients do affirm, we also have great reason to rest satisfied, that they were
indeed such, notwithstanding all the Cavils of some of the last Age, which have
since been sufficiently refuted. It is true, they did not long appear in that
form of Communities; for they were dissolved at Jerusalem, and dispersed into
diverse Regions by that great Persecution, after the Death of Stephen, and,
doubtless, by like Occasions in other Places: But the Example and Doctrine of
our Savior and his Apostles could not but provoke many, especially among the
Jews, before well-disposed for it, to forsake the World, and betake themselves
to a retired, abstracted, Contemplative Life. The Natural Inclination in them
was excited and fortified by the various Examples which were common among them
before; and then receiving such further Encouragement from our Savior and his
Apostles, both directly and indirectly, from several Doctrines of the gospel,
concerning Selfdenyal, Mortification, Contempt of the World,
Heavenly-mindedness, etc. this could not but mightily affect them generally
with an Heroic Contempt of the World, and of the Body, and all Earthly things:
The very Doctrine, Promises, and Miracles, with which they were confirmed, were
apt, of their own Nature, to produce all this; but much more, being accompanied
with such a Spirit and Power, as the Preaching of the Apostles and the
Primitive Christians then was. And certainly they wanted nothing but
Opportunity, even then in the Apostles times, to have settled in Coenobitical
Societies; which as soon as the commom obstacle, the Persecutions, was removed,
by the Providence of God, in raising Constantine to the Throne of the Empire,
they presently began to do, first in Egypt, where, it is probable, were many
descended from the Recabites and Esseans, and in no long time after in most
other Parts. Concerning those in Egypt in his time, St. John Chrysostom gives
us this Account: Should any one come now to the Deserts of Egypt, he would see
all the Wilderness altogether more excellent than a Paradise, and innumerable
Companies of Angels shining in Mortal Bodies. For there is to be seen spread
over all that Region the Camp of Christ, and the admirable Royal Flock, and the
Conversation of the Heavenly Powers illustriously shining upon Earth. And this
you may see most splendid, not in MEN only, but also in WOMEN. Heaven it self
does not so shine with various Constellations of Stars, as Egypt is beset and
illustrated with innumerable Convents of Monks and Virgins: But of this more
hereafter.

These things being well considered, it will be very plain, 1. That they who
have derived these Religious Institutions from our Savior and his Apostles, by
their Example and Doctrine, and the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit, had a good
Foundation of Truth to maintain their Assertion. 2. That they who have raised
such Prejudice in the Minds of the People against such Holy, Religious
Societies in general, as to beget in them an Odium against all; if they did it
in simplicity, and merely through the Prejudice they themselves had conceived
from the Scandals of those of their time, yet did they very rashly and
inconsiderately in so doing: but if they did it to temporize and ingratiate
themselves with Princes and Great Men, who had enriched themselves with the
Spoils of the Monasteries, and the Revenues of the Church, they did very
wickedly and impiously. We must not deny or question the Justice of the
Judgment of God upon them: but, Who are they by whom the Righteous God does
usually execute such Judgments? And at this time we have great reason to take
that for a Warning to our Selves. Were they cast out for their Laziness and
Corruptions? What then have we to expect? Suppose ye that they were Sinners
above all that have succeeded them? I tell you, Nay; but except ye Repent ye
shall all likewise perish. God is able to restore them again: The Vineyard
shall be taken from you, and given to other Husbandmen, who shall render him
their Fruits in their Seasons.

I Thought I had done here: For though I know many have written very bitterly
against Monks and Monkery, I thought them not worth the looking into: because I
believed the Truth, which I have asserted, will stand as an impregnable Rock
against all their Blasts. Yet, at last, it coming into my mind, that an
excellent Person of great Learning, Judgment, Piety and Candor, of this Church
of England, had written something to like purpose, I thought fit to look into
him; and finding, to my Sorrow for him, but great Satisfaction in this Case,
how unworthy of himself, and of how little weight it is, which he has said
against them, I intended to have spared his Name, and to have passed it over
with a short Note that it needed not, nor deserved an Answer. But considering
that that is only the way of the World; that we ought to sacrifice all Esteem
of Men, whether our selves or others, to the Truth, and to the Service of God,
and of Men too, for their Admonition; and that the Holy Scriptures spare not to
record the Failings of Holy Men; I resolved to do the like. To be plain
therefore, that Excellent Person, Mr. Joseph Meed, having concluded the
Apostasy of the latter times, foretold, 1 Timothy 4.1. to be the Worship of
Saints introduced into the Christian Church, through the Hypocrisy of Liars,
forbidding to Marry, and commanding to abstain from Meats; to make good his
Interpretation of that first part of the Prediction, and make it complete,
concludes the latter part to be understood of Monks, that they were the chief
Advancers of Saints Worship: And to prove this, he produces the Testimony of
Chemnitius, a known Adversary to them, who lived about 1200 Years after the
time he speaks of; and Eunapius, (a known Enemy not only to them, but to all
Christians) whom he calls wretched Catiffe, and damned Dog. And why so? Why,
because he blasphemes the Saints and Servants of Christ, who loved not their
Lives unto Death, the Dust of whose Feet he was not worthy to lick up.
Competent Witnesses indeed; and a special Testimony this: but he adds: Yet may
we make a shift to gather hence, etc. But without Shifts we may see plainly to
what Shifts his unadvised and preposterous Zeal had reduced him, thus to expose
the Weakness of the Cause he had undertaken, taken, when all his Learning,
Diligence, and Inquiry, and all Antiquity, could afford him no better Evidence;
and to expose himself to the same Censure he had deservedly given to his own
Witness. Had they been Monks and only Monks, who had been guilty of this, had
it been fair to cast an Aspersion upon all? and, Was it fair, within a dozen
Lines after, to print Bishops and Monks in different Characters, while both
were under the same Circumstances? At this rate, What Calumnies might not be
raised against the People of God in all Ages; the Israelites, the Christians,
the very Apostles themselves, and such as pretend most of all to Reformation?
The Devil has always sowed his Tares, and most industriously amongst the best.
But upon this Evidence, there is no question but the Accused will be acquitted
by all impartial Judges.

As to what St. Austin says of some Hypocrites rambling about in the Habit of
Monks, it is very disingeniously, not to say dishonestly, alleged concerning
Monks in general. But St Austin's Mind concerning the Monks of his time is so
plain in what follows, that I need say no more of it in this place. And for
further answer to this Abuse of his Testimony, they who please may peruse it in
his own Words upon Ps. 99. and 132. and Ep. 137. And the same may be said
concerning Gregory of Towers. v. Cassian. Coll. 18. c. 16.

He had unhappily concluded before, that those Words of St. Paul are a
Description of Monkery; and when that Conceit was once fixed in his Mind, it
presently set all his Parts and all his Learning to work to prove it to others;
and gave easy admittance to all that might seem to favor it. Hence it was
that he imagins Abstaining from Meats may comprehend Renouncing of Possessions.
Nor could he otherwise have thought that the Monks did any more It was Conc.
Chalced. did that, c. 15. to them, not to all.
forbid Marriage, than St. Paul himself did; nay, than our Savior himself did:
Nor have set himself ( Disc. 28.) to derogate from that Obedience of the
Recabites to the Institutions of their Progenitor, which God himself had so
highly approved, and testified his Approbation of by so gracious a Promise: Nor
have imagined that the Law of Nazarism was ever imposed upon any; much less
that it is one of the things expressly named, which the Apostles decreed at the
Council of Jerusalem, should not be imposed upon the Gentiles, who believed in
Christ; or that Act. 21.25, did prove any Prohibition of that, whereby the
Apostles decreed the Gentiles should observe no such thing. There is a great
difference between a Prohibition of Impositions, and a Prohibition of a free
and voluntary Act. But how does Prejudice blind Men's Minds! That a Man of his
Parts, of his Learning, of his Judgment, Candor, and Generosity in asserting
the Truth in other matters, should be so affected with a mere Imagination of
his own, as to maintain that, to do such an Indignity to so glorious a part of
the Christian Church, which St. Gregory Nazianzen calls the most Choice and
Wisest part of the Church; and St. Hierom, the Flower of the Church, which
produced so many Glorious Saints of so great Virtue, and adorned with such
various and illustrious Graces; produced so many Bishops, innumerable, and
amongst them the most illustrious Lights of the Church, both for Virtue and
Learning; was so much respected not only by the People, but by the best of the
Christian Emperors, and approved and favored by the most Eminent Bishops of
the Church, and has so many Testimonies of their Excellence by Persons of the
greatest Credit and Reputation, and deserved so well in many respects; that
such a Man, for the sake of a Fancy of his own, should set up a Chemnitius, a
prejudiced Adversary to them; and Eunapius, a Pagan Adversary to the
Christians, against such a Cloud of Witnesses, and so wrest and strain the Holy
Scriptures, and thereby so expose himself to just Censure, is one of the most
remarkable Instances of the Mischief of Prejudice that I can think of: an
Edifying instance to make all Men, good Men, learned Men, and wise Men, jealous
of themselves, and cautious that they do not impose upon themselves; not to do
God Service: for he needs no such Shifts, nor is at any time pleased with them.

OF THE ESSEANS, OUT OF JOSEPHUS.
THERE are Three Sects of Philosophers amongst the Jews, [of long Gontinuance
and Antiquity.] One, is that of the Pharisees; another, of the Sadduces; and
the third, of the Esseans, which is the most Famous of the Three. The Esseans
are Jews born, but live in the greatest Union together imaginable: They
consider all Pleasures, as Vices that are to be avoided; and esteem Continence
and Victory over Passions, as the greatest Virtues. They reject Marriage, and
account other Men's Children put to them to be taught, whilst young, as their
own Kinsmen; whom they diligently instruct in their Manners and Opinions; not
for that they condemn Marriage and Propagation of Mankind, but to avoid Women's
Incontinence: for they think that none of them keep themselves true to one Man.
Also, they contemn Riches, and all things with them are Common, and no Man
amongst them is Richer than other. And they have a Law amongst themselves, that
whosoever will embrace their Sect, he must make his Goods Common: for so,
neither any amongst them seems abject for Poverty, nor any great for Riches;
but they have, as it were, all equal Patrimonies, like Brethren.

This is a Custom worthy Admiration, and such as is not to be found amongst any
other, either Greeks, or Barbarians, that make account of Virtue, which they
have practiced from all Antiquity. They account it a Shame to anoint the Body
with Oil; and if any Man, though against his Will, be anointed therewith, they
use all diligence to wipe it away: And they account themselves fine enough, if
their Clothes be white.

They have amongst them Stewards to oversee all things for their Common
Benefit; who are chosen from amongst themselves by a Common Consult. Their
Revenue is distributed according to the Need that every one has. They have not
one certain City, but are dispersed in many Cities; and if any of their Sect,
though a Stranger, come to them from another Place, they give him any thing
they have, as if he were their ancient Acquaintance. In like manner they go
boldly to those whom they never, in their Lives, saw before, as though they
were familiarly acquainted with them: And therefore when they take a Journey,
they only arm themselves against Thieves, and carry nothing with them else. In
every City there is one appointed, whose Office is [to entertain Strangers] to
receive and lodge those of their Sect that come thither; and to see that they
neither want Clothes, nor any thing else necessary for them. All Children under
Government, brought up by them, go apparelled alike; and they never change
their Apparel nor Shoes, except they have worn out their first Apparel. Amongst
themselves they neither Buy nor Sell; but every Man that has any thing which
another wants, gives him it, and takes that of him which himself needs;
yea, every one of them may take any thing he has need of, from whom he
pleases, without any Change.

Above all, toward God they are very Religious. They attribute to Him the
Government and Disposition of all things. They say that the Souls of Men are
immortal; and all the uttermost of their Endeavor and Delight is to maintain
Justice and Equity. They send their Offerings unto the Temple, yet Sacrifice
they not with other Men, by reason they use more sacred and different
Ceremonies; for which they are secluded out of the Common Temple, and Sacrifice
apart. Otherwise, they are Men of most composed Behavior. Before the Sun rise
they speak of nothing but Holy things, and then they make certain Vows and
Prayers, after the Custom of their Country, as it were, praying that God would
please to make it rise upon the Earth.

After this, every one is dismissed to work, or practice the Art he knows:
And when every one has diligently labored till Eleven a Clock, they all meet
together again, and being covered with Linen Clothes, they wash their Bodies
with cold Water; and having thus purged themselves, they go to their Cells,
into which no Man that is not of their Sect is admitted. And then they come to
the Refectory, as into a Holy Temple, where, all sitting down with Silence,
there is set before every Man, in order, a Loaf of Bread and a little Mess of
Pottage, all of one sort. Before they eat, a Priest gives Thanks, and no Man
may eat any Meat till his Prayer be made to God. Likewise, when Dinner is ended
they pray again; for both before and after they give Thanks to God, the Giver
of all: And then putting off the Apparel, as Sacred, they apply themselves to
their Work till Evening. At Supper they do, as before, causing their Guests to
sup with them, if by fortune any come. Their House is never troubled with Cries
or Tumults; for every one is appointed to speak in his turn; so that their
Silence produces respect in Strangers. The Cause of this Moderation, is, their
continual Sobriety, and that every one is limited how much to eat or drink.

And although that in all other Matters they are ruled by their Superior, yet
in these two, to wit, Compassionating and Helping, they may do as they think
good: for every one may, when he pleases, help those whom he thinks deserve
Help; and, when he pleases, give Meat to them that are in Need. Yet may they
not give any thing to their Kindred, without the Leave of their Superior.

They take great care to suppress their Anger; they keep their Promise, and
maintain Peace; and People account every Word they speak of as much force, as
if they had bound it with an Oath: And they shun Oaths worse than Perjury; for
they esteem him a Liar, who is not to be believed without he call God to
witness. They study diligently Ancient Writers, chiefly gathering out of their
Writings what is most convenient for the Soul and the Body: Out of them they
learn Remedies for Diseases, and the Virtues of Herbs, Stones, and Metals.

Those who are desirous to be of their Order, do not strait-way converse with
them; but, for a Year before, live out of the College, and have the same Diet,
a little Hatchet, and such a Girdle as is before spoken of, and a white
Garment: But, at the Years end, if they perceive such a Person to be continent,
they give him a Diet more agreeing with their own, and he is permitted to wash
himself in cold Water, to the end to purify himself; yet he is not admitted in
common amongst them, till for Two Years more they have observed his Life and
Manners: And, at last, when he is thought worthy, he is admitted to their
common Company. But before he is received to the common Table, first he is to
protest solemnly to honor and serve God with all his Heart; to observe Justice
and Fidelity toward all Men; never willing to hurt any Man, nor injure any for
another Man's Command; but always to hate the Wicked, and assist the Good; to
keep his Faith to all, but especially to his Superiors; because they hold
their Power from God. To which they add, that if he be put in Authority over
others, he never will abuse it, to the Prejudice of those who are under him,
and neither exceed the rest in Apparel, nor any other ambitious Pomp: that he
will always love the Truth, and severely reprove Liars: and that he will keep
his Hands and Soul pure from all Theft and unjust Gain: and that he will not
conceal any Mysteries, or Secrets of their Religion, from his Companions, nor
reveal them to any Strangers, although he should be threatened thereto by
Death. Adding moreover, that he will never deliver any Doctrine, save that which
he has received; and diligently preserve the Books, as well as the Names, of
those from whom they received it. These Protestations they oblige those to take
solemnly, who enter into their Order, to the end to fortify them against all
Vices.

Those of the Society who transgress notoriously, they thrust out of their
Company: And who-ever is so punished, for the most part dies a miserable
Death; for, it being not lawful for him to eat with any Stranger, he is reduced
to feed on Grass, like Beasts, and so he perishes through Famine. For which
cause oftentimes they are moved with Compassion to receive many into their
Order again, when ready, by Famine, to yield up the Ghost; judging them to have
endured Penance enough for their Offenses, who, with Famine, were almost
brought to Death's door. They are very severe and just in their Judgments; and
to decide any Matter, there is never fewer of them than an Hundred, and that
which is by them agreed upon is irrevocable. Next after God they reverence
their Lawgiver, insomuch, that if any one revile him, they forthwith condemn
him to Death. They take it for a great Duty to obey their Elders, and what is
appointed by many; so that if Ten of them sit together, no Man of them must
speak, without he be licensed thereto by Nine of the Company. They account it a
great Incivility to be in the midst of the Assembly, or on their right hand.

And they are more severe than any other Jews in observing the Sabbath; for
they do not only abstain from dressing Meat (which they dress the Evening
before) that Day; but also, they may not remove any Vessel out of its place,
nor satisfy the Necessities of Nature.

Upon other Days they dig a Pit, a foot deep in the Ground, with the Hatchet
which (as we before said) every one, at his Entrance into their Order, has
given him; and then covering themselves diligently with their Garment, as if
they feared to be Irreverent to the Light of Heaven; in that Pit they ease
themselves, and then cover their Ordure with the Earth they took out of the
Pit: and this they do in the most secret places. And though this purging of
their Bodies be natural, yet do they, by washing, purify themselves after it,
as after great Uncleanness.

Furthermore, amongst themselves they are divided into Four Orders, according
to the time which they have continued this Exercise of Life: and they that are
Juniors bear such respect to their Seniors, that if they do but touch one of
them, they are obliged to purify themselves, as though they had touched a
Stranger.

They are long lived, so that most of them live an Hundred Years; which I judge
is, by reason of their well-ordered Diet, and their Temperance.

They contemn Adversity, and by Constancy and Fortitude triumph over Torments.
They prefer an honorable Death before Life. The Wars which the Jews made
against the Romans showed what invinsible Courage and Hardiness they have in
all things; for they suffered the Breaking of the Members of their Bodies, Fire
and Sword, and all kind of Tortures, rather than be brought to speak the least
Word against their Lawgiver, or to eat Meats forbidden. They could not be
forced to any of these, neither would they entreat the Torturers, nor show any
Sorrow amidst their Torments. Yea, in the midst of their Pains they scoffed at
their Tormentors, and joyfully yielded up their Souls, as though they hoped to
pass to a better Life.

For it is an Opinion amongst them, That the Body is mortal and corruptible,
but the Souls remain ever immortal; and being of a most pure and etherial
Substance, wrap themselves in Bodies, as in Prisons, being drawn thereunto by
some natural Inclination: But when they are delivered out of these carnal
Bonds, then presently, as freed from a long Bondage, they joyfully mount into
the Air. And of the Good Souls they say, as did the Grecians, that they live
beyond the Ocean in a place of Pleasure, where they are never molested with
Rain, nor Snow, nor Heat; but have always a sweet and pleasant Air. But the
Wicked Souls (as they say) go into a Place very tempestuous, where there is
always Winter Weather, always Lamentations of those who for ever are to be
punished. For I judge that the Greeks are of this Opinion, when they say there
is an Isle for the Virtuous, whom they call Heroes and Half-Gods; and that the
Souls of the Wicked go to a Place in Hell, where it is feigned, that some are
tormented, as Sysiphus, Tantalus, Ixion, and Titius. Those Esseans also believe
that they are created Immortal, that they may be induced to Virtue, and averted
from Vice; that the Good are rendered better in this Life, by the Hope of being
Happy after Death; and that the Wicked, who imagine they can hide their Evil
Actions in this World, are punished for them in the other with Eternal
Torments. This is the Esseans Opinion, touching the Excellence of the Soul;
from which we see very few of those depart, who have once embraced it.

There are also some among them, who promise to foretell things to come: which
Faculty is obtained as well by the Study of Holy Books and Ancient Prophecies,
as by the Care they take of sanctifying themselves: And their Predictions
seldom fail.

They are, at least, Four Thousand in Number, who have neither Wives nor
Slaves; supposing that Women are the occasion of Injustice, and Slaves do cause
Insurrections; and living apart by themselves, they serve one another; and
choose out certain upright Men among the Priests, to gather the Fruits and
Revenues of the Land, to the end they may be maintained and nourished thereby.
In a Word, they follow the same Course of Life that they do, who are called
Plisti among the Danes. There is another sort of Esseans, agreeing with the
former, both in Apparel, Diet, and kind of Life, and Observance of the same
Laws and Ordinances; only they differ in the Matter of Marriage: Affirming,
that to abstain from Marriage tends to abolish Mankind. For (say they) if all
Men should follow this Opinion, presently all Mankind would perish.
Notwithstanding, these People use such Moderation, that for Three Years space
they observe the Women they intend to Marry; and then, if they appear sound
enough to bear Children, they Marry them. None of them lie with their Wives
when they are with Child; to show that they do not Marry to satisfy Lust, but
to have Children. When their Wives wash themselves they are covered with a
Garment, as the Men are: And this is the Manner and Custom of this Sect.

OF THE ESSEANS, OUT OF PHILO.
IT IS a strange and lamentable thing to consider, what a continual Faintness,
and how much Listlessness, we find in our selves to those things which we
should prosecute with the greatest Vigor, as being the nearest related to us,
and most proper for us: It Is this Sluggishness which putrefies all the Seeds of
Integrity, that are in our Natures. On the contrary, we have an unsatiable
longing after and desire of those things of which it is fitting we should be
divested. Hence it is that both the Sea and Land are full of Wealthy, and
Vainglorious, and Voluptuous Men. Whereas the Number of Wise, and Righteous,
and Good Men, is very small. But though that which is small is rare, yet it is
not quite not existing in Nature. This both Greece and the Barbarous Countries
can attest: For, in Greece did flourish those who were truly called the Seven
Wise Men, (besides whom, others also, as is very probable, flourished, both
before and since them) whose Memory, inasmuch as they were the Ancienter, has
not vanished; though, the Memory of the later of them, through the great
Neglect of their Contemporaries, lies in Obscurity. And in other Kingdoms were
many Ancients, venerable both for their Actions and Discourses, even numerous
Armies (if I may so say, because of the difficulties of Virtue) of Good and
Excellent Men. Such among the Persians are the Magi, who diving into the Works
of Nature for the Knowledge of the Truth, are quietly; by much Leisure and
Opportunity, instructed in Sacred things; and do also teach others the Divine
Virtues by clearer Demonstrations. Such also among the Indians are the
Gymnosophites, who, besides Natural Philosophy, applied themselves to Moral
Philosophy; and made their whole Life a Demonstration of Virtue.

Neither does Palestine and Syria want their share of Excellent Virtue; for
there no small part of a Numerous sort of Jews does dwell: for there are some
there which are called Esseans, in Number (as I think, for I cannot be exact)
above Four Thousand: They have their Denomination from Holiness, in the Greek
Dialect; for although they have the best and most Worshippers, yet they
sacrifice no Creatures; but they are ambitious to prepare their Minds so, as
that they may present their Thoughts in a fit Temper to be consecrated, and as
becomes Holy Men.

They dwell only in little Villages, avoiding Cities and great Towns, because
of the Immoralities of the Inhabitants of such Places, being very sensible that
Souls receive an incurable Wound from the Conversation of such Men; just as our
Bodies imbibe a Disease from corruptive Air. Some of them Till the Ground, and
others follow such Arts and Trades as are of use in Times of Peace, and by
which they may be helpful to their Neighbors.

None of them hoard up Gold and Silver, or possess great Estates of Land out of
Covetousness of Revenues; but they are all contented with what will just supply
the Necessities of Life. These are the Persons that, of almost all Men, keep
themselves Monyless and Estateless. These are very Rich by their Industry, and,
indeed, more Wealthy by their wise Institution, than it is possible that those
whose Minds stand in need of the Favor of Fortune should be, or their own
voluntary choice of only what is just necessary can make them Poor. These are
they who look upon a Temper, which makes a Man need very little, and be soon
satisfied, to be true Affluence, and a brave Estate; as indeed it is.

You cannot find a Gun-Smith, or a Cutler; not one that makes Arrows, or Darts,
or Javelins, or Daggers, or a Headpiece, or a Breast Plate, or a Shield, or,
indeed, any of those Trades amongst them which work upon Arms, or any
Instruments which belong to War; or upon any of those things which promote or
tend to the Promotion of Vice in Peace. They own no Use to be in Merchandise,
or Taverning, or keeping Public Houses, or Navigation; for they avoid all
Provocations of Covetousness.

There is not one amongst them a Servant; but they are all Freemen, and wait
upon one another mutually by turns; and they condemn Masters, not only as
unjust Persons that lay Holiness wast; but as impious ones too, who destroy the
Established Law of Nature; for she, like a common Mother, has brought us
forth, and bred us all up alike, as Natural Brethren, having made us not only
Nominally, but Really Brethren. But that treacherous Principle, Covetousness,
(which prompts us easily to overlook one another) has made a Breach in this
Universal Alliance, and wrought in us Strangeness instead of Familiarity, and
Enmity in the place of Friendship.

They resign the Logical part of Philosophy, as being not necessary in order to
the Acquisition of Virtue, to Word-Hunters; and the Physical part of it, (so
much only excepted as proves the Existence of God, and the Genesis of the
Universe,) as that which exceeds the Comprehension of Humane Nature to those
who affect to prattle at random about Sublime things. But they take a great
deal of pains in cultivating the Moral part thereof, making great use of some
Traditional Laws of their Fathers, which encourage the Soul mightily in its
prosecution of Heroic Virtue: and, indeed, they are such Laws, as it is
impossible for a Humane Soul to discern and think of without some Divine
Instruction. These they teach on Seventh Days, (besides other times) with
extraordinary Care, and in very excellent Methods; for the Seventh Day is
reckoned Holy by their Laws; and in it they abstain from all other Business,
and go to their Sacred Places, (which they call Synagogues) where the Young Men
sit in their Orders, according to their different Ages, below the Elders, and
hear attentively and reverently with all befitting Decency. When they are sat,
one of them takes the Books and reads; and then another of the most Experienced
reads, passing by those things which are not so practical and thoroughly known:
Part of their Philosophy they communicate by Signs, [or Riddles,] [or
Hieroglyphics,] in Imitation of an ancient Custom. The Subjects of their
Instruction are, Sanctity, Righteousness, Economy, Polity, the Knowledge of
Helps to, or Hindrances of the Truth, the Differences between things really
Good, and really Bad, and things that are Indifferent; the Choices of things
which ought to be chosen, and Avoidances of contrary things; making use herein
of Three general Terms and Canons, (viz.) (...), or the Love of God; (...), or
the Love of Virtue; and (...), or the Love of Man. Of the first they give
infinite Demonstrations, Namely, a continued Series of Chastity through the
whole Life, refraining from Oaths and Lies, and a steady Belief that the Deity
is the Author of all Good things, but of nothing that is Evil. For Evidences
of their Love of Virtue, (which was their Second general Canon) they prescribed
Freedom from Love of Money, Freedom from Love of Glory, and Freedom from Love
of Pleasure, Continence, and Patience; also Needing but little, Simplicity,
cheap and spare Diet, Freedom from Swellings of the Mind, regular Obedience,
and Stability, and all other Habits of the like Nature. For Indications of
their Love of Man, (which was their third general Canon) they taught
Benevolence, Equality, (which is better than the highest Pretenses in Words)
and having all things Common; of which it may not be unseasonable to speak
briefly.

In the first place then, you must know, no one has a House of his own, but
what does as equally belong to all; for, because of their cohabiting together
in Multitudes, their Houses are open to all Comers from other Parts, in case
they are those that like the same way of Living. They have all one Refectory,
common Banks and Expenses, and common Clothes, common Victuals, and common
Lodgings. One common united Roof, and one and the same common Diet and Table,
is what you cannot find amongst any others [of them,] and perhaps no where else
at all.

In the Evening, when they have received their Hire, they don't keep it to
themselves, but bring it and cast it in, in the midst, before all, for the
common Benefit of those who want to make use of it. Those also that are Sick
are not neglected, because they are not able to help themselves, having common
Banks laid up in readiness for the Healing the Sick, so that they may be at
extraordinary Expense on such extraordinary Occasions without fear. They
revere, honor, and take great Care of their Elders, maintaining and cherishing
them in their Old Age by their Manual Labor, and many other means, in all
Plenty and Security.

OF THE THERAPEUTS, OUT OF PHILO.
HAving spoken concerning the Esseans, who were zealous of, and studiously
exercised in an Active Life, more exactly than all, or, to speak indeed more
tolerably, than very many others: I come now, keeping close to the thread of my
Design, to speak as much as is true and pertinent concerning those who have
embraced a Contemplative way of Living: And here I shall add nothing of my own
to set off my Narrative, as Poets and Orators, whose ends of Writing are mean,
and who are at a loss for good and excellent Matter: It Is Truth, and that only,
which I unfeignedly love and salute, how unwelcome soever this Method may be to
the Artificial Speaker. But in my Entrance on this Subject, I find a great
Contest with my self; however, the Greatness of the Virtue of those Men ought
not to be the Cause of Silence in those, who don't think it fair that what is
admirable should be concealed.

What the Purpose of these Philosophers was, their very Name discovers; for
they are called Therapeuts and Therapentesses, from (...), either from Healing,
and more truly than other Physicians, since they profess a nobler Medicinal Art
than that professed in the City; for that only heals Bodies, but this cures
Souls of Diseases very severe and hard to be cured; Souls beleagur'd and
oppressed with Pleasures and Lusts, Griefs and Fears, irregular Desires, and
Follies, and Iniquities, and an infinite Multitude of other Passions and Vices:
Or from Worshipping, because they have been taught by Nature and Holy Laws to
worship the Being which is Better than Good, and Smpler than One, and Ancienter
than Unity.

Those that enter upon the way of Living which the Therapeuts use, don't do it
out of Custom, or at the Instigation of any Persons; but because they are
ravished with an Heavenly Love, and struck powerfully by the Deity, and feel
Spiritual Exultations of Joy in their Souls, and will not be at rest till they
see the Object they long for: Wherefore, because through their desire of an
Immortal and Blessed Life, they reckon themselves Dead to this Mortal Life,
they leave their Estates to their Sons, or Daughters, or any other Relations,
making them their Heirs cheerfully, and with a free Mind: Those of them which
have not Relations, leave them to their Friends and Acquaintance. The Greeks
celebrate Anaxagoras and Democritus, because they, being smote with the Love of
Philosophy, let their Estates be devoured by Sheep. I admire those Men, because
they themselves were above Riches: But, How much better were those, who, not
suffering their Estates to be devoured by Cattle, applied a Remedy to the Needs
of Men, and made the Indigent Rich? for that was an inconsiderable (not to say
Mad) Act, for which Greece admired those Men: But this is a sober Custom, which
shows much Consideration, Prudence, Humanity, and Sweetness of Disposition.
What can Enemies do more than devour and make the Countries of their Enemies
bare of Corn, Fodder, and Trees, that being brought into the straits of
Necessity, they may yield. Just thus did Democritus serve his Kindred,
contriving, as it were, with his own Hands Streights and Poverty for them, not
designedly perhaps, but by not fore-casting and having in his Eye the Benefit
of others: How much better are these, though the Efforts of their Affections
for Philosophy were not less than his. These preferred an extensive Concern and
Generorosity of Mind before Contempt of their Friends, benefitting others with
their Estates, and not making a corrupt use of them, that they might benefit
both themselves and others; others, by ample Estates; themselves, by
Philosophizing; because the Cares of Money and Lands devour much Time: But it is
an excellent thing to be frugal of Time, since, as the Physician Hippocrates
said, Life is short, but Art long. But to proceed in our Narration.

When they quit their Estates, and are no longer caught by any Baits, they
depart without ever turning back, and leave their Brethren, Children, Wives,
Parents, numerous Relations, friendly Intimacies and Engagements, and the
Countries in which they were bred and born; because Custom and Familiarity are
very attracting, and have the greatest Power to ensnare. And when they do thus,
they do not remove into another City, like miserable, unfortunate Servants,
who, instead of Exchanging Slavery for Liberty, only exchange their Masters;
for, indeed, such are they, who part with one Estate, to purchase another in
some other City; for every City much inhabited (though it be governed by Good
Laws) is full of unspeakable Tumults and Hurries, which any one that is once
led by Wisdom cannot away with: But they live and exercise themselves without
Walls, in Gardens and By-Fields, seeking after Solitude, not out of a morose
affected Disgust against Men; but because they are sensible Mixtures are
unprofitable and hurtful, by reason of the Dis-agreeableness of their Manners.

This sort of Men are in all parts of the habitable World; and, indeed, 'twas
but fitting that both Greece and the Barbarous World should partake of this
perfectly good Sect.

They abound in Egypt in every one of their Provinces, and especially about
Alexandria: But the principal of them retire, as to their own Country, from
all Parts, to a Colony of Therapeuts, at a commodious Place about the Lake
Maria, situate upon a little rising Hill, and very convenient both for
Security, and good Temperature of Air. As for Security, that Place is best
which is surrounded with Neighboring Villages and Cottages: And as for good,
well-tempered Air, continual Gales, which proceed from a Lake that lies open to
the Sea, and that part of the Sea which is nigh furnish them with that; for the
Sea sends fine, thin Gales, and the Lake, which lies open to the Sea, thick,
fat Gales; which two, so curiously mingled together, make a very Healthy Air.

The Houses in which they live together are very mean and slight, and just
serve for Defense against two very necessary things, the Scorching of the Sun,
and the cold Crudeness of the Air: But they are not near together, as the
Houses in the Cities; for Neighbourhoods are troublesome and ungrateful to
those who court Retirement: Neither are they far distant from each other;
because they love Communion and Society together, and that they may help one
another if they should be set upon by Thieves.

In every House they have an Oratory to themselves, called a Sanctuary and
Monastry; in which, alone by themselves, they celebrate the Mysteries of a
Sacred Life, never bringing thither any such thing as Meat, or Drink, or any
other things else which are necessary for the Repairs of Nature's Decays; but
only Laws, and inspired Oracles, which were spoken by the Prophets, and Hymns,
and other things by which Knowledge and Piety are increased and perfected. They
always preserve an unintermitted Remembrance of God; so that even in their
Dreams their Fancies form and present them with no other Images, but the
Beauties of the Divine Powers. Hence many speak out in their Sleep, and whilst
they are dreaming do interpret the venerable Decrees of the Holy Philosophy.
They are used to Pray twice every Day, viz. Morning, and Evening: When the Sun
rises, begging due Composedness, Illumination, and Gentleness of Mind, and that
their Mind may be filled with Heavenly Light: When it sets, they beg that the
Soul may be quite eased of the Tumor and Vanity of the Senses and Objects of
Sense, and that being fixed in her own Sanhedrim and Consultory, she may trace
the Tracts of Truth. All the space of Time between the Morning and Evening,
they give themselves to Exercise: For reading the most Holy Scriptures they
Philosophize, Allegorizing the Philosophy of their Ancestors: For they
interpret the Composure of a plain literal Sense, as the Symbols [or
Signatures] of a secret or concealed Nature, by probable Conjectures. They have
also Composures of Ancient Men, who, being the principal Promoters of this
Sect, have left Monuments of this Model in their Allegories, which they make
use of as certain Archetypals, imitating the Manner of their Design; so that
they don't only contemplate. Moreover, they also make Songs and Hymns upon God,
of all sorts of Measures and Tunes, to which they are obliged to prick the
Graver sort of Notes. Six Days together every one of them apart Philosophize by
themselves in their Cells, never going over the threshold, nor so much as
peeping out; but on the Seventh Days they meet together in a common Body and
sit down together in Order, according to their Age, in a very decent Posture,
keeping their Hands out of sight; to wit, their right Hand between the Breast
and their Chin, and the left Hand upon the Cavity of their right Side: The
Eldest and Expertest of them, when he is come, discourses to them with a fixed
Eye, and a steady Voice, with Reasoning and Wisdom, not affecting out of
Ostentation Excellency in Words, like Orators and Sophisters; but with great
Searchingness of Thought, and Accuracy of Interpretation, which does not sit
upon the tip of the Ears, but by hearing goes into the Soul, and continues its
fixed Dewlling Place there. All the rest hear the Exhortation with Silence,
signifying their Approbation only by Motions of their Eye or Head.

The common Temple, in which they meet together on Seventh Days, has Two
Enclosures; one being allotted for the Men, called (...); the other for Women,
called (...); for the Women ordinarily hear together with them, having the same
Emulation and Purpose. The Wall which parts the Enclosures is built about three
or four Cubits high from the Pavement, like a Fortress, being higher up open to
the top. By this Contrivance the Female Sex preserve that Modesty which becomes
them, and hear well enough as they sit in the Auditory, because nothing hinders
the Voice of the Speaker.

They first lay Temperance in the Soul, as it were for a Foundation, and raise
a Superstructure of other Virtues upon that. Not one of them uses any Meat or
Drink before Sunset; for they reckon the Exercise of Philosophy worthy of the
Day; but Bodily Necessities to belong to Darkness: Wherefore, they bestow their
Days upon that, and some small part of the Night upon these. Some of them
having a peculiar Desire after Knowledge raised in them, forget to Eat for
Three Days together: And others are so luxuriously and deliciously cheered and
feasted by Wisdom, supplying them liberally with Sentiments, that they
withstand their Appetites double that time, and hardly taste the least
necessary Food for Six Days together, being used (as they say of a certain sort
of Grasshoppers) to be fed by Air; for their Singing makes Want very easy.

And because they reckon the Seventh Day all Holy and all Festival, they
vouchsafe it a peculiar Honor; for after the Care of the Soul, they anoint the
Body also, allowing it Relaxation, just as they do their Cattle, from continual
Toil. They eat nothing that is costly, but feed upon cheap Bread, and Salt:
Those of them that live deliciously, dress it with Hyssop. Their Drink is
Spring Water. Thus they appease those Two Tyrannesses, Hunger and Thirst, which
Nature has placed over [or under] the Mortal kind, bringing nothing to allure
them, but only such things as are needful, without which it is not possible to
live. For this Reason they eat that they may not be hungry, and drink that they
may not thirst; but they avoid Fullness and Satiety, as the Enemy and Traitor
both of Soul and Body.

Covering being of Two kinds, namely, Clothes, and a Dewlling Place; (having
acquainted you that their Dwellings are mean, made without Art, of whatever
comes to hand, and only for use) I come now to acquaint you, that their Raiment
also is very mean, worn only for Defense against Cold and Heat: They have a
thick Cloak over some rough Skin or other, in Winter; and in Summer, a lighter
short Garment over their Shoulder, or Linen. They also exercise themselves to
a perfect Freedom from all Arrogance and Vanity, knowing very well that
Falsehood is the beginning of Tumor, and that Truth is the Source of the
Avoidance of vain Pomp and Ostentation; and that both these have the Nature of
their different Spring and Fountain; for from Falsehood flow numerous and diverse
Idea's [or kinds] of Evils; but from Truth, a great Abundance of both Humane
and Divine Goods.

The manner of their Feasting is thus; For Seven Weeks together they assemble
together, which they do not only out of Respect to the Number Seven, but also
to the Power of it; for they know it to be a chaste and Virgin Number. This
Festival is a Preparatory to the greatest Feast, (viz. Pentecost,) so called
for its belonging to the Number Fifty, which is the most Holy and Natural
Number, because of the Power of a right-angled Triangle, which is the Principle
of the Production of all things. When they are met together, arrayed in White,
as soon as the Ephemereuts (for that is the Name they call their Beadles by)
give the Sign, all of them, before they sit down to eat, standing in a very
decent Order, with all Gravity, do, with their Eyes and Hands lifted up to
Heaven, (their Eyes, because they have been taught to see things so worthy of
Veneration; their Hands, to signify that they are not guilty of Eating any
Food before, out of pretense of Necessity) pray to God that their Banqueting
may please Him, and be according to his Mind, or [according to understanding.]
The Seniors sit down according to their Admissions; for they don't reckon those
who have lived many Years, and are very Ancient, the Seniors there; but, on the
contrary, they look upon them as Young Children, if they have but lately been
enamored with that way of Living; but they count those who began betime, in
the Flower of their Age, to betake themselves to the Contemplative part of
Philosophy (which, indeed, is the best and Divinest part) their Seniors, though
their Youth be not yet expired. The Women also are at the Feast with them, many
of which are very Ancient, and Virgins out of pure, Love to Purity, not out of
Necessity, as some of the Priestesses amongst the Greeks, who live so upon that
Account, rather than out of free Choice: No; these live so because of a true
Zeal for, and desire of Wisdom; for, having a fervent desire to live by Wisdom,
they make no account of Bodily Pleasures; neither do they desire Mortal, but
Immortal Offsprings, which only a Soul that truly loves God is able to bring
forth out of its self; for it is God who has shed into it the Intellectual Rays
of the Father, by which 'twill be able to contemplate the Decrees of Wisdom.
When they sit together, the Men sit on the Right hand, and the Women on the
Left. If any one supposes that softer Seats than ordinary (though not so
costly) were prepared for such Noble, Virtuous Exercisers of Virtue; let him
know, that they have cheap sort of Carpets made of some Leaves and Barks of
Trees that grow there, on which they lean a little; for they remit something of
the hard way of Living that the Lacedaemonians use; though, in all respects,
they study Frugality, and have a strong Antipathy against the Philtres of
Pleasure. They are not waited upon by Slaves; for they look upon the keeping of
Servants to be a Custom against Nature; for she made and brought forth all Men
free. But the Iniquity and unreasonable Covetings of those who have affected
Inequality, the Ringleader of all Mischief, have brought Camps into the World,
and set the stronger Men on Fire, to exert their Strength against the Weak.
Here, as I said, is no Servant; but Freemen give all necessary Attendance,
which they do heartily, and with all readiness, even to the Prevention of
Request; for the Juniors of the Company, which are appointed from Meal to Meal,
do, with all Diligence, serve those who have arrived to a great pitch of
Virtue, (just as Natural Sons do, with great Pleasure and Emulation, serve
their Parents) reckoning these their common Parents to be nearer related to
them than their Parents by Blood, since nothing is nearer than Integrity to
those who have right Minds. Those that wait come with their Garments loose
about them, lest there should be the least Appearance of Servility amongst them
at this Feast. I know some will laugh at the Hearing of this; but they are such
as do those things for which they ought to weep and lament. At those Feasts no
Wine is brought in, but only very clear Water; cold Water for the most, and
warm Water for the Tenderest of the Old Men. Their Table is pure from all
Bloody Creatures; Loaves are their Meat, and Salt is their Sauce. The most
dainty of them, indeed, make it more palatable with Hyssop; for Right Reason
charges them, like Priests, to sacrifice Sacrifices without Wine, and to live
upon them; for Wine is an incentive of Folly, and chargable Dishes provoke
Lust, which is the most Insatiable of all Beasts. And so much for the First
part.

After the Guests are sat in the Orders forementioned, the Waiters do stand
decently in Order, ready to serve. There is no Drink brought, but every one
calls for it as he wants it; and, which is more than any thing already
mentioned, no one dares Belch, or fetch his Breath indecently: But some body
either offers a Query upon some place of the Holy Scriptures, or solves
something proposed by another without any Solicitude about the manner of the
Solution; for not one amongst them desires Fame by fine Speaking: But every one
loves to see another more exact; and when they see him so, not to envy him,
though they are not so accute themselves. They have all the like Desire to
learn. Sometimes one of them takes more time when he teaches, repeating and
dwelling upon what he says, that he may imprint his Notions on their Souls;
for, many times, the Mind of the Auditors being not able to keep pace with the
Interpretation of one that speaks too closely, or too fast, falls short of
comprehending what is said; the rest look with their Faces upright upon him who
speaks, in one and the same Posture, and give Notice of their Understanding and
Comprehending what they hear by a Nod, or a Look. They discover their
Commendation by the continued Cheerfulness of their Aspect; but a Doubt is
signified by a stiller Motion of the Head, and their Right hand's little
Finger. The Juniors also that wait give no less Attention than those that sit
at Table. Their Expositions of the Holy Scriptures are Allegorical Hints; for
the whole Constitution of their Law seems to them like an Animal; in which the
literal Expressions, are the Body; and the invisible Sense infolded in the
Words, the Mind; wherein the Reasonable Soul begins distinctly to consider the
Properties thereof, as through the Perspective of the Names, after it (having
beheld the admirable Beauties of the Notions, and unveiled the Symbols) has
brought to light the deeper [or more recondite] Sense to those, who, from a
small hint, are capable of tracing obscure Truths by the Light of those that
are manifest. After the President seems to have made a sufficient Discourse, so
as that his Applications successfully hit what he aimed at, and the Attention
of the Auditors perceive his meaning, they all give an Humm, thereby
signifying that they are pleased, and choose, for the future, to put his Advice
in Execution.

After this, he rises up, and sings an Hymn in Praise of God, which is either
of his own, or some ancient Poets composure; for their Poets have left them
Measures and Songs of all sorts; (...), Trimetres; (...), Introits, [or
Processional;] (...), Laudatory; (...), Sacrifical; (...), Altar-Songs; (...),
Stationary; (...), Choiral with Stanza's of various Measures; some of which are
used with their Faces turned from, and others with their Faces turned toward
the Altar: After whom the others, according to their Orders, in a very decent
manner, do also sing, the rest hearing with deep Silence, except when the last
Lines, or the short after-Hymns, are to be sung; for then they all sing out,
both Men and Women.

When every Precentor has finished his Hymn, the Juniors bring in the Table, as
was just abovementioned; upon which they have all their Holy Loaf of Bread
leavened with Salt and Hyssop mingled together. They have Hyssop in the
Hall-Loaf, out of Reverence to their Holy Table in the Church Porch; for on
this Table they have Loaves and Salt without Sauces; the Loaves unleavened, and
the Salt unmixed: For 'twas fitting that the simplest and purest things should
be allotted to the Principal part of the Sacra, as the Reward of the
Ministration; and that others should imitate the same, and abstain from those
Loaves, that their betters may have them as their Prerogative.

After Supper, they keep a Holy Vigil all Night. They keep the Vigil thus: They
all rise together, and in the middle of the Hall make two Choirs; one of Men,
and the other of Women; each choosing their Eminentest person for Music for a
Precentor; and then they sing some Hymns made in the Praise of God, with
variety of Measures and Stanza's, sometimes singing all together, and sometimes
alternately, with peculiar Gestures, and dancing about, as those who are struck
with a Divine Fury. Sometimes they sing Processional, sometimes Stational
Hymns, altering their Postures with respect to the Altar, as they see occasion:
Then when each of them has been separately and by themselves entertained, just
as though they had been drinking some Divine Wine, they both mingle together,
and make one Choir, in imitation of the Choir at the Red Sea, upon the account
of the Miracles wrought there, which exceeded the Thought and Hope of the
Israelites, and made them all in one Company exult, as though they were beside
themselves, and sing Eucharistical Hymns to God their Deliverer; the Prophet
Moses, being the Men's Precentor; and Miram the Prophetess, Precentress to the
Women: The Choir of the Therapeuts and Therapeutesses, is just like it, singing
with different Notes; for the treeble Voice of the Women mingled with the Base
of the Men, makes a lovely and truly Musical Harmony. Their Thoughts are truly
fine, their Words are fine, and their Choiristers are comely: in short, the
Thoughts, the Expressions, and Choiristers, are all pious and devout. After
they have continued their Holy Transport till the Morning, they don't feel
their Heads disordered, or their Eyes heavy; but they are more wakeful than
they came; and as soon as they see the Sun rise, with their Eyes and their
whole Body toward the East, and their Hands lifted up toward Heaven, they
pray for Lightsomness of Mind, and Truth, and Rational Quick-sightedness. After
these Prayers every one of them retreat to their own Oratories, to cultivate
and traffic in their usual Philosophy.

Since therefore the Therapeuts have embraced the Theory of Nature, and lived
together with one Soul, and were Citizens both of Heaven and Earth, and were
truly commended and conformed to the Father and Maker of all things by Virtue,
which procured them that Friendship which is the truest Honor; do thou, by
applying thy Mind to a Prosecution of Virtue, which is better than all
Prosperity, reach the Top and Perfection of Felicity.

The Judgment and Observations of Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea, ( in his Eccl.
Hist. l. 2. c. 16.) and other Ancient Writers, concerning Philo 's Book of the
Therapeuts, and that they were Christians.
MARK (the Evangelist) going into Egypt, is reported to have been the first
Publisher there of the Gospel he had written, and to have settled Churches in
the very City of Alexandria. And furthermore, that so great a Multitude both of
Men and Women, who there embraced the Faith of Christ, professed from the very
beginning so severe and so Philosophical a Course of Live, that Philo
vouchsafed in his Writings to relate their Converse, their Assemblies, their
Eating and Drinking together, and their whole manner of Living.

It is reported that this Philo, in the times of Claudius, came to be
familiarly acquainted with Peter at Rome, who then Preached the Word of God
there: neither is this unlikely. For that Work of his, of which we speak, being
by him elaborated a long time after, does manifestly contain all the
Ecclesiastical Rules which are to this present observed among us. And seeing he
describes evidently the Lives of the Ascetae amongst us, he does make it
sufficiently perspicuous that he did not only see, but also very much approve
of and admire the Apostolical Men of his time, who being, as it is probable,
originally Jews, upon that account did then observe, in a great measure, the
Judaical Rites and Customs.

First of all therefore, in that Book which he entitled, Of Contemplative
Life; or, Of Suppliants, having professed that he would insert nothing
disagreeable to Truth, or of his own Head into that Account which he was about
to give, he says, That the Men were called Therapeutae, and the Women that were
conversant among them Therapeutriae: And he adjoyns the reason of that
Appellation, either because, like Physicians, they healed the Minds of those
that resorted to them, curing them of their vicious Affections; or because they
worshipped the Deity with a pure and sincere Service and Adoration.

Further, whether Philo himself gave them this Name, devising an Appellation
agreeable to the Manners and Dispositions of Men; or whether they were really
so called from the beginning, the Name of Christians not being every where
spread and diffused, it is not necessary positively to affirm or contend about
it. But he attests that, in the first place, they part with their Goods,
saying, That as soon as they betake themselves to this course of
Philosophizing, they put over their Wealth and Possessions to their Relations.
Then, casting away all Care of Wordly matters, they leave the Cities, and make
their Abode in Gardens and solitary Places; well knowing the Conversing with
Men of a different and disagreeing Persuasion to be unprofitable and hurtful.
Which thing the Christians of that time seem to me to have instituted out of a
generous and most fervent Ardour of Faith, endeavoring to emulate the
Prophetical severe Course of Life. Therefore in the Acts of the Apostles (which
contain nothing but the perfect Truth) it is showed, That all the Disciples of
the Apostles selling their Possessions and Goods, divided the Price among the
Brethren, according as every one had need, that so there might not be any
indigent Person amongst them. For as the Word says, As many as were Possessors
of Lands or Houses sold them, and brought the Prices of the things that were
sold and laid them down at the Apostles feet: and Distribution was made unto
every Man according as he had Need.

After Philo has attested the very same things with these, of the Therapeutae,
he adds thus much farther concerning them, word for word, saying, This sort of
Men, indeed, is diffused far and wide over the whole World. For it was
requisite that both Greeks and Barbarians should be partakers of so excellent a
Benefit. Egypt especially is full of them, throughout all its Divisions; but
most of all about Alexandria. But from all places, the principal of them retire
themselves into a most commodious place above the Lake Maria, situate upon a
little rising Hill, excellently well seated both for Wholsomeness of Air, and
Convenience of Abiding, as into the Country of the Therapeutae.

Then, after he has described their Houses, after what manner they were built,
he speaks thus of the Churches they have in diverse Places. In every House there
is a Chapel, called a Semnaeum, and Monasterium, in which, alone by
themselves, they perform the Mysteries of an Holy Life. They bring in thither
neither Meat nor Drink, nor any Corporal Provisions or Necessaries; but only
the Law, and the divine Oracles of the Prophets, and Hymns, and such like;
whereby Knowledge and Piety are increased and perfected.

And a little while after, he says: All the interval of time, from Sun rising
to the Evening, they spend in Meditations of Philosophy: For reading the Holy
Scriptures, they Philosophize after their Country way, and expound
Allegorically. For they suppose that the Words are only Notes and Marks of some
things of a Mystical Nature, which are to be explained Figuratively. They have
Writings of some ancient Persons, who have been heretofore famous Leaders of
their Sect, and have left them many Monuments of that Learning, which consists
in dark and secret Expressions, which they, using as original Platforms, do
imitate thereby that Course of Study.

These, certainly, seem to be the Words of such a Man as had heard some of our
Religion expounding the Holy Scriptures. And it is very likely that the
Writings of those ancient Persons, which he says they had, were the Gospels and
Writings of the Apostles, and certain Expositions of the ancient Prophets, of
which sort many are contained both in other Epistles of Paul, and also in that
written to the Hebrews.

Afterward Philo thus writes concerning the New Psalms composed by them. They
do not only spend their time in Contemplation, but they compose Songs and Hymns
to the Praise of God of all sorts of Meeter and Musical Verse, which they write
in grave and seemly Rhymes.

He relates many other things of them in that Book I mentioned: But I judged
these fittest to be selected and picked out, in which certain Marks of Church
Discipline are proposed.

But if any one should think what Philo here says to be in no wise proper to
the Evangelical Polity, but may be adapted to others besides those I have
mentioned; he will certainly be convinced by Philo's following Words; in which,
if he shall duly weigh the Matter, he will receive a most undoubted Testimony
of this thing. Now he writes thus: Having first laid Temperance, as a certain
foundation, they build thereupon the other Virtues. For none of them takes
either Meat or Drink before Sunset: for they hold it requisite to spend the Day
in the Study of Philosophy, and the Night in making necessary Provision for the
Body. Therefore they allot the whole Day to study, but allow a very small
portion of the Night for Bodily Provision. Some of them forget to eat for Three
Days together, so great is the desire of Knowledge that possesses them. But
some others of them are so well pleased with, and feed so richly and
deliciously upon the Banquets of Wisdom, which sets before them wholesome
Precepts, as a most sumptuous Feast, that they are wont scarce to taste any
necessary Food in twice that space, to wit, in Six Days time.

We suppose these Words of Philo to be evidently, and without all doubt, spoken
concerning those of our Religion. But if, after all this, any one shall still
persist in a peremptory denial of these things; he will, at length, recede from
his obstinate difficulty of Belief, being persuaded to submit to such manifest
Demonstrations as are no where to be found but in the Christian Religion,
composed according to the Rule of the Gospel.

Philo says further therefore, That among these Men, of whom we speak, there
are certain Women conversant, many of which continue Virgins being old; not out
of Necessity, like some of those amongst the Grecian Priests, but voluntarily
preserving their Chastity out of an ardent Affection to and Desire of Wisdom;
in the Embraces and Familiarity whereof they earnestly affect to spend their
Lives; having despised all Bodily Pleasures, and desiring earnestly not a
Mortal Issue, but an Immortal; which that Mind only that loves, and is beloved
of God, can of it self bring forth.

After many other Expressions, he speaks yet more plainly thus; Their
Expositions of Holy Writ are figurative, by way of Allegories. For these Men
suppose the whole Law to be like a Living Creature; the bare Words whereof are,
as it were the Body, and the invisible Sense, that lies hid under the Words,
resembles the Soul. Which sense this Sect have and do make it their Religion
earnestly to search into and contemplate, beholding in the Words, as in a
Glass, the admirable beauty of the Meaning.

There is no necessity of adding farther here an account of their Assemblies,
of the distinct Apartments of their Men and Women, and of their several Studies
and Holy Exercises, now in use amongst us, more especially about the Feast of
our Lord's Passion, when we are wont to practice them in Fastings, Watchings,
and attentive Reading of Holy Scriptures. All which the Man we have so often
mentioned, does relate in his Writings accurately, after the same manner in
which we only at this time observe them: Especially he mentions the Vigils of
the great Solemnity, the Holy Exercises therein, and the Hymns we are wont to
recite. And how, when one has begun to sing a Psalm harmoniously and gravely,
the rest, silently hearkening, do after sing out in Chorus, the latter parts
only of the Verses. And how throughout those Days, lying in Straw upon the
Ground, they wholly abstain from Wine, (as he has said in these express Words)
and eat nothing that has Blood in it: Water is their only Drink, and their Food
is Bread with Salt and Hyssop.

Farther he describes the Order and Degrees of their Governors, to wit, those
who perform the Ecclesiastical Offices; then the Ministrations of the Deacons;
and, lastly, the Episcopal Presidency over all. He that desires to know these
things more accurately, may be therein informed from the forementioned History
of Philo.

It is therefore apparently evident to every one, that Philo writing thus, did
mean thereby those first Preachers of the Evangelical Doctrine and Discipline,
at the beginning delivered by the Apostles.

Epiphanius, Bishop of Cyprus, concerning the same, Har. 29. 5.
HAving said that the Christians were at first called Nazarens, as Act.
24.5.2.22. and for some time Jesseans, whether from the Name of Jesse, or from
the Name of our Lord Jesus, because they were his Disciples, he adds: But thou
may find this in the Writings of PHILO, in the Book by him entitled, Of the
Jesseans, who describing their Polity and Commendations, and recounting their
Monastries near about the Lake Maria, he relates it of no other than of
Christians. For he, when he was in that Region, called Mariotis, and was by
them themselves conducted to the Monastries of that place, got much Profit by
it. For, being there in the Days of Easter, he saw both their Lives, and how
some lived without Eating all the Holy Week of Easter, some Two Days, and some
until the Evening. But all these things were done by this Man for the treating
of the Subject concerning the Faith and Manners of the Christians.

St. Hierom concerning the same, in his Book de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis.
PHILO the Jew, Born at Alexandria, of the Race of the Priests, is therefore by
us placed among the Ecclesiastical Writers, because writing a Book of the first
Church of Mark the Evangelist at Alexandria, he discourses in Praise of our
People, (the Christians there) recounting that they were not only there, but
also in many other Provinces, and calling their Habitations Monastries. Whence
it appears, that such was the Church of the first Believers in Christ, as now
the Monks endeavor and desire to be, that nothing may be any ones own, that
is, that none claim a Propriety in any thing, that there be none amongst them
Rich, none Poor, their Patrimonies be divided among those who need; that they
all attend to Prayer, and Psalms, also to Doctrine, and to Continence, such as
Luke relates were the first Believers at Jerusalem. It is reported, that under
Caius Caligula he was in some Danger at Rome, whither he was sent Legate for
his Nation: that when he came a second time to Claudius, he there, in the same
City, spoke with the Apostle Peter, and held Friendship with him; and for this
Cause also wrote in Praise of the Followers of Mark, the Disciple of Peter at
Alexandria.

A little after, recounting the Works of Philo, among the rest, he puts in One
Book concerning the Lives of our People, that is, concerning Apostolic Men, of
which we have spoken before, which he entitled, (...), viz. because they did
contemplate Heavenly things, and prayed continually.

Johannes Cassianus concerning the same, lib. 2. de Institut. cap. 5.
IN the Beginning of the Faith there were indeed but few, but those most
approved Persons, reckoned under the Denomination of Monks, who, as from Mark
the Evangelist, of Blessed Memory, who first presided Bishop in the City of
Alexandria, they received their Rule of Living, did not only retain those Great
things, which we read in the Acts of the Apostles, that the Church, or Crowd of
Believers, at first made so famous, viz.

The Multitude of them, who believed, were of one Heart, and of one Soul;
neither said any of them that ought of the things, which he possessed, were his
own; but they had all things Common. [Neither was there any among them that
lacked:] for as many as were Possessors of Land or Houses, sold them, and
brought the Prices of the things which were sold, and laid them down at the
Feet of the Apostles; and Distribution was made unto every Man according as he
had need.

But they even built up more sublime things upon them. For retiring into the
most secret parts of the Suburbs, they lead a Life of so great Rigor of
Abstinence, that so severe a Profession of Life was an amazement to others. For
they applied themselves with so much Fervor to the Reading of the Divine
Scriptures, and to Prayer, and to the Work of their Hands, Day and Night, that
neither the Appetite, or Memory of Meat, unless after two or three Days, did
interrupt them by Hunger of the Body. And they received Meat and Drink, not as
what they desired, but what was necessary, and not that neither before Sunset,
that they might conjoyn the time of Light with the Studies of Spiritual
Meditations, but the Care of the Body to the Night; and other things did they
effect more sublime than these: concerning which, he who is not sufficiently
informed by the People of the Country, may satisfy himself in the
Ecclesiastical History.

Sozomen concerning the same, 1 Hist. Eccl. c. 12.
HAving spoken of the Glory of the Christian Religion, by reason of the Virtue
of its Professors, and of the Confessors then living, and of the Famous Bishop
Spiridion, he adds: But most of all did they illustrate the Church with their
Virtues, and propagated the Christian Doctrine, who exercised the Monastic
Discipline. For this kind of PHILOSOPHY coming from God, with the greatest
Benefit to Men, despises indeed many Sciences, and the Artifice of Logic as a
matter of Curiosity, and by which the Exercise of better things is supplanted;
nor is any thing of Advantage for a right kind of Life conferred by it; and
with a more natural Prudence, void of Curiosity, teaches those things which
remove wholly Vitiousness, and effect better things; but the Middle things
between Virtue and Vice it reputes not among the Good; but delights in only
Good things, and holds him for an ill Man, who, although he abstains from Evil,
yet does no Good. For it does not make show, but exercises Virtue, and makes
no account of the Glory, which is of Men, resisting the Affections of the Mind
with great Fortitude; nor does it yield to the Necessities of Nature, nor stoop
to the Infirmities of the Body; but having obtained the Powers of a Divine
Mind, it looks perpetually at the Creator of all, whom it worshippeth Day and
Night, and appeaseth with Prayers and Supplications: But having begun a pure
Religion, with Purity of Mind, and the Exercise of Good Deeds, it makes light
of Washings, and such like [Purifications.] For it judges Sins only to be
Impurities, and being Conqueror of those things which happen from without,
and, as I may so say, Mistress of all, is not diverted from her purpose,
neither by the Confusion of those things which fill the Lives of Mortals, nor
by any Necessity; neither is it provoked with Contumelies; nor being injured,
does it revenge it self; nor does it sink, being pressed either with Sickness,
or with Penury of Necessaries; but does rather triumph over those, in which she
exercises Patience, and Meekness, and Contentation of Mind all the Life long;
and, as far as is possible to Humane Nature, becomes near to God; using this
present Life as in a Passage, is neither anxious for the acquest of Earthly
things, nor does so much as think of things present, even in urging Necessity;
but perpetually prizing a Life frugal, and discharged of temporal Furniture,
respects the Felicity which it has from thence, and is always disposed for a
Blessed End: But incessantly breathing out Piety toward God; it abhors the
Defilement of filthy Speaking, not so much as enduring in Speech those things
which in Fact it has banished from its Course of Life, and by degrees
contracting the Necessities of Nature, and compelling the Body to be content
with mean things; it does with Temperance, overcome Prodigality; Injustice,
with Justice; and corrects Lying, with Truth; and in right order keeps
Moderation in all things, and orders its Method of Life in keeping Concord and
Communion with Neighbors: It provides for Friends and Strangers, communicates
its Good to those who want, confers upon every one what are commodious for
them; not being troublesome to those who rejoice, but administering Comfort to
those who are sad: But in all studiously reaching after the True Good,
discoursing with sound Speeches, and wise Thoughts void of Elegance and
Rudeness, as with certain Medicines, does cure its Auditors with Decency and
Respect, without Contention, Scorn, or Anger: For since it is furnished with
reason, it refuses every unreasonable Motion, and completely rules the
Affections both of the Body, and the Mind.

This most Excellent Philosophy was begun, as some say, by Elias the Prophet,
and John the Baptist; but PHILO, the Pythagorean, writes, That the most
Excellent of (his Nation) the Hebrews, being assembled from all Parts in a
certain place at the Lake Maria, did Philosophize in a little Hill thereunto
adjacent: but describes their Habitation, Living, and Conversation; such as we
also now see amongst the Monks now living in Egypt. For he writes, that they
who began to Philosophize forsook their Estates, and renounced both Things and
Persons belonging to them, and lived without the Walls in solitary Fields and
Orchards; then that their Houses were Sacred, which they called Monasteries;
that they did devoutly worship God with Psalms and Hymns, nor did touch any
Food till Sunset; that some among them abstained for three days together or
more, and lay certain days upon the Ground; but Wine, and Things that have
Blood, they never at all used; but their Meat was Bread, and Salt, and Hyssop,
and their Drink Water: That ancient Women and Virgins dwelt among them, and for
the Love of Philosophy, (or Wisdom) of their own choice abstained from Marriage.

And Philo writing to this purpose seems to intend the Jews, who, in his time,
embracing Christianity, lived a little too much after the Jewish Manner, and
observed the Rites of their Nation. For among no others is that kind of Life to
be found: from whence I conjecture, that this Philosophy has, from that time,
flourished in Egypt: But others think that the Persecutions of those times gave
Occasion to this Religion; For, because those who escaped by Flight lived in
Mountains, and Deserts, and Woods, they contracted a Habit of this kind of
Living.

This of St. HIEROM being omitted in its proper place, (page 46.) it was
thought fit to insert it here.
MARK, the Disciple and Interpreter of Peter, entreated by the Brethren at
Rome, wrote a short Gospel, according to what he had heard Peter relate. Which
when Peter had read, he approved it, and by his Authority gave it to the Church
to be read, as writes Clemens in sexto (...) libro, and Papias Bishop of
Hierapolis. Of this Mark does Peter also make mention, under the Name of
Babylon, figuratively signifying Rome: The Church which is in Babylon salutes
you, and (so does) Mark, my Son. Wherefore, taking the Gospel, which he had
composed, he went to Egypt, and first Preaching Christ at Alexandria, he
founded the Church (there) with such Doctrine and Continence of Life, that it
enforced all Followers of Christ to their Example. At length Philo, the most
Eloquent of the Jews, seeing that first Church at Alexandria yet Judaizing,
wrote a Book concerning their Manner of Living, as in Praise of his own Nation.
And as Luke relates, that the Believers at Jerusalem had all things Common, so
does also he, what he did see done at Alexandria under Mark, commit to Memory.
He Died in the Eighth Year of Nero, and was Buried at Alexandria, Anianus
succeeding him.

Of the Ancient MONKS of Egypt, And their Original; A Relation of Piammon, an
Ancient Egyptian Abbot, and a Presbyter or Priest of great Grace and Virtue,
even to the doing of Miracles, Cassian. Coll. 18. cap. 4.
THERE are in Egypt Three sorts of Monks, whereof Two are excellent, but the
Third tepid and sloathful, and by all means to be avoided. The first is of the
Coenobites, who living together in a Religious Society, are governed by the
Judgment (and Order) of One Elder, (or Superior) of which sort a very great
number of Monks are resident throughout all Egypt. The second, is of the
Anchoretes, (or Hermites) who being first instructed in the Monasteries, and
become already perfect in their Conversation, have chosen the Secrets of the
Desert: of whose Perfection we also wish to be Partakers. The third, the
reprehensible one of the Sarabaits. Of all which we shall discourse severally
more fully in order.

The Discipline of the Coenobites took its beginning from the time of the
Preaching of the Apostles. For such was that whole Multitude of Believers at
Jerusalem, which, in the Acts of the Apostles, is thus described:

The Multitude of them, who believed, were of one Heart, and of one Soul;
neither said any of them that ought of the things, which he possessed, were his
own; but they had all things Common. Neither was there any among them that
lacked: for as many as were Possessors of Land or Houses, sold them, and
brought the Prices of the things which were sold, and laid them down at the
Feet of the Apostles; and Distribution was made unto every Man according as he
had need.

Such, I say, was then the whole Church, as it is now difficult to find a very
few in the Monasteries. But when, after the Apostles decease, the Multitude of
the Believers began to grow Tepid, and that most of all, which came into the
Faith of Christ of Foreigners and diverse Nations, of whom the Apostles,
according to their Rudiments of Faith, and inveterate Custom of Gentisism, did
require no more, but that they should abstain from Fornication, and from things
strangled, and from Blood; and that Liberty which was indulged to the Gentiles,
by reason of the Infirmity of their first Belief, began by degrees to
contaminate the Perfection even of that Church, which was settled at Jerusalem;
and the Number daily increasing, either of Natives, or of Foreigners, the
Fervor of that first Faith began to cool; not only those who came flowing in
to the Faith of Christ, but even they who were the Principal of the Church were
relaxed from that Strictness. For some thinking that, which they saw conceded
to the Gentiles, by reason of their Infirmity, to be lawful also for
themselves, believed they should suffer no Detriment, if they did, with their
Goods and Estates, (retaining them in Propriety to themselves) follow the Faith
and Confession of Christ. But others, in whom the Apostolic Fervor did still
abide, mindful of that ancient Perfection, departing from their Cities, and
from the Company of those who believed the Negligence of a more remiss Life to
be Lawful for themselves, or for the Church of God, began to reside in places
without the Cities, and more secret, (or retired) and to exercise privately and
apart the things which they remembered to be instituted by the Apostles
generally throughout the whole Body of the Church: And so did that Discipline,
which we have mentioned, of the Disciples, who sequestered themselves from the
Contagion of the rest, come to a Settlement. Who, in process of time, by
degrees, being separate from the Crowds of Believers, because they did abstain
from Marriage, and withdrew themselves from the Company of their Parents, and
the Conversation of the World, were called Monachi, or Monazontes, for the
Strictness of their single and solitary Life. Whence it followed, that, from
the Communion of their Company, they were called Coenobitoe, and their Cells
and Habitations Coenobia. This therefore alone was the most Ancient kind of
Monks, which was the prime, not only in Time, but also in Grace (and Virtue,)
and which continued inviolable for very many Years, even to the Age of Father
Paul, or Antony; the Footsteps whereof we even now see remaining in the strict
Coenobia, (or Monasteries, as now called.)

Of this number of Perfect ones, and, as I may say, fertile Root, were produced
after these also the Flowers and Fruits of the Holy Anchoretes, (or Hermites;)
of which Profession, we know, those, whom we a little before remembered, viz.
Holy Paul and Antony, to have been the Principal, or first Beginners. Who
betook themselves to the Secrets or Retirements of Solitude, not as some,
through Pusillanimity, or the Disease of Impatience, but out of Design of more
sublime Advancement, and Divine Contemplation, although the former of them is
said to have gone into the Wilderness under pretense of Necessity, while, in
the time of Persecution, he avoids the Snares of his Relations. Thus from that
Discipline, which we have mentioned, proceeded another kind of Perfection, the
Followers of which are deservedly named Anachoretoe, that is, Retired, because
not content with this Victory, whereby they have avoided the secret Snares of
the Devil among Men, designing to encounter the Devils in an open Combat and
manifest Conflict, they fear not to enter into the vast Recesses of the
Wilderness, in imitation of John the Baptist, who remained in the Wilderness
his whole Life; and of Elias and Elisha, and of those whom the Apostle makes
mention of thus: They wandered about in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented: Of whom the World was not worthy, wandering in
Deserts, and in Mountains, and in Dens, and in Caves of the Earth, Heb. 11.37,
38.

And when the Christian Religion did flourish in these two Professions of
Monks, but this Order also began to decline, there arose up after those, that
worst and unfaithful kind of Monks, or rather, that Evil Plantation reviving
grew up, which, by Ananias and Sapphira sprouting out in the beginning of the
Church, was cut down by the Apostle Peter; which, among the Monks, was judged
detestable and execrable, nor by any other more used, so long as the Fear of
that strict Sentence remained with them fixed in the Memory of the Faithful,
with which the Blessed Apostle not suffeirng the aforesaid Leaders of that New
Crime to be cured with any Penitence, or any Satisfaction, did cut off the
pernicious Sprout with sudden Death. But that Example, whereby with Apostolical
Severity it was punished in Ananias and Sapphira, being, through long
Inconsiderateness, and the oblitering nature of Time, by degrees, subtracted
from the Contemplation of some, there arose that sort of the Sarabites; who
from thence that they did sequester themselves from the Congregation of the
Coenobites, and did separately provide for their own Occasions, in the
propriety of the Egyptian Language were named Sarabites, proceeding out of the
Number of those, whom we mentioned before, who choose rather to simulate the
Evangelical Perfection, than to embrace it in Truth and Reality; being provoked
with an Emulation, or by the Commendation of those, who preferred the complete
Nudity of Christ before all the Riches of the World. For these, while either
with a weak Mind they affect a Matter of the highest Virtue, or are by
Necessity compelled to come to this Profession, while they are eager only to be
reckoned under the Name of Monks, without any Emulation of their Studies or
Endeavors, they do not at all seek after the Discipline of the Caenobites, nor
are they subject to the Will and Ordering of the Seniors or Superiors, nor
being instructed by their Traditions, do they learn to overcome their own
Wills, or receive any Rule of Discretion by a regular Erudition, but renouncing
(the World) in outward Appearance, that is, to the sight of Men, they either
continue in their Houses under the Privilege of this Name, obliged to the same
Occupations; or buidling Cells for themselves, and calling them Monasteries,
they abide there in their own Power and Liberty, not at all submitting to the
Evangelical Precepts, viz. that they be employed in no Solicitude for daily
Food, in no Distractions of Family Concerns; which they only use without
Infidel doubting, who being set free from all the Goods of this World, do so
subject themselves to the Presidents of the Monasteries, that they do not so
much as own themselves to be Lords of themselves. But they, who declining, as
we said, the Strictness of the Monastery, reside two or three together in
Cells, not content to be governed by the Care and Government of the Abbot, but
principally procuring this for themselves, that being set free from the Yoke of
the Superiors, they may have the Liberty of exercising their own Wills, and of
going out, and gading where, or doing what they please, even more in their
daily Works than those, who live in the Monasteries, are (indeed) consumed (and
wasted) Day and Night, but not with the same Faith, and the same Purpose (of
Mind.) For this they do, not that they may subject (or commit) the Fruit or
Product of their Labor to the Judgment of the Steward; but that they may
acquire Money, which they may lay up. Between which, what Difference there is,
I pray you observe.

Those not thinking any thing of the Morrow, do offer to God the most grateful
Fruits of their Labor. But these extending their Infidel Solicitude not only
to the Morrow, but even to the Terms of many Years, believe God either a Liar,
or a Beggar, who either cannot, or will not, afford them his promised
Sufficiency of daily Food and Raiment. Those, with all earnestness, desire that
they may attain Nudity of all things, and Poverty: These, that they may obtain
an Affluence of all Goods: They striving with one another, labor to exceed in
their daily Works the stated Rule, for this purpose, that what is redundant
above the Holy Uses of the Monastery, may be given to the Prisons, or to the
Hospitals, or to the Poor, at the Pleasure of the Abbot: These, that what
remains of their daily Gluttony, may serve either for a more profuse
Gratification, or be hoarded up through the Sin of Covetousness. Lastly, To
grant that these things, which are with none of the best Purposes hoarded up,
may also, by them, be better disposed of than we have said; yet even so do they
not aspire to the Worth of the Virtue and Perfection of the others. For they
bringing so great Revenues to the Monastery, and daily renouncing them
themselves, do persevere in so great Humility of Subjection, that they are
deprived of the Power, as of themselves, so also of those things which, with
their Sweat, they have acquired, continually renewing the Fervor of their first
Ab-renunciation, while they do daily strip themselves of the Fruits of their
own Labor. But these, even in that which they give to the Poor, being puffed
up, do daily fall headlong. Those, the Patience and Strictness, with which they
so devoutly hold out in this Profession, which they had once embraced, that
they never fulfill their own Wills, makes them daily crucified to the World,
and living Martyrs: but these, the Tepidity and Lukewarmness of their own Wills
sinks down alive into Hell.

There is also another, a fourth sort, which we see lately to have risen in
these, who flatter themselves with the Show and Image of Anchoretes, and who,
in their Beginnings, did seem with a kind of short Fervor to desire the
Perfection of the Coenobites, but presently being cooled, while they refuse to
cut off their former Manners and Vices, nor are content long to bear the Yoke
of Humility and Patience, and disdain to be subject to the Government of the
Seniors, or Superiors, they require separate Cells, and desire to sit
Solitaries, viz. that so, they being provoked by none, they may be thought
Patient, Meek, and Humble, by Men. Which Institution, yea, Lukewarmness, whom
it once infects, it never permits to arrive at Perfection. For, by this means,
their Corruptions are not only not cured, but strengthened for the worse, while
they are provoked by none; as a certain deadly intestine Poison, by how much
the more it is conceiled, spreading so much the deeper, makes the Disease
incurable to the Party.

St. Hierom concerning the same, Epist. 22. ad Eustoch. c. 15.
THERE are in Egypt Three sorts of Monks: the first, Coenobites, which they, in
the Language of their Country, call Sauces, we may say living in Common: The
second, Anchoretes, who live alone separately throughout the Deserts, and from
thence that they have retired far from Men, are so called. The third, that
which they call Remoboth, a very bad and disesteemed kind, and that which, in
our Province, is either sole, or the first. These inhabit two or three, and not
many more, together, living at their own Pleasure and Command, and of what they
have wrought, bring all together for common Maintenance. They dwell, for the
most part, in Cities and Towns, and, as if their Art, not their Lives, were
Holy, whatever they sell is at a greater Price (than ordinary.) There are
often Squabbles among them, because living of their own Provisions they do not
suffer themselves to be subject to any one. They are wont, in truth, to contend
about Fastings; and what is matter of Secrecy, they make it matter of Victory
(or Triumph.) Among them all things are affected, their Sleeves large, their
Sandals flopping, their Garment thicker, and frequent are their Sighs, visits
of Virgins, and detraction of the Clergy; and if a Feast Day come, they fill
themselves till they vomit. These therefore being cashiered, as very Pests, let
us come to those who are more in number, and live in Common, that is, those
whom we have said are called Coenobites.

The first Confederation, or mutual Agreement amongst them, is, to obey their
Superiors, and to do whatever they command. They are divided into Decennaries,
(or Tithings) (as our Ancestors called them) and Centenaries; so that One of
Ten does preside over the other Nine, and over those Ten Presidents the
Centenarie, or Hundreder. They abide separate, but in Cells joined together,
until the ninth hour; according to their Institute, none goes to another,
except these Decanes or Deans, whom we mentioned, that if, perhaps, any of them
has any doubtful Thoughts, he may be comforted by his Discourses. After the
ninth hour they come together in common, where Psalms are sung or chanted, the
Scriptures read, as accustomed, and the Prayers being done, and all sitting
down, he in the middle, whom they call the Father, begins to discourse; while
he is speaking, there is great Silence, (and Composedness) that no one dares to
look aside, or to hawk and spit. The Excellence of the Speaker appears in the
Weeping of the Auditors: silent Tears trickle down their Faces, but their
Compunction does not so much as break out into Sighs. But when he comes to
speak concerning the Kingdom of Christ, and of the future Beatitude and Glory
to come, you may see all, with a moderate Sigh, and Eyes lift up to Heaven,
say, Who will give me the Wings of a Dove, and I will fly away, and be at rest?
After this the Assembly is dismissed, and each Tithing or Decennary, with their
Father, go to their Table, where they serve every Week by turn. There is no
Noise at their Meal, none, while eating, speaks: They live upon Bread, Pulse,
and Herbs, which are seasoned only with Salt. Wine only Old Men take, who with
Children have their Meal together, that the spent Age of some may be sustained,
and the tender Age of others not destroyed. Then they rise together, and having
sung an Hymn, retire to their Stalls. There, until Evening, each with his
Companions discoursed to this purpose: Did you see such an one, and such an
one? What Grace in him? What Silence? What decent Comportment? If they see one
weak, they comfort him; if fervent in the Love of God, they encourage him to
Industry. And because in the Night, out of the time of public Prayers, each
does watch in his own Couch, they go about to every one of their Cells, and
laying their Ear to them, diligently listen what they do. Whom they apprehend
more remiss, they do not presently reprove; but, dissemble what they hear,
visit him more often; and Beginners they rather provoke at first, than compel
to Prayer. The Work of the Day is settled, and being delivered to the Decane or
Tithing-Man, is after carried to the Steward, who himself also does every
Month, with great Reverence, give account to the (General) Father of all. By
whom also the Provisions, when made ready, are tasted; and because none may say
I want a Coat, or a Cassock, or a Mat, he so orders all things, that none
should ask, none should want. But if any begin to be Sick, he is carried to a
larger Room, and is so taken Care of by the Ministry of the Old Men, that he
desires not the Delicacies of Cities, or the Affection of his Mother. Upon the
Lord's Day they apply themselves only to Prayer and Reading; which indeed they
do at all times when their Work is done: They do every Day learn something out
of the Scriptures. Their Fast is alike all the Year, except Lent, in which only
it is permitted them to live more strictly. From Easter to Whitsontide their
Suppers are changed into Dinners, whereby both the Ecclesiastical Tradition is
observed, and they do not charge their Stomach with a doubled Portion of Food.
Such does Philo, an Imitator of the Platonic Style; such Josephus, the Greek
Livie, in the second History of the Captivity of the Jews, relate the ESSEANS
to be.

St. Austin concerning the same.
UPON John 10.11. I am the Good Shepherd. But there in Egypt, how he is the
Good Shepherd, those who know, do confess; those who know not, let them inquire
how Great a Flock he has there together, how Great a Number of Holy Men and
Women, wholly contemning the World, he there has. That Flock has so
increased, that it has expelled Superstition even from thence; all the
Superstitions of Idols, which were so powerful there, has it expelled. Sermon.
50. de Verb. Dom. c. 10.

St. Austin concerning the Anchorets, and Coenobites, and Holy Nuns of his time.
DEservedly have thou (O Catholic Church, the most True Mother of Christians)
so many Hospitable People, so many Officious, so many Merciful, so many
Learned, so many Chaste, so many Holy, so many so Inflamed with the Love of God,
that in the greatest Continence and incredible Contempt of this World they are
delighted with the Desert. What, I pray you, is it that they see, who cannot
not love Man, and yet can (live and) not see Man? Truly that, whatever it is,
is more excellent than Humane things, (or any thing of Man) in the
Contemplation of which, a Man can live without (the Sight of) Man. ( This of
Anchorets, and then, a little after, of the Coenobites.

Who knows not that a Multitude of Christians, of most exquisite Continence,
are daily more and more diffused throughout the whole World, and especially in
the East, and in Egypt, which you can by no means be ignorant of. I Will say
nothing of those, whom I mentioned a little before, who being most retired
wholly from all sight of Men, are content with Bread alone, which at certain
times is brought to them, and Water, inhabit the most barren Deserts, enjoying
Communication with God, to whom they adhere with pure Minds, and are blessed
with the Contemplation of his Beauty, which cannot be perceived but by the
Intellects of Saints. I say I will say nothing of these: for they seem to some
to have forsaken Humane Affairs more than they ought, who understand not how
much their Minds do profit in Prayer, and their Lives for Examples to others,
whose Bodies we are not permitted to see. But I think it long and superfluous
to discourse of this: For this so great a height of Sanctity, who does not of
his own accord think it to be admired and honored, who by our Speech can think
so? Only they are to be admonished, who vainly boast themselves, that the
Temperance and Continence of the most Holy Christians of the Catholic Faith
has proceeded so far, that it may seem to some that it should be restrained
and recalled within Humane Bounds: So far above Men are their Minds thought to
have ascended by those who are displeased at it.

But if this exceeds our Ability to bear, who will not admire and applaud
those, who, having contemned and forsaken the Allurements of this World, are
congregated into a common, most chaste and most holy Life, spend their Days
together, living in Prayers, Lessons, Conferences, not puffed up with any
Pride, nor troublesome with any Obstinacy, nor pining with any Envy; but
modest, bashful, quiet, do offer up to God their Lives most agreeable among
themselves, and most firmly adhering to Him, from whom they received this
Power, a most grateful Present. None possesses any thing of his own; None is
burdensome to any one. They work those things with their Hands, with which
their Body may be supplied, and they not be hindered from God. But the Work it
self they deliver to those whom they call Deans, because they have the
Oversight of Tens, that none of them may be touched with any Care of their
Body, neither in Food or Raiment, nor any thing else needful for daily
Occasions, or for any change of Health, if it happen, as is common. But those
Deans dispensing all things with great Care, and making ready whatever that
Life does, by reason of the Imbecility of the Body, require, do yet deliver all
over to one, whom they call the Father. But these Fathers are not only most
holy in their Manners, but most excellent in Divine Doctrine, eminent in all
things: They direct without any Pride those, whom they call Sons, with great
Authority of Command, and with great Readiness of Obedience in them. They meet
all at the end of the Day every one out of their Cells, while yet Fasting, to
hear that Father. And they meet before each of the Fathers, at least Three
Thousand Men: for many more live under one. They hear with incredible
Attention, and deepest Silence, signifying the Affections of their Mind, as the
Speech of him who speaks moves them, either with Sighing, or with Weeping; but
Modest, and without Noise. Then they refresh their Bodies so much as is
sufficient for Health and Salubrity, each restraining his Appetite, lest it be
greedy even of those few and mean things which are provided. In like manner
they abstain, not only from Flesh and Wine, for sufficient allay of Lusts, but
also from those things which do so much the more excite and provoke the
Appetite of the Stomach and of the Palate, by how much they may seem to some
more clean: Under which pretense, a filthy Desire of exquisite Dishes, without
Flesh, is wont to be ridiculously and filthily defended. Truly, whatever is
redundant above necessary Provision; for there is much redundant by the Work of
their Hands, and the Strictness of their Meals; it is with no less Care
distributed to the Poor, than with what it was earned by them who distribute
it. For they do by no means endeavor that these things should abound with
them, but by all means are diligent, that what does abound may not remain with
them; insomuch, that they send even Ships laden to those places where indigent
People dwell. There Is no need to say more of a thing so well known.

This is also the Life of the WOMEN, who serve God with Carefulness and
Chastity, who are separated and removed from Men as far as is decent, joined to
them only in pious Charity, and Imitation of Virtue; to whom Young Men have no
access at all, nor the Ancient neither, although most Grave and Approved,
further than to the threshold, for the supplying them with the Necessaries
which they need. They do both exercise and sustain the Body, by making Cloth,
and deliver the Garments themselves to the Brethren, receiving of them again
what is necessary for their Maintenance.

These Manners, this Life, this Order, this Institution, if I would praise it,
I am not able to do it as it deserves. And I fear lest I should seem to think
that of it self barely related it would not please, if I should think fit to
add to the Simplicity of a Reporter the Flourishes of an Orator. lib. 1. de
Moribus Ecclesiae Catholicae. cap. 30, 31.

The Direction of Piammon, to some Foreiners, who came to his Monastery.
WHo-ever desires to obtain the Skill of any Art, unless with all Care and
Vigilance he oblige himself to the Studies and Labors of that Discipline, which
he desires to learn, and observes the Precepts and Institutions of the most
complete Masters of that Art or Science, he does in vain, with vain Desires,
wish to be like them, whose Care and Industry he refuses to emulate......

Wherefore, if the Cause of God, as we believe, drew you to an Emulation of our
Knowledge, you must, abdicating the Prejudices of your Education, with all
Humility, observe whatever ye shall see your Seniors (or Superiors) do or
prescribe. Nor let it move you, or withdraw and divert you from that Imitation,
although, at present, the Reason or Cause of any Thing or Fact (which you see)
be not manifest to you. For to those who think well and simply of all things,
and do more study to imitate than examine what they see prescribed or done by
the Ancients, by their own Experience does the Knowledge of all things come to
them. But he will never enter into the Reason of the Truth, who begins to learn
with questioning things: For the Enemy seeing him rather confiding in his own,
than in the Judgment of the Fathers, does easily drive him to that, that even
those things which are most profitable and wholesome for him, shall seem to him
superfluous and hurtful: And so does the crafty Enemy impose upon his
Presumption, that he persuades him, pertinaciously adhering to his unreasonable
Determinations, that that only is Holy which he, in the Error of his Obstinacy,
thinks Right and Just. Cassian. Coll. 18. cap. 2, 3.

An Excellent Exhortation of Pinuphius to a Novice, upon his Admittance into
his Monastery.
lib. 4. de Vit. Pat. cap. 31. ex Cassian.
SON, thou know after how many Days waiting before the Doors, thou art this
Day received. Of which difficulty (of thy Reception) thou ought, in the
first place, to understand the Cause: for it may advantage thee much in this
Life, which thou desire to enter into, if, understanding the Reason of it,
thou do accordingly come to the Service of Christ, and as thou ought to
do. For as infinite Glory is promised hereafter to those, who faithfully serve
God, and do adhere to Him according to the Institution of this Rule: so most
grievous Pains are prepared for them, who shall perform the same coldly and
negligently; and shall neglect to produce congruous Fruits of Sanctity,
according to what they do profess, or by Men are believed to be. For it is
better not to Vow, than to vow, and not perform: and Cursed is he who does the
Work of the Lord negligently. Therefore, for this cause, wast thou long refused
by us, not that we do not desire, with all our Hearts, to promote the Salvation
of thee, or of all, [or do not wish, even afar off, to meet those who desire to
come to Christ] but lest, being too hastily received, we should make both our
selves guilty before God of Levity, and thee of the greater Punishment, if, at
present, easily received, and, not understanding the weight of this Profession,
thou should afterward prove either a (total) Deserter, or a tepid
(Professor.) -- Know therefore that this Day thou art dead to this World, and
that, according to the Apostle, thou art crucified to the World, and the World
to thee. -- But perphaps thou will say, How can one that is Living be
Crucified? Hear briefly the Reason.

Our Cross, is the Fear of the Lord: for as one Crucified, has not the power
thereafter to move or turn his Members any way at the pleasure of his own Mind;
so we also ought to apply our Wills and Desires, not to that which pleases us
at present, but according to the Precept of the Lord, as it obliges us. And as
he who is fixed to the Tree of the Cross, does not then regard the things of
this World, nor think of his Affections, is then moved with no desire of
Possessions, and while he is yet living in the Body, reckons himself dead to
all Earthly things; so we also, by the Fear of God, ought to be crucified to
all carnal Vices, and there always to have the Eyes of our Minds fixed, whether
we ought every moment to hope to arrive. We must therefore beware that we do
not at any time resume any of those things, which, at our Renouncing (the
World) we have forsaken. For the crafty Serpent does always watch our Steps,
that is, he lays Snares for our going out, and even to the end of our Life does
always endeavor to supplant us: and therefore to have begun well profits
nothing, if it be not well finished. Wherefore, according to the Determination
of the Scripture, being entered into the Service of the Lord, stand in the Fear
of the Lord, and prepare thy Soul, not for Ease, not for Delights, but for
Temptations and Streights: for we must through many Tribulations enter into the
Kingdom of God; For narrow is the Gate, and straight is the Way, which leads to
Life, and few there are who find it.

The Beginning therefore of our Salvation, is the Fear of the Lord: For by
this, is both the beginning of our Conversion, and the Preservation of our
Virtue obtained; which, when it has once pierced into the Mind of Man, it
produces a Contempt of all (these) things, and begets an abhorrence of the
World; and by Contempt, and forsaking of our Riches, is true Humility obtained.
And Humility is proved by these Tokens: 1. If the Religious person have in him
all his Wills mortified. 2. If he conceil not his Acts nor his Thoughts from
his Superior. 3. If he commit all to his Judgment, (and reserve) nothing to his
own Discretion. 4. If in all things commanded he keep the Meekness of
Obedience, and Constancy of Patience. 5. If he do Injury to none, and also bear
patiently those done to him. 6. If he do nothing besides the Exemplar of his
Rule. 7. If to all things commanded him, he judges himself as an ill and
unworthy Workman. 8. If he declare himself inferior to all. 9. If he hold his
Tongue, and be not forward to speak. 10. If he be not apt to Laughter. By such
Tokens is true Humility discerned.

And these things also be necessary for thee to be observed in the
Congregation, viz. That, according to the Declaration of the Psalmist, thou
be as one Deaf, not Hearing; and one Dumb, not opening his Mouth:
questioning nothing, judging nothing of these things, which shall be commanded
thee. Wherefore thou ought not to hope to obtain thy Patience from the
Virtue of others, that is, that thou then only possess it, when thou art
provoked by no Body.

The beginning of our Salvation, (as has been said) is, the Fear of our Lord.
Of the Fear of our Lord, is sound Compunction begotten; From Compunction of the
Heart, proceed Contempt and Nakedness of all Riches; From that Nakedness,
Humility proceed; Of Humility, is begotten Mortification of our Wills; And by
Mortification of our Wills, are all Vices extirpated; By the expulsion of
Vices, do Virtues fructify and grow up; And by the growth of Virtues, is
Purity of Heart acquired; And by Purity of Heart, is the Perfection of
Apostolical Charity possessed. Cassian. 4. Instit. cap. 32.

The Advice of Moses, an Ancient Egyptian Abbot, for the obtaining true
Discretion.
TRUE Discretion is not acquired but by true Humility. Of which Humility, this
is the first Proof, if all things, not only which are acted, but even which are
thought, be referred to the Examination of the Elders, so that the Person, not
trusting to his own Judgment, do, in all things, acquiess in their
Determinations, and learn what he ought to judge Good or Evil by their
Teaching. Which Instruction will not only teach a Young Person to walk in the
right path by the true Way of Discretion, but will also preserve him unhurt
from all the Frauds and Snares of the Enemy. For he can by no means be
deceived, who ever lives not after his own Judgment, but after the Manner of
the Ancients: Nor will the Crafty Enemy be able to impose upon his Ignorance,
who does not cover any of the Thoughts arising in his Heart with a pernicious
Bashfulness, but does either reject or admit them upon mature examination of
the Elders. For immediately after a malignant Thought is discovered, it
withers; and before the Judgment of Discretion be pronounced, the filthy
Serpent, being, as it were, by the virtue of Confession drawn out of his dark
subterraneous Den into the Light, and in a manner exposed and detected,
withdraws himself. For so long do his noxious Suggestions prevail in us as they
are conceiled in the Heart, and no longer. Cassian. Coll. 2. ca. 10. v. 4.
Instit. cap. 9, 39. Basil. Ascet. Qu. 26. Constable. cap. 19.

The Instruction of the Ancient Egyptian Abbot, Nestero, concerning Spiritual
Knowledge, Cass. Coll. 14.
THERE are many kinds of Sciences in this World: For as great Variety there is
of them, as (there is) of Arts and Disciplines: But though all of them are
either altogether unprofitable, or serviceable only for the Commodities of this
Life; yet is there none of them, which has not a proper Order and Method of
its Teaching, by which it may be attained by those who desire it. If therefore
those Arts are directed to be attained by certain and proper Methods, how much
rather does the Discipline and Profession of our Religion, which tends to the
contemplating of the Secrets of Invisible Mysteries, and seeks not the
Retribution of a temporal Gain, but of Eternal Reward, consist in a certain
Order and Method: Of which, the Science is twofold: the first, Practical; that
is, Actual, which is performed in the Amendment of Manners, and the Purgation
of Vices: the other, is Theoretical; that is, which consists in the
Contemplation of Divine things, and the Knowledge of most Sacred Senses. ( cap.
1.)

Who-ever therefore would attain to the Theoretick, (or Contemplative) it is
necessary that with all Study and Industry he acquire first the Actual Science.
For this Practical may be possessed without the Theoretick; but the Theoretick
without the Practick cannot be thoroughly apprehended: For there are certain
Steps so ordered and distinguished, that the mean Estate of Man may ascend to
the top: If they succeed one another in the Order which we have said, one may
by them come to the top; to which, if the first be taken away he cannot fly up.
He does therefore in vain endeavor to see God, who does not avoid the
Infection of Vices: For the Spirit of God flies that which is feigned, nor will
it dwell in a Body subject to Sins. ( cap. 2.)

But this Actual Accomplishment consists of two Branches; The first, the
Knowledge of the Nature, and of the Cure of Vices: The second, the Knowledge of
the Order of Virtues; and the Accomplishment of the Mind with them; so that it
may not serve them by the Compulsion of a forcible Regiment, but be as it were
fed and delighted (with them) as with a Good natural to it, and ascend that
hard and narrow Way with Delight. ( cap. 3.)

If your Concern be to attain to the Light of Spiritual Knowledge, not out of
vain Ostentation, but from the Grace of Reformation, you must first be affected
with a Desire of that Beatitude, of which it is said, Blessed are the pure in
Heart, for they shall see God: that ye may also arrive to that, concerning
which the Angel said to Daniel: But they, who are instructed, shall shine as
the Splendour of the Firmament; and they, who instruct many to Righteousness, as
the Stars for ever and ever. --

Wherefore, continuing that Diligence of Reading, which I perceive you have,
make have with all Industry, as soon as may be, to learn completely the Actual,
that is, the Moral Discipline; for without this cannot be understood that
Contemplative Purity, which I mentioned, which they alone obtain, as a Reward
after the Expense of many Labors and Pains, who become perfect, not by the
Words of other Teachers, but by the Virtue of their own Actions. -- If ye will
prepare a Sacred Tabernacle in your Heart for Spiritual Knowledge; purge your
selves from the Contagion of all Vices, and divest your selves of the Cares of
this Life: For it is impossible for a Soul which is busied but a little in
Worldly Affairs, to obtain the Gift of Knowledge, or to be fruitful in
Spiritual Senses, or retentive of Sacred Lessons. Observe therefore in the
first place, lest your Study in Reading, and Labor of your Desire, be
frustrated by vain Elation, that you impose Silence on your Tongue: For this is
the first Entrance of Actual Discipline; -- and that you receive the
Institutions and Sentences of all the Seniors with Attention and Silence; and
laying them up in your Heart, make have more to practice them your selves, than
to teach them to others: For from this, will grow a pernicious Presumption of
Vainglory; but from that, the Fruit of Spiritual Understanding. Do not dare
therefore to utter any thing in a Conference of the Seniors, but what either an
hurtful Ignorance, or the Cause of necessary Knowledge does compel, as some,
who, filled with the Affection of Vainglory, pretend to enquire what they know
very well: For it is impossible that he, who, out of design to gain the
Applause of Men applies himself to the Study of Reading, should obtain the Gift
of true Science. For, of necessity, he who is fettered with this Passion, must
be bound also with other Vices, and especially of Pride; and so failing in the
Actual and Moral Undertaking, he cannot at all attain to Spiritual Knowledge,
which springs from it. Neither presume to teach to any in Words, what you have
not first practiced in Deeds: For this Order has our Lord, by his Example,
taught us to observe, of whom it is said, -- Which Jesus began to do, and to
teach. Beware therefore, lest leaping out to Teach, before Practice, you be
reputed in the Number of them, of whom, in the Gospel, our Lord says to his
Disciples: What they say to you, observe and do; but according to their Works,
do not: for they say, and do not, etc. c. 9.

If therefore you would attain to the true Knowledge of the Scriptures, you
must make have first to obtain a settled Humility in your Heart; which will
lead you, not to that which puffs up, but to that which gives Light of
Understanding, or illustrates Knowledge by the Perfection of Charity. For it is
impossible that an uncleansed Mind should obtain the Gift of Spiritual
Knowledge, etc. ( cap. 10.)

Moreover, this is by all means to be endeavored, that having expelled all
Earthly Solicitude and Thought, you give your self continually to Sacred
Lessons, until continual Meditation tincture your Mind, and form it to the
Likeness of it self, etc. ( cap. 10.)

But it is impossible, as I said before, that any one unexperienced should
either understand or teach these things: For he who is not capable so much as
to conceive them, How should he be fit to teach 'em? Of which, if
notwithstanding he should presume to teach any thing, his Speech, without
doubt, would be ineffectual and unprofitable, reach only to the Ears of the
Auditors, but not pierce the Heart. ( cap. 14.)

Abbot Moses, concerning the End and Scope of a Monastic Life, Cassian. Coll.
1.
THE End of our Undertaking, according to the Apostle, is Life Eternal: so he
says Romans 6.22. Having your Fruit unto Holiness, and the End Everlasting Life:
But the Scope Purity of Heart, which he deservedly calls Holiness or
Sanctification; without which the aforesaid End cannot be attained. -- Which
Scope he elsewhere expressly mentions: Forgetting those things which are
behind, and reaching forth to those things which are before, I press toward the
(Scope or) Mark, for the Prize of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus,
Phil. 3. -- Whatever therefore guides us to this Mark, that is, Purity of
Heart, it is to be followed with all our Might: but whatever does withdraw us
from it, is to be eschewed as pernicious and noxious. For, for this do we
undergo and act all things: For this are Parents, Country, Dignities, Riches,
Delights of this World, and all Pleasure, contemned, to wit, that perpetual
Purity of Heart may be retained. This Design therefore being resolved upon, our
Acts and Thoughts shall always be rightly directed to the obtaining of it.
Which if it be not continually set before our Eyes, it will not only make all
our Labors vain and instable without Profit, but also all our Thoughts varying
and contrary to themselves. For, of necessity, the Soul, which has not whether
to have recourse, and where principally to rest, must every moment be changed,
according to the variety of its Occurrences; and by those things which happen
without, be continually transformed into that State which next presents its
self. ( cap 5.)

For this Cause therefore are all things to be done and sought after by us: for
this, is the Desert to be chosen; for this, Fastings, Watchings, Labors,
Nakedness, Readings, and other Exercises of Virtue, we know, are by us to be
undertaken; to wit, that by them we may prepare and keep our Heart unhurt from
all noxious Passions; and by treading those steps ascend to the Perfection of
Charity. -- They are not Perfection, but the Instruments of Perfection: for in
them does not consist the End of this Discipline; but by them is the End
arrived to. -- Whatever therefore may disturb that Purity and Tranquillity of
our Mind, although it may seem Profitable and Necessary, is to be avoided as
noxious. ( cap. 7.)

This ought therefore to be our principal endeavor, this the unmovable Design
of our Heart continually to be desired, that our Mind may continually adhere to
God and Divine things. Whatever differs from that, how-ever great, is to be
judged of an inferior Nature, or of the meanest, or certainly noxious. The
Figure of this Mind or Action is very finely represented in the Gospel in the
Persons of Martha and Mary. -- In which you see that our Lord placed the
principal Good in the Theory, that is, in Divine Contemplation. Whence the
other Virtues, though we declare them necessary, yet we resolve them to be
reckoned in the second degree; because all are sought for the sake of this
alone. For our Lord saying, Thou art solicitous, and art troubled about many
things; but there is need (but) of a few, or even One; he placed the Chief
Good, not in an actual, though commendable Work, and abounding in many Fruits;
but in Contemplation of Himself; which is indeed simple, and (but) One, etc. (
cap. 8.)

To attend uncessantly to God and Divine Contemplation, is impossible for Man
encompassed with this Infirmity of the Flesh. But it behooves us to know, where
we ought to have the Intention of our Mind fixed, and to which design we may
always apply the Prospect of our Mind, which when it can obtain, it rejoices;
and from which, being distracted, it grieves and sighs; and does so often feel
her self to have departed from her chief Good, as she does find her self
separated from that Profpect, etc. ( cap. 13.)

Therefore is frequent Reading, and continual Meditation of the Scriptures,
that from thence we may have occasion of remembering Spiritual things. Therefore
is frequent Singing of Psalms, that daily Compunction may thence be obtained.
Therefore is Diligence used in Watchings, Fastings, and Prayers, that the Mind,
being refined, may not savor Earthly things, but contemplate Heavenly: Which
again ceasing, through Negligence creeping in, of necessity the Mind, waxing
gross with the Filth of Corruptions, must sink and fall into the Carnal part. (
cap. 17.) v. Col. 9. cap. 26.

Abbot Daniel, concerning the triple State of Souls, Cass. Coll. 4. cap. 19.
ACcording to the Doctrine of the Scripture, there are Three States of Souls:
the first, Carnal; the second, Animal; the third, Spiritual; which we read thus
noted-out by the Apostle: for concerning the Carnal it is said, I have given
you Milk to drink, not Meat; for then ye were not able, neither yet indeed are
ye; for ye are yet Carnal, 1 Cor. 3. And again; While there is among you
Emulation and Contention, are ye not Carnal? ibid. Concerning the Animal, it is
thus mentioned; The Animal Man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God;
it is Foolishness to him, 1 Cor. 2. But of the Spiritual; But the Spiritual
judges all things, but is judged of none. ibid. And again; Ye, who are
Spiritual, instruct those who are of that sort in a Spirit of Gentleness, Gal.
6. And therefore we must be diligent, that when, by our Renunciation, we have
ceased to be Carnal, that is, have begun to separate our selves from the
Conversation of Worldly People, and to cease from that manifest Pollution of
the Flesh, we strive presently, with all our Might, to acquire the Spiritual
State; lest flattering our selves because we seem, according to the outward
Man, to have renounced the World, or to have forsaken the Contagions of Carnal
Fornications, as if by this we had gotten the top of Perfection, we should
thenceforth become more remiss toward the Emundation of other Passions, and
more slothful; and, being detained between both, not be able to attain to the
degree of Spiritual Profit; supposing that it is abundantly sufficient for us
for Perfection, that in the outward Man we seem separated from the Conversation
and Delights of this World; or that we are set free from Carnal Corruption and
Mixture: And so being found in that Cepid State, which is reckoned the Worst,
we shall understand that we are to be vomited out of the Mouth of the Lord,
according to his Sentence, saying; I would thou were Hot or Cold; but (because)
thou art now Tepid, (or Lukewarm) I will begin to spue thee out of my Mouth,
Rev. 3.15. etc.

Abbot Isaac, concerning PRAYER, Cass. Col. 9.
THE End of every Monk, and Perfection of his Heart, tends to a continual and
uninterrupted Perseverance in Prayer, and, as far as is permitted to Humane
Frailty, strives after an unmovable Tranquillity, and perpetual Purity of Mind.
For the Enjoyment of which we unweariedly seek, and continually exercise as
well Labor of the Body, as Contrition of Spirit: And there is between these a
certain reciprocal and inseparable Conjunction. For as the Structure of all
Virtues does tend to the Perfection of Prayer; so unless all these be bound and
compacted together by the toping of it, they can by no means hold out firm and
stable. For as without them cannot this perpetual and continual Tranquillity of
Prayer, of which we speak, be acquired and perfected; so neither can those
Virtues, which prepare for it, without the Continuance of it, be accomplished.
Wherefore, neither can we rightly treat of the Effect of Prayer, or enter to
the principal End of it, which is accomplished by the Employment of all
Virtues, by a hasty Discourse, unless first all these things, which for the
obtaining of it are either to be cut off, or to be prepared, be in order
enumerated and discussed; and according to the Instruction of the Parable in
the Gospel, those things, which belong to the Building of that Spiritual and
more sublime Tower, be counted and diligently prepared for it. Which,
notwithstanding, will neither profit, being prepared; nor rightly admit those
high topings of Perfection to be built upon them, unless first all refuse of
Vices being cast out, and all dead rubbish of Passions dug up, the most firm
Foundations of Simplicity and Humility be laid upon the sound and solid Earth
of our Heart, that Evangelical Rock, upon which this Tower to be built, with
the Employments of all the Spiritual Virtues, may be both unmoveably
established, and raised up to the highest Heavens by the Consistence of its own
Firmness. -- ( cap. 2.)

And therefore, that the Prayer be made with that Fervor and Purity it ought,
these things are by all means to be observed. First, The Solicitude of Earthly
things in general, is to be cut off: Next, not only the Care, but not so much
as the Memory of any Business or Cause is to be admitted: Detractions, idle
Talk, much Talk, Jestings, are likewise also to be cut off: Anger above all
things, or the Perturbation of Sadness, are to be thoroughly rooted out: The
pernicious Food of Carnal Concupiscence, and the Love of Money, is to be
plucked up by the Roots: and these and the like Vices, which are visible even
to the Eyes of Men, being cut off and wholly thrust out, and such a cleansing
of the Rubbish, which is perfected in the Purity of Simplicity, (or Singleness
of Heart) and Innocence first made, the unshaken Foundations of a profound
Humility, which may bear a Tower reaching to the Heavens, are first to be laid;
then is the Superstruction of Spiritual Virtues to be built upon it: and from
all Discourse, (or Reasoning) and light Wandering, is the Mind to be
restrained, that so it may, by degrees, be elevated to God, and to Spiritual
Intuition. For whatever our Soul conceives before the Hour of Prayer, of
necessity it will occur to us while we pray, by intrusion of our Remembrance.
Wherefore, such as we would be found while we Pray, such ought we to prepare
our selves to be before the time of Prayer. For from the precedent State is the
Mind formed in Prayer, etc. ( cap. 3.)

The Quality of the Soul is not unfitly compared to a light Feather, which, if
it be not spoiled by some wet from without happening to it, by the levity of
its own Substance, with the help of a gentle Breath, is as it were naturally
raised up on high, and to the Heavens: But if it be aggravated with the
Accession of any wet, it is not only not raised up to any Aerial Flights by its
natural Mobility, but will be depressed down to the very Earth by the weight of
the Wet received. So also our Mind, if it be not aggravated with contracted
Vices and Worldly Cares, or corrupted with the Humor of noxious Lust, being
lifted up, as with the natural Advantage of its Purity, will, with the least
Breath of Spiritual Meditation, be elevated on high; and forsaking low and
Earthly things, will be transported to those which are Heavenly and invisible.
So that we are very properly admonished by our Lord's Precepts: See that your
Hearts be not at any time overcharged with Gluttony, Drunkenness, and the
Cares of the World, Luke 21.34. And, therefore, if we would our Prayers should
pierce, not only the Heavens, but what are above the Heavens, let us take Care
to raise our Mind purged from all Earthly Corruptions, and cleansed from all
Dregs of Passions to its hatural Sublimity, that so our Prayer may ascend to
God dis-burthened of all Weight of Corruption. ( cap. 4.)

The Intention of a Monk ought always to be fixed in God; by whom even a small
Separation from that Chief Good is to be accounted a present Death, and most
pernicious Destruction. And when the Mind comes to be settled in such a
Tranquillity, or loosed from the ties of all Carnal Passions, and the Intention
of the Heart does most tenaciously adhere to that One Chief Good, then does it
fulfill that of the Apostle; Pray without Intermission, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. and, In
every place lifting up pure Hands without Anger or Disputings, 1 Timothy 2.8. For
the Sense of the Mind, if I may so say, being drenched in this Purity, and
reformed from the Earthly Filth to a Spiritual and Angelick Likeness, whatever
it receives into its self, whatever it handles, whatever it does, will be a
most pure and sincere Prayer. ( cap. 6.)

The various Species of Prayer, I judge, cannot be comprehended without mighty
Contrition of Heart, Purity of Mind, and Illumination of the Holy Spirit. --
For according to the measure of Purity, in which every Soul does proceed, and
the quality of the State, in which, either by Occurrences she is lowered, or by
her own Industry renewed, she her self is every moment new formed. And
therefore it is certain, that Prayers are by none always made of the same form,
etc. ( cap. 8.)

They who having the penal thorn of Conscience plucked out of their Heart, are
secure, ruminating the Favors and Mercies of the Lord, which he has either in
time past given, or at present does give, or has prepared for the future, with
a most pure Mind, are transported with a most servent Heart to that ardent
Prayer, which cannot be expressed with the Tongue of Men, or comprehended. Yet
sometimes a Mind, which has profitted to that true effect of Purity, and has
now begun to be rooted in it, is wont, conceiving all the parts of Prayer at
once together, and like an incompressible and devouring Flame spreading over
all, to pour out to God ineffable Prayers of a most pure vigor, which the
Spirit it self interceeding with inexplicable Groans, we being ignorant, does
send forth to God, conceiving in that moment so great things, and pouring them
out ineffably in Supplication, as it cannot at another time; I will not say,
repeat with the Mouth, but not so much as recollect with the Mind, etc. ( cap
15.)

The higher and more sublime State (of Prayer) is formed by the Contemplation
of God alone, and the Fervor of Charity, by which the Soul being cast down,
and melted into Love of him, does very familiarly discourse to God, as its own
Father, with a peculiar Devotion. Which State that we ought diligently to
desire, the Form of the LORD's-PRAYER does instruct us, saying;

OUr Father. When therefore we do confess with our own Mouth the God and Lord
of the Universe to be our Father, we do indeed profess our selves to be adopted
to be the Sons of God out of a State of Slavery: adding thereunto, Who art in
Heaven; that flying from the abode of the present Life, which we live upon
Earth, with much horror, as a Pilgrimage, and separating us far from our
Father, we may hasten rather with our utmost desire to that Region, in which we
confess our Father lives; and may admit nothing of that kind which may render
us unworthy of this our Profession, and of the Nobility of such an Adoption; or
make us incurr his Displeasure: To which Order and Degree being promoted, we
shall continually be inflamed with that Devotion, which is in good Children,
that now we shall employ all our Affection, not for our Commodities, but for
the Glory of our Father. Saying to Him, Hollowed be thy Name, etc. ( cap. 18.)

And after a brief but excellent Explication of all the parts of this Prayer,
he adds:

You see therefore, what Model and Form of Prayer is proposed to us by the
Judge himself, who is to be entreated by it; in which is no Petition of Riches,
no Remembrance of Dignities, no Prayer for Power or Strength, no mention of
Corporal Needs, or of Temporal Life contained. The Creator of Eternity will
have nothing fading, nothing vile, nothing temporal, to be implored of him. And
therefore he will do a very great Injury to his Magnificence and Munificence,
who-ever passing by the Petition of Eternal things, will rather ask any thing
transitory or fading; and by the Vileness or Meanness of his Prayer, will
rather incurr the Offense, than obtain the Favor of his Judge. ( cap. 24.)

This Prayer therefore, though it may seem to contain all plenitude of
Perfection, because either instituted or established by the Authority of our
Lord himself, yet does it promote those of his Family to that higher State,
which we mentioned before, and lead them, in a more eminent degree, to that
fervent, ineffable Prayer, known or experienced by very few, which transcending
all humane Sense, is not distinctly delivered by any manner of Words or
Expressions, but which the Mind, illustrated by the infusion of that Celestial
Light, does, not signify by humane and narrow Eloquence, but pour out
abundantly, as out of a full Fountain, in full compacted Senses, and ineffably
utter to the Lord, producing so great things in that little point of time, as
the Mind can neither easily utter, nor recovering it self particularly
remember. ( cap. 25.)

And that you may perceive the Affection of a true Prayer, I will produce to
you, not my own, but St. Antony's Sense of it: Whom we have known to have
sometimes so persisted in Prayer, that he frequently praying in an Excess of
Mind, when the Sun began to rise, we have heard him, in fervor of Spirit, cry
out; Why do thou hinder me, O Sun, who do now rise to withdraw me from the
Splendour of this true Light? Whose also was this Celestial and more than
humane Sentence, concerning the End of Prayer: It is not (says he) Perfect
Prayer, in which a Monk does understand By Prayer, these Men understand an
Elevation of the Soul to God; and they who have observed how much the Soul may
be affected and taken up in the Contemplation of much inferior Objects, will
not so confidently censure this, though they never had Experience of any such
thing in themselves. It is no more than Plato has said of Oratory in Menon.
even this it self that he prays. ( cap. 31.)

They only with most pure Eyes do behold the Divinity of Jesus, who ascending
from low and Earthly Works and Thoughts, do retire with him into the high Mount
of Solitude; who being free from the Tumult of all Earthly Thoughts and
Perturbations, and separate from all mixture of Vices, elevated with a most
pure Faith, and Eminence of Virtues, does reveal the Glory of his Countenance
and the Image of his Clarity to those, who are meet to behold Him with pure
Aspects of Soul, etc. ( Coll. 10. c. 6.)

This is the Design of a Solitary, this ought to be all his Intention, that he
may come to possess in this Body an Image of future Beatitude, and begin in
this Vessel to fore-tast the Earnest of Heavenly Conversation and Glory. This,
I say, is the End of all Perfection, that the Mind, so extenuated (or refined)
from all Carnal Dust, may be daily elevated to Spiritual things, till all its
Conversation, all its volutation of Heart, may become one continual Prayer.
And, as I said a little before: All our Love; all our Desire, all our Study,
all our Endeavor, all our Cogitation, all that we see, all that we speak, all
that we hope, may be God; and that Unity which now is of the Father with the
Son, and of the Son with the Father, may be transfused into our Sense and
Minds; that is, that as he loves us with a pure and indissoluble Charity, we
also may be joined to Him in a perpetual and inseparable Charity. ( cap. 7.)

For the Attaining and Practice of this, he recommends, from Experience of the
Seniors, the continual or frequent mental repetion of that verse, Psalm. 70.
Deus in adjutorium meum intend; Domine ad adjuvandum me festina; in our
Liturgy, O God make speed to save us; O Lord make have to help us: and largely
shows the use of it at all times, and upon all special occasions.

Abbot Theodore, concerning the right Knowledge of the Scriptures, Cassian.
lib. 5.
HE was endowed with very great Sanctity and complete Science, not only in the
Active Life, but also in the Knowledge of the Scriptures: which he acquired,
not so much by Study of Reading, or Humane Learning, as by Purity of Heart: for
he could hardly either understand or pronounce so much as a few Greek Words.
When he sought the Explanation of a certain obscure Question, he persisted
indefatigably in Prayer seven Days and Nights, until he knew the Solution of
the Question proposed, by the Revelation of the Lord. ( cap. 33.)

When certain of the Brethren, admiring his eminent Light of Knowledge,
inquired of him the Sense of certain Scriptures; he said, A Monk desiring to
attain to the Knowledge of the Scriptures, ought by no means to employ his
Pains upon Books of Commentators, but rather restrain and keep all the Industry
of his Mind and bent of his Heart to the purifying of his Carnal Affections;
which being expelled, presently the Eyes of his Mind, the Veil of his Passions
being once removed, will begin as it were naturally to contemplate the
Mysteries of the Scriptures. For they are not published to us by the Grace of
the Holy Spirit, that they should be unintelligible and obscure; but they
become obscure by our Fault, the veil of Sins over-clouding the Eyes of our
Mind; which being again restored to their Natural Sanity, the Reading of the
Holy Scriptures will even alone abundantly suffice to the Contemplation of true
Knowledge; nor will they need the Instructions of Commentaries, as these Eyes
of Flesh need the Doctrine of none to see, if they be free from Suffusion and
Dimness of Sight. For therefore is there so great Variety and Errors arisen
amongst Interpreters themselves, because the most running to Interpret them,
without using any Diligence toward the Purgation of the Mind, by reason of the
Grossness or Uncleanness of their Heart, thinking things diverse or contrary,
either to Faith, or to themselves, they could not comprehend the Light of
Truth. ( cap. 34.)

For this see in Smith 's Select Discourses, The true Way and Method of
attaining to Divine Knowledge.

Abbot Serapion of Discretion, Cass. Coll. 2. cap. 11.
WHEN I was a Child, and lived with Abbot Theon, this brutish Custom was
imposed upon me by the Enemy, that after I had eaten with him at the ninth
hour, I did every day secretly convey one Biscuit into my Bosom, which I did
after, without his knowledge, eat in secret. Which Theft, though I did
constantly, through my accustomed Incontinence, commit; yet when I had
gratified my Appetite, coming to my self, I was more tormented with the Guilt
of my Theft, than satisfied with what I had eaten. And when I was every day
compelled, to the grief of my Heart, to perform that most troublesome work,
imposed, as it were, by Pharaoh's Taskmasters instead of Bricks upon me, nor
could extricate my self from this their most cruel Tyranny, and was ashamed and
confounded to discover the secret Theft to my Senior; it came to pass, by the
Hand of God, who was pleased to rescue me out of the Yoke of this Captivity,
that certain Brothers desired to come to the Cell of the Senior for Edification
sake. And when they were refreshed, and a Spiritual Conference was begun, the
Senior answering to their Questions discoursed of the Vice of Gastrimargy, or
Gluttony, and of the Domination (and Slavery) of Thoughts kept secret, and did
explain their Nature and most dismal Power so long as they were concealed: I by
the power of this Conference being pricked, and terrified with an accusing
Conscience, as believing that these things were spoken for that Cause, that the
Lord had revealed the Secrets of my Heart to the Senior, I began first secretly
to sigh; then, the Compunction of my Heart increasing, breaking out into Sighs
and Tears, I pulled the Biscuit, which by that evil Custom I had secretly stolen
to eat, out of my Bosom, where it was concealed, and proferring it to them, I
did prostrate upon the ground with Supplication for Pardon, confess how I did
every day eat in secret, and with abundance of Tears did implore them to beg my
Absolution from this hard Bondage of the Lord. Then said the Senior; Be of good
Comfort, Child; Thy Confession has obtained thy Absolution, though I hold my
Tongue: For thou have this day gotten the Victory of thine Enemy, more
powerfully beating him down by thy Confession, than thou thy self were cast
down by him through thy Concealment. Whom not at all checking either by thy own
or any others Reprehension, thou did suffer to domineer over thee till now.
But now, after this thy Confession, that wicked Spirit shall not be able to
disquiet thee; nor shall the filthy Serpent any longer hold a hiding place in
thee, being drawn-out into the Light, out of the Darkness of thy Heart, by a
salutary Confession. The Senior had not finished these Words, and behold a
Burning Lamp, proceeding from my side, so filled the Cell with the smell of
Brimstone, that the Stink of it would not suffer us to remain in it. And the
Senior resuming his Admonition; Behold, says he, our Lord has visibly proved
to thee the Truth of my Words, that thou should see with thy Eyes the
Instigator of thy Affection driven out of thy Heart by a salubrious Confession;
and should know that the detected Enemy should no longer at all have place in
thee, by his manifest Expulsion. And so it is, according to the Sentence of the
Senior, the Domination of that diabolical Tyranny in me is, by the Virtue of
this Confession extinct, and for ever laid; so that the Enemy never after
attempted to inject so much as the memory of this Concupiscence, nor have I
ever after felt my self assaulted by any Instigation of that thievish desire.

In this manner therefore may we most easily come to the Science of true
Discretion, if following the tract of the Seniors, we presume neither to act
any thing new, nor to determine it by our own Judgment; but walk in all things
as their Tradition, or Probity of Life shall inform us. In which Institution
being settled, any one may, not only come to the perfect reason of Discretion,
but remain safe against all the Snares of the Enemy. For by no other Vice does
the Devil draw a Religious person so headlong to Destruction, as when he does
persuade him, neglecting the Advice of the Seniors, to confide in his own
Judgment, and Determination or Doctrine. For since all Arts and Disciplines
found out by humane Ingenie, and which are of no more benefit than for the
Commodities of this temporal Life, though they may be handled with the Hand,
and seen with the Eyes, yet can they not rightly be comprehended by any one
without the Teaching of an Instructor; How improper is it to believe that this
only should not need a Teacher, which is invisible and occult, and which is not
seenthrough but with a most pure Heart, wherein an Error produces not a
temporal Damage, nor what is easily repaired, but perdition of Soul, and
perpetual Death? For it has a Conflict Day and Night, not against visible, but
invisible Enemies; and not against one or two, but against innumerable troops,
a Spiritual Combat, the Case of which is so much the more pernicious to all, by
how much both the Enemy is more mischievous, and the Encounter more secret. And
therefore is the Trace of the Seniors always to be followed with the utmost
Diligence, and to them are all things, which arise in our Hearts, taking away
the Veil of Bashfulness, to be related. ( cap. 11.) v. sup. p. 79.

Abbot Cheremon, concerning the Wonderful things which the Lord does, in a
special manner, operate in his Saints, Cass. Coll. 12. cap. 12.
GREAT indeed and wonderful are the things, nor thoroughly known to any Man,
except only to those who have experience of them, which the Lord with ineffable
Liberality gives to his Faithful ones, even in this Vessel of Corruption. Which
the Prophet viewing in Purity of Mind, as well in his own Person, as in the
Person of those, who come into this State and Affection, cried out; Great are
thy Works; and that my Soul knows very well. Otherwise could not the Prophet
be thought to have said any rare or great matter, if he be thought to have
pronounced this either with other affection of Heart, or concerning other Works
of God: For there is no Man, who does not acknowledge the Works of God to be
wonderful, even from the very Vastness of the Creation. But of those things,
which by his daily Operation he does produce in his Saints, and with a special
Bounty does pour out unto them, no other can be sensible but the Soul of them
who enjoy it, which, in the secret of its Conscience, is so the only Judge of
his Favors, that it not only cannot with any Speech relate them, but not so
much as in Sense and Thought comprehend them; when descending from that
inflamed Fervor, it sinks down to material and terrene Prospects. For, Who
would not admire the Works of God in himself, when he sees the insatiable
Greediness of the Stomach, and the costly and pernicious Luxury of the Palate,
so restrained in Him, that he seldom (and unwillingly) takes scarce so much as
a little, and that very mean Food? Who would not be amazed at the Works of God,
when he feels that fire of Lust, which he before believed to be natural, and in
a manner inextinguishable, to become so cooled, that he does not feel himself
incited so much as with a simple motion of his Body? How could any but revere
the Power of the Lord, when he should see Men, before fierce and desperate, who
were provoked even by officious (or well-meant) Services to the greatest Fury
of Anger, to have come to so great Lenity and Gentleness, that now they not
only are not moved with any Injuries, but even, when any are done them, do with
great magnanimity rejoice? Who would not plainly admire the Works of God, and
with his whole Heart cry out, I have known that great is the Lord, when he
sees himself or another of Greedy, become Liberal; of Prodigal, Frugal; of
Proud, Humble; of Nice and Curious, Carleless and Homely; and even choosingly
enjoying Want and Scarcity of temporal things? These indeed are the wonderful
Works of God, which the Souls of the Prophets and such (experienced Persons) do
know in a peculiar manner, being amazed with the Intuition of so wonderful a
Contemplation. These are the Prodigies which the Lord has placed upon Earth,
which the same Prophet considering, calls all People to the admiration of them:
Come and see the Works of God, the Prodigies which the Lord has placed upon
the Earth, etc. For what can be a greater Prodigy, then, in a very little
moment, for Men of greedy Publicans, to become Apostles; of fierce Persecutors,
most patient Preachers of the Gospel, so as to propagate that Faith, which they
did persecute, even with the Effusion of their Blood. These are the Works of
God, which the Son declares that he, with the Father, daily does work, etc.
Concerning this saving Work of God, the Prophet prays to the Lord, saying;
Confirm, O God, this which thou have wrought in us. And, to pass by abscondite
Dispensations of God, which the Mind of all the Saints does every moment
perceive peculiarly exercised within themselves, that Celestial Infusion of
Spiritual Rejoycings, in which a dejected Mind is raised with the Alacrity of
an unexpected Joy, and those unknown Excesses of Heart, and as ineffable as
unheard of Solaces of Joys; with which sometimes drooping in a listless
Stupidity, we are raised, as out of a deep Sleep, to most fervent Prayer; this,
I say, is the Joy of which the blessed Apostle speaks, Which Eye has not seen,
nor Ear heard, nor has come into the Heart of Man; that is, of him, who is
still a Man stupefied with Earthly Vices, and sticks in Humane Affections, and
perceives nothing of those Gifts of God. At last the same Apostle adds, as well
concerning himself, as those like him, who have departed from Humane
Conversation; But God has revealed them to us by his Spirit. v. Cyp. Ep. 2.

THese things I thought fit to collect cut of much of this kind, to give a Taste
of the Manners and Spirit of these Holy People: and lest those who are little
acquainted with these things should imagine that they were the mere Phansies of
Melancholy Monks; I will here add a Taste of the Sentiments of some others; and
instead of many, of two Eminent Bishops, Men of greatest Reputation both for
Learning and Virtue; St. Gregory Nazianzen, and St. Austin, Bishop of Hippo:
But first to begin with St. Gregory Nazianzen, it will not be amiss to add
here, to those before, his Character of the Holy Monks of his time.

St. Gregory Nazianzen, concerning the Lives and Exercises of MONKS in his time.
Orat. 9. to Julian, the Comptroller of the Customs, upon the Discharge of the
Monks.
MY Speech presents to you the Poor, the whole Choir of Priests, the Choir of
Philosophers, [Monks] who are tied down by no Band; who possess only their
Bodies, nor them wholly; have nothing for Caesar, but all for God; Hymns,
Prayers, Watchings, Tears, a Possession not to be seized on, viz. to be dead to
the World, alive to Christ; to have killed the Flesh; to have drawn the Soul
from the Body: Sparing these, or rather purely restoring to God the Worshippers
and Disciples of God, and Contemplators of Celestial things, the first Fruits
of our kind, the Pillar, the Crown of Faith, the precious Pearls, the Stones of
that Temple whose Foundation and Corner Stone is Christ, the noble
Accomplishments of the Church; most nobly indeed, both for them, and for thy
self, and for us all have thou taken Care. And such Riches should I rather wish
thee from us, than Treasure of much Gold and Silver now appearing, and after a
little while not being at all.

But what he observed in them, he elsewhere expresses more copiously, as with
great Approbation, Applause, and even Admiration, in these Particulars;
Watchings, Fastings, Prayers, Tears, brawny Knees, knockings of the Breast,
deep Sighs, nocturnal Stations, travel of the Soul to God, soft Weepings at
Prayers, a Medicine of Compunction to those who hear it; Singing, Glorifying,
Meditating on the Law of the Lord day and night; carrying Exaltations of God in
their Mouths: And also those noble Testimonials and Indications of a Life
according to God, silent Preachers: Hair foul and uncombed; Feet naked, and
like the Apostles, wearing nothing dead; decent Shaving; Raiment reproving
Arrogance; a Girdle becoming an undeck'd Body, keeping the Coat from hanging
loose, but so as though it did not gird it; an even Pace; an unwandering Eye; a
pleasing sort, or rather powerful way of Smiling, which checks the Excess of
Laughter; Discourse guided by Reason; Silence more venerable than Speech;
Commendations seasoned with Salt, not to flatter, but to excite to Proficience;
a sort of Reproving, more desirable than Praise; a Mean in Compunction and
Relaxation, and a Mixture and Temperature of both Lenity with Authority and
Authority with Modesty, so that neither is debased, but rather recommended by
the other; due Measures of Converse and Retirement; of Converse, to help
others; of Retirement, to get insight into the Mysteries of the Spirit; a
Converse preserving Solitude (or Recollection) in Society; and Retirement
retaining Brotherly-kindness and Charity in Solitude: And which are yet Greater
and Sublimer things than these: Riches in Poverty; Possession in Pilgrimage;
Glory in Disgrace; Power in Weakness; Fruitfulness in Celebacie, if Divine
Offsprings be better than what have beginning from the Flesh. They are such as
live deliciously, by refusing Delights; and Mean, for the sake of Heavenly
things; have nothing in the World, and (yet) are above the World; who are out
of the Flesh, and (yet) in the Flesh. Whose Portion is the Lord; who are Poor,
for the sake of a Kingdom, and Kings for their Poverty. These, my Wealth and
Banquets, while present, made me exult for Joy; and if absent, stopped the
brisk Circulation of my Blood.

Thus far his Character of these Holy Men: And now for a Taste of his
Contemplation, of which we have a Touch here, where he sets out the End of
Retirement, to get Insight into the Mysteries of the Spirit.

St. Gregory Nazianzen, concerning Divine Contemplation. Orat. 42.
I Will Stand, says the admirable Habakkuk, upon my Watch; and I with him to
day upon the Power and Speculation given me by the Holy Ghost, and will
contemplate and know what is showed, and what is spoken to me. --

I being to speak of the great Sacrifice, and of the greatest of Days, cannot
but have recourse to God. Here will I begin, and purge ye me your Mind, and
Hearing, and Understanding, who-ever relish these things; for as much as a
Speech of God is Divine; so shall ye depart with a Savor of things which do
not fade. --

God Was always, and Is, and Shall be; or rather Is always: For Was, and Shall
be, are fragments of Time with us, and of a fading Nature. But he always Is,
and so does he name Himself, speaking to Moses in the Mount. For he containing
All in Himself has a Being neither beginning, nor ceasing, as a certain Ocean
of Essence, immense and boundless, exceeding all conception both of Time and
Nature, represented with the Mind alone, and that but very faintly and
obscurely, not from what are in Him, but from what are about Him, one
Conception being collected after another into some one Image of the Truth,
flying before it be laid-hold-on, and running away before it be apprehended,
illustrating only the Principal part of us, and that purified, as the Lightning
strikes the Sight without remaining; that, as it seems to me, he may with what
is comprehensible draw us to Himself; (for what is altogether incomprehensible,
is neither hoped nor attempted) and with what is incomprehensible, may become
admired; being admired, may be the more desired; being desired, may purify us;
and purifying, make us Dei-form or God-like: and these things perfected, he
may, as with Familiars, converse with us, God to God's united and made known,
etc.

To make this remarkable Discourse the more plain and intelligible, it may be
fit and necessary to add some brief Notes out of the Greek Commentators,
Nicetas and Psellus, upon it.

The Sense of the Prophet's Words is this: I will keep my Mind Pure and Entire
from all Worldly Care, and will fly into a certain Security very firm, and as a
Thought raised on high: and thence will I observe what God will speak to me,
etc. Nicetas, n. 1.

Stand signifies Firmness and Constancy, and a State unmoved, and unmovable to
meaner things; Speculate an accurate and agreeable Contemplation and Knowledge,
and that Impetus (or Earnestness) wherewith the Mind is carried to those things
which come to our Knowledge. For so he, who does emerge out of the Grossness of
corporal things, at first goes the middle way, which is called Animal; but
afterward the more sublime, which is called Spiritual. Psell.

The Watch (or Guard) is the Manner of every ones Soul, according to which he
does receive Divine Visions in a certain proportion. For if any one shall raise
himself by higher Contemplation, he will err. He calls it Power, because every
Soul raised up to a Divine Simplicity, and conversing immediately with Divine
Visions themselves, uses those kind of Sights freely, and according to this
Power, condescending to the Capacity of his Auditors, etc. He calls it
Speculation, because the Soul does not measure Divine Visions by the Will, but
by the Intellective Faculty and Measure of its Purgation. Psell. 9.

What the Sun is in Sensibles, that God is in Intellectuals: For as It does
illuminate the visible World, He does in like manner the Invisible. Moreover,
as It makes those, who look upon it, bright; so He makes them Divine and
Deiform. Nicetas.

The Presence of Spiritual Light and Divine Splendour converts the Mind of
those, who are judged worthy of such a Glory and Contemplation, from many and
various Opinions and Imaginations to that which truly is, that is to God, etc.
Nicetas.

For what the Eye is in the Body, this the Mind is in the Soul. As therefore to
behold the Lightning when it breaks out, there is need of good Eyes: so also
for this, that we may be illustrated by the Contemplation of God, is required a
Pure and Sound Mind. For as in a Looking-Glass sordid and impure, the Form of a
Face cannot be represented; so neither in a foul and unclean Mind, the Splendour
of God. Ni.

Whoever, knowing that they are only Mind, have passed the bulk and grossness
of the Body, -- and have purged their Mind from the Stain of Vices, and
rendered it fit and meet for the Reception of the First (or chief) Mind and
Creator of all things, God is united to them. For when the Mind is Pure and
Incorrupt, he does converse with the Mind without any thing intervening, and by
it has Communion with the Soul, as again by this he is joined to the Body. But
he is united, not as He is, but as We are capable of that Union. And hence at
last he becomes known: Nor can any one otherwise know God, unless he open his
Soul to Him, and receive him in it. Psellus.

God does so much become known to Men, as he is familiarly joined to them, who
by Virtue are joined to Him. For according as is their Ascent he does descend.
And how much Man does approach to God, so much also does God become known to
Man, imparting the Knowledge of himself according to the proportion of Purity
that is in every one.

See whether the Spiritual and Divine Gradation will raise us. For from the
Incomprehensibility of the Divine Nature, as from the first step of a Ladder,
we are raised to Admiration of him, as to the second step: again, from
Admiration we ascend to more earnest Desire: then from Desire are we raised up
to Purgation: and from hence, further to Likeness with God: and, lastly, we
arrive to converse familiarly with God, and know Him more perfectly by Union.
Then, when we are made Deiform, does the true and natural God converse
familiarly with those, who by Grace are called Gods, infusing the Divine
Fulgers of his Knowledge in us as every one is purified. Nicetas.

To be made God, is to be partaker of Divine Illumination; but not to pass into
the Divine Essence. -- Since we are set in the Confines between God and Matter,
if we decline to Matter, we are Gross and Material; if we tend toward God, we
are called Divine, and thereupon Gods. Nicetas.

St. Austin concerning the same.
THE Life of the Body, is the Soul; the Life of the Soul, is God. The Spirit of
God dwells in the Soul, and by the Soul in the Body, that our Bodies also may
be the Temple of the Holy Spirit, whom we have from God. Ser. 18. de verb.
Apost. c. 6.

It is not unreasonable to say, That the Incorporeal Soul is so illuminated
with the Incorporeal Light of the Simple (or pure) Wisdom of God, as the Body
of the Air is illuminated with the Corporeal Light, and as the Air grows dark
upon the departure of that Light. 11 de Civ. Dei, c. 10.

Minds are to Souls as their Senses; but of Sciences whatever things are most
certain, they are such as are those things which are illustrated or shined upon
by the Sun, that they may be seen, as the Earth and all Earthly things. But God
is he who does illustrate; but I Reason am so in Mind, as the Aspect is in the
Eyes. The Eye of the Soul is the Mind, pure from all stain of the Body, that
is, remote and purged from all desires of Mortal things, etc. 1 Soliloq. c. 6.

It is a great and very rare thing, with the Intenseness of the Mind to
transcend all Creature, corporeal or incorporeal, being considered and found
mutable, and to approach to that unchangeable Substance of God, and there learn
from Him, that none but he made all Nature, which is not Himself. For so God
speaks with Man, not by any corporal Creature sounding in corporal Ears, etc.
but he speaks by the very Truth it self, if one be fit to hear with the Mind,
not with the Body. 11 de C. D. 2. v. ibid. Coq.

When the Soul sees that singular and true Beauty, it will the more love it.
But unless it fix on it its Eye with a mighty Love, and decline not any whether
from beholding it, it cannot remain in that most Blessed Vision. 1 Solil. c. 7.

One thing there is that I can prescribe thee: I know no more. That these
sensible things are wholly to be forsaken; and that we must greatly beware
while we act this Body, that our Wings, which we need have entire and perfect,
be not hindered by any of their Birdlime, that we may fly away from this
Darkness, to that Light, etc. Therefore, when thou shall be such, that nothing
of Earthly things does at all delight thee, believe me, in that moment, in the
same point of time, thou shall see what thou desire, etc. 1 Soliloq. c. 14.

Thou do desire to see and embrace Wisdom as it were naked, without any thing
of covering, so as she does not suffer herself, except to very few and her most
choice Lovers, etc. It is a certain ineffable and incomprehensible Light of
Minds: that vulgar Light, etc. ibid. c. 13.

Confide constantly in God, and as much as thou can commit thy self entirely
to Him. Do not be willing to be as it were thine own, but profess thy self to
be a Servant of the most Gracious and Bountiful Lord. For so will he not cease
to raise thee to Himself, and will permit nothing to befall thee, but what
shall profit thee, though thou know it not. 1 Soliloq. 14.

Hear me, my God, hear me after that manner of thine known to very few. --
Command, I beseech thee, whatever thou will, but heal and open my Ears, that I
may hear thy Voice: Heal and open my Eyes, that I may see thy Becks. -- Say to
me, which way I shall look that I may behold Thee, etc. 1 Soliloq. c. 1.

Being admonished to return to my self, I entered into my most inward parts,
thou being my Leader: and I could do it, because thou wast become my Helper. I
entered, and I discerned with the Eye of my Soul, such as it was, above the same
Eye of my Soul, above my Mind, the unchangeable Light of the Lord; not this
vulgar, and visible to all Flesh. Nor was it as of the same kind greater, as if
it grew more and more clear than it, and filled all with its Greatness. This
was not that, but another, quite another from all those. Nor was it so above my
Mind, as Oil above Water, nor as Heaven above Earth; but superior, because he
made me; and I inferior, because I was made by it. He who knows Truth,
knows it: and he who knows it, knows Eternity. Charity knows it. O
Eternal Truth, and true Charity, and dear Eternity. Thou art my God; for Thee
do I sigh day and night. And when I first knew Thee thou did assume me, (or
take me up) that I should see it to be which I did see; and my self not to be,
who did see. And thou did beat back my weak Sight, shining vehemently upon
me; and I trembled with Love and Horror, and found my self to be far from Thee
in the Region of Dissimilitude, (or Unlikeness) as if I heard thy Voice from on
high; I am the Food of grown Persons; grow, and thou shall feed on me. Nor
shall thou change me into thee, as the Food of thy Flesh; but thou shall be
changed into me. And I know that for Iniquity thou do tutor Men, and make
my Soul to pine away like a Spider. And I said, Is Truth nothing, because it is
diffused, neither through finite, nor through infinite spaces? And thou cryedst
from a far, Yes indeed, I AM THAT I AM. And I heard, as it is heard in the
heart; and there was no cause of doubt at all left; and I could easilier doubt
that I was alive, than that Truth was not, which is seen being understood by
the things which are made. 7 Confess. c. 10.

More to this purpose might be noted out of these, and others of great
Authority in the Christian Church; though it may be observed that anciently the
Christians, as well as the Jews and Heathens, were very cautious not to express
the Mysteries of their Religion to the Profane, or to such as were not
capable, according to our Savior's Admonition, Mat. 7.6. and out of that
caution, and a like caution to avoid all Ostentation and secure their Humility,
were more sparing in their Expressions of any thing of this nature in their
Writings, than those of after-Ages, who, by degrees, began to write more
openly, and at last to compose whole Books of what was before taught more
secretly to particular Persons, as they were capable to receive it; but this is
sufficient for the present.

By this Taste of the Spirit of these Holy People, together with the Testimonies
of such Excellent Persons as were contempory with them, and well acquainted
with their Manners and Exercises, we may judge of the Rashness and
Inconsiderateness of many of later times, who have made no scruple to despise,
vilify, and reproach the Monastic State in general; and the Impiety and
Wickedness of such as have industriously endeavored to rake up all the Dirt,
and raise all the Calumnies and Slanders they could against them. If the Abuses
and Corruptions, which in later times have increased among them, were such as
might provoke the Indignation of Men and Judgments of God upon them, must the
whole State from the beginning be condemned for them? If the Serpent cast out a
Flood of false and Hypocritical Pretenders, such as those described by Piammon
before, page 59. and Hierom, page 65. called Sarabites and Remoboth, to drown
and obscure the Excellence of those who were sincere, does it become Christians
to help the Serpent in that attempt? There are also (says St. Austin) who are
false Monks, and we have known such; sed non periit Fraternitas Pia propter
eos, qui profitentur quod non sunt; But the Pious Fraternity is not therefore
lost because of those, who profess themselves to be what they are not, in Psalm.
132. and in diverse other places he notes such a mixture among them; and the
Unreasonableness of those, who censure all for the Miscarriages of some. Should
we judge of Episcopacy by the Actions of too many of that Order, which might be
noted even from the time of Diotrephes, but especially after they became not
only secure, but greatly honored by Christian Princes and Emperors; or of the
Reformed Churches, by what has been acted by some amongst them; or even of
Christianity, by the Lives and Manners of too many called Christians; how
unreasonable would that be?

If we look into the more ancient times, we shall find them admired even by
Jews and Heathens, and censured and condemned by none but Infidels, Heretics,
and Apostates. Only one SYNESIVS is set up against the concurrent Judgment of
all the Great Lights of the Church, Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzen, Chrysostom,
Ambrose, Austin, and innumerable more. And who is this Synesius? A Bishop
indeed, and a Learned Philosopher; but as a Learned Doctor of this Church, and
no Friend to Enthusiasm, has observed, a better Platonist than sound
Christian; one who lived among them, and yet very ignorant of what was most
considerable in them; one who passes a harsh Censure of them, and yet in it
gives a remarkable Testimony for them. He knew indeed what every Rustic could
take notice of, that they practiced themselves, and recommended to others,
Temperance, and Continence, and great Austerities; and thereof he is an
unexceptionable Witness; but the reason thereof he knew not; and therefore
calls their Way of Living Barbarous, Adamantine, and contrary to Humane Nature;
an ample Testimony rightly understood. He knew their diligent Labor and Works,
and what was said concerning their continual Contemplation of Divine things:
and thereof is an undeniable Witness; but how that was consistent with twisting
of Reeds and making of Baskets, that he could not conceive. He knew that they
had great regard to Motions, Impulses, Transports, etc. and thereof he is a
competent Witness; but what to make of them he knew not; and therefore thought
that they did thereby hope for the End without the Means. He knew that they
were very confident of their Knowledge of Divine things; and thereof he is a
sufficient Witness; but what they were he understood not; nor how they should
attain any such Knowledge without Learning and Study; and therefore thought
they did very arrogantly assume to themselves a greater Measure of Divine
Knowledge than others had. And what wonder if he, who did not believe all the
known Articles of the Christian Faith, should be no more acquainted with such
Mysteries and Secrets in Spiritual things, as are by the Wisdom of God hid from
the Wise and Prudent, but revealed unto Babes, than some of our Learned Doctors
are at this time? Undoubtedly had those great Men, mentioned before, no way
inferior to this in any part of Learning, understood no more of these things
than he did, they had been of his Mind; or had he understood as much as they,
he had been of theirs. And so much for Synesius, a very competent Witness of
what he knew in this Case, but a most incompetent Judge of what he understood
not.

If we come nearer to our own times, and inquire into the State of the
Monasteries at the time of the Dissolution, Stow the Historian writing of the
Year 1536. 28. Hen. 8. says, The Poor did much lament the Downfall of
Monasteries, for the great Hospitality which was kept there. And it is certain,
that till after the Dissolution of Monasteries there was no Law in England to
enforce any Man to pay to the Relief of the Poor by way of Temporal Coercion.
The Stat. of Ed. 1. called the Stat. de Asportatis Religiosorum, recites it to
be one chief End of building Monasteries, that Hospitality and Almsgiving might
be exercised, and the Sick and Feeble maintained. The Clergy then scarce
pretending themselves to be Proprietors, but rather Vsu-Fructuarii: and as Mr.
Seldom says, that Parsonages and Vicarages were Elemosynae Laicorum; so it
seems they were used as a kind of Reserve for the Laity, when they fell into
Poverty again, that is, the Surplus was so: for there was always to be deducted
the Maintenance of him, who waited at the Altar, according to the Dignity and
Quality of his Person, Order, and Function. This was the Observation of a very
good Friend to the Church of England, the late Lord Chancellor Finch. But as to
the Monasteries, certainly that was an excellent Provision for the Poor, where
they might be supplied with Spiritual as well as Corporal Alms; and such as it
seems did not fail till the last; so that we needed no Law for Provision for
the Poor till the Monasteries were dissolved. Which is that Sin, whereof the
Learned and Judicious Mr. Joseph Meed says, the whole Body of the Reformation
is notoriously guilty; which, nevertheless, says he, is accounted no Sin, and
yet such a one as I know not whether God ever passed by without some visible
and remarkable Judgment. Ep. 14. p. 760. ( v. Ep. 58. p. 829. Disc. 2. p. 15,
17. and Disc. 27. p. 119...) and the Judgment he thought begun upon some, ( v.
p. 17. and 829.) and expected more to follow. And since the Righteous God is a
severe Revenger of the Indignities and Injuries done to his Saints; nor can he
be thought to have less regard to Sacred Persons than to Sacred things, I know
no reason why the great Defects of pious and a complete Christian Education,
which are now notorious in our Universities and that Blindness, and Spirit of
Sloth and Slumber, which, from thence, seems to have seized and possessed all
Ranks and Qualities of Persons and Parties amongst us, may not be a special
Judgment of God for that Universal Prejudice and Contempt, which upon the
Scandals of some, the profane Sacrilegious Impiety of others, and the
inconsiderate Rashness and Indiscretion of many more, have raised against it.

FINIS.

