THE SPIRIT OF The Church-Faction DETECTED, In its Nature and Operations, More
Particularly in The Mystery of the Convocation-Book, Lately Published and
Exposed To the View and Censure of the World, by the late Archbishop of
Canterbury: And in The Progress of the Faction, And the Mischiefs thereof, The
late Civil War, and our present Disappointments.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCXCI.

Lately published by the same Author.
AN Admonition concerning a Public FAST; The Just Causes we have for it, from
the full Growth of Sin, and the near Approaches of God's Judgments; And the
Manner of Performance, to obtain the desired Effects thereof; Which ought to be
other than our Common Forms; and with stricter Acts of Mortification than is
usual amongst us.

An APPEAL to Heaven and Earth, against the Christian Epicureans, who have
betrayed their KING and Country, and Exposed them to the Judgments of GOD;
Drawn up in Questions Theological, and Theologico-Political.

A CAVEAT to the READER.
IT is certain that Mankind is commonly very prone to that Folly of running out
of one Extreme into another: And it is as certain and apparent that the
Christians all over the World being divided into several different Parties, are
generally (where they have any Zeal at all) more zealous for their own
particular Parties, and for those things which are peculiar to them, than for
Christianity it self, or the Great matters of it, in which all agree: and that
accordingly they are generally more led and swayed by the Comments and
Doctrines of their Teachers and leading men of their respective Parties, and
the Opinion they have of them, than by the plain Text of the S. Scripture, and
the Authority thereof, though they do not apprehend so much themselves. All
this might be proved by many Evidences of Fact: but that would be too long for
this place; and besides it is needless: For all acknowledge it to be so in all
parties but their own; which is sufficient Evidence, as good as need be,
against all; for their own Confession against themselves is not to be expected.
And all acknowledge it to be a Fault, wherever it is.

This I note for Caution, and to prevent that ill Use which might be made of
what I have here written for a good End; ( viz. that the Church of England
might be moved to Reform of her self what is amiss, to cast out all Abuses, and
extirpate all those pestiferous Weeds and Roots of Faction,) and in case that
God for her Negligence should a second time leave her to the Correction of any
other Party, that they may not again overshoot themselves, and by inconsiderate
heat, instead of Reformation put all into Confusion; or by Severity against
their fellow Servants, provoke the Judgments of their common Lord against
themselves. For all have their Faults, and very considerable ones too: and most
have some Good almost peculiar to themselves, which the rest either overlook or
neglect, if not oppose, or obstinately refuse. Even that very party which has
most Weeds of all, may, and if I be not deceived, often does produce such Fruit
amongst those Weeds, as can hardly be matched by any of the other; which must
therefore have the more to answer for, that under a better Culture they do not
bring forth better, and more mature and excellent Fruit. Had we been as
careful to retain and improve what was good, and to restore and repair what
was lost or decayed, as we were to cast out all that was bad, our Work had been
more complete, and successful. But while Heat of Contention makes all Parties
apt to take the matters in Controversy for the great Matters of Religion, what
are really the Great Matters of Religion, are the less regarded by any, and
what are taken to be so, but are not, are prosecuted and pressed further than
they ought to be, by each respectively when they get the Advantage for it.

Such were the Superstitions and superfluous Rites, whereby the genuine Simple
and most Proper and Decent Christian Worship of God, was in the Church of Rome
corrupted and obscured, like good Wheat in a Great heap of Tares and Chaff,
that many to avoid them have run into a contrary Superstition, avoiding and
neglecting even natural expressions of Reverence and Decency in it, and little
less than Profaneness. This justly moved some of our Bishops, and Dr. Laud
especially, when he came into favor, to labor, as he says, That the External
Worship of God (so much slighted in many parts) might be preserved, and that
with as much Decency and Uniformity as might be. But it was pressed too far, in
unnecessary matters, in a kind of arbitrary manner, without an equal concern
for the promotion of real and internal Piety; nay, with obstinate refusal and
opposition of Reformation of other great Abuses, in Discipline, Non-Residence,
Pluralities, etc. and with Opposition even of some Means of the promotion of
Religion, the Observation of the Lords Day, Lectures, And the purchase of
Impropriations, as if it was the only thing necessary, or it and absolute
Subjection to the Will of the Prince under the Notion of Loyalty, was the sum
of all Religion. And this again on the other side, made it be looked upon as
mere Formality, and a Project to prepare us for the readmission of Popery, and
so raised a greater Antipathy against it; which at last cast all out, but in
its place brought in Indecency, Profaneness and Confusion. But we have now a
Choice of such Bishops, as I hope will make a better use of what I have
written, and do their parts to make this Caution needless.

For the Readers better satisfaction concerning the near agreement of the
Nature and Genius of our Church-Faction with that of the Church of Rome, I
recommend to his perusal and Consideration Dr. Barrow's Account of the
Inconveniences of the Papal Pretenses, page 201. to page 214. Of the Popes
Supremacy.

THE SPIRIT OF THE Church-Faction DETECTED, etc.
I Have formerly taken notice of a certain Difference between the
Church-Faction, and the True Church of England. and the ingenious Dr. H(...)
has larely acquainted the Honorable House of Commons, and the World since in
a Sermon now in Print, with a notable and very true distinction between the
Spirit of God, and the Spirit of the Church of England; which must be
understood of the Church-Faction, which arrogates to it self the Name of the
Church of England, as its Mother the Church of Rome does the Name of the
Catholic Church, and with as good Right and Reason every whit. Of this Faction
I say it must be understood; for the True Church of England owns no Spirit for
its Guide but that of God. And since he has furnished us with so useful and
remarkable a Distinction, to whom can we more properly have recourse to
understand the Nature of this Spirit, than to him who professes himself
possessed of it? and besides, is very free and apt upon all occasions to afford
Experiments and plain Demonstrations of its natural Virtues and Faculties? And
one he has lately given in the Case of Mr. David Jones, and that so notable an
one, as may fully satisfy all men who consider it well, which I will therefore
briefly relate.

Mr. Jones had twice preached here in London, for a Minister who was absent;
and at the second time, (being to make some stay in Town,) he was desired by
some persons of other Parishes, who had either heard him or heard of him, to
preach at their Churches, and particularly at St. Andrews and Christ-church,
both the same day, 2 Nov. Thereupon, considering the quality of those
Auditories, he made choice of a Sermon which he had formerly made at Oxford,
upon 1 Timothy 6.17. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not
high-minded: And discoursing upon the parts of his Text in order, as is usual,
before he came to discourse of the Rich, which he principally intended, from
the first word he touched upon the Ministerial Charge, and the Neglect thereof
by many Pluralists, Chaplains and other Non-Residents, and others deserting
then former Charges for temporal Advantage. And this passed well enough in the
Morning at S. Andrews, where there were none present who were much concerned
in it: But in the Afternoon at Christ-Church, Dr. H(...) being there, who has
a Cure in the Country, two Lectures in the City, is the Kings Chaplain, and a
Noble-mans Chaplain besides; all this seemed designed directly against him,
especially being preached by one of his own College. And thereupon, as Mr.
Jones was going from the Pulpit to the Vestry, the Dr. came to him, and after
some hard words took him by the shoulder, and bid him be gone out of the
Church; adding, That he would take care he should come no more there to tell
them of their Faults.

This strange carriage of the Dr. occasioned much Discourse; and that, and the
Effervescence of his own Passion, made him not only break out into foul and
false Aspersions of Mr. Jones, in all Companies the Week following, but into
indecent Reflections upon him even from the Pulpit, the next Lords day. This
moved a Friend of Mr. Jones, who was then at Church, to go to the Dr. afteward
into the Vestry, to expostulate the matter calmly with him. But the Dr. could
not contain himself, but presently fell into passion; and threatened, he would
desire those Gentlemen (who stood there by) to serve him, as he had served Mr.
Jones the Sunday before: To which the other replied, If he were of that temper,
he should not need to trouble himself, for he had no more to say to him; and so
left him; but the next day wrote him the following Letter.

Reverend Dr.
I Am very sorry that such a Difference should fall out, between two Persons so
qualified to do good service in the Church, as may prove some Impediment to
both: It becomes men of your Profession to be mutual Assistants to one another
in the promotion of the Work and Service of your common Master. And therefore
that the Evil of the Difference may be prevented and stopped, and if possible
turned to good, I beg your patience to peruse and seriously consider these few
things, which I shall as briefly as I can, and with all candor and impartiality
offer to your consideration. I am of opinion that (as it usually falls out in
most differences, so in this,) there may be some fault on both sides.

Mr. Jones I take to be in the right in the Substance of what he delivered, but
may have erred a little in Circumstance, in the Season of his delivering it.
But yet in Charity that ought to be imputed to the height of his Zeal for the
Reformation of things notoriously amiss, and of great Importance to be
reformed. And as his unblamable and strict Life obliges us to make this
construction of it; so the great and notorious Remisness of the Governors of
our Church, makes his Reproof, whether in season or out of season, excusable at
least, if not commendable: And if you or any other of the Clergy offer to give
him any Disturbance for it, I dare assure you, you will but so much the more
expose your selves and a foul Cause. It will be more agreeable to Christianity,
and the places you hold in the Church, to humble your selves before God, and
set speedily about such a Reformation as may make such Preaching needless. And
for Mr. Jones, I hope I shall be able to prevail with him to consider better of
the Season for those things, but not to remit any thing of his warmth against
them in due season, until I see more Zeal for the Reformation of them in
others.

But your Fault (pardon my plain dealing, which proceeds not from ill will, but
to do you good,) is in the Substance of what is amiss. You have undertaken (as
I am informed) the greatest Charge in the World, the Cure of Souls, and neglect
it; leave it to a Hireling, who if he be as good a man as your self, deserves
as much, that is all the Profits; if he be not, you do not discharge your Duty
there. And you not only neglect so great a Charge, but neglect it for the
World, for the Profit of a Lecture, nay two Lectures; and in a place where
there is no need of your Help, where there are Laborers who want Work, and
some who want Subsistence besides: So that the sin of your Neglect is
aggravated with great Scandal, tempting People both to Worldly-mindedness, and
to suspect that you, an eminent Dr. either believe not the Doctrine you
profess, and so also to Atheism; or that you believe not the strict Observation
thereof to be necessary, and so at least to Licentiousness: and aggravated not
only with Scandal, but with Incharitableness too, and that even to men of your
own Kind, through such Vnsatiableness, or V. Isa. 6.11.
Canine Appetite, which not only preys upon the Flock, but devours the very
Shepherds. Nor is this all yet; for you plainly encourage and lead into sin the
People you preach to. If to covet another man's Servant be a Sin, contrary to
the express Command of God, then certainly to inveigle another man's Servant
from him is a greater Sin: And if this be so, what is it then to inveigle the
Minister of a whole Parish from the service of their Souls? And no less a sin
than this are all they guilty of who contribute to either of your Lectures. The
due consideration of this, and what it is to be partakers in other men's sins,
as they are in all yours before mentioned, is fit to be recommended to your
Auditors. And a due sense of these things, (had you bin in nothing else
concerned in that discourse) would have allayed and checked the intemperance of
your Passion against a just Reproof, which I am certain was not designed by any
man for your person more than for any other, but ordered it seems by the
Providence of God to fall upon you, for your Correction, and your Good, if it
be not your own fault

But to all this, instead of that Christian use you ought to have made of it,
you added another fault, by your passionate and indecent Treatment of him for
it, in such a manner as had not bin excusable had you bin Rector, but was much
less so in you, who have only so precarious an Interest in that Church, as only
Lecturer, and such as you cannot retain without sin both in your self, and in
those who contribute to it.

And yet to this you have since added a third in your Sermon yesterday, [on
Act. 26.29. concerning Reproof, that it ought to be mild and gentle.] For, 1.
It was an Abuse of Religion and of the Doctrine of the Gospel, to make use of
it to gratify your Passion in Indecent Reflections. 2. It was imprudently done
in your Case, in as much as those Reflections do all rebound and more
notoriously fall upon pour self, who had justly and inexcusably deserved the
worst you could say to that purpose. 3. You did not handle that Doctrine
faithfully: for tho such as are overtaken in a fault are to be restored in a
spirit of meekness, yet such as sin deliberately are to be sharply reproved:
And this being your own case, and whereof you were admonished, you did not at
all touch upon it; but handled the Word of God deceitfully, like those false
Prophets who prophesied smooth things. (Isa. 30.10.) Your passionate Carriage
afterward in the Vestry, to my self, who was willing to have discoursed these
things calmly with you, I pass by: but expect your Answer to this, and shall be
ready, without any further regard to what is past, to treat with you as your
future and better Carriage shall deserve, and hoping the best shall remain

Your Humble Servant. E. S.
10 Nov. 1690.

Had the Dr. upon perusal of this Letter well considered how unhappily he had
fallen into a Quarrel, which in Prudence he ought to have avoided at first, and
however to let fall as soon and as silently as might be, it is likely it might
have passed over with a little talk only for a few days. But as for the
Letter, he told the Messenger who carried it, and desired his Answer, that he
had nothing to do with Mr. S. (who wrote it) and he would send him no Answer:
And for Mr. Jones nothing less than to have him Suspended or Silenced could
satisfy that Spirit he is of, whatsoever it is. And it was not long before
such another Occasion raised him up some Companions in the same Cause against
Mr. Jones. For notwithstanding this Treatment by that Doctor, he made bold in
another Sermon the next Lords Day, or the next but one, to touch two other
Faults of many of our Clergy, viz. Neglect of Catechizing, and Admission of
scandalous Persons to the Sacrament: And these two Sermons (though it was
undeniable Truth in them, at which they took such Offense) presently raised
such a Spirit in many of the Clergy about the City, that no less than forty or
fifty, as is reported, at one Meeting, agreed together that none of them should
permit David Jones to Preach in his Pulpit; and accordingly a Pulpit which was
Promised by one of them for a Stranger the next Lords day was denied as soon as
it was known that David Jones was the Man. And afterward at another Meeting,
or some way or other amongst them, they so prevailed with the Bishop, that he
would neither permit him to Preach without a License, though that is seldom or
never required of Strangers in London; nor let him have a License, though he
was willing to take one, and pay the Fees, having an absolute Promise to be
Chosen to a Place in London if he might have a License. So that after ten Years
hard Study in the University, and a sober and strict Life, he is by the Spirit
of this Party kept from the Service of God in the Exercise of his Ministry, to
which he is Ordained according to the Church of England, and from a Livelihood
in his Calling, for no other Fault but Preaching against the Faults of others,
whilst those who are guilty thereof are not only connived at, but favored even
in their unreasonable, and not more imprudent than impudent Prosecution of one,
who did but reprove them. And this Dr. being not only guilty of those Faults,
but moreover a principal Agent in this Prosecution, notwithstanding the private
Admonition of that Letter, since that had no better effect upon him, it was
thought fit to make it public; and the rather because by some Expressions of
the Bishops, the Letter seems to have been either misrepresented to him, or
mistaken by him.

And thus much for David Jones his Case, which, though very hard, yet being
only a private Case, I should not have thought sit to have made thus public,
did it not present us with a considerable Instance of the Nature of that wicked
Spirit, which has brought both the Church and the State of this Nation into a
most dangerous Condition, and very near to a most dismal Catastrophe; and with
a fair Occasion to detect its Nature and Operations before it accomplish the
same in the Confusion and final Destruction of both.

And First it is very plain that this is none of the Spirit of God or of
Christ, for that is pure, peaceable, gentle, Jam. 3.
and easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits; and these Fruits (to
judge according to our Savior's Rule) are Love, Joy, Peace, Long suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Mat. 7.
Faith, Meekness, Temperance, and the like; Gal. 5
but this Spirit is quite the contrary, passionate, furious, irreconcilable
implacable; and its Works are, Emulation, Envy, Strife, Anger, Malice, Hatred,
Rage, Revenge, and the like. So that in those Words of the Dr. to the House of
Commons, [ Though I must not say with St. Paul, (...)rm. (...) October. (...)g.
25.
that I think I have the Spirit of God; yet I dare say that I have the Spirit
of that Church in which I was born and bred; and I dare say no more:] there may
be more truth than he was aware of, or did intend. And if the Apostles in their
Zeal for Christ himself knew not what Spirit they were of, it is no wonder if
this Faction be of another Spirit than that which is of God, though they may
not know it.

Secondly, As it is plain that this Spirit of the Faction is not the Spirit
which is of God, so it is as plain that it is the Spirit of the World, by the
great Fervor and Affection it has and produces to the things of the World,
and the little concern it has for the things of God: Great Zeal and Jealousy
for the External Pomp and Grandeur of the Church, and the Honor and Dignity of
the Clergy; but little concern for the Internal Beauty and Splendour of the
Church, or for the Honor of God or the Christian Religion: As our Savior
says, No Man can serve two Masters; for either he will hate the one and love
the other, or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other: Ye cannot
serve God and Mammen: So it is plain, that the reason why they have so little
concern for the Honor and Service of God, is because they are so full of the
Spirit of the World: There is their Treasure, and there are their Hearts also.
This is apparent in many and frequent Instances of diverse Natures; deserting of
former, and many times great Charges, for a little advantage of Profit;
Deserting of such Charges as an industrious Man might well enough discharge,
and for Advantage in the Profits not only accepting but contending for such
Places as are greater than they can possibly discharge. And for Pluralities and
Non-residence I refer the Reader to Mr. Jones's Sermon, and to the Groans of
the Church, in a Book entitled Ichabod, Printed for John Harris at the Harrow
in the Poultrey.

And Thirdly, It is as plain, that there is more in it than merely the sordid
Spirit of the World, the Spirit of Covetousness, though that be said to be
Idolatry, (as is every excursion of the Affections to any thing more than to
God;) and the amity of the World to be enmity to God, there is also a proud,
haughty, arrogant, domineering Spirit of Opposition, of whatever stands in its
way, of Reformation, of any thing, though never so necessary; of the very spirit
and life of Religion, and of Christ himself in his Saints: In plain terms, the
Spirit of Antichrist, the very same with that of Rome, only a little restrained
by the Reformation from some particular Projects of Opposition, which yet it
supplies by others as effectual. But in diverse Instances it appears to be the
very same: As, 1. In violent Opposition of any Reformation, though never so
reasonable, or necessary, and upon the very same Principles, viz. least it
should weaken their Authority, or abridge some Temporal Advantage. And hence it
is that not any of those things, which the first Reformers settled as well as
they could for the present, but noted to be defective, and desired might be
more completely reformed in due time, has to this day bin promoted toward a
more complete Reformation; but whoever appeared much concerned for it, were
opposed, reproached and persecuted. As this appeared early, even in Queen
Elizabeth's time; when those who desired a Reformation in respect of
Discipline, were at first reproached with the Name of Disciplinarians, and
afterward persecuted unto Death, not without some straining of the Law against
them, but not any thing done in so necessary a Case. The very same Spirit it
is, which in the case of Pluralities, and Non-Residence, that storms and
bandies against David Jones, for but touching upon it in transitu. And the same
Wicked Spirit it is, which keeps our Divisions, not only by Obstinacy against
all Christian Condescension in things indifferent, least they should remit any
thing of their Authority; but by obtruding new occasions of Offense and
Difference, to keep out as many as they can from Conformity, that so they may
ingross all Preferments the more entirely to themselves. 2. In more strictly
requiring Obedience and Conformity to their own Laws, than to the Laws and
Commands of God; nay, at the same time permitting the greatest Violations and
Contempt of the Gospel by their own Members without the least resentment, and
conniving at notorious Immoralities, I might say indulging them, in such as are
but zealous for the Church, as they call the Faction; for such are frequently
excused, treated and commended by them as honest Loyal Churchmen, though they
seldom appear at the Church, or perform any serious act of Religion. And what
is this but setting up themselves above the Worship of God? 3. In flattering
and cajoling of Princes: or in the Scripture phrase, in Fornication with the
Kings of the Earth. There is only this Difference between the Great Whore and
this Faction, that the former, like a great Person, a stately Dame, was
folicited and courted by the Kings of the Earth, and imperiously commanded
them, though she prostituted her self to their embraces: But this, like a
little Whore, or Common Prostitute, solicited them, and mercenarily prostituted
her self to their Pleasure for Silk Stockings, Ribbons, and such Finery, for
Preferments. But in three most material things they agree exactly. 1. In
asserting the Pretenses of their Gallants. 2. In raising themselves in Temporal
Advantages by them. 3. In incensing them to espouse their Quarrels, and by
Temporal Laws, and Civil and Military Power to subdue or suppress their
Adversaries. But this must be explained, and the Mystery be made manifest.


The Sacred Office of Ministers of Jesus Christ, I think truly the most
Honorable Employment that a mortal Man is capable of; and therefore should
think nothing too much for them, which might render the Persons employed in
such an Office the more honorable in the sight of all Men. But when I
consider, what only is truly Honorable in the sight of God, of the Blessed
Angels, and of all wise men; and what is so only in the Opinion of the Ignorant
People of the World; that these latter without the former are apt rather to
move Indignation and Contempt, than any truly honorable Esteem in the Minds of
Men; and that Common Experience shows, that such is the corruption of Humane
Nature, that they not only usually prove Lures to corrupt minds, to attract
such as to the Prey, but for the most part corrupt or debase even the better
sort of those who do but accept them; it puts me in mind of that notable
Observation of Ammianus Marcellinus, concerning the Bishops of the City of
Rome, and the Country Bishops; That the former indeed lived in great Splendour,
rode in their Coaches, were curiously clothed, and fared sumptuously; but
might be truly happy, if despising the Grandeur of the City they lived like the
latter, whom their modest Attire, their spare Diet, and their humble Behavior,
recommended both to the Eternal Deity, and to the sincere Worshippers of him.
It makes me think also of the words of that Great and Good Man, Sir Matthew
Hale, who, when I told him the News of the Preferment of one of the Clergy,
whom I knew he had a respect for, replied very seriously and gravely: I did
never rejoice in the Preferment of any of my Friends of the Clergy; for though
it be a good sign of good times when Good Men are preferred; yet I do not think
it good for them: For I never knew any man made better by Preferments, but many
worse. And it makes me conclude with much Assuranee of Truth, that those things
wherewith Constantine heretofore, and our Ancestors in this Nation afterward,
expressed much Affection and Respect to the Church, and piously designed to
adorn and exalt it in Esteem, Honor and Power, have proved in truth no better
than the unadvised Indulgences of fond Parents usually prove to their Children;
please their childish Affections for the present, but insensibly deprave both
Body and Mind, and deprive them of many real and great Advantages, which a
prudent Discipline, and well regulated Education would have furnished them
with. Certain it is, that the admired things of the World do not satisfy, but
Dropsie-like increase the Thirst, and so entangle Men's Minds more and more in
worldly Affections, which the design of Christianity is to divest us of. The
genuine Christianity is the most Divine and only complete Philosophy, that ever
appeared among Men. And a true Church of Christ is a Society of Men selected
out of the World, not corporally, but in their Souls and Affections, and
certain Institutions and Manners; and particularly amongst others, by
Renunciation of the Pomps and Vanities of it. Such a Church debauched by the
Spirit of the World, becomes a Whore in a spiritual sense, according to the
phrase of the S. Scriptures. And when the lust of those things is excited by
this Spirit of the World, to the Rage of Persecution of the Members of Christ,
it becomes then a complete Antichrist.

Thus the Great and Famous Church of Rome, the Mistress of all the Western
Churches, being debauched, became the Great Whore; and the rest were only as
Servants to her, or Members of her. And such was the Church of England, till
she deserted her Service at the Reformation, and set up for her self. Then
indeed she began to reform many of the Corruptions of her Mistress; but her
State and Grandeur she thought she might retain without Detriment or Danger to
her Integrity, little suspecting that this was the Root and principal Occasion
of all the Corruptions of that once famous and truly honorable Church; and the
more easily overlooking the Corruptions of which, much of that State and
Grandeur does consist, though it be very plain and obvious if duly considered:
For it is plain, beyond all contradiction, that our Episcopacy, as it stands
modelled to this day, however we magnify our Church upon it, even to the
unchurching of almost all others, is no genuine Institution, but a Mungrel
Constitution of Antichistian Original; and of very pernicious Consequence both
to Church and State. It is a truth, which at least after diverse more gentle
Admonitions I must speak out: for I see no hopes of any good from it, unless
the Corruptions thereof be reformed. A principal part of what is reputed
peculiar to the Episcopal Office, is taken from our Bishops, and committed to
Laymen, viz. The Administration of Discipline. This as a piece of State, in
imitation of the Grandees of the World, was heretofore committed to the
Chancellors, as a matter below their Dignity to execute themselves; so that to
this day they remain deprived in effect of a considerable part of their Office:
of which Bishop Beadle had so just a resentment, that he endeavored the
restititution thereof. And as their Office in part is taken from them, so they
on the other side are not a little taken from their Office, by Secular Business
in Parliament, besides other Secular Business in the Country. Which to me
seems a greater piece of Sacrilege than the alienation of part of their
Revenues, and application of it to secular uses. Being thus in part deprived of
their Office, and in part abstracted from it, it is but agreeable to the rest,
that they are partly also deprived of their Churches. Where they have Seats
indeed left them, but the Cathedrals in all or most places, if I mistake not,
are not in the Power of the Bishop, but of the Dean and Chapter, consisting of
a number of Prebends, who are obliged to be resident some certain, but no long
time, as three weeks or a month in the Year; and having Cures remote, and
commonly out of the Diocese, are of little Use or Benefit to the Church or
City, if at all to any part of the Diocese. Thus is the ancient venerable Body
or Society of the Bishop and his Presbytery with us divided and distracted, and
rendered in a great measure useless and insignificant to the Ends of its
Original Institution; and the Damage thereof to the Church not only covered and
concealed, but augmented also, by the Addition of secular Titles and
Employments, through the subtilty of that Wicked spirit. A plain Mungrel
Constitution, instead of the ancient simple Christian Form.

That these things are not of Christian Institution, is plain from the Sacred
Scriptures, and the Writings of the Christians of all former Ages before they
were introduced. And that they are of Antichristian Original, is as plain from
the Writings of those Ages when they were introduced; but both may be made
manifest to all Men by a much shorter and easier way: And that is, by
considering the different Ends and Designs of the Spirit of Christ, and of the
Spirit of Antichrist, and the Tendency and Subserviency of these things to the
End and Designs of the one or the other.

The End and Design of Christ, and of his Spirit, which does animate and guide
all true Christians, is to withdraw Men from the World, to train and exercise
them to an entire Subjection of the whole Man to God, and to exalt and unite
them, who are dependant Beings, to him, who is their only Center of Repose and
Happiness. On the contrary, the Aim and Design of the Wicked One, the Spirit of
Antichrist, called also the God of this World, is to withhold and withdraw the
Minds of Men from God; and in order thereunto to entangle their Affections with
the false appearances of the things of this World, and distract their thoughts
with multiplicity of Superfluities and Impertinences thereof; that being
unhinged from their proper Center, they may center upon some false bottom, and
set up themselves for little Deities, Gerentes se pro Centro mundi; which being
the very state of the Devils, does necessarily involve them in their Condition,
and engage them to their Party, amongst whom they must unavoidably be subject
to such as are more powerful than themselves.

Accordingly our Savior, when he was pleased to converse with Men in the habit
of a mortal man, was pleased to appear in a mean Condition, without House or
Lands, without other Attendants than his Disciples, and those chosen out of the
meanest sort of people: His Speeches and Discourses weighty and comprehensive,
but plain, and without any affectation either of Oratory or exactness of
Method: his Institutions for Initiation and Confederation of his Disciples, and
Worship of God, few and simple, with little Ceremony, though very significant:
His Doctrines few and plain, that he was the Son of God, the Messiah, or
Christ, anointed by his Spirit to be a Prince and a Savior to all Nations; and
that of his Fullness of the Divine Spirit, we all who believe in him and obey
him, should receive, and so be partakers of the Divine Nature: His Precepts
likewise few, but very extensive, and easily intelligible; to love God with all
our Powers and Faculties; and our Neighbor, who is equally related to God, as
our selves; and to keep our selves pure and unspotted of the World. And
accordingly his Apostles and Disciples, those who had not the things of the
World, sought them not, but were contented with Food and Raiment; and that they
often sought by their own labors, and those who had more, distributed what
they had to such as wanted. On the contrary, Antichrist is described in the
Scripture, 1. With great Pomp, State, Grandeur, Power and Dominion. 2. With
much Subtilty, and strong Delusions. 3. With great Violence and Cruelty, being
drunk with the Blood of the Saints. And if we well consider the Methods which
have been used for the suppression of the Christian Religion, through the
Instigation of that Wicked Spirit, which rules in the Hearts of all wicked Men,
and too often prevails in such as are not of his party, if not well purified
from carnal and terrene Affections, and very vigilant and circumspect, we shall
find that the first was indeed by open Violence, by the Jews and the Heathens:
But as soon as that appeared not to be sufficient for his purpose, he made use
of his Subtilty, and transforming himself into an Angel of Light, set to work
by his Instruments to corrupt the simblicity of the Christian Doctrine with
subtle Notions, and under pretense of Zeal for the true Faith to raise
Dissentions, and divide the Christians into different parties, and set them one
against another. And by this Means he prevailed mightily among the Greeks, who
were addicted to Speculation and Oratory: But when his first Method of Force
wholly failed him, and the Roman Emperors became Christians, neither had his
second Method that effect among the Romans as it had with the Greeks, they
being more addicted to Pomp, and Grandeur, and Dominion, than to Notions and
Speculations; he presently attached them with those things which were more
agreeable to their Disposition, and instigated them to express their Zeal for
the Church, by conferring as much of this kind upon it as might be, and their
Bishops as greedily to catch at it. This is that which St. Augustine and the
Bishops of that famous Council in Africa noted, and gravely and sharply
reproved in the then Bishops of Rome, that they introduced Typhum Seculi in
Ecclesiam, the Pomp and Grandeur of the World into the Church: And when they
were once tainted and levened with this Poison of the Spirit of the World, they
were easily instigated to the use of Force and Violence against any who never
so justly opposed their Ambition, (as that Council did) till at last they
proceeded to Blood and all kind of Cruelty in after Ages.

And now for the Tendence and Subservience of these things of the World, so
much neglected by Christ and his true Disciples, and so greedily sought after
by others, to which of the Ends before mentioned it is most, and the Effects
and Consequences of them upon Men: 1. It is plain that they do for the most
part strangely insinuate themselves into the Affections of those that acquire
them; insomuch that what is commonly said of one of them, Crescit amor nummi
quantum ipsa pecunia crescit, may truly be said of all; much would have more,
and the more men have, the more they still crave; and so easily observable
every where, that I need say no more. 2. These Affections to the things of the
World are apt continually to occupy and take up the Mind, and to avert it or
detain it from God, its proper Object; partly by Complacency in them, and
partly by Distractions about them. 3. And this does easily proceed to a kind of
Trust and Confidence in them, and Reliance upon them, with Acquiescence and
Repose; whereby they become such a false bottom to it as I mentioned before, an
Idol instead of the Living God. 4. And this must needs partly chill, if not
extinguish all true Devotion and Affection to God, and cause a Narrowness of
Soul, as to any generous Acts for his Service, or the common Good of Men; and
partly infatuate it with False Security and Presumption of the Favor of God,
grounded upon such External Blessings, and a formal outside Religion according
to its own Disposition. 5. And then lastly, All is soon completed with that
height of Pride, Arrogance, and Indignation and Severity against all who
oppose, or refuse to stoop and pay Reverence to so Worshipful a Being. All
which is directly contrary to the entire Subjection of the Creature to the
Creator, which is the very End of our living here upon Earth, and of the
Conduct of the Divine Spirit, and insensibly leads into the State, and subjects
it to the Power of the Devils.

And for the Effect and Consequence thereof upon others, the Ostentation of
those who have some share of these things, is apt to provoke the Emulation of
those who have less: and that instigates them first to Care and Pains to get as
much as their Neighbors, though otherwise they may perhaps have enough for
themselves and their Families, if they would but conform to it; and so robs
them of much precious Time, and distracts their Minds from their proper Object,
by unnecessary Care for Superfluities; and so also gives advantage to the
Spirit of the World to insinuate the deeper into them: And Secondly, if honest
Pains and honest Gains will not satisfy the Emulation, it instigates further
to indirect Means, as Frauds, Cheats, Exactions, Oppressions, secret Stealth
and open Robbery, wherewith particular Persons are wronged and molested, and
many undone; many Arts, Projects and Practices of Covetous and Ambitious
Officers, Courtiers, Statesmen, and Princes, whereby States and Governments and
whole Nations are disturbed, and often involved in great Troubles; and most of
that various Wickedness which we daily see punished with the untimely Death of
so many Malefactors. But besides those grosser Evils, which are apparent to
every ordinary Observation, there is another more subtle Evil Consequence,
which falls heavy upon a great part of Mankind, and so makes the Curse much
worse than ever God made it. It keeps down many Young and many honest
industrious People, that with all their Care, Labor and Industry, they are
hardly able to get an honest Livelihood and Subsistence for their Families, and
makes Necessity a great Temptation to many. These are great Evils under the
Sun, such as do greatly strengthen and increase the Kingdom of Darkness, and
such as the Christians of the Reformed Churches (as we call them) have much to
answer for before God. But it would require a longer Discourse than is fit for
this place fully to explain them. I shall therefore only add, that the Great
Instruments of this Mystery of Wickedness, are the Great Men of the World, the
Stately Dames, and all that either prosecute the things of the World with
Greediness, and without measure, retain them without use, or use them with
Ostentation, in Attire, in immodest Fashions, (such as our Women's Fioccoes,
fitter for Fore-horses heads than for the Foreheads of Christian Women,) in
great Tables, Curious Furniture, Attendants, and Prodigality at Inns and
Taverns, to Servants, upon their Pleasures, and other matters, forgetting the
Account they must one day make for these Talents. But no greater Instruments do
I know in this Mystery than such Clergymen, as forgetting the Design and
Precepts of the Gospel, and the Example of our Savior and the ancient
Christians, by a contrary Example in seeking Preferments, in making Provision
for the flesh, and Ostentation of the things of the World in themselves, their
Wives and Children, and by too close following, and thereby authorizing and
encouraging the Fashions, and Modes and Finery and State of the World, render
themselves the Devils Journeymen to expose and recommend his Wares, and his
Servants to spread his Snares, who should as the Ministers and Servants of
Jesus Christ by their Example recommend the noble Simplicity of our Christian
Profession, as well as by their Doctrine inculcate the Exactness of a true
Christian Conversation, and the Strictness of the Account we must all one day
give of what we have done in the Flesh. And yet some there are, who, as if
their Compliance and Encouragement to these things by their Example were not
enough, scruple not to be Advocates for them, even in their Pulpits, and in
Printed Books, and teach People by Pharisaical Glosses to elude the plainest
and most express Texts of Scripture, and instead of Religious care to conform
their Manners to them, to study and invent such Comments for them as may least
thwart their corrupt manners; little considering that the Precepts of the
Gospel were designed for Mankind with respect to a Common Good, and that many
things, which considered in themselves, or as the acts of a particular Person,
may seem little, yet considered with all their Circumstances and Consequences
when become Common to a whole Nation, or to many Nations, are very pernicious,
and therefore all participation in them dangerous to particular Persons. Nor do
I see how the Pompous Titles and Vestments of our Bishops can be excused from
recommending these false Wares, instead of the genuine Ornaments of the Gospel,
as Motives of Respect. And certain it is, that those Bishops, who in the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, were the Principal Reformers of the Church
of England, thought them fit to be reformed; nor was that opposed upon any
consideration of Religion, but reason of State, and that not well considered,
as the event has proved. And I my self have discoursed with Bishops now
living, who have expressed to me the same sense of these things, and I doubt
not but would willingly consent to a reformation of them. But for their
Revenues, I should not wish any abatement thereof, provided they were but
conferred in such manner as might not continually fill and pester the Church
with worldly Factious Men, and so used as they ought to be, as Talents whereof
an Account must be given for the real Service of Religion; that they who have
Riches, were as rich in Good Works; that so the People might be taught by their
Example, as well as by their Doctrine, the true Use and Value of Temporal
things, and the danger of Riches otherwise. Only whereas in the first Ages, the
Stock and Revenues of the Church were employed partly for the Maintenance of
the Bishop and Clergy in common, not of the Bishop alone, and partly for Works
of Charity, (for such was then the Frugality and Piety of the Clergy, that
their Charity often extended to very remote parts,) and whereas afterward our
Ancestors in this Nation (to say nothing of other Parts) so ordered the Matter,
that besides an ample separate Revenue for the Bishop, all Parishes had a
competent Maintenance for the inferior Clergy belonging to them; and it was
one of the notorious Abuses of the Papacy to rob the richer Parishes of their
maintenance for their own Clergy, and therewith augment the Revenues of the
Bishops, or of the Monasteries, which was the Original of Impropriations; I do
not see how our Bishops and Deans, and Chapters can with good Conscience retain
such Impropriations, and see the Parishes out of which they receive such
Revenues, deprived of competent Maintenance for able Ministers, or enjoy so
ample Revenues, as many of them do, and make so little use of it for the
promotion of Christianity either abroad or at home; contrary to the constant
Doctrine of the Christians of all former Ages, that a Clergyman may not use the
Stock of the Church, or the Revenues of his Benefice, but only as his Moderate
need requires, and is obliged to employ the residue in Pious Uses; and of the
Casuists and Doctors of later Ages generally agreeing it to be a Sin in a
Clergyman to mispend what exceeds his moderate Necessity, and many to be such a
Sin, as obliges to Restitution for the Service of the Church, and Religion:
Which savours much of the genuine Christian Spirit.

But this Faction is of a contrary, or quite other Spirit: They have little
zeal for, or sense of any pious Uses. Great Zealotes they are indeed for the
Church, but it is but for the Pomp and Grandeur of it, which consumes all, and
can spare nothing for any truly pious Uses; and like the Capernaites who
followed Christ for the Loaves, only for the Preferments, of which they hope
for a share. And therefore it is that their Zeal and Jealousy is very warm
against Dissenters, whom they look upon as their Rivals, or their Adversaries,
be they never so sober, so Religious, and so Industrious for promoting of Piety
and Virtue; but against the most Profane Contemners of all Religion, if they
but favor the Faction, nothing at all. And no less Zealots for the State and
Government, under the specious Name of Loyalty: But it is in truth only for the
obtaining the Preferments, which are not to be had without favor at Court. And
therefore they can easily be content to sacrifice the Rights of their Country
for their own Preferment, and betray their Trust for Pensions and Gratuities;
and their Kings too, by base Compliances, and by evil and pernicious Counsels,
into such Courses, as make their Government no less uneasy to themselves, than
to the People; and after all desert them when they see occasion to save
themselves, if they have not before made their own case desperate. A just
punishment I confess for such Princes as will not consider or be persuaded in
time, that they who will betray their Country to gratify them, will not fail
to betray them also for their own Advantage, and to desert them in case of
greatest Danger.

This plainly is the property of a deceitful Harlot, contrary to the Duty and
Qualities of a truly loving and faithful Wife: And if we enquire into the
Original of these Amors, it will be easy to trace them to the very beginning
and first entrance of the Scotch Race into this Kingdom King James his Heart
was undoubtedly (as is usual in such cases) mightily lifted up with his so
easy access to the Crown of England. And it no less filled the Hearts of
others with Hopes and Expectations, some of Honors, some of Places and
Estates, and some of both: which his Prodigality of both, yet more enlarged,
and Emulation raised to the highest degree. These Emulations were partly
National between the Scotch and English; and partly among the English
themselves, and those of two sorts, such as at the Court sought Preferment in
the State, and such as sought either Preferment in the Church, or Favor in
Church matters: So that he was addressed to, and courted by all Parties for his
Favor, in an extraordinary manner, and by most in the usual methods of
Courtship, viz. Magnifying his Wisdom, and his State and Power beyond Truth and
Modesty, insinuating into him all the Prejudice that might be against those who
were looked upon as Rivals; and recommending their own specious Services, by
misrepresenting the Modesty of others for want of affection. And so gross,
notorious and impudent were the Acts of this Courtship, as provoked the House
of Commons in the very first Parliament, to make a Declaration of their Grief
to find his Majesty, to the extreme prejudice of his Subjects of England, so
greatly wronged by Misinformation; and among other things concerning the Rights
and Liberties of his Subjects of England, and the Privileges of Parliament,
which they there assert, but belong not to this place to be here recited.

Among the Competitors for his Favor were many serious religious people, who
sought his Favor only for the Reformation of some things in the Church, which
were thought not so thoroughly reformed as was to be wished. And for that
purpose prepared a Petition which was subscribed by many hundred hands: They
had encouraged themselves upon the Favor the King had formerly showed them, in
writing to the Queen on their behalf; and they had had an Agent with him
immediately upon the Queens death, to whom without doubt he gave a fair and
smooth Answer. But some of the Bishops were not behind hand with them in
Scotland, and soon outwent them in the Success of their Courtship and his
Favor after he came into England. He had conceived a Prejudice against a
Scotch Presbytery before: This Bancroft and some other hot men took advantage
of, both to heighten the prejudice against all who desired any thing of a
Reformation here, and to insinuate themselves into his Favor. And when he
found himself received, and securely settled in the Throne beyond his
Expectation, he soon discovered his Inclinations; and more particularly in his
Proclamation, 24 Oct. 1603. Concerning such as seek Reformation in Church
matters: Which stopped the Petition for some time; and in the Conference at
Hampton Court, 14 Jan. which whether appointed at the instance of any others,
or at the Kings own pleasure, is uncertain; but served, as appears by the
Relation, principally for the King to express his Favor to the Bishops, and
Conforming party, and his Prejudice against the rest, and for them to express
their Respects to him, as some of them did by speaking to him upon the knee,
(viz. Whitgift and Bancroft,) and applauding what he said, as undoubtedly
spoken by the special assistance of Gods Spirit; and for mutual Courtship and
Indearments between them.

But though they were never so well assured of the Kings Favor, yet were they
fearful of the Parliament, which had often in the Queens Time been upon Bills
against Pluralities, and for Reformation of other matters, which though the
Archbishop by the Queens means had prevailed to have stopped, yet was he so
concerned, that he wished he might not live to see another Parliament. And this
disposed Them, not only by way of Complement, as a means to recommend
themselves to the King, but in good earnest for their own Interest, being well
assured of his Favor, to magnify the Kings Authority, and set it as high as
might be, even without the concurrence of the Parliament, and to derogate as
much as they durst from their Authority. And this again so much the more
disposed the King to favor Them, not politickly in apperance only, but in good
earnest, as the most apt Instruments he could have for his Designs, (which
appear by many plain instances to have been from his first coming in to set up
himself by his Arts and Kingcraft above all Law;) and for that end, to confirm
and enlarge the Authority of the Bishops and Clergy, which depended upon him
for their Preferment, as much as might be, to make them the more capable to
serve his turn.

And these are the true Principles, which have produced and raised this Faction
to what it is: For upon these Principles were things managed by a secret
Correspondence between him and some leading men of the Clergy. Accordingly in
the next Convocation, after they had provided in the first Cannon for asserting
his Supremacy according to the Law of the Land against all foreign
Jurisdiction, in the next Canon they set it up paramount the Law, and without
the Parliament, to be the same Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, that the
godly Kings had among the Jews, and Christian Emperors in the Primitive
Church; and might with as much reason have asserted as much concerning his
Authority in Civil matters if they durst, for both depend upon the same
Principles; but that both he and they knew very well would never have passed
without being taken notice of, and questioned in Parliament.

And therefore there was another Project to help that out, carried on with
great Artifice and Secrecy in the same Convocation, which at last has appeared
in print, published by the late Archbishop, under the Title of Bishop Overals
Convocation Book (though he was no Bishop in seven years after it passed the
Convocation,) The chief purpose of which is pretended to be, to imitate the
Scriptures in setting out and describing the Dignity of our Savior Christ by
his Almighty Power and Universal Government of all the World, as they say in
the beginning. But they tell us not what Occasion they had to do this in so
solemn a manner. The King in his Letter (lately published) to good Dr. Abbot
(who probably was not acquainted with the Intreigue,) tells them, You know all
of you, as I think, that my Reason of calling you together, was to give your
Judgments: How far a Christian and a Protestant King may concur to assist his
Neighbors to shake off their Obedience to their own Sovereign, upon the
account of Oppression, Tyranny, or what else you like to name it? Nor does
there appear any just Occasion for this: For if it be well considered, it was
not War, but a Treaty of Peace between the Hollanders and Spain, which was then
under consideration. Nor does the Form of the Book suit with a mere Resolution
of such a Doubt: For it is one thing to give a Judgment or Opinion of a Case of
Conscience, and another to make Canons and Decrees. Nor lastly, is the matter
of it proportionable only to such an Occasion. And therefore if the Matter and
Form of the Book be well considered, there will appear great reason to believe
that these were mere Pretenses to cover some other Design; and that the true
Design of the Book was only or principally to assert, That an Absolute,
Irresistible and Unaccountable Monarchy, without consent of the People, is Jure
Divine, Gods Ordinance, Originally descending from him, and depending upon him;
and that all others are degenerate Forms of Government; and to assert a like
Jus Divinum for their own Ecclesiastical Government, and withal to prejudice,
vilify and decry all Claim of any Right in the Government, or of Liberties by
the People, with the reproachful Terms, and under the Notion of Factious
Popularity, which are plainly known to have been the Kings own Sentiments, by
whose special License and Authority they did sit and consult. And this is so
plain and visible in the Book, that the Learned Dr. Sherlock makes no Scruple
to speak it out plainly, that The princpal Design of it is to assert the
Irresistible Authority of Sovereign Princes; which was as much of it as his
Subject led him to speak of; otherwise I doubt not but had he had occasion, he
could and would have said as much of the other part of the Design, viz. the
Ecclesiastical Government.

And if this was indeed the Design, it was, in my apprehension, especially as
it was managed in that clandestine and covert way, and with such a Form of
Authority, not only unjust, but vile and dishonorable, unbefitting the Majesty
of a King, or the dignity of a Convocation of Clergymen, and a great abuse of
Religion, to prostitute the Reputation of so venerable Authority to abuse
People out of their Right; nay, to enchant them as it were to venture their
Lives and Fortunes against their own Right and Interest, as it did by degrees
at last make them do, besides many other Mischiefs it has produced, and
principally upon the Authors, as is very usual by the Just Judgments of the
Righteous God. But all this I will endeavor to make plain and manifest as
briefly as I can, in the several Particulars following.

1. That King James 1. notwithstanding his many Professions and solemn
Protestations to govern according to Law, did from the very beginning of his
Reign, study and employ all his King-craft, to make himself Absolute, and get
all into his own Power. This is so well known, that I need only mention some of
his Artifices and Attempts to that purpose, with References to Evidences and
Testimonies thereof. As, 1. Upon the Parliament it self. 1. To restrain the
Freedom of Elections of Knights and Burgesses, and the Returns of Members for
diverse Corporations, as may be perceived by his Proclamation 1 Jan. 1 Jac. 2.
To draw the Determination of such Elections into the Chancery, before an
Officer of his own, as may be seen in the Case of Sir Fr. Goodwyn, 1 Jac.
lately published in Lex Parliamentaria. 3. To restrain their Freedom of
Debates, which was complained of in Parliament, with the two preceding, 1 Jac.
and afterward occasioned that Remonstrance, 24. May, 8 Jac. and at last
produced that free and generous Protestation concerning their Rights in print,
in Wilson p. 188. and Rushworth p. 53. To which, others might be added; which
made the Parliament tell him, that in the first Parliament of his Reign, the
Privileges of their House, and therein the Liberties and Stability of the
whole Kingdom had been more universally and dangerously impugned, than ever
since the beginning of Parliaments, etc. V. Journal, An. 1. 2. To make his
Proclamations pass for Laws or Edicts, (as they have since done in France) of
which he published no less than Seventy in the first Year of his Reign, and
many every year after, till they were printed all together in a Volume, in the
form of Acts of Parliament, and Books were written for their Authority, and
that the Parliament took notice and complained of it. And then he began to
cover it as well as he could by another Proclamation, 24 Sept. 8 Jac. 3. To
impose Taxes without consent of Parliament, as appears by the Remonstrance, 24
May, 1610. printed with a learned and necessary Argument concerning that
matter, and the Benevolence notwithstanding extorted, Anno 1614. v. Wilson p.
78. 4. To set up Extrajudicial Opinions of Judges for Laws, ( vide the Apol. 1.
Jac.) and to impose upon the Judges to give Judgments in favor of Prerogative
contrary to the Laws, and their own Oaths, as may be seen in Franklins Annals,
Anno 1616. 14 Jac. which compared with that noble Case of Cavendish in
Anderson, 1 Rep. 152. in the Queens time, the different behavior of them two
and their Judges, will appear very remarkable. 5. To tune the Pulpits, (as some
pretend that Queen Elizabeth used to phrase it) and set the Clergy on work by
Preaching, Writing and Discourses, to promote his Designs by pretense of
Scripture and Religion, and to make good by color of Divinity what could not
be done by Law, and seek Principles for a chosen Conclusion, which is the
matter now in hand. And therefore,


The Second particular is, That there was at that time a Party of the Clergy,
who (besides a Court Faction) struck in, joined and held a secret
Correspondence with him for the promoting of these matters. This might be
observed in diverse Instances precedent to his first Parliament; but the
Complaints of the House of Commons the very first Sessions, of some of the
Higher Clergy writing a Book against them, even the Parliament sitting, and the
Inferior Clergy inveighing against them in Pulpits; yea, publishing
Protestations tending to the Impeachment of their most ancient and undoubted
Rights, as may be seen in the Journal, is sufficient evidence of it self, and
yet will receive farther Confirmation from what follows.

The third is, That this Work was an Arcanum Imperii, and managed and
transacted in a secret mysterious and disguised manner between them. This we
may see plainly by what They pretend to be Their chief Purpose, and He to be
His Reason of calling them together, that they did agree in this, that each
Party did use Colors and Pretenses: but as it usually falls out in secret
Conspiracies, that all Circumstances are not provided for, so in this their
Disagreement in the Particular, discovers that both were but Pretense. This may
further be perceived by the Kings Letter to good Dr. Abbot, published in the
Observator: For why should he write of that matter to Good Dr. Abbot, rather
than to Trusty Dr. Bancroft, who was President of the Upper House of
Convocation for the Province of Canterbury? or to Thornborough Bishop of
Bristoll, who was one of that Convocation, and besides was thought sit to be
made President for the Province of York? or to Learned Dr. Overall, who was the
person employed to draw up the Book, and was besides Prolocutor of the Lower
House? Nay, why was it written at all? Had the King no Conference with any of
them? Was not Archbishop Bancroft a Privy Councellor? And was none of these
able to declare the Kings pleasure to the Convocation? And why should his
Orders (mentioned in that Letter) to a Convocation of the Clergy be sent by his
Solicitor, and he be again employed in that business to them? Must our
Solicitor instruct our Bishops and Clergy in matters of Divinity? or must the
Bishops and Clergy determine matters of Law, and Right, and Civil Government
according to the Kings pleasure, by the Information of his Solicitor? What
other probable Reason can be conceived for all this, but that there being an
Arcanum Imperii to be managed with great Policy and Secrecy, under another
Pretense, they who were the principal Confidents and Agents for promoting the
Secret, must not appear openly at all concerned in it; but because some body
must be employed for the King, good Dr. Abbot, whom no body would suspect to be
privy to any such Intreagues, and the Solicitor, a Man of another profession,
must be put upon some service which might disguise the matter, and help to
prevent suspicion of the true Design? And this to me is a great Confirmation
that it was all Trick and Intreague between the King and some leading Men in
the Convocation for the purpose aforesaid. But the while I cannot but pity that
Good Man, and diverse other such of that Convocation, who, if they did not
consent to those things in the Convocation, are abused by Bancroft, or
Thornborough, or Overal; or if they did, were not less abused, being drawn into
a matter, the bottom of which they did not understand, by a vile Conspiracy and
mischievous Faction, which has hitherto been the Bane of the Church of
England, and of the State too, and will henceforward be the shame of that
Convocation to after Ages.

And from hence we may also perceive the true Reason, why so notable a Work of
this Convocation has been so great a Secret in our History, and so little
taken notice of for above fourscore years, till of late made public; and that
which may also serve for a further Confirmation of this matter. Some indeed
have concluded from the Letter to Dr. Abbot, that it was because the King was
displeased with them, viz. for a passage there mentioned; and though the words
mentioned in the Letter are not literally the same, as in the printed
Convocation Book, yet in Charity they could scarce believe any Alterations made
in the Cannons before they were printed. But by the Letter we understand that
the King was not so displeased but that he promised to send them his Orders
about it by Mr. Solicitor, and bids them till then meddle no more with it. And
the Publisher of the Book informs us, that there were several Amendments made
by the Upper House of Convocation, and that the Book was printed according to
them. And the Sabscriptions of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and of the Bishop
of Bristoll President of the Convocation of York, to the first Book, show that
the Work did afterward go on, was finished, and passed not only that
Convocation, but that of the Province of York also: And further than that did
they go, even to add two Books more to it. So that there was no such
displeasure of the King against it; nor could that be the reason why those
Canons were never ratified in Parliament, or stamped with the Kings Authority.
But the most probable Reason, consonant to the Nature of the thing, and to the
Methods which were used, is either, That it was never intended to be published,
lest it should be confuted, and so the Design spoiled, or censured in
Parliament, and so turned against them, but be kept as a Secret: For so its
Authority would be no less Venerable, nor would its Effects be less powerful
upon some prime leading men, who might influence others: Or, That it was
thought fit first to try how some such Notions vented by private men would pass
or escape, before the Venerable Authority of such a Work should be exposed to
Censure. And accordingly soon after were diverse Books with passages in them to
the same purpose published, of which notice was taken in Parliament, and among
the rest one by Blackwell a Secular Priest, whom, if I mistake not, Bancroft
kept in his House, or protected; and another written by John Cowel Doctor of
Law, and dedicated to the Archbishop, (Bancroft,) who, as he there says, at
his coming to him from the University, first put him upon those Studies, and
was suspected, as he confessed in Parliament, to have a Finger in the Book. And
upon this the Commons first, and afterward both Houses, fell very warmly; till
the King seeing what they were like to do, to save his Champion from more
severe Censure, and to pacify the Parliament, takes upon himself to suppress
it, by a Proclamation on purpose. And a Proclamation indeed came out, but such
as sufficiently shows the Kings Disposition and Tenderness in the Case. And
this was a sufficient Experiment to show then what was like to become of the
Convocation Book should it be offered to the Parliament, authorized by the
King, or so much as appear in public: And this may be the reason why it was so
long before any complete Treatise upon those Principles ever appeared. For
that, if done by any considerable Person, might not only have provoked the
Censure of the Parliament, but have exposed them to Examination and Discussion
of able Lawyers, and other Learned men both at Home and abroad, (for all
Nations are concerned in it,) and that K. James and some others of that Party
had reason enough to suspect they would not bear: And therefore we meet with
little of them, till Sir To. Filmer's Patriarcha was published after his Death,
upon the persuasion of Dr. Heylin, and after K. Charles 2. his Restoration, at
a very seasonable time for such stuff. So that this was sufficient reason why
so extraordinary a Work as this, which concerns all the Governments of the
World, and could not escape the Censures of all, besides the Effect it might
have in the Parliament and the whole Nation, should be no less carefully kept
secret than we find it to have been, (though that be very strange,) to produce
its Effect like some Spell or Magical Operation, unperceived, as I shall
further explain it, when I have dispatched one particular more. And that is,

4. That this Secret, this Work of Darkness, was a Work also of Dishonesty, a
Hidden Work of Dishonesty, and a Mystery of Iniquity: I might add, and of kin
to the great Mystery of Iniquity. And to dispatch this, I shall pass by lesser
matters, and apply my self only to the Two main Pillars, upon which all their
pretended Irresistible Power of all Sovereign Princes depend, which if I do but
remove from under their Structure, all their work must fall to the Ground.
These two Pillars or Principles of their Regal Power, are, the one Patriarchal,
derived from the Patriarchs; the other Providential, acquired by the Disposal
of the Divine Providence.

Upon the Patriarchal they build a Jus Divinum for an Absolute, Irresistible
Monarchy, making and calling all other Forms of Government Degenerate Forms.
But for a Foundation for this, having no Evidence of any Positive Law of God,
they are forced to have recourse to the Law of Nature; and because from thence
they could only prove a Potestas Patria, they would confound that and Potestas
Regia; and that Potestas Patria is in a sort potestas Regia, we must believe
upon their Authority. Which is right like deceitful Builders, to build upon a
false or uncertain Foundation. But had it bin in truth as they would have us
believe, that Potestas Patria was after a sort Regia, and so the Patriarchs
were indeed Monarchs, (which they were not, though they were indeed more, viz.
Lords and Proprietors,) yet, because the Brother has not by any Law of Nature
any such Power or Authority over his Brethren, as the Father has over his
Children, the Monarchy after the death of the Patriarch, if he has diverse
Children, does necessarily by the Law of Nature resolve it self into an
Aristocracy, and that again after a Generation or two into a Democracy, as the
ultimate result of Nature, where it rests as having attained its greatest
Perfection, under the Theocracy of the supreme Monarch of the World, and from
whence no Monarchy can ever proceed, but either by the express Appointment of
God, or by Agreement, Consent or Act of the People, or by Violence, which may
acquire a Possession indeed, but never any Right, jure naturali. And a mere
Violence without Right, may by the Law of Nature be removed by Force, whenever
sufficient can be raised to do it: So that for any King to disown any Title by
Consent of the People, unless he claim by express Appointment of Almighty God,
is a Disclaimer of the best Title he has, and a kind or degree of Abdication:
And consequently all who do so, are Usurpers and Tyrants, and may justly be
deposed whenever the People pleases, and can do it. Besides, since there is no
Prince in the World who can claim by this Patriarchal Right, or is possessed of
any such Government, what is to call all other forms degenerate Forms, but to
affront all the Governments now in the World.

The other Pillar or Principle of Providential Right, which is settled Chapter 28.
and the Canon following, is this: That when Subjects shake off their Obedience
to their Sovereigns, and set up a Form of Government after their own Humors;
or Kings through Ambition and Malice invade their Neighbors, they do wickedly:
And that the Offenses of such Rebels or Oppressing Kings are not mitigated by
the Providence of God in using them: But when any such New Forms of Government,
begun by Rebellion, are after thoroughly settled, the Authority in them is of
God; and all who live within the Territories of such New Governments, are bound
to be subject to Gods Authority, which is there executed, and may not rebel
against the same. They are their own words, as the Book is printed. But here it
was they were at a stand, at this Chapter and Canon. The King in his Letter before
mentioned, calls it a Thorny Business It seems he had led, if not drove them
into a Labyrinth, out of which neither he nor they knew how to extricate
themselves. So hard it is when Men leave honest, plain, and simple Truth, to
fix upon Pinciples for a chosen Conclusion, and to form any Pillars which can
support a false and deceitful Building. The King had done beforore what he
could in his slye way, quasi aliud agens. He had often told his Mind concerning
Jus Regium in subditos, as in May last (they are his Words in the Letter) in
the Star Chamber, upon the Occasion of Hales's Pamphlet. And Mr. Solicitor,
(says he) has sufficiently expressed my own thoughts concerning the Nature of
Kingship in general, and concerning the Nature of it, ut in mea persona. And
yet after all it seems he was at a loss about it, and therefore says, They are
Edged tools, or rather like that Weapon that is said to cut with one Edge, and
cure with the other, and hids them meddle no more in it till He gives them His
Orders by Mr. Solicitor. What His Orders were we know not yet; but whatever
they were, we may perceive them all here plainly entangled, confounded, and
inconsistent with themselves, and their Principal Design: and so as to
establish and confirm what they designed to subvert and abolish, that is, The
Peoples Rights and Interest in Government, and that Jure Divino as plainly as
any Right of Monarchs; and to subvert what they designed to build or fortify,
viz. an essential Absoluteness and Irresistibility of Monarchy Jure Divino.

For, 1. They had been imposing upon the S. Scriptures, and straining it in the
27. Chapters, and as many Canons preceding, to extort from it some appearance
of a Divine Prescript or Appointment of such an Absolute Irresistible
Patriarchal Monarchy, as the only approved Form of Government, and for their own
Hierarchy subject to it; and this under pretense of setting out the Deity,
Dignity, Almighty Power, and Universal Government of our Savior Christ. Which
how near of kin it is to the Romish Antichristian Imposture, and how gross an
Act of Spiritual Fornication between them, and what an illegitimate and
spurions brood was like to be generated by it, I leave to such Readers as have
their Senses exercised to judge. 2. But how to derive this Patriarchal Right to
all Sovereign Princes now, was such a Difficulty as put them to a loss. By
Hereditary Succession they could not: for none can now prove himself Heir by
Descent to any of the Patriarchs; nor can any now prove a Divine Nomination or
Appointment of himself or any Ancestor, to whom he can prove himself Heir by
Descent; or any Grant from any such Patriarch or Prince. And to derive any
Right from a deliberate and well considered Agreement of a Free People, was
contrary to the Design; and they had already resolved and decreed, Can. 2. with
no little Sophistry, That if any man affirm any such thing of a Civil Power and
Authority in, or derived from the People, (whom they please not to name without
some additional Title of Disorderly Multitude, or Factious Popularity,) he does
greatly err. 3. And therefore having taken all that pains to lead People into
a persuasion that such an Absolute, Irresistible Monarchy is Jure Divino, for
an Expedient to supply that Defect, and derive this to all Sovereign Princes
now Jure Divino only, without admitting any Right derived from the People, they
contrive this Artifice, to frame this other Pillar, only of the wicked Acts of
Usurpers and Rebels, (as if no others but such were the Authors and Founders of
All Governments now in being,) and the Providence of God interposing and
overruling these wicked Acts to his own Designs. Which is such a piece of
shuffling Disingenuity, or rather Dishonesty and Impiety, as no man of a
Christian Spirit will offer to excuse, but abominate and detest; being built
upon a false Supposition, contrary to many plain Instances in Aristotle and
diverse ancient Historians, and other Writers of the Original of Governments, of
which such Learned men as Bancroft, and the principal Managers of that
Convocation, could not be ignorant. 4. But in this, as such Enterprises use to
prove, by the special Judgment of God, their Folly and Infatuation appears to
be no less than their Disingenuity and Dishonesty: For from their Doctrine and
Resolutions will these things undenyably follow, contrary to their own Design,
Viz.
1. That God has not determined by any positive Law or Declaration of his Will
in the S. Scripture, any one Form of Civil Government for all Nations; but left
that to the Determination of his Special Providence, disposing the Nature, and
Circumstances and Minds of People, and interposing in their Actions and
Counsels to constitute one or other, as should seem most expedient. And, 2.
That if when any new Form of Government (whatever it be) is thoroughly settled,
the Authority in it is of God, and all are bound to be subject to Gods
Authority which is there executed; then is the Authority which the People
either retain in the First Constitution of a Government, or recover afterward,
when thoroughly settled, whether in the making, dispensing with, or abrogating
Laws, inspecting the Government, or Correcting the Exorbitances of Princes
themselves, or whatever else, as much of God, and Jure Divino, as the Authority
of any King whatever can be. 3. That if this be true in the Case even of such
new Governments as began by so unjust and wicked means as Usurpations and
Rebellions, as is affirmed and decreed by the Convocation, then must it be
confessed to be unquestionably true in the case of all such Governments as
began without any such wicked or unjust Means, and were constituted by a
deliberate mutual Agreement of a Free People, who being sui juris, might and
ought, jure naturali and divino, to consider and agree of such a Form of
Government as They should judge most expedient for themselves. 4. That if a
Free People wisely considering the Inconveniences incident to the three simple
Forms of Government, constitute a Form of Government for themselves, so
composed as to comprehend whatever is desirable in any of them, and to avoid
the Inconveniences incident to each, as far as their Humane Prudence can
discern; do this upon great Deliberation, and by Public Pact or Matual
Agreement; and ratify the same by Solemn Oath of all Parties: Such an Original
of Government is according to the Law of Nature, being a Necessary Provision,
upon Principles of Reason and Wisdom, for the Common Good, without Injury to
any; has the Obligation of the Law of Nature, being a Public Pact by mutual
and Deliberate Agreement; has also a Divine Obligation by the Solemn Oath of
the Parties, subjecting all to the Judgment of God in a special manner; and may
reasonably be believed to have been promoted by the secret Energy or Providence
of God, who is a Lover of Mankind, and always ready to assist them in all
Sober, Just and Wise Counfels; to be his Ordinance, and to have his Authority
in all respects in a special manner: And that the Violation of any part of such
a Constitution, by whomsoever it is, is a Violation of the Ordinance of God,
and like to provoke his Judgments upon all who shall dare to transgress so many
and great Obligations; and most severely upon such as shall do it with a high
hand, let their pretenses be what they will. 5. If in a Government so
constituted, it be agreed more particularly, that a certain Person, being best
qualified for that purpose, for the necessary Exercise of Government, shall be
as it were the Principle of motion; and for the greater Honor and Majesty of
the State shall have the Title of King, and be invested with the Ensigns of
Majesty, the Crown and Scepter, by express consent of the People first solemnly
asked, but first shall take a Solemn Oath at his Coronation to Govern according
to the Laws, before any Subject shall swear Allegiance to him: shall have with
those the Jewels and Crown Lands, and Public Revenue of the Nation; but to use
for the State and Defense of the Realm, not to alienate at his Pleasure: In the
Administration of Justice, all Authority, Process, Precepts, and Writs, etc.
shall be in his Name, but so as he may not refuse it to any; the designation
and authorizing of the Persons of the Judges, shall be by him, but only with
such Powers, and for such Judicatures as are constituted by Law; and they shall
be sworn to Judge and do Justice according to Law, shall not obey his Letters
or Commands to the contrary; and he himself and his Actions in Civil Matters
shall be subject unto and bound by their Judgment: In Matters of State all
shall be by his Authority, but by Advice of the Nobility, or of a Privy Council
of Persons sworn in due Form of Law, and who shall be answerable for what
Advice they give: Lastly, As to the Ardua Regni, and Great Matters, of making,
dispensing with, and repealing Laws, redressing of Grievances, imposing of
Taxes, making of War, etc. the Assembling of the States of the Realm shall be
by him, but within a certain definite time; the Dismission of them likewise,
but not till all the Business be dispatched; the Ratification of Laws shall be
by him, but only of such as are first agreed both in Matter and Form by the
other States: He may make War by Advice of the Privy Council, but at his own
Charge, unless the other States agree to it; and if it prove prejudicial to the
Nation, they are to consider of it: And to them the Imposing of Taxes, the
Examination and Declaration of Grievances, and the Inspection and Consideration
of the Management, State and Condition of All belongs, as a Right and Power
remaining in and retained by them. In sum, the Government is so constituted of
all the three Forms, that the Regal is plainly but one third part of the whole,
and that most Honorary, conferred upon him by the rest, and apparently in all
the Parts in trust for the Whole; but most of the rest Originally in them,
retained by them, and so remaining in them, jure naturali: This Constitution
must by the Doctrine of this Convocation be confessed to be, as it is in truth,
the Ordinance of God, and the Authority which it has, to be Gods Authority.
Now such a King is a Sovereign Prince, and he is Absolute; that is, he is not
bound by any Tenure to any other Emperor, King or State: In this sense he is
both these, and his Crown is for the same reason an Imperial Crown: But
otherwise he is not Absolute to do what he pleases, that is, without Law, or
that his Will should be a Law, as the Roman Emperors was, Quod Principi
placuerit Lex esto. He has so much as the Common Agreement or the Constitution
has given him, and no more; the other States in all things else retaining
their Natural Power, and not only the Laws, which he is sworn to observe,
confining him within bounds, but the very Constitution, which gives him his
being: And therefore if a Question arise in such a Constitution concerning any
Right of King or People, the Proof will ly on the part of the King to make good
his Claim by the public Agreement or Constitution, and not on the part of the
People, who have a precedent Title, viz. Jure Naturali, and are subject to him
in nothing but what he has by the Constitution, or Original Contract.

And such an entire Constitution being the Ordinance of God, and the Authority
residing in the whole, and in each part Gods Authority, the Authority of the
whole is Irresistible; and the Authority of each of the Parts equally
Irresistible. And therefore, as whoever violates the Authority of the whole
violates Gods Authority, so whoever violates the Authority of either of the
parts, in that part violates the Authority of the whole, and Gods Authority;
and may therefore be resisted, though it be either of the Parts that does it,
even the King himself: For in that he does not act by, but contrary to Gods
Authority: and Resistance of the King in such case, is no Resistance of his
Authority (for he had no such Authority to do what he does,) but of a Tyrant,
or an Invader, Aggressor or Usurper; nor Rebellion, but a Just Defense of the
Government and Constitution, of Gods Ordinance and Gods Authority. But on the
other side, as such a Violation may be, either by open Force, or by Fraud,
secret Practice and Conspiracy, so they who do it this way, are as much
Traitors against the Government, as they are Rebels who do it the other, though
against the King himself. And if the King in such a Constitution, conspire with
a part of the People to do this, He and They become thereby, a Traiterous
Faction, He violates Gods Ordinance, his own Oath, and in effect Abdicates his
Government, and may justly be deposed for his Traiterous Practice, and They be
punished as Betrayers of their Country, and Traitors to the Government. And
God himself does often punish such Abuses of his Authority, especially in
persons professing Religion, even in this Life by his Providence with very
severe and remarkable Judgments. And such we may observe in the present
business of the Convocation, and the Consequences thereof, from first to last,
as will further appear in what follows. For,

From what has been said, I think it apparent, that the Doctrine and
Resolutions of this Convocation, do, as I said, plainly confirm what they were
designed to subvert, and subvert what they were designed to erect or raise up;
which is an argument of a very strange Infatuation, as if God had smitten them
with Astonishment, given them a Spirit of Slumber, and mingled a perverse
Spirit in the midst of them; as he threatened to do in the Counsels of the
Egyptians, Isa. 19. a thing not at all incredible, or indeed to be questioned,
if we consider how wicked and perverse a work it was they were about, which is
likewise apparent and easy to be concluded from what has been said: that is,
in general, as I said before, a hidden Work of Dishonesty, and a very Mystery
of Iniquity; but more particularly such a Conspiracy as I mentioned but now,
with diverse Aggravating Circumstances.

For that Constitution there described is the very true and genuine English
Constitution, and one of the best in the World. But the Principal Design of
that Book, (as Dr. Sherlock has rightly observed, and is apparent to an
ordinary Capacity) and by consequence of that King, and of the Principal
Managers of that Convocation in it, was to assert the Irresistible Authority of
Sovereign Princes, as he phraseth it, that is, such an Authority, Jure Divino,
as makes them irresistible in any thing: Which is utterly inconsistent with
such a Constitution, where the Supreme Authority is so divided among several
Essential parts, as with us, the King, the Lords, and the Commons. So that it
was plainly a Conspiracy against the Government of their Country, to enslave
their Country, and turn the Legal Government thereof into Tyranny; against an
Ancient settled Government of their Country, and therefore, according to their
own Doctrine, against the Ordinance of God, and Gods Authority.

And their End in it was plainly for their own Advantage, the very same with
that of the Papists, and generally of aspiring Courtiers: They are all for
Arbitrary Government, not only in pretense to insinuate themselves into Favor,
but in reality, because they find it more easy to deal with the single Person
of a Prince, and to deceive him with Flatteries and Insinuations, than with so
great a Body of Men as an English Parliament, among whom it can hardly be
expected but there will always be some or other of Parts and Ability to
discern and defeat their Projects before they can bring them to perfection, and
who will not be corrupted, as Favorites often may. And the Parliament in the
Queens time had bin so often upon Reformation of Pluralities, Non-residence,
and other matters as ungrateful to them, as before to the Papacy, that they
even dreaded the thoughts of it. And this was their Tentation, and the Occasion
of their engaging in such a Work, in such a Manner.

And indeed the Manner of their managing this Work is no less observable, being
altogether agreeable to a Mystery of Iniquity, viz. 1. Under False Pretenses;
pretense of Religion, and pretense of setting out the Dignity of our Savior
Christ, by his Almighty Power, and Universal Government of the World; so like
the Great Mystery, that never was Daughter more like her Mother. 2. With gross
Sophistry and Fallacies, craftily leading People into such Opinions as they
cautiously forbear to affirm. As Can. 2. concerning the Original of Civil
Power, to affirm, That it was derived from the People, they seem very formally
to condemn as a great Error; and yet they craftily intermix so many allayes,
that indeed they do not, unless it be affirmed, 1. As a Consequence of such
Premises there mentioned as may be in some sort false. 2. That it was first so
derived. 3. And not simply from the People, but from the People and disordered
Multitude. And 4. it must also be coupled with this Negation, and is not Gods
Ordinance, etc. So that it seems a designed Artifice to deceive the People, and
mislead them into an Opinion, which yet they themselves did not believe, and
had therefore secured their Evasion: which might be confirmed from many other
Instances of their Canons, contrived and drawn up in such a fraudulent and
fallacious form. That of Can. 28. I have touched already, and the Fraud being
detected, I leave the rest to every ones own Observation. And 3. This is done
with the greatest Solemnity and Formality that could be, in a Convocation of
the Clergy, in the Form of Canons and Decrees, and those severally passed as
upon particular Debates, with a Placet eis to each, and attested to have passed
with one consent, (under the terms of Constitutions) by Bancroft, for the upper
House of the Province of Canterbury, by Overal for the lower House, and by
Thornborough for the Province of York; whereas those Canons of that
Convocation, which were published, passed only the Convocation of the Province
of Canterbury.

And now to consider the Consequences of it, How scandalous and impious it is
to the Christian Religion, and how scandalous and derogatory to the Authority
of the Church of England, and Convocations of our Clergy, I leave to the
Consideration of others: Likewise how pernicious it might have been to the
Civil Government of Sovereign Princes and their States, by sowing the seeds of
Dissension between them, had this Convocation Book been published, and obtained
Authority or Reputation in the World: But what Work it might have made in the
World, may be perceived by what it has actually made in these Nations, which I
will briefly note in some few Observations concerning the Progress and Success
of it, and of this Regal Ecclesiastical Faction.

Whether Archbishop Whitgift had before had any hand in laying down the Plot or
not, he lived not to have any share in the Management of the Convocation: That
Dr. Heylin (Life of Laud, Anno 1610. p. 63.) attributes solely to his Successor
Bancroft, who had before managed A Secret Corrrespondence with K. James in
Scotland, insinuating unto him the Necessity of Consorming both Kingdoms in
Government, and Forms of Worship, and laying down a Plot for restoring
Episcopacy to that Kirk, without Noise or Trouble. But that Faculty of laying
down Plots he notes in them both, and the great Intimacy there was between
them. And another special Qualification in Bancroft for such a Work, may be
observed from that Author, viz. a close management of his matters without
noise, and forbearing upon occasion to appear in them himself. I have already
noted ( p. 27.) the Complaints of that Parliament against the Higher Clergy for
writing Books, and the Inferior Clergy for inveighing from the Pulpits against
them; and ( pa. 29.) that Book of Dr. Cowels, published not long after the
passing the Convocation Book, which may all reasonably be judged the Effects of
this Work of the Convocation. Thornborough himself had before written one, for
which he was questioned in Parliament. And though Bancroft published none now,
yet he failed not to promote the Work otherways, not only by close
Insinuations, but by open plain Assertions, whereof Coke's 12. Report, pa. 63.
has a considerable Instance, and by encouragement of such Principles in the
Court, the Universities, and all parts. And doubtless his Project of a New
College at Chelsey, for which he had gotten an Act of Parliament, was
principally designed for a Seminary of Champions for this Cause; and being
Chancellor of the University of Oxford, he would not fail to leven and prepare
many there for the purpose. But Death put an end to his Progress and Project, 2
Nov. 1610.

But the Faction died not with him: Nor was the Propagation of the Doctrine,
even by printed Books, neglected. There was one published that Year, and
dedicated to him by Dr. Carleton, afterward Bishop of Landaff, which has
diverse passages in it to that purpose, and others it seems there were, which
occasioned new complaints in Parliament the same Year. And yet so hotly was it
still maintained and promoted, that within few Years after was Bishop Neile,
(who by the Power and Mediation of Bancroft, was made Clerk of the Closet, That
standing continnally at the Kings Elbow, he might be ready to perform Good
Offices to the Church and Churchmen, Heyl, p. 60.) for seditious Speeches
questioned in Parliament, till by many tears, and a submissive behavior he got
off: But he so gained the Favor of his Master, that he was preferred to the
Deanery of West minster, afterward successively to the Bishoprics of
Rochester, (1608.) Lichfield, (1609.) Lincoln, (1613.) Durham, (1617.) by K.
James, and of Winchester (1628.) and York (1631.) by King Charles, after he had
been again complained of in Parliament: All which Promotions gave him
Opportunity to promote the Work, for which he was an apt and active Agent, in
all parts of the Nation.

Such another Zealot for the Cause was Harsnet Bishop of Chichester, who in
Parliament time preached such a Sermon at Whitehall upon the Text, Give unto
Caesar, etc. as gave such Offense, that King James was constrained to call the
Lords and Commons to the Banqueting House, and calm them with Good words; and
the Sermon was burnt, but the Bishop was afterward preferred to Norwich by K.
James, and after that to York by K. Charles.

The like was done by Dr. Roger Mainwaring, Chaplain in Ordinary to the King,
in two Sermons before the King and Court at Whitehall, and after published, for
which he was impeached in Parliament, and charged with a wicked intention to
seduce and misguide the Conscience of the King touching the Observation of the
Laws, etc. sentenced to be imprisoned, fined a 1000. li. disabled from
Preferments, etc. and his Sermon suppressed by Proclamation, declaring the
Censure and Sentence just: Yet was he soon after pardoned, preferred to the
Rectory of Stanford Rivers, void by the promotion of Mountague to Chichester,
and had a Dispensation to hold it with that of St. Giles's in the Fields,
afterwads to the Deanery of Worcester, and finally to the Bishopric of St.
David's, which was highly resented by the Lords, so that the King commanded him
not to come to the Parliament, nor send any Proxy.

And this brings me to the Top of all the Faction, who promoted it to its
Perfection, or rather Confusion, viz. Dr. Laud, against whom then Bishop of
Bath and Wells, Complaint was made to the Commons, that he had warranted these
Sermons to the Press; and Mainwaring was no sooner censured, but Lauds Cause
was called to the Report. But all further Proceedings against him at that time
were soon stopped by Dissolution of the Parliament, 26 June, and 1. Jul. had he
his Conge d'eslier for Bishop of London, and soon after other Favors, of which
more hereafter.

These Sermons were preached in pursuance of certain Instructions drawn up by
him at the Command of the King, for promoting an illegal Imposition, under the
name of a Loan; and being preached at Court, upon such an Occasion, by a
Chaplain in Ordinary, he had no doubt some special Instructions, Directions, or
Advice in it. In other places the Preachers did their parts according as they
were required by the said Instructions, amongst whom (...) Beale was taken
notice of, and Sibthorp, Dr. of Divinity, and in Commission of the Peace,
advanced the Service, (what he could) in a Sermon at Northampton Assizes, to
the same effect with Mainwaring, viz. to justify the Lawfulness of the Kings
imposing Taxes by his Regal Power, without Consent in Parliament, and that such
Impositions bind the Conscience. This Sermon was sent as a snare to Archbishop
Abbot to License at the Kings Command; which he for weighty Reasons refusing,
it was referred to Laud, by whom, after some Qualifications and Corrections, it
was approved; and then with a Dedication to the King, and a stately
commendatory License by Mountain then Bishop of London, printed and published,
and the Author afterward with Mainwaring and others, was pardoned at least, if
not preferred and rewarded.

How the rest did their parts, by inculcating this Doctrine of the Regal Power
in Imposing of Taxes without Consent in Parliament, though directly contrary to
one of the most certain and known fundamental points of the English
Constitution, through the instigation of men of such a Temper and Power as
Bishop Laud, his old Patron Neile, his Tutor Buckridge, Harsnet, Mountain,
Howson, Curle, Pierce, and the rest of the Church-Faction, may be understood by
what was done by the Lords and Favorites of the Court-Faction, there being an
entire Combination between them, well expressed in the beginning of the
Instructions: For the Gentlemen who refused the Loan, were bound by
Recognisance to appear at the Council Table, and many appointed to their
several Commitments in Foreign Counties, and many committed to the Fleet,
Gate House, Marshalsey, New Prison; the common sort ordered some to be enrolled
among the Companies of Soldiers, others to be impressed to serve in the King's
Ships.

Such Impositions had been attempted by King James in his Time, first directly
claimed by him as a Right by Letters Pattents, 6 Jac. and the Illegality of
that being showed, then more indirectly under the Notion of a Benevolence, 12
Jac. and that also being opposed as against Law, Reason, and Religion, viz. the
King's Oath at his Coronation, it is an argument of great Pertinaciousness in
the Faction, that they dare thus impudently assert this Right again, which the
King himself does in effect disclaim by requiring it not as a Tax, nor so much
as as a Benevolence, but only as a Loan; and of a strange Fascination upon the
King, to be so imposed upon by these Enchantments, as to enforce with so much
Violence to his Subjects, and probably not without some to his own Conscience,
what he could not plainly assert as his Right, or directly claim as his due.

And such a Fascination is no less observable in that Excess of his Affection
to this Faction in opposition to his Parliament, which appears in the Constancy
of his special Favor to such of them as the Parliament censured, soon after
conferred upon them, and (as in the case of Mainwaring) though he himself had
publicly declared the sentence just. Certainly this on both sides was Passion,
no less than what the Scripture calls (...), or the Rage of an unlawful Lust,
as if intoxicated by that abominable Magical Love Potion of the Golden Cup. And
if we look a little further into the Story, we shall meet more Evidence of such
an Intoxication in the Inconsistence of the King's Actions, having the next
Year in full Parliament solemnly granted that most just and reasonable Petition
of Rights, and so confirmed them by a New Act, and yet nevertheless before the
next Session, through these Enchantments, violating the same in as gross manner
as ever before.

But I need not to note more of such illegal Projects or Practices, which were
various, and persisted in till they came to the usual Determination of such
Public Differences, the Sword and Civil War, by the severe Judgment of God
upon the King and the whole Faction: For they are fresh in Memory of many
living, and obvious in printed Books; and that they all proceeded upon the same
Principles, may be underliood both by the Persons who had then the chief
Management of Affairs, and by that Solemn Declaration of their Principle, which
may be looked upon as the concluding Act of the Faction, which sealed up all,
their Canons and Decrees made in their Synod 1640. continued durante
beneplacito, by a New Commission after the Parliament dissolved.

There was a perfect Combination between the two Factions, and both proceeded
upon the same common Principle in matters of State, which being made matter of
Religion, by that means the Church Faction could not but be concerned in all.
And though that was not so rampant while Abbot was Archbishop, yet was it then
strongly promoted by Neal and others, at last overpowered him, and when his
Successor Laud got up, carried all both in Church and State, (rid the Beast.)
He was a fierce Opposer of all, who differed from him in Ecclesiastical
Matters, as Puritans, or in Civil Matters, as Republicans, was Anno 1608.
recommended by his Tutor Buckridge to the service of Neal, and by him afterward
to K. James, by whom he was gradually raised, at last to the Bishopric of St.
David's, Anno 1621. and came to that Power and Authority with Buckingham, that
he made him his Confessor and Counselor: and in the beginning of the next
Reign, grew as much into the King's Favor, as before he had been in the Dukes,
becoming as it were his Majesty's Secretary for all Church Concernments: was
made Bishop of Bath and Wells, and Dean of the Chapel, 1626. and 1628. after
Complaint against him in Parliament, Bishop of London, and Privy Councellor,
(together with his old Patron Neal) and after the Dukes Death he is called to
the Helm of the State, and steers the Course thereof by his Directions. About
the same time was Sir Th Wentworth, afterward E. of Straffod, by the Treasurer
Weston brought over to that Party, made a Privy Councellor, and became the most
devour Friend of the Church, the greatest Zealot for advancing the Monarchical
Interest; and Laud and he coming to a right understanding, entered into a League
of inviolable Friendship, and joining Hearts and Hands together, co-operated
from thenceforth for advancing the Honor of the Church and his Majesty's
Service. Such another intimate with him, and Friend of the Church, was the
Attorney General Noy, who projected the Ship Money, whose death he much
lamented. And such another Sir Fr. Windebank, for whom he obtained the place of
Secretary of State. Upon the Death of the E. of Pembroke, 1630. he was chosen
Chancellor of the University of Oxford, and upon the death of Abbot, 1633.
immediately made Archbishop of Canterbury. And how the seed sown in the dark in
the former Convocation, was cultivated and propagated by such strenuous
Laborers, and the Sunshine of Majesty, till it appeared in it is full maturity
in the next, may easily be conceived without reciting any more particular
Instances.

In this Convocation there were three things, which Canterbury was to take
special care of, the Regal Power, the Episcopal Power, and Uniformity. For the
Regal Power, they decree that the Order of Kings is of Divine Right, the
Ordinance of God, founded in the prime Laws of Nature, and clearly established
by express Texts of Scripture: That a Supreme Power is given to this Order by
God himself, to command all, and punish with the Temporal Sword all stubborn
and wicked doers: That the care of God's Church is committed to Kings in
Scripture, and her Government belongs in chief to Kings: That the Power to call
and dissolve Councils is the true Right of all Christian Kings: That to avow in
any of their Realms, any Independent Coactive Power, either Papal or Popular,
is to undermine their Regal Office: That for Subjects to bear Arms against
their King upon any pretense whatsoever, is at least to resist the Powers which
are ordained of God: That Tribute, Custom, etc. and all manner of support and
supply is due to Kings from their Subjects by the Law of God, Nature, and
Nations, etc. And they ordain this to be read by every Parson, etc. every
quarter of the Year, under pain of suspension, and that no Ecclesiastical or
Academical Person shall maintain or abett any Position in opposition or
Impeachment of any part thereof under pain of Excommunication.

Now if this be true, which they have decreed, then have all Kings the same
Power jure divino, which cannot be restrained by any humane Constitution; then
are all those Constitutions of Government, whereby a limited Power only is
given to the King, though settled by solemn Agreement, and mutual Oaths for
Observation and Performance thereof, all void, as to any Limitations, as
derogatory to the Law of God, and the King may, and must use his Power, which
he has jure divino; and then are all those, who insist upon any Right by any
such Laws, which is inconsistent with that Plenitude of Royal Power jure
divino, factious and seditious, and to be punished with the Temporal Sword as
stubborn and wicked doers. But if all Forms of Government when thoroughly
settled, have Gods Authority, and the Powers that be (in each) be ordained of
God; if Public Pacts and Agreements (by which Governments are usually
constituted and ratified) are to be observed inviolably jure naturali; and if
Solemn Oaths (by which Pacts and Agreements are usually confirmed, and made as
Sacred and Inviolable as may be) are to be observed most religiously and jure
divino, then is their Doctrine false, factious and seditious, and tending to
the Subversion or Disturbance of most Kingdoms in this Part of the World, and
of our own in particular, and was therefore justly condemned by the next
Parliament; then is the Church of England in Convocation, and her Doctrine no
less fallible than the Church of Rome; and then was that Faction the great
Occasion of our late Civil Wars, by misleading the Consciences of the King and
of a great part of the People, of great Abuses by Declarations and Clauses,
inconsistent with the Constitution of our Government, obtruded into diverse Acts
of Parliament, and of many illegal Arbitrary Acts in the Reigns since; is still
the occasion of our Civil Dissentions and Unsettlement, and of much of our
Disappointments under the present Government at this day, and will continue so
to be till either some good Counsel and Resolution put an end to it, or it
produce another Civil War.

For while Princes, and some part of the People shall be persuaded upon
pretended Principles of Religion, that the Regal Power is Jure Divino, above
all Humane Laws; and the rest know that it anciently has been, and to this day
is very different all over the World, in all Kingdoms, according to their
several Constitutions, in some more absolute, as the Eastern, and the Roman
Emperors, in others very little, as diverse of the Northern, and particularly
the German from whom the English descended, who acted in Council Authoritate
suadendi magis quam Jubendi Potestate, and that by the English Constitution it
is limited, and confined to the observance of Law in all parts of it; this must
be a perpetual Cause or Occasion of Dissensions, which are apt to break out at
last into Wars. But if the Occasions of that Error being observed, it be well
considered, that the Power of the Jewish Kings, the Roman Emperors, or any
other, is no Rule for the measure of our Government, where the greatest Power
of all is manifestly not in the King, but remaining in the whole Body of King,
Lords and Commons: That Expressions in some Acts of Parliament, Articles of
Religion, or Canons, used and intended merely in Opposition to Papal Pretenses,
ought not captiously to be extended to what was not intended, or in question
contrary to manifest Truth: That Expressions in the Homilies out of Zeal
against Conspiracies and Rebellions of Papists are of no Authority in Questions
or Controversies of State, nor Deerees of Universities, when to serve a
Faction, or please those from whom they expect Preferment: and That Ambition,
Self-interest, and Flattery, the usual Attendants of Princes Courts, are always
the promoters of such Pretenses: the Faction will soon be deserted by all
honest men; and then may we hope for a Happy Settlement, which is the Design of
this Paper, and the sincere Desire of it is Author.

FINIS.

