A NARRATIVE OF THE Extraordinary Penitence OF Rob. Maynard, Who was CONDEMND
For the Murder of John Stockton, Late Victualler in Grub-street. And Executed
at TYBVRN May the 4th. TOGETHER with the SEVERAL CONFERENCES Held with him in
Newgate: As also a Copy of the Papers which he left to be Published after his
DEATH.

By Joseph Stevens Lecturer of Cripplegate on Sunday Mornings.

Quem poenitet pecasse, pene est innocens. London, Printed for John Dunton at
the Raven in Jewen-Street 1696. -- Price 6 d.

An Account of the Penitential Behavior of ROBERT MAYNARD, etc.
RObert Maynard, (a Stranger to me) Condemned the last Sessions but one, and
Executed the 4th of this present Instant, as being concerned in the Barbarous
Murder in Grub-street; was very Importunate with his near Relations, to engage
my Assistance in the Preparation of his Soul for another World. Upon whose
Request I Complied, and, as often a^ I had Opportunity, I Visited him. He
seemed to be filled with Sorrow for his Many, and Crying Sins, Expressing, That
his Load was very Ponderous, and Insupportable; not only Disturbed at the
Thoughts of his Shameful End, but extremely Terrified upon a View of his most
Vicious Life, which was the Occasion of his Approaching Unhappy Exit. When
first I was admitted to him; he Asked me, Whether there was any Hope of
Salvation for such a Vile Wretch as he? for, Replies he, As my sins are great,
so they are attended with the Highest Aggravations, as being committed against
my Conscience, which often interposed, and would have diverted me from many
Unjust, and Sinful Perpetrations; but I, foolish, giddy Wretch, unwilling to be
subject to this Monitor, betook my self to excessive Drinking, Loose Company,
and such like, to drown its Cries, and Screeches, and to render my self
Unmindful of its Items. With what Face therefore dare I look up toward Heaven,
and Ask Pardon of that God, whose Vicegerent I have so proudly disobeyed, and
offered so much contempt unto? How can I beg for an Interest in Christ, who
have all my Lifetime raked in his Wounds, Crucified him daily afresh, and put
him to an open shame? And here he fell into a Strong Agony -- My Business with
him being to prepare him for his Approaching Death, I thought my self obliged
to Answer him to this effect. That Sinners, who have lived all along in Open
Defiance to Heaven, and brought themselves to an Untimely End by their Lewd
Courses, cannot, (if sensible of their own Unworthiness,) with much Confidence
look up to that offended Majesty, and hope for Pardon, because it is to be
presumed, that Repentance, hurried by a dread of a Shameful Death, and a
Fearful Expectation of Hell, is generally so hasty, and inconsiderate, that it
consists more in Words, and a few Tears, than in an absolute Coversion of the
Heart, Will, and Affections. But then I urged, that the Fear of Hell usually is
the first thing which awakens Vicious Men, and brings them to a Serious
Thoughtfulness; and though such was the supposed Motive of his Return, yet I
cautioned him against Despair; adding, That though his Conversion be late, and
the time short that he had to effect it in, yet, if it be sincere, out of Love
to God, and hatred to Sin, as this is the Scriptural Notion of Repentance; so
this is the best means to prevail with God to be reconciled, and to Pardon his
Iniquities, Transgressions and Sins. Upon which, he burst out, By the help of
God I will spend the time I have to live in a strict search, and examination of
my Heart, I will not take things upon Trust, I may easily be deceived in the
Matters of my Soul; for the Devil is very ready to suggest, that I have Wept
enough. I have Read, said he, that the Devil goes up and down, like a Roaring
Lion, seeking whom he may devour; he has Seduced, Tempted, and Betrayed me, and
has now brought me into these Unhappy Circumstances; but, I hope, through
Divine Assistance, I shall be enabled to prevent him from tumbling me into
Hell. O Lord, help me now in my great Extremity, give me not over to the will
of the Common Enemy; vouchsafe me a Portion of thy Grace, and I will endeavor
to improve it to thy Glory, and my Souls good. I humbly confess that I do not
deserve it, because I too sadly remember that I have all my Lifetime turned it
into wantonness; but thou art a God whose Nature is to show Mercy, and to pass
by sins Heartily Repented of: Here his Agony ceased; and being in a fit frame
of Spirit for Prayer, He Asked me to join with him in that Duty, which I did
readily; and, while he was engaged in it, he seemed very Devout and Earnest, as
if by his Importunity he would have Wrested Mercy out of the Hands of God. The
Duty being over, he thanked God for that blessed opportunity. I then took my
leave of him for that time, giving him directions how he should order his
Conversation till my next Visit.

A bout two or three days after, I went again; and when he was brought to me,
he uttered words to this effect, Blessed be God that ever I came into this
Prison; I might have been now running on headlong into Hell, treasuring up for
my self wrath against the day of Wrath. I find so much comfort in my present
Circumstances, that, me thinks, I had rather Dye than Live; for tho God has
justly permitted my sins to betray me into this misery, yet I perceive he
delights not in the Death, the Eternal Death of Sinners; tho he suffers my Body
to be Punished, yet I have hope, he will save my Soul for the sake of his Son
Jesus Christ. Here I interrupted him with this Query, What Testimony he could
give of the sincerity of his Repentance? And upon what ground his hope of
Heaven was founded? He Answered me thus, as near as I can remember, My Heart is
affected with a deep sorrow for my Sins, the thoughts of them fill me with
indignation against my self; I am very odious in my own Eyes, it grieves me
that I should offend that God, who gave me Life, and Breath, and all things.
Time was, and very lately too, that nothing so much delighted me, as the being
Drunk, keeping Company with lewd Women, Swearing and doing mischief unto
others; but now I abhor and condemn my self, and wish I could recall my misspent
time -- I Answered him that these were good Instances of Godly-sorrow, but
withal hinting to him, that this Repentance might be Superficial, and not of
much depth; for that the Heart being deceitful, it might Cousen him in his
judgment, and insinuate the belief into him that he was a Devout Publican, when
only a vainglorious Pharisee. -- He replied, I hope my watchfulness over my
Heart, will prevent my being deceived by it: And this is my hope, that whereas
I never once considered of my miserable state, but run on Jollily in Sin, so
now I am afflicted and sore troubled upon a Reflection, and tho God has made
use of this method to awaken me, yet I hope it is as an earnest of future
mercy. -- The Night drawing on, I ended my Conference with him in Prayer.

The next time I Visited him, was in the Evening before the designed Execution
Day, after the last Sessions but one; and going into the Condemned Hole, I
found him, with the rest appointed to Dye, very devout in Prayer; one of his
Expressions I very well remember, O Lord, I beseech thee, let not the good
Counsels of thy Minister be thrown away upon me, but incline me to be a strict
doer, as well as an attentive hearer. When he had gotten up from off his Knees,
spoke to this effect. O, Sir, This is the best exercise that ever I was engaged
in, this is better than a great Estate, than Honors, and the most ravishing
Pleasures of this World. If I had kept to this Duty, God's Blessings would have
a tended me, and I had been an happy Man: But thanks be to God that he accepts
of my late Addresses. I asked him how it was with him? I find (said he) that
God is good and Gracious, and delights not in the Afflictions of his Servants;
my grief is mingled with inward Joy, such as the World cannot give; nothing
delights me so much as the thoughts of God, these spirit, and bear me up under
the shame and reproach I must undergo. He asked me, What were my Sentiments of
him? I Answered, That if his Expressions did proceed from a broken and contrite
Heart, I did believe he was in a state of Grace, and way of Mercy. Upon this we
proceeded to Prayer, and while upon his Knees, was, to outward appearance in
great Raptures and Ecstasies. After this I gave him further Directions for the
management of that little time he had to live, and so left him.

The next Morning, being Execution-Day, about seven a Clock, I went to take my
final leave of him, concluding, and he not knowing to the contrary, but that he
was to Dye that Day. Sir (said he) the happy time is come, this day I hope to
be grasped in the Embraces of my dear Redeemer; now shall I be wafted over into
a blessed Eternity, where I shall never weep, nor sorrow more, where no sin, no
temptation shall interrupt my Rapturous Enjoyments. When first I came into this
Frison my Conscience was so enraged, that I could not rest night nor day; my
sleep was disturbed with abundance of ill-aboding Dreams, and was perpetually
haunted by my injured Conscience; for God says, there is no Peace to the
wicked, and I am sure, I have found it to be true; tho sin be pleasant to the
Flesh, yet it is very bitter to the Soul, but thanks be to God, that has given
me his Grace to Repent of the Sins of my whole Life, and has reduced me to such
a blessed Frame and temper of Spirit. Then he asked me how and in what sense he
should understand that saying of our Savior, Come unto me, all ye that travel,
and are heavy laden, and I will give rest unto your Souls. I told him, that
Christ addresses himself to penitent Sinners, who are vexed and grieved at
their sins, entirely desire to forsake them, and to be admitted into his
Communion and Fellowship; and in order hereunto, come unto him by Faith and
Repentance; and they who thus return; he will comfort them with peace of Mind
here, and Crown their Souls with Glory hereafter; whereupon he replied, I hope
then my condition is good; for my Conscience, which was so turbulent, and
out-rageous, is calm and peaceable, and am filled with a Joyful hope of a
blessed Eternity. Then he desired me to go to Prayer with him, which I did; and
at length took my final leave of him. Execution being over, I was informed that
he did not Dye with the rest of the Prisoners, but respited, as was supposed,
by the Keepers of the Prison, till the Sessions following.

It was I think, a Week, or thereabouts, b^^ore I went to Visit him; and the
r^ther, because it was generally repo^^ed, that he behaved himself very
u^seemly in the Prison, Cursing and S^earing, and living after a loose and
de^auched rate; that he had broken his letters, and attempted the breaking
G^al. I inquired of Mr. Tokefield the ^lark, and of some others belonging
the^eto, of this matter, who told me, Tha^ they never had a Prisoner who carred
himself better; and that he was often heard to Pray, and Sing Psalms. But it
unhappily falling out, that a Criminal, who had broken out of one or two Goals,
being confined in the Condemned Hole with him, who was a very Reprobate,
tempted him to Saw off his Shackles, which he did; and told him, That he could
procure his Rescue; but being discovered, he was Chained down close to a Ring,
fastened in the Dungeon for such a pu^pose: He told me, It was a very great
grief to him to be confined wi^h such a lewd Person, for he often in^errupted
him in his Devotion, and did all he could to be troublesome and vexatious.

And here he took occasion to give me a large Account of the Murder, and
Robbery committed in Grub-street, for the which he was Condemned to dye;
(though I had before many Discourses with him about it,) it will not be amiss
to Insert HIS RELATION.

'Being, said he, redued to Poverty, not for want of Work, but through my own
Extravagancies, I sought all opportunities to gratify my craving Appetite, and
joined my self with such Company which best suited my Wicked Intentions. At
length Mr. Stockton, the Person Murderd, was the Man we pitched upon to Rob and
Rifle; and one Evening, I, together with one Mercer, and one Bevin, went to
this Stockton's House to Drink, and he and the rest of us were very Merry, but
impatiently waiting for such a time of Night as would be most proper for our
Intended Robbery. I take it upon my Death, that I had no Murder in my Heart,
nor had I any such Bloody Design, nor did the rest of my Accomplices mention
any such thing, before, nor after we came in. Between the Hours of Twelve and
One (I think that was his Expression) we gave a Signal to each other that it
was high time to begin our work. Accordingly I laid hold of Mr. Stockton,
pulling him by the Neck-cloth, and Conjuring him to be quiet, or otherwise it
would be the worse for him One of the other two Seized him, while I Bound his
Kins-woman, and the other went up the Stairs to Plunder; but presently came
down, and Swore, he could find none of the Money so much talked of: Instantly I
went up, and brought down the Money, and, to my great surprise, found the Poor
Man dead: I asked who Murdered him? One of them Replied, I did, the Old Dog
would not be quiet, and therefore I Knocked him of the Head. I said, I had
rather lost all we came for, then this should have happened.

'When we were coming out, Mercer (I think he said so) would have gone back
again, and killed the Woman; for then says he, we shall have no body to Witness
against us: but I restrained him from that Bloody Action, and so we went to my
House, and there Shared the Money amongst us, and sent the Plate away to be
Melted down.

'And this, said he, is the great Burden that has Oppressed and Wounded my
Conscience. For though, says he, I did not actually Commit the Murder, yet I
was in their Company that perpetrated it, and therefore hold my self equally
Guilty with them; and am not only justly Condemned to Dye a Temporal Death,
but, without Infinite Mercy, must Dye Eternally.

'That which most troubles me, is, that I should be Instrumental of sending a
Man into another World, without any Intimation of his Sudden Death, or giving
him Time to Beg God's Pardon, and Mercy.

'I am not so Rigidly dealt with, though the Law has Condemned me, yet it gives
me time to Repent of this, and all other my Sins; and the Lord grant I may
Improve the Time so Mercifully allowed me.

Here I Suited my Discourse to his Ingenuous Confession; and Labored to make
him yet more and more sensible of this Horrid Fact; and indeed, in his general
Deportment, I saw visible Characters of Sorrow and Penitency. I Visited him
several times after this.

But that which I shall further take notice of, is, That on Monday Morning, the
4th of this Instant (the Day appointed for Execution by the Sheriffs, though the
Keepers of the Prison knew nothing of it certainly) between the Hours of Six
and Seven, I went into the Prison, and desired to speak with this Robert
Maynard, who was brought out to me.

I Asked him how Affairs stood between God and his Soul? He told me, He hoped
his Condition was Hopeful; only, says he, I am troubled with abundance of
vain, wandering Thoughts, which very much interrupt me when I am Praying.

To this, I answered, That this is a common Calamity, and no Christian is freed
from it, but more or less is unhappily disturbed by wandering thoughts; I urged,
that God would not impute these unto him, if he did not nourish, and entertain
them with delight and complacency, but upon the first knowledge of them,
labored to cast them out of his Mind; that Men are accountable for Evil
Thoughts, when they are Entertained with Desire, and harbored as Incentives to
Sin.

He Answered, I have, and yet do strenuously endeavor to eject them, as
Perverters of God's Worship, and Enemies to the Preparation of my Soul for his
Embraces.

In the Interim, the Great Bell in the Neighboring Steeple began to Tole; he
listens, and in a Great Agony cries out, What we dye to day? I did not know it
before; this is my Passing Bell; it would have much troubled me to have heard
it, and had left the Work of my Soul unwrought; but blessed be my good God, who
has assisted me by his Grace and Blessed Spirit: I am not afraid to Dye, nor
nor does the Noise of that Bell cast me down, but rather urges me to be still
working on till my last period.

Come, says he, once more to Prayers, it is a blessed thing to approach God in
Prayer, and I am never better then when I am upon my knees.

When the Solemnity was over, He asked me to go with him to the Place of
Execution, and I did.

He told me, that he had left SOME PAPERS, which he desired me to Print, for
the Good of all those who survived him; and would not be easy, before I had
made him a Promise, that I would Print them; I have therefore affixed them, as
his Own Copy, which I have by me; making no Deviations from his Sense, only
Correcting some Passages, which, through Distraction of his Thoughts, and other
Inconveniences which attended him, might be indigestedly Penned.

THE PAPERS Left by Robert Maynard, Which he desired might be Published after
his Death.
I Considering that being now summoned to a speedy appearance before the
impartial and most dreadful tribunal of the just and Righteous Judge of all the
Earth, there to answer for those many and heinous sins visible in my vicious
and ill lead Life: I hold my self obliged to enter into a narrow search, and a
very close Inspection of my heart, and all my ways; indeed are great and many,
so great that they justly bring my body to shame and ruin, and my Soul, (if
God have not mercy upon it) to endless misery.

These general Considerations have almost distracted my thoughts; yet I cannot
find any rest, till I have made a more diligent search, a more distinct and
particular discovery of all that wickedness that has been damned up in my heart.
My sins have now found me out, and Gods Justice has overtaken and arrested me.
So that now being to be made a spectacle of shame to the world, I leave these
as a warning behind me, that all who hear, or read them may fear to do wickedly.

Let the consideration of my unhappy condition, add weight to my words.

Dying men surely will not dissemble, and put the World off with shams and
lies; I will speak the Truth to God's Glory and my own shame.

I confess then that the Hand of Heaven has been exceeding Bountiful to me; he
has given me all things richly to enjoy. I had no reason to murmur, as if my
Portion had been sparing, either in Spiritual or Temporal things.

For, First, I came of very Honest and Godly Parents, who took great care to
bring up their Children to know their Duty toward God and Men. But I, the worst
of all (after my good Father and Mother had instilled what Goodness they could
into me) would not thankfully receive the Grace of God tendered to me, to
Cultivate and Rectify my Rude Nature, nor be subject to their wholesome
instructions, but followed the Notions of my corrupt Heart, seldom served God,
but often doing the Devils drudgery, sometimes diverting my self by excessive
Drinking, sometimes Gameing, and other Immoral Exercises, till I became a
Monster in Sin, and an Hero in Iniquity. Now Nature which blushed at a Sin, and
at first made modest Refusals, is become impudent, and bare faced, and sticks
not at the Vilest Perpetration. Now Conscience, which was tender and sensible,
is, by my repeated imprudences, become Callous, and past seeling.

Little did I think of afterolaps, that there was so much bitterness in the
seemingly delicious Draughts of Sin; I was not aware of these furious
^^^uptions, and violent Thunderings of an injured mind.

But this was my course of Life, while a single Man.

When I was about Eighteen or Nineteen Years Old, I began to think of Marriage,
and at length got me a Wife, descended from Honest Parents, who was well
inclined, and frequently importuned me to be so too; often soliciting me to go
to Church, and spend the Lord's Day in his Service, but I was altogether deaf
to her Pious Councels, and followed my own heady Humor, and finding by my
Extravigant Courses, that my Substance wasted, and I began to be in penury and
want, I betook my self to the last shift, which usually loose Livers do,
namely, To List my self for a Soldier; I was not long in that employ, but I
began to think of getting a Discharge, which I did; but when returned Home, I
could not settle to any business, whereby to get an honest livelihood; but
alienating my Affections from my Wife, (perfideous wretch that I was!) I soon
contracted with another Woman, who, in a little time, discovered my Villainy,
and with too much reason feared her Life would be miserable with me; for that
if I could violate my Sacred Vows in Matrimony, it was her just suspicion I
should prove false to her, and so I did; for I took no care to provide for her,
nor for the Issue of her Body, but run into daily Extravigancies.

All therefore that I can do, by way of Reparation for the Injuries I have done
to these miserable Women is, heartily to beg their Pardon, to beseech God to
bless and keep them from such base and inhuman usage for the future.

You that know not the depths of Satan, and make light of some sins, especially
the to too fashionable sin of uncleanness; beware in time, as you love your
Souls. Delude not your selves with these vain Thoughts and Arguments, I will
only commit such and such a sin, and stop at such a state in wickedness, and
proceed no further. By these Decoys I have plunged my Soul into this great
Thraldom. Therefore do not thus provoke God as I have done. For when once Men
arrive to such a height of imprudence, as to cast off all awful Apprehensions
of God, they are readily prepared to commit all manner of Wickedness, and
insensibly plunge themselves into manifold Mischeifs. Let my downfall then
scare you into a Reverential fear of God; or otherwise; if my Fate be not
yours, yet hell will be your after-reward, from which, I hope the good God, for
Christ Jesus sake will deliver me.

As I am a Monument of shame, an object of Scorn, and redicule of Mankind, so I
am the subject of my own sorrows, I weep, lament, and bewail the Fruits of my
Folly; but let none so rejoice at my misery, as to forget themselves, and run
into mischiefs forbidden. Believe it, a wounded Conscience in this Life, is an
insupportable Burden, but will prove a never Dying Worm in the World to Come,
it will be gnawing and griping to eternal Ages. If you were but sensible of the
bitter Agonies and strong Convulsions which have seized and overwhelmed me, as
the just effects of a vicious Life, you would be afraid of sin, and dread every
incentive to it. Pray credit my experience; to be summoned before an earthly
Judge, to be Arreigned and Tried for Life, to be pronounced by the Virdict of
the Jury, guilty of Death, to be Tied up, and sentence past accordingly; these
are affrighting, and amasing considerations, which cease the Spirits, and put
the Powers into confusion; but I am able to give you assurance, that these are
by vast degrees inferior to that Consternation which arrests my trembling and
guilty Soul, at the consideration of its sudden appearance before the Judgment
Seat of Christ, upon whom I entirely depend, and hope will show Mercy upon me,
as he has promised he will upon all Penitent and Believing Sinners.

That therefore you may avoid the Shame, Reproach, and Ignominy, which I
endure; be prevailed with to Keep Holy the Sabbath Day, which I too much
Neglected, and which was an Inlet to all the Sins I am guilty of. Let not one
Sin get the Ascendant over you, for one attracts another, a second, a third,
and so on, even to an infinite number.

When once a Man gives way to the insinuations, and fair pretenses of any one
Vice, he is insensibly wrought upon by another, and at length becomes
subservient to those sins he had the least thoughts of, and most aversion from.
I shall instance in my Self.

When first I entered upon a Sinful Course, I thought no wrong to any one, I
was only injurious to my self, pestering my Body with Diseases by excessive
Drinking, wasting my Substance by immoderate Gaming; but being reduced to
Poverty thereby, I was tempted to supply my Extravigances by Pilfering and
Stealing from others, and, at length, to be instrumental in the Murdering of a
Man, for which I now stand justly Condemned to Dye.

Though I did not actually Murder him, nor knew nothing of his Death, till I
came down Stairs from Rifling; yet I hold my Self equally Guilty with those who
did.

And I beseech God to Pardon this presumptuous, inhumane Act, Deliver me from
Blood-guiltiness, and accept of my late Repentance for all the Sins committed
in my Life. Amen.

May the 1st. 1695. My most Affectionate, but unhappy and sorrowful Wife.
IT is now too late to wish I had been so ingenuous and governable as to have
listened to your affectionate and Pious Counsels, which you often and readily
tendered, out of no other design, but to be my own friend, and to make me Live
in favor with God and Man. I cannot but call to mind how often thou have
followed me with weeping Eyes, and a sorrowful Heart, Praying, beseeching, and
entreating me to forsake my loose and idle Company, to leave that abominable
sin of Cursing and Swearing, to serve God, and follow an honest employment, and
how indecently and inhumanly I behaved my self toward thee for so doing. It
cuts me to the Heart that I should abuse my best Friend, and cast all thy
Exhortations behind me, which were expressed with so much candor, love and
condescension for these my absurd and unchristian dealings toward thee; God
Allmighty, who is a most Just and Righteous Being, has permitted me to be
plunged into my present unhappy circumstances, and given me to understand, that
I have obstinately withstood my own Good, and refused many fair opportunities
of being a happy Man: But, dear Wife, being convinced of thy entire affections
toward me, I am bigg with hope that you will Pardon my former Insolences and
perversnesses; for though I have foolishly sunk into degeneracy, yet I am
persuaded thou have not lost thy wonted Tenderness of Spirit, which indeed may
be justly hardened against me, because I have endeavored always to make thee
unsuitable returns; and if still thou have any yearning Bowels after me, I
cannot but conclude thou art one of the best Wives in Nature. I could wish I
were in a condition to make thee satisfaction for those many days of Grief,
those broken sleeps, those sighs, sobs, and heart-akings, I have been the sole
cause of. Methinks I hear thy sweet Expressions mingled with Love and fear.
Methinks I see thee dull and drooping at the rerefractoriness of thy Husband,
lamenting and almost distracted, because of his inflexible Humor. Was there
ever such a wretch in Nature as I! Accept therefore of these Lines from thy
sorrowful and distressed Husband, accept them as the Characters of his
Repentance for all the wrong he has done to thee; and read them over and over,
not to indispose, but to comfort thee with the hope that I am in a way of being
Saved; for though God has made use of this severe means to rouse and awaken my
Conscience, yet it is, I hope, out of a merciful design to make me happy in the
World to come. Be not dismayed at my shameful fall; but entirely cast thy self
upon God, who will defend and comfort thee, and turn this temporal Affliction,
to thy Spiritual and Eternal Good. Remember to avoid those sins, which thou
discoverest me most prone unto, and all others which thy own Nature may be
prompted and inclined to. Never omit thy Duty either public or private;
consult the Glory of God in all thy Actions, be humble, modest, meek, and
condescending, and an example of Holiness to thy Sex. Let the good of thy Child
be thy daily care, nourish and cherish it, and the more, because it is
Fatherless; and as it grows up, instill good Principles into it, learn it to
know its Creator, and the Duty and Homage it owes him. Correct it when
necessity requires, encourage it to be good, and never be backward in
well-doing.

I beseech thee, dry up thy Tears, and don't contract Distempers by immoderate
sorrow. I am but going before, though after an ignominious and shameful manner,
and e're long thou must dye too, and then I hope we shall both meet in Heaven.
Our parting is dreadful; our adieus are uncooth and formidable, but fate has so
ordered it, and we must rest contented, though not without some Reluctance,
which is incident to flesh and Blood, and now the more provoked, on account of
this unhappy accasion.

Dear Heart, I must think of stopping my Pen, for this is only the Instrument
of thy Sorrow, and the sad remembrancer of former Transactions, and brings
afresh to thy mind the many instances of thy slighted and abused Love; and this
will be, to renew thy grief, which is burden enough already, and to represent
the sense of my ill-spent Life. I beseech God to pour upon you the Riches of
his Goodness, to give you all things both for Soul and Body; that you may live
in his Faith and fear, and make up that lost time, occasioned by my vexatious
and troublesome carriage toward thee. This is all I think fit to communicate
to thee, and it is expressed with an affectionate Heart. I shall end with that
saying of St. Paul, I pray God grant you, according to the riches of his Glory,
to be strengthened with his might by his Spirit, in the Innerman, that Christ
may dwell in your Heart by Faith, that you being rooted and grounded in Love,
may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the height, breadth, length
and depth, and to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, that you may
be filled with all the fullness of God.

I Rest thy Affectionate, but distressed Husband, Robert Maynard.


Sinners remember the Expressions of a Dying Man, let them sink deep, and be
perpetual warnings to you. Here ends the Confession of Robert Maynard.

It may reasonably be presumed, that if men are not void of Natural Modesty,
and bidden adieu to all seriousness, these lines will affect them, and Spirit
them with resolution against the sins which were the ruin and entire overthrow
of this poor Creature; who was willing to expose his indigested Papers, to
public view, that they might timely prevent wicked men from falling into
endless misery; and certainly if such Pathetick Arguings of a Dying Man, be not
powerful and influential; it is much to be feared, that men are hardened against
reproof, and impregnable to good advice. Dying men, who are seized with a quick
and peircing sense of their sins, speak with most feeling, and least
affectation. They tell us plainly, that sin is pleasant but for a very little
time, that it puts Conscience into strong Convulsions, and Creates a very Hell
within a Man's self; that it hardens him against serious Exhortations, makes
him forget God and his Soul; and without infinite Mercy will crush him into the
Regions below, where do dwell Devils and Damned Fiends. Who can be better
judges of this than they who experience the woeful effects of sin? And who more
obdurate than they who securely live in sin, notwithstanding such affectionate
warnings? I shall therefore make use of this opportunity.

First, To persuade Parents that they take care to bring up their Children in
the fear of God; that they instill the Principles of the Christian Religion into
their Children betimes, while they are tender and flexible, and subjective to
the Admonishments of their Friends. It is a sad consideration that Fathers and
Mothers are so generally negligent of this most Christian Duty; and suffer
their Children to grow up with no better an Education than corrupt Nature gives
them. How often do we hear little Creatures, whose tongues are scarce strong
enough to pronounce their Mother Language, take God's Name in vain? Tho they
are not sensible of the evil of such Profane Expressions, yet their Parents
should Correct them, and they by a constant observation of their severity,
would soon learn to avoid the taking of God's Name into their Mouths, at every
turn, tho not out of a sense of their duty to God; yet out of fear of
Punishment, Train up a Child, says the Wise Man, in the way he should go, and
when he is old, he will not depart from it; that is, initiate, or instruct him;
First, according to his Capacity: Or rather, Secondly, in that course and
manner of Life which thou would have him to choose and follow, or as some
render it, in the beginning of his way, i. e. in his tender years, as soon as
he is capable of Instruction; and when grown to Maturity, he will not easily
deviate from his early Institution; the impressions made in Childish years will
remain; not but that he may fall off, and become a Reprobate; but for the most
part, a timely and Pious Education, produces a future Religious Deportment. And
to encourage Parents to this duty of well Educating their Children, let them
consider, that this is an immediate way to procure God's Blessings upon their
Families; to make their Children, when grown up, to do good in their
Generation; to be serviceable and useful to them when Aged, or reduced to
Poverty: But above all, this Christian care will be matter of great comfort
when they come to Dye.

2. Let Masters also be watchful over their Servants, pressing them by their
Religious Examples to an holy Life. Masters are as answerable to God for their
Servants, as Parents are for their Children. And this considered, they should
keep them in a Religious awe, learn them to be sober and modest, Exhort them to
whatsoever things are Just, Honest and of good Report. Call upon them to join
in Family-Devotion, to frequent the Church; restrain them from the looser sort,
oblige them to be meek and Courteous. Were Masters of Families thus
Conscientious, Servants would be more Faithful in their Posts; it is thus
expressed in the Whole Duty of Man, page 314. 'Masters are to Admonish and
Reprove their Servants in case of faults, and that not only in faults against
them, wherein few masters are backward; but also, and more especially in faults
against God, whereas every master ought to be more troubled than at those which
tend only to his own loss, or inconvenience; the dishonor of God, and the
hazard of the meanest man's Soul, being infinitely more worthy our disquiet,
than any thing of the other kind can be. And therefore when masters are
presently on fire for any little negligence or fault of a Servant toward
themselves, and yet can without trouble see them run into the greatest sins
against God, it is a sign they consider their own concernments too much, and
God's Glory, and their Servants Souls too little. Such Masters forget that they
must one day give an Account how they have governed their Families.

Religion was never at a lower Ebb than now, which speaks that Men were never
more insensible of their miserable State. But Methinks this should be a
Paradox, since our City abounds with Learned and able Divines, who are daily
ringing Men in the Ears with the danger of sin, and the necessity of a speedy
and timely Conversion. But such is the absurd folly of men, they are, as it
were, glutted with Divinity, and think they are too much importuned to be
happy. But can cautions in matters Spiritual be too often Published? Does not
the Souls of Men call for Admonitions and Persuasions, and the utmost diligence
that can be used, to prepare them for the Embraces of the Father of Spirits? Is
any thing of that worth, as the Soul? For this Christ did Sweat and Groan, and
Bleed and Die.

Sirs, consider, that to lose the Soul, is to lose all and no redeeming it,
after the fatal Sentence is past upon it. Confider what a terrible thing it
will be to be doomed to eternal Misery, to be shut up with Devils and damned
Fiends in the unhappy Residenses of endless Torments. Who can dwell with
everlasting burnings? Who can endure to be Rackt, and Stung, and Griped for
ever, without Redemption? Be therefore persuaded to forsake your Sins, whilst
you have strength to commit them; do not procrastinate, and shift off your
Repentance to hereafter, lest before that time come, you be unexpectedly
Arrested, stripped into naked Spirits, and set a shore upon the other invisible
World. It is strange that men must be Courted to be Happy! They are industrious
enough to get Temporal Riches, eager of Worldly Honor, or any thing which may
render their Lives Comfortable, Easy, and Desirable; and yet very backward in
laying up Treasure in Heaven: This is a Work so unsuitable with the humor of
the Age, so vastly different from those acquisitions which the greatest part of
the World study for and seek after, that it is looked upon a very stupid,
melancholy, lifeless employment. Time enough, say they, to think of another
Life, when we have nothing else to do; when our senses decay, and cannot relish
outward Delights, when our Bodies are bound down to a state of inactivity by
the Violence of Killing Diseases; when the Physician gives over Prescribing,
and there is no apparent hopes of Recovery. But what a pernicious suggestion is
this; who can assure himself of Grace to Repent at such a time? For besides the
Prevalency of vicious Habits, which are great obstructions to Repentance, it is
but just with God to deny his Grace at the last gasp to those who have
obstinately refused the merciful repeated tenders of it all their life time.
With all the manifest imprudense of Delays, is it reasonable to suppose that
God will accept of our lame, imperfect Services, a faint, Lord have mercy upon
me, a few extorted Prayers, and hasty resolutions, after Satan has quaffed our
Youthful Blood, and has employed us in his drudgery in our Health and Strength?

You therefore that put the evil day afar off, and reckon upon Repentance when
you come to Dye; consider, that tho God has revealed to men that they shall
certainly Dye once, yet he has not acquainted them at what time; it may be
sooner or later; nor yet after what manner, it may be a Lethargy may seize
thee, and so all thy Powers and descerning Faculties stupefied, and thou
insensible of thy departure. Or it may be a violent Fever may affect thy
Brain, and thou not name the name of God, but in Oaths and Curses, and thus
leave the World. So that, since the time of our Departure hence is uncertain,
since the manner and circumstances of our Exit, is kept as a secret from us, it
is the greatest folly in the world to put off the business of our Souls to
hereafter. The time present is that alone we can properly call our own, to
morrow, next week, or month, are uncertainties; before this, we may be stripped,
and sent into the other World. Work therefore whilst it is called day, for the
night comes wherein no man can work.

I hope this short application may have its designed effect upon all that read
it, to the Glory of God, the well-governing of their Lives, and the Eternal
Comfort of their Souls.

FINIS.
BOOKS in the Press, and designed for it. Printed for John Dunton.
THE Design for Recording the most Remarkable Providence of Judgment and
Mercy, etc. Which have happened in this Age, (by the Reverend Mr. Turner)
having been much approved of, as appears by the well Attested Relations which
have been sent to him from many parts of the three Kingdoms, (none of which
have yet been Printed. The said work will be Published with all possible
Expedition. Proposals, and Specimens giving a full Account of this History, are
to be had of the Undertaker John Dunton, at the Raven in Jewen-street, and of
most Bocksellers in London and the Country.

The Poetical Works of the Ingenious PINDARICK LADY

The general History of the Quakers, from their first Original, down to this
present time. Written in Latin by the Learned Croes, and done into English by
an able hand.

THE Third and Fourth Volumes of the FRENCH BOOK of MARTYRS (for which no more
Subscriptions will be taken in) will be Published with her late Majesty's ROYAL
PRIVILEGE, are Preparing for the Press; but being much larger than the two
former Volumes (for these Two Last Complete the Work and contain the MARTTRDOMS
of all the French Protestants, from the beginning of the Reign of LEWIS XIV.
down to this time) 'twill be a considerable time before they can possibly be
ready for publication; but as soon as they are notice thereof will be given in
the Gazette by the Undertaker John Dunton, at the Raven in Jewen-street.

If any Ministers VVidow, or other person, have any Library, or parcel of books
to dispose of, if they will send a Catalogue of them, or notice where they are,
to John Dunton, at the Raven in Jewen-street, they shall have ready money for
them, to the full of what ^hey are worth.


