A Seasonable and Necessary ADMONITION TO THE Gentlemen OF THE FIRST SOCIETY,
FOR REFORMATION of MANNERS.
Concerning Reformation of Themselves, of the Bishops, and of the House of
Commons.
Gentlemen,
THOUGH I am a Stranger to many of you, and come not to your Meetings, yet am I a
Sincere Wellwisher to the Work you are engaged in, and to your selves for it:
And though I was soon called away, for a better Service, I hope (as good as that
is) and such as may Crown it at last with a Heavenly Blessing; yet have I never
ceased, as occasion was offered, to contribute what I could to promote it. And
for that purpose do I now write this. I chanced lately to look into a Book,
wherein I observed that you had not only increased your Numbers, but also
enlarged your Style and Title, and made it more Comprehensive, not only for
Execution of Laws, and Suppression of Vice, but for Reformation of Manners, and
a National Reformation. Which I do not dislike provided you make good the
Undertaking. For Suppression of Vice is but like Weeding the Ground. But
Reformation of Manners require the Planting of Virtue. And this I hope you will
be careful to do first at home amongst your selves, and especially in your
peculiar I Engagment, and make your Real Virtue Exemplary to the Nation, by a
true Magnanimity, worthy of Englishmen, worthy of Gentlemen, worthy of
Christians. Nothing under God does more animate to true and Heroic Virtue, than
such Examples. But if when occasions require Generous Actions, you think to
cover Laziness and Timidity with Prudential Excuses; and in Printed Books with
Pompous Recommendations, M^gn^sto Bugbears to represent as Courageous those,
who did not fly, though they did not dare to assault the Monster, or Second those
that did, as if the Design was to cheat an Impudent vicious Generation into a
Reformation, as Mothers sometimes fright their Children; or to seek for the
Applause of real Virtue by such Actions, as have little of true Virtue in them:
This would be rather to animate Vice, when the Trick is understood, and to
corrupt your selves with Vanity, than to reform the Nation. And if such a Man
as St. Paul was careful least while he Preached to others himself should become
a Castaway, you cannot think such a Caution and Admonition impertinent or
needless. And that you may see by proper Experiment that it is not, I shall
acquaint you with that, which, though some of you know very well, I presume most
do not, notwithstanding your Printed Account of the Societies, etc. [by those,
who knew it very well.]

This work was in a hopeful way long since, to have made a greater Progress
throughout the whole Nation, long before this than it has yet done at this
Day, had not the Wickedness of some Corrupt Judges checked it, and the
Treacherous Prudentials of some pretending Zeal or Good Will to it, neglected
that Opportunity, which an Honest Prosecution might have turned to its much
Greater Advancement. While the late Queen was living, certain Gentlemen of the
Society were questioned for Writing a Book, entitled, The Beginning and
Progress of a Needful and Hopeful Reformation; and for what they had done in
that good Work, before the then Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal, whereof
two were Members of the House of Commons, and one of them Speaker. Whereupon
the Author of the Book presently sent them a Letter that he wrote it, and would
be ready to answer for it when they pleased. So that when they appeared, they
were discharged of that, but questioned for the rest, and, though in the Presence
of no less than Seven of the Reverend Bishops, who came on purpose, so ill
treated by the two Commissioners Members of Parliament, as was thought good
Cause by the Author of the said Book to Petition the House against them, for
Discouraging the Execution of the Laws, and Contempt of her Majesty's
Authority. And having drawn a Petition, advised with Counsel upon the Matter of
Law, and with diverse of those Bishops, and other Persons of Quality, who were
present at the Hearing, concerning the Matter of Fact, he put it into the Hand
of a Member, whom he knew obliged to present it: which after many Put-offs, was
at last done, but so timed, that there were then but few Members in the House,
and those such as Voted it should not be read. Which was another Fault not less
than the Former, being a Denial, without any Color of Cause, of a Fundamental
Right of all the Commons of England. For this he first complained at the next
Public Sessions of the County, for which that Member served; and soon after,
at the next Sessions at the Old Baily, laid the whole Cause before the Judges,
and the Lord Major and Aldermen, as chief of two of the most considerable
Bodies of the Commons of England: And the Papers were left in the hand of Sir
Richard Levet, then Sheriff, and now Lord Major of the City of London.

In this Case you may observe, first how great an Opportunity and Advantage was
neglected, in not prosecuting two such Great Crimes so testified by such and so
many Witnesses, and what good Effect that must have had throughout the whole
Nation, for the Promotion of that Good Work? And secondly, What ill Effect it
had, by discouraging such as were well affected, and animating such as were ill
affected to it? And thirdly, I Need not tell you who were, and who were most,
faulty in this Case; Certainly they, who were most obliged, whether by special
Engagement, or by their own Calling or Profession, and had most advantage for
it, and yet neglected it. Nor will I interpose my Opinion, what farther use you
are to make of it; but leave that to your own Consideration and Virtue. You
must look to your own Obligations. It is not a light matter to engage in the
Service of God. When you are in, you must go on without fearing the Faces of
Men; and have a care you do not the Work of God negligently. If you look at a
National Reformation, you must look farther and deeper than that Superficial
Reformation, of Suppressing Vice by Execution of Human Laws; though that be a
commendable Undertaking. If you will go no farther than that, you must not
arrogate to your selves the Honor of that, which belongs not to you, and is
out of your Province. But as you are Gentlemen, and profess your selves
Christians, I must hope you will show your selves such, make good your Word and
Engagement so publicly declared, and know and follow your Leader. It was I,
(so Providence ordered it) who, after I had my Quietus from another Service,
began your Society, and made Choice of the First Persons; publicly asserted
their Cause, and defended their Actions, when they were first questioned; and
had they followed me, had brought it, by the Blessing of God, to a farther
Progress than yet has been made. But when I saw some, whom I had introduced,
set up with Formality, Affectation and Vanity, (though for all these Infirmities
they might be useful, yet) in so serious a Work I could not bear it. But the
All-wise Providence made use of that to take me off, when it was begun and
settled, for a better Service. And to that upon perusal of the Title and
Approbation of your Book I now Invite you. You are engaged, and cannot go back:
That would be not only your Shame, but Sin against your own Souls. Either
follow, or join with me, or show me some Reasons to the contrary; or go on your
selves without me, so you do but do it effectually, and make good your
Undertakings.

The Necessity of a more effectual Reformation appears in your own Book, and
what Order amongst us it is, that should need it least, but does need it most,
as one of them has ingeniously confessed. How else comes it to pass, that if
the Work be so good, of five and twenty Reverend Bishops, you could prevail but
with five to approve it? and those none of the Greatest or Nearest, but of the
Meanest and Remotest; You must go to Bath, to Bristol, to Gloucester, to Wales
and Chester, for Approbations, and amongst those to such as notoriously need
Reformation themselves, for taking and holding Charges, and of the highest
Nature, the Care of Souls, so inconsistent. And if such Men as they be guilty
of such Faults, What a Reformation is that which brings forth such Fruits!
Certainly it self stands in great need of Reformation; and to the very bottom:
Their very Principles are faulty. To show and demonstrate this, I have begun,
etc.

This was dated Nov. 4. 1699. and sent to your Meeting in Threadneedle-Street,
but soon came into the Hands of one concerned to conceil it. What followed is
only concerning some Papers left in the Hand of Mr. Ra. Hartley, who might
properly be called the Seniour of your Society, was the first Actor in
Commission of the Peace in it, the first and greatest Sufferer of it, and even
from such as ought to have treated him otherwise; and has deserved as well in
the Service as any Man in it. The Papers were what was begun for a more
Fundamental Reformation, and have been much enlarged since; so that what is
there said, is needless now to be repeated. But this is now Published upon this
special Occasion: It relates what did concern the Beginners of your Society and
the Seven Bishops, and does now concern your whole Society, and the whole Order
of Bishops, to redeem the Opportunity, which was then inexcusably neglected.

There has since that Letter been another such Opportunity neglected, if there
was any Member of your Society in the last House of Commons, as you know there
was; and I know there was those, who knew what was written to Sir R. C. to be
true. And where was your Zeal for Reformation, that none of you all showed more
concern in such a Case as that? But it is now again revived by a late Printed
Paper concerning the Corruption and Impiety of the Late House of Commons, if it
be not also prudentially neglected. Here you have an Opportunity to demonstrate
the Reality of your Zeal for the Honor of God, and of your Concern for the
Service of your Country. And you are like to have one, who was one of the
first, and principal Actors next Mr. Hartley, of the Society, a Member of the
next Parliament, and to serve for the same County, for which he served, who was
concerned in that Violation of that Fundamental Right of all the Commons of
England, and for which two of the Principal Criminals concerned in that Charge
of Impiety, did serve the last and precedent Parliament. So that it is hard to
say, how a Man can have more special Obligations upon him for any Service,
besides those General Obligations of Profession of Religion, Love of his
Country, and the Trust reposed in him.

But though he be so specially obliged, yet I conceive the whole Society
concerned; and it is very likely diverse Members of it more specially by former
neglect of Duty. Now is the time to appear in this Cause, and show your selves
Men and Christians. If you, who make such Pretenses for a National Reformation,
show your selves Tristers with God and Man upon another such Occasion, what can
you expect but that God and Man should spew you out of the Nation. I see some
of you, who set up for the Glory of Reforming others, so far from Reforming
themselves, that they are rather sunk deeper into that empty Formality,
Affectation and Vanity, which I could not endure in so serious a Work at the
first, have often reproved in private, and, since that could not prevail, think
necessary to be a little checked by a more public Admonition: but in hope of
Amendment upon this, shall say no more at this time. I wish you all well, and
should be ready to serve you all, or any of you in the Work you are engaged in,
if there be occasion.

It is a Work, which requires very serious Application, and Good Resolution.
The Root of all our Unhappiness, which most needs a Reformation is in the
Parliament, and especially in the Spiritual Lords, as they are commonly called,
and the House of Commons. I must be bold to say, I know not a more
Insignificant Body of Men upon the face of the Earth than the present Bishops:
Nor have they ever been much better since they were cowed and dispirited by
that Beast, Hen. 8th, and Corrupted with Treacherous Principles by his False
Prophet, Cranmer. Nor can I expect ever to see things better till the
Cranmarian Spirit, and that Cursed thing then introduced be cast out of the
Nation. It will, I verily believe, prove a continual Curse both to Church and
State to the Destruction of both, if it be not speedily cast out, but longer
fostred by such Bishops. And though the inferior Clergy make some Opposition, it
seems to me but trifling and scandalous, by so much insisting upon Human
Principles, as if there were no better to determine the Case effectually; or
they did not dare to assert them. Such is their worldly Wisdom. Had we Bishops
of true Christian Spirits, we should need no Societies for Reformation of
Manners among the Laity. But God has raised up all the Societies, and
permitted the Sects to expose the Unworthiness of such a Body of Bishops. Nor
can we expect better than a continual Succession of Temporizing Flatteres of
Princes, till what I have said be done. Perhaps some Grub-street Scribler to
get a Penny, may call this Sauciness, and their Lordships, if they have no more
Religion, be offended at it. But I must let them know, I write it purely out of
Fidelity to God, and Fidelity to my Country. They know who I am, and that I am
ready to demonstrate what I say at any time. Let them mend their Manners, be
more faithful and serviceable to God and to their Country, and they will soon
find I know how to employ my self better, than to find Faults, when there is no
Necessity for it.

And for the House of Commons, I must declare I know no greater Danger both to
Religion and to the Government, than from them, unless their Principals, for
whom they serve will make them more sensible of their Duty; make them know they
are not their Masters but their Servants, by giving them Instructions, and
inquiring into their Behavior in the House, and vindicate that great and
necessary fundamental Right of every Commoner of England, to have their
Petitions for just and proper Matters, duly and decently answered, without
either rejecting their Petitions without reading, or discouraging them by
Dominereing Commitments. And this is a matter your Society is specially obliged
to promote at this time in good earnest. It is true, all the Commons of England
are concerned in it in general, but you more especially, who are concerned for
your selves immediately, and upon that occasion for the Service of your
Country. How silly a thing was it to tell the World in your Book, that the
Bishop of Gloucester has been a great Encourager of your Undertaking, and writ
a Vindication of it, when he was one of the Seven, who were present at the
Hearing, and he who scribled that part of your Book, one of those, who were
questioned, and yet neither they nor any of the rest, have to this Day ever
farther appeared in that Matter; and the Vindication was but built upon the
Foundation of the Book beforementioned, of the Beginning and Progress of the
Reformation, and a little trick of some to ingross the Honor of this Work to
themselves; which they should still have enjoyed, had they but better deserved
it: and yet I will not deny them the just Commendations of what they have done;
for it is a good Work, and deserves Encouragement.

But in the House of Commons there is one great Decay of our Government, which
is commonly taken notice of, but no care taken for the Repair. Many Ancient
Corporations, which were considerable heretofore, are in process of time
reduced to such a Paucity of inconsiderable Electors, and those so subject to
some particular Persons, that they have in Truth and Reality no Choice at all,
(no more than our Dean and Chapters) so that it may well be questioned, if the
Principles of the true English Government, which was founded upon true
Principles of Wisdom, Justice and Equity, be well considered, whether Writs
ought to be sent to such Buroughs, and the Persons returned by them be admited
to sit in Parliament. Besides these there are diverse other inconsiderable
Buroughs, who have showed themselves so base and mercenary in their Elections,
that they have long since justly forfeited their Right of Elections, if it were
looked into; So that it may be considered, Whether it be not an Abuse of the
Government, and an Injury to all the Counties, Citys and Considerable
Buroughs, that Writs are still sent out to them?

These are things fit to be considered by such as pretend to attempt a National
Reformation: For unless this Root be reformed, all other Attempts are but
playing with a vain Pretense of Reformation, which is more like to render your
selves and the Nation ridiculous at last, than to produce any solid and lasting
Fruits. I do not write this to discourage your Proceedings, but to make you
sensible of what you have of your selves undertaken, and to excite you to show
your selves Men, and perform your Engagements. Nor do I call you to any thing
impracticable, or more than to do what you can. You are like to have some
Members in the House: You may all consult out of the House what is fit to be
done by them in it: and those who are not Members to act there, may do good
Service by acting as Solliciters without. Do but honestly what you can, and I
have no more to say. But I must tell you, What is the Right and Duty of every
Commoner of England, upon any special Occasion, is much more the Right and Duty
of so many engaged in a Society for such a Reformation. Any one of you may
Petition the House, and you may injoin any one of your own Members, who is of
the House, to present it. And you have this Encouragement that none can oppose
it, but he will easily be discovered to be no true Friend to his Country, but a
Man of Design and Interest, and unworthy of a place in such an Assembly. And
besides this, if the Number of such Persons in the House be too great to obtain
so necessary a Preparation, I see no reason why the king, with the Advice of
the Judges and Privy Council, should not dissolve them, and summon another
Parliament without any Writ to such Corporations. Nor do I know any more just
and reasonable matter for all the Counties, Cities, and most considerable
Buroughs, to Address to His Majesty for, than this; and few things more
Honorable for His Reign.

Besides the Justice of this, it is greatly necessary to prevent diverse
Mischiefs and Inconveniences to the Nation, both from Foreigners, and from
Parties and Factions at home, and particularly that pernicious one of
Republican Deists and Latitudinarians, so dangerous, no less to Religion, than
to the Government.

Other things there are very pertinent for your Consideration. But I shall not
trouble you with more, till I understand what use is made of this: Which, though
in print, I intend only for the use of your selves and some few others.

Your Faithful Friend and Humble Servant.

FINIS.

