Considerations for Competitors and Electors of Representatives in Parliament.
TRVSTS are things, which all men agree, nemine contradicente, ought to be
performed with all Faithfulness, and for that purpose with all the care and
diligence, that the nature, importance or difficulty of the matter does
require. Hence it is that Honest men, who make Conscience of the due
performance of their Obligations, are not easily persuaded into such
Undertakings, unless where near Relation, intimate Friendship, great Charity
upon some special advantage and need of their assistance does move, and in some
sort oblige them to it; much less are they apt to intrude into such
Employments, or offer themselves, except where there is apparent need of their
assistance, and upon due consideration of their own abilities to discharge what
they undertake: And therefore when men are without any such special motives
found to thrust themselves into such Employments, or stand in competition with
men as well, or better qualifyed for the business than themselves, this is
generally looked upon as a just Cause of suspicion of some sinister Ends and
Designs in them.

This being so in Private Trusts, Why is it not, or should it not be much more
so in Public, since they are of greater Importance? And yet it is not always
in these? The reason is this: Of Public Offices of Trust, some are also
Offices of Profit, and reason good they should be so, being Offices of great
Skill and Pains, and requiring the expense of living proportionable to the
Dignity of the Office: And such as Providence has left to get their Livings by
their Labor, may reasonably desire such honest Employments as they are duly
qualifyed for. But in this there are usually great faults committed, as 1. When
men, who are in a competent, decent, and convenient way of living, are not
contented therewith, but Ambitiously aspiring, or Insatiably gaping, after
greater and higher Matters: These are not, nor cannot be either complete
Christians, or truly good Men, and when the Tentation comes, do usually show
themselves. 2. When they seek such Places merely for the Profit, and are not
sufficiently qualifyed duly to discharge the Office and Trust. 3. When by their
Interest or Friends, they interpose to keep out better or fitter Men than
themselves; in both which cases they do Prejudice to the Public, and are
Obstacles and Impediments to its Service.

Other Offices and Employments are of great Trust, Honor and Authority, but of
little or no Profit, but rather occasion of Expense. These, I conceive, are
neither to be sought for the Honor or Authority by any, nor to be refused for
their trouble or expense, by such as are well qualifyed for them, when they are
regularly called to that Service. But of all Public Trusts in this Nation,
there is none, taken singly, of greater weight and concern than that of
Enquiring, Consulting and Acting, in Parliament; of which I shall speak a
little more particularly, as to the Persons to be Chosen for Representatives of
the Commons, and the Duty of the Electors. Each of these has a double Trust
reposed in him, the one by the Electors for the special good of the place for
which he is chosen, the other by the Constitution of our Government for the
good of the whole Nation, wherein the Religion, Lives, Liberties, Properties,
and whole concern of all that is valuable is comprehended, and many times great
concerns of other Nations also: And in this the Representative of the meanest
Borough has an equal share with a Knight of the largest County.

The Qualifications of a Person to be chosen for such a Service, ought to be
proportionable and agreeable to the Extent and Weight of the Trust, which is to
be reposed in him. As 1. Integrity, and such Integrity as is not to be moved by
any prospect of Profit, Honor, or Fear of the Faces of Men. 2. Knowledge and
good Understanding in that variety of Matters, which may occur, and are there
to be considered, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, the Principles of Laws and
Government in general, and the Laws and Government of England in particular,
and many other matters, with a good Sagacity, Prospect and Foresight, into the
remote consequences of things. 3. Diligence and Industry, to attend and
consider, and prepare and forward matters of Importance to the Public. These
are necessary, if not indispensable qualifications; to which may be added two
others of great use, that is, 4. Elocution, so as to speak pertinently and
closely to business, and 5. Reputation of Integrity and good Judgment which
usually makes what is spoken by such a Person to be the more regarded by the
rest. These five qualifications are as requisite to a complete Parliament Man,
as are the five Senses to a Complete Man.

Such indeed are to be desired, to be sought for, to be preferred and chosen,
where they may be had. But where persons thus qualified in all particulars, and
in the highest degree, are not to be had, in such case they that come nearest
are to be chosen, especially at such times when matters of great moment and
concern are to be ordered. This is plain and evident, because the End, which
all men in such cases are by the Laws of God and Nature obliged to intend, is
the public Good, and by consequence are likewise obliged to make choice of the
most just and proper means and Instruments for the attaining of that End; and
such only are those who have most of the principal qualifications aforesaid,
and in the highest degree.

And by this Rule may all such, both Competitors and Electors, who are more
concerned to discharge their Duty and serve their Country, than to gratify
their Ambition or serve a private interest, easily direct their Actions, and
judge of the actions of others. And therefore 1. for Competitors, whoever,
because of his Quality, his Estate and Ability to spend most Money, or his
interest among his neighbors upon any other score than the qualifications
aforesaid, shall oppose another better qualifyed in those respects for this
purpose than himself, does certainly either Act upon mistaken Principles, or is
transported with a vain Ambition, or has not that Affection for his Country,
and Sense of his Duty, as he ought to have. And this may be further
demonstrated from a familiar Instance, for there is no Wise and Considerate
Man, but in his private matters of Law, in matters relating to his Health, in
matters of Dealings with other Men, and the like, will seek assistance from
such as are of more Ability in those respects than himself; and therefore in
matters of greatest moment to himself to his Posterity, and whole Country, not
to do the like, is inconsistent both with common Prudence, and that sense of
Duty, and of the weight of his undertaking, which every Honest man has in the
acceptance of but a private Trust; and certainly men's so forward intruding into
a Trust of so great Importance, deserves no other Construction than it does,
and usually has, in the case of a Private Trust, under the like Circumstances.

By the same Rule also may the Electors as easily direct their choice, if they
intend the Just and Honest discharge of their Duty; that is, if they regard
only or principally the true and proper qualifications of the Person for the
business for which he is to be chosen, and lay aside all by respects and
private concerhs. Some men pretend that a good Estate is a necessary, or
principal qualification, to oblige the person to be the more concerned for so
considerable an Interest, but that is but a mere Fallacy; for a Covetous or
Ambitious Man will be apt to use that as a step to Sacrifice the Interest of
his Country, to the satisfaction of his Humor, which soever it is, whereas an
honest man contented with his condition, will be no less careful to preserve
the little he has, than he that has more. Others are carried on upon the
consideration of Friendship, which is as unreasonable as if a man instead of an
able Lawyer or Physician, should make choice of a person but meanly Skilled in
either of those Sciences because he is his Friend: and as absurd and
unreasonable it is for any man to take it ill from his Friend, who chooses the
assistance of a more proper Man in a special case than himself. The first of
these does plainly prefer his private Friendship before the public good of his
Country, and the latter his own Interest or humor before either. A like
mistake is very common in Cities and Boroughs, where they think themselves
obliged to choose their actual or expected Benefactors, and they again expect
to be chosen. Of these we may judge by what is said of the last. In the Country
many are swayed by Fear of the displeasure of their Landlords or great
Neighbors, and they as unreasonably expect their compliance. The former do in
a matter of greater importance, the choice of Trustees for their Country, what
they would not do in a less, the choice of Trustees for a small Estate of their
own: And the latter take from their Neighbors that Freedom, which they would
not have taken from themselves; or having basely given up their own, would
injuriously Usurp their Neighbors Right, as has often been the case of late
times. For that Rabble of Brutes who are ready to Sacrifice all to their
Bellies, they are scarce capable of hearing Reason, Venture non habit aures, but
if any of them have so much humanity left as to listen to it, the Rule before
expressed may-direct them.

FINIS.

