AN APOLOGY For, and an INVITATION To, the PEOPLE called QUAKERS, TO Rectify
some ERRORS, which through the Scandals given they have fallen into.

WHEREIN The true Original Causes, both Humane and Divine, of all the Divisions
in the Church, and Mischiefs in the State, and among the People, are plainly
and briefly opened and detected.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1697.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THAT whole Bodies or Societies of Men are subject to the same Infirmities,
which the Individuals, of which they consist, are, and often Sick of the same
Diseases, and the very worst of all, those of the Mind, Blindness,
Conceitedness, Perverseness, Obstinacy, Incorrigibleness, and Impatience of
Reproof, or even Friendly Admonition, the Experience of all Ages does
abundantly manifest; but in none is it more manifest, than in the People of the
Jews, whom God raised up to be an Example, Admonition, and Warning, to the rest
of Mankind. Their whole History, and all their Prophets, are Testimonies of
this all along from first to last; and of this height of the Disease to be most
offended and enraged against their best Friends, such as most earnestly desire,
and most faithfully seek and endeavor their Good and Recovery; They reckon
them their Enemies, who tell them the Truth, Isa. 29.21. make a Man an Offender
for a Word, and lay a Snare for him, who Reproves in the Gate, that is,
publicly, for National Sins, and those of the Great Ones. Act. 7.52. Which of
the Prophets have not your Fathers Persecuted? says Saint Stephen. Besides
this common Infirmity, it is very obseravble, in the unhappy Divisions which
are now among Christians, that generally in all, there is a greater Zeal and
concern for their own Church or Party, than for the common Interest of
Christianity, and the real Service of God, and Salvation of Souls. And this
being so, What Entertainment is such a Discourse as this like to meet with in
the World? But if it be considered for what End, and for whose Service it is
written, that may be sufficient for Encouragement to the Author, and for
Caution to the Reader, how he treats it. And that, with the Lesson now to be
read, (December. 18.) may serve for sufficient Advertisement, Isa. 50.7, 8, 9.
The Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not be confounded: therefore have
I set my Face like a Flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed. He is near
that justifies me, Who will contend with me? let us stand together: Who is
mine Adversary? let him come near to me. Behold the Lord God will help me, Who
is he that shall condemn me? lo, they all shall wax old as a Garment: the Moth
shall eat them up.

Some things but briefly mentioned here upon this occasion, which may seem
doubtful or obscure, are intended, upon another more proper, to be more fully
explained and cleared.

An Apology for, And an Invitation to, The PEOPLE called QUAKERS, To rectify
some ERRORS, which through the Scandals given, they have fallen into, etc.
ALmighty God does in many things govern the greater Collective Bodies of Men,
as he does the lesser of Families, and single Persons: and therefore what is
the Duty of single Persons, or of the Heads of Families, under several
occurrences of the Providence of God, the very same is the Duty of the
Governors of those greater Bodies, whether they be Civil, or Ecclesiastical.
And therefore again, as when any Cross or Affliction befalls a Person, if he
have any Sense of God and Religion in him, he ought not to neglect it, as an
insensible Creature, or a brute Beast; nor to look upon it, as a mere Accident
and Misfortune, like an Atheist or Infidel; but to acknowledge the Hand and
Providence of God in it, examine himself, and consider well for what intent or
purpose, it may have been ordered or permitted by the Righteous, Wise, and
Gracious Overruling Providence of God, and without delay apply himself to do
and perform what that Dispensation does appear to him to call for.

When Divisions, Schisms, and Separations of Parties do fall out in a Church,
these are such Afflictions, as ought to be looked upon, as the Loss of one in a
Family, or of a Member in a particular Person; and therefore not to be made
light of, or passed over as Misfortunes and Accidents, but to be well
considered, as ordered or permitted by the Special Providence of God, with
great Justice and Wisdom, and therefore for some special End to be inquired
into, taken notice of, and observed by his Church, that they may thereupon
apply themselves to what he requires of them for his Service and their own
Good. When this is neglected, all other Means usually prove not only
ineffectual, but productive of more or greater Evils.

What was written afore-time, was written for our Admonition and Instruction:
and as we are plainly told, that in the Division and Separation of the Ten
Tribes from the House of David, the Cause was from the Lord, 1 Ki. 12.15. So in
that great Division of the Eastern and Western Churches, and breach of
Communion between them; and in the Western Church that great Division and
Separation of all those Churches, called Reformed; and in the great Division
again amongst them into Lutheran and Calvanist, and the several Sub-divisions
of several Parties and Sects amongst them; and lastly, to come nearer home, in
all the Divisions, Sub-divisions, Sects and Parties, which have separated from
the Church of England, and afterward one from another, there is as certainly
the Hand of God, and did we consider it well, we might plainly see that the
Cause is from the Lord.

This we can all see in the Great Division, and Separation of all these
Churches called Reformed, from that of Rome; but she her self either cannot or
will not see it: And this, to say no more of the Foreigners here, our
Dissenters at home think they see, and do see; but we of the Church of England
do not see, or will not see, to any purpose as we ought. But as they of the
Church of Rome lay all upon the Heretics, and will acknowledge nothing amiss
among themselves; so we of the Church of England lay all upon the Separatists
and Dissenters, but will acknowledge nothing amiss among our selves. And that
which dazzles the Eyes, and blinds the Minds of People in both, is chiefly the
Pomps and Vanities of the World (which are renounced at Baptism) without, and
the God of this World, who blinds their Minds, within. The things of this
World, to Earthly-minded People, are like Sugar-Plumbs to Children, which stop
their Mouths, and satisfy them that all is well with them.

But if things were more narrowly looked into, it might be perceived, That
there is scarce any Party of Separatists or Dissenters, that has not something
of Truth peculiar to them; and that there is something in particular amiss in
the Church, which gave Occasion to that Separation, and whereof something
peculiar in that Sect may serve for Admonition. And therefore, that in all
there is a secret Providence of God, ordering or permitting them for Judgment,
Correction, Reproof, and Admonition to reform, unto the Church, and unto those
very Parties, in which any such Division and Separation has been made. But
generally all they, who should have taken the Admonition, have had their Mouths
so stopped, and been so bribed and enchanted with the Devil's Sugar-Plumbs and
Baits of Preferments, that while all was so well with them, as they thought,
they could see nothing amiss in the Church, but magnified it, as a most
glorious Church, and laid all the Fault upon the Dissenters and Soparatists,
who they thought only wanted what they were possessed of; and the Scandal of
their Ambition, Pride and Covetousness, and Neglect of a due Care of Souls,
has, by their Preaching, I doubt, betrayed more Souls into the Snares of the
Devil, than all their Preaching has rescued out of them, and thoroughly
converted unto God. It is a sad Truth, but Truth it is, and a Great one too,
and very manifest to all, whose Eyes are open, That our Universities, and
Church Preferments, which were designed by our Pious Ancestors, for the
promotion of true Piety, as well as Learning, are, by the Subtilty of Satan,
and Neglect of true Piety and Devotion to God, become very subservient to the
Kingdom of Darkness, less to the Kingdom of Light: From which corrupt Fountain
has proceeded, one way or other, not only all our Divisions, but most of all
the Evils, which do now afflict either the Ecclesiastical or Civil State: and
if some very good Care be not speedily taken, more and greater yet are more
like to ensue, than these be removed.

Of all the Sects which have sprung up amongst us, there is none more
considerable in this respect, whereof I am speaking, or less considered as it
ought to be, than that of the QUAKERS, as they are abusively called; begun by
GEORGE FOX, a young Man, born of mean, but honest and religious Parents, at
Drayton in Leichestershire, in the Year of our Lord 1624. and educated from his
tender years in the Fear of the Lord, but to no more Humane Learning than only
to read English, and write indifferently. He was in his Youth disposed to
Virtue and Piety; and when upward of Nineteen retired from his Relations and
Acquaintance, and lived in diverse places, where he was not known, working at
his Trade of a Shoemaker, with his hands for his Livelihood, but exercising
his Mind in serious Meditations, both while at his Work, and at other times of
Leisure especially. In the Year 1646. he understood, That University Learning
was not enough to qualify Men to be Ministers of Christ; and thereupon,
instead of hearing them, used to retire with his Bible into Solitary places,
joining neither with the Ministers of the Church, nor with the Dissenters, but
relying wholly upon the Lord Jesus Christ for his Inward Teaching. At another
time he understood, That God, who made the World, did not dwell in Temples made
with Hands, but in his Peoples Hearts. And in the Year 1647. having been for
some time exercised with Temptations and Troubles in his Mind, he came farther
to understand, That all was done, and to be done, in and by Christ; and, How he
conquers and destroys the Tempter. And some time after he went among the
Professors at Duckenfield, and Manchester, and declared Truth (as he calls it)
amongst them, and also at Broughton in Leichestershire, and Mansfield in
Northamptonshire; and then People came far and near to see him. And here his
Preaching seems to have commenced. And in 1648. were diverse Meetings of Friends
in several Places. And this was the Beginning of that Sect, which is now become
so considerable in outward Appearance, and I wish more considerable in a true
inward Power than it is. For as all Mankind are apt to relapse and sink down
again from the Elevation to which God at any time raised them: so I doubt are
this People now relapsed very much into a Form, only of a different sort and
appearance.

The Beginning of George Fox seems to have been by and under a true Divine
Conduct; such as Abraham was led by; such as Moses was driven by from the Court
of Pharaoh into the Wilderness; and such as the Holy Prophets of Old, and
greater numbers of Holy Christians afterward, were partly led, and partly
driven by into the Wilderness, Solitary places, and Retirement from Relations,
Friends and Acquaintance; as our Savior says, to forsake Father and Mother,
Brother and Sister, and House and Land, for his sake: and in those Retirements
he did receive Openings, as he calls it, of Truth indeed: and when he came from
his Retirement, and went into the Meetings of Professors, he did declare Truth
indeed, as he expresses it. For it is a certain Truth, that University
Learning, that Preaching and Praying at Churches, or elsewhere, that the
Studying of the Holy Scriptures, that the Profession of Faith in Christ, the
Use of the Sacraments, and most frequent and constant use of the great and
chief Solemnity of the Christian Worship; nay, even Zeal for Christ, and doing
Miracles in his Name, and Reliance upon his Merits, are all, though good in
their kind, and very necessary, and some absolutely necessary; yet are all
short and deceitful to those, who rest in them, and seek not in all and above
all, that inward Principle of Light and Life, which is Christ in them, who
receive him in Sincerity and Purity, and retain it by faithful and ready
Obedience to his Conduct.

This George saw very well and rightly. And if he did, in the heat of Disputes,
either through Transport, or any humane Infirmity, or through the Subtilty of
Satan getting any Advantage of him, over-shoot himself, it is no more than what
Luther and Calvin, and the rest of the Reformers, have done; who, whether they
have reformed or deformed most, may very well bear a Dispute; and he and his
Party deserve to be pitied, and helped out by gentle and kind means. And great
reason there is for it, upon two accounts at the least. 1. Because the Scandals
given were the occasions of their Errors. 2. Because Christianity having before
been pulled to pieces, and no where complete, entire, and clear from
Corruptions and Abuses to be found in any Church or Party of People in the
World, they of all the parts chose the better, the Soul, leaving the Body, as a
dead Carcass to the rest.

It is true, this is in a great Measure to be imputed to those, who by their
Empty Formality gave the Occasion; yet it was a Fault in Them, who took such
Offense at it. What God has joined together, Man must not presume to put
asunder: If the Leaper be commanded to wash in Jordan, (2 King. 5.10.) he must
not think that to wash in the Rivers of Damascus will do as well: If the Blind
Man be commanded to wash in Siloam, (Jo. 9.7.) or even Moses to cast up Ashes
into the Air, ( Exodus 9.8.) the Command must be obeyed and observed, or the
Effect shall not follow: If People be commanded to be Baptized in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, that their Sins may be forgiven, and that they may receive the
Holy Ghost, ( Act. 2.38, 41.) if they presume to neglect and cavil at the
Command, their Sins are more like to be increased and faster bound, than
forgiven, and they more like to receive Satan transformed in a Spirit of
Delusion, than the Holy Spirit of God; and to die in their Sins, though with
many false Comforts, than to come to true Rest in the Lord, in any other way
than he has prescribed. God's Command, if it be but the forbearing of an
Apple, ( Genesis 2.17: 3.3, 6, 11.) or the doing that, which our Reason cannot
understand, must be observed punctually. Disobedience to the Wisdom of God, is
no less a Sin than Disobedience to his Will. And therefore I dare not excuse
this People in this; for their Sin may be greater, and their Case more
dangerous, than they or I can imagine: but I cannot but pity them, be ready to
help them, to hope the best, because they were led into it, and did it through
Ignorance, Prejudice, and the Scandals of others; and to speak comfortably to
all that will receive it, and submit to the Call of God, humble themselves
before Him, and return to their Duty. But the Sin of those, who shall refuse,
and go on obstinately, will be greatly aggravated, and their Case more
dangerous and difficult. If they fall into the Ditch, the company of a blind
Guide will not save them: If they die in their Sins, it will be but a sorry
Comfort to them that their Blood must be required of another.

But to help them out, I know no better and more effectual way, than to detect
the Snare and Stratagem whereby they fell, and the Stone at which they
stumbled. And it was no other than what I have mentioned already in general,
the Scandal given by others, and Offense taken by them: but it will be
necessary to consider it more particularly: and the first particular, that I
observe in the Journal of G. Fox, was an empty Formality void of the Power of
Godliness, that he perceived and felt in all Parties, the Professors as well as
the Priests, as he calls them: that they were Ministers not of the Spirit, but
of the Letter only, 2 Cor. 3.6. that their Preaching was but with Wisdom of
Words, 1 Cor. 1.17. with the enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, ibid. 2.4. or at
best but a Ministration of the Letter, not of the Spirit. (I do not write his
Words, but his Sense.) And this was an undeniable Evidence, and Demonstration
of the insufficiency of University Learning alone (alone I say) to qualify Men
to be Ministers of Christ; for there were of both sorts, those who wanted not
that, if that had been sufficient: And if we inquire into the true reason of
that, how that comes to pass, since a principal End of our Universities is to
qualify Persons for that Service, we shall presently discover that, which is
the Root, and true Cause, both of that, and of almost all the Unhappiness of
this Nation; and that is a great Defect, and Neglect of Teaching and Learning
the best and chief part of all Learning and Knowledge; of true Heavenly Wisdom.
Their Learning is plainly such an ineffectual Learning, which does deceive
their Souls, being void of the chief solid Food, like Chaff without the Corn,
and Husks without the Kernel: it stops the Mouth, satisfies the Stomach; but
famisheth the Soul: and not only so, but, like unwholesome Food, breeds only
Wind and Crudities, a Knowledge that puffs up, and Diseases; a superficial
Notional Business, without any thing of true Culture and Food of Souls: a Form
plainly without the Power; such a Cheat and Deceit, as the most virulent
Expressions of any called Quakers, could not exceed; but even Indignation would
extort almost as much from a sober Man duly sensible of it. It deceives
themselves; it deceives the People, whom they undertake to feed; and it
deceives the whole Nation.

The Teaching here is agreeable to the Design of those who come to learn; a
mixed Design of an unnatural Composure, Heaven and Earth, or rather Earth and
Heaven; not so much God and Mammon, (which, according to our Savior's
Doctrine, are inconsistent) but Mammon and God; for the principal in the Design
in this Case ought first to be named: and it is visible in their Actions which
that is; and even in their Common Expressions: for if one propose a Place with
all the Advantages of doing Good that may be, presently comes this filthy
fulsome Question; But what Encouragement is there? as if an Advantage for doing
Good was not Encouragement enough to a Christian to enter into the Service of
God, without some humane assurance of I know not what temporal Income. And
Preferments are not only thought, but plainly asserted to be the Encouragements
of Learning; and I doubt they have their Reward. What unsatiable Greediness is
observable generally in all, to be scandalous in almost the best, that can come
at them! And what is the Use they make of them, when they have with great
Study, and Pains, and Solicitations, and Compliances, and Flatteries, and
Costs, at last obtained them; but Pride, and Luxury, and Extravagancies of
Wives, and Children; to which all v. Fa. Paul, Of Matters Beneficiary, N. 236,
237. and s. a Sin to ^ispend that which exceeds the moderate Necessity of a
Clergyman.
That must be sacrificed, which was designed for Provision for true Food of
Souls; of which Thousands are daily famished, for want of a competent number of
duly qualified Laborers in the Lord's Vineyard, in the great Parishes about
this City, and other parts of the Nation, where there is Maintenance enough, if
such Persons were employed, as did indeed make that their Business, Care and
Concern. All their Learning raises but few above the Sensual, to the Animal
State; but none to the truly Spiritual: if any attain to that, it is by such
Means as may be used any where else, as well as at the University, as things
are there ordered at present; and not by University Learning, which, as it is
ordinarily used, does more hinder than further it. Nor is it likely it should
have much better Effect upon others, which has no better upon themselves: For
in the Spiritual Generation, as in the Carnal, Men beget their like; the
strong, such as are strong; and the weak and infirm, such as themselves are.

But if we look farther into the Concerns of the whole Nation, and their Duty
to their Great Master in that respect, are not they to be both severally and
jointly, not only Pastors, but Watchmen; severally over their own particular
Charges, and jointly over the whole Nation? But what an insignificant
Generation are they, even the Chief of them in that respect, not only far short
of the Generosity and Magnanimity of genuine Christians, and the more immediate
Servants of the Great Jehovah, but even of the natural Genius of their own
Nation; as if their Preferments had some Narcotick and stupifying quality, or
some secret Enchantment in them: And so in truth they have; they are like the
Trojan Horse; when they think they have got a great Prize, they themselves are
surprised and captivated by, they little think what, invisible Enemies. When
they return to the Pomps and Vanities of the World, which they had renounced in
their Baptism, they desert the Heroic Christian State, and enter into the
Power of the Enemy; and their true Christian Strength departs from them: they
have no longer any real strength to serve the Lord Christ, but only such an
Appearance of it, as serves to deceive themselves and others; and make them the
more effectually subservient to that Interest, which they do not design to
serve: for their Actions and Behavior render their Preaching not only
ineffectual, but scandalous to Men, and ridiculous to the invisible adverse
Powers, who are not a little gratified with the spectacle of it. It puts a
Slight and Contempt upon the great and noble Examples of our Savior, and the
Ancient and most Heroic Christians; but spreads the Devil's Snares, and decoys
Men into them; promotes Christian Idolatry, which is Covetousness, to be as
effectually destructive as any of the Jews ever was, or any of Papists can be;
and tempts the World to believe, that either Earthly-mindedness, or to mind
Earthly things, is consistent with Christianity, or that they are no
Christians, and do not themselves believe what they Preach unto others.

But to speak a little more distinctly, there are two things to be considered
in our English Clergy; what they have originally from Christ, and what they
have originally from Man. From Christ they have Authority to preach the Gospel,
to teach and instruct the People, to administer the Sacraments, and offer to
God the solemn Prayers of the Church, to admonish, correct, and execute
Ecclesiastical Discipline, where there is occasion, and to receive the
Oblations of the People for maintenance of themselves, and for Pious Uses; and
a right to all the Respect and Submission which is due to the Ministers of
Christ in so Holy an Employment. And from Man, they have Houses, and Lands, and
Revenues, and Titles, and Honors, and Civil Power and Authority, and Charges
and Encumbrances. And these are some good and useful; and some evil,
pernicious, inconsistent with their Christian State; and, to be plain,
Antichristian. The Houses, Lands, and Revenues may be of good use, if they be
used as they should be; but the rest are Antichristian, under pretense of
Honoring, Degrading; and under pretense of enlarging their Power with what
they had not, debasing and abridging what they had, and subtly enslaving the
Ministers of Christ to be Servants of Men; and not the outward Man only, but
their very Minds and Spirits. And here lies the very Mystery of Iniquity. They
are deprived of one part of their Christian Authority, and their Hands bound,
under pretense of State and Grandeur, by having Chancellors, like the Grandees
of the World. They are subjected to the State by their Acceptance of their
Honors and Dignities from thence, (the very Temptation that was offered by the
Devil to our Savior, and a betraying of the Rights of the Church of Christ.)
And the Papal Enchroachments and Usurpations being transferred to the Crown,
and all Ecclesiastical Preferments coming from the King, this is first a Bait
to allure Ambitious Minds, and then an Enchantment upon them, that they dare
not displease the Creator of their Grandeur, though for the Service of their
true Lord and Master, and the Savior of their Souls. So that we are like to
have a continual Succession of Flatterers of Princes, instead of faithful
Monitors, as become the Servants of the great God to be; and Nurseries of false
Loyalty, instead of true Piety and Devotion to God; and of Instruments of
incessant Dissentions between Prince and People, instead of Healers of our
Breaches; a just Judgment or deserved consequence of Sacrilege and Usurpation
upon the Church of Christ. And here, if I be not much mistaken, lies the Root
of all the Unhappiness of this Nation, and at this time in particular.

The Providence of God has not at any time been wanting to us; but we have
been always wanting to our Duty to Him, and to our own true Interest. And
though all have been wanting, yet the beginning of this deficiency has been in
them, who should have better attended to, and wisely considered the Motions of
Providence, and been the first active vigorous Movers to the rest to have
corresponded with it: But, alas! they attended more to the Motions of Men, and
to please them, or at least not displease them, for their own Advancement or
Security; and this is called Prudence forsooth: And so have we lost a most
favorable Opportunity put into our hands. When Men turn from God to Men for
Counsel, or Assistance, or Advancement, that Divine Power which does ordinarily
accompany the Ordinances and Orders of God, does usually depart from them,
though chosen, or regularly commissioned by him; as it did from Saul: And then
they are ready to fly to any mean things for support or safety.

The Church of England has been in Bondage, under the Civil Power, ever since
it was discharged from the Roman Usurpations, which were not totally abolished,
but too much reserved to another Master; and a Slavish Spirit has ever since
possessed it. It did quietly acquiess in the greatest Sacrilege that ever was
committed: It contentedly suffered the most solemn part of its Liturgy,
composed by English Bishops, and, as was declared by Act of Parliament, by the
aid of the Holy Ghost, to be dismembered, disordered, and defaced, and the
Christian Sacrifice abolished by Foreigners, and a Factious Party, which have
ever since been Thorns in their Sides, without the concurrence of the English
Clergy. The true Christian Discipline they never had the Courage to attempt to
restore, though an Office was prepared for a Memorial, with a Wish to have it
restored, from the beginning, which King Charles II. observing upon an
Ash Wednesday, asked, Why do they not restore it? Who hinders 'em? And for the
Worship of God, we have ordinarily only Mattens and Vespers, and that too only
on the Lord's Day, and in that too the Prayers short and deficient, either to
excite, or to express the Devotions of the People, where there is any; and
besides all this, what we have, commonly read with so little Devotion, as gives
Scandal to many, and no little disturbance to others. And our very Sacraments
and most Holy Things, no less than Holy Days, are scandalously profaned.
Baptism, which is the Solemnity of our engaging in the Christian Covenant, not
only permitted, but even forced upon such as do not desire it, either for
themselves or their Children; but bring their Infant Children either for fear
of the Apparator, or out of Custom to be like their Neighbors, without any
sense or understanding of so much of the Christian Religion as was required
anciently of Catechumens, before they were admitted to Baptism. And that other
Sacrament, the Holy Memorials of our Savior's Passion, which, from the rising
of the Sun to the setting of it, that is, all over the World, has, in all
Assemblies of Christians, for the solemn Worship of God, till the last Age,
been presented before God, as a solemn Recognition of our Redemption by Christ,
and Subjection to him as our Lord, has been not only most shamefully
neglected, and so treated, both in Sermons from the Pulpit, and in Printed
Books, that it appears few amongst us rightly understand it at this day; but
most horribly profaned, not only by common admittance of all that will to it,
but even forcing the most wicked and profane Officers to it, upon the Penalty
of losing their Places. And so unhappily have some of our Controversies with
Papists and Fanatics been managed, and so superficially and impertinently our
Preaching been generally throughout the Nation, that we have disputed one part,
into disbelief of the Scriptures and Infidelity; another, into contempt of one
of the chief Principles of Christianity; and generally all, into Neglect and
Contempt of the Examples, Precepts, and Counsels of greatest Perfection in the
Christian Religion; and together with that, preached the People generally into
a careless tepid state of Indifferency; so that in the Country especially, it
is rare to meet with two or three good sensible intelligent lively Christians
in a Parish. And who of our principal Clergy can deny any of this? And if it be
all true, why is it not reformed? If they cannot reform all, why not as much as
they can? Why is not the Christian Worship restored in their Cathedrals? And if
those be so burdened by profane Officers imposed upon them, that they fear to
expose it, why do they not reform their own Families, and restore it at least
in their own Chapels? What Account will this Glorious Church, as carnal
Flatterers call it, give of their Neglect of Propagating the Gospel in Foreign
parts, at least in our own Plantations, and suffering them to be such
Nourseries of Scandals to the Infidels? What Account of the many things fit to
be done at home, for the Service of their Master; and fit to be considered by
them jointly in a Body, and promoted in Parliament; which yet are neither
studied, nor considered, nor so much as thought on by any of them, no more than
if they did not belong to their Care, or were not of any Concern to their
Master, though they sit Session after Session in the Parliament? But how can it
be expected that they should ever extend their care to things so remote, who
take no more care of what does concern them in their own Chapels and Families?

It is an amazing thing for one whose Eyes are open, to consider these things.
But it fairs with collective Bodies of Men, as with single Persons: they are
subject to the like Diseases: the State of this Church is plainly a Tepid,
Scorbutic, Latitudinarian, Laodicean State, quite sick of the Prudentials; and
has been so in a manner from the first Settlement of the Reformation. And to
speak freely, as becomes an honest Man, though there was great need of a
Reformation, when it was begun by Luther, and long before; yet has that great
Work been so ill managed, with more of the Antichristian than Christian Spirit,
that I cannot see, by any growth in Grace and Virtue, that the Blessing of God
has ever been with it; only he seems to have preserved these Reformations
rather as Judgments and Corrections for the Obstinacy of that Church which
would not reform: and raised up and preserved the several Sub-divisions of
Parties amongst us for the very same cause and purpose. For the True Cause of
all the Divisions and Separations amongst us, is no other but our Scandals,
Abuses and Corruptions; both by way of Natural Causation, and by the special
Judgment of God, to awaken us, if it be possible. And though the Blessing of
God, the true Spiritual Christian Blessing, be not upon them, because he does
not favor Schisms and Divisions, yet is his Protection over them, as his
Instruments in the Nature of a Judgment, and in some things to raise an
Emulation in those of the Church, i^ they would lay it to heart and understand
it For there is none of them all, but there is some thing in them, which may
serve for Admonition and Notice of something amiss in the Church.

This which I have now said, may be of us^ not only to them of the Church, but
also to a^^ the several separate Parties, and deserve their very serious and
deep Consideration. For it i^ not a light matter to Make a Schism or Divisio^
in any particular Church, or in the Catholic^ Church. It has been looked upon,
in all Ages, to be a damnable Sin: and who-ever does well consider the several
weighty Admonitions in the Scriptures concerning it, if he have not a benumed
Conscience, will not make light of it; nor yield to plausible pretenses: there
is nothing so bad, but the Wit of Man and subtle Suggestions of Satan can put
a color upon it; nor so good, but they can mis-represent it and disparage it:
but it is dangerous and very imprudent to play tricks with Sacred things. Any
thing else may be more safely meddled with in that manner.

This does concern them all in general; and I must add a word or two more:
There are none of the best of them, that I have yet talked with, that could or
would deny that their Party was much sunk in Piety and Virtue from those
degrees of it, which was in those before them of the same Party. And this being
so, it concerns us all to consider well, whether the Apostasy foretold be not
an Apostasy in Practice, as well as in Principles? and, Whether, while we are
gazing to see the Judgments of God upon it abroad, it may not be found amongst
us at home; and we feel, in a surprise upon the Nation at home, what we expect
to see elsewhere, at Rome; as was upon this City in sixty six. And certain I
am, that there are not only Antichristian Principles amongst us all, but whole
Antichristian Sects and Parties, which, deceived by the Subtilty of Satan,
under the most specious appearances of the most pure and refined Christianity,
do undermine and enervate the true Genuine Christianity, and the Power of
Godliness. It is one of the Devil's most subtle Policies, by abuse of
Scripture, and mis-application of certain Truths, to impose upon People, and
overturn them. So he began with our Savior, and so he goes on with Professors
to and at this day. The Holy Scriptures are abused, the Honor of God is
abused, the Merits of Christ are abused, the Guidance of the Spirit is abused,
the Moderation and Condescension of the Gospel is abused, and whatever is most
Excellent and Admirable is abused by the Subtilty of the Enemy, and the supine
Negligence, and Inconsiderateness and Folly of Men. And woe be to them who dare
presume to be the Instruments and Leaders in these Abuses and Doctrines.

It is certain that our Savior gave Instructions to his Apostles for the
Settling of his Church; and that they accordingly in all places, where there
were a competent number of Converts, did ordain Elders, and gave Authority to
others to do the like; and so settled a Succession in the Church, which has
continued all over the World to this day. And it is certain, that the State of
the Jews was so corrupted in his time, as provoked the Judgment of God upon
them, so that they are a Monument thereof all over the World to this day; and
yet neither He, nor his Disciples, did ever refuse communion with them, till
they were cast out; and so far was he from allowing them to separate, that he
foretold their being cast out of the Synagogues, as part of the Persecution
they were to suffer. It is also certain, that our Savior did foretell that
many false Prophets, that is, false Teachers, should come in his Name, and
deceive many; and gave great Caution not to go out or believe them; and that
his Apostles did the like, and did with great earnestness exhort all to beware
of Divisions, Schisms, and Separations in the Church: And accordingly, in all
Ages, for Men to take upon them the Office of Elders or Ministers of the
Gospel, without a Regular Ordination, derived by Succession from the Apostles;
or to draw away people after them, and engage them in Separate Parties, has
been looked upon as a heinous Sin; and whoever have done so have been Infamous
in the Church ever since. And therefore, if our Dissenters did continue daily
with one accord at our Temples, as the primitive Christians did, and did
continue their Assemblies at their own Meeting-places, for Instruction and
Edification, without any Separation from the Church, provided there was nothing
but true Christian Doctrine taught amongst them, I do not see but they might be
of very good Use, and deserve not only an Indulgence, but Encouragement from
the Public Authority. But they, who make a Trade of it to engage Separate
Parties, I do verily believe have much to answer for before God: and those who
desire to be Christians indeed, had need to beware of them. And this I must in
justice say, after all I have said concerning what is amiss amongst us, that,
thanks be to God, we have those amongst us, who, for good Learning, for
profitable Preaching, and for sincere Piety, Devotion, and all Virtue, are no
way inferior to any of the Dissenters, if to be equalled by any of them: and
yet I cannot say they are so many, but there may be reason enough to receive
those Laborers also into our Lord's Harvest. And I heartily wish it was well
considered, How they may be made more serviceable in so important and needful a
Work, without any thing of a Separation: and that they would consider, Who They
are, who sit in Moses, or rather the Apostles Seat, and, What our Lord does
require in that respect.

And now, to come more particularly to the PEOPLE of that Party called Quakers,
I must first acquaint them, that I have not only had several Conferences, with
the Principal Persons of their Party, whom they call Ministers, but have also
sent them several Letters and Papers to their Second Days Meetings: And as our
Conferences have hitherto been managed in a very friendly manner, so I do
desire to proceed in the same manner with them also: and therefore, what is
directed at first only to the second days Meeting, I shall desire them now to
receive, as intended from the first for them all, though I thought it most fair
and decent to proceed in that order. And it is as follows:

To William Penn, and the rest of the Friends with him, at their second days
Meeting in Grace Church Street.
William, and the rest of the Friends with thee,
MY Hearts desire and Prayer to God for you all, is, that ye may be saved: for
I am persuaded that you have a Zeal of God, at least many of you, though not
according to Knowledge in some things. Nevertheless, whereto ye have attained,
in that I desire ye may be established, and that God will be graciously pleased
to reveal the rest to you, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing.
For which purpose I come, I trust, by the Grace of God, with a Message of Grace
and Peace to you. I am well satisfied that it is no mere Humane Project or
Artifice, that at first raised you up, and has conducted you hitherto: but a
Supernatural Power, and that it is of the Lord, some way or other, (as was the
Separation of the Ten Tribes from Rehoboam, 1 King. 12.^ for Correction and
Reformation of something ami^ in this Church. And therefore I dare not presume
either upon my own head, or by my own Ability, t^ intermeddle in it. But my
Heart is enlarged toward you upon these Considerations: 1. Tha^ ye do assert
one of the Great and Chief Principle^ of the Christian Religion, which I have
observe^ to be very unworthily and even despitefully treated by too many, who
have gotten into, or seek, Preferments and Employment in the Church, without
Chec^ or Reproof; and so unworthily deserted by most for fear of reproach, or
disgrace, or hindrance in their Preferment, that I have not known it generously
asserted by above two or three in the Pulpit, (but those great Men indeed)
though it be plainly a Doctrine most authentickly and solemnly professed and
declared in the Church of England. 2. That ye do bear a good Testimony against
other Abuses connived at, or tolerated amongst us. 3. I am moved with Pity
toward you, that you should have so great Causes of Offense or Scandal given
you, against the Holy and Established Institutions and Ordinances of Christ,
for the Ministerial Office; for the Admission of Proselytes; and for the great
Solemnity of the Christian Worship, which has been so long abused with
Controversies, that I know very few Persons now amongst us, who do rightly and
completely understand it; and even against the Person, Satisfaction, and Merits
of Christ himself. But when I consider your Notions and Sentiments concerning
these things, though I am well satisfied that you are under the Conduct and
Energy of some Spiritual Power; yet, What that Spirit is? and, Whether One or
Diverse? in my Judgment, does deserve very good Consideration. Ye know what
Spirit it was, which God sent between Abimelech and the Shechemites, Jud. 9.23.
and what that was, that was sent from the Lord to Saul, 1 Samuel 6.14. and what
that was, that was commissioned by God in the case of Ahab, 1 King. 22.22, 23.
and what that was, in the midst of the Princes of Noph, Isa. 19.14. which was
from the Lord too. And that such a Spirit has been among some called Quakers,
is manifest both by their Actions, Speeches, and Writings; nay, the very Spirit
of the Devil, and of Antichrist, is apparent and undeniable, from the
Indignities offered both in word and deed, to Holy things. But that is not the
thing now to be considered, what Spirits may have appeared among them. For even
among the Apostles, Satan had power to enter into Judas; and it is not
improbable but those, whom our Savior told, Ye know not what Spirit ye are of;
and even Peter himself, when our Savior said to him, Get thee behind me,
Satan, might not at the time be free from some Impressions of Evil Spirits.
That, it is likely, was a Peculiarity of our Savior's, or the Prince of this
World to have nothing in him. But the thing to be considered, is, What Spirit
that is which at first excited, and has now the Conduct of the whole Body of
this People? And, not, whether it be sent, or commissioned from God? but,
Whether it be one of the Ministering Spirits sent forth to minister for them,
who shall be Heirs of Salvation? or, One of those Seducing Spirits, to whom, in
the latter times, that some would give heed, was, in the times of the Apostles,
expressly said by the Spirit of God? And great Reason there is to take this
into very deep Consideration: 1. Because of the many and weighty Cautions given
by our Savior and his Apostles, and left upon record in the Sacred Scriptures,
for our warning in these latter times, to beware of them, and not to go out
after them; with Admonitions concerning their Subtilty, their Energy or Power,
and their strong Delusions to deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect; and
that even Satan him self is transformed into an Angel of Light, that is puts on
the Appearance of an Angel of Light (2 Cor. 11.14.) and, lastly, that we should
tr^ the Spirits, (1 Jo. 4.1.) 2. Because, if the Trial be by Agreement or
Disagreement with the Doctrine, Institutions and Ordinances of Christ, and his
Apostles-authorized by him, they may seem t^ have apostatized and gone off, or,
at least, fallen short of them, in matters of great Moment, an^ special
concern, those before mentioned; an^ therefore to be Seduced by some Spirit of
Error* For I doubt not but the Devil himself has the Malice and Envy against
the Man Christ Jesus, by whom he has been Conquered and Vanquished, and
against the Solemn Memorial of that Victory, that could he but keep people from
engaging in that Holy Covenant with Him by Baptism, and from the Solemnity of
that Memorial, he would be willing himself to lead them into all other Truth,
upon that condition, rather than fail. Yet notwithstanding, since they are a
Sober People, have received, retained, and do act upon one of the chief
Principles of Christianity, and have diverse commendable things in them; and
what Errors they have fallen into, have been occasioned by the Scandals and
Offenses given by those of the Church, who will have a sad account to answer
for it: I do hope in the Mercy and Goodness of God, that if it be a good
Spirit, which has the Conduct of them, he shall lead and dispose those who are
Sincere amongst them, to the acknowledgment of the Truth in those things,
whereto they have not yet attained; and if it be otherwise, he shall be forced
to resign the Conduct of them to a more powerful and better Guide; and that we
shall see such a Society of Complete Christians come out of this despised
People, as are at this time hardly to be found in any part of the World, that I
know of. These are my Thoughts, and Hopes concerning this People in general at
present. And Hopes, I say, grounded upon the Mercy of God, and Power of God,
which no Good Being would oppose; nor no Evil Power can stand before. And in
His Name I come unto you, knowing assuredly that neither I, nor any Humane
Ability, is able to prevail against the Power that is amongst you,
notwithstanding the Certainty of the Truths that I have mentioned already, and
shall endeavor, by the Grace and Assistance of God Almighty, through our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, more fully to explain unto you in due time: But, as I
said, if it be a good Power, it will favor me and assist me in it, and rejoice
in it too: and if it be an Evil Power Commissioned, it must cease, and submit
to that Victorious and All-Conquering Name: Its Enchantments must be dissolved,
and its Sophistry and Falacies detected. I therefore, as an Ambassador of
Christ, in the Spirit and Meekness of Christ, beseech you, Be ye reconciled to
the Truths of God, and receive them with that Reverence and Gratitude that is
meet, without Cavelling, or regard to any Temporal concern. I do not invite you
to return to the Abuses and Corruptions which you have forsaken, but to those
Truths, and to the due use of those Holy things, against which you have been
Scandalized by those Abuses and Corruptions. Nor do I invite you to dissolve
your Society, or to leave off your Meetings, and drown your selves in a
promiscuous Multitude. No, you have in part born a good Testimony, and I would
have you do so still: But I invite you only to make your Testimony more
Complete, Illustrious, and Irrefragable, by bearing your Testimony to the whole
Truth; and not any longer a Testimony like the Feet of Daniel 's Image, partly
strong, and partly weak, by a mixture of Truth with Falsehood; for that cannot
stand long together; but to strengthen the things that remain, and set in order
the things that are wanting, that ye may stand; for otherwise ye will certainly
be Broken to Pieces. I invite you but to what I am doing my self with a small
Company of Poor people, that is bearing a Testimony for God, and manifestly
under his Conduct: But it is neglected by them, to whom it has been offered
for a sufficient Time, and in a sufficient Manner, considering their Learning,
and pretense to Knowledge: And now it is offered to you, a despised People,
that God may humble the Proud and High-minded, and confound the Wisdom of the
Wise, by mean and despicable things, in the sight of Men. Be Wise, and neglect
not the Opportunity, and you, who were last in the Worlds account, shall be
first. What ever you do, you will find there is solid Truth in the Proposal,
and I wish you may receive it to the Honor and Glory of God, and your own
Comfort and Salvation; and you will then find me to have been

Your Sincere and Cordial Friend, E. S.
31 Aug. 1696.

After this there were other Letters and Papers sent, which may be taken notice
of hereafter, as there may be occasion; but the last contained certain
Questions, which I think fit now to propose to the Consideration of all, who
are sincere, and do desire not to deceive themselves, nor be deceived in a
matter of so great Importance, as the Will and Service of God, and the
Salvation of their own Souls. If any notwithstanding will presume to go on in
any false or Erroneous Ways, they must answer for it, and their Blood, if they
miscarry, must be upon their own Heads. For the Design and Use of these
Questions is, to examine the case, What Spirit they are of? the Spirit of
Christ, or the Spirit of Antichrist; the Spirit of Truth, or some subtle
Spirit of Delusion? Whether they be Christians indeed, or counterfeit
Christians, that is, Antichristians? Whether Hypocritical Professors in Words,
but Renagadoes in Deeds, refusing the Solemnities of his Covenant and Worship,
and the Orders of his Church, or such sincere Christians as are ready to follow
the Guidance of his Spirit out of their own Wills, and out of their own Wisdom
and Imaginations, and Errors and Mistakes, into all Truth? and, Whether they be
in the Way of Salvation, or of Delusion and Perdition? The Times of this
Ignorance God winked at, but now commands all Men every where to Repent.

QUESTIONS PROPOSED To the People called QUAKERS, First to their Ministers, at
their second days Meeting; and now, to them All; for the better Examination,
and rectifying some Errors and Mistakes amongst them.
I. WHether there be not a great Party of fallen Angels and wicked Spirits,
which are Enemies to Mankind, and with all the Power, Activity, and Subtilty
they can, do continually endeavor to hinder their Salvation, and Communion and
Union with the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit?

II. Whether the Word, which in the beginning was with God, and was God, was
not made Flesh and dwelt amongst Men, being born of the Virgin Mary, and called
Jesus, which signifies a Savior, and Christ, the Messiah, the anointed of God,
and Jesus Christ of Nazareth?

III. Whether his Appearance in Mortal Flesh was not to destroy the Works of
the Devil, the Prince of that Party of fallen Angels and wicked Spirits; to be
a Prince and a Savior to Mankind, and the Captain of their Salvation to all
who receive him, and subject themselves entirely to his Teachings by his
Example, and by his Doctrine, and Precepts, and Orders recorded in the Holy
Scriptures, and by the Motions of his Holy Spirit upon and in their Hearts and
Minds?

IV. Whether he be not the Only Mediator between God and Man; so that Man can
have no Communion with the Holy God, or Participation of the Spirit of
Holiness, but by and through Him?

V. Whether that Party of fallen Angels and wicked Spirits, knowing this, do
not above all things endeavor, by all means, to withold people from closing
and uniting with that Holy Mediator, and to withdraw as many as they can as
much as they can from Him?

VI. Whether their most dangerous and subtle Actings in this Opposition be not
principally, by Way of Deceit, under the Appearance and Pretense of Good to
Man, and of Good Spirits?

VII. Whether it has not been foretold, that, in the latter times especially,
there should be many false Teachers, who, with such specious Pretenses and
secret Energy, should endeavor to draw away People from the Faith, as to
deceive, if it was possible, the very Elect; and Warnings given to beware of
them, by Christ and by his Apostles?

VIII. Whether the Spirit of God and the Spirit of Christ be not the same, and
a Holy and Pure Spirit, a Spirit of Truth and Righteousness, leading into all
necessary Truth, and from all Fraud, Deceit, and Falacy, Cavils, and shuffling
Evasions?

IX. Whether it be not reasonable that Christ Jesus, who had done so much for
Man, should prescribe what Manner he pleased for his Peoples engaging with Him;
and for their recognizing Him, and making their Solemn Address to the Father by
Him; and what Orders he pleased and would have observed and continued in his
Church?

X. Whether to oppose such Appointments, Prescriptions or Orders, or to cavil
at them, seek Evasions or Pretenses to neglect them, and yet pretend to be
Christians, be not a great Evidence of Insincerity, and of a subtle
Antichristian Spirit of Satan transformed into an Angel of Light?

XI. Whether Jesus Christ, besides his General Command to his Apostles after
his Resurrection, to go to the Gentiles, and teach all Nations, baptizing them
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, etc. did not
for forty days show himself to them, speaking of the things pertaining to the
Kingdom of God, until the day in which he was taken up, after that he, through
the Holy Ghost, had given Commandments unto them, and in or with those
Commandments give them sufficient Instructions and Directions for the
Constituting his Church, which he purchased with his Blood?

XII. Whether the Apostles did not in all things faithfully pursue his Commands
and Directions?

XIII. Whether besides his express Commands and Directions, they did not also
receive the Holy Spirit, according to his Promise in an extraordinary manner,
and had the same residing in them, and manifesting his Presence with them, by
extraordinary Operations, to guide and assist them in their Work?

XIV. Whether they having received the Command to make Disciples in all
Nations, (whether Jews or Gentiles) baptizing them, as aforesaid, and teaching
them to observe all things, whatsoever he commanded them, did not in all places
preach the Gospel, exhort the People to believe and be baptized, and baptized
with Water those, who did believe, though baptized before with John's Baptism,
and though they had received the Holy Spirit, whether Jews or Gentiles?

XV. Whether the Apostles, and the People converted by them, after they had
received the Holy Ghost, did not, when they came together in one, or assembled
for the Solemn Worship of God, break Bread, and eat the Lord's Supper, and do
as their Lord did, and commanded them to do; and that so constantly, that there
is not known any Assembly of Christians in the time of the Apostles, nor in
many Ages after, to have been held for the Solemn Worship of God without it?

XVI. Whether the Apostles did not ordain Elders, and appoint others, by
special Appointment, to do the same, in every City; by such Authority, that
none did presume to take the Office of Elder unto himself, but who was so
ordained; or the Office of Ordaining Elders, but who was so appointed, either
in the times of the Apostles, or afterward, but who have been infamous ever
since?

XVII. Whether seeing that our Savior himself, though he needed not, would
notwithstanding be baptized with Water, to fulfill all Righteousness, and
thereupon had sensible Approbation from Heaven, did also by his Apostles
baptize with Water; and that it is plain by their Practice, that his Apostles,
and the whole Church of Christ, did understand his Command to baptize all
Nations, of Baptism by Water, and as necessary for Forgiveness of Sins; and
that Baptism with the Holy Ghost was peculiar to himself: whether, I say, this
being so, it be not a forced and strained Interpretation, without any sound
ground, and contrary to the most authentic Means of explaining Words, to
restrain that Command to Baptism by the Holy Ghost only?

XVIII. Whether, if such Construction be by any Spirit more than humane, it be
not the Spirit of Antichrist or Satan transformed, to withold Men under his
own Dominion, from solemnly engaging with Christ, and from Forgiveness of their
Sins in his Name? or, If it be only by Opinion of Men, such Opinion obstinately
persisted in, be not a Damnable Sin, contrary to subjection of all Imaginations
to the Obedience of Christ, and subverting of Souls, and such Teachers to be
abominated and anathamatized by all sincere Christians, as Seducers, and the
Ministers and Instruments of Satan, though they appear in Sheeps clothing?

XIX. Whether, it having been the constant belief of all Nations, (whether Jews
or Gentiles) that they had a real, though Spiritual, Communion with the Gods
they worshipped, in their Participation of their Sacrifices, as St. Paul
intimates, 1 Cor. 10. and may be proved by good Authority; and Christians duly
disposed, having a like Communion with Christ in the participation of the
consecrated Bread and Cup, as St. Paul affirms; and the solemn Worshipping of
God, by presenting our Prayers to the Father, with those Memorals of our
Savior's Passion, being plainly a Recognition of our Redemption by Christ, and
of his Dominion over us, acquired by his Passion, and that that is the only
Propitiation, and He the only Mediator, by which, and by whom we Mortals born
in Sin can have Access to, and Acceptance with the Father; and St. Paul having
received the Doctrine of what he taught concerning this, from the Lord; and the
ancient Christians frequenting this Ordinance, after they had manifestly
received the Holy Ghost: Whether, I say, this being so, to reject these either
as Types and Shadows, (which are indeed Antitypes, as the Grecians express it,
Solemn Memorials, and Sensible Declarations before God, Angels and Men, of
present internal actions of our Minds, for the greater Manifestation and
Notoriety of the Fact) be not mere Sophistry, Shuffle and Evasion; or as
needless, upon pretense that Christ is come to them in the Spirit; or of their
having the Substance; be not to set up themselves in Pride above the Apostles
and Holy Christians, who had so manifestly the Spirit of God; nay, above Christ
himself, viz. to reject that as needless, which he instituted as necessary; and
a plain Evidence of the Subtilty and Delusion of Satan, to oppose Christ, and
detain and withdraw people from his Solemn Worship, and under the most specious
appearance of the Spirit of God, by sensible Motions to things appearing Good,
and by False Lights, to corrupt and adulterate them, and get and keep a
residence in them, as if it was the Spirit of Christ? Whether such Obstinacy,
such Fallacy, in such a Matter, of such Importance in Christianity, and yet so
easy to Man, and void of all Exceptions, be not plain Evidence of a Mystery of
Iniquity in it?

XX. Whether to deliver those things in the Name of the Lord, as immediately
from the Lord, and by his Spirit, which may be plainly perceived and detected
to proceed either from a humane Spirit, or a Spirit of Error, be not a great
Presumption against the Holy Majesty o^ God, and a great Scandal to the Holy
Doctrine of the Guidance of the Spirit of God, and therefore a double and great
Sin; the Sin of the False Prophets of old, and that which in Germany formerly,
and since in this Nation, raised so great a Prejudice against the Truth?

Upon the perusal of these Questions, it may be supposed that some Answer was
returned, and therefore some account of that may reasonably be expected; and I
should have been glad to have been able to have answered so reasonable an
Expectation more fully: but the truth in short is, that eight of the first ten
were answered affirmatively, but the other two were answered indeed, but with
Answers not to the Questions: and the other ten remain yet to be answered; but
I hope upon due consideration will be answered at last, not with words only,
but with deliberate solemn Actions. Nor are my Hopes without rational Ground.
For in the several Conferences I have had with them, seven or eight at a time,
of the principal leading Men of their Party, they behaved themselves, as became
serious considerate Persons; heard patiently and attentively, replied gravely
and calmly, none interrupting either me or any of their own party while
speaking; and our Conclusion was friendly, though not altogether agreeing in
the same Sentiments. And this is my Ground in respect of the Persons.

And for the Matter it self in question, That they have been led into Error and
Mistake in some things, the due Consideration of these Questions will in a
great measure make them sensible. And when, besides, they shall consider by
what Means they, who misled the rest, came to overshoot themselves, and fall
into those Mistakes, viz. through the Scandals beforementioned, and that
common Infirmity incident to us Mortals, to run from one Extreme into another;
this will farther satisfy and confirm them in the truth of it. And if to these
Considerations be added a clear Explication of the Truth, which they did not
rightly apprehend before this, with the Grace of God, will farther inlighten
the Mind of those, who are sincere, and regard Truth more than any temporal
Concern, with much Satisfaction, viz. That Baptizm with Water, and that Noble
Solemnity of the Christian Worship, are not needless Types and Shadows o^
things past and fulfilled, as they imagine, but Solemn Expressions and
Declarations, more comprehensively and remarkably significative than Words,
before God, Angels, Devils and Men, o^ present Acts of the Mind, of what is
internally and invisibly at the same instant acted in Spirit; the one, of our
Engagement in an Holy Covenant with God in Christ, by putting off, by
Repentance, our Pollutions through Sin, and Dedication of our Selves to the
Holy Trinity; the other, of our Recognition of our Redemption by Christ, by his
Death and Sacrifice upon the Cross, and of his Dominion over us, and our
Subjection to Him, even to lay down our Lives in Obedience to Him, as he did
His in Obedience to his Father which is done by making our Solemn Address, and
presenting our Prayers to the Father, with the Memorials of his Passion, as the
Great Propitiation for the Sins of Mankind, and Participation of those
Memorials, being Consecrated not only by a Separation to a Holy Use, but by a
real Sanctification through the Spirit of God at the Prayers of the Church,
whereby the Faithful have a real and Spiritual Communion with Him, and one with
another. This is the pure Offering of the Gentiles, foretold by Malachy, That
it should be Offered by them from the rising of the Sun, even unto the going
down of the same. And this is the Sense and Meaning thereof received and
retained by the Church of Christ all over the World, till Calvin's new Notions
became received as the Pure Word of God, and made this most Sublime, most Holy,
and most August Sacrament, as it is deservedly called by Dr. Morton, be taken
in effect for a needless Ceremony, or of no great Importance, by others besides
the Quakers, and used, or rather neglected, accordingly even to this day. These
are the great things in it, which I have now mentioned, but rare to be found in
our Books now a days, or heard of from our Pulpits: Nor can it conveniently
here be explained as it deserves. But as to both these, what is said before,
page 13, 14. ought to be considered. These things, I say, well considered,
cannot choose but make great Impression upon the Minds of those who are
sincere, and have a due sense of their own Spiritual and Eternal concerns.

But when they shall also understand, That the great Principle of the Guidance
of the Spirit of God, is not so peculiar to themselves as they imagine, but the
constant Doctrine of the Church of Christ in all Ages, and of the Church of
England in particular, (as I have showed in a Discourse of Mystical Divinity,
and some others under the Title of Asceticks, or the Heroic Piety and Virtue
of the Ancients,) and notwithstanding the Extravagancies of some inconsiderate
Opposers of Fanaticism, asserted by most eminent Men of this Church, as the
profound Dr. Cradock, lately deceased, (who himself told me, he had Preached
twenty or thirty Sermons upon that Subject) and others now living; and that
there are and have been, before George Fox appeared in the World, Persons in
the Communion of the Church of England, as well acquainted with Spiritual
things as themselves; and, by consequence, how little necessity there is of
venturing upon the Sin of Schism for that cause: And moreover consider, that
Christ appointed an Order of Men for his Ministerial Office to succeed in his
Church by an external Call and Commission; and notwithstanding the Corruptions
of those who sat then in Moses's Seat, would not suffer his Disciples to break
Communion with them, or disregard their Authority; and by consequence how
dangerous it may prove in the end, for Men to presume to set up Parties, and
draw People after them contrary to his Orders, and to continue so to do, after
fair Warnings and unanswerable Admonitions to the contrary.

To conclude, When they shall farther consider, how horrid a Sin it must needs
be to presume to attribute to the Holy Spirit of God, the Workings of their own
Imaginations, or perhaps the Subtle Suggestions of some wicked Spirit of
Delusion; and to expose and scandalize the Holy Doctrine of the Guidance of the
Holy Spirit, by denying of certain and manifest Truths; and using such little
Shifts and Evasions to oppose plain Evidence, as an honest and ingenious Lawyer
would scorn and be ashamed to ^se for his Client: When all these things, and
^ore that might be observed, are well understood and considered, why may I not
with reason hope that all, who are really such as they ^ave appeared, in the
several Conferences I have had with them, to be, should answer the End of my
Letters and Questions, with more than civil and kind Words, in real and solemn
Actions? Why should I not hope that no pri^ate Interest, nor any Temporal
Concern, should ^inder them? Why should I not hope, that ^nce God has
apparently again concluded all under Sin, (which all Parties confess of all
others but their own, and is true of all without ^xception) that all should
humble themselves before Him, return to mutual Charity one with another, and
subject themselves, and all their ^maginations, to his Wisdom, as well as their
^ctions to his Will, to the intent that he may have Mercy upon all? Why should
I not hope I say, since God has done this, and for thi^ End, that they, if
they be indeed partake^^ of his Holy Spirit, should be the first in giving
Glory to God, by such a just and reasonable Humiliation before his Divine
Majesty and Acknowledgment of our Humane Infirmity if never so little left to
our selves, or but steping aside out of the Order of his Holy Conduct (...) and
subject themselves entirely and readily to a^^ the Orders he has appointed in
his Church No sober wise Man will expose himself, and lea^ others into Danger
or Hazard, when he man without any Difficulty or Encumbrance put himself and
them into Safety and Security: No^ will any ingenious Man, if he have committe^
a Mistake, stand it out and maintain it against a Grave and Judicious Man: Much
less will any considerate Man, who has any sense of God and regard to his
tremendous Majesty, dare t^ persist in Opposing or Disputing his Institution or
Orders: and therefore I shall here conclud^ this.

But because I have received certain Question concerning these Matters, but
without an^ Name of any who sent them, or to whom (...) should return Answer,
though I shall forbear t^ expose them, by making them public; yet b^ cause I
am debtor both to the wise and to the unwise, for their Satisfaction, who are
either moved with such Scruples, or rely upon such infirm Grounds, I shall
return a brief comprehensive Answer to the Eight Questions in these following
Assertions.

The Holy Scripture of the Old and New Testament is the only Rule of Faith and
Practice, rightly understood and used: But it is in many Cases only a General
Rule, leaving the special Application in some, to all Persons; in others, to
certain determinate Persons. And therefore to require Express and Plain
Scripture for Faith and Practice in all things, does proceed from Ignorance and
Weakness in some, but too often from a disingenuous Spirit of Contention, a
dishonest Design, or Satanical Delusion.

The Practices of the Primitive Christians were some Permanent, to continue in
the Church; others Temporary, and Alterable, according as there might be
occasion, for Order, Decency, and Edification, and did vary from the beginning
in several Churches and parts of the World; whereas the others were truly
Catholic, according to Vincentius Lirinensis his Rule, that is, universally
observed without any known beginning since the Apostles.

The Spirit of God was poured forth upon all Flesh, when the Gospel was
Preached to all Flesh, or to every Creature, that is, not only to the Jews, but
to the Gentiles also. But as to individual Persons, it was never so poured out
upon all Flesh, but there were some things preacquired; as Faith in Christ
Jesus, and ordinarily Baptism with Water, Obedience, and Prayer, etc. Nor was
the Manifestation thereof ever given to every one; but to every one to whom it
was given, it was given to profit withal.

As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God: and, If any
Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8.14, and 9. But it
is to be known and remembered, that a great and principal, and the most certain
Leading of the Spirit of God is not sensible, or easily perceivable how it
comes; but it is generally a Secret Illumination of the Mind to perceive the
Excellence of the things of God, and the Emptiness and Deceitfulness of the
things of the World; from which proceeds an Appetite to those, and an
Indifference to these; and in particular actions a like secret Illumination of
the Mind, to apply the general Rules of the Scriptures to the particular Sense,
and an Inclination of the Will to what is so perceived to be the Will of God.
And in more sensible Motions, Impressions, and Openings, as some call them, the
Trial is by their Agreement with what is agreed to proceed from the Spirit of
God; that is, the Holy Scriptures; what is contrary to that is to be rejected,
as coming from the Enemy: what is not inconsistent with that ought to be
followed; or if doubtful, be referred to the Judgment and Determination of the
Elders, according to the Observations of the Ancients; or of the most
Experienced Christians, especially of such as by their Office and Place are
authorized, and obliged to be Guide of Souls. And those who have presumed to
reject these Ordinary Means, which God has appointed, and established in his
Church, have frequently fallen into Mischief.

There are many of the Mind of Simon Magus, Act. 8.18. they are desirous to
purchase it, but not at the Price our Savior set it, Mat. 13.44, 46. And there
are many false counterfeit Spirits, very officious to offer themselves where
they find hopes of Reception; and they always suggest and instigate to the
following of their Leading, which is insensibly, and as they find their
Followers disposed, from the Holy Scriptures, and from Christ; and when they
cannot prevail with them in that manner, they endeavor to fill them with
Spiritual Pride and Conceitedness, make them admired by others, as
extraordinary and very Holy Persons, that they may make them think better of
themselves than they ought, and so get advantage of them that way. And there
are generally two great Faults committed by most Pretenders to the Guidance of
the Spirit. 1. They do not well consider themselves, and teach others the
necessary Qualifications pre-acquired for the obtaining of so great a Divine
Favor. 2. They neither consider nor teach others the necessary Cautions and
Directions for Trial of Spirits. In general the Conscientious Observation of
the Holy Scriptures, is a principal thing for both. For as the Law was our
Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, so the Conscientious Observation of the
externally revealed Will of God, which is Obedience, is our Schoolmaster to
prepare us for, and bring us to the true Spirit of God. But for more particular
Cautions and Directions, that is a Subject too large for this Occasion, and
has been largely treated of by others.

The Questions concerning Baptism with Water, and the Eucharist or Holy
Communion, are even such as that of Naaman, 2 Kin. 5.11, 22. But they who make
them are not like the Servants of that Heathen, who gave him this prudent
Admonition: If the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not
have done it? How much rather when he says unto thee, Wash and be clean? May
they at least take Example from that Heathen, who received the Admonition even
from his Servants, even with the like blessed Success. And this, with what I
have said before, is as much as I apprehend necessary to be said to the
Questions, for such serious considerate Persons, as are willing to be satisfied
and informed of the Truth: and I shall be ready to give them all further
Satisfaction, when I understand where any real Scruple does remain.

THE REVIEW.
WHAT I have written, I have written with all Plainness and Simplicity, with
all Candor and Impartiality, and Good Will to all; without any other Design
than for the Service of God, and the Good of all; and without any Affection of
any Ornament, as becomes the Majesty of the Truths of God: Yet can I not expect
but I must incurr the Censures of most in one thing or other, when I consider
the general Corruption of Men's Minds and Judgments, as well as of their
Manners, at this time; not only of the Scandalous and Profane, or Hypocritical
Professors; but even of such as are sincere in many things, and deservedly
esteemed in the World both for Parts and Honesty; and yet in others, not so
complete as might be wished, partly through the Bias of their own
Dispositions, and partly through the Common Cheat of Honorable Names; such as
Prudence, Moderation, Discretion, Charity, etc. and their Contraries, calling
Good, Evil; and Evil, Good; and partly through certain False Notions,
undermining the Integrity of the Evangelical Doctrine of Christ, as the
Pharisees did the Law of Moses, and rendering it of none Effect in many things;
which have been introduced and recommended to the World, by a late Sect
appearing in a very plausible Form, but, in truth, generated by an unnatural
Copulation of Church of England with some Socinian Principles, setting up their
own Corrupt Humane Reason in the place of the Divine Wisdom, and wresting the
divinely inspired Scriptures to a Compliance with it; persuading themselves and
others that the Noble Heroic Virtues, so much studied and practiced by the
ancient Christians, such as Humility, Contempt of the World,
Heavenly-mindedness, etc. were for times of Persecution; but we are under
another Dispensation; as I my self have been told by a Principal Author and
Promoter of it; and encouraging such Temporizing Compliances, under the
specious Pretenses of Moderation and Prudence, as are not only Inlets to Sin,
and Hindrances of Graces, but inconsistent with the Practices and Sentiments of
the best Christians of all Ages, with the Doctrines and Instructions of the
Apostles, the Example and Precepts of our Savior himself, (to say nothing of
Evangelical Counsels in this Age) our Baptismal Engagements, and the Genuine
Spirit of Christianity, and the Interest of the Kingdom of Christ in this
World. What Glosses they make upon our Savior's Sermon upon the Mount, I must
leave to others better acquainted with them, to consider. But, What can be
expected from persons so levened, but as severe Censures of this Writing as
they take this to be of others? but that reasonable Expressions of just
Indignation at Abuses and Corruptions in Matters of Religion, or at abuse of
Scriptures to patronize Vanity, and by persons professing Religion, should be
censured for Passion? but that such warm Expressions and Charges, as were
necessary to awaken such out of a Deadly Slumber, as Experience had proved,
could not be moved by gentler touches, should be censured as Incharitableness?
and necessary plain Dealing with Mortals, for the Service of God, the Good of a
Country, and the Salvation of Souls, be censured as Indiscretion, Disrespect
to Superiors, and Sauciness?

But to leave such as are ready to wish, and to talk, but will do nothing but
what may serve to recommend themselves to those whose Commendations are most
desirable; are willing to use others, as the Cats foot, but will not touch the
Work with one of their Fingers; nor intermit the complement of a Dinner to
consult of what themselves profess to be matter of great Importance; whose
Prudence prefers to countenance Religion with Perukes, and Laces, and Topknots,
and Servants in Livery, rather than to bear the Reproach of Christ, in bearing
Testimony against the Vanities of the Age, by the tacit Reproof of them in a
decent but plain and a little unfashionable Attire; who prefer Charity at
home, in providing for the temporal concerns of themselves and their Families,
with some little creditable Acts of Charity, as we call it, before trusting to
Providence in more liberal Contributions to unfashionable Good Works: to leave
such, I say, and to come close to the business, to the State of the Church, (of
which I am yet a Member, and am not satisfied to separate while I live in the
Nation, notwithstanding all I dislike in it) for this is the Root of all, and
principally to be considered; and they are to take care of the Dissenters: If
we consider the Great things belonging to the Charge of the Governors of this
Church, both severally in their particular Diocesses, the State of the Clergy
and People there; and jointly to them all as one Body, viz. The Court, and the
Nobility; The Universities; The Parliament, so far as Religion is concerned
there; The Prisons, (which might be made Schools of Virtue, but are now
Nourseries of all Vice and Wickedness) and Condemned Persons there; (for whose
Assistance they of the Roman Communion employ the ablest and best qualified of
their Clergy, and we the most ordinary, though they are not a few, who are
every Year Executed in this City, and throughout the Nation; The Foreign
Plantations, and the Propagation of the Christian Religion by that Means
abroad; for our Neglect of which the Monks, and Jesuits, and Quakers, and such
as we call Phanaticks, will rise up in Judgment against them; and the
Dissenters at home; for they also belong to their Care, to remove all just
Occasions, give all reasonable Satisfaction, and to use all truly Christian
Means to reduce them: If all these, besides diverse others, which cannot
presently be thought on, be considered, What Account can be given that may
reasonably pass with a considerate Mortal Man, of any of these? and, What
Account then can be given of all to the Immortal, All-seeing, Righteous God.

These are Generals, of each of which a particular and clear Account must be
given by every one of that Order, what sense he has had of his Duty in that
respect, and what Care and Endeavors he has used in discharge thereof? To
these I will add but one or two Particulars, of Occurrences in this Reign: One,
of a Bill for Suppression of Vice and Debauchery, drawn indeed at their
Request; but after it had been perused and perfected, not only by able Counsel,
but by all the Judges then in Town, particularly the Lord Chief Justice
Polexfin, the Lord Chief Baron Atkyns, Mr. Justice Dolbin, Baron Letchmare, and
I think one or two more, and fair written out put into their hands, and a
Motion made by the Bishop of Chester to bring it into the House, and granted by
the Lords, and yet stifled and suppressed in their hands. Another, a Needful
and Hopeful Reformation, begun by the Authority and Encouragement of the QUEEN,
and not only vigorously prosecuted here in Middlesex, but in a hopeful way in
many other Cities and Counties all over the Nation, and this stopped first by a
Combination of Middlesex Justices, (I need say no more) but at last more
effectually in a Judicature of Equity, in the Presence of no less than seven of
our Reverend Prelates, by two wicked Men, the one Speaker, and the other a
Member of Parliament, the Mr. Ralph Hartley, who is still a Sufferer between a
Succession of City Magistrates, and a Combination of Surry Justices, and some
other persons, and shamefully oppressed by them.
Justice of the Peace, who had been most diligent, and other persons concerned
in the Promotion of that Good Work, checked, vilified, and abused, without any
just cause, to the discouragement of the Execution of the Laws, and Contempt of
Her Majesty's Authority; and all in the Presence of those Bishops, who came on
purpose to countenance the Cause of Reformation, were satisfied of the Iniquity
of the Proceedings against it, and yet not one of them ever appeared after in
it, to any purpose more than in one little printed Discourse in Vindication of
the Gentleman so abused, as aforesaid. And what Account can be given of these
things?

It is a great Truth, That neither King, nor Parliament, nor Bishops, of
themselves and their own Motion, have done any one Act, that I know of, worthy
of the Name of Christian. And where lies the Fault of all this, but at their
door, who, instead of Admonishing, and Exciting, and Animating to due Returns
of true Gratitude in Fact to God, for his admirable Providence, have, by their
Neglect, and the consequences of it, provoked the Favors of Providence to
withdraw, and to leave us to our selves, and to eat the Fruit of our own
doings? And whence comes this Neglect of so many so obliged, but from a common
Defect of Good Education at the Universities, and the Enchantment of their
Preferments?

But is not this Great Uncharitableness, may our Grave Prudential Gentlemen
say, thus to lay open to the World the Nakedness of our Governors, and of the
Church? Doubtless as great as for a Physician to prescribe a bitter Potion to a
tender Patient; or a Surgeon to cut or burn, after trial of more gentle
means, what is found otherwise incurable. It is that they, at whose door lies
the Root of all (...) Evil, may give Glory to God, by taking Sha^^ to
themselves, and giving Good Example Humiliation and Reformation to others. But
they will not, I hope the despised Quakers (...) be so wise, as to accept the
Honor of beginni^^ the Example. For all have sinned, and co^^ short of the
Glory of God.

But, Who called You to this Office? may o^ Prudentialists say: By what
Authority do The this? and, Who gave Thee this Authority? (...) who gave me
Eyes to see, and a Heart to (...) sensible of it, and a Mind to be Faithful to
Hi^^ who called me and led me, by his Hand, to h^^ Holy Service, not for filthy
Lucre's sake; n^^ to make a Trade of it; not to seek the Wor^ in the Church;
but to serve Him in the Servic^ of all Men, in the best manner I can.

FINIS.

