Important QUESTIONS Of State, Law, Justice and Prudence, Both Civil and
Religious, UPON THE Late Revolutions AND PRESENT STATE OF THESE NATIONS.

Consistere simul non possunt Voluntas Imperandi and Voluntas Perdendi

Grot. 1. de Juri Belle. c. 4. 11. Regi in partem non suam involanti vis justa
opponi potest: quia eatinus Imperium non habet.

Grot. ibm. 13. Quisquis Imperii Summi partem habet, non potest non jus habere
eam partem tuendi. Quod ubi fit, potest Rex etiam suam Imperii partem Belli
Jure amittere.

Grot. ibm. By Socrates Christianus.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1689.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Design of this Paper is not what some might imagine by the Title, to raise
Doubts and Questions, but the contrary, to prevent and resolve them. Certain it
is, that many Difficulties are, and may be better, and with more Ease, Brevity,
and Satisfaction, resolved merely by well stating the Question, than by long
Arguments and Discourses. And the old Socratick way of convincing and
instructing by Questions, has been thought by some Wise Men of latter Ages not
less useful or satisfactory than that of Syllogistical Disputations.

The present State of the Nation.
WHERE IS King James the Second, being long since Seduced from the Reformed
Religion, wherein he was Educated, to the Superstitions and Abominations of the
Romish Religion, out of his great Zeal for the same, and through the Evil
Counsels and Instigations of the Jesuits, and of other Persons of the same or
the like wicked Principles and Persuasions, has ever since with great
earnestness, and by various means endeavored the Re-establishment thereof, and
the suppression and utter extirpation of the genuine Christian Religion
reformed from the Superstitions and Abominations of the Roman, and publicly
professed under the protection of the Laws in these and diverse other Nations,
as of a Pernicious Heresy, and under the Notion and Name of the Northern
Heresy. And for that end, during the Reign of the late King Charles the
Second, held diverse secret Counsels and Conspiracies, both with notorious
Enemies of the Reformed Religion beyond the Seas, and at home with Persons
notoriously guilty by the Laws of High Treason. And in pursuance of those
Counsels and Conspiracies, is generally believed to have been a Principal
Author and Promoter of Wars, Bloodshed, and other great Mischiefs among the
Professors of the Reformed Religion; that being weakened by their own hands,
they might the more easily be Destroyed and Subjugated by those of his party.

And whereas the said King James, since his access to the Throne, in further
prosecution of the same Designs, Counsels, and Conspiracies (not to mention any
secret Practices, which may possibly be made more manifest in due time) has
notoriously, contrary to the true Constitution of the Government of this
Nation, contrary to diverse express Statutes, contrary to his own repeated Word
and Solemn Promises, and contrary to the very form of the usual Coronation Oath
(which he is presumed to have taken) assumed to himself a Power to Suspend and
Dispense with the Laws, (which is an Essential part of the Legislative
Authority, which belongs not to the King alone) and under pretense thereof,
keeping up a great Army in time of Peace, has not only Armed great numbers of
Papists, but put and continued in Offices, both in the Army and in the Navy,
many Papists and others Persons not qualified by Law.

And that the Administration of Justice might be also in the hands of Papists,
and such as were believed would comply with his Designs, has in the Counties
chosen diverse Papists for Sheriffs, displaced, and put out of Office most of
the Protestant Justices of the Peace, and in their Room has put and continued
professed Papists, and other Persons not qualified by Law; insomuch that
generally throughout the Nation, in the Counties there is not a legal Justice
of the Peace to be found in many miles distance, whatever occasion should
happen: In Corporations has by his Letters of Mandamus caused professed
Papists to be chosen for Mayors, Aldermen, and Sheriffs: And in the Courts of
Justice at Westminster has placed and displaced Judges till he had furnished
the same with such as were believed would most perfectly comply with his
Pleasure, without much regard to the Laws.

And for the promotion of those Designs in the Church as well as State, has
granted to diverse Persons, of whose compliance therein he was well assured, a
Commission in the nature of the High Commission (which with all other of like
nature at any time to be granted, has by express Acts of Parliament been
utterly abolished and made void) by which he has caused the present Lord
Bishop of London most unjustly and contrary to all Law and Equity to be
Suspended from his Office; the President of Magdalen College in Cambridge, and
the President and Fellows of Magdalen College in Oxford, contrary to Law to be
put out of their Free-holds; and by the same proceedings might (as may
reasonably be believed was designed) have turned out all the Clergy of England,
who would not have complied with whatever he should have pleased to command.

And for the more direct restoration of the Papal Authority and Religion in
England (which to endeavor or attempt is High Treason by the Statutes) has
sent his Ambassador to the Bishop of Rome, and admitted and entertained a
Legate from him; has permitted Popish Bishops to be consecrated in England,
and to hold their Visitations, a Jesuit to be of his Privy Council, Jesuit
Schools, and Convents for Friars to be erected, and Popish Chapels for Public
Mass in diverse places; and has placed and permitted known Papists to hold
considerable places and Employments in the Church and in the Universities.

And that the things thus designed and promoted might have been confirmed with
the Formalities of a legal Establishment, has used diverse indirect Means, and
employed diverse Agents, to have such Persons only chosen to serve in
Parliament, as he could be assured would comply with his Pleasure therein; a
practice which strikes at the very root of our Government, and tends directly
as the most immediate means to the subversion thereof.

And to complete all, that they might be so Established and Secured for the
future from danger of being defeated by a Protestant Sucessor, has by the arts
of those Subtle Agents been so far transported in his Passion for that Painted
Rotten Religion, as to comply with them in an Though it be in truth Unnatural,
yet it may not seem so, or to be unreasonable to one who reputes them to be
obstinate Heretics; and for that Cause deserving to be disinherited.
unnatural intrigue to adopt or set up a Supposititious Child (as is by most
Persons in the Nation of all Ranks and Qualities firmly believed,
notwithstanding the Extrajudicial Depositions In-rolled and Published in Print)
for his own Son and the Rightful Prince of Wales, though to the disinheriting
of the true heiress apparent and his own Children; that so he might have a
pretended Successor, to be Educated in the Popish Religion, and in time to
perfect the Work he had begun; or (as is believed by some) to baffle all hopes
of a Protestant Successor for the present, and in due time to set up one of his
Natural Sons of his own Religion.

And whereas, when many Lords, both Spiritual and Temporal, Gentlemen and
others of all Ranks; observing these things, and well considering the great and
apparent Danger, that these Nations were by these means brought into, had, as
the only Remedy under God, craved aid of His Highness the Prince of Orange,
(whose interest and concern in these matters, as well as Affection to these
Nations and to the Protestant Religion, did both qualify and oblige him to
interpose) and the Prince thereupon coming in with a Competent Army, had in a
Declaration set out these and the like matters as the cause of his coming, and
referred all to the Determination of a Free Parliament; the Nobility and Gentry
and others daily resorting to him, and engaging in an Association with him for
the Defense of the Protestant Religion, the Ancient Government, Laws, and
Liberties of these Nations, and great parts of the Armly daily revolting to
them; the said King James was pleased at first so far to comply with these
reasonable Demands, as to order Writs for Elections to be Sealed, and yet not
long after (whether through his Conscience of the Illegality of his Actions,
not able to endure the Examination of these matters, or through the
instigations of his wicked Counselors, or both) caused most of the said Writs
to be burnt, conveyed away the great Seal, the Pretended Prince of Wales, the
Queen, and diverse of the Conspirators in that Intrigue, and accessories
thereunto; to prevent, as is believed, their cross Examination, and further
discovery of the whole Contrivance, and of the rest of the Persons concerned in
it, and at last departed himself beyond the Seas, deserting these Kingdoms and
the Government thereof.

All this being not only true, but notorious matter of Fact, so that the
Relation of it needs neither Apology nor Proof; there arise thereupon several
QUESTIONS, which may concern the whole Nation and all Persons therein, who have
any regard to the due discharge of their Duty well to consider, and in order
thereunto.

I. Questions of State, concerning the Constitution of the English Government.
1. WHether by the Sacred Scriptures, or any Positive Law of God, there be any
Particular Form of Government prescribed for the several Nations of the World?
or all be left at liberty to constitute any such just form of Government, as to
them shall seem most convenient? And all Persons as strictly obliged to the
just and reasonable Observance of those Public Pacts and Constitutions,
whereby their several Governments are formed, as of any private Pacts
whatsoever? and all again at full Liberty to use all just and reasonable means
for the preservation thereof?

2. Whether by THE CONSTITUTION OF THE GOVERNMENT OF ENGLAND in Legislation, or
making of Laws the Jus Regiae Potestatis, or Regal Power, be more than one
third part? of the Kings Negative Voice comprehend any thing more than what
each of the Houses have? And therefore his assuming as his Prerogative, of what
belongs to the whole, be not an Invading of the Rights, both of the Lords, and
of the Commons; and within the sixth Case of Hugo Grotius, 1. de Jure belli c.
4. 13. wherein just force may be used against the Invador?

3. Whether by the Constitution of the Government of England, for the ordinary
Administration of Justice, there be not certain Courts and Offices appointed,
whose Authority the King can neither enlarge nor abridge; as in each County the
Hundred Courts once in three Weeks, the County Court once in a Month, the
Courts at Westminster once in a Quarter or four times in a Year, the Circuits
twice in the Year, and for Extraordinary Matters, by the Common Law and
Statutes yet in force and unrepealed, ths Parliament once in the Year at least?
So that the Regal Right in this respect extends little farther than first to
the choice of the Persons, and secondly, that the Commission and all Process be
made in his Name, as the Supreme in the Government, and for the greater Honor
and Majesty of the King and Kingdom?

4. Whether by the Constitution of the English Government, in all Ordinary
matters between the King and the Subjects, the Ordinary Courts of Justice at
Westminster have not Jurisdiction, and the Judges of these Courts be not the
proper Legal Judges; who may and ought to judge and determine according to the
Law of the Kings Right, and Actions, and of the Validity thereof, and to order
equal Right to be done to the Subjects, as well as to the King Himself?

5. Whether by the Constitution of the Government of England, in all
Extraordinary Matters, the High Court of Parliament be not the Supreme
Judicature; and may not of themselves without the King both Judge and Correct
the Errors and Misdemeanors of the Judges and great Officers of the Nation,
and moreover enquire into the Actions of the King Himself, so far as they
concern the Public State of the Nation; and if they see cause, both judge and
declare them to be public Grievances and contrary to Law, and also demand
Redress by Petition, and also in cases of great Importance and Necessity, when
the Constitution and public State of the Nation is in danger, by Force and
Arms? And whether this Right does not remain in the Lords and Commons of this
Nation in such Case if the King refuse to call a Parliament, there being then
no Superior Authority or other means to determine the matter between them,
when the very damental Laws and Constitution are in Question?

Indeed it is plain in the Frame and Composure of the Government it self and in
the Actions of our most Ancient and Succeeding Parliaments, and confirmed by
the Polititie of those People from whom they did descend, that out Wise
Ancestors in the Constitution of this Government did particularly intend and
take care of two things; The one to give all the Honor and Majesty that could
be to the King, for the greater Honor and Advantage to the Nation abroad: The
other to retain all the Power that might be to themselves, for the greater
Security and Benefit of the Public at Home. And therefore, when they had
limited and confined his Power as much as was thought convenient, they invested
him with the rest, not as a Right which he might dispose of, or use as he
pleased, but as a Trust, the management whereof they would inspect and
consider; and for that end, as well as to inspect the Actions of inferior
Officers, supply Defects, etc. did think fit to have frequent Conventions or
Parliaments. So that his Right has a great and weighty Duty (if not a
Condition in Law, as they call it) essentially annexed to it; and he is in
effect only the Supreme Officer, and a kind of High Reeve of the Nation, as the
High Shire-reeve of the County, who in many respects does truly represent him.
And therefore because some have in our Age asserted such an Unaccountableness
and Irresistibility in the King as is inconsistent with this Constitution, and
others from some Clauses and Declarations prescribed in some late Statutes
passed soon after the Return of the late King Charles the Second, may think
themselves bound in Conscience to maintain the same, it may be necessary to
propose to their serious consideration some few

Questions concerning those Clauses, and the Oaths, and Declarations
prescribed, in the Statutes of 12, 13, and 14. Chapter 2.
1. WHether they who did take these Oaths and declare accordingly, are thereby
(being only Declarative of their belief at that time, and not promissary for
the future) obliged to persist in the same belief, and act accordingly in all
cases which may happen, without further Inquiring or Examination of the Truth
of that matter?

2. Whether all or any of those Clauses, or the Oaths prescribed in the
Statutes aforesaid, being all merely Declarative, and not Constitutive, do; or
can make any real alteration in the Laws, and in the very Constitution of the
Government from what they were before?

3. Whether the vulgar sense of those Clauses, Oaths, and Declarations, be not
inconsistant with the Natural and Original Right of Mankind, to defend and
maintain their Rights? the special Constitution of the English Government? the
frequent Practice of English Parliaments? and known Principles of Law allowed
at this day? be not contrary to the Sentiments and Practices of most Nations of
this part of the World? to the Judgment and Practice of diverse Reformed
Churches upon great deliberation in their own Case? and of Queen Elizabeth,
King James, etc. and the State of England in their Assistance to other People
oppressed by their Kings and their Ministers? and of dangerous Consequences
both to Prince and People? disposing Princes with more Liberty to transgress
the Laws, and exposing innocent People, if they believe it to oppression by
them; if not, to Wars and Contention with them for the maintenance of their
Right? and therefore the Clauses and Declarations aforesaid, to be either
wholly rejected as false; or else accommodated with some better and more
convenient sense and Explication? as that, which no Man will deny, That neither
the King, nor his Ministers, acting according to Law, may be resisted upon any
Pretense whatsoever. And it may deserve some Considerations

4. Whether considering the Time, when these Statutes were made, the ambiguous
Terms in which the Declarations are drawn, neither restraining them to Lawful
Actions and Commssions, because that would not serve the turn, nor expressly
extending to Unlawful, because that was not likely to pass; the Activity and
cunning Insinuation of the Romish Emissaries, and their real Interest to have
the Government absolute in one governable Prince, rather than subject to the
Counsels and Resolves of an untractable Parliament, and the Tricks which they
have since imposed upon us; it be not likely that in these, as well as some
other Statutes about and since that time, there may not be some of their
Projects craftily intermixed, and unperceived in the transport the Nation was
then in? and the rather if the late late King Charles the Second, had before
that time entered into their Communion, as is now believed?

And because in these things many well-meaning people may be imposed upon, not
only by the Authority of men, whose Judgments may be biased by Prospect of
Favor and Advantage, but also by Ambiguity of words, as King, Absolute,
Imperial; it may be fit to note that the word King, does not necessarily import
more than one having Supreme Executive power to govern according to Laws, as
the King of England certainly has, though the Parliament may judge whether he
does so or no. So that if any claim more, that is to be proved from the special
Constitution of the Government. So the word Absolute, when that is attributed
to the Kings of England, it is to be understood not in respect of Laws, but of
Tenure. They hold not of Pope, Emperor, or any other person or State. And in
like manner the word Imperial, when used of the Crown of England, it imports no
more than that it is not held of any other Crown.

II. Question of Law, Justice and Prudence, upon the Matter of Fact before
related.
1. WHether the Matter of Fact before related, does not contain diverse very
high, deliberate, and resolved Violations of the Laws, and Constitution, and
tending directly and manifestly to the Subversion of the true and ancient
Government of this Nation, and be not good Evidence, and a plain Declaration,
that the said King James did certainly design and endeavor the Subversion
thereof, and to make it Arbitrary; and was therefore an Enemy to it?

2. Whether all this being done at the instigation of the Papists, and in
favor of their Religion, (which obliges them all, both Prince and People, to
use their utmost endeavor for the Extirpation of Heretics,) be not also good
Evidence and an open Declaration, (notwithstanding their pretense of Liberty of
Conscience,) that he was also an Enemy to the Religion and People of this
Nation, being Protestants, and by the Pope and his party reputed and condemned
for Heretics?

3. Whether the said King James, having assumed to himself a power of
Suspending and dispensing with the Laws, and thereby invaded the Rights of the
Lords and Commons, and thereby, and by many other open Acts declared himself an
Enemy to the Government, Religion and people of this Nation, (which are things
inconsistent with the Ends and Being of Government and Civil Society,) and all
this contrary to his Solemn Coronation Oath, and through the persuasion and
instigation of Jesuits and others, notoriously guilty by the Laws of High
Treason, has not thereby demonstrated himself incapable of the Government of
this Nation, and not to be further entrusted therewith? and therefore,

4. Whether the Prince of Orange his Coming in to preserve and maintain the
Right of the Princess and himself, and to defend and protect an Innocent people
in the Legal enjoyment of their Religion, Rights, and Liberties, from Violence,
Oppression and Destruction, designed and prepared (as is believed) against them
contrary to the Laws, as Queen Elizabeth and the people of this Nation had
heretofore done for his Ancestors and Country, be not justifiable by the Laws
of God and man?

5. Whether the Lords, Gentlemen, and others of this Nation, who in this case,
for the preservation of themselves and their Country, invited the Prince to
come in, or after his coming entered into the Association with him, for the Ends
aforesaid, did any thing therein but what was necessary, just, and lawful by
the Laws of God and Man, the Constitution of this Government, and many
precedents in this Kingdom?

6. Whether the Officers and Soldiers, who had indefinitely entered into the
Service of the King, are not to be presumed to have acted therein as rational
men, and to have intended a reasonable and legal Service to their King and
Country, for the preservation of the legal Government, Laws and Liberties
thereof, and not a slavish Service to the will of a Tyrant, and Enemy of their
Country; and therefore in deserting the King, and revolting to the Prince and
his Associates, when this came to be disputed, did not do an act of greater
Generosity, Loyalty, end Fidelity to the Government and their Country, than if
they had continued in his Service, and brutishly, or upon a vain and mistaken
principle of Honor, assisted to the subversion of the Government, the
destruction of their Countrymen, and the suppression and extirpation of the
Religion, which they themselves do profess?

The common abuse of the term Loyalty, to impose upon the Nation, makes it
necessary to explain the genuine Notion of it. Which is nothing else, when
attributed to Persons, but either the state of a Freeman, or Jus civitatis, or
a conformity of the Will and Actions to the Laws of the Land, and the
Government by Law Established. But that vulgar notion of Loyalty, whereby many
well meaning Men have by the Sophistry of Jesuits and ill designing Disloyal
Men, been imposed upon, taken for an Active Compliance with, or at least
passive Submission to the Will and Pleasure of the Prince, whether conformable
to the Laws and Established Government, or not, is in these designing men
plainly Knavery, Sycophantry, and Treachery, against both King and Government,
and has betrayed a whole race of Kings into great Mischiefs and Destructions.

7. Whether upon due consideration of the precedent Questions, all the rest of
the Protestants of these Nations ought not in Prudence, Justice and Charity to
their Country, to unite and join with the said Lords, Gentlemen, and others,
who have associated for the end aforesaid, and unanimously agree to commit the
Government, Crown and Dignity thereof to the next undoubted Heir of the Royal
Family, who is duly qualified for the same? or, by mutual agreement of all
parties to such of the Royal Family as is best qualified for the Management
thereof in the present Circumstances? lest otherwise by their unnecessary
over-cautious scrupulous forbearance they give occasion and encouragement to
discontented Persons to involve all in such new Troubles, Factions,
Insurrections, and Disturbance of the Public Peace and Settlement, as by their
more generous Unanimity might easily be prevented?

And because here may arise some Scruples from the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, these things as to that may be considered.

1. Whether the Duty of the Subject be not proportionable to the Right of the
King, and extends no further?

2. Whether, the word Heirs ought not to be intended, first, of legal and
undoubted Heirs? secondly, of such as are duly qualified for the Discharge of
such a Public Trust and Office, and not of any such as are non compos mentis,
or, which is worse, do cum ratione insanire, and would confound and destroy all?

3. Whether in the case of Succession, both the Practice of Ancient Times, and
an Ancient Formality used at the Coronation, be not Evidence of a Right of
judging and choice upon a special occasion, of a fit Person of the Royal Family
to succeed, remaining in the Lords and Commons of this Nation?

8. Whether these Nations professing themselves Christians ought not in Duty to
God, and Prudence to themselves, to acknowledge with all Reverence and
Devotion, his Admirable, Wise, Powerful, and Gracious Providence, in these late
extraordinary Revolutions, and great and seasonable Deliverance from so many
and great, both incumbent Evils, and impendent Dangers over them? and to
express their sense thereof, both by Solemn Thanksgivings, by a speedy and
effectual Reformation of that Torrent of Debauchery introduced and designed for
their Ruin, and by all dutiful Concurrence with the Indications of his Will
thereby intimated to us?

9. Whether it be not reasonable for a Christian Nation to believe, That the
said King James having Unhappily by the delusions of the Papists deserted the
true Religion, wherein he was Educated, and revolted to the Superstitions and
false Religion which they profess, may not by the special Providence and
Righteous Judgment of God for the same, and other sins, be deserted and left to
the Delusion also of their unsound and deceitful Policies, and thereupon to be
deserted by his People, and the Army in which he trusted, as was Rehoboam by
the ten Tribes?

10. Whether the Special Providence of God, so visible and apparent in this
case, may not justly be looked upon by all serious Protestants, as a
Manuduction and Indication of his Will, that these Nations should concur
therewith, in a cause so just and necessary, to the Exclusion of the said King
James from the Government thereof, and to commit the same to some other more
proper Person of the Royal Family? and whether all, who shall obstinately
refuse to concur therein, have not some reason to fear that they may also in
some degree partake of the same Divine Judgments?

11. Whether it be not also a Christian Duty incumbent upon these Nations; upon
this occasion to take into their serious Consideration all those other Actions
of the King, (besides his revolt to the Romish Superstitions and Abuses) which
may reasonably be believed to have contributed, as well through the Judgments
of God, as by their natural Efficacy, to the bringing of all this Evil upon
him; and thereupon speedily to make all such effectual Provision, as may be
necessary for the prevention or removal of the same and the like occasions of
mischief from the Nation it self?

12. And whether among such actions may not justly be reckoned as Notorious,
first, Uncharitable fomenting and promoting of Dissentions and Distractions
between Christian Nations and People. Secondly, Discountenancing the serious
profession and practice of the Reformed Religion, and Irreligious encouraging
Profaneness and Debauchery, both by Example, and by Impunity and Connivance.
Thirdly, Unjust Violation of the Laws and established Government (contrary to
the Coronation Oath) and endeavoring to make it arbitrary, by various illegal
Practices both upon the ordinary Courts of Justice, by making the Judges
Patents to be only durante been placito; and then displacing such as would not,
contrary to their Conscience and Duty, comply with his pleasure and Designs;
and upon the High Court of Parliament it self, by perverting and interrupting
the Legal Freedom of Elections, both in the Corporations, and in the Counties;
and tampering with the Members themselves, etc. For which and the like Evils,
speedy, proper, and effectual Remedies ought to be provided.

Questions of Prudence, Religion, and Humiliation, upon the late Revolutions
and present State of the KING.
1. WHether the King, having by sad Experience found the so much admired
Knowledge and Subtilty of the Jesuits especially, and other Emissaries of the
Church of Rome, so perniciously erroneous and deceitful in matters of Policy,
has not just cause to suspect that it may be so also in matters of Religion,
and thereupon, now at his Leisure, to retire into some convenient place of
Freedom, and there to take a farther and impartial Examination, whether it be
not so indeed?

This may possibly be done effectually by well weighing but of two
Considerations, of great Importance, and yet of no great Intricacy; the one
concerning the Head of their Church, the other concerning the Body of their
Religion, and the nature and Tendency of it, compared with the nature and
Tendency of the Genuine Christian Religion. First, Whether all that special
Authority and Power, which the Bishops of Rome have so long claimed and
exercised as peculiar to themselves, and derived from Christ by St. Peter, be
not a gross Imposture? As it needs must be, if either no special Authority was
ever either given or promised by Christ to St. Peter, or exercised or claimed
by him, more than what was given by Christ to all his Apostles, John 20.19, 23.
Mark 16.15. or exercised by them; or no special Authority was ever conveyed by
St. Peter to the Church or Bishops of Rome, more than to any other Church or
Bishop which he Founded and Instituted. And besides their defect of Proof,
(which lies upon them to make out) in the one from the Scripture, and in the
other from good Authority; there are two things of great weight against them.
First, That the ancient Bishops of Rome claimed no special Authority peculiar
to themselves, but by other and inferior Title, and what was much less than
they now claim. Secondly, That there was very gross Imposture and Forgery used
for the introducing and promoting of this pretended Authority. And if this
Pillar of their Church fall, the other, their pretended Infallibility, must by
consequence fall with it. And of this Subject may be Read, Dr. Barrow of the
Supremacy, with Dr. Cave of the ancient Government of the Church. Secondly,
Whether all that which is properly called Popery be not such another Corruption
of the genuine Christian Religion, by humane inventions influenced by the
subtilty of Satan, as was that of the Law of Moses by the Scribes and Pharisees
at the time of the coming of our Savior? and directly tending to oppose,
enervate and affront the same? This may easily be perceived by comparing the
essential parts of the Christian Religion with the opposite Corruptions of
Popery, and the Tendency of each. As 1. The Example of the Heads, Christ and
his Apostles with that of the Pope and his Cardinals. 2. The Doctrine. 3. The
Worship. 4. The Discipline. 5. The Means of Propagation, etc. And to this
purpose may be read Dr. Moor's Mystery of Iniquity, and a little Tract called
the Mystery of Iniquity Unvailed, Written by Mr. Allen, but Printed without his
Name.

2. Whether, if upon such farther Examination, it should please God to open his
Eyes, and give him a clear sight of his Errors, and of the Evils he has
committed, as well as those he has brought upon himself; it will not be his
Duty and his Wisdom immediately thereupon to apply himself to do the part of a
true Penitent indeed? to humble himself, give Glory to God, by Confessing and
Lamenting his Sins, acknowledging the Justice of his Judgments, and accepting
his Punishment, be content with a retired penitent Life; and thereby as a part
of Restitution endeavor the Peace of these Nations, which he has so much
disturbed, not giving any farther disturbance himself, or encouraging any
discontented erson, but abandoning all Color and pretense for any such Matter?
This would certainly prove his direct way to Happiness hereafter, and possibly
to greater Happiness even here than he could ever have enjoyed amidst the
Distractions of the Government of three Kingdoms. And all real Happiness I
heartily wish him both here and hereafter.

3. Whether it may not be fit, notwithstanding he may not be further trusted
with the Government of these Nations, upon the Consideration of Humanity, to
treat him with Pity, Civility, and Respect, and a Competent Annual Allowance;
yet such as may not by good Husbandry become in time a means of New
Disturbance, and upon Condition that he do peaceably retire to some remote
parts, as Italy, or the like, and continue there, or at that distance without
further trouble to these Nations or himself?

FINIS.

