THE BEGINNING AND PROGRESS OF A Needful and Hopeful REFORMATION IN ENGLAND.
WITH The First Encounter of the Enemy against it, His Wiles Detected, AND HIS
Design ('t may be hoped) Defeated.

London, Printed in the Year 1691.

To the King.
SIR,
THAT I have written so plainly as I have done, of Matters so much concerning
your self and your own Actions, was not for any want of Affection either to
your Person or Cause, nor yet through any insolent Humor; but from great
Affection to your Person, great Concern for the happy Success of your Majesty,
in your not only justifiable, but commendable and honorable Undertakings; and
above all, Fidelity to God, who, I was satisfied, had raised you up; and whom I
desired you might follow Faithfully and Fully, as those happy Captains of old:
But I soon perceived you, to my great Grief, to be in great danger to be
mislead, and I took the most effectual Course that I could to prevent it, that
you might be sensible of it in time.

This I did as an Honest Man, a Loyal Subject, and a Faithful Friend to my
Country: But now I can with some Assurance and Confidence say something more;
that the Hand of God was in it; I have had Experience for the time of four
Apprenticeships, of the unhappy Consequences of such a Miscarriage of my own,
in a Case, wherein few or none, that I know, were likely to have directed me
better. And I have been trained up for near as long in such Exercises of
Fidelity to my nearest and dearest Relations and Friends, which were at the
time no less troublesome to my self than ungrateful to them. But these are
things I little thought on, till not long since, knocking at one of their
Doors, (where I had been once an intimate and a welcome Guest, but upon such an
occasion for many Years after a Stranger,) all this matter was very clearly
opened to my mind; and ever since I have been very sensible that there was a
special Hand of God in it all, from my first speaking to your Highness (as then
it was) at Dorchester, my drawing the Declaration after at Henley, and all that
I have done since; though I knew it not; only I had the Comfort of my Sincerity
and Fidelity to God and Man. And what I wrote at first, but conjecturally
concerning the Persons and Counsels, which have mislead you, Time and the
special Providence of God, have since confirmed, and given me clearer Evidence
of it.

This Age is thought by many to be as Learned and Knowing as ever any was: for
my part I know none that I think more conceitedly Ignorant: Learned in
Languages, in Books, in Notions and Opinions of Men, in Sophistry, and the
superficial Ornaments of Learning; Skillful in dishonest Craft, which they call
Policy; and experienced in the Anatomy of Sublinary Creatures; I easily grant:
But for the Interiora Rerum; intimate Acquaintance, and Spiritual Sensation (as
one calls it not amiss) in the Great things of Religion, Profound Understanding
in true Wisdom, and Knowledge of the Powers of Nature, in these I take it to be
very short. And for particular Persons, I doubt there are few equal to some who
have lived in Ages reputed the most Ignorant and Unlearned. As for Religion I
know very well, and can say it with Confidence, that both the Conformists and
Non-conformists are all inexcusably Faulty in the External part of it; and I
doubt will be found as defective in teaching and inculcating some of the most
important Doctrines of it concerning the Internal. The Reformation was a
necessary. Work, and the Work of God; but Men have carried it on with too much
of a Humane Spirit of Opposition; which has, indeed, cast out many Abuses of
the Church of Rome, but seems to have left them diverse excellent Virtues, and
other good things to themselves. This has caused the Fruits of the Reformation
in all parts to be so Mean and Barren, and every day more and more dwindling,
till almost all was, by degrees, overrun with Ambition, Covetousness,
Sensuality, and at last with Atheism, Infidelity, Profaneness and Debauchery,
and Contempt of all Religion. And for the great and important Matters of
Religion, many great and learned Men of this time, seem no better to understand
and use the New Testament, than the great Doctors of the Jews did the Old in
our Saviors. And where Religion is so defective and superficial, I am certain
there can be little of Profound Wisdom. Nor do I admire at this at all; for I
see very few, who take the right way to attain it, but most many ways run from
it: First, in pursuit of the Profits and Preferments of the World; and when
they have obtained them, by the use they make of them: And besides all this,
the vulgar Learning of the World, as it is used and pursued, is as great a
Diversion as any thing I know: Insomuch that in those Matters one may more
easily meet with sound Advice and Direction from a sincere, religious,
experienced Christian, that is well acquainted with the Sacred Scriptures, and
a Book or two of Devotion, and no more, than from any of our Pharisaical
Doctors, who look Huffing and Big, and with empty Oratory and Sophistry, draw
ignorant conceited People after them. And I dare confidently affirm, that
diligent Study, and conscientious Observance of the Canonical Scriptures, the
Books of Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus, and Tho. a Kempis his Christian Pattern,
shall make a Man not only a better Christian, but a wiser Man even in the
Management of Civil Affairs, and the Business of the World, if he apply himself
to it, than all the Systemes of Divinity, Ethics, Oeconomicks and Politics,
and all the Learning besides, that this Age has produced, without the true
Power and Spirit of Religion. I value Learning and learned Men, as much as any
Man does, if it be joined with solid Virtue: But among learned Men, I see many,
who are mere Drudges for the Wise, only they gratify their own Humor; and
those I pity, to see them so near Wisdoms Gates, and not to find the Entrance:
But others, who are Cheats, and having first corrupted and deceived themselves
with the Shells and Superficials, or some mean part of Learning, or Skill, are
very dangerous to be relied on for their Judgment, in Matters which require the
best Advice that can be.

I have once before touched upon this by way of Caution, when I did only,
though strongly, suspect that your Majesty might suffer some Inconveniences by
some mistaken Counsels. But I now write more Freely and Confidently; because
now I know that it has been so; and I should be heartily Sorry that it should
continue so longer. I know the Affairs of your Majesty have been from your
first Access to the Government here, greatly prejudiced by the Evil Counsels of
some Men, and I know the Men, some of them at least. I know your Affairs have
been greatly prejudiced both here and Beyond Sea; and if you remove not some
Persons further from you, and cast some ill Mem from your Favor, you will meet
with many Rubs and Difficulties, and your End will be Inglorious. You have been
mislead into the rough and crooked Ways of the Wilderness, (which I understand
very well by many Years grievous Experience;) and led out of the plain and
happy Way of Abraham. You came into this Land under the Hand of Divine
Blessing; but you have fallen from that State, and since been only in a State
of Mercy and Protection. The Work of God indeed has gone on, and must go on,
and you may be made use of in it, but you will meet with many Crosses, and miss
of your Aim, in what concerns your self, unless you can recover your former
State; which though not Impossible, I have found to be very Difficult, and
intelligent and faithful Guides in such cases rare to be met with. The great
Doctrine of Repentance is corrupted, and abused by the Papists; and it is
imperfectly, nay and falsely, taught amongst the Protestants: (I make no
difference, whether Conformists or Non-conformists.) There is a necessary and
an indispensable part in many cases, and many times when the Sin is secret,
that is, Giving Glory to God, which I have hardly ever known mentioned, but
never treated by any to purpose. The Ancient Christians understood it well; the
S. Scriptures express it by doing Works meet for Repentance, and Judging our
selves: But the Spirit of Opposition has almost suppressed it amongst us, and
thereby betrayed many Poor Souls; so that the Neglect thereof causes them to
lie long, it may be all their days, under the Judgments of God; which might be
avoided, if this Doctrine was truly taught, and Wisely and Faithfully Practiced.

Such a Judgment I have mentioned in the following Tract upon your Majesty; the
mention of which to the Counsels of Flesh and Blood may seem to expose your
Majesty, and strengthen the Hands of your Enemies; but the Truth is not so; for
it will have a quite contrary effect, unless the Fault be in your self. It was
mentioned for the Glory of God, and for a necessary Admonition for your own
Good; for the Conviction of those who have mislead you, that seeing their
Error, they may be so much the more concerned that you may be set right; and
for the Consideration of those who desire to be Faithful to you: And if you
humble your self under the mighty Hand of God, give Glory to him in owning his
Hand in it, and apply your self resolvedly to Works meet for Repentance, he
will certainly raise you up above all your Enemies: Nay, your Humiliation and
Acceptance of his Correction, is the first step of the only ready way to
recover your self, and gain an Augmentation of your Honor. We all are
Spectacles, not only to Men, but also to the Angels, but such especially as are
called or lead to any special Service; and if They do not actually Glorify God
in the Works to which they are called, there are those Ministers of his, who
will secure his Glory in the Execution of his Judgment upon them, until they
know that the most High rules in the Kingdom of Men, and gives it to
whomsoever he will. But this is not all, the next step is the Works of
Repentance, Eminent Acts of the contrary Virtue to what has been done amiss,
steadily pursued with great Resolution, upon all just Occasions. And such an
Occasion is now offered in the Matters related in the following Discourse,
which may prove of evil Consequence to be either neglected or lightly put off.
It is true, the Honor and Authority of her Majesty, which ought to be as dear
to you as your own, is concerned in it; and the Honor of your own
Administration no less. But you are to look beyond all this. It is more
properly (and indeed indispensably) your Office to be Active and Magnanimous in
maintaining the Laws, and the due Execution thereof, than in Fighting our
Battles. That is the part of a General, this of a King: And this is properly
that, wherein you are Gods Deputy and Vicegerent. And the Faithful Performance
of the Charge of this Relation to him, is always to be regarded far above all
Transitory Honor and Temporal Considerations whatever; and does often require a
greater Magnanimity, than to charge an Enemy in the Field. This may be done by
a Brutish Courage, wherein an English Mastiff is equal to the greatest General
in the World; but that is peculiar to Man, and to the Noble Creatures above
him: And to the Faithful Performance thereof, a generous Magnanimity is so
requisite, that God himself prescribed it as a necessary Qualification in his
Judges. And to this, if I be not greatly mistaken, your Majesty is specially,
and doubly obliged, as Matter of Duty, and as one of those Works I have
mentioned before.

But this is but one of them, it is not a bare Execution of the Laws, that
those Obligations of yours extend to, but a Vigorous and Magnanimous
Prosecution of the Ends of these Laws, which is the Suppression of all
Wickedness and Impiety, by all the Means, wherewith by Law you are invested; by
which Virtue and Piety may be encouraged, and Vice and all kind of Wickedness
discouraged and suppressed. To conquer the Vices of a Nation is a more glorious
Work than to conquer their Armies: And this is to be done more effectually by
resolute and constant Demonstrations of your Favor and Displeasure toward the
greatest Persons of the Nation, as they deserve, than by the strictest
Execution of the Laws, were they severer than they are, against those of meaner
Quality, without it. And if you have not Zeal enough, nor Charity enough, nor
Courage enough, nor true Wisdom enough, to do this generously and resolutely
for the Honor and Service of God, the Good of the People committed to your
Charge, and the Satisfaction of a good Conscience, your Religion is vain, your
Courage brutish, and your Wisdom Foolishness with God, (not to say Earthly,
Sensual and Devilish) and God will certainly lay your Honor in the Dust,
should you so neglect His for Fear of Man; which always brings a Snare. He is
in truth not a King, but a Slave, or has little Esteem for Virtue, that wants
either the Power or the Will to have Virtuous Persons only to attend upon
himself, or the Person of his Queen. He is not fit to be a Bishop, or
Superintendent of the Congregations of a City, who cannot order his own Family;
much less is the fit to be a King, who cannot model his Court according to his
own Mind. The leudest of Men even Common Soldiers, may be reclaimed by
Discipline; and are thereby restrained from those Enormities, to which they
have greater Temptations than to Swearing, and other Sins which Christianity
prohibits. And where they are not, Experience proves it is for want of real
Virtue in their Commanders. Much more may those, who often appear in a Prince's
Presence, if the Prince has Piety enough to desire it heartily, and Manly
Magnanimity enough to try it to purpose. If in such a Cause as this King James
had ventured his Crown, he could never have lost it; for God and Man would have
been for him. And this must be done now, if it was more dangerous than it is;
some eminent Acts of this nature must be done, before the former prosperous
State can be recovered; And more than this; for there is no such Danger or
Difficulty in it, as some vain Politicians would pretend.

The first regard in all our Actions ought to be to God Almighty, from whom we
have our Being, upon whom we do depend, and to whom we owe and must give
Account of all our Actions, and of the Employment of all our Powers and
Faculties and Oportunities for his Service. The next regard, but subordinate to
that, is to be to the Good of Man: And this our Gracious God accepts as a
principal part of his Service: It is in effect the same which Daniel recomends
to the King, as a proper Means to recover the Favor of God and avert the
Judgment decreed against him. Wherefore, O King, let my Counsel be acceptable
unto thee; and break off thy Sins by Righteousness, and thine Iniquities by
showing Mercy to the Poor. Ambition of Domination, and wilful Encroachments
upon the Rights of others, is abominable in the sight both of God and Man, and
mightily aggravate any former Offenses, especially when under Correction. But
when these things are really abandoned, and it is manifest by a constant course
of Actions, or some sufficient Demonstration, that the Honor and Service of
God, and the Good of a People is sincerely and principally intended, this
engages both God and Man to favor such a Person. And this I dare say with
great Confidence, and without any partiality, on behalf of my own Country, that
there is not a Nation under Heaven that naturally produces a braver People, or
more easily governed by a Wise, Just, and Generous Prince than this; a People
more Faithful, more free of their Purse, or more Courageous in any Undertaking.
Let them but enjoy their Rights, and they are easily pleased; but they are
naturally honest, and plain-dealing, as generous Minds always are; and abhor
tricks and underhand Practices, which have been the common, if not only
Politics of the late Reigns. This and maintaining Favorites, who have been
the Masters and Instruments of such Policies, have made the Government uneasy
to the People, and the People to appear otherwise to the apprehensions of
Strangers, than their Natural Genius realy is, when all proceeded from the
Imprudence of the Princes, and the Baseness and Corruption of some Evil Men,
who most easily insinuated into their Favors, by such Arts and indirect Means,
as the Genuine honest English Genius disdained and could not brook.

And now Sir, If you will follow their Methods, and make use of their
Instruments, you must beware how you disoblige this and that Lord and their
Parties; for the People seeing you set up a separate Interest of your own
against theirs, and to enrich your self and a Party of corrupt dishonest
Favorites, make use of the old Arts to pick their Purses and cheat them of
their Subsistence, they will be ready to close with any in the prosecution of
the means of their Relief; as they did with your self against the like
Practices of your Predecessor. But if you be resolved to demonstrate your
Virtue and Magnanimity, for the Honor and Service of God; first in constant
effectual discouraging and suppressing of all Profaneness and Debauchery, and
encouraging Virtue and Piety (which is agreeable to the English Genius
naturally disposed to Religion;) and next (despising those former vulgar
Policies, and rejecting those few Vermin and Beasts of Prey, which those
degenerate Reigns had fostered and bred up) in acting only upon the plain and
easy genuine English Principles of true Policy, Justice, Providence, Industry;
maintaining the Rights of the People, leaving Delinquents (though otherwise the
greatest Favorites or useful Ministers) to the clear Justice of the Laws;
extorting nothing by indirect Means, but retrenching needless and excessive
Salaries, Pensions, and Expenses; craving nothing but upon just and evident
occasions, and employing it accordingly, for the common Benefit of the Nation;
making those things, which are in truth your proper Charge and Business, your
principal and greatest Care, Endeavor, and Design; these Means will certainly
give you that Favor and Power with God, and that Empire and Command in the
Hearts, Purses, and Actions of this People, that will set you far above all
Temptations to mean Compliances with vicious Persons, be they never so great
and powerful; or any Faction whatever at home; and make you a Terror to your
Enemies abroad.

The Direct Way to all this is plain and easy to be found, if carefully heeded
and observed; but so different from the vulgar Tract of Policy and Wisdom of
the World, that it cannot but seem Folly and Madness to such Abderites. It
requires only a constant Attendance to the End, and an Heroic Magnanimity, to
walk steadily in it. These two make that Noble Virtue so much extolled in
Sacred Writ, which overcomes the World. If the Heart be pure, and the Eye fixed
upon the End, the Way will easily be discerned, and then if there be true
Magnanimity to proceed, (without which there can be no complete Virtue) no
Monsters of Menor Devils can hinder the Progress, but serve only to make the
Achievements the more Glorious: Yet such there are which must be encountered
and subdued, and the most dangerous of all the very first, that Monster of
Self, which is the Devil in Man, and will certainly play the Devil indeed, and
confound all, if not thoroughly cast out, and carefully watched and kept out
Other wise it will defile the Heart, divert the Eye, and by some Ignis fatuus
mislead a Man out of the true Way, the only Way of God's Blessing; and then he
certainly falls into the hands of some of the other Monsters, who are permitted
to worry him till he recover the right way again. But if this first be cast
out, and constantly kept out, the rest will easily be vanquished and put to
slight, and have little Power to hurt him. Of those, some are easily known by
their monstrous Horns, Ears, Eyes, Tongues, Talons, Tales, cloven Feet and
filthy Odor; and a noble Here may subdue them by his ordinary Retinue: But
there are others the more dangerous because, though in truth as very Monsters
as the rest, they can pull in their Horns, and so disguise themselves, that a
Man may be in danger, and be damnified by them before he be aware: They are of
the Nature of Foxes (or Wolves in Sheeps-Cloathing) Sirens and Remoras, and
they are to be subdued by the Here himself, or by a Band of select Champions.
The subduing of all these at home (which is not hard) would make your Conquest
of all abroad easy, your self a Glorious Instrument indeed, and these Nations
Happy. Which is the only aim in all this, and the hearty desire of

Your Humble and Faithful Subject

THE BEGINNING and PROGRESS Of a Needful and Hopeful REFORMATION, etc.
NOthing can be so well and commendably done, but the Wit and Malice of Evil
Men, through the Instigation and Assistance of the Apostate Spirits (who rule
in the Minds of all such, and carry them captive at their Will) is able to
misrepresent it as evil, blame worthy and detestable. Nor ever was, or can any
thing be well undertaken, and begun for the Glory and Servite of Almighty God,
the Honor of the Christian Religion, or the Good of Men; but it always has,
and certainly will meet with all Opposition possible, by those Principalities,
Powers and Wicked Spirits, with whom we contend in those unhappy Subjects of
their Empire of Darkness, in whom they really act, riding them as an Ape a
Mastiff-Dog, though their proper Residence be in the vast Regions of the Air.
And when mortal Men undertake any such real Good Works upon their own Head, in
their own Strength presuming upon that, or other plausible Work for their own
Glory, though under the Self-deceit of a better Design, without the Presence
and Assistance of the Invisible Ministers of the Divine Providence, and out of
their Conduct, though with never so great Appearance of Humane Power and
Ability, they are easily baffled and overpowered, and their Work defeated, if
not turned to the Disadvantage of what was proposed. But when the Work is of
God, though the Beginning be never so small, the Means never so difficult, the
Instruments never so weak on unlikely, it must stand; and the Gates or Ports of
Hell; that is, in the Scripturesense, the Grand Sessions of Devils, with all
their secret Councils and Cabals, and all their Power, shall not be able to
prevail against it, or defeat it. It is true, wicked Men shall have only a
Temporal Reward for their Service; and those who do not fully follow the Divine
Conduct, but either seek their own Glory more than the Glory of God, or
yielding to the deceitful Counsels of Worldly Wisdom neglect what is most for
his Honor and Service, shall be blasted, and lose the Honor they might
otherwise have acquired: But the Work shall go on and succeed notwithstanding,
and all Opposers be crushed and oppressed, and deceitful Workers confounded.
This is strange Doctrine and new Philosophy to the Sentiments of this
degenerate sensual and brutish Generation: But it is in it self notwithstanding
old, true, and certain. And whoever they are, who either in public or private
Affairs, act without due regard to those Invisible Powers, they act but as
Brutes, Fools, and People in the dark, though they may seem to be very
successful in many respects: for never was any considerable thing done in the
World, without the Interposition of some of those Powers. Of most of this some
Instances may be observed in what follows.

The King was no sooner invited to the Administration of Affairs in this
Nation, than he was to the exerting of his Authority, and the Reputation and
Advantages, which God had given him, toward the most necessary Work of a
Reformation of that Wickedness, and those abominable Impieties, which had
overspred the Nation, and provoked the Judgments of God against his
Predecessors, that he might thereby secure the Blessing of God upon his
Administration: But it is not strange, if where Christ had his Messenger, the
Devil had his Ministers, Elymas like, to pervert the Right Ways of God, and
turn away his Deputy from the Faith and Belief of those things, which were so
necessary at that Time and Season. And though the same Necessary Work has been
diverse times, upon special occasions, much pressed since, yet nothing has been
produced by that means, unless that Letter to the Bishops, which commendable
indeed in it self, yet was so defective in respect of what ought to have been
done, that it may justly be feared, that it had no better Acceptance with God
than it has had Effect amongst Men to this purpose. True Philosophers have for
many Ages been little regarded in Princes Courts; but for the most part been
misrepresented and excluded by Sycophants, Flatterers, and the Masters of
vulgar Politics, not to say Pimps and Panders, and the most dissolute,
licentious, and worst of Men. But though the Evil Counsels, which for some time
have prevailed, and intercepted from the King that Honor and Success, and from
the People those Benefits, they might before this time otherwise have enjoyed,
were long secret; yet by the special Providence of God they have since appeared
in public: And it may be hoped, as it is our Duty to pray, that God will,
notwithstanding all former Errors, yet give their Majesty's understanding to
discern the vast difference there is between True Wisdom, and the Evil Counsels
of such Vulgar Politics, both in the Event and in the Principles.

The same Necessary Work has also been proposed to the Parliament, but there
stopped and suppressed, by the mean Prudentials of such as ought to have been,
in a special manner, the most generous and zealous Promoters of it: But as
since that time the Good Providence of God, and the Wisdom of his Majesty has
supplied us with some Persons, from whom we may expect better things, so that
Good Providence of God has not been wanting to his own Work in other respects;
and from a small Beginning, will, I doubt not, carry it on to Perfection,
through all Opposition, and to the Confusion of all, who shall dare either
openly or secretly to give any interruption or disturbance to the Progress of
it.

About this time the last year, the Officers and Inhabitants of the
Tower-Hamlets, upon occasion of their Majesty's Proclamation for the
apprehending of Highway-men, Robbers, etc. considering that Common Bawdy-houses
were the usual Nurseries and Receptacles of such evil People, resolved to use
their utmost Diligence and Endeavors to suppress the same; and for that
purpose, drew up an Agreement in Writing under the Hands of many of them, which
was afterward prosecuted with very good Success. And this was remotely the
occasion of another Agreement, of which I shall give a more particular Account,
as follows:

One of these Subscribers, coming afterward to live in the Strand, recommended
this, and proposed something of the like Nature to a Gentleman, whom he
believed to be ready to embrace and promote any good Proposals for the Benefit
of his Country; and who thereupon proposed it to some other Gentlemen of his
Acquaintance, whom he thought had Leisure, and were well affected to such
Works; who likewise readily embraced the same. And they all agreed to meet once
a Week, not at any certain Place, but such as from time to time they should
think most convenient, to consider of some such Undertaking, and to promote it
what they could.

But those Gentlemen being all but one private Persons, and living in several
Parts, and not likely to be constantly Resident and Inhabitants about London,
could not conveniently engage in any such Parish-work; but leaving that to the
Inhabitants of the several Parishes, thought something of a more universal
Nature, and such as private Persons by their Pains and Purses might promote,
more proper for them: And thereupon began to consider how they might best
promote the Execution of such Laws, as we have against all manner of Profaneness
and Debauchery.

And considering that all this Mischief, which like a Torrent had overspread
the whole Nation, and all Ranks and Degrees of People in it, proceeded indeed
from the evil Examples of the late Reigns; but yet received great Encouragement
from the Remissness and Negligence of the Magistrates and Justices of the
Peace, in not duly executing the Laws, as by their Oaths they are obliged to
do: This appeared a Difficulty above their Power to overcome, and for which no
proper and effectual Remedy could be thought on below Her Majesty's Authority.

It was then not long before a General Sessions was to be held at Hicks-Hall
for the County of Middlesex; and Her Majesty was no sooner moved for her
Letter, to recommend and require the strict Execution of those Laws, to the
Justices there; then she did most readily and graciously receive the Motion,
and commanded a Letter presently to be prepared as full as might be for that
purpose. And as well for a memorable Instance of her Piety and Virtue, as for
the Authority of it, and relation it has to the Business in hand, I think fit
here to insert it, as follows.

Maria R.

TRusty and Well beloved, We Greet you well.
Considering the great and indispensable Duty incumbent upon us, to promote and
encourage a Reformation of the Manners of all our Subjects, that so the Service
of God may be advanced, and those Blessings be procured to these Nations, which
always attend a Conscientious Discharge of our respective Duties, according to
our several Relations, We think it necessary, in order to the obtaining of this
Public Good, to recommend unto you the putting in Execution, with all Fidelity
and Impartiality, those Laws, which have been made, and are still in force
against the Profanation of the Lords Day, profane Swearing and Cursing,
Drunkenness, and all other lewd, enormous, and disorderly Practices, which by a
long continued Neglect and Connivance of the Magistrates and Officers
concerned, have universally spread themselves, to the Dishonor of God and the
Scandal of our Holy Religion; whereby it is now become the more necessary for
all Persons in Authority, to apply themselves with all possible Care and
Diligence to the suppressing of the same. We do therefore hereby charge and
require you to take the most effectual Methods for putting the Laws in
Execution, against the Crimes above mentioned, and all other Sins and Vices,
particularly those which are most prevailing in this Realm; and that especially
in such cases where any Officers of Justice shall be guilty of any of those
Offenses, or refuse or neglect to discharge the Duty of his place for the
suppressing them, that so such an Officer by his Punishment may serve for an
Example to others. And to this end we would have you be careful and diligent in
encouraging all Constables, Churchwardens, Headborroughs, and all other
Officers and Persons whatsoever, to do their part in their several Stations, by
timely and impartial Informations and Prosecutions against all such Offenders,
for preventing those Judgments, which are solemnly denounced against the Sins
abovementioned. We cannot doubt of your performance hereof, since it is a Duty
to which you are obliged by Oath, and are likewise engaged to the discharge of
it, as you tender the Honor of Almighty God, the flourishing condition of his
Church in this Kingdom, the continuance of his Holy Religion among us, and the
Prosperity of the Country.

And so we bid you farewell. Given at our Court at White Hall, the 9th. day of
July, in the Third Year of our Reign. By Her Majesty's Command. Nottingham.

To our Trusty and Well-beloved the Justices of the Peace for our County of
Middlesex as Hicks's Hall.

This was the Letter, and, besides others afterward, it had this happy Effect,
or Consequence, at least, immediately following: In board date the Ninch of
July; the Tenth it was delivered to the Justices; the Eleventh they made their
Order pursuant to it; and the very next day, it is observable, had we that
famous Victory in Ireland; as if the Almighty, who by his Wisdom disposes the
Times, Seasons, and Circumstances of all things, designed that very time for
the Engagement, (which, as I take it, neither party then intended,) to
demonstrate or signalize his Favor upon so small a Beginning of a Reformation.

No doubt but some, who think themselves wise, will smile at least, or shake
their Heads, at this Observation. But they must know, that it is not Wisdom,
but often folly and stupidity, not to take notice of such Minute Things, as the
Vulgar (even of learned and reputed Wise Men) little regard. And though from
such Circumstances considered alone it may not be fit to be very positive in
concluding such Inferences; yet from a concurrence of diverse Circumstances, a
truly Wise Man may receive such satisfaction for the happy and successful
guidance of his Actions, as the Wisdom of the World is not capable of. And the
Truth is, Divine Indications are for the most part rather by such secret Hints
and unobserved Admonitions, as the wisest of Worldly Men would overlook, than
by such sensible Incitations as might move a Horse or a Mule; though even such
are often overlooked by many who think themselves wise, and too often by such
as are in some degrees Partakers of the true Celestial Wisdom. Because they
regard not the Works of the Lord, nor the Operation of his Hands, he will
destroy them, and not build them up: But, whose is wise will ponder these
things, and they shall understand the Loving Kindness of the Lord.

And therefore passing by former Occurrences, upon this Occasion I think fit to
add here a brief Observation upon some of this Year. In the War in Ireland His
Majesty was concerned in Interest more than in Honor; because he was not
engaged in Person in it, and it was not managed under his immediate Conduct.
But in the Common Cause of the Confederates he was more concerned in Honor,
being personally engaged in it. A Noble Confederacy it is indeed and a Just and
Honorable Cause; and it has been blessed with no mean Success in general. But
if we consider the Particulars; though there has been nothing wanting, either
of Courage, Activity or Conduct in the King, and he had a great and powerful
Army under his Command; yet has he so failed in Success, that he has been
able to do nothing at all. Ireland has been reduced without him; the Emperor's
Forces have had such Success against the Turks, when they were more in danger
to have been destroyed by them, than to have obtained such a Victory, that the
Turks have been forced to a Truce: And those in Savoy have had the like,
forcing the French General to retire into his Master's Territories. But those
under the immediate Command of King William, have been like the bewitched Cart,
I formerly mentioned, and been able to effect nothing at all; but on the
contrary, he suffered some Diminution of his Honor at the beginning, by the
loss of Mons almost before his Face; and some also, in conclusion, by the
French falling upon his Rere. I know that short-sighted Men can easily satisfy
themselves with some supposed visible Causes of all this. But whatever they
think, these things are ordered by a secret Hand of Providence; which no Man,
who has any true Sense of Religion, can deny. What then may be the Reason of
this, in relation to that overruling Providence? I will not say again what I
have so often said; and since a third Years Experience has now confirmed what
I said at first. It is true, the Work of God does, and must go on, and succeed;
and he has, and, I believe must still have, for some time a great Hand in it;
but, I doubt, unless he be better advised, and take better Counsels, it will be
but of Service, not of Honor; that part will be given to others:
Notwithstanding (as it was said to Barack) the Journey that thou take shall
not be for thine honor, Jud. 4.9. Which words have been much in my mind this
Summer. And there is besides a farther danger, lest what he has gained already
he may not longer enjoy than is necessary for this Service. I write not this to
prejudice his Majesty or his Service; but in very Faithfulness to him; and that
both he himself, and those about him who are well acquainted with the Main
Principles of Religion, and heartily desire his Well-fair, may be moved to take
these things, and the Questions not long since published into serious
consideration, and discern wisely what is to be done. But he must have a care
whom he trusts: for the case is not easily discerned by every Doctor; much
less how hard it is, when a man is once surprised, to get out of it; and what
are the most absolutely necessary Means in order thereunto; And He has been
too much deceived and mislead already.

This is no impertinent Digression from what I was about, for his Majesty is
equally concerned in what follows, as well as what goes before, and they are
nearly related the one to the other. And therefore I now proceed: The business
by her Majesty's Favor succeeding so happily, these Gentlemen farther
considered, that if the Justices should be as ready to issue out their Warrants
according to their own Order, as they had been to pass their Order in pursuance
of her Majesty's Letter, yet that could have little effect, unless people could
be prevailed with to give due Information of the Offenses every where committed
against the said Laws, as they should have occasion to know and take any
special notice of them. And for that purpose they agreed to persuade as many as
they could, not only to give Information of all such Offenses of this kind as
they occasionally should take notice of; but moreover, as their leisure should
permit, to go out into the Streets and Markets, and public places on purpose,
and to observe the peoples behavior there; and of such Offenses as they
observed to be committed against any of the said Laws, to give information to
some Justice of Peace at their next leisure. And a considerable number they
prevailed with to do this, merely out of a commendable Zeal for the Honor of
the Christian Religion and the Church of England, and a just Abhorrence and
Detestation of those unmanly and wicked Abominations which are every where
committed to the offense of all who have any spark of true Religion, Virtue or
Consideration in them; they being all of them persons of the Church of England,
and such as frequent the Prayers of the Church and the Sacrament.

And because in so populous a place, and where Impiety and Wickedness was grown
so impudent, the Informations against such Offenses daily committed were like
to be many, for the Ease of the Justices of the Peace in issuing out their
Warrants (for which no Fee is to be paid to their Clerks) lest it should become
tedious to them, and so become neglected, these Gentlemen, at their own charge
caused Blank Warrants to be printed, for all such occasions, and besides
provided and employed fit persons in several parts of the City and Suburbs to
fill up the same, as the case should be, for any who should be willing at any
time to give Information thereof to any Magistrate or Justice of the Peace: so
that the Justice had ordinarily no more to do but to examine the person upon
his Oath, and sign and seal his Warrant, unless there might be occasion for any
little alteration in it; and the Informer had a much easier dispatch than
formerly, when he must attend the leisure not only of the Justice himself, but
of his Clerk too, till he could have leisure to draw his Warrant, whch was
often a great discouragement to him to trouble himself another time.

This done, unless the Justice would please to take the trouble upon himself to
send the Warrant to the proper Officer (which he ought to do, and could
command no body but his own Servant to do it) to ease him also of this
trouble, it was ordered that the person who should give the Information, should
be desired to bring back the Warrant signed to him that filled it up. And
another person was employed to call weekly for all Warrants signed and sealed
by any Justice of the Peace, and then to carry them out and deliver each of
them in the several Parishes to some proper Officer of each Parish where it
should be executed. And for this they allowed him out of their common Stock
half a crown a day.

And lest the Business after all should receive any disappointment by the
Neglect or Miscarriage of the Officers to whom the Warrants should be
delivered, the persons deputed to fill them up were ordered to keep an Account
of the several Offenders, the Offenses, the time and place of the Commitment;
and of the respective Justices of the Peace who should grant the said Warrants;
and he who was employed to carry them out, was likewise ordered to keep a like
account of the respective Officers names to whom he delivered them, to the
intent that Registers might thereby be made of all to be delivered to the
Justices of the Peace at their P^^^y Sessions (...) their several Divisions, to
enable them the better to examine the Officers how they had executed the
several Warrants delivered to them, and to charge them to account for the
several Penalties by them levied.

Having thus ordered natures about these parts, they farther considered how
they might promote this happy beginning to other parts of the Nation; and to
that end and purpose caused the Order of Sessions for Middlesex, and the like
Order of the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen to be printed in a smaller
letter, and to be sent into all parts of the Nation, it their own charge,
hoping that other Cities and Counties would thereby be provoked to follow so
good an Example, and show their readiness of themselves to gratify her
Majesty's so gracious and pious intentions: As the County of Gloucester, and
that City did, having timely notice, the same Quarter Sessions: and others,
it is said, have done the like since.

This was a Business which they foresaw from the beginning could not be carried
on without some Charge; and therefore for that purpose they presently agreed to
raise a Common Stock by their own voluntary Contributions. And though they
resolved to spare neither Pains nor Costs, for the promoting of it, yet being
most of them private persons, they thought it most prudent upon diverse
considerations to manage it with as little noise as might be, and with all the
Privacy that a business of this nature is capable of. And had continued so to
do, had not the Malice, Misrepresentations, and Calumnies of some evil
persons, at this last Sessions at Hiks's-Hall made a Plain Narrative of their
Procedings necessary for a Just Vindications of their Innocent, Honest and
Commendable Design and Undertaking.

It is true, it could not be expected but that many Offenders, who were
punished by the Justice of these Laws, would be incensed against all such as
they should know to have any hand in promoting the Execution of them, as
likewise such dissolutes (...) are unwilling to be restrained within the (...)
of Religion, Virtue or Sobriety. And it has been observed that many such as are
ill affected to the Government, have at much as any opposed and exclaimed
against this Execution of these Laws, principally, and with the greater heat
and indignation, because recommanded and required by her Majesty's Authority.
But there being nothing in all those Proceedings contrary to Law; or which any
private person might not lawfully be concerned in, but all designed and
directly tending to the promotion of what her Majesty had so graciously
recommended and required for the Honor and Service of God, and the good of the
Nation, there could be no doubt of the Apprebation, of her Majesty and of a
good people, if it should at any time come to be known. And it was all so
contrived for the Ease of the Magistrates and Justices of the Peace, that upon
that single consideration it might well be thought to deserve not only their
Approbation, but Thanks also and special Encouragement: But there are two other
Considerations in the Case, which ingenuous minds would have been sensible of,
and affected with: the one, that what was done, was for promotion of their own
Order; the other, the Honor that was done them by recommending their Example
to the whole Nation. And great pity it is, that a Party of unworthy persons
gotten into the Commission of the Peace of this County should have so far
prevailed upon some of their fellows, as by their Rashness and
Inconsiderateness, (to say no worse,) to bring a blemish upon the Bench, where
notwithstanding (to do them right) were many worthy persons, who utterly
disliked their Proceedings, besides many others of worth and quality who were
absent.

It is certain that no part of the Nation does more abound with persons of
worth and well qualified for the Administration of Justice than this part of
Middlesex, near London: and yet it is commonly said and believed, that it has
usually had the unappiness to have more notorious, corrupt, mercenary, and ill
men in Commission of the Peace than any County of England besides. And the
reason may be supposed to be this. Hither is the common resort of the dreggs of
the whole Nation, and (besides many other vicious and licentious people) of
many persons of broken fortunes, and many Lawyers, who have neither Abilities
to get into practice, nor Virtue to be contented with their own Estates, and
what they might honestly acquire by such employments as they are qualified for.
And whereas in other Countries there is nothing of Profit to be easily gotten
by being in Commission of the Peace, which might invite any to solicit to be
in, but a certain Charge attending it; in this it is commonly said and
believed, that some Justices of the Peace do usually make 200 or 300 li. per
annum of their places, or more. And it is not unlikely, if it be well looked
into, that there may be, found at this time in Commission of the Peace for this
County diverse persons of very ill Morals, of profane and light Conversation,
of decayed and broken Fortunes, and some professing the Law, who have little or
no Practice, unless as Justices of the Peace, and who have used great
solicitation by recommendations to get in; and some who may reasonably, and are
suspected to be no good and faithful friends to this Government. And from some
of these Gentlemen, probably, the violent Opposition that has been lately made
to those honest and commendable Endeavors of the Gentlemen before mentioned
for promoting her Majesty's Pious and Honorable Intentions, and the very End
of the Order of Sessions, has proceeded.

Though the Order of Sessions upon the Queen's Letter was passed without any
interruption and with great expedition the very next day after the receipt of
the Letter, and and in like manner such an other Order in the City by the Lord
Mayor and Court of Aldermen not long after, though without any such Letter to
them directed; yet it soon appeared that some Magistrates in the City, and
Justices in the County were not so forward to observe their own Orders and
execute the Laws as was expected. This appeared by the treatment, which diverse
met with; who offered to give them Informations, but were put off, checked and
discouraged for their pains. And it was observed that several who were most
cold in the business were such as were believed not overwell affected to the
Government: And this occasioned those Questions which were printed in the
Athenian Mercury, Sept. 5. which are not improper to be here inserted, as
follows.

1. Whether an Alderman in the City, being a Justice of Peace, or other Justice
of the Peace in the Country, refusing to ^^ke an Information upon Oath against
any scandalous Sin or Offense punishable by the Law, and subject to his
Cognizance, or to send out his Warrant for the Punishment thereof; upon legal
Conviction, does not thereby violate his Oath of Justice of Peace, and become
guilty of Perjury before God?

2. Whether for that Cause, especially if his Refusal be common and notorious,
though it be not punishable by the Statute against Perjury, he may not be
punished by the Common Law?

3. Whether it be not a plain indication that such a Person has little or no
sense of Religion, or of the Fear of God in his Heart?

4. Whether, it being plain Matter of Fact, that many addicted to the late King
James are so far transported with Faction that they not only refuse to observe
our Solemn Fasts, but oppose the Reformation of the manners of the Nation, in
Opposition to the Queen's Authority recommending the same, such Refusal as
aforesaid be not an Indication that such Aldermen or Justices are no better
Friends to the Government and Nation, than they are to Religion and Virtue?

5. Whether it be not fit that their Majesty's be informed, and that they both
out of Duty to God and Care for the good Government of the Nation, take Notice
of such Persons, and not suffer the Execution of the Laws to be longer
entrusted with them? Or, Whether the Government of a Nation may entrust the
Execution of the Laws to such inferior Magistrates, as may be justly suspected
to be neither well affected to Religion nor to the Government?

6. Whether it be not the Duty of all good Christians, and of all sober People,
who wish well to their Country, to Note such Persons, and to esteem them as
Heathens and Publicans, or no good Friends to their Country or the present
Government, and to avoid them?

These were Questions one would think, no man who had either Knowledge in the
Laws, or Affection to Religion, Virtue, or Sobriety, could be offended at; yet
were there some Justices at a petty Sessions, not long after, who were so much
concerned at them, and had so little discretion, as to discover their defect in
both by great heat and warm discourses, to have the Mercury suppressed, and
when they knew not how to do that, to have the Author of them bound to his
good behavior, if they could know who he was, (yet was he one not hard to be
known, and who never disowned his own acts.) And these sort of men, no doubt,
readily struck in to give some check to these Proceedings.

But when diverse of those who were persuaded, and out of a pious zeal for the
correction of that Profaneness and Debauchery which they frequently met with,
resolved to give Information thereof, found such cold Entertainment and
Discouragements from some, they first applied themselves to, their good
Affections to so necessary a Work suffered them not to desist for those
discouragements, but rather to seek out for other Justices of the Peace, where
they might have better Treatment and an easy Dispatch to return to their own
employments, being most of them Tradesmen. And when they met with this from
some others, but especially from Mr. Ralf Hartley, a sober, virtuous and
generous person; they daily more and more resorted to him; so that in some time
there were some hundreds of Informations brought to him, and upon due
Examination he granted his Warrants accordingly. But such was his Caution to
keep within the bounds of the Law, that his house being within the Liberties of
the City, if any came to him to his house, he always refused to act any thing
of Justice business there, but directed them to some place in Middlesex, as his
occasions lead him, where they might come to him, and that once known more came
to him.

Among so many Informations, it were a wonder if no Involuntary Mistakes were
committed: yet it seems they were so few that Malice it self could find out no
more than two that carried color enough to ground a Calumny upon: and two
possibly there were; the one, The Owner of a house, and his Tenant (they say he
was) lived both in the same house, which is an Alehouse: so that many might
not know which of them kept the Alehouse. But if there was any mistake in
this, it was an involuntary mistake: but the house was truly assertained in the
Warrant: the other, A Woman, who buried her Husband, married another, but yet
being commonly called by the name of the first, as is frequent, such as had not
heard of his Death might well suppose him still living. And this, if it was so,
was such another Mistake as the former; but neither of them any fault in the
Justice. And yet these are all the Faults that are particularly assigned in
these Proceedings; which is a great Evidence of the Injustice of the Calumnies
raised against him.

There is one thing more, which has been made use of for a Ground, and very
Artificially dressed up into a fine Story, though it be in truth no more than
this. One day there came to Mr. Hartley to his House a Person, whom he knew
not, about some Warrnts: Mr. Hartley being busy, and before resolved not to
meddle with any such Business there, ordered him to come to him to Lincolns Inn
to a certain Chamber, where he had appointed to be at a certain Hour, and where
these Gentlemen diverse times met, but at this time were only Mr. Hartley, Sir
R. B. and Mr. Y. the Owner of the Chamber. When the Man came there, he proved
to be a Constable of the Parish, where Sir R. B. lived, of whom Sir R. had
heard great Complaints for Misbehaviour and Neglect of his Office; and meeting
him so Opportunely, reproved him for it, and threatened to have him punished if
he did not mend his Manners, as any one else might have done, without
personating a Justice of the Peace. Besides this one Constable, there was never
any at that Chamber with any of these Gentlemen, but one, whom Mr. Hartley once
sent for to secure a Drunken Man, who with a naked Bagonet frighted the People
as they went along the Fields, and was by some of them brought before him
there. And these were all the Constables that were ever there. Nor had Mr.
Hartley ever signed more than two Warrants at that Chamber, or any Warrants at
any other Chamber in Lincolns Inn above twice or thrice, when these Matters
were so misrepresented the last Sessions.

This is the Truth, the full Truth, and nothing but the Truth, of all the
Matter which a Combination of some Justices of the Peace at a Public Sessions
at Hick's-Hall, have lately Ma^iciously, Falsely and Scandalously
misrepresented in a Formal Order of Sessions, under pretense of an Information
to the Court, and in a Report of a Committee (to whom this mighty matter was by
the Order referred to be examined,) grounded upon Oath (as they say) of I know
not whom, I know what I say. This Language, though it may seem strange to some,
is no more than is necessary and decent in this case. Wherein the Persons
intended behaved themselves not with that Gravity, Justice, Uprightness, Candor
and Integrity which becomes Judges and Magistrates; but as some little,
peddling, mercenary Lawyers use to do; who if they happen to get some little
brangling Cause, think they do bravely well, if in the opening of it they can
but set it out with Colors, feigned Aggravations, and little Strains of Wit or
Oratory, though for want of sollid Matter and good Evidence upon the Trial, it
redound to their own Shame, and the confounding of their Cause. Just so have
these Men done, to the exposing of their own Wants both of Religion, Virtue,
Law, good Manners and Discretion, and to the Scandal of the whole Bench and
Commission, and deserve no better but to be treated by all Men with Indignation
and Contempt, as will more fully appear hereafter. But in the mean time, that
they took their ground from that one Passage betwixt Sir R. B. and that
Constable, may be presumed from these Circumstances, that it was at that
Chamber, that Sir R. B. Mr. Hartley, and the Owner of the Chamber were all
three there at that time, and they only, which did not often happen, there
being other Gentlemen besides, who did use to meet, and not always there, upon
the same occasion, not one of whom, it seems, their Worships had any notice of.

Some Gentlemen undoubtedly were drawn in to concur very innocently in these
things, through the confident Pretenses of others of the Informations they had
received; and though some others might readily concur out of Prejudice against
the Execution of those Laws: yet that which at first seemed to move the
greatest Heat, was a Supposition of some considerable Profit, which those
Persons, who were at such Charge, and took such Pains, must certainly put into
their own Purses. And great talk there was of the Ways how it might be done,
doubtless by some, who better understood the Trade, than the Office, of a
Justice of the Peace, and were displeased that any such Advantage should be
intercepted from themselves, by such as were not in Commission of the Peace,
and therefore had no Pretense for it. And it seems, and is very likely, that
this Business was consulted, and a Party prepared for it before the Sessions,
who thereby got Advantage to carry it with the less Difficulty: But this
Supposition at the Sessions, when better considered, was found so void of all
Evidence or Probability to support it, that we find nothing of that now either
in the Report or Order preceding, though it was much talked on at the beginning
of the Sessions. But the Order of Sessions, which bears date October. 12. runs in
this Form:

This Court, being informed that Sir R. B. Bar. has set up an Office at
Lincolns Inn in this County, to superintend the Actions of their Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for this County; And has caused several Orders and
Warrants to be printed without lawful Auohority so to do; And by the Aid of
Ralph Hartley Esquire one of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for this County,
has caused several Convictions to be made against several Persons within the
said County contrary to Law, does think fit, and accordingly Order that etc.
[the Names of the Twelve good Men are spared, though it be more than some of
them deserved.] Justices of the Peace, or any three of them be, and they are
hereby desired to meet, at Hicks 's-Hall in this County on Tuesday Morning
next, and examine into the Truth of the said Information; and by what Authority
the said pretended Office is set up and managed? and by whom? and to what end
and purpose? What Inhabitants of this County has been committed of any, and
what, Offenses, by color and means thereof? and to certify their Opinion upon
the whole matter unto this Court on Friday next. And it is further ordered by
this Court, that the several High Constables within this County do forthwith
Summon the Petty Constables within their respective Divisions, to bring into
this Court, on Thursday Morning next, all such Warrants as remain in their
Custody for the Levying of any Sum or Sums of Money upon any of the said
Inhabitants upon any Convictions for Tippling, exposing of Fruit or other Goods
to sale on the Lords day, or any other Offense for the Profanation thereof.

And for prevention of any Irregular Proceedings in the Conviction of such
Offenders for the future, this Court does recommend it to the respective
Justices of the Peace of this County, in their several Divisions, to Summon
such Offenders before they be convicted of any Offense, and to inform such
Offenders of their Accusers, and Offense of which they are accused; and not to
convict any Person in his Absence, unless after such Summons he neglect or
refuse to appear before the Justice according thereto: And that no Justice of
the Peace of this County do convict any such Offenders out of his own District;
nor discharge any Offenders convicted of any Offense at any Petty Sessions held
out of his Division; but that it shall be left to the Direction of the Justices
of the Peace within the Division, where such Party is convicted, to admit such
Offenders to Bail, if they find it convenient.

Per Cur. Harcourt.


How this Court was informed, or by whom, I find so hard to learn, that I
vehemently suspect there was no such positive Information ever given in Court
at all. However, the first part of it is false, and contains no less than a
triple Falsehood: 1. That there was any such Office: 2. That there was any set
up by Sir R. B. 3. That there was any for any such End, to inspect the Actions
of the Justices: The second part is disingenuous; for both the Orders and
Warrants are known to be such, as, though they had had no special Authority for
Printing them, needed none; and therefore an Evidence of Dishonesty and
Injustice in those who promoted it, and penned or directed the Order, and of
great Inadvertence at least in all that passed it. And the third an Impudent
and Foolish Calumny, Mr. Hartley having more than once upon considerable
Occasions, given undeniable Evidence of his Constancy and Steddiness to his own
Principles and Conscience, and therefore a further Confirmation of the Iniquity
of those who inserted it, and of no less Incivility toward their own Members;
and of like Inadvertence at least in all who consented to the Passing of it.

The Order of Reference had been reasonable, if the Information had been fair
and probable, and the Persons named indifferent and impartial. But the contrary
of this may be suspected, since the Information being so faulty, yet all but
one subscribed the Report, which was referred to any three of them.

The second part of the Order plainly discovers how well affected these
Gentlemen are to the Observation of the Lords day, and what regard they have to
any Laws, which suit not with their Humor. For the Warrants concerning that,
are the only Warrants, which they call in to Inspect and Suppress.

It also as plainly discovers what sense of Religion they have, of the Honor of
God, and of the Good of Human Souls; and whose Servants and Agents they are.
Profanation and irreverent use of things Sacred is a disrespect to God, and a
pleasant Spectacle to the Devil. And the Apostate Spirits, as often as they
fail to draw Men into Evil, do presently apply themselves either to distract
them with Business and Cares, or to divert them with Pleasures and Recreations
from that important Good, which cannot be attained by such as seldom attend to
it with serious and deep Meditation, but easily lay that aside. And for those
whose Minds are all the six days encumbered with many things of the World, to be
diverted a good part of the Seventh from that One thing necessary, cannot but
greatly gratify those malicious Spirits; and to see so much of their Work done
to their hands; nay, and the very Ministers of God for the Good of Men (as
Magistrates are ordained to be) become Volunteers in their Service for the
Promotion of it, contrary to their Oaths, and contrary to the Laws, they were
appointed to execute. I doubt there will be few found to have been very sound
Christians, who have little regarded the Observation of this Day. And certain I
am, that one of the Best and Wisest Justices that ever England had, the late
Lord Chief Justice Hale, was a very Religious observer of it himself, and did
greatly recommend it to others upon all occasions, both by Word and Writing,
and largely in his last Instructions before his death to his Grandchildren,
not only from Principles, Authorities, and Arguments of Reason, but also from
his own long and frequent Experience.

They conclude this notable Order with certain Recommendations to their fellow
Justices, (which is the third and last part of it) and with great appearance of
Justice and Equity; but in truth with great Presumption against the Laws, great
Insolence against her Majesty's Recommendations and Commands, and great
Artifice to frustrate or obstruct the Effect thereof, and of that very Order of
Sessions, which was made in Obedience and pursuant thereunto. Nothing can have
a more plausible appearance of Reason and Justice than the Prevention of
Irregular Proceedings, and Notice of one's Offense and Accuser before
Condemnation: And by the Common Law no Man can be Convicted but after Summons
and Trial per Pares. But if the Wisdom of the Great Council of the Nation have
thought fit in some special Cases, of notorious common Offenses against the
Laws, not only of the Nation, but of God and Nature too, and for which the
Penalties are small in comparison of the Crimes, to omit both, and to appoint a
more expeditious way of Proceeding, it is a very bold Presumption in a little
Faction at a Sessions to make themselves wiser than the Laws, and to assume to
themselves so much of a Legislative Power, as to prescribe to their Fellows
Rules to act by contrary to the Laws, and to correct the Methods direrected by
the Laws as Irregular Proceedings.

The like Presumption it is to prescribe narrower Bounds to themselves and
their Fellows to act in, under a new name of their own District, than their
Majesty's and their Commission has set them, or their Oaths will allow them to
observe. It is true, for Licensing of Alehouses, and taking Accounts, and
making of Officers, and such like things, which cannot so well be done by
Strangers, as by those who live in the same Division, the Justices in all
Countries have used (as by Law they may) to divide both the Trouble and the
Profit, (which in those things accrue to their Clerks) between them, and to act
in their own Divisions; neither indeed can they ordinarily do otherwise, unless
they would neglect their own, these being matters which are usually dispatched
in all the several Divisions throughout the whole County at the same time. But
it is a new Project to extend this to the Punishing of Offenders, thereby to
hinder the Execution of these Laws. And such is that of acquainting all
Offenders who are their Accusers, which would certainly deter People from
giving any Information (the Penalties being so small) against the most
notorious, malicious, impudent, and desperate Offenders. A much more just and
reasonable Course was it therefore, which Mr. Hartley took, to let any one know
who was his Accusers, if he would be bound to Prosecute him.

These being matters of very bold Presumption against the Laws, and greatly to
the hinderance of the Execution of them, are so much the greater Insolence
against her Majesty, who by her gracious Letter had recommended and command the
strict Execution of them with so much Earnestness, as may be seen before.

But this is not all; Upon Thursday Morning according to this Order the
Counstables brought in the Warrants remaining in their Custody for the Offenses
aforesaid, of which no small number, had been neglected to be Executed,
probably by some secret underhand Encouragement, and by these Gentlemen were
torn or suppressed, under pretense of Illegality and Irregularity; by which,
what they understand may be judged by what has been observed already.

And here, having seen before how observant they are of the Laws of the Land,
and of her Majesty's Recommendations and strict Commands, it is fit to take a
little notice What just regard they have to their own Rules and Prescriptions;
which they no sooner make than they notoriously violate; unless they were made
only in favor of such as Transgress the Laws, which the Queen requires to be
Executed, but not in favor of those, who worthily endeavor to promote the just
Execution of them. Which is the Case of Sir R. B. a Gentleman of Quality, a
Bar. who came over with the Prince, and a Person of very good Reputation: yet
was not he vouchsafed this Favor to have so much as a Summons, or any civil
Notice from their Worships.

Nay, though upon a general Notice from others, That his name was in question
there for what he had done in this matter, he sent a very civil Letter with an
Abstract of the Methods of the Proceedings before related, and such a Register
of the Warrants as is before described to Sir C. L. the first Man of the said
Committee, to give them all the Satisfaction that upon such general Notice was
cenceived requisite, and these were all delivered to him by a Gentleman of good
Quality before the Report was made, yet would the said Sir C. L. and his
Fellows needs proceed in that rash, ungentile, false and scandalous Report
notwithstanding; as if there had been no Authority in the Nation to superintend
or control their Actions. Nor could he obtain the favor to be by them informed
of his Accuser, or of the Particulars of his Offense, that he might have given
a more particular and complete Satisfaction, if there was occasion, before he
was so scandalously misrepresented by the Committee in their Report to the
Bench, notwithstanding the Recommendations of their Order aforesaid for that
purpose in the case of any of the foulest Offenders without Exception. Which is
plain Demonstration that it was not any sincere regard to Justice, but under
Pretense of that an evil Design to obstruct and discourage the Execution of
these Laws, contrary to the Queens Letter, and to the Order of Sessions
thereupon, that was intended by some of them in those Illegal Recommendations.
The Letter was as follows:

October 16. 1691.
SIR,
FOrasmuch as the Malice of Wicked Men has so far prevailed as to misrepresent
that Undertaking in which, with diverse worthy Persons I am happily concerned
for promoting the Execution of the Laws against Profaneness and Debauchery in
conformity to your Order of Sessions, and on that account have not spared to
calumniate me: I judged the true Representation of this matter to be so
necessary, that I have prevailed with those Gentlemen to permit me to lay
before you the Methods they take in that Affair. By which it will manifestly
appear, that it is so far from being Profitable, that it has been, and is no
small Charge to them. And in order to spread this yet further they have been
moved to set the Example of London and Middlesex before the rest of the
Kingdom, which required the Reprinting of several thousands of both Your
Orders, which have been by them sent throughout the Kingdom, and of which they
have already seen the happy Effects. And forasmuch as all your Examination of
Constables, as to the Execution of Warrants, cannot but be defective, since you
have no Account wherewith to charge them: These Gentlemen have here also sent
you an exact Account of all the Printed Warrants which have been granted from
the very first, (except the last Fortnights which are not yet Registered, but
will be against your next Petty Sessions) by which you may call every Constable
to an Account for the Execution of the Warrants, which have been delivered to
him. Which Account was designed and prepared for the several Petty Sessions
where they judged the Examination thereof most proper to be taken, had not this
Misrepresentation forced them to a Vindication at this time. I am

Sir, Your most Humble Servant, R. B.
For Sir C. L. These

By this Letter it appears that those Gentlemen knew then of no other Calumny
raised against them at the Sessions, than that of making Profit to themselves
by this Undertaking; which they so fully answer, that we find not any touch of
any such thing in the Report. And this, and what any prudent and ingenuous Man
might have observed upon the Letter and other Papers, might have satisfied
their Worships (had they been such) how little credit was to be given to the
rest, which the bare Truth of the Case has so far confuted, though those
innocent Gentlemen were not permitted to know what they were. Of the which,
that the Reader may judged shall here insert The Report.

WE, whose Names are subscribed, in pursuance of an Order of Referrence to us
hereunto annexed, have made diligent Inquiry and examined into the particulars
to us referred; and upon the whole matter our Opinions are, First, it appearing
to us upon Oath, that there is, and for some months last past has been, an
Office or Society kept in Lincolns- Inn, commonly called Sir R. B 's Office in
the Chamber of Mr. Y --: And that there does preside Sir R. B. assisted with
Mr. Hartley, and the said Mr. Y --: That when any Constables have recourse to
the said Office, the said Sir R. B. gives Directions, Repremands, and Threatens
the respective Constables personating a Justice of the Peace, the said Mr.
Hartley speaking but little, and being made use of only as a Property to sign
all the Warrants presented by the said Sir R. B. and Mr. Y --: That when the
Constables go to Mr. Hartley, to his Habitation in London, to complain of the
Irregularity of the said Warrants, he bids them come to the said Office: That
we have perused about 500 Warrants of Conviction, signed by the said Mr.
Hartley: That many of them are Illegal, some of them Nugatory and trifting, and
all of them Irregular: It appears to us that some are convicted for suffering
Tippling in their Houses, that never sold any drink; others convicted that had
been dead two years before the time of Conviction: That there are about 400
Informers belonging to the said Office, who carry out Warrants from the said
Office ready filled up, and tender the same to be signed to several Justices,
who if they do (upon not being well satisfied with these Proceedings) refuse to
sign the same, are threatened to have their Names Returned into the said Office.
And we are of Opinion, that the Multiplicity of those Irregular Convictions is
a great Hinderance to their Majesty's Revenue of Excise, and a great Oppression
upon the People, and tends to the Ruin of most Victuallers and
Alehouse-Keepers, and makes the present Government uneasy to them, as appears
to us by their frequent and daily Complaints: That the Proceedings of the said
Office or Society is a great Affront to, and so resented by the whole
Commission of Peace: And we are of Opinion that such Warrants as are issued out
of the said Office, not executed, should be superceded.


That these Gentlemen used no ordinary Diligence to find out all the Faults
they could, and to amplify and mis-represent what ever appearance of any Fault
they met with, as foully and maliciously as they could, and as the light and
frothy Wit of some of them could devise, is very apparent. But that they
wilfully refused to use that Honest and Upright Diligence and Integrity in the
Examination of the Truth of the matters referred to them, which became them,
and they ought to have done, is apparent from this, which they cannot deny,
that they made their report ex part; without sending any notice to Sir R.B. or
acquainting him with the particulars of their Information against him, although
he was ready to have given them that satisfaction, which might have prevented,
not only their so foully and unworthily injuring him, but also their so
unadvisedly exposing their own Persons, and their Unfitness and Unworthiness to
be entrusted with the Administration of Justice, and the Execution of the Laws;
notwithstanding the Recommendations of the very Order of Referrence, which in
this case had been just and reasonable to have been observed.

It appearing to us, say they, upon Oath: But whose Oath this was they
resolvedly conceal, and will not discover; or who were their Informers, so much
as to their Brother Justice, who is concerned in it, and was upon the Bench
most part of the Sessions; notwithstanding the said Order of Referrence: Which
is another great Evidence of Partiality, and little regard to Justice or Common
Civility. And this justly moves those Gentlemen, who know the matter of the
Report to be false, to believe with much assurance that the Committee cannot
produce any one Person of Credit, that either did, or will affirm it upon Oath
in such manner as they have set it out. And if this be so, how foul a Fault it
is in them thus to amplify and misrepresent Informations which they have
received upon Oath, I leave to others to determine. But in cafe they had had
some malicious desperate Fellow, or some conceited Knight of the Post, who
could have dressed up his Story in this manner, is all that such Men will say
upon their Oath, presently to be credited and solemnly reported? Ought not
Circumstances to be considered, and Probabilities be well weighed before any
thing be concluded, and especially in such a Case as this? Certainly there was
no such diligent Examination as is pretended, and became them to have made;
when what they had, and might have had on the other side was not regarded.

That there was any such Office commonly called Sir R. B's Office, or any at
all set up by him; that he or any one else did ever preside at any of the
Meetings of those Gentlemen; that there were any respective Constables, more
than the two beforementioned, who had any Recourse to that Chamber; that Sir
R. B. did there personate a Justice of the Peace; that Mr. Hartley was made use
of as a Property to fign Warrants; and that he did at any time bid any
Constable come to the said Office, are all false, and impudent, scandalous
Fictions, and plain Nugatory Trifles of some malicious, light and inconsiderate
Persons. And having already set out the Truth of those things, from whence they
took their Ground, I need say no more to confute them.

From what has been said, and indeed from a due Consideration of the Report it
self, it is manifest what Credit is to be given to their Bare Assersion, that
of about 500 Warrants, which they say they perused; many were Illegal, some
Nugatory and Trifling, and all Irregular, without the least mention of any
other Particular, than those two, which I have before showed, were Mistakes (if
they were indeed Mistakes) not of the Justice, but of the Informers, and
besides involuntary, and such as any man might easily commit; Which is a strong
Presumption and weighty Argument, that they had no more or greater Instances;
especially when we see them strain their Oratory to multiply two single
Instances into plural Numbers. But for them to complain of Illegal, Nugatory,
Trifling and Irregular! However their calling in, tearing, or suppressing so
many Warrants under such Nugatory Pretenses, is that for which I think they
ought not to be trifled with.

The next Clause is true in part, viz. that the Informers did tender Warrants
ready filled up to be signed to several Justices, who refused to sign them: But
it is not only false, but improbable that they should threaten any Justices;
and more improbable that they should threaten to return their Names into any
such Office, which they never heard of, nor could be imagined to have any Power
over them.

They conclude their Report with their Worship's Opinion; viz. 1. That the
Multiplicity of the Convictions (which they please, to call Irregular, by which
what they intend is noted before) is a great Hinderance to their Majesty's
Revenue of Excise. On the Loyalty and Policy of the late Reigns! Not yet
forgotten. But they forgot we have now Princes of more Magnanimity and
Religion, than to stoop to so mean Policies as the Augmentation of their
Revenue by the Profanation of Religion, the Corruption of the Manners of the
People, and the Violation of the Laws, which they are bound to maintain, and
see that they be duly executed; and of more Prudence than to be so imposed upon
by such Pretenses, so to recede from their Authority as well as Duty. They add:

2. And a great Oppression upon the People, and tend to the Ruin of most
Victuallers and Ale house keepers, and makes the present Government uneasy to
them. The profound Wisdom and Goodness of these Gentlemen! Possibly so good
Nature might extend to one sort more, which they thought not fit, or needless
to name, being sufficiently comprised among these. And indeed it is a plain
Case, that the Execution of Good Laws will always most certainly make any
Government uneasy to those, who will not otherwise amend their Manners. And
the Neglect thereof will as certainly in time make them as uneasy to the
Government. But for ruining of any honest and sober Victualler, and Ale house
keeper by legal Convictions, the Parliaments which made the Laws, were, it
seems, of another Opinion: And we may presume all those, who all this while
have never since thought fit to alter them, to have continued of the same.
Certainly these Gentlemen, who presume thus to argue against the Laws, very
much forget themselves, that they were only at a Sessions of the Peace, and not
of Parliament; or else they would never so unanimously have subscribed to such
Stuff as this. But we have more of their Worships Opinion; viz.

3. That the Proceedings of the said Office (as they will needs call it) or
Society is a great Affront to, and so resented by the whole Commission of the
Peace. By whose Commission, I suppose, they intend all the Justices in
Commission, and not only their own Party; and if so, I must be excused from
giving Credit to what they say; for I know the contrary: And though they had
mustered all their Strength for this purpose, yet I am satisfied that there
were diverse very worthy Persons upon the Bench this Sessions, who well approved
the Proceedings of those Gentlemen; but not those of this Committee. And had
the Committee but deigned that lawful Favor or Civility to the innocent and
honest Gentlemen concerned, which they readily extend, even beyond Law, to
Criminals and Offenders, they might have seen Cause to have better confuited
their own Reputation, than to have exposed it by so mistaken and unworthy a
Resentment.

Lastly, they conclude their Opinion, That such Warrants, as are issued out of
the said Office not executed, should be superceded. There being no such Office,
it is hard to say what Warrants they mean: But because we must suppose they did
mean some, unless we suppose them to talk idly, we must understand all such as
were signed by Justice Hartley at that Chamber. But had they been more than
indeed they were, Why must they be superceded? Certainly they would be hard put
to it to find a legal and regular Answer; and much more to answer for all those
Warrants, which they have torn or suppressed, very rashly, I doubt and
unadvisedly, as well as illegally.

This Report, notwithstanding all that has been said, was confirmed (as they
are pleased to term it) by an Order of Sessions, bearing date the 16th. of Oct.
But though the Minutes were then taken, something to do there was, it seems,
among some of them afterward, before they could settle the Order, which, though
often called for, a Copy of it could not be had till that Day Fortnight; and by
that time they had at last hammered it out, how agreeable to the Minutes I know
not, in the Form here following:

UPon reading the Report of Sir C.L. Sir J.S etc. Justices of the Feace for
this County, to whom it was referred, by Order of this Court of the 12th. of
October instant, to examine, among other matters, what Inhabitants of this
County have been convicted by Warrant from Ralph Hartley Esquire one of their
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for this County, for Tippling, exposing Goods
to Sale on the Lord's Day, or any other Offenses for Profanation thereof,
whereby it appeared the said Mr. Hartley has signed above 500 Warrants of
Conviction, many of which are illegal; and that some Persons were convicted for
suffering Tippling in their Houses, that never sold any Drink; others that had
been dead two years before Conviction. It is thought fit and ordered by this
Court, That the said Report be, and it is hereby confirmed; and that all
Constables and Headboroughs within their respective Divisions in this County,
do attend their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for this County, at their Petty
Sessions, to be held within their several Divisions, with all such Warrants of
Conviction as now are, or shall hereafter come to their Hands, against any
Person or Persons, for Tippling, exposing of Fruit, or other Goods to Sale on
the Lords Day, or any Offense for Profanation thereof; and that the said
Justices of the Peace, at their said Peity Sessions, do Summon before them the
Persons Convicted of any such Offenses, and the Informers, and suspend the
Execution of, or discharge all such Warrants as they shall find to be illegal;
and also to examine what Moneys have been levied by Virtue of any such
Warrants, how the same has been disposed of, and to whom by Name, and by whose
Warrant of Conviction such Money has been levied, and certify what shall
appear to them upon such Examination to their Majesty's Justices of the Peace,
at the next General Sessions of the Peace to be held for this County.

Per Cur Harcourt.


In the Recital in the beginning of this Order it is said indeed, whereby it
appeared, etc. but what that was, whereby it appeared, it does not there
appear; yet they think fit and positively order, That the said Report be, and
is hereby confirmed; though that it self be another Difficulty what they intend
by confirmed? It was Matter of Fact, which was referred to the Committee to
examine and report; and is it fit for the Bench to confirm what perhaps may in
Fact be false? And if it be so, will their Confirmation amend it? And not
rather be a blemish upon the Proceedings of the Court, and the whole Commission
(as they call it) wherein are diverse worthy Persons, who were then absent; and
if they had been present, would doubtless have opposed and disclaimed these
Proceedings. Well affected Gentlemen, it seems, they were, who were upon the
Bench, and agreed to this Order; or at least who have been hammering of it ever
since, and easily persuaded to call in Question 500 Warrants and 500 more to
that, if so many come to the Constable's hands before the next petty Sessions;
because the Committee tell them that many of them were illegal and all
irregular, without naming any one Particular for which they are so. In case
some had been convicted for suffering Tippling, that never sold Drink; and some
who were dead two years before (which yet are such strains as no way become the
Gravity and Integrity of a Magistrate) or any other mistake had been in the
Information, (which doubtless should have been set out, if any such could have
been found,) I would know of their Worships, whether this had made those
Warrants illegal or irregular? And what had been the proper Legal and Regular
Course to have been taken, and by whom, in such a Case?

But of the 500 Warrants, suppose many had in truth been Illegal; Were all
those 500 Warrants for Profanation of the Lord's Day? Or, if they were not,
were none of the rest Illegal? If any of the rest were illegal, why are such
only as were for the Profanation of that Day ordered to be brought in? If none
of all the rest were illegal, it is plain that Mr. H. acted commonly with good
Understanding of what he did; and if he had erred in one or two Particulars,
those might easily have been expressed in the Order. And since they are not,
there must have been some Reason for it: And what more likely than that there
were no such as they could rely upon, and therefore resolved upon a General
Allegation, though a mere Calumny, to support their Design to interrupt and
discourage the Execution of these Laws, by an Order of Sessions, which they
found they could not do by checking and discouraging the Informers in private?
Otherwise it had been certainly more proper for the Committee to have reported
the particular Instances and Cases wherein they had been Illegal or Irregular,
and their Opinions thereupon with their Reasons; and such a Report might have
been proper to have been confirmed by the Opinion of the Bench, for the
directions of particular Justices. But otherwise to require the Constables to
bring in all these Warrants to be inspected at the petty Sessions, was
unnecessarily to trouble the Country, and to give occasion of Dissensions and
Confusion among the Justices themselves.

And I desire to know by what Law or Authority the whole Bench can order the
Justices at the petty Sessions, to summon the Persons convicted and the
Informers, (who perhaps are not known) and to suspend the Execution of so many
Warrants till they have reheard the Causes over again? And what Authority the
Justices at their Petty Sessions have to put any such Trouble upon the Officers
in such Case, or upon the Informers either?

But to conclude this Matter, these things are apparent to any one who
considers them, from these Orders and Report themselves, without more of do.

1. First, That these Gentlemen, who have made all this stir without any better
ground, were Persons not very well affected to the Execution of these Laws.

2. That that was apparently a great Cause, why so many resorted to Mr.
Hartley, with Informations, who making Conscience of executing the Laws
according to his Oath, heard them patiently, and gave them all convenient
Dispatch.

3. That these Gentlemen, who were the first occasion of this Resort and
Trouble to Mr H. by wilful Neglect of their Duties, were unworthily incensed
against him for it, and for his honest conscientious discharge of his.

4. That though they have been so greatly (though undeservedly and unworthily)
inceased against him, as appears by their indecent and scandalous treatment of
him in this matter; yet have they not been able to assign any one particular of
Illegality or Irregularity in any one Warrant, of about 500. which they say
they have perused, signed by him. And that this is a great Demonstration of his
Justice, and worthy Behavior in all this business, and of their Iniquity and
unworthy Malice against him.

5. That the Report, and this Order of Sessions to confirm it, and the matters
therein contained, tend directly to the Interruption and Disturbance, and
Discouragement of the Execution of these Laws, which (as was their Duty) her
Majesty had specially recommended and required to be faithfully and diligently
executed.

6. That all this is done without any particular just and manifest Reason;
which is therefore a manifest and bold Contempt of her Majesty's Authority.

And now, upon consideration of this whole matter, which is so gross and
palpable as cannot be denied, and will doubtless move the Indignation of all
Serious and Virtuous People in the Nation, many good People will be concerned
to know, whether by our Laws and Constitution there be no due Correction for
those Relics of Arbitrary Government? To which, for their Satisfaction I can
assure them, that there is sufficient, and that by the special Favor and
Providence of God, we have now such (...) and such Judges upon the (...), that
it is not to be questioned, but some effectual course will be taken for the due
correction of those bold Presumptions against the Laws, and Insolences against
her Majesty's Authority, and for a better Regulation of the Commission of the
Peace for this County for the future.

FINIS.

